==PAGE:1==
Perception­based processing of digital im­
ages for dynamic adaptation to ambient light
conditions
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient
light conditions
Master Thesis
January, 2025
By
Yi Zhan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Coding and Visual Com­
munication, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Yi Zhan ­ s222504
Signature
Date
ii
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the modern era of digital imaging, achieving accurate reproduction of the color and
luminance conditions under which images are captured on different displays, especially
under varying ambient lighting, is a significant challenge. However, existing pipelines
face challenges in balancing computational efficiency and visual accuracy, especially in
scenarios involving high dynamic range (HDR) content.
This study introduces a perception­based dynamic image adaptation pipeline, designed to
enhance visual fidelity. The system enhances visual consistency and supports single and
batch processing workflows by leveraging advanced Color Appearance Models (CAM),
Tone Mapping Operators (TMO), and optimized white point estimation. Key methodolo­
gies include the CIECAM16 model, an improved bilateral filtering for adaptive HDR­to­
SDR conversion, and optimized white­point estimation techniques to improve color accu­
racy and computational efficiency. The pipeline’s performance was extensively tested on
datasets under different lighting conditions. Additionally, the system incorporates auto­
mated detection of color checkers within images, enabling a quantitative assessment of
color fidelity through comparison with standardized reference colors.
Results demonstrate the pipeline’s capability to maintain visual consistency and accu­
rate color reproduction across varying illumination scenarios. This research offers po­
tential applications in XR and real­time dynamic scenarios, which provides a foundation
for future advancements for applications in fields such as smart home environments and
autonomous driving.
Keywords: Displayed image, ambient light adaptation, color appearance model, tone
mapping operator, white point estimation, bilateral filtering, ColorChecker.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my supervisors, Claire Mantel and Søren
Forchhammer, for their continuous guidance and support throughout this research. Their
invaluable advice and assistance on both theoretical and experimental aspects has greatly
enhanced the quality of my work. They have shown me areas for improvement and helped
me grow not only academically but also in communication and self­expression.
I am also deeply thankful for their care and thoughtful guidance in my personal life and fu­
ture career planning. Their encouragement and insights have been a source of inspiration
and motivation, making this journey both fulfilling and rewarding.
Lastly, I wish to thank my family and friends for their patience, understanding, and emo­
tional support throughout this journey. Their belief in me has been a constant source of
motivation.
Thank you for your unwavering support.
iv
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Research Review
5
2.1
Concept Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Analysis of Existing Technologies and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Methodology
19
3.1
Overall System design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Obtaining the White Point Value
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
Application of CIECAM16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.4
Tone Mapping Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Experiments and Evaluation
31
4.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.3
Evaluation Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Results and Analysis
41
5.1
SDR­SDR Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
HDR­HDR Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.3
HDR­SDR Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Conclusions and Outlook
49
6.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Bibliography
51
A User Guide
55
A.1 Installation Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 File List . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.3 Run Command . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
B Overall White Point Estimation
57
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Since the advent of photography, accurately rendering colors and images under different
lighting conditions has been a central focus. Early film photography struggled to achieve
accurate color reproduction in changing environments, and digital imaging faces similar
challenges. The mismatch between the viewing conditions of digital images and videos
and the conditions at the time of capture can lead to a poor viewing experience, with colors
and overall appearance not being accurately represented.
With the rapid development of modern display devices, expectations for high resolution,
color accuracy, and immersive visual experiences have soared. The variety of screens
has grown, from smartphones and tablets to TVs, VR/AR devices, and smart wearables,
each with significant differences in resolution, size, color space, and dynamic range. Con­
currently, the proliferation of HDR (High Dynamic Range) technology has further raised
the standards of display technology, significantly improving the visual experience for users
through higher brightness contrast, wider color gamut (such as Rec. 2020), and richer
detail presentation capabilities. However, the support for HDR across different devices
varies, ranging from traditional screens that only support Standard Dynamic Range (SDR)
to high­end devices that support HDR10, HDR10+, or Dolby Vision, making it a complex
technical challenge to achieve consistency and optimal display effects in a multi­screen
environment. Therefore, effectively adapting digital images, especially high­quality HDR
content, across various display devices is not only key to enhancing user experience but
also an important research direction in digital content production and distribution.
When human observers view a scene, the visual system processes the light entering
through the pupil to understand the physical world. In addition, the visual system adjusts
to the intensity and color of ambient light to ensure a good interpretation of the scene.
Accurately presenting colors under different ambient lights is crucial. When displaying
images/videos on a monitor, the surrounding environment of the displayed scene is not
relevant. Since the human visual system cannot use context to adjust what the eyes see,
computational methods have been developed to ensure accurate perception. This project
focuses on recreating on monitors a visual impression as close as possible to viewing the
original scene. It interacts with various display aspects, such as color gamut mapping, dy­
namic range mapping, and wide field­of­view rendering (e.g., head­mounted displays for
VR/AR). Color appearance models (CAM), such as CIECAM16, provide a mathematical
framework for simulating human color perception. Additionally, tone mapping techniques
bridge the gap between high dynamic range (HDR) scenes and the limited range of digital
displays. Utilizing these tools, combined with more effective white point estimation, tone
mapping, and error assessment algorithms, the research has developed a perception­
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
1
==PAGE:10==
based image processing pipeline aimed at improving color consistency and computational
efficiency. For instance, integrating bilateral filters for tone mapping enhances detail re­
tention, while using color checkers provides a standardized method for assessing color
adaptability. However, challenges remain in achieving real­time processing for dynamic
lighting environments and ensuring robustness across various applications, such as auto­
motive systems and XR. Building on these advancements, this research proposes an op­
timized perceptual pipeline specifically designed for dynamic ambient light adaptation. By
improving tone mapping, enhancing white point estimation, and incorporating advanced
evaluation metrics, the study aims to provide powerful solutions for high­resolution image
processing and immersive visual applications.
1.2
Objectives
This project aims to optimize a perception­based image processing pipeline to improve
the efficiency and accuracy of dynamic ambient light adaptation. The pipeline relies on the
CIECAM16 model to simulate human visual perception and applies the Reinhard method
for tone mapping, converting HDR images into SDR images suitable for viewing on SDR
displays. However, existing implementations face challenges in several areas, including
efficient batch processing of images, accurate and automated white­point estimation, pre­
cise handling of extremely high dynamic range images, and preserving details from the
original image. Additionally, there is a lack of sufficient quantitative metrics to evaluate
the system’s performance when reference target images are unavailable.
This project introduces several optimizations, such as integrating the original pipeline into
a self­operating system capable of processing both single images and batch datasets.
The system incorporates a series of parameter flag mechanisms, allowing users to dy­
namically adjust model settings for each run, including operations like downscaling the
original images, thereby significantly reducing computational requirements.
Additionally, the pipeline employs the MaxRGB method for direct white­point estimation,
eliminating the reliance on raw measurement data. It also improves the tone mapping
algorithm by adopting an enhanced version of the fast bilateral filtering method proposed
by Durand and Dorsey, aiming to enhance the visual fidelity of HDR images on SDR
displays. Furthermore, dynamic evaluation tools, including real­world color checkers, are
utilized to verify color accuracy under various conditions.
1.3
Thesis Structure
The structure of the thesis is as follows:
The first chapter is Introduction. It provides an overview of the research background and
significance of perception­based image processing for dynamic ambient light adaptation.
It identifies the challenges in the current pipeline and introduces the research objectives
and contributions.
The second chapter reviews Color Appearance Models, White Point Estimation meth­
2
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:11==
ods and Tone Mapping Techniques. It summarizes the CIECAM16 model, tone mapping
methods such as Reinhard and Durand­Dorsey, and discusses advancements in white
point estimation and their relevance to improving image processing pipelines.
The third chapter focuses on the Optimized Pipeline Design. It introduces the overall
pipeline structure and explains the application of color appearance models, tone mapping
operators, and the implementation of white point estimation methods.
The fourth chapter, Experiment and Evaluation, describes the experimental setup, in­
cluding datasets, implementation details, and evaluation methods. It also highlights the
method of extracting ColorChecker automatically from scenes.
The fifth chapter, Results and Analysis, presents the experimental results. This chapter
provides qualitative and quantitative analyses of the pipeline’s performance under differ­
ent lighting conditions and applications.
Finally, the thesis concludes with the sixth chapter, Conclusions and Outlook, which sum­
marizes the key findings and discusses potential extensions to real­time and immersive
systems.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:13==
2
Research Review
2.1
Concept Introduction
2.1.1
Color Space Conversion
Color space conversion is a basic process in image processing, transforming color rep­
resentations from one coordinate system (color space) to another. Different color spaces
emphasize different aspects of color information to meet specific needs, such as percep­
tual uniformity, hardware compatibility, or computational efficiency.
Conversion between RGB and XYZ
Cameras often capture images in the RGB (Red, Green, Blue) color space, which is
device­dependent and represents how colors are formed by combining red, green, and
blue light. Meanwhile, the XYZ color space, also known as the CIE 1931 color space,
is a fundamental model released by the International Commission on Illumination (CIE).
Serving as a standard reference for color representation, it plays a critical role in color
science by providing a perceptually meaningful and device­independent framework for
color representation. Furthermore, it forms the foundation for numerous derivative color
spaces.
The XYZ color space is designed to approximate human color perception while main­
taining device independence, making it a critical intermediary in color space conversions.
Specifically, the X dimension represents a mixture of red and green light, the Y dimension
corresponds to luminance and closely aligns with human brightness perception, and the
Z dimension reflects sensitivity to blue light.
RGB­XYZ conversion enables the XYZ color space to bridge perceptual and technical
aspects of color, ensuring its continued relevance in practical applications. The primary
colors and the white point establish the basis vectors of the RGB coordinate system in the
XYZ coordinate system. Based on these basis vectors, the conversion matrices between
RGB and XYZ can be derived [1].
The chromaticity coordinates xyz (coordinates in a 2D diagram) are the normalized form
of XY Z (coordinates in a 3D diagram), as described by the Formula 2.1. From this, it can
be deduced that xyz shares the same proportionality as XY Z.





x =
X
X+Y +Z
y =
Y
X+Y +Z
z =
Z
X+Y +Z
(2.1)
The fact that the sum of the three primary colors results in white indicates that the XYZ
coordinates of the white point are equal to the sum of the coordinates of the primary colors
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
5
==PAGE:14==
(same tristimulus values). Using these two relationships, the XYZ coordinates of the white
point can be calculated from the xyz coordinates of the primary colors and the white point.
The XYZ coordinates of the white point serve as the basis vectors of RGB in the XYZ
coordinate system. Representing these basis vectors as a matrix gives the RGB­XYZ
conversion matrix, as described by Formula 2.2.


X
Y
Z

=


RX
GX
BX
RY
GY
BY
RZ
GZ
BZ

×


R
G
B


(2.2)
Since most SDR images used in this project and in common digital image scenarios are
within the sRGB color space (default white point: D65), which offers a good balance
between gamut coverage and compatibility, the transformation can be performed using
the standard formula 2.3.


X
Y
Z

=


0.4124
0.3576
0.1804
0.2127
0.7152
0.0722
0.0193
0.1192
0.9503




R
G
B


(2.3)
XYZ­RGB conversion follows the reverse process of calculation. To transforming sRGB
values to XYZ values, the matrix in 2.4 is used.


R
G
B

=


3.2406
−1.5372
−0.4986
−0.9689
1.8758
0.0415
0.0557
−0.2040
1.0570




X
Y
Z


(2.4)
Conversion between XYZ and CIELab
In the process of visual comparison evaluation for the project, the CIELab color space
(also known as L*, a*, b*) is utilized. Developed by the CIE, this color model is based on
perceptual uniformity, meaning that equal numerical changes in its values correspond to
roughly equal visual changes. The model is designed based on human color perception
and aims to represent color differences as perceived by the human visual system. It is
widely applied in research fields that require accurate color representation and compar­
ison. In the space, the L* represents luminance, ranging from 0 (black) to 100 (white),
correlating with human perception of brightness. The a* denotes the green–red axis, with
negative values indicating green and positive values indicating red. The b* denotes the
blue­yellow axis, with negative values indicating blue and positive values indicating yel­
low.
The transformation from the XYZ space to CIELab involves a non­linear mapping that
adjusts for human visual sensitivity [2]. The process begins with normalizing the XYZ
tristimulus values using the reference white point. The normalized values are then trans­
formed using Function 2.5 to ensure perceptual uniformity:
6
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:15==
f(t) =



t1/3,
if t > δ3
t
3δ2 + 4
29,
if t ≤δ3
(2.5)
where δ = 6
29.
The CIELab components are computed as follows:









L∗= 116f
(
Y
Yn
)
−16,
a∗= 500
[
f
(
X
Xn
)
−f
(
Y
Yn
)]
,
b∗= 200
[
f
(
Y
Yn
)
−f
(
Z
Zn
)]
(2.6)
where Xn, Yn, and Zn are the tristimulus values of the reference white point.
This transformation ensures that the CIELab space not only maintains the device indepen­
dence of the XYZ space but also provides a more intuitive and consistent representation
of color differences.
2.1.2
Color Appearance Models
Color appearance models (CAMs hereafter) play a crucial role in color science, espe­
cially in cross­media color reproduction and image color transformation. With the rapid
advancements in digital imaging technology, maintaining visual quality and color accuracy
when displaying images under varying lighting conditions remains a significant challenge.
Ambient lighting and display medium capabilities often differ from the conditions under
which digital images and videos were originally captured, resulting in discrepancies that
can negatively affect the viewing experience. Colors and overall image appearance may
be inaccurately represented, leading to a lack of fidelity and visual coherence.
To address this issue, CAMs are mathematical models that are designed to model how the
human visual system perceives color in diverse lighting environments and against varying
backgrounds quantitatively [3], which attempt to describe the cognitive aspects of human
color perception, in other words, the appearance of colors under observation conditions
that do not match the corresponding physical measurements of the stimulus source.
To model color appearance, a series of perceived attributes [4] [5] of color stimuli associ­
ated with complex visual inputs and varying observation conditions are defined according
to [6]. These attributes — Lightness, Brightness, Colorfulness, Chroma, Saturation, and
Hue — are crucial for color perception, describing the perception of the patch in its envi­
ronment. Details are as follows:
• Lightness J
Lightness is a relative measure that can be seen as relative brightness, depending
on how its light emission compares to that of a similarly illuminated area perceived
as white [7]. It can be calculated as the formula 2.7. Lightness ranges from light
to dark and equals to 50 when the luminance of a stimulus is about 18% of the
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
7
==PAGE:16==
reference white, indicating a midpoint.
J = 100 ·
( A
Aw
)cz
(2.7)
The A value represents the achromatic response, Aw [8] is the achromatic response
for the white point, c is a surround­dependent constant, and z is a constant.
• Brightness Q
Brightness refers to the visual sensation that determines how much light a stimulus
appears to emit, ranging from bright to dim [9].
Q =
(4
c
)
J
√
Aw + 4
5
(2.8)
• Colorfulness M
Colorfulness refers to the absolute intensity of a color stimulus [9].
M = C ·
(FL
10
)0.25
(2.9)
FL is a factor derived from the adapted field luminance LA using equation 2.10 as
presented in [6].
FL = 0.2k4 (5La) + 0.1
(
1 −k4)2 (5La)1/3
(2.10)
k =
1
5La + 1
(2.11)
• Chroma C
Chroma refers to the perceived difference between a color stimulus and an achro­
matic stimulus of the same brightness [7]. It is represented on a numerical scale,
where the minimum value (zero) indicates white or black. As chroma increases, the
color becomes more vivid. The scale also reflects variations in perceived chroma
through changes in coordinate distances.
C =
√
(a2 + b2)
(2.12)
• Saturation s
Saturation refers to the relative proportion of colorfulness to brightness in a stimulus,
based on human color vision [9]. Saturation allows for the comparison of a color
stimulus to an achromatic stimulus, regardless of brightness differences.
s = 100
√
M
Q
(2.13)
• Hue h
8
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:17==
Hue is the attribute of color perception that distinguishes colors like red, green, blue,
and yellow [9]. It is represented as a circular scale in systems like Munsell and NCS,
where chromatic colors have hue, while achromatic colors do not.
h = arctan
( b
a
)
(2.14)
As discussed in [10], CIECAM16 has been introduced under CIE standards, which is a
new CAM predicting color perception under different lighting conditions. Building on the
CAM16 model, CIECAM16 features a chromatic adaptation transform and equations for
calculating perceptual attributes, utilizing the CIE 1931 standard colorimetric observer.
It simplifies the earlier CIECAM02 model [11] while maintaining the same level of pre­
dictive accuracy. CIECAM16 offers a practical approach to color management, ensuring
consistent and accurate reproduction across various environments. In this project, we
will fine­tune the CIECAM16 model to improve its performance under changing lighting
conditions.
CAMs utilize key input parameters such as the tristimulus values (XYZ) of the color stim­
ulus, the adapting white point, the luminance of the adapting field, and the relative lumi­
nance of the background. By characterizing the viewing conditions through these param­
eters, CAMs predict perceptual attributes.
Adapting field luminance (LA) is a crucial input parameter for the CIECAM16 model. It
is often determined to be 20% of the luminance of a white object in the scene. Another
significant parameter, the relative luminance of the background (Yb), is chosen to be the
average Y value for the pixels in the entire image, ranging from 0 to 100. Finally, the
Surround condition of the model can be set to Average, Dim, or Dark. These parameters
are determined based on the viewing conditions and are used to calculate the perceptual
attributes.
The workflow of the CIECAM16 color appearance model can be summarized in several
key stages according to [12]. The forward CIECAM16 model operates by processing
color data through a series of steps, starting with the input of XYZ values under a test
illuminant, along with relevant viewing conditions. In the initial step, the model calculates
a set of values and parameters that depend on the surround and viewing environment,
including reference white values and factors related to the illuminant. These parameters
are calculated only once, as they remain constant for the given conditions.
In the second step, the model computes the initial responses of the three color cones (red,
green, and blue), transforming the XYZ values into color space responses. The model
performs chromatic adaptation. The relative tristimulus values are transformed into the
CAT16 color space as is shown in the equation 2.15, where the degree of adaptation is
calculated to obtain the chromatically adapted signals. The third step applies color adap­
tation to these responses, adjusting for the surrounding lighting conditions and ensuring
that the color responses reflect the desired adaptation. The adapted signals undergo non­
linear response compression in Hunt­Pointer­Estevez (HPE) cone space [13] [14] using
the HPE matrix [15] [16].
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
9
==PAGE:18==
Following that, the model calculates the post­adaptation cone responses, adjusting for
negative and positive values differently depending on the color channel. Then, in step four,
the model computes the components related to color appearance, such as chromaticity
(a and b) and hue information (h).
Finally, in steps 5 to 9, the model uses all previously computed values to derive percep­
tual attributes, including lightness, brightness, chroma, colorfulness, saturation, and hue
composition. These attributes are designed to reflect the visual perception of color under
the specific lighting and viewing conditions, providing a comprehensive description of how
the color appears to the human eye.



Xa
Ya
Za


=



0.4013
0.6502
−0.0515
−0.2503
1.2044
0.0459
−0.0021
0.0490
0.9531






X
Y
Z



(2.15)
Based on these, the perceptual appearance attributes are derived. These correlates rep­
resent how the color patch is perceived within its environment and can change dynamically
with variations in environmental conditions.
By following these steps, CIECAM16 can effectively predict color perception under varying
conditions, providing an accurate and practical solution for a wide range of color­related
applications in both research and industry.
The inverse CIECAM16 model [17] enables the transformation of perceptual color at­
tributes back to tristimulus values, making it a critical tool for color conversion and match­
ing. Given inputs such as lightness, brightness, chroma, colorfulness, saturation, hue,
and associated viewing parameters, the model reconstructs tristimulus values through a
series of calculations. These include determining intermediate parameters like opponent
color signals, adapting to different chromatic environments, and applying reverse trans­
formations to achieve the final output.
This process relies on specific algorithms and equations to ensure precision in describ­
ing and predicting how colors appear under different lighting and viewing conditions. By
working in conjunction with the forward model, which predicts color attributes from tris­
timulus values, the inverse model supports applications in color management systems
where consistent and accurate reproduction of colors is essential across various devices
and environments.
CAM16­UCS [12], an extension of CIECAM16, provides a uniform color space that en­
hances the perceptual uniformity of color differences, making it particularly useful in appli­
cations requiring precise color discrimination. Another significant development is ZCAM
[18], a color appearance model specifically designed for high dynamic range (HDR) and
wide color gamut (WCG) content. ZCAM is recognized for its capability to manage ex­
treme brightness levels and deliver robust color appearance predictions, which are critical
for emerging technologies in display and imaging systems.
10
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:19==
2.1.3
White Point Estimation
As we can see in the previous section, obtaining the white point value of an image accu­
rately is a crucial step for applying color appearance models and for image color repro­
duction. The white point, also referred to as the reference white, is a set of tristimulus
values used to define the white object in the scene during image capture or reproduction.
Precise white point estimation is a key step in processing digital images to adapt to ambi­
ent lighting conditions. Over the years, various methods have been developed to estimate
the white point, with each method suited for specific applications and assumptions.
Direct Calculation Through Direct Measurement of Light Source Tristimulus
Values
In laboratory environments, illuminance spectrophotometer (e.g., CL­500A) can be used
to directly measure the tristimulus values (X, Y, Z) of a light source, allowing for precise
determination of the white point. When only the correlated color temperature (CCT) and
Δuv data are available, Yoshi Ohno’s method [19], proposed in 2013, can be utilized to
calculate the light source’s tristimulus values. Δuv is a measure of the distance between
the chromaticity coordinate of the light source and the closest point on the Planckian locus
in the CIE chromaticity diagram, which determines Correlated Color Temperature (CCT),
finding the nearest point on the Planckian locus. Δuv can be calculated by Equation 2.16.
The calculated data can then be applied to determine the white point effectively.
∆uv =
√
(u −u0)2 +
(2
3v −2
3v0
)2
· sgn(v −v0)
(2.16)
where (u, v) represents the chromaticity coordinates of the test light source and (u0, v0)
is the nearest point Planckian locus. sgn(z) = 1 if z ≥0 and sgn(z) = −1 if z < 0.
MaxRGB Assumption Based Method
Since the light source often dominates the brightest areas of an image, this method pre­
dicts the white point by assuming that the brightest R, G, and B channel values in the
image correspond to the RGB value of the light source. More practical guidance and
this method’s application can be found in [20]. While this approach is intuitive and com­
putationally efficient, its accuracy heavily depends on the image content because of the
theoretical base. It performs best when the scene contains bright regions illuminated by
the dominant light source. However, in complex lighting conditions or in the presence of
extremely reflective areas, the errors can be significant. Despite these limitations, this
method remains a practical and viable option for the current project.
Other Methods
There are still many other methods for white point estimation, each with its own strengths
and limitations. For example, the Gray World Assumption [21] method assumes that the
average reflectance of objects under natural lighting is constant and approximately ”gray”
[22] [23], which has already been applied in the automatic white balance adjustment of
some cameras [24]. Based on this assumption, for an image with diverse color variations,
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
11
==PAGE:20==
the average values of the R, G, and B channels are expected to converge to a similar
gray level. This method is computationally simple and easy to implement. However, its
effectiveness significantly diminishes in images with large uniform color regions, where
the underlying assumption of diverse colors is not met.
In addition, some machine learning algorithms have also been applied to white point pre­
diction, such as Convolutional Color Constancy (CCC) [25] and Fast Fourier Color Con­
stancy (FFCC) [26]. These methods use convolution kernels to score the image’s log­
chrominance histogram to select the best scene illuminant. FFCC, in particular, performs
a Fourier transform convolution on a portion of the log­chrominance histogram and uses
the softmax function to fit a von Mises distribution to predict the illuminant. However, these
methods require large datasets for training and are computationally intensive in terms of
both time and space.
2.1.4
Tone Mapping Operators
Tone mapping is vital for image reproduction systems, particularly in HDR image process­
ing [27]. The Tone Mapping Operator (TMO) is key to this process, aiming to convert the
luminance of HDR scenes to Standard Dynamic Range (SDR) displays [28] while retain­
ing essential visual details for a realistic effect. The principle of tone mapping involves
using a mapping function to adjust the original scene’s luminance for compatibility with
display devices.
Reinhard Method
Based on different theoretical foundations, many different mapping methods have been
proposed. The Reinhard method is a classic tone mapping operator introduced in [29].
The core concept involves understanding the human visual system to adaptively adjust
luminance of the image. This method analyzes the global luminance information of the
image and uses a relatively simple yet effective approach to compress the dynamic range.
The Reinhard tone mapping operator is a foundational method for compressing the dy­
namic range of HDR images, designed to balance visibility and detail in both bright and
dark regions when displayed on low dynamic range devices. By employing a logarithmic
transformation of luminance values [30], this operator effectively preserves image details
even without explicit knowledge of scene parameters [9].
In practical applications, the algorithm calculates the global luminance of the image by sta­
tistically analyzing the luminance values of all pixels to obtain a log­average or key lumi­
nance value. This key value serves as a basis for remapping the luminance of each pixel,
ensuring dynamic range compression is well­distributed across the image. For brighter
areas, the luminance is reduced to prevent overexposure, while darker areas see a boost
in luminance to enhance visibility of shadow details.
At the core of the algorithm is the computation of luminance, defined as a weighted sum of
the red, green, and blue channels to align with the human eye’s sensitivity [31] to different
wavelengths:
12
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:21==
L = 0.2126R + 0.7152G + 0.0722B
(2.17)
To address issues with very low luminance values, the logarithm of the luminance is taken,
followed by the calculation of the log­average luminance:
log Lav = 1
N
∑
x,y
log[δ + L(x, y)]
(2.18)
Here, N represents the total number of pixels in the image, L(x,y) is the luminance of
pixel (x,y), and δ is a small constant to prevent errors from black pixels. Using this, a key
normalization factor k is computed based on the range of log­luminance values:
k = log Lav −log Lmin
log Lmax −log Lmin
(2.19)
factor = 104k/Lmax
(2.20)
This factor is then used to remap pixel luminance, compressing the dynamic range effec­
tively. The scaled luminance is processed through the Reinhard operator, which ensures
that bright regions are subdued to avoid overexposure, while maintaining detail visibility
in shadows.
Finally, the tone­mapped luminance is combined with the original chromaticity to recon­
struct a SDR image, which is then encoded and scaled to the displayable range [0, 255].
By decoupling luminance transformation from chromatic adaptation, the Reinhard oper­
ator achieves a natural and visually appealing result, making it a robust choice for HDR
image processing and display.
The advantage of this method lies in its relatively high computational efficiency, which can
maintain the overall contrast and natural color of the image to a certain extent. However,
it may lead to detail loss or color distortion in some complex scenes, such as those with
large areas of highlights or extremely low luminance regions.
Fast Bilateral Filtering Method
Durand and Dorsey proposed a tone mapping method in their paper [32] that utilizes fast
bilateral filtering to reduce image contrast while preserving details. This approach focuses
on maintaining details in both shadow and highlight areas, making it a promising candidate
for improving image quality in HDR adaptation.
The method is based on the idea of decomposing an image into a base layer and a detail
layer. The base layer encodes large­scale luminance variations, while the detail layer
retains the fine structures of the image. By reducing contrast only in the base layer, the
method achieves a balance between overall contrast adjustment and detail preservation
[33].
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) Linear scaled luminance image
(b) Tone­Mapped Image using Reinhard Op­
erator
Figure 2.1: Comparison of a high dynamic range image processed using linear com­
pression (left) and the Reinhard tone mapping operator (right). The Reinhard operator
provides a better balance of detail across luminance ranges, making the image suitable
for display on standard dynamic range devices[29].
Figure 2.2: In the dual­layer bilateral filtering method outlined in [32], the image is split
into luminance and color layers. The luminance layer is further divided into a base and a
detail layer, with only the base layer being compressed, while the color layer is processed
separately using a straightforward ratio­based method.
14
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:23==
Bilateral filtering is the core technique used for this decomposition. It is a nonlinear fil­
ter where the output for each pixel is a weighted average of the input pixels. It can be
viewed as a weighted average estimator (W­estimator) [34] in robust statistical estima­
tion, belonging to the same category of estimators as zero­order anisotropic diffusion.
This connection allows the results from anisotropic diffusion research, particularly those
related to edge­stopping functions, to be applied to bilateral filtering, providing a more
solid theoretical foundation for its use. The weights are determined not only by the spatial
proximity of pixels (via a spatial kernel function, often a Gaussian) but also by the intensity
differences between pixels. Specifically, the intensity­domain weights are governed by an
influence function that reduces the weights of pixels with significant intensity differences
from the center pixel. This approach effectively prevents excessive blurring near edges,
thereby preserving edge information in the image.
Bilateral filtering’s signal dependence makes direct acceleration with Fast Fourier Trans­
form (FFT) impractical. Instead, a piecewise linear approximation method is used, which
divides intensity values into segments, calculating a linear filter for each. The final output
for a pixel is achieved by linearly interpolating between the outputs of the filters for the
two nearest segment values. This approach significantly speeds up the process through
FFT­based convolution [35] while minimizing noticeable artifacts.
Given that most operations in bilateral filtering (apart from the final interpolation) resem­
ble low­pass filtering, spatial downsampling can be applied to accelerate computations.
Nearest­neighbor downsampling is used to preserve the histogram structure of the im­
age. With an appropriate downsampling factor, computational efficiency can be improved
without introducing visible artifacts. The final interpolation step is performed on the full­
resolution image to ensure the accuracy of edges and maintain overall image fidelity [36].
In the process of contrast reduction with edge preservation, small halo artifacts may ap­
pear around anti­aliased or high­contrast edges. To address this, the normalization factor
in bilateral filtering can be used as a measure of uncertainty. By taking the logarithm of
this factor, suspicious pixels can be detected. For these identified pixels, a correction is
applied using linear interpolation between the original output and the result of low­pass
filtering with a small Gaussian kernel [37]. This approach helps mitigate the impact of halo
artifacts [38] to some extent, ensuring smoother transitions and preserving image quality.
In contrast reduction, the base layer is first extracted using bilateral filtering, and the detail
layer is obtained by dividing the input intensity by the base layer. The contrast of the
base layer is then compressed, typically by calculating a scaling factor in the logarithmic
domain. This compresses the range of the base layer to a user­controllable base contrast.
In practice, a base contrast of 5 often yields good results, though adjustments may be
necessary in scenes where light sources are visible.
The color processing method is relatively simple. Contrast compression is applied in
the logarithmic domain of pixel intensities, and colors are recombined after the contrast
reduction step. In experiments, Gaussian and Tukey bi­weight influence functions [39]
have demonstrated accuracy in image decomposition [40]. Additionally, the scale of the
spatial kernel has a minimal effect on the results and can generally be set to 2% of the
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
15
==PAGE:24==
image size.
This method offers simplicity by requiring user control over only two parameters: overall
luminance and base contrast, allowing intuitive adjustments to image appearance. It is
highly efficient, processing high­contrast 10­megapixel images in just 6 seconds on stan­
dard hardware, outperforming previous approaches [41]. The method effectively han­
dles challenging scenarios, such as indoor lighting and sunsets, preserving both realistic
overall appearance and fine details, making it a robust and user­friendly solution for tone
mapping.
2.2
Analysis of Existing Technologies and Conclusions
2.2.1
CIECAM16
CIECAM16 is one of the most advanced color appearance models nowadays. It has sev­
eral advantages that make it suitable for many applications. First, it predicts perceptual
color attributes accurately under different lighting and viewing conditions. This is impor­
tant for ensuring color consistency across various devices and environments. Second,
it uses a chromatic adaptation transform (CAT16). Third, compared to its predecessor,
CIECAM02, it is less complex but still maintains a high level of accuracy. These features
make CIECAM16 a reliable tool for our task.
2.2.2
MaxRGB­based White Point Estimation
The white point can be predicted using either precise light source data or heuristic image
analysis methods. Given that obtaining accurate light source measurements may be dif­
ficult for some datasets in this project, and in order to balance computational efficiency
with robustness to image scene variations, the MaxRGB­based white point estimation
method is a suitable choice. This method does not require large datasets for training, and
its straightforward principle makes it easy to implement. It can provide relatively accurate
predictions for images in most datasets.
2.2.3
Reinhard Tone Mapping Method
The Reinhard tone mapping method is a global operator that is widely used because of
its simplicity and efficiency. However, it has some limitations. One major limitation is that
it applies a uniform adjustment across the entire image, which means it usually ignores
local details. Another problem is that it is not suitable for scenes with very high dynamic
range, where the image has very bright and very dark areas. In these cases, important
details might be lost. Nevertheless, the Reinhard method is a good choice for simple
scenarios where computational speed is important.
2.2.4
Fast Bilateral Filtering Method
To gain better and more robust results, the fast bilateral filtering method proposed by
Durand and Dorsey is suitable, which is a local tone mapping operator. It has several
strengths that make it different from global methods. First, it can preserve local details by
16
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:25==
separating the image into a base layer and a detail layer. The base layer is used to adjust
the contrast, while the detail layer keeps the fine structures of the image. Second, it is
good at preserving edges, which makes the image look sharp and clear. Third, it allows
users to control parameters, such as edge sharpness and tone reproduction, to get the
desired results.
However, this method also has some challenges. The first challenge is that it requires
careful tuning of parameters to achieve the best results. If the parameters are not set cor­
rectly, the image may lose quality. The second challenge is that it is more computationally
intensive compared to global methods like Reinhard, especially with some parameters set.
Even though techniques like spatial downsampling can improve efficiency, it still requires
more resources.
Overall, the fast bilateral filtering method is a powerful tool for tone mapping, but improve­
ments should be made in this project.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:27==
3
Methodology
3.1
Overall System design
3.1.1
The Workflow Framework
The image processing system in this research is designed to achieve efficient image ad­
justment and evaluation. The entire process can be divided into six main steps, each with
its specific objectives and associated algorithms. The following is the overall workflow of
the system.
Figure 3.1 illustrates the overall workflow framework of this image processing system.
The following is an introduction to the process shown in the diagram:
Figure 3.1: Overall Workflow Framework of Image Processing System
First, the system accepts input data, including image files (which can be in HDR or SDR
format) and a configuration file. The configuration file contains parameters required for
processing the images, such as the light source’s luminance and correlated color temper­
ature, or the light source’s XYZ tristimulus values. It may also include the XYZ values of
the white point for the target observation environment, if available. The primary goal of
this step is to prepare all the input data and parameters necessary for image processing.
After receiving the input, the system allows the user to choose between single­image
processing or batch processing. In the single­image processing mode, the user can input
the filename of the image to be processed. This mode is often used for debugging a
specific processing step or focusing on the effects of parameter changes on a single
image. In batch processing mode, the user can specify a folder name or a file type (e.g.,
’.hdr’, ’.exr’, or ’.jpg’, ’.png’) to process a large number of images uniformly. This mode
is often used for parameter adjustment or evaluating and statistically analyzing results.
It is also possible to choose whether to downscale the image before processing to save
processing time.
After processing through the pipeline, the system outputs the processed images and eval­
uation results (including differences in theoretical colors under the target ambient light
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
19
==PAGE:28==
conditions). These outputs allow the user to retrieve the processed images and assess
the quality and effectiveness of the image processing to determine whether the results
meet the expected goals.
In this part, the main.py file using argparse module is responsible for loading the image
and configuration file and passing the data to subsequent modules for processing.
The detailed pipelines within the processing system will be introduced next.
3.1.2
Processing SDR Content for Display on SDR Screens
Figure 3.2 illustrates the system workflow when the user inputs an SDR image and intends
to view it on an SDR display under different ambient lighting conditions.
Figure 3.2: SDR image processing workflow for SDR displays
First, the system receives an SDR image file along with a configuration file (’config.json’)
that contains processing parameters such as the measured light source luminance, cor­
related color temperature (or the light source’s XYZ tristimulus values), and the target
white point. The Ohno method can be applied to calculate the tristimulus values of the
light source based on the measured correlated color temperature and Δuv values. If di­
rect measurement of light source information is unavailable, white point estimation can
be performed using the MaxRGB­based method. Thus, two boolean flags were defined
to control the selection of the method for estimating the image’s white point. The first flag
determines whether to estimate the white point using the MaxRGB method or via direct
measurement. The second flag controls whether to calculate based on CCT or directly
input the measured XYZ values. A detailed explanation of the white point estimation pro­
cess will be provided in subsequent sections. The white point information will be utilized
in the next steps.
Next, the image in the RGB color space is converted to XYZ tristimulus values to serve
as input for the color appearance model. A linear transformation matrix can be used to
convert the image from the RGB space to the CIE XYZ tristimulus values.
The Colour library provides a range of algorithms and datasets that are applicable in the
field of color science. The library’s built­in function for converting sRGB values to XYZ
20
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:29==
values can be utilized, along with the application of CCTF decoding. Decoding CCTF,
or Color Component Transform Function, maps the nonlinear RGB image signal values
to XYZ tristimulus values, preparing it for further processing and optimize the storage of
color information.
The CIECAM16 model is then applied to obtain the visual perception attribute parame­
ters of the image. In addition to the XYZ values of the image and the white point, the
required parameters for applying the model include the adapting field luminance, the rel­
ative luminance of the background, and the surrounding conditions. The adapting field
luminance (LA) is typically determined as 20% of the luminance of a white object in the
scene. The relative background luminance (Yb) can usually be chosen as the average Y
value of all pixels in the image. The surrounding conditions can be determined based on
the brightness of the viewing environment. These parameters are established according
to the viewing conditions.
Subsequently, using the obtained perceptual attributes and the target ambient lighting
conditions of the observation image, the inverse CIECAM16 model is applied to convert
the parameters back to actual XYZ values for the image. The ambient lighting conditions
of the target viewing environment, including color temperature and brightness, can be
configured.
Finally, the adjusted XYZ values are converted back to the sRGB color space for display
on an SDR monitor. Additionally, CCTF encoding is applied to ensure proper encoding of
the RGB values for screen display, which is the reverse process of decoding.
3.1.3
Processing HDR Content for HDR Screens
Figure 3.3: HDR image processing workflow for HDR displays
The system workflow for when the user inputs an HDR image and intends to view it on
an HDR screen under different ambient lighting conditions is similar to the process for
displaying SDR images adapted to ambient light on an SDR screen. The detailed workflow
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
21
==PAGE:30==
is shown in Figure 3.3.
The difference in this processing pipeline, apart from the input and output of the pipeline
being changed to the HDR image format, lies in its main objective of preserving both the
high dynamic range and the high bit depth when presenting the image on HDR displays,
thereby enhancing the image’s detail and expressiveness. Therefore, a float32 bit depth
is kept for both reading and saving images.
When converting the original RGB image to XYZ tristimulus values and back to the RGB
color space, there are differences compared to the process for SDR images. Since the
HDR images used in the project’s experiments and datasets are inherently linear values,
there is no need for CCTF encoding or decoding during conversion to XYZ values.
Additionally, due to the requirement to display the processed images on high­definition
imaging devices and based on comparisons in subsequent experimental results, the sys­
tem uses the ITU BT.2020 color space for the conversion. BT.2020 [42] (i.e. Rec.2020) is
a newer color standard published by the International Telecommunication Union in 2015
and is widely used in Ultra High­Definition Television (UHDTV) and digital video produc­
tion. Compared to BT.709 [43], BT.2020 offers a significantly wider color gamut, partic­
ularly in the green region, enabling it to display richer and more vivid colors. Its default
white point is D65 as well. In this project, when BT.709 was used, it was observed that the
limited display range in the green region often caused green over­saturation after normal­
ization. This issue was mitigated by adopting the BT.2020 color space. The conversion
formulas are shown in Equation 3.1 and Equation 3.2.


X
Y
Z

=


0.6370
0.1446
0.1689
0.2627
0.6780
0.0593
0.0000
0.0281
1.0610




R
G
B


(3.1)


R
G
B

=


1.7167
−0.3557
−0.2534
−0.6667
1.6165
0.0158
0.0176
−0.0428
0.9421




X
Y
Z


(3.2)
In an image from the dataset with green over­saturation after using the BT.709 color space
conversion, its xy coordinate distribution is shown as in Figure 3.4. As can be seen, it
overflows the BT.709 color space, but remains within the BT.2020 color space.
Subsequently, the luminance range can be scaled for display on HDR screens. It can
be scaled to the maximum display brightness of the HDR screen or to a level close to
the brightness of standard SDR displays, using tools such as a luminance map in log2
scale. The image itself remains in HDR format to ensure sufficient detail and gradient
expressiveness during display.
3.1.4
Processing HDR Content for Display on SDR Screens
The workflow for processing HDR content to adapt it for display on SDR screens follows
a structured pipeline, as shown in Figure 3.5. The main difference from processing HDR
22
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: XY coordinate distribution of an image with green over­saturation
images for display on HDR screens lies in the additional luminance compression process
before the application of CIECAM models to compress the high dynamic range and wide
color gamut of HDR content into the constraints of SDR displays while preserving as much
detail and visual fidelity as possible. Below is a detailed description of the processing
steps:
Figure 3.5: HDR image processing workflow for SDR displays
First of all, since this pipeline processes large images and requires a significant amount
of memory, the Garbage Collector in Python is called before processing each image to
actively release unused memory and prevent memory leaks. The system receives an
HDR image as the input. The input HDR image is converted from BT.2020 color space to
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
23
==PAGE:32==
the CIE XYZ tristimulus values using the linear transformation matrix.
Then the luminance information is extracted, which is then processed using luminance
mapping methods. The first one is the Reinhard method, which is a relatively simple
and effective method applying to the image globally. The second method is the bilat­
eral filtering, used to smooth luminance while maintaining key edges and details in the
image, which will be discussed further in the next section. The result is the mapped lu­
minance, which forms an important intermediate step in the overall processing pipeline.
The mapped luminance, along with the chrominance information from the original HDR
images, is used to generate tone­mapped images.
Simultaneously, XYZ value of the white point is estimated from the HDR image. This
estimated white point is used in the application of the CIECAM16 model to compute the
perceptual attributes, which helps in adjusting the color appearance of the tone mapped
images to better match the characteristics of the SDR display and the intended viewing
environment. Subsequently, the inverse CIECAM16 model is applied to obtain the ad­
justed XYZ tristimulus values.
Finally, the adjusted XYZ tristimulus values are converted back to the RGB color space
to generate the SDR image, which is in a format suitable for display on SDR screens.
In summary, this methodology combines various techniques including color space conver­
sions, luminance processing, tone mapping, and color appearance modeling to effectively
process HDR content for display on SDR screens.
3.2
Obtaining the White Point Value
In this section, we will focus on how to obtain the white point value of an image in order to
calculate accurate perceptual attributes, thereby achieving the goal of adapting to different
ambient lighting conditions. The relevant code is implemented in the ’whitepoint.py’ file,
including the ’MaxRGB­based’ function for calculating the maximum RGB value and the
adjustment algorithm.
3.2.1
Direct Input
The system provides three different methods for obtaining the XYZ tristimulus values of
the scene white point in the original image. The first method offers a direct input channel
for the XYZ tristimulus values of the ambient light source. This method is suitable for cer­
tain standard light source scenarios. Standard light sources refer to artificial light sources
defined by the CIE that approximate standard illuminants, such as the D65 light source,
which simulates average daylight with a color temperature of approximately 6500K. Its
XYZ values are set as [95.047, 100.000, 108.883].
Additionally, other specified light
sources, such as CIE A, CIE B, and D50, are defined to simulate various real­life sce­
narios for standardizing color measurement. If stable and accurate tristimulus value in­
formation of the light source can be measured in experimental scenarios, it can also be
directly input.
24
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:33==
3.2.2
Calculation based on Measurements
The second method involves calculating the tristimulus values using the correlated color
temperature (CCT) and Δuv data obtained from measuring the light source, based on the
calculation method proposed by Ohno. This method requires the use of Colour Matching
functions (CMFs). One of the earliest and most fundamental color standards that can
be used is the ’CIE 1931 2 Degree Standard Observer’, which refers to the 2° standard
observer data established by the CIE in 1931. The data is adjusted to the default spectral
shape to ensure consistency within a specific wavelength range and interval. This method
provides a channel for use in laboratory scenarios, though it should be noted that there
may be slight discrepancies between this calculation and direct measurements.
3.2.3
Estimation based on MaxRGB
In most scenarios, we only have a single image without illuminant measurements, espe­
cially when the original data is in HDR format. In such cases, we need to estimate the
XYZ tristimulus values of the white point from the image. The method primarily used for
this is based on the MaxRGB hypothesis. The specific procedure is as follows:
Since the MaxRGB method simply applies the maximum values of the R, G, and B chan­
nels of the image, a bad pixel or noise in the image can cause significant errors in the re­
sult. Therefore, the image needs to be preprocessed before applying this method. First,
the ’rescale’ function from the Scikit­image library is used to resize the image. Experi­
mental results [20] show that the method performs best when the images are scaled to
approximately 64x64 pixels. Thus, a scaling factor of 1/64 of the original image height is
selected, and bicubic interpolation is used during the resizing process to provide better
image quality. During the scaling, the original pixel value range is maintained, and anti­
aliasing is enabled to avoid distortion when reducing the image size. Afterward, all pixel
values of the resized image are normalized to ensure they fall within the [0, 1] range for
easier subsequent processing. This simple preprocessing method significantly improves
the performance of the MaxRGB method.
Subsequently, the maximum value of each color channel across all pixels is extracted
from the normalized image data and combined into a NumPy array. The resulting array
is normalized with respect to the Y component of XYZ and scaled to the range of 0–100
to facilitate its application in the CIECAM16 model.
3.3
Application of CIECAM16
In this system, the CIECAM16 model is used to quantitatively describe human visual per­
ception of color under different ambient lighting conditions, ensuring consistent visual
perception of images. This allows the system to adjust image colors to suit the target
display environment. The functions ’apply_CIECAM16’ and ’apply_inverse_CIECAM16’
in the ’color_appearance.py’ file are the main components used to accomplish this step.
By scaling the input XYZ values of the image and those of the white point to a range of 0–
100, the CIECAM16 forward model can be applied to derive perceptual attributes using the
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
25
==PAGE:34==
function ’XYZ_to_CIECAM16’. The process starts by converting the XYZ coordinates into
a modified set suited for the viewing conditions using the Chromatic Adaptation Transform
(CAT16) matrix in Equation 2.15.
The adapting field luminance (LA) serves as a key input parameter for the CIECAM16
model, which can be calculated by Equation 3.3. The Lw represents the luminance of
the reference white in cd/m2, while Yw is the luminance factor of the reference white.
LA is typically defined as 20% of the luminance of a white object in the scene. In this
project, it is often assumed that the brightest part of the original image corresponds to a
white object. Therefore, 0.2 times the maximum luminance value of the image is selected
as the adapting field luminance. This value is typically used for luminance adaptation
calculations in color appearance models.
LA = LW · Yb
YW
(3.3)
Another critical parameter, the luminous factor of background (Yb), is calculated as the
Equation 3.4. Lb is the luminance of the background while Lw can be seen as the lumi­
nance of the light source. If the observed object is an image, the value of Yb can be set as
the average Y value of all pixels in the image. Therefore, in this project, Yb is determined
by calculating the average luminance of the entire image. When it cannot be accurately
determined, a value of 20 can be used as an approximation. This value represents the
average luminance level of the viewing scene and is used in color appearance models to
account for the influence of background luminance on visual perception.
Yb = 100xLb/Lw
(3.4)
The Surround parameter is based on the surrounding conditions: Average, Dim, or Dark.
It can be determined by the value of SR, which refers to the Surround Ratio, being calcu­
lated by Equation 3.5, in which LSW means the luminance of the reference white mea­
sured in the surround field and LDW means the luminance of the reference white mea­
sured in the display area.
SR = LSW /LDW
(3.5)
These parameters, decided by the specific viewing environment, are utilized to compute
perceptual attributes using the equations of the CIECAM16 forward model. Once the per­
ceptual attributes are determined, the CIECAM16 inverse model is employed to transform
them back into CIE XYZ values via ’CIECAM16_to_XYZ’.
When applying the inverse model, the input consists of the perceptual attributes calculated
using the forward model, while the output is the XYZ tristimulus values of the image under
the target viewing conditions. The values of the target illuminant, adapting field luminance,
luminous factor of background, and surrounding condition can be set depending on the
target viewing conditions.
26
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:35==
3.4
Tone Mapping Method
For HDR images, we need to perform dynamic range compression to fit SDR display de­
vices while preserving details and contrast as much as possible. In this section, different
tone mapping algorithms are tested and compared, including the Reinhard method and
the fast bilateral filtering method. Ultimately, the project optimized the fast bilateral filter­
ing approach by introducing dynamic parameters, which was successfully integrated into
the pipeline, achieving satisfactory results. This part of the code is implemented in the
’tone_mapping.py’ file, and the relevant functions include ’reinhard_tone_mapping’ and
’durand_dorsey_tone_mapping’.
3.4.1
Reinhard Method
The Reinhard tone mapping method, as a relatively simple tone mapping approach in
terms of principles and computation, is an effective technique for compressing the dy­
namic range of an image for display on SDR screens. Therefore, it was utilized in the
early stages of the project. However, due to its global approach that limits the preser­
vation of local details, particularly when processing images with extremely high dynamic
ranges, its compression factor can lack robustness, leading to suboptimal results. It may
inadequately compress highlights or enhance shadows, resulting in distortion. Conse­
quently, this method was ultimately not selected for processing images in the pipeline,
though it remains as an alternative option for special cases.
First, the Y component is extracted from the original HDR image already converted to XYZ
values and stored as the luminance information. This approach differs from the method
used in Reinhard’s study, which calculates luminance based on human perception using
weighted RGB values based on Formula 2.17. The luminance data is then processed
in the logarithmic domain, where the maximum, minimum, and average logarithmic lumi­
nance values are computed. Using these values, the luminance adjustment coefficient k
and the scaling factor f are calculated according to Formula 2.19 and Formula 2.20 to
scale the luminance, ensuring the compressed luminance is confined to the 0­1 range.
Finally, each of the three color channels is processed separately. By applying luminance
mapping while maintaining the original color ratios, the tone mapped image is produced.
3.4.2
Bilateral Filtering
The fast bilateral filtering method proposed by Durand and Dorsey was used in tone map­
ping. The main steps of this algorithm involve separating the image into luminance and
chrominance components, converting the luminance to the logarithmic domain, and then
decomposing it into a base layer and a detail layer using bilateral filtering. The base layer
is compressed while preserving the detail layer. Finally, the processed luminance is re­
combined with the original chromatic information, followed by color encoding to produce
the final SDR image.
This method is characterized by its ability to compress the overall dynamic range while
preserving local contrast details. However, subsequent testing revealed its limitations
when processing extremely high dynamic range images. Additionally, issues were ob­
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
27
==PAGE:36==
served in edge smoothing and chrominance processing. As a result, the algorithm was
optimized to address these shortcomings. The pseudocode is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Pseudo­code for Tone Mapping
1: function ToneMapping(input_image_path)
2:
# 1. Image Loading and Preprocessing
3:
HDR_image ←LoadImage(input_image_path, bit_depth=float32)
4:
XYZ_image ←RGB_to_XYZ(HDR_image)
5:
# 2. Luminance­Chrominance Separation
6:
luminance ←GetYChannel(XYZ_image)
7:
chrominance ←ComputeChrominance(HDR_image, luminance)
8:
# 3. Luminance Range Compression
9:
luminance ←ClipLuminance(luminance, percentiles=[0.1, 99.9])
10:
log_luminance ←ComputeLog(luminance)
11:
# 4. Bilateral Filter Decomposition
12:
base_layer ←BilateralFilter(log_luminance)
13:
detail_layer ←log_luminance ­ base_layer
14:
# 5. Compression Processing
15:
compression_factor ←ComputeCompressionFactor(base_layer)
16:
output_luminance ←CompressBaseLayer(base_layer, compression_factor) + de­
tail_layer
17:
output_luminance ←ClampRange(output_luminance, [0, 1])
18:
# 6. Image Reconstruction
19:
output_image ←ReconstructRGBImage(chrominance, output_luminance)
20:
return output_image
21: end function
First, the luminance Y component is extracted from the HDR image’s XYZ values, and
the chrominance components are obtained by dividing the image’s RGB values by the lu­
minance component. To reduce the impact of extreme luminance values on the results, a
preprocessing step is applied to the image’s luminance by clipping the top and bottom 1%
to address the issue of failure when processing extremely high dynamic range images.
Then, the luminance is transformed to the logarithmic domain for further processing. The
dynamic range is computed as the difference between the maximum and minimum loga­
rithmic luminance values.
The core step is extracting the base layer using the ’denoise_bilateral’ function from the
’skimage.restoration’ library on the logarithmic luminance.
The setting of major parameters for the ’denoise_bilateral’ function and their effects are
as follows:
• Win_size
This parameter defines the size of the window for performing the bilateral filtering.
Larger values result in a broader area being considered for each pixel, leading to
a more pronounced smoothing effect over a larger region of the image. Smaller
28
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:37==
values focus on smaller areas, making the filtering more local and preserving fine
details but resulting in less effective noise reduction. It is set to 5 in the pipeline.
• Sigma_color
This parameter controls the sensitivity of the filtering to differences in pixel values.
A higher value means that more pixels with different colors or intensity will be con­
sidered in the averaging process, resulting in smoother transitions but potentially
losing details. A smaller value keeps more local contrast and fine details. A novel
approach was employed here by dynamically calculating the value of sigma_color
based on the image’s dynamic range. The value is set to 0.4 times the dynamic
range to achieve stronger smoothing effects for high dynamic range images while
preserving more details for low dynamic range images.
• Sigma_spatial
This parameter defines how much spatial distance is considered for smoothing. It
affects how much influence surrounding pixels have based on their spatial distance
from the target pixel. A higher sigma_spatial value increases the spatial area used
for filtering, making distant pixels more influential in the smoothing process, but it
may introduce more ambiguity. A smaller value restricts the influence to nearby
pixels. The value is set to 8, indicating that points 8 pixels apart still have some
influence.
• Bins
This value controls the quantization of color differences when calculating the Gaus­
sian weights for the filtering. To save image processing time, it is set to 1000. For
more precise results, the default value of 10,000 can be used, but this will signifi­
cantly increase processing time.
• Mode
This specifies how the function handles pixels that are near the edge of the image,
where the filter window extends beyond the image boundaries. After experimenting,
it was decided to set the mode to ’edge’ to replicate the border pixel value avoiding
unnatural borders (e.g. bright or dark edges), in the processed image.
• Channel_axis
The axis of the image array corresponding to color channels is None by default,
which means the image is grayscale. Since the logarithmic luminance is a single
channel, it can be set to None.
Subsequently, the detail layer is obtained by subtracting the base layer derived from bilat­
eral filtering from the original logarithmic luminance image. Figure 3.6 below is the result
of decomposing the logarithmic luminance domain of an image into the base layer and
detail layer. The left shows the base layer while the right displays the detail layer, captur­
ing fine textures and local contrasts. The right­hand colorbars illustrate their respective
ranges in the logarithmic domain.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
29
==PAGE:38==
After that, the dynamic range of the base layer is computed, and its reciprocal is taken to
determine the compression factor for the base layer.
Figure 3.6: Decomposition of the logarithmic luminance domain into base and detail lay­
ers.
The absolute scale of the compressed luminance range is obtained by multiplying the
maximum luminance of the base layer by the compression factor. This scale is used
to balance the compressed luminance values and prevent excessive shifts. The com­
pressed result of the base layer is then combined with the detail layer, and the absolute
scale factor is subtracted to produce the final compressed luminance values. These val­
ues are converted back into the linear domain, and any luminance values outside the 0­1
range are clipped, resulting in the mapped luminance. Finally, the mapped luminance
is multiplied with the previously saved chrominance information to reconstruct the tone­
mapped image.
Through the whole systematic workflow described above, the entire image processing
pipeline achieves fully automatic processing from input to output, ensures color adapta­
tion and dynamic range optimization.
30
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:39==
4
Experiments and Evaluation
4.1
Datasets
The experiments were conducted on datasets containing different content, as the system
includes separate pipelines for processing SDR and HDR images.
4.1.1
SDR Content
The SDR image dataset primarily consists of real­scene photographs captured in the mul­
timedia laboratory.
A daily scene was designed in the laboratory, featuring a plate on a table filled with various
fruits and vegetables, including bananas, carrots, pears, and small tomatoes. These
items, which have a broad color spectrum (red, orange, yellow, and green), were chosen
to evaluate color reproduction and adaptation. A nearby potted plant and a blue­green
net featured densely packed objects with complex shapes, providing challenges for edge
processing and maintaining clarity in image processing. The shadow from the table edge
introduced darker regions, enhancing the visual contrast of the images. The arrangement
of these objects remained unchanged throughout the image capture process.
To create different ambient lighting conditions, the laboratory’s light sources were con­
trolled to combine two luminance levels and two color temperature settings, resulting in
four distinct ambient light scenarios. Scenes under these conditions were captured using
an XT­20 camera, with constant focal length, focus point, and exposure settings. This en­
sured the captured 4240x2830 pixel images reflected only the influence of ambient light
variations. Captured images are shown in Figure 4.1
(a) Image under High
Luminance and High
Temperature
(b) Image under High
Luminance and Low
Temperature
(c) Image under Low
Luminance and High
Temperature
(d) Image under Low
Luminance and Low
Temperature
Figure 4.1: Images under Four Different Ambient Lighting Conditions
To precisely evaluate ambient light conditions, a CL­500A illuminance spectrophotometer
was used. This device enables accurate measurement of important light­related parame­
ters, including illuminance (Ev), correlated color temperature (CCT or Tcp), and ∆uv. The
spectrophotometer was positioned consistently for all measurements. The illuminance
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
31
==PAGE:40==
HighLuminance
HighTemperature
HighLuminance
LowTemperature
LowLuminance
HighTemperature
LowLuminance
LowTemperature
Ev
1256.0
1170.0
49.8
49.8
Tcp
5461
2683
5233
2702
∆uv
0.0007
­0.0010
0.0017
0.0007
x
0.459
0.447
0.336
0.455
y
0.411
0.405
0.347
0.411
Lmax
0.991
0.828
0.487
0.630
Table 4.1: Ambient Light Measurements and Image Luminance Characteristics
was measured in lux (lx). Color Temperature was expressed in Kelvin (K), and ∆uv repre­
sents the chromaticity deviation from the blackbody locus on the CIE 1960 UCS diagram,
assessing how closely the light source matches an ideal blackbody radiator. The four sets
of ambient light data measured in the laboratory are shown in Table 4.1, with the last row,
Lmax, representing the maximum image luminance, which was obtained by extracting the
Y component from the image.
4.1.2
HDR Content
The HDR content dataset mainly consists of three parts.
HDR Images Generated from Lab­Captured SDR Exposures
The first part is HDR images generated from multiple exposures of the SDR images cap­
tured in the lab as introduced above. Each HDR image was generated by merging five
SDR images with different exposure values. During the merging process, a Gaussian
weighting function was applied to prioritize specific pixel values, enhancing the quality of
the merge. Additionally, a gamma curve was used to linearize the images before combin­
ing them. The HDR generation employed the Debevec and Malik method, utilizing 50% of
the dynamic range. The resulting HDR images, created under two different color temper­
ature conditions, are shown in the Figure 4.2. These HDR versions provide consistency
for evaluation.
(a) HDR Image merged
under High Temperature
(b) HDR Image merged
under Low Temperature
Figure 4.2: HDR Images of Lab Scenes Under Various Ambient Lighting Conditions
HDR Photographic Survey Dataset
The second part of the dataset originates from the ’HDR Photographic Survey’ carried
out by Mark Fairchild et al., a public database of HDR images, some of which with de­
tailed colorimetric and luminance measurements. This collection offers a variety of HDR
32
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:41==
photographs alongside their corresponding data, most of which capture outdoor natu­
ral environments, along with one image featuring the LuxoDoubleChecker (Figure 4.3a),
which includes two ColorCheckers under different lighting conditions. This unique collec­
tion provides valuable content for advancing HDR imaging research and testing.
Seven representative images were selected from the dataset for this project.
These
images generally exhibit extremely high dynamic ranges, as many feature strong light
sources, reflective surfaces, and shadowed dark areas. These challenging images were
chosen to test the robustness of the pipeline. All of them are in .exr format.
(a) Luxo Double Checker
(b) Bar Harbor Sunrise
Figure 4.3: Original Version of two HDR Images in Photograpic Survey Dataset
Funt et al. HDR Dataset
The third part of the dataset comes from the Funt et al. HDR Dataset (hereinafter referred
to as ”Funt Dataset”), which consists of 105 scenes captured with a Nikon D700 digital
camera, using auto­bracketing to capture up to 9 exposures with 1 EV difference. All of
them are in HDR format.
(a) Image S0010
(b) Image S0010 with
ColorChecker
Figure 4.4: Two HDR Images of the same scene from Funt Dataset
The dataset includes two series of base images captured from the same scenes. One
series includes four combined ColorCheckers placed in the scene, while the other does
not. The illumination incident on the ColorCheckers represents the overall scene’s lighting
color. Along with the exposure data, most images also provide the positions of the white
patches on the four ColorCheckers, as well as the bounding box coordinates for the entire
set of ColorCheckers. This information allows for precise localization of the color patches,
facilitating the evaluation of image processing results. Additionally, the RGB values of the
white patches sampled from the ColorCheckers are provided to determine the scene’s
illuminant chromaticity, serving as a reference for white point estimation and assisting in
result evaluation for this project.
The project selected two images from each of the sixteen scenes in the dataset (32 images
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
33
==PAGE:42==
in all), covering a wide range of indoor and outdoor lighting conditions. This selection
provides sufficient data to gather statistics for evaluation. This part plays a crucial role in
the HDR image dataset for the project.
4.2
Implementation Details
4.2.1
Platform and Software
The experiments were conducted on a Windows workstation with an Intel i7 processor and
16GB RAM. The implementation was developed using Python 3.8 with key dependencies
including OpenCV 4.5.3, NumPy 1.21.0, and the Colour Science package 0.4.6.
4.2.2
Processing Pipelines
SDR­SDR Pipeline (Processing SDR Content for Display on SDR Screens)
• Input: SDR images (.jpg/.png format)
• Output: Adjusted SDR images
HDR­HDR Pipeline (Processing HDR Content for HDR Screens)
• Input: HDR images (.exr/.hdr format)
• Output: Adjusted HDR images
HDR­SDR Pipeline (Processing HDR Content for Display on SDR Screens)
• Input: HDR images (.exr/.hdr format)
• Output: Adjusted SDR images
4.2.3
Parameters
Ambient Light Type
• ”warm”: CIE B (XYZ_w = [109.215, 100, 75.199])
[T ≈4874K]
• ”cool”: D65 (XYZ_w = [95.047, 100, 108.883])
[T ≈6504K]
CAM Parameters for Various Ambient Light Intensities
• ”bright”: LA = 800, Yb = 2.5, surround = average
• ”dim”: LA = 100, Yb = 0.5, surround = dark
Maximum Luminance for Displays
• SDR: 300 cd/m2
• HDR: 4000 cd/m2
4.2.4
Optimization Strategies
• Parameters auto­adjustment based on image characteristics
• Memory management using garbage collection
34
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:43==
• Downscaling for large images
• Error handling for robustness
4.3
Evaluation Methods
After processing the images, the system will conduct an image quality assessment to en­
sure color accuracy and overall visual effect. This section introduces both qualitative and
quantitative evaluation methods for assessing the effectiveness of the processed images
from each pipeline. It covers various scenarios, including cases with or without mea­
surement data, with or without target images, and with or without ColorCheckers. The
processed images are automatically saved in their respective folders, and the quantita­
tive batch data results are automatically written in Excel files, with timestamps added to
facilitate comparison of results across different iterations.
4.3.1
Qualitative Evaluation
The visual experience of the human eye is the most basic and intuitive evaluation method.
Observing the images output by each pipeline on the screen helps to quickly assess the
effectiveness of the processing based on experience.
For the pipeline that adjusts SDR images for display on SDR screens to adapt to ambi­
ent lighting conditions, the input images are derived from controlled laboratory scenes.
The laboratory light sources can be adjusted to match the target viewing ambient lighting
conditions, and the captured images can serve as target images for comparison, allowing
for an evaluation of the pipeline’s effectiveness. In other words, the four images captured
under different ambient lighting conditions in the dataset can act as both input images and
target images interchangeably. Therefore, directly observing and comparing the input im­
age with the target image can provide a simple verification of the pipeline’s effectiveness.
For the pipeline that adjusts HDR images for display on HDR screens to adapt to ambi­
ent lighting conditions, observe whether the image presents all details in high resolution,
whether it appears natural when displayed on an HDR screen under different ambient
lighting conditions, and whether the overall color balance is harmonious. Additionally, it
is essential to assess whether the image luminance has been scaled appropriately to the
set maximum luminance level.
For the pipeline that adjusts HDR images for display on SDR screens to adapt to ambient
lighting conditions, observe whether there are areas in the image that are too bright or too
dark, and whether details in the highlight and shadow areas from the original HDR image
are preserved and correctly presented on the SDR display through proper tone mapping.
Users can assess whether the colors of the scene and objects in the processed image
are presented naturally and appropriately based on their daily experience, ensuring that
the images appear normal in various lighting conditions.
However, since visual perception varies from person to person, quantitative metrics are
needed.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
35
==PAGE:44==
4.3.2
Quantitative Comparison Between Images with Target Image
Availability
Several common quantitative metrics are introduced to objectively compare two images
to assess the effectiveness of the pipeline, mostly used to evaluate the images from the
lab scene.
MAE and MSE
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Squared Error (MSE) are employed to measure
the average difference across the pixel values in two images. They can be calculated by
Equation 4.1. Smaller values indicate that the adapted image and the target image have
a smaller color difference, while MSE assigns higher weights to larger differences.
MAE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|,
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(4.1)
Difference Image
A difference image is generated by subtracting the adapted image from the target im­
age, computing the absolute difference in RGB values for each pixel, which represents
the extent of the color difference between the two images. The difference image helps
to visually highlight areas with noticeable color differences while pure black indicates a
minimum color difference.
ΔE
ΔE serves as a key measure of color difference. ΔE under CIE 2000 standards is applied
to quantify perceptual color differences between two colors in the CIELAB color space.
The calculation is shown in Equation 4.2. A lower ΔE value signifies a closer perceptual
similarity between colors.
∆E =
√
(∆L)2 + (∆a)2 + (∆b)2
(4.2)
4.3.3
Quantitative Evaluation on White Patches
The HDR dataset selected from the Funt Dataset in the experiments include the coordi­
nates and illumination coordinates of the white color patches, which provides the specific
locations of the white patches in four ColorCheckers and records the average RGB values
of the 3x3 pixels around their centers for each image. The data serves two purposes: first,
to check the accuracy of the white point estimation method used in the project, and sec­
ond, to evaluate the effectiveness of processing HDR images for display on SDR screens
while adapting to ambient lighting conditions.
Evaluating White Point Estimation from White Patch RGBs
The accuracy of white point estimation is evaluated by comparing the estimated white
point with the measured white point in the RGB domain. The estimated white point values
in XYZ space are converted to RGB, normalized so that the sum of the three channels
equals 1, and scaled to the 0–100 range.
36
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:45==
The measured white point data is loaded from the illuminance data files in .mat format
provided by the Funt dataset. The RGB values of the white patches in the four Col­
orCheckers, illuminated from different angles, are averaged and similarly normalized as
above.
Then the Euclidean distance (L2 distance) is calculated between the estimated and mea­
sured white points in RGB color spaces to quantify the error as shown in Equation 4.3.
L2_distance =
√∑
(p1 −p2)2
(4.3)
The L2 distances from all processed images are aggregated to compute key metrics,
including minimum, median, average, RMS (Root Mean Square), and maximum values.
These metrics provide a detailed statistical summary of estimation accuracy. Results are
exported to an Excel file. Smaller L2 Distances signify greater accuracy in white point
estimation, and statistical metrics offer an overview of the pipeline’s overall performance
across the dataset.
Assessing HDR­SDR Processed Images
Based on the coordinates of the center of the white patches in the four ColorCheckers
provided by the Funt dataset, a 4x4 pixel region around the center is extracted, and the
average value of these pixels is calculated. Then, the average value of all four patches is
computed and normalized so that the sum of the three color channels equals 1. This value
is compared with the normalized standard white point under the target light source. The
color difference (ΔE) between them is calculated to quantitatively evaluate the effective­
ness of adjusting HDR images to adapt to ambient lighting for display on SDR screens.
This serves as a key metric for assessing the quality of white balance adjustment and the
overall color reproduction performance of the pipeline.
4.3.4
Automatic ColorChecker Detection for Evaluation on Color Patches
In order to assess the color reproduction capability of the pipeline that displays HDR im­
ages on an SDR screen more comprehensively, using the ColorChecker placed in the
images from Funt dataset, a system was designed in this project to automatically extract
the color values of the 24 color patches on the central ColorChecker that is directly facing
the camera in the scene. This section will provide a detailed explanation.
To extract the central ColorChecker, considering that the dataset provides only the co­
ordinates of the top­left and bottom­right corners of the bounding box for the entire set
of ColorCheckers. Since the ColorCheckers are not necessarily placed on a horizontal
plane, we manually inspected the dataset images to define a region of interest (ROI) that
roughly includes the central ColorChecker.
For this purpose, we selected the following range:
• Width: 28% to 85% of the bounding box width.
• Height: The bottom edge extends 1% below the bounding box’s lower edge, while
the top edge is located at 60% of the bounding box’s height.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.5: Example of bounding box and ROI selection for extracting the central Col­
orChecker
This ROI generally covers the central lower portion of the bounding box. An example is
shown in Figure 4.5, where the blue box represents the bounding box provided in the
dataset, and the red box indicates the selected ROI for detecting the ColorChecker.
Subsequently, image processing is performed on the ROI. First, the image is converted
from the RGB color space to grayscale to facilitate processing. Then, Contrast Limited
Adaptive Histogram Equalization (CLAHE) is applied to the grayscale image to enhance
the local contrast, making details more distinct. This step involves creating a CLAHE
object, which limits the degree of contrast enhancement and divides the image into an
8×8 grid for processing.
Median filtering, which is suitable for reducing salt­and­pepper noise, is applied to the
enhanced image to blur it, effectively removing noise while preserving edges. Since the
pixel size of the ROI varies between images, an adaptive filter kernel size is chosen. If
either side of the ROI is shorter than 80 pixels, the kernel size is set to 3; otherwise, it is
set to 7. The blurred image is shown in Figure 4.6a
Canny Edge Detection from the OpenCV library is applied to the blurred image. This
method involves several steps: calculating image gradients using the Sobel operator,
suppressing non­maximum values to sharpen edges, applying dual­threshold detection
to classify edge pixels, and connecting edges to form continuous boundaries. The low
threshold is set to 50, and the high threshold is set to 150, ensuring precise edge detection
while minimizing noise. The result is shown in Figure 4.6b.
After that, the resulting edges might be broken or incomplete. Morphological operations
(mainly closing, dilation and erosion) are applied to bridge these gaps and create solid
edge boundaries. The kernel size increases in odd increments from 1 to 9, providing
varying levels of processing effects for subsequent filtering.
To detect straight lines within the processed edges, ’HoughLinesP’ is used to detect
straight lines within specific length. These line segments are combined with the lines
obtained from the morphological operations mentioned above. The result is shown in
Figure 4.6c.
38
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:47==
(a) Blurred Image
(b) Edges Detected
(c) Combined Lines
(d) Contours Detected
Figure 4.6: Intermediate results of image processing
To identify and extract potential contours corresponding to the ColorChecker chart, the
’findContours’ function in the OpenCV library is set to the list mode to retrieve all detected
contours without establishing a hierarchical relationship. The contours are shown in Fig­
ure 4.6d. A filter based on the shape of the ColorChecker itself is then applied. The
contour area must exceed 10% of the ROI area, and the aspect ratio must be between
1.15 and 1.7. This step effectively filters out many small color block contours that are
mistakenly detected as part of the ColorChecker.
Then a perspective transform correction is applied to the detected contour to ensure the
ColorChecker is properly oriented. The vertex coordinates of the minimum bounding rect­
angle of the contour are calculated and a perspective transform is applied to bring it to a
horizontal position. It also checks the relationship between the width and height to deter­
mine whether the transformed image needs to be rotated by 90 degrees. In the original
image, extracting the image according to the coordinates results in the image shown in
Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: ColorChecker Extracted in the Original Image
Next, each color patch is sequentially extracted from the results. The width of the patches
is determined by dividing the overall width by 4, and the height is determined by dividing
the height by 6. The center of each color patch is located by iterating over the four columns
and six rows. For each center, the RGB values of all pixels within a region of one­quarter
the size of the patch around the center are sampled, and the average color is calculated.
The color difference (ΔE) is then computed by comparing the average color with the ref­
erence color, which provides the evaluation results.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
39
==PAGE:48==
The reference data for the ColorChecker is derived from specifications published by X­
Rite in 2016, corresponding to the ’ColorChecker Classic’ edition released after November
2014 [44], which provides the CIELab values of 24 color patches, arranged in four rows
and six columns, under the D50 illuminant.
However, due to variations in the size of the ColorChecker in each image and differences
in lighting conditions, this method currently cannot effectively extract the ColorChecker
in all images. The robustness of this method needs further improvement. Out of the 13
images with bounding box coordinates used for the experiment in the Funt Dataset, only
11 can correctly extract the ColorChecker region using this method. However, the existing
data can still provide some statistical results for evaluation reference.
Thus, by comparing the colors of the 24 color patches in the ColorChecker from the pro­
cessed HDR content, adapted for display on SDR screens and adjusted for ambient light­
ing, with the standard colors under the same lighting conditions, a quantitative evaluation
of the pipeline’s performance is obtained based on the color differences (ΔE).
40
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:49==
5
Results and Analysis
5.1
SDR­SDR Pipeline
5.1.1
Calculation of White Point
Using the Ohno method, the calculated XYZ tristimulus of the white point based on CCT
and Δuv measurements in the laboratory were converted to CIE xy chromaticity coordi­
nates, and plotted on the chromaticity diagram to validate the accuracy of the computed
XYZ values. As shown in Figure 5.1, the white points of both the original and target scenes
are positioned close to the Planckian locus, reflecting the appropriate color temperature
correspondence. Furthermore, the distances of these points from the Planckian locus
align with the measured ∆uv values.
Figure 5.1: White points in the chromaticity diagram
5.1.2
Processed Images
Figure 5.2 shows a comparison between a set of processed images and the target images.
It can be observed that their color temperatures are similar, but upon closer inspection,
slight differences can still be identified. Figure 5.3 presents a difference image, indicating
minimal differences in the nearly black areas, while significant differences are observed
in high­contrast edges and shadow regions.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
41
==PAGE:50==
(a) Processed Image
(b) Target Image
Figure 5.2:
Comparison of Processed Image and Target Image in Adapting High­
Luminance High­Temperature Image to High­Luminance Low­Temperature
Figure 5.3: Difference Image when Adapting High­Luminance High­Temperature Image
to High­Luminance Low­Temperature
5.1.3
Statistics
An overview of the statistics in Table 5.1 shows that, in most instances, MAE, MSE, and
ΔE between images decrease to extremely low values after processing. Some of the
increased values may be caused by measurement errors. It can also be observed that
all ΔE values above 10 occur in scenarios requiring adaptation to changes in luminance.
The main reason may be that when taking photos under different ambient light levels, the
shutter speed and aperture remained unchanged, but the ISO was adjusted, leading to
changes in image brightness not only due to the light source but also due to the variation
in the camera’s light intake. In addition, cumulative errors in the selection of La, Yb, and
Surround factors may also contribute to the overall error.
Input Image
Target Image
Original MAE
Adapted MAE
Original MSE
Adapted MSE
ΔE Original
ΔE Adapted
highlxhightmp.jpg
highlxlowtmp.jpg
0.155
0.037
0.037
0.004
20.795
4.473
highlxhightmp.jpg
lowlxhightmp.jpg
0.443
0.338
0.214
0.137
38.109
30.345
highlxhightmp.jpg
lowlxlowtmp.jpg
0.485
0.336
0.259
0.154
42.722
36.989
highlxlowtmp.jpg
highlxhightmp.jpg
0.155
0.064
0.037
0.007
20.795
9.984
highlxlowtmp.jpg
lowlxhightmp.jpg
0.359
0.293
0.17
0.106
40.779
28.384
highlxlowtmp.jpg
lowlxlowtmp.jpg
0.401
0.295
0.2
0.112
42.717
33.132
lowlxhightmp.jpg
highlxhightmp.jpg
0.443
0.275
0.214
0.084
38.109
21.42
lowlxhightmp.jpg
highlxlowtmp.jpg
0.359
0.231
0.17
0.063
40.779
19.912
lowlxhightmp.jpg
lowlxlowtmp.jpg
0.044
0.045
0.003
0.003
6.356
7.992
lowlxlowtmp.jpg
highlxhightmp.jpg
0.485
0.291
0.259
0.099
42.722
27.354
lowlxlowtmp.jpg
highlxlowtmp.jpg
0.401
0.247
0.2
0.077
42.717
24.667
lowlxlowtmp.jpg
lowlxhightmp.jpg
0.044
0.053
0.003
0.004
6.356
9.966
Table 5.1: Statistics on measurement usage from SDR­SDR pipeline
42
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:51==
5.1.4
Refining White Point Estimation for Outlier Data
It can be observed that two cases of color temperature adaptation with constant low lu­
minance show outlier values (the last row and the fourth­to­last row of Table5.1), which
are likely due to measurement errors. The abnormal result can be seen in Figure 5.4a.
In such cases, the MaxRGB­based strategy can be used to estimate the white point val­
ues and correct the results. The corrected results are shown in Table 5.2, and one of
the corrected output image is in Figure 5.4b. Both have improved. In conclusion, using
image­based white point automatic estimation as a backup solution effectively reduces
the likelihood of outliers caused by measurement errors.
(a) Output before Correction
(b) Output after Correction
Figure 5.4: One of the Outliers when using measurements to determine the white point
Input Image
Target Image
Original MAE
Adapted MAE
Original MSE
Adapted MSE
ΔE Original
ΔE Adapted
lowlxhightmp.jpg
lowlxlowtmp.jpg
0.044
0.034
0.003
0.002
6.356
3.497
lowlxlowtmp.jpg
lowlxhightmp.jpg
0.044
0.035
0.003
0.002
6.356
3.958
Table 5.2: Corrected Results using White Point Estimation
5.2
HDR­HDR Pipeline
5.2.1
Statistics for lab HDR images
The statistical data of the adaptation results for the HDR images generated in the labora­
tory under ambient lighting conditions are shown in Table 5.3. MAE, MSE, and ΔE values
between images have decreased significantly.
Input Image
Target Image
Original MAE
Adapted MAE
Original MSE
Adapted MSE
ΔE Original
ΔE Adapted
HighTemp.hdr
LowTemp.hdr
0.1896
0.0501
0.0540
0.0069
23.4609
7.0753
LowTemp.hdr
HighTemp.hdr
0.1896
0.0598
0.0540
0.0089
23.4609
10.4109
Table 5.3: Statistics for lab HDR images
5.2.2
Estimation of White Point on Funt Dataset
The MaxRGB method with preprocessing was applied to estimate the white points for 97
HDR images with illuminance measurements from the Funt Dataset. The normalized RGB
values obtained from the estimation were compared with the normalized measured white
point RGB values, ranging from 0­100, and the statistical data of the resulting L2 distances
are presented in Table 5.4. The complete data is provided in Table B.1 in the Appendix.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
43
==PAGE:52==
Detailed data for the 13 images used as input for the pipelines in the experiments are
shown in Table 5.5.
Metrics
L2 Distance
Min
0.295
Median
4.36
Average
6.562
RMS
8.865
Max
28.182
Table 5.4: Overview of White Point Estimation Results
By summarizing the statistical data, it can be observed that the direct white point estima­
tion results for HDR images show a certain degree of reliability overall. However, there
are significant variations in the results across different images. The overall distribution is
relatively concentrated, with a few extreme cases showing large outliers. Upon examining
the images with significant errors, it is generally because they feature multiple complex
light sources overlapping, which leads to the failure of the MaxRGB method.
Filename
Measured (Normalized RGB)
Estimated (Normalized RGB)
L2 Distance
S0010.hdr
[ 0.234 0.409 0.357]
[ 0.213 0.440 0.347]
3.91
S0020.hdr
[ 0.218 0.432 0.350]
[ 0.244 0.437 0.319]
4.009
S0050.hdr
[ 0.222 0.434 0.344]
[ 0.242 0.450 0.308]
4.349
S0080.hdr
[ 0.222 0.431 0.347]
[ 0.229 0.432 0.338]
1.123
S0190.hdr
[ 0.309 0.373 0.318]
[ 0.365 0.451 0.184]
16.433
S0300.hdr
[ 0.229 0.402 0.369]
[ 0.344 0.470 0.187]
22.641
S0320.hdr
[ 0.383 0.451 0.165]
[ 0.333 0.494 0.173]
6.563
S0350.hdr
[ 0.193 0.423 0.384]
[ 0.226 0.414 0.360]
4.17
S0650.hdr
[ 0.203 0.434 0.363]
[ 0.195 0.439 0.366]
1
S0700.hdr
[ 0.244 0.422 0.334]
[ 0.238 0.435 0.327]
1.652
S0750.hdr
[ 0.253 0.390 0.357]
[ 0.200 0.415 0.385]
6.553
S0810.hdr
[ 0.433 0.434 0.133]
[ 0.393 0.456 0.151]
4.862
S1010.hdr
[ 0.410 0.444 0.146]
[ 0.474 0.398 0.128]
8.11
Table 5.5: Detailed White Point RGBs and L2 Distances for the 13 Input Images
5.2.3
Processed Images from Funt Dataset
For the other HDR images, the output images of adjusting them to adapt to different am­
bient lighting and be suitable for HDR displays are shown in Figure 5.5, with the original
image in Figure 4.4a. The parameters of the ambient lights were introduced in 4.2.3.
44
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:53==
(a) Warm and Bright
Light
(b) Warm and Dim
Light
(c)
Cool
and
Dim
Light
(d) Cool and Bright
Light
Figure 5.5: Adapted HDR Images under different ambient lighting conditions through
HDR­HDR pipeline
5.3
HDR­SDR Pipeline
5.3.1
Processed Images
Reinhard Method
The figure below demonstrates examples of tone­mapped outputs generated using the
Reinhard method.
Figure 5.6a shows the tone­mapped result for the image ”S0010”
(4.4a), while figure 5.6b presents the tone­mapped output for the image ”LuxoDoubleChecker”
(4.3a).
It can be observed that the Reinhard method effectively compresses the dynamic range
for certain images, restoring details in both highlights and shadows. However, when deal­
ing with extremely high dynamic range images (such as LuxoDoubleChecker), the current
mapping is insufficient for dynamic range adjustment, resulting in overexposed or under­
exposed areas in the image.
(a) S0010_CC
(b) LuxoDoubleChecker
Figure 5.6: Examples of tone­mapped output using the Reinhard method
Bilateral Filtering Method
Figure 5.7 and 5.8 demonstrate examples of output images through the HDR­SDR pipeline
using the improved Bilateral Filtering method. It can be observed that the pipeline demon­
strates effective luminance compression and color restoration. The details in both the
highlights and shadows are restored, including extremely bright light sources or reflective
surfaces. Meanwhile, the target viewing light source is set to D65. The original HDR
image of Figure 5.7a is Figure 4.4b, while the original image of Figure 5.7c is Figure 4.3b.
From the ColorChecker in Figure 5.7b, the white patch appear rather gray, indicating
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
45
==PAGE:54==
(a) S0010_CC
(b) Luxo Double Checker
(c) Bar Harbor Sunrise
Figure 5.7: Examples of tone­mapped output using the Bilateral Filtering method
that the method may have overly compressed the brightness in this image, lowering the
intensity of the bright areas. However, this image is quite unique. Considering all the
images in the dataset, the pipeline proves to be a highly effective and robust approach.
(a) Original Image
(b) Adapted Image
Figure 5.8: An example of the original and adapted images processed through the pipeline
using the ’PeckLake.hdr’ dataset.
5.3.2
Evaluation on White Patches
As observed in Figure 5.9, the colors of the ColorCheckers in all the processed images
appear consistent and visually accurate, indicating the effectiveness of the pipeline in
preserving color fidelity.
Figure 5.9: Close­up view of the ColorChecker in S0010
Table 5.6 presents a comparison between white patches in processed images through
HDR­SDR and the theoretical standard white under ambient D65 light conditions. Metrics
such as ΔE, mean R/G/B values, and L2 distance are used to quantify the differences. L2
distance is calculated in the normalized RGB domain.
From the data, the average ΔE value is 12.436, indicating a noticeable color difference in
46
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:55==
some cases. Several images show significantly higher ΔE values, suggesting greater de­
viations from the expected white point. Similarly, the L2 distance values also reflect these
trends, with high values corresponding to images with greater color differences. This may
be attributed to errors in white point estimation. Conversely, some images show much
lower Delta E and L2 distance values, highlighting cases where the method performed
better.
Meanwhile, it can be observed that outdoor scenes often achieve better results after re­
viewing these images. There could be several reasons. First, natural lighting in outdoor
environments is more uniform and stable, making color and brightness adjustments eas­
ier. Second, outdoor colors, such as blue skies and green vegetation, are more likely to
fall within common color spaces, ensuring accurate color reproduction. Additionally, white
point calibration benefits from the predictable characteristics of natural light, whereas in­
door lighting can introduce complexities due to mixed light sources.
These results suggest that while the pipeline is effective overall, there are scenarios where
refinement is needed to better adapt to specific lighting conditions and maintain color
accuracy.
Image
ΔE
Mean R
Mean G
Mean B
L2 Distance
Whether Outdoor
S0010_CC_SDR.png
10.585
1
1
0.899
2.847
No
S0020_CC_SDR.png
2.809
0.936
0.947
0.931
0.411
Yes
S0050_CC_SDR.png
8.893
0.695
0.731
0.671
2.016
Yes
S0080_CC_SDR.png
8.586
0.882
0.921
0.865
1.54
Yes
S0190_CC_SDR.png
17.507
0.713
0.921
0.872
6.152
No
S0300_CC_SDR.png
16.319
0.509
0.725
0.844
11.563
No
S0320_CC_SDR.png
21.97
0.912
1
0.692
8.617
No
S0350_CC_SDR.png
9.614
0.435
0.514
0.498
4.083
Yes
S0650_CC_SDR.png
4.7
0.455
0.46
0.428
1.794
Yes
S0700_CC_SDR.png
7.763
0.333
0.35
0.299
3.706
No
S0750_CC_SDR.png
14.27
0.432
0.505
0.407
5.374
Yes
S0810_CC_SDR.png
17.326
0.691
0.658
0.457
9.894
No
S1010_CC_SDR.png
21.329
0.919
1
0.712
7.967
No
Average
12.43623
5.074154
Table 5.6: Comparison of white patches in processed images against theoretical standard
white under ambient light conditions
5.3.3
Evaluation on Colour Patches
The processed image S0020_CC_SDR.png, which effectively extracts the ColorChecker
and has a good output result, was selected to present the data of evaluation on colour
patches. The RGB values of 24 different color patches from the ColorChecker in this
image were compared with the standard colors, and the resulting data is listed in Table
5.7.
The values indicate the color differences between the processed and reference color
patches, with the red and moderate red patches having the smallest differences (ΔE =
4.174) and the cyan patch showing the largest difference (ΔE = 28.61), which happen to
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
47
==PAGE:56==
be opposite colors. These differences highlight the areas where the tone mapping and
color reproduction of the image may not perfectly match the reference. At the same time,
the processing results for pure white and pure black are also good.
The reason for this result may be the choice and limitations of the color space, as dif­
ferent color gamuts have significant differences in the blue­green region. It could also
be due to accumulated errors caused by parameter inaccuracies in the color appearance
model. Additionally, the distortion may be caused by the significant impact on the high
color temperature regions during tone mapping.
Colour Patch
ΔE
R
G
B
white
4.174
1
1
1
blue
18.054
0.355
0.312
0.958
orange
4.417
0.821
0.481
0.189
dark skin
11.63
0.402
0.344
0.266
neutral 8
10.082
0.87
0.934
0.919
green
12.282
0.524
0.663
0.316
purplish blue
18.325
0.465
0.446
1
light skin
12.179
0.717
0.628
0.542
neutral 6.5
10.304
0.712
0.771
0.766
red
1.54
0.706
0.201
0.195
moderate red
1.912
0.749
0.335
0.368
blue sky
12.779
0.501
0.555
0.782
neutral 5
8.172
0.509
0.549
0.544
yellow
10.654
0.922
0.884
0.266
purple
8.409
0.351
0.29
0.534
foliage
4.883
0.408
0.468
0.253
neutral 3.5
3.741
0.344
0.366
0.373
magenta
10.141
0.714
0.396
0.743
yellow green
8.905
0.75
0.871
0.326
blue flower
12.204
0.604
0.614
0.924
black
2.01
0.213
0.216
0.225
cyan
28.61
0.548
0.652
0.936
orange yellow
10.35
0.836
0.69
0.219
bluish green
15.389
0.75
0.904
0.842
average
10.048
Table 5.7: ΔE values with reference and RGB components for various color patches in
the processed image S0020_CC_SDR.png
48
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusions and Outlook
6.1
Conclusions
6.1.1
Pipeline Performance
SDR­SDR Pipeline
The Ohno method demonstrated reasonable accuracy in calculating white points. Image
processing led to significant reductions in MAE, MSE, and ΔE between adapted and target
images, indicating improved color consistency. However, specific errors in measurement
and image capturing may lead to poor results.
HDR­HDR Pipeline
For laboratory­generated HDR images with a target, the adaptation process effectively
decreased color difference. For the Funt Dataset, the MaxRGB method with preprocess­
ing showed overall reliability in white point estimation for HDR images, despite variations
and outliers. These outliers were primarily associated with complex lighting conditions
that challenged the MaxRGB method. The pipeline can effectively adjust HDR images to
adapt to HDR displays under different ambient lighting conditions.
HDR­SDR Pipeline
The Reinhard method was effective for some HDR images but struggled with extremely
high dynamic range content. In contrast, the improved bilateral filtering method achieved
better luminance compression and color restoration, though some color differences are
still large, especially under complex indoor light and high colour temperature. The error
may arise from inaccuracies in the choice of color space and the accumulation of errors
across multiple steps. Overall, it proved to be a robust solution for this pipeline.
6.1.2
Methodology Evaluation
Color Appearance Model
CIECAM16 played a crucial role in accurately predicting color perception under diverse
lighting conditions. Its chromatic adaptation transform and parameter­based calculations
ensured consistent color reproduction across different environments, making it an essen­
tial component of the pipeline.
White Point Estimation
The combination of direct calculation on measurement (Ohno method) and the MaxRGB­
based estimation provided flexibility. The MaxRGB method, especially with preprocess­
ing, was suitable for most scenarios and offered a practical solution when direct light
source measurements were unavailable.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
49
==PAGE:58==
Tone Mapping
The bilateral filtering method, with optimized parameters, outperformed the Reinhard
method in handling HDR­SDR conversion. It effectively preserved details while com­
pressing the dynamic range, although further improvements could be made to address
specific image artifacts.
6.2
Outlook
6.2.1
Robustness Enhancement
To validate the reliability of the pipelines, more precise shooting and measurement proce­
dures are required, along with an expanded dataset to achieve more accurate statistical
results. To enhance the robustness of ColorChecker extraction from images, more gener­
alizable methods, such as the integration of neural network algorithms, should be applied.
Meanwhile, in the white point prediction method, the simple assumption of MaxRGB in­
evitably leads to failures under complex lighting conditions, which needs to be addressed.
Machine learning algorithms could also be introduced. However, these improvements
may lead to increased computation time, and balancing system robustness with compu­
tational complexity will be a key focus for future research.
6.2.2
Real­time Processing
Future research can focus on optimizing the pipeline for real­time applications. This could
involve exploring more efficient algorithms and hardware acceleration techniques to re­
duce processing time. Methods to enhance the speed of color adaptation, tone map­
ping, and other computationally intensive steps should be explored. Additionally, machine
learning­based approaches could be explored to predict optimal parameters in real­time
based on the characteristics of the input images and ambient lighting conditions.
6.2.3
Application Expansion
The pipeline has potential applications in various fields such as XR (Extended Reality),
autonomous driving, and smart home environments. In XR, it could enhance the visual ex­
perience by ensuring accurate color reproduction and dynamic range adaptation in virtual
and augmented reality displays. For autonomous driving, it could improve the visibility of
images captured by vehicle cameras under different lighting conditions, thereby enhanc­
ing the safety and reliability of the system. In smart home environments, it could optimize
the display of images on various devices with different capabilities, providing users with a
more consistent and high­quality visual experience. Future work should focus on tailoring
the pipeline to the specific requirements of these applications and conducting extensive
field tests to validate its effectiveness.
50
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 61966­2­1:1999 ­ Multimedia sys­
tems and equipment ­ Colour measurement and management ­ Part 2­1: Colour
management ­ Default RGB colour space ­ sRGB. 1999. url: https://webstore.iec.
ch/publication/6169.
[2]
CIE TC 1­48. CIE 1976 Uniform Colour Spaces. 2004, p. 24. isbn: 978­3­901906­
33­6.
[3]
C. J. Li, M. R. Luo, and G. H. Cui. “Colour­difference evaluation using colour ap­
pearance models”. In: Proceeding of Eleventh Color Imaging Conference (CIC11).
Scottsdale, AZ: IS&T, 2003, pp. 127–131.
[4]
S. Y. Choi et al. “Investigation of large display color image appearance. I: Important
factors affecting perceived quality”. In: Journal of Imaging Science and Technology
52 (2008), pp. 1–11.
[5]
S. Y. Choi et al. “Investigation of large display color image appearance. III: Model­
ing image naturalness”. In: Journal of Imaging Science and Technology 53 (2009),
pp. 1–12.
[6]
Erik Reinhard et al. HDR Imaging. 1st. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2005.
Chap. 2, pp. 19–83.
[7]
Steven K. Shevell, ed. The Science of Color. Elsevier, 2003. isbn: 9780444512512.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780444512512/the-science-of-color.
[8]
C. J. Li and M. R. Luo. “Testing the robustness of CIECAM02”. In: Color Research
and Application 30 (2005), pp. 99–106.
[9]
Ahmet Oguz Akyüz and Erik Reinhard. “Color Appearance in High­Dynamic­Range
Imaging”. In: Journal of Electronic Imaging 15.3 (2006), p. 033001. doi: 10.1117/1.
2238891.
[10]
Changjun Li et al. “The CIE 2016 Colour Appearance Model for Colour Management
Systems: CIECAM16”. In: Color Research and Application 42.6 (2017), pp. –. doi:
10.25039/TR.248.2022.
[11]
CIE Central Bureau. A colour appearance model for colour management systems:
CIECAM02. 159. Vienna: CIE Central Bureau, 2004.
[12]
C. Li, Z. Li, Z. Wang, et al. “Comprehensive color solutions: CAM16, CAT16, and
CAM16­UCS”. In: Color Research & Application 42 (2017), pp. 703–718. doi: 10.
1002/col.22131. url: https://doi.org/10.1002/col.22131.
[13]
Mark D. Fairchild. Color Appearance Models. 3rd. Wiley, 2013. url: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/9781118653128.
[14]
R. W. G. Hunt and M. R. Pointer. “A colour appearance transform for the CIE
1931 standard colorimetric observer”. In: Color Research and Application 10 (1985),
pp. 165–179.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
51
==PAGE:60==
[15]
C. J. Li et al. “The performance of CIECAM02”. In: Proceedings of Tenth Color
Imaging Conference (CIC10). Scottsdale, Arizona: IS&T, 2002, pp. 28–32.
[16]
N. Moroney et al. “The CIECAM02 colour appearance models”. In: Proceedings of
Tenth Color Imaging Conference (CIC10). Scottsdale, AZ: IS&T, 2002, pp. 23–27.
[17]
M. R. Luo and C. J. Li. “CIE color appearance models and associated color spaces”.
In: Colorimetry: Understanding the CIE System. Ed. by J. Schanda. Hoboken, New
Jersey, USA: Wiley, 2007. Chap. 11.
[18]
Muhammad Safdar et al. “ZCAM, a Colour Appearance Model Based on a High
Dynamic Range Uniform Colour Space”. In: Optics Express 29.4 (2021), pp. 6036–
52. doi: 10.1364/OE.413659.
[19]
Yoshi Ohno. “Practical Use and Calculation of CCT and Duv”. In: LEUKOS 10.1
(2014), pp. 47–55. doi: 10.1080/15502724.2014.839020.
[20]
Brian Funt and Lilong Shi. “The Rehabilitation of MaxRGB”. In: Final Program and
Proceedings ­ IS&T/SID Color Imaging Conference. SOC Imaging Science & Tech­
nology, 2010, pp. 256–259.
[21]
K. Takahashi et al. “Auto white balance algorithm based upon estimating color tem­
perature of scene illuminant”. English. In: Proceedings of ICIS’02: Tokyo, Interna­
tional Congress of Imaging Science 2002. Soc. Photographic Sci. & Technol. Japan,
2002, pp. 377–378.
[22]
G. Buchsbaum. “A spatial processor model for object colour perception”. In: Journal
of the Franklin Institute 310 (1980), pp. 1–26. doi: 10.1016/0016-0032(80)90022-7.
[23]
Joost van de Weijer, Thomas Gevers, and Arnold W.M. Smeulders. “Edge­based
color constancy”. In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 16.9 (2007), pp. 2207–
2214. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2007.905195.
[24]
Xiao­zhao Xu et al. “Improved Grey World Color Correction Algorithms”. Chinese.
In: ACTA PHOTONICA SINICA 39.3 (2010), p. 559.
[25]
J. T. Barron. “Convolutional Color Constancy”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Interna­
tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2015, pp. 1945–1953. doi: 10.1109/
ICCV.2015.224.
[26]
J. T. Barron and Y. Tsai. “Fast Fourier Color Constancy”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2017, pp. 3799–
3808. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.404.
[27]
A. O. Akyüz, E. Reinhard, and S. Pattanaik. “Color Appearance Models and Dy­
namic Range Reduction”. In: First ACM Symposium on Applied Perception in Graph­
ics and Visualization (APGV). 2004, p. 166.
[28]
A. O. Akyüz et al. “Do HDR Displays Support LDR Content? A Psychophysical Eval­
uation”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics 26.3 (2007), p. 38.
[29]
Erik Reinhard et al. “Photographic tone reproduction for digital images”. In: ACM
Trans. Graph. 21.3 (July 2002), pp. 267–276. issn: 0730­0301. doi: 10.1145/566654.
566575. url: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/566654.566575.
[30]
F. Drago et al. “Adaptive Logarithmic­Mapping for Displaying High Contrast Scenes”.
In: Computer Graphics Forum 22.3 (2003), pp. 419–426.
52
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:61==
[31]
P. G. J. Barten. Contrast Sensitivity of the Human Eye and its Effects on Image
Quality. Bellingham, WA, United States: SPIE ­ The International Society for Optical
Engineering, 1999.
[32]
Frédo Durand and Julie Dorsey. “Fast bilateral filtering for the display of high­dynamic­
range images”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics 21.3 (2002). Cited by: 1037,
pp. 257–266. doi: 10.1145/566654.566574. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/
record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-0036995425&doi=10.1145%2f566654.566574&partnerID=40&
md5=3f20f88541fd658dfbb925441eb3d522.
[33]
J. TUMBLIN. “Three Methods of Detail­Preserving Contrast Reduction for Displayed
Images”. PhD thesis. College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, 1999.
[34]
F. R. Hampel et al. Robust Statistics: The Approach Based on Influence Functions.
New York: Wiley, 1986.
[35]
C. Tomasi and R. Manduchi. “Bilateral Filtering for Gray and Color Images”. In: Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. on Computer Vision. 1998, pp. 836–846.
[36]
J. TUMBLIN and G. TURK. “LCIS: A Boundary Hierarchy for Detail­Preserving Con­
trast Reduction”. In: Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 99. Computer Graphics Proceed­
ings, Annual Conference Series. Los Angeles, California: ACM SIGGRAPH / Addi­
son Wesley Longman, 1999, pp. 83–90.
[37]
P. Perona and J. Malik. “Scale­space and Edge Detection Using Anisotropic Diffu­
sion”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI)
12.7 (1990), pp. 629–639.
[38]
K. Chiu et al. “Spatially Nonuniform Scaling Functions for High Contrast Images”.
In: Proceedings of Graphics Interface. 1993, pp. 245–253.
[39]
B. M. Oh et al. “Image­based Modeling and Photo Editing”. In: Proceedings of ACM
SIGGRAPH 2001. ACM Press / ACM SIGGRAPH, 2001, pp. 433–442.
[40]
G.W. LARSON, H. RUSHMEIER, and C. PIATKO. “A Visibility Matching Tone Re­
production Operator for High Dynamic Range Scenes”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 3.4 (Oct. 1997), pp. 291–306.
[41]
S. N. Pattanaik et al. “A Multiscale Model of Adaptation and Spatial Vision for Re­
alistic Image Display”. In: Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 98. Orlando, Florida: ACM
SIGGRAPH / Addison Wesley, 1998, pp. 287–298.
[42]
Masayuki Sugawara, Seo­Young Choi, and David Wood. “Ultra­High­Definition Tele­
vision (Rec. ITU­R BT.2020): A Generational Leap in the Evolution of Television
[Standards in a Nutshell]”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 31.3 (2014), pp. 170–
174. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2014.2302331.
[43]
Byongtae Ryu et al. “New RGB primary for various multimedia systems”. eng. In:
Journal of Information Display 15.2 (2014), pp. 65–70. issn: 21581606, 15980316.
doi: 10.1080/15980316.2014.919966.
[44]
X­Rite. New color specifications for ColorChecker SG and Classic Charts. http :
//xritephoto.com/ph_product_overview.aspx?ID=938&Action=Support&. Retrieved
October 29, 2018. 2016.
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:63==
A
User Guide
A.1
Installation Requirements
• Python 3.8+
• NumPy
• Scikit­image
• OpenCV
• Colour
• Pandas
• Matplotlib
A.2
File List
Figure A.1: File List of the Project
• SDR_lab, HDR_lab: Images captured and generated in the multimedia lab
• HDR_MATLAB_3x3, INDEX, real_illum: Measurement data from Funt Dataset
• config.json: Configuration file for measurements
• output: Saved output images and evaluation results
• color_appearance.py: Color space conversion and CAM models
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
55
==PAGE:64==
• Colorchecker.py: Evaluation based on ColorChecker in Funt Dataset
• evaluation.py: Quantitative metrics for evaluation
• image_process.py: Image rescaling
• main.py: Main function of pipelines
• plotcolorchecker.py: ColorChecker plotting for reference
• plotting.py: Diagrams plotting
• tone_mapping.py: Tone mapping methods
• whitepoint.py: White point value obtaining
• whitepoint_evaluation.py: Evaluation on white point estimation
A.3
Run Command
To plot a pure ColorChecker
run plotcolorchecker.py
To evaluate white point estimation results
run whitepoint_evaluation.py
To run SDR­SDR pipeline for single image
run in the terminal:
python main.py ­p sdr ­in ’path/input_image.png’ ­tg ’path/target_image.png’
To run SDR­SDR pipeline for batch test
run in the terminal:
python main.py ­p sdr ­ins ’sdr_lab’ ­tgs ’sdr_lab’
To run HDR­HDR pipeline for single image
run in the terminal:
python main.py ­p hdr_hdr ­in ’path/input_image.hdr’ ­alt warm or cool ­ai bright
or dim
To run HDR­HDR pipeline for batch test
run in the terminal:
python main.py ­p hdr_hdr ­inhdrs ’hdrimage’ ­alt warm or cool ­ai bright or dim
To run HDR­SDR pipeline for single image
run in the terminal:
python main.py ­p sdr_sdr ­in ’path/input_image.hdr’
To run HDR­SDR pipeline for batch test
run in the terminal:
python main.py ­p sdr_sdr ­inhdrs ’hdrimage’
To evaluate HDR­SDR pipeline results on patches
run Colorchecker.py
56
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:65==
B
Overall White Point Estimation
Table B.1: Overview of White Point Estimation Results on 97 Images
Filename
Measured White Point (Normalized RGB)
Estimated White Point (Normalized RGB)
L2 Distance
S0010.hdr
[ 0.23414739 0.40863756 0.35721505]
[ 0.21285385 0.43988645 0.34725973]
3.91
S0020.hdr
[ 0.21822965 0.43206426 0.3497061 ]
[ 0.24398944 0.4366803 0.31933028]
4.009
S0050.hdr
[ 0.22225648 0.4341249 0.34361862]
[ 0.24157757 0.45026723 0.3081552 ]
4.349
S0080.hdr
[ 0.22228889 0.43084004 0.34687107]
[ 0.22942542 0.43225616 0.33831838]
1.123
S0110.hdr
[ 0.23530792 0.43473589 0.32995619]
[ 0.24931177 0.44546875 0.30521944]
3.038
S0160.hdr
[ 0.22652386 0.42378056 0.34969558]
[ 0.23352149 0.43362 0.33285856]
2.072
S0190.hdr
[ 0.30914318 0.37299312 0.3178637 ]
[ 0.36479422 0.4508983 0.1843075 ]
16.433
S0200.hdr
[ 0.27823834 0.41132012 0.31044154]
[ 0.23096706 0.42934623 0.33968678]
5.844
S0220.hdr
[ 0.2723958 0.44935591 0.2782483 ]
[ 0.32357517 0.42120883 0.25521594]
6.279
S0260.hdr
[ 0.35826653 0.43541413 0.20631934]
[ 0.43566793 0.4219015 0.14243065]
10.127
S0270.hdr
[ 0.27372537 0.42014375 0.30613088]
[ 0.25389308 0.3926469 0.35346 ]
5.822
S0280.hdr
[ 0.21872482 0.4022029 0.37907228]
[ 0.3199333 0.4605404 0.2195263]
19.774
S0290.hdr
[ 0.24906261 0.42849107 0.32244633]
[ 0.26007766 0.44763288 0.29228956]
3.738
S0300.hdr
[ 0.22855141 0.40203264 0.36941595]
[ 0.343857 0.4695184 0.18662466]
22.641
S0320.hdr
[ 0.38305147 0.45148084 0.1654677 ]
[ 0.3334949 0.49392298 0.1725821 ]
6.563
S0350.hdr
[ 0.19293727 0.42321708 0.38384565]
[ 0.22591077 0.41407558 0.36001363]
4.17
S0360.hdr
[ 0.18631613 0.41650882 0.39717505]
[ 0.22820541 0.45316795 0.31862673]
9.627
S0370.hdr
[ 0.21955038 0.42818143 0.3522682 ]
[ 0.20755786 0.42879528 0.36364684]
1.654
S0400.hdr
[ 0.2420674 0.43087577 0.32705683]
[ 0.22897494 0.4191655 0.3518596 ]
3.039
S0420.hdr
[ 0.2311934 0.41265669 0.35614992]
[ 0.28706124 0.4725476 0.2403911 ]
14.18
S0470.hdr
[ 0.22131201 0.42260035 0.35608764]
[ 0.22475618 0.43981525 0.33542857]
2.711
S0480.hdr
[ 0.23076091 0.45116728 0.31807182]
[ 0.23641369 0.44539264 0.31819364]
0.808
S0510.hdr
[ 0.23442187 0.45250202 0.31307612]
[ 0.25330228 0.4312777 0.31542 ]
2.85
S0520.hdr
[ 0.23368531 0.43161926 0.33469543]
[ 0.22696376 0.43793115 0.33510503]
0.923
S0550.hdr
[ 0.53800942 0.37758709 0.08440348]
[ 0.5375506 0.38498893 0.07746041]
1.016
S0560.hdr
[ 0.23278472 0.43885156 0.32836372]
[ 0.23978369 0.44109523 0.319121 ]
1.181
S0570.hdr
[ 0.27463376 0.41845904 0.3069072 ]
[ 0.2663652 0.44665325 0.28698158]
3.55
S0590.hdr
[ 0.37977032 0.44717875 0.17305092]
[ 0.42544824 0.38259822 0.19195351]
8.133
S0600.hdr
[ 0.40662194 0.45183858 0.14153948]
[ 0.4201331 0.43537885 0.14448805]
2.15
S0610.hdr
[ 0.22867399 0.43897633 0.33234968]
[ 0.2127627 0.43275604 0.35448128]
2.796
S0620.hdr
[ 0.18882816 0.41508515 0.39608669]
[ 0.25900513 0.4352976 0.30569723]
11.621
S0630.hdr
[ 0.20122302 0.42189496 0.37688203]
[ 0.20748831 0.43872654 0.35378513]
2.926
S0640.hdr
[ 0.20254661 0.3918581 0.4055953 ]
[ 0.15780208 0.38983265 0.45236525]
6.476
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
57
==PAGE:66==
Table B.1 continued from previous page
S0650.hdr
[ 0.20299171 0.43379684 0.36321145]
[ 0.19487767 0.4386303 0.36649197]
1
S0660.hdr
[ 0.25867861 0.44894197 0.29237942]
[ 0.3017801 0.45913088 0.23908904]
6.929
S0670.hdr
[ 0.25416697 0.41442144 0.33141159]
[ 0.24763885 0.44799453 0.30436656]
4.36
S0690.hdr
[ 0.22714682 0.4401932 0.33265997]
[ 0.23361611 0.4255328 0.34085107]
1.8
S0700.hdr
[ 0.24363007 0.42199881 0.33437112]
[ 0.23752242 0.4354678 0.3270097 ]
1.652
S0710.hdr
[ 0.24139372 0.43018949 0.32841679]
[ 0.21398817 0.44742173 0.33859003]
3.393
S0720.hdr
[ 0.21900997 0.44219782 0.33879221]
[ 0.21709648 0.44126925 0.3416343 ]
0.355
S0730.hdr
[ 0.28554405 0.35353889 0.36091705]
[ 0.28201053 0.4453351 0.27265438]
12.739
S0740.hdr
[ 0.24363594 0.44767763 0.30868643]
[ 0.19932553 0.49229065 0.30838385]
6.288
S0750.hdr
[ 0.25342125 0.38956236 0.35701639]
[ 0.19993201 0.41525468 0.38481325]
6.553
S0760.hdr
[ 0.24204557 0.44674088 0.31121354]
[ 0.240834 0.44530192 0.31386417]
0.325
S0770.hdr
[ 0.21183633 0.4313659 0.35679777]
[ 0.27406964 0.45470348 0.2712269 ]
10.835
S0780.hdr
[ 0.25408853 0.43708517 0.3088263 ]
[ 0.24413306 0.44184265 0.31402433]
1.22
S0790.hdr
[ 0.20397179 0.41266147 0.38336674]
[ 0.26945293 0.4467269 0.28382018]
12.393
S0800.hdr
[ 0.34800251 0.44383788 0.2081596 ]
[ 0.2542817 0.39654312 0.34917516]
17.58
S0810.hdr
[ 0.43279047 0.43409494 0.13311459]
[ 0.39315742 0.4558416 0.15100095]
4.862
S0820.hdr
[ 0.21683816 0.43871558 0.34444626]
[ 0.2619507 0.41974458 0.31830478]
5.548
S0830.hdr
[ 0.19419272 0.43641961 0.36938767]
[ 0.29381976 0.4566047 0.24957554]
15.712
S0840.hdr
[ 0.18247752 0.4306359 0.38688658]
[ 0.28436244 0.4604295 0.2552081 ]
16.914
S0850.hdr
[ 0.2412174 0.46125146 0.29753115]
[ 0.23422074 0.45403498 0.31174424]
1.741
S0860.hdr
[ 0.2700747 0.44846418 0.28146112]
[ 0.2858601 0.4663707 0.24776928]
4.129
S0870.hdr
[ 0.30163731 0.44036168 0.25800101]
[ 0.3580742 0.43327403 0.20865177]
7.53
S0890.hdr
[ 0.31194748 0.44257205 0.24548047]
[ 0.34085038 0.4432696 0.21588007]
4.138
S0900.hdr
[ 0.21594406 0.39152381 0.39253214]
[ 0.17432804 0.42819723 0.3974747 ]
5.569
S0910.hdr
[ 0.1650158 0.41370528 0.42127892]
[ 0.19864053 0.40473944 0.39662004]
4.265
S0920.hdr
[ 0.17198437 0.41694551 0.41107012]
[ 0.20902686 0.4421737 0.3487995 ]
7.672
S0930.hdr
[ 0.17165341 0.41780973 0.41053686]
[ 0.16929674 0.41971114 0.41099212]
0.306
S0940.hdr
[ 0.17234387 0.41701316 0.41064298]
[ 0.17817971 0.42294547 0.39887482]
1.441
S0950.hdr
[ 0.1923683 0.4035304 0.4041013]
[ 0.21233541 0.44489098 0.3427736 ]
7.662
S0960.hdr
[ 0.23276602 0.44380885 0.32342513]
[ 0.30706996 0.48698115 0.20594884]
14.555
S0970.hdr
[ 0.24265003 0.44831979 0.30903018]
[ 0.29997534 0.4508874 0.24913725]
8.295
S0980.hdr
[ 0.23529888 0.41975379 0.34494732]
[ 0.22699912 0.44277447 0.3302264 ]
2.856
S0990.hdr
[ 0.24594705 0.42139515 0.33265779]
[ 0.21164952 0.436987 0.35136348]
4.206
S1000.hdr
[ 0.38078809 0.45364578 0.16556613]
[ 0.37904906 0.47039807 0.15055287]
2.256
S1010.hdr
[ 0.40956111 0.44420376 0.14623513]
[ 0.47382572 0.39825138 0.12792286]
8.11
S1020.hdr
[ 0.40439632 0.43950298 0.1561007 ]
[ 0.3972277 0.43776742 0.16500485]
1.156
S1030.hdr
[ 0.31364849 0.45536528 0.23098623]
[ 0.35989374 0.47435534 0.16575089]
8.219
S1040.hdr
[ 0.28089143 0.39510645 0.32400212]
[ 0.22629543 0.45631564 0.31738898]
8.229
S1050.hdr
[ 0.40567711 0.43341122 0.16091167]
[ 0.24763735 0.42690197 0.32546076]
22.824
S1060.hdr
[ 0.24485935 0.43947257 0.31566809]
[ 0.23883982 0.43646973 0.3246904 ]
1.125
58
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
==PAGE:67==
Table B.1 continued from previous page
S1070.hdr
[ 0.28267102 0.37194959 0.34537939]
[ 0.23969762 0.44824335 0.3120591 ]
9.369
S1080.hdr
[ 0.23781073 0.44013644 0.32205283]
[ 0.23792906 0.4379933 0.3240777 ]
0.295
S1090.hdr
[ 0.23578085 0.42459248 0.33962667]
[ 0.37935543 0.508533 0.11211149]
28.182
S1110.hdr
[ 0.20163327 0.41295343 0.3854133 ]
[ 0.22978917 0.41864347 0.35156733]
4.439
S1120.hdr
[ 0.20198241 0.41272886 0.38528873]
[ 0.26473385 0.41812474 0.3171414 ]
9.28
S1130.hdr
[ 0.21397856 0.42022474 0.36579669]
[ 0.28910193 0.44863793 0.2622601 ]
13.104
S1140.hdr
[ 0.36345241 0.45107506 0.18547254]
[ 0.38308603 0.4369489 0.17996512]
2.481
S1160.hdr
[ 0.24994402 0.42786083 0.32219515]
[ 0.3736698 0.41047812 0.21585207]
16.407
S1170.hdr
[ 0.26713106 0.38969151 0.34317743]
[ 0.28865802 0.4487787 0.26256326]
10.224
S1180.hdr
[ 0.23963901 0.43150692 0.32885408]
[ 0.23574689 0.42905277 0.3352003 ]
0.784
S1190.hdr
[ 0.23017594 0.45920621 0.31061785]
[ 0.22198339 0.43063465 0.34738204]
4.728
S1200.hdr
[ 0.26302216 0.42519887 0.31177897]
[ 0.23532654 0.43579182 0.32888165]
3.423
S1210.hdr
[ 0.26302216 0.42519887 0.31177897]
[ 0.25967085 0.44891375 0.29141545]
3.144
S1220.hdr
[ 0.18174699 0.42145472 0.39679829]
[ 0.24192493 0.43830982 0.31976524]
9.919
S1240.hdr
[ 0.18859395 0.41993488 0.39147117]
[ 0.17538138 0.4222993 0.40231934]
1.726
S1250.hdr
[ 0.18666758 0.41123547 0.40209695]
[ 0.17992786 0.4230498 0.39702234]
1.452
S1260.hdr
[ 0.22149039 0.40884761 0.369662 ]
[ 0.24464668 0.42823717 0.32711613]
5.218
S1270.hdr
[ 0.22173781 0.40864363 0.36961857]
[ 0.29175794 0.42164326 0.28659877]
10.938
S1280.hdr
[ 0.19673662 0.40803202 0.39523137]
[ 0.25756258 0.43340293 0.30903453]
10.851
S1290.hdr
[ 0.20999263 0.41566304 0.37434433]
[ 0.20244025 0.38504946 0.4125103 ]
4.951
S1300.hdr
[ 0.1901204 0.40464566 0.40523394]
[ 0.37058797 0.41912988 0.21028207]
26.605
S1310.hdr
[ 0.25372748 0.42952845 0.31674408]
[ 0.23686925 0.42971563 0.33341515]
2.371
S1320.hdr
[ 0.25174951 0.42804504 0.32020545]
[ 0.23805714 0.4327492 0.32919362]
1.704
S1330.hdr
[ 0.25773605 0.42727164 0.31499231]
[ 0.23670445 0.43406337 0.32923216]
2.629
Perception­based processing of digital images for dynamic adaptation to ambient light conditions
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.electro.dtu.dk
