==PAGE:1==
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to
Predict Cancer Driver Genes
Master Thesis
DTU Bioinformatics and System Biology
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Anna Melidi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
OpenAI. (2025). DALL-E [AI-generated image]. Retrieved January 10,
2025, from https://openai.com/dall-e/
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Anker Engelunds Vej 101, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared in collaboration with the Danish Cancer Institute for the
Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Bioinformatics and System Biology.
Anna Melidi - s222757
Signature
Date
ii
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
04/02/2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the impact of missense mutations in transcription factors (TFs) on
their structural stability and directly links these mutations to changes in gene expression
profiles observed in luminal A (lumA) breast cancer patients. Adopting a systems biology
approach, this work integrates structural insights, mutational data, transcriptional regu-
lation networks and gene expression analyses to uncover mechanistic pathways that drive
oncogenesis.
To achieve this, the study employs two advanced bioinformatics tools: MAVISp, a modular
framework for the structural interpretation of mutations, and Moonlight2R, a predictive
framework for identifying cancer driver genes. By integrating these tools, the study iden-
tifies cancer driver target genes impacted by mutated TFs and reveals their roles in cell
proliferation and apoptosis.
A key contribution of this work is the co-development of a new function TFinfluence
in Moonlight2R package that connects structural data from MAVISp with somatic muta-
tional data, transcription regulation networks and links these to driver gene predictions.
This function provides a comprehensive understanding of how TF mutations disrupt gene
regulation and contribute to oncogenesis. Furthermore, MAVISp was enhanced to pro-
cess large protein structures and complexes using scalable Snakemake pipelines, enabling
efficient analysis of structurally complex TFs.
The analysis explores the mutational landscape of patients with lumA breast cancer and
highlights a subset of destabilizing mutations in key TFs, such as TP53, FOXA1, RUNX1,
ATM, NF1, SMARCA4 and STAT3, significantly impairing their ability to regulate critical
driver genes. These structural alterations lead to downstream gene expression changes,
offering mechanistic insights into the regulatory disruptions associated with lumA subtype.
By examining the downstream effects of TF-associated mutations, this thesis bridges the
gap between molecular alterations and gene regulatory consequences. It provides a predic-
tive framework for identifying cancer driver genes whose expression is influenced by desta-
bilizing mutations on TFs and uncovers pathways central to cancer progression. These
findings deepen our understanding of the regulatory disruptions underlying lumA breast
cancer and offer promising directions for biomarker discovery and therapeutic interven-
tion.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Anna Melidi, MSc Bioinformatics & Systems Biology, DTU
Thank you to Elena and Matteo T for their constant support and insightful guidance
throughout this research journey. Their mentorship allowed me to delve into my research
with confidence and the freedom to explore various paths.
Thank you to everyone at DCI, for this introduction to the fascinating field of Structural
Biology and especially to the world of fighting cancer. Your collective dedication has been
truly inspiring.
Lastly thank you to my classmates in the office, Eleni, Lorenzo, Pablo and Paraskevi with
who we shared the same challenges and stresses, and supported each other throughout
this journey.
iv
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
BP biological process.
DEG differentially expressed gene.
FEA functional enrichment analysis.
GRN gene regulatory network.
lumA luminal A.
MAVISp Multi-layered Assesment of Variants by Structure for proteins.
OG oncogene.
PRA pattern regognition analysis.
TF transcription factor.
TSG tumour supressor gene.
URA upstream regulators analysis.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Cancer Development and Origin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Cancer Driver Genes and Mutations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Multi-omics Approaches in Cancer Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Transcription Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Luminal A Breast Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Moonlight2R: An Integrative Framework for Cancer Driver Gene Identifi-
cation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.7
MAVISp: A Tool for Understanding Mutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Aims
13
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Somatic Mutational Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Moonlight2R
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Results & Discussion
21
4.1
Code Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Somatic Mutation Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
MAVISp coverage and curations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Functional and Cancer Drivers Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
TF Influence Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6
Bibliographic Research of Resulting Mutated TFs & Structural Visualization 29
5
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A Supplementary
53
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:11==
Thesis Overview
The structure of the thesis is as follows:
Chapter 1 – Introduction: This chapter introduces the fundamental concepts of cancer
development, focusing on the role of driver genes and mutations in tumor initiation and
progression. It emphasizes the importance of transcription factors in gene regulation and
their potential impact when mutated. The chapter highlights luminal A breast cancer
and its unique molecular characteristics. Additionally, it discusses the role of multi-omics
approaches in understanding cancer’s complexity by integrating genomics, transcriptomics,
proteomics, metabolomics, and epigenomics. Finally, the chapter presents Moonlight2R
and MAVISp, two frameworks central to this thesis for identifying cancer driver genes and
interpreting mutations structurally.
Chapter 2 – Aims: This chapter outlines the objectives of the thesis.
Chapter 3 – Methodology: Here, the thesis outlines the data collection, the bioin-
formatics tools and the analytical frameworks used throughout the study. Detailed de-
scriptions of MAVISp, the modular framework for structural mutation interpretation, and
Moonlight2R, the predictive tool for cancer driver gene identification, are presented. Ad-
ditionally, the chapter explains how these tools are integrated to address the research
objectives.
Chapter 4 – Results & Discussion: This chapter presents the development and ap-
plication of the framework to a dataset of lumA breast cancer patients, along with the
structural visualization and bibliographic analysis of the resulting mutations of interest.
Additionally, it discusses the functional implications of these mutations and their potential
impact on transcriptional regulation.
Chapter 5 – Conclusion: This final chapter summarizes the key findings of the thesis
and highlights the significance of the results in the broader context of cancer research. It
provides an overview of the implications of the findings and outlines potential avenues for
future work, including further research and improvements to existing framework.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
1.1
Cancer Development and Origin
Cancer development is a complex, multistep process that transforms normal cells into
malignant ones. This transformation typically begins with a single cell acquiring genetic
mutations that disrupt normal cellular functions, leading to uncontrolled proliferation.
As these mutated cells continue to divide, they accumulate additional genetic, epigenetic,
transcriptomic, and proteomic alterations, further enhancing their malignant properties.
Over time, these cells can invade surrounding tissues and spread to distant organs, a
process known as metastasis [1, 2].
Genetic mutations, such as point mutations, insertions, deletions, and chromosomal re-
arrangements, can activate oncogenes or inactivate tumor suppressor genes, leading to
uncontrolled cell growth [3]. Research indicates that while the sequence of mutations af-
fecting key pathway genes varies across cancer types, a common feature is that mutations
in apoptosis-regulating genes tend to occur during the early stages of tumor progression. In
contrast, mutations in genes involved in invasion pathways are more commonly observed
in later stages of carcinogenesis. The loss of apoptotic control therefore is believed to be a
critical early event in cancer initiation, as it allows for the survival of an increased number
of cells, thereby elevating the likelihood of accumulating additional mutations that drive
tumor development [4]. Epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation and histone
modifications, can alter gene expression without changing the underlying DNA sequence,
often resulting in the silencing of tumor suppressor genes or the activation of oncogenes.
These epigenetic changes serve as global regulators of gene expression, profoundly affecting
cancer progression [5, 6].
Transcription alterations, such as changes in mRNA expression levels, can disrupt normal
cellular functions and promote tumor development [7, 8]. Protein level changes, includ-
ing variations in protein expression, post-translational modifications, and protein-protein
interactions, further contribute to the malignant phenotype by affecting cell signaling
pathways, metabolism, and the tumor microenvironment [9, 10].
Cancer can originate from various cellular sources, such as stem cells, intermediate pro-
genitor cells, or fully differentiated tissue cells that acquire oncogenic alterations over time
[11]. Understanding what drives cancer in these complicated molecular layers is crucial
for developing effective prevention and treatment strategies.
1.2
Cancer Driver Genes and Mutations
The genes involved in carcinogenesis, driver genes, are broadly classified into two principal
categories: oncogenes (OGs), which drive carcinogenesis when activated or overexpressed,
and tumour supressor genes (TSGs), which contribute to cancer development when inac-
tivated or silenced. The identification of driver genes is crucial for developing targeted
therapies, as knowing which genes are involved in tumorigenesis can lead to the design of
specific inhibitors or antibodies to treat cancer patients effectively.
Driver genes are usually harboring driver mutations, which are mutations that significantly
contribute to the development of cancer [12]. The search for such alterations in the coding
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
3
==PAGE:14==
DNA sequences is the foundation of traditional techniques for discovering cancer driver
genes. Yet, not all mutations contribute to cancer development. Mutations that don’t
impact on tumor development are classified as passenger mutations. Understanding the
distinction between driver and passenger mutations is a cornerstone of modern cancer
research and essential for identifying actionable targets for therapy [13, 14, 15]. However,
there are cancer drivers genes that don’t necessarily harbor any mutation, bur drive cancer
due to other reasons (Figure 1.1). For instance, genes that do not have mutations but
control targets that are able to cause cancer are also regarded as cancer drivers.
For
example, overexpression of KDM5C enhances the growth and invasion of gastric cancer
cells by reducing p54 expression, so KDM5C is considered as a cancer driver [16, 17].
Figure 1.1: Cancer Drivers and Mutations: A Venn diagram illustrating the relationship between genes with mutations
and cancer driver genes. The larger orange circle represents genes with mutations, which include both passenger and driver
mutations. A subset of these genes, depicted in the smaller overlapping green circle, are cancer drivers with driver mutations.
Additionally, some cancer driver genes do not harbor mutations but contribute to oncogenesis through other mechanisms.
(Figure generated with draw.io [18])
Varying numbers of drivers genes have been reported across different studies due to dif-
fering methodologies and datasets, with new driver genes continually being discovered as
more data becomes available and analytical methods advance [19, 20, 21]. Typically, can-
cer genomes harbor 4–5 driver mutations in driver genes per tumor, encompassing both
coding and non-coding genomic regions as an integrative analysis of 2,658 whole-cancer
genomes and their corresponding normal tissues across 38 tumor types revealed. Never-
theless, about 5% of that cases lacked identifiable driver mutations, indicating that the
catalog of cancer driver genes is still incomplete [22].
The complexity though of cancer extends beyond single-gene alterations, involving intri-
cate interactions across various biological layers. This complexity challenges traditional
methods of understanding tumorigenesis based solely on mutational patterns. To unravel
these multifaceted processes, researchers turn to multi-omics approaches, which integrate
diverse data types enhancing the accuracy of cancer driver predictions [23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28].
4
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:15==
1.3
Multi-omics Approaches in Cancer Research
Multi-omics approaches in cancer research integrate various biological layers, including
genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and epigenomics, to provide a com-
prehensive understanding of cancer’s molecular underpinnings. Cancer genomes are com-
plex, with significant variations observed both between different cancer types and within
individual tumors of the same type. Therefore multi-omics strategies seems essential in
addressing this complexity [29, 30].
Multi-omics integration is based on the principle that the combination of different omic
datasets can yield insights that surpass the analyses of each data layer individually. Ge-
nomic data may reveal mutations driving tumorigenesis, transcriptomics highlight aberrant
gene expression patterns, epigenomics reveal which genes are switched on and off and pro-
teomics elucidate functional protein changes. When these layers are analyzed together,
intricate relationships between genes, proteins, and metabolic pathways are uncovered, en-
abling the discovery of biomarkers, therapeutic targets, and new cancer subtypes (Figure
1.2). By analyzing multiple omics data from the same patients, researchers can classify
cancer subtypes more accurately, understand cancer pathophysiology better and predict
patient outcomes, which is essential for personalized medicine [29, 31, 32].
Figure 1.2: The integration of omics datasets represents a pivotal step in multi-omics research. Datasets
such as somatic mutations, gene expression, methylation, and proteomic data are combined using diverse computational
frameworks with specialized methodologies.
This integration enables the comparison of molecular characteristics from
multiple perspectives and facilitates clustering of patients based on clinically relevant features. Potential outcomes include
improved identification of clinical subtypes, deeper insights into cancer pathophysiology, identification of promising drug
targets, and enhanced support for clinical decision-making. (Figure generated with draw.io)
Despite its transformative potential, multi-omics integration poses challenges, including
data standardization, harmonization of large datasets, and the need for advanced com-
putational frameworks. Collaborative efforts and global initiatives aim to address these
barriers, emphasizing reproducibility and accessibility. As these challenges are system-
atically overcome, multi-omics will become an indispensable pillar of oncology research,
ultimately bridging the gap between high-throughput data generation and clinical appli-
cation [33, 34].
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
5
==PAGE:16==
1.4
Transcription Factors
TFs are essential regulatory proteins that play a pivotal role in controlling gene expression.
They bind to specific DNA sequences, influencing the transcription of target genes either
by promoting or inhibiting the recruitment of RNA polymerase, the enzyme responsible
for transcribing DNA into RNA. The role of TFs in cancer development has emerged
as a critical area of study within cancer biology and dysregulation of TFs—and thus the
regulatory circuits they control— can lead to dysregulation of cellular processes, ultimately
contributing to oncogenesis.
These alterations can drive tumor initiation, progression,
and metastasis by disrupting normal regulatory networks and facilitating aberrant gene
expression patterns [20, 35, 36, 37].
One important mechanism underlying TF dysregulation is mutations. Mutations in TFs
can be classified into several categories with missense— which result in the substitution of
one amino acid for another in the protein sequence—being particularly noteworthy. Mis-
sense mutations can compromise their ability to regulate the expression of target genes ef-
fectively. These mutations can lead to changes in TF-DNA binding domain, TF-cofactors,
TF-TF or other TF-binding partners interactions and affect their binding affinities, po-
tentially destabilizing functional complexes essential for normal cellular processes [38, 39,
40]. On the other hand, mutations that structurally destabilize the TF can significantly
contribute to disease pathogenesis by disrupting the native conformation and function of
the protein.
It has been suggested that most disease-causing and deleterious non-synonymous muta-
tions primarily affect protein stability rather than functionality [41, 42]. These mutations
commonly occur within the hydrophobic core or at key hydrogen bond sites, disrupting
structural integrity and exposing hydrophobic residues to the aqueous environment. Such
exposure often leads to protein misfolding and aggregation, mechanisms implicated in var-
ious diseases. In cancer, destabilizing mutations in the protein core are frequently linked
to the inactivation of TSGs, compromising their ability to maintain cellular homeostasis
[43]. Specifically to TFs, like TP53 and RUNX1, their missense mutations in cancer has
been found proportional to their thermodynamic impacts on protein stability and DNA
binding [37].
Conversely, cancer-related mutations in OGs often target functional regions such as bind-
ing sites, enhancing protein activity or regulation. Systematic analyses further highlight
that cancer-associated missense mutations frequently disrupt protein-protein interaction
interfaces rather than the structural core, reflecting their role in altering functional path-
ways [39, 40]. For example, missense mutations in TP53 at residues 181, 247, and 249, have
been shown to alter interactions with key binding partners like TP53BP1 and TP53BP2
[37]. Similarly, mutations in RUNX1 have been shown to cluster within critical functional
domains, impacting its ability to regulate genes involved in hematopoiesis and cancer
[44]. These findings underscore that while disease mutations broadly destabilize proteins,
cancer-related mutations also strategically impact functional interactions, driving tumor-
ogenesis.
6
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:17==
1.5
Luminal A Breast Cancer
Luminal A (lumA) breast cancer is the most prevalent subtype, representing 40–50% of
all breast cancer cases. Characterized by high expression of estrogen and progesterone re-
ceptors and low HER2 levels, lumA tumors typically have a relatively favorable prognosis.
This makes lumA a critical focus for studies aimed at improving treatment outcomes and
tailoring therapies to individual patient profiles [45].
Transcriptional dysregulation plays a crucial role in lumA breast cancer. Key TFs such as
GATA3, ESR1, FOXA1, and TFAP2A are essential for maintaining the luminal phenotype
and promoting tumor growth and differentiation.
Mutations within the cis-regulatory
elements of these TFs can disrupt their binding to DNA, leading to altered gene expression
patterns that favor oncogenesis. For instance, mutations in the cistromes of these TFs have
been identified as cancer drivers in lumA breast cancer, underscoring the importance of
TF-mediated transcriptional regulation in this subtype [46].
In addition cancer driver genes like PIK3CA, PTEN, and TP53 that contribute to tumor
growth and invasion and modulate tumor microenvironment have been found to interact
with several TFs, such as CCR7, BRD7, DDX3X, FOXM1, CENPA, and CIITA. This
suggests a tightly regulated network that impacts cell signaling pathways involved in tu-
morigenesis and metastasis [47, 48].
Mutations in specific genes such as GATA3, TP53, and RUNX1 are particularly significant
in lumA breast cancer progression. GATA3 mutations disrupt DNA binding and protein
stability, worsening tumor phenotypes [49]. TP53 mutations, common in lumA, impair the
tumor suppressor’s ability to regulate stress response pathways, promoting tumorigenesis
[50, 51]. RUNX1, which functions as a tumor suppressor, shows diminished expression in
lumA, contributing to hyperproliferation and reduced therapy response [52, 44].
In conclusion, the interplay between TF-driven regulatory networks and genetic mutations
in lumA breast cancer highlights the complexity of its biology. These insights pave the
way for novel therapeutic strategies targeting transcriptional dysregulation, ultimately
improving patient outcomes.
1.6
Moonlight2R: An Integrative Framework for Cancer
Driver Gene Identification
Moonlight2R [27] provides a versatile framework for detecting cancer driver genes that
are unique to specific tumor types and tissues of origin by integrating omics data, gene
regulatory networks (GRNs) and pathway-level analyses. It is freely accessible as an open-
source R package within the Bioconductor project and its relevance to this thesis lies in
its application to predict target cancer driver genes regulated by mutant TFs, a key step
in elucidating how these TF mutations disrupt regulatory networks and contribute to
tumorigenesis.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 1.3: The Moonlight2R pipeline. The first step in Moonlight2R is a functional enrichments analysis (FEA) which
determines if any of Moonlight2R’s 101 cancer-related biological processes are enriched among an input set of differentially
expressed genes (DEGs). This is done through Fisher’s exact tests and Moonlight2R Process Z-scores. The Moonlight2R
Process Z-scores indicate if the activity of the process is increased or decreased based on literature reportings and gene
expression levels.
The next step, a gene regulatory network analysis (GRN), creates gene networks for each DEG by
calculating the mutual information between all pairs of DEGs. Following GRN, the Moonlight2R pipeline diverges into an
expert-based and a machine learning approach. The next step, an upstream regulatory analysis (URA), then evaluates the
effect of each DEG on the biological processes through Moonlight Gene Z-scores. If the expert-based approach is selected,
the Moonlight Gene Z-scores will only be calculated for chosen biological processes. If the machine learning approach is
selected, the Moonlight Gene Z-scores will be calculated for all of Moonlight’s 101 biological processes. In the expert-based
approach, pattern recognition analysis (PRA) then identifies the oncogenic mediators which fit an oncogene or tumor
suppressor pattern based on the Moonlight Gene Z-scores. The two chosen biological processes must have opposite effects
on cancer (growing/blocking), e.g. proliferation of cells and apoptosis. In the machine learning approach, the prediction of
oncogenic mediators is done using a random forest classifier. Following Moonlight2R’s primary layer, a secondary mutational
layer is applied through the TF influence which identifies trancription factors (TFs) that bear destabilising mutations and
regulate driver genes in cancer patients cohort. First, the TFs that regulate the oncogenic mediators are sourced from
TRUSTT regulatory networks. Then TF mutations found on cancer patients cohorts are identified from MAF files and
their structural effect is classified from MAVISp. (Figure adapted from [27])
The idea behind Moonlight2R is to identify critical cancer driver genes by analyzing gene
expression data and linking them to curated biological processes, such as apoptosis and cell
proliferation, that influence cancer progression or suppression. Starting from differentially
expressed genes (DEGs), it refines the selection by detecting genes associated with these
processes and validating them with an additional second layer of evidence, like DNA
methylation or mutational data.
The Moonlight2R pipeline follows a structured, stepwise approach (Figure 1.3). It begins
with functional enrichment analysis (FEA), which identifies cancer-related processes signif-
icantly overrepresented between DEGs. Fisher’s exact test is employed to reveal enriched
gene sets functionally tied to cancer biology. This step highlights groups of genes—referred
to as regulated genes—that are closely linked to critical biological processes or diseases.
8
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:19==
In the next step, mutual information-based gene regulatory network (GRN) analysis is
performed to explore regulatory relationships between DEGs. This network-driven ap-
proach yields valuable lists of regulated genes for each sDEG and sheds light on how
DEGs interact within cancer pathways.
At this point, Moonlight2R branches into two different modes: the expert-based mode
and the machine-learning mode. In the expert-based mode, the user specifies biological
processes of interest, guiding the analysis to focus on predefined cancer-related pathways.
Conversely, in the machine-learning mode, all curated processes are evaluated to identify
patterns that might not be immediately obvious, using a more automated, data-driven
approach.
Moonlight2R then evaluates the regulatory impact of DEGs on biological processes through
the upstream regulators analysis (URA) step. Here, Moonlight Gene Z-scores are used to
assess how each DEG influences the network of enriched gene sets. The URA calculates
Z-scores to quantify the combined regulatory effect of all involved genes on specific biolog-
ical processes, providing insight into the key molecular drivers of observed gene expression
changes. URA uses the gene regulatory network inferred in the GRN step and the expres-
sion data for the DEGs to assess how upstream regulators influence gene expression.
Finally, pattern regognition analysis (PRA) classifies into potential OGs and TSGs, called
oncogenic mediators, depending on their effects on the cancer-related processes.
The
expert-based approach classifies genes based on patterns in two user-selected key processes
with opposite roles in cancer, while the machine-learning approach utilizes a classifier to
identify patterns predictive of cancer driver activity.
Building on the primary analysis, a secondary layer of analysis is performed that serves as
an extra level of evidence and searches for the so called mechanistic indicators. In other
words, it is aiming to find a mechanistic explanation that could link the above gene expres-
sion profile to a molecular explanation using different additional data. During the course
of this thesis a secondary mutational layer TFinfluence was developed that introduces
mutational data to explore the structural impact of TF mutations on driver gene regula-
tion. Mutations derived from cancer patient cohorts and their structural impact predicted
by MAVISp, this layer investigates how destabilizing TF mutations affect the regulation
of OGs and TSGs. By assessing TF stability and its influence on transcriptional regula-
tion, TFinfluence adds a mechanistic dimension, hypothesizing that such disruptions can
explain altered expression patterns of driver genes.
Together, these steps enable Moonlight2R to provide a comprehensive and detailed un-
derstanding of cancer-related regulatory mechanisms, integrating data-driven exploration
with mechanistic insights.
1.7
MAVISp: A Tool for Understanding Mutations
The complexity of cancer mutations has necessitated the development of specialized com-
putational frameworks to evaluate their impact on protein function and structural sta-
bility.
Multi-layered Assesment of Variants by Structure for proteins (MAVISp) [53],
a structure-based framework developed by the Cancer Structural Biology group at the
Danish Cancer Institute, addresses this need by predicting the consequences of mis-
sense mutations on protein stability and function.
Currently it processes analyses for
more than 500 proteins across diverse biological functions, such as TFs, chaperones, tu-
mour suppressors and the database is frequently updated and publicly available here:
https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/MAVISp-1.0
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 1.4: Overview of MAVISp components. a) MAVISp includes different modules, each managed by workflow
engines or dedicated tools. The modules highlighted in blue handle the selection and collection of protein structures, while
the modules in orange are dedicated to structural analyses of variant effects. The procedure begins with a gene name, its
UniProt and RefSeq identifiers and the desired structural coverage. For each gene, all the steps can be conducted on a
standard server with 32-64 CPUs. The only exceptions are: i) the ENSEMBLE GENERATION module, which includes
all-atom MD simulations, and ii) Rosetta-based calculations on binding free energies and folding/unfolding free energy
calculations. Depending on the simulation length and system size, these might require access to HPC facilities. The simple
mode uses single experimental structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB), the AlphaFold Protein Structure Database,
or through generation of initial models with AlphaFold3, AlphaFold2 and AlphaFold-multimer. In the ensemble mode
(additional modules in fading fill) a conformational ensemble for the target protein or its complexes is identifeied throught
the ENSEMBLE_GENERATION module. (Figure generated with draw.io)
Conventional predictors mainly identify variants through statistical associations or prede-
fined genetic patterns, focusing on whether a variant is pathogenic or benign. In contrast,
MAVISp integrates mechanistic insights, linking variants to functional annotations and
exploring the molecular effects of variants, including those with uncertain or conflict-
ing evidence. In more detail MAVISp performs independent predictions by the so-called
MAVISp modules which depend on Python scripts, bash workflows, or Snakemake and
frequently supported by particular virtual environments. It runs on two different modes:
simple and ensemble mode depending on the analyses high- or low-throughput level. The
ensemble mode is used on a collection of different protein conformations, while the sim-
ple mode uses a single conformation of the protein and its complexes.
The protein’s
known cancer mutations are initially collected along with all its the possible missense vari-
ants. The STRUCTURE_SELECTION and INTERACTOME modules then use this information
to identify the protein’s structures and known interactors. Then the analysis modules
are used by the framework, with the STABILTY module to evaluate the mutational effect
on structural stability by calculating the change in folding free energy upon mutation.
When assessing complex stability the change in binding free energy is calculated by the
LOCAL_INTERACTION module. Furthermore, the LONG_RANGE and post-translational modi-
fication PTM modules are used to examine potential allosteric effects and regulatory changes
resulting from phosphorylation site alterations, respectively (Fig 1.4).
A distinctive feature of MAVISp is its integration of in silico mutagenesis techniques,
FoldX [54] and Rosetta [55] or RaSP [56], which independently compute the ΔΔG values
for mutations. ∆∆G represents the difference in the folding free energy (∆G) between a
wild-type protein and a mutated variant. It is calculated as:
10
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:21==
∆∆G = ∆Gmutant −∆Gwild-type
where:
• ∆Gmutant is the folding Gibbs free energy of the mutant protein,
• ∆Gwild-type is the folding Gibbs free energy of the wild-type protein.
As a default MAVISp, uses both RaSP and FoldX, after following a benchmark as it is
more suitable for high-throughput data collection compared to the CPU-intensive scans
based on Rosetta. By comparing predictions from both these methods, MAVISp ensures
robust consensus-based classifications of mutation effects on protein stability. It categorizes
mutations into four functional classes: stabilizing (∆∆G ≤−3 kcal/mol in both methods),
destabilizing (∆∆G ≥3 kcal/mol), neutral (−2 ≤∆∆G ≤2 kcal/mol), and uncertain (if
∆∆G falls between these thresholds or if the two methods yield discordant). The above
thresholds have been set due to evidence showing that variants with changes in stability
below 3 kcal/mol are not featuring marked decreased stability at the cellular level.
Additional annotations for variant interpretation are provided drawing on data reported
in ClinVar or calculated using tools such as REVEL (ensemble-based predictions of rare
missense variant pathogenicity) [57], DeMask (amino acid substitution impacts via ho-
mologs and deep mutational scanning) [58], GEMME (method that predicts mutational
outcomes by explicitly modeling the evolutionary history of natural sequences) [59], EVE
(evolutionary modeling for mutational outcomes through deep generative approaches) [60],
AlphaMissense (integrating AlphaFold2 structures, sequence data, and population fre-
quency) [61] and EFoldMine (Sequence-based Prediction of Folding Initiation Sites) [62].
These systematic classifications could be particularly relevant for cancer-related TFs,
where even subtle alterations in structural stability can disrupt DNA binding, protein
interactions, or regulatory networks, driving oncogenesis.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:23==
2
Aims
This thesis aims to investigate the mutational landscape of TFs in lumA BRCA patients,
focusing on how missense destabilizing mutations influence gene expression and drive onco-
genesis. This study integrates omics data with structural changes in TFs, linking these
alterations to gene regulatory dynamics to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying
cancer progression in lumA.
To this purpose I cotributed to the development of a new function, TFinfluence, within
the Moonlight2R R package. This function will connect structural data from MAVISp with
somatic mutational data, gene expression data, and transcription regulation networks,
providing a comprehensive view of the regulatory disruptions contributing to cancer.
To enhance MAVISp database’s coverage of TFs, a concerted effort was undertaken to
curate additional TFs not present thereby enriching MAVISp’s repository with a broader
spectrum of TFs relevant to lumA cancer research.
However some TFs had large structures that weren not covered in the AlphaFold Protein
Database, which was limiting the ability to analyze these proteins within MAVISp. To
accommodate this need, MAVISp was enhanced to process user-inputted protein structures
using scalable Snakemake pipelines. This development enabled efficient analysis of TFs
with large structures, thereby expanding the database’s applicability to a wider range of
proteins.
Through these objectives, the thesis seeks to bridge the gap between driving mutations,
molecular alterations and gene regulatory consequences, offering insights into the regu-
latory disruptions underlying lumA breast cancer and potential directions for biomarker
discovery and therapeutic intervention.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:25==
3
Methodology
The methodological approach is outlined in Figure 3.1, which illustrates the sequential
steps involved in the study. The process includes:
• Data collection of:
– Gene expression from TCGA BRCA normal and lumA breast cancer patients and their
Differential Gene Expression normal vs tumor (already available in the lab)
– Transcription factors structural data from MAVISp database/curations and MAVISp
pipeline modification
– Somatic mutational data from TCGA luminal A cancer patients (already available in
the lab)
– Transcriptional regulatory networks from TRRUST v2
• Somatic Mutational Analysis with maftools
• Driver Genes Prediction within Moonlight2R and new function TFinfluence co-development:
– Functional Enrichment Analysis (FEA)
– Gene Regulatory Network construction (GRN)
– Upstream Regulatory Network Analysis (URA)
– Pattern Recognition Analysis (PRA)
– TF Influence Analysis
• Literature review of the resulting mutations and structural visualization
A detailed implementation of the analysis can be found in the publicly available GitHub
repository at ELELAB/TF_stability_for_moonlight2R.git. In the repository, the imple-
mentation is organized as follows:
• ./rawdata/: This directory contains the input data files used for the analysis, including:
– mutations.csv: Somatic mutational data from TCGA-LumA.BRCA.
– BRCA_BRCA.LumA_dataDEGs.rda: Differential Gene Expression data normal vs tumor
lumA.
– BRCA_BRCA.LumA_dataFilt_HUGO.rda:
Normalized counts of gene expression for
TCGA-BRCA lumA.
– trrust_rawdata_human.tsv: Data from TRRUST that contains transcription factors,
their targets, and the regulatory relationships.
The raw data used in the analysis are currently internal to the laboratory. However, they
will be made publicly available in the future by OFS.
• ./results/: Contains the output of the analysis, including:
– Various .rda files that contain the output of the various steps FEA, GRN, URA, PRA
and TF (e.g., FEA_lumA.rda, URA_lumA.rda).
– CSV summary files:
TFinfluence_summary_table.csv which contains the re-
sulting destabilizing mutations of TFs that regulate the expression of drivers,
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
15
==PAGE:26==
TFinfluence_TFmutations.csv with all the important TFs and their total number
of missense mutations , and PRA_drivers.csv with all the predicted drivers.
• ./mavisp_csv/: Contains MAVISp database files necessary for TFinfluence function.
• ./scripts/: Holds the R scripts used to produce the results, including:
– run_moonlight.R: This script runs the Moonlight2R pipeline and generates all the
result files and some figures such as the FEA plot and coverage figures.
– somatic_mutation_analysis.R: This script is used for somatic mutation analysis,
generating the MAF oncoplot, MAF mutation summary and all the lolliplots.
• ./figures/: Contains the visualizations generated from the analyses.
These folders can be used as a reference point to navigate the repository for further
exploring the analysis.
Figure 3.1: Methodological Overview of the Thesis. This workflow illustrates the sequential steps involved in the
study, starting with data collection, which includes gene expression data from normal and luminal A breast cancer patients
from TCGA, structural data for transcription factors (TFs) variants from the MAVISp database, somatic mutational data
from TCGA luminal A cancer patients, and transcriptional regulatory networks from TRRUST. The somatic mutational
analysis is performed with the maftools package, followed by driver gene prediction within Moonlight2R. That process
includes functional enrichment analysis (FEA), gene regulatory network (GRN) construction, upstream regulatory net-
work analysis (URA), pattern recognition analysis (PRA), and TF influence analysis. Finally, a review of mutations and
structural visualizations is performed using PubMed resources. By this way the impact of missense mutations in TFs on
structural stability and their downstream effects on gene regulation and expression profiles in cancer is investigated, pro-
viding predictive insights into regulatory disruptions that can serve as biomarkers or therapeutic targets. (Figure generated
with draw.io)
16
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:27==
3.1
Data collection
3.1.1
Gene Expression and Somatic Mutational Data
Gene expression, clinical and somatic mutational data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), specifically the TCGA-BRCA project, were already available in the lab, as well
as their differential expression and no further analysis was conducted in the scope of this
work.
The gene expression dataset included 559 tumor samples and 62 normal ones,
while somatic mutational data came from 494 lumA breast cancer samples in Mutation
Annotation Format (MAF) file.
3.1.2
Transcriptional Regulatory Networks
For this study, TF regulatory relationships were sourced from TRRUST version 2 [63],
a curated database of transcriptional regulatory networks for human and mouse genes.
Specifically, the human subset was utilized, comprising 8,444 TF-target regulatory rela-
tionships of 800 human TFs derived from 11,237 pubmed articles, which describe small-
scale experimental studies of transcriptional regulations.
TRRUST employs a sentence-based text-mining approach to efficiently extract regulatory
interactions from Medline abstracts, which are then subjected to manual curation. This
ensures the inclusion of high-confidence TF-target interactions annotated with regulatory
modes, critical for the identification of functional transcriptional influences. Additionally,
interactions in TRRUST are enriched among top-ranked regulatory pairs inferred from
high-throughput expression data, validating its utility as a gold-standard resource for
benchmarking.
To ensure reliable insights into TF function, only TFs with a clearly defined regulatory
mode (activation or repression) were selected.
This filtering step allowed the analysis
to focus on a subset of TFs with experimentally validated, directional regulatory effects,
aligning with the objective of identifying distinct transcriptional regulatory influences
within cancer-associated pathways.
3.1.3
Curation of Transcription Factors Variants with MAVISp
MAVISp framework was applied in simple mode to efficiently curate and analyze TF vari-
ants for their potential impact on protein structure and function.
MAVISp’s modular
design enabled the application of STABILTY, PTM and LONG_RANGE module for this study,
though the primary focus was on the STABILITY module calculations. Additionally acces-
sory tools were used to collect variant annotations from AlphaMissense and ClinVar as
well as variant predictions from DeMask and EFoldMine to predict sites of early folding
regions. All the applicable modules were performed under the strict set of procedures that
are codified in each module.
Over the course of this thesis project the following 31 TFs were curated and reviewed:
APC, ATF2, CBX8, CRX, E2F1, FOXA1, HCFC1, HMGB2, HOXA11, LMO4, MAX,
MED23, MGMT, MTF1, NF1, NFATC3, OTX2, PITX3, POU1F1, POU4F2, RANBP2,
RARB, SPI1, TBX3, TBX5, TFAP4, TFPT, TRAF6, TRRAP, XBP1 and ZFP36L1.
Annotations for the TF variants were gathered and aggregated from ClinVar [64], COSMIC
[65, 66], and cBioPortal [67]. To complement these resources, all possible missense variants
of the protein targets were assessed.
Structural models of the TFs were retrieved by the AlphaFold Protein Structure Database
[68] or through generation of initial models with AlphaFold3 [69]. All of the entries were
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
17
==PAGE:28==
processed without inclusion of cofactors. After evaluation of the predicted aligned error
(PAE) scores, only the structurally ordered regions with high predicted local distance
difference test score (pLDDT) were retained for analysis. The aim was to obtain the best
structural coverage and minimize the number of low confidence regions by trimming and
not considering protein residues with low score (pLDDT > 70) and disordered regions. This
ensured a focus on regions with reliable structural data. For TFs containing long disordered
linkers or complex domain architectures, structural domains were analyzed independently,
with individual PDB files generated to represent distinct regions of interest.
Then stability calculations were carried out by prediction of changes in folding free energy,
which was used to describe the thermodynamic stability of the protein during the process of
folding or conformational change between the mutated variants and the wild-type protein.
The tools used were:
• MutateX with FoldX5: An in-sillico saturation mutagenesis scan was performed using
MutateX, leveraging FoldX5 for accurate and efficient predictions of ∆∆G across all
possible point mutations. [70]
• RosettaDDG: Using a curated mutation list, stability effects were further assessed
with RosettaDDPrediction under the ref2015 and cartesian2020 scoring functions.
These models provided finer-grained estimations of stability shifts while optimizing
computational resource usage.
• RaSP Workflow: The RaSP (Rapid Saturation Profile) pipeline was employed for
an additional round of stability predictions, serving as a validation of ∆∆G values
across TF variants.
The consensus of FoldX and RaSP was used with mutations exhibiting a stability change
greater than 3 kcal/mol considered destabilizing at the cellular level. Variants with ∆∆G
values ranging from −2 kcal/mol to 2 kcal/mol were deemed neutral, mutations with ∆∆G
values below −3 kcal/mol were classified as stabilizing according to both methods, while
mutations were considered uncertain if with ∆∆G fall between these thresholds or if the
two methods yield discordant. The results can be accessed from the MAVISp database:
https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/MAVISp-1.0/.
Plots that summarize the effects of the resulting mutations on the individual modules
of the MAVISp framework, categorized into structural and functional impacts, were gen-
erated using MAVISp downstream analysis. PyMOL [71] was employed to visualize the
mutations.
3.2
Somatic Mutational Analysis
The MAF file was processed using the maftools R package [72]. The subsetMaf() function
was used to subset mutations of the TFs present in TRRUST v2 and the subset was used
for the Somatic Mutational Analysis. Key mutational metrics, including variant classi-
fications (e.g., missense mutations, nonsense mutations, and frameshift indels), variant
types (e.g., single nucleotide variations or indels), and the frequencies of affected genes
were summarized using plotmafSummary().
To provide an overview of the mutational
landscape, the oncoplot() function was employed, offering a visual representation of mu-
tation burdens across the dataset. Focusing on mutations with potential structural and
functional consequences, only missense mutations were retained for downstream analysis.
18
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Moonlight2R
The input data required for analysis includes the gene expression data of normal and lumA
samples, the DEGs, the MAF file, and the TRRUST gene regulatory network.
First, Functional Enrichment Analysis was performed, using Fisher’s exact test to iden-
tify overrepresented cancer-related processes among the normal vs lumA primary tumour
DEGs, grouping them into regulated genes associated with key biological functions. Next,
Gene Regulatory Network analysis was conducted, where mutual information was used to
infer the regulatory relationships between DEGs, producing a network of interconnected
genes. From this network, only the target genes identified by TRRUST were then fil-
tered, narrowing down the set of genes to those specifically associated with the regulatory
interactions detected by TRRUST.
Following this, Upstream Regulatory Network analysis was applied to assess the regulatory
activity of DEGs related to apoptosis and cell differentiation by quantifying Z-scores.
These biological processes were specifically chosen not only due to their established links
with the hallmarks of cancer but also because of evidence suggesting distinct roles in
different stages of tumor progression as discussed before.
Then to classify driver genes, Pattern Recognition Analysis was performed, where genes
were classified as oncogenic mediators -OGs or TSGs- through the expert-based approach
for the same two biological processes.
Lastly, the secondary TF mutational layer TFinfluence was developed and integrated
to combine transcriptional regulatory networks from TRRUST v2, mutational data from
the MAF file, and structural data from MAVISp. TFinfluence was configured to read the
MAVISp consensus between RaSP and FoldX for stability classification, as RASP offers
similar accuracy to Rosetta but with significantly lower computational cost. This integra-
tion was subsequently used to identify destabilizing TF mutations that could potentially
explain the gene expression profile.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:31==
4
Results & Discussion
4.1
Code Development
4.1.1
MAVISp
Enhancements were made to two existing Snakemake-based pipelines of MAVISp: the
MutateX pipeline and MAVISp_automatization.
The MutateX pipeline predicts changes in folding free energy (∆G) upon mutation for
each residue, using either predefined residue types or mutation datasets as input. Initially,
this pipeline relied solely on automatic retrieval of protein structures from the AlphaFold
Protein Structure Database (AFDB), limiting its utility to AFDB models.
To expand its applicability, the pipeline was enhanced to support user-supplied PDB files.
This addition accommodates scenarios where:
• Custom Models: Structures are generated using AlphaFold3 or other external
tools because corresponding models are unavailable in the AFDB due to their size.
• Experimental Structures: High-resolution experimental PDB files need to be
analyzed for greater structural accuracy.
Key technical adjustments include:
• PDB Input Handling: Dynamic detection of user-provided structures was imple-
mented, alongside checks to ensure file integrity and compatibility.
• Workflow Flexibility: The pipeline now seamlessly integrates AFDB-retrieved and
user-defined PDB structures without disrupting downstream steps, such as mutation
scanning or ∆G calculations.
• Streamlined Interaction: Configurations were restructured for intuitive inclusion
of custom structures while maintaining the default workflow for AFDB-retrieved
models.
These improvements ensure that the MutateX pipeline supports both novel computational
models and experimentally resolved structures, broadening its applicability to diverse re-
search contexts. The updated pipeline is available at ELELAB/mutatexpipelines.
The MAVISp_automatization pipeline was developed to streamline the multi-step MAV-
ISp framework, automating tasks such as:
• Aggregation of mutation data,
• Retrieval and trimming of PDB models from AFDB,
• Retrieval of all available PDBs from the Protein Data Bank,
• Filtering of mutation lists for downstream analysis,
• Identification of protein interactors ,
• Prediction of protein phosphorylation sites,
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
21
==PAGE:32==
• Stability predictions using RaSP,
• Prediction of de novo phosphorylation sites induced by mutations, and
• Identification of early folding regions.
To align with the MutateX pipeline’s new functionality and accommodate cases where
AlphaFold models are unavailable or unsuitable, modifications were made to enable user-
supplied PDB structures. These changes included:
• Compatibility adjustments to accept user-provided models across the pipeline work-
flow,
• Integration of output data from the MutateX pipeline into the MAVISp framework,
• Verification of structural and formatting consistency to ensure seamless operation.
These combined enhancements to the MutateX and MAVISp_automatization pipelines
address limitations in structure input flexibility, providing MAVISp with a robust and
comprehensive toolset for protein mutation analysis.
TF curation benefiting from these improvements included APC (2,843 amino acids),
RANBP2 (3,224 amino acids), and NF1 (2,839 amino acids). For these large proteins,
AFDB models weren’t available so AF3 models were generated. The optimal trimming
method was then selected based on established guidelines, followed by subsequent analyses.
4.1.2
TFinfluence in Moonlight2R
The TFinfluence function, developed within the Moonlight2R framework, implements a
secondary analytical layer to assess the influence of destabilizing mutations in transcription
factors (TFs) as a mechanistic explanation for observed expression changes in downstream
targets. This thesis contributed by enhancing functionality, integration, and specificity
of the function to improve its performance and extend its applicability. The pipeline is
available at github.com/ELELAB/Moonlight2R.
To better integrate structural insights, supplementary columns in the TFinfluence output
were added to indicate the availability of TFs and their respective mutations in the MAV-
ISp database. This modification addressed two primary cases of missing annotations: (i)
mutations that were unavailable because the TF was not yet curated within MAVISp and
(ii) mutations lying within structural regions not covered in MAVISp. These distinctions
were essential to provide clear and actionable results for further analysis.
Following the extensive benchmarking with the RaSP framework, the default stability
dataset utilized by TFinfluence was updated. Earlier versions of the function used a
consensus of Rosetta and foldx stability predictions.
However, due to RaSP’s ability
to replace Rosetta at comparable accuracy with significantly lower computational over-
head, the new default for the TFinfluence analysis uses a consensus between RaSP and
foldx. This change improves the computational feasibility of high-throughput studies,
maintaining the accuracy of predictions while reducing resource requirements.
Additionally, the specificity of missense mutation detection within TFinfluence was im-
proved . The initial implementation filtered mutations based solely on regular expressions,
which could result in false positives. An enhanced filtering layer was introduced that incor-
porates additional criteria, leading to a more refined and reliable detection process. These
improvements boost the robustness of TFinfluence in analyzing the functional impacts
of destabilizing mutations.
22
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Somatic Mutation Analysis
The somatic mutational landscape of TFs in lumA breast cancer was characterized using
data from 494 samples retrieved from the TCGA BRCA project.
Following mutation
annotation and processing with the maftools R package, key metrics were summarized.
Subsetting the mutational data of the genes that are known TFs using the TRRUST
database enabled a focused analysis of TF-specific alterations.
Eventually out of the
795 known TFs from TRRUST, 527 TFs were bearing mutations in the studied dataset,
highlighting the extensive genetic variability present in these regulatory proteins.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: LumA Mutational Profile: (a) Oncoplot summarizing somatic mutations across TFs in lumA breast cancer.
Each row represents a gene, while each column represents a sample. The barplot at the top shows the mutation burden
across samples, and the barplot on the right indicates the number of mutations per gene. Mutation types are color-coded,
as indicated in the legend. (b) Summary of mutational metrics in the lumA dataset. (Top left) Classification of mutations
by type, indicating the predominance of missense mutations.
(Top center) Distribution of variant types across SNVs,
insertions (INS), and deletions (DEL). (Top right) Single nucleotide variation (SNV) classes showing a high frequency
of C>T transitions. (Bottom left) Boxplot depicting variants per sample, with a median of two mutations per sample.
(Bottom right) Top mutated TFs, with GATA3 and TP53 leading the list.
Figure 4.1a and Figure 4.1b illustrate the mutational profile and key metrics, respectively.
The oncoplot (Figure 4.1a) highlights the mutational burden across the subset of TFs,
revealing that 61.86% of the analyzed lumA samples harbor at least one mutation in
the investigated TFs.
Among these, GATA3 emerges as the most frequently mutated
gene, with alterations observed in 20% of samples, followed by TP53 at 13%.
These
findings suggest a pivotal role of GATA3 in the lumA subtype, likely tied to its function in
regulating estrogen receptor activity, while TP53 mutations may reflect its well-established
role in tumor suppression and genomic integrity. Additional mutations were identified in
NCOR1, RUNX1, and TBX3, with each gene altered in approximately 7% of the cohort.
Rarer mutations in genes such as ARID1A, SPEN, and FOXA1 further underscore the
heterogeneity in the transcriptional regulation pathways disrupted in lumA breast cancer.
The visualization further stratifies mutation types across these genes, revealing a predom-
inance of missense mutations across the dataset. Structural mutations, such as frameshift
deletions, splice site alterations, and nonsense mutations, occur less frequently but likely
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
23
==PAGE:34==
have a disproportionate functional impact due to their potential to disrupt protein struc-
ture or generate premature stop codons. This distribution highlights a complex interplay of
driver events, functional impairments, and structural consequences across the mutational
landscape.
Figure 4.1b provides an overview of key mutational metrics, including variant classifica-
tions, variant types, and single nucleotide variation (SNV) classes. Missense mutations
are by far the most frequent class of alterations, accounting for over 950 mutations, fol-
lowed by nonsense mutations and frameshift events. Variants associated with structural
or functional disruption, such as frameshift insertions and deletions, are rarer but remain
relevant to key biological processes.
The majority of the mutations are SNVs, with transition events, particularly C>T tran-
sitions, occurring most frequently. Indels contribute a smaller but notable fraction of the
mutational burden, often causing frameshifts or deletions that can severely disrupt TF
functionality.
The distribution of variants per sample demonstrates a modest mutational burden, with
a median of two mutations per sample. Despite this relatively low mutational burden, the
strong concentration of mutations in specific TFs such as GATA3 and TP53 highlights
their potential biological and clinical significance.
4.3
MAVISp coverage and curations
To enhance the comprehensiveness of MAVISp database, TFs with a high number of
missense mutations identified in Somatic Mutation Analysis of the MAF file and with
known target regulation with the putative driver genes from Moonlight2R were prioritized
for curation. This whole list of the TFs and their total number of missense mutations is
provided in Supplementary A.1. The Table 4.1 lists the TFs curated during this thesis
along with their structural coverage and structure source. This targeted approach aimed to
enrich MAVISp’s coverage, facilitating a more detailed structural analysis of the mutations
found in lumA cancer patients. As shown in Figure 4.2a out of the 229 TFs found regulating
the expression of putative driver genes, 57 (24.9%) are included in the MAVISp database as
far until 10/01/2025. This curated subset of TFs include in total 230 missense mutations
accounting for the 40.8% of all missense mutations found in these 229 important TFs of
lumA cancer patients.
Moreover, the MAVISp structural coverage of the TFs with highest mutational burden was
visually represented in a barplot as shown in Figure 4.2b, illustrating the distribution and
stability classification of missense mutations across these TFs. Destabilizing mutations
represent a minority, indicating that only a small subset of these mutations significantly
compromises TF stability. Many mutations are located in intrinsically disordered regions
(IDRs), which may affect the regulation of TF activity despite their structural flexibility.
A significant number of mutations classified as neutral suggests that while these mutations
may not directly destabilize the TFs, their potential regulatory impact might still arise
from changes to functional sites or interactions rather than outright structural perturba-
tion. Lastly, a notable portion of the mutations is classified as uncertain, highlighting
gaps in current structural knowledge or predictive limitations.
Interestingly, there are
no mutations classified as stabilizing, underscoring the potential unidirectional impact of
mutations in lumA patients toward impairing TF functionality rather than enhancing it.
24
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: MAVISp coverage details: (a) Coverage of the Transcription Factors (TFs) that regulate the expression
of driver genes in the MAVISp d Database (left), Distribution of missense mutations in the curated and non curated TFs
(right) (b) Structural Coverage of missense mutations of TFs in the MAVISp Database. This barplot illustrates the stability
classification of the missense mutations identified in the lumA cancer patients cohort.
Table 4.1: MAVISp Curated Transcription Factors (TFs) during this thesis project with their structural
coverage and structure source; AlphaFold database (AFdb), AlphaFold3 (AF3).
TF
Residues covered
Source
APC
5-243, 324-773
AF3
ATF2
23-50, 349-426
AFdb
CBX8
3-188, 360-381
AFdb
CRX
36-104
AFdb
E2F1
127-300
AFdb
FOXA1
170-247
AFdb
HCFC1
16-402,1811-2001
AFdb
HMGB2
2-166
AFdb
HOXA11
242-308
AFdb
LMO4
19-146
AFdb
MAX
17-110
AFdb
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
25
==PAGE:36==
TF
Residues covered
Source
MED23
1-1335
AFdb
MGMT
4-180
AFdb
MTF1
139-314
AFdb
NF1
7-2747
AF3
NFATC3
409-701
AFdb
OTX2
37-103
AFdb
PITX3
62-124
AFdb
POU1F1
126-200, 218-271
AFdb
POU4F2
254-404
AFdb
RANBP2
3-757, 1186-1307, 2027-2147, 2325-2450, 2925-3224
AF3
RARB
75-415
AFdb
SPI1
168-259
AFdb
TBX3
102-329
AFdb
TBX5
37-238
AFdb
TFAP4
38-216
AFdb
TFPT
58-138
AFdb
TRAF6
52-502
AFdb
TRRAP
94-704
AFdb
XBP1
69-218
AFdb
ZFP36L1
115-192
AFdb
4.4
Functional and Cancer Drivers Insights
Functional Enrichment Analysis was performed to identify biological processs significantly
associated with the DEGs between BRCA lumA and normal samples and visualised in Fig-
ure 4.3. Among the most significant findings were pathways related to cell proliferation,
cell migration, and immune regulation. Notably, the ”proliferation of cells”, ”cell prolifer-
arion of tumor cell lines” and ”cell movement” processes reflect hallmark cancer traits of
sustained proliferation and invasion, as expected for lumA tumor biology [73]. Specifically,
the biological process of ”cell proliferation,” as defined by the Gene Ontology and KEGG
databases, includes 3,938 annotated genes, with 2,044 identified by Moonlight as differ-
entially expressed genes. Similarly, immune-related processes, such as ”cell movement of
myeloid cells” and ”inflammatory response,” suggest immune system involvement in the
tumor microenvironment, which aligns with the known immune dysregulation observed in
cancer.
Metabolic processes, including ”fatty acid metabolism” and ”synthesis of lipid,” were also
significantly enriched, indicating metabolic reprogramming commonly seen in cancer to
support rapid growth and biosynthesis. While the identification of these processes rein-
forces established lumA tumor biology, the enrichment of immune-associated pathways
points toward the interplay between tumor cells and the immune microenvironment as a
key feature in lumA, warranting further exploration.
26
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.3: Functional enrichment analysis (FEA) of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between BRCA
lumA and normal samples. The barplot displays significantly enriched biological processes (BPs), as indicated by the
top FDR-adjusted significance values (-log10FDR10, in blue) and Moonlight z-scores (increased, yellow; decreased, purple).
Key processes include cell proliferation, cell movement, and immune-related activities, such as leukocyte migration and
inflammatory response. The blue bar heights indicate the strength of significance, and color distinctions reflect predicted
activity changes (increased or decreased) based on the DEGs.
Values in parentheses indicate the number of genes in
common between the genes annotated in the BP and the genes used as input for the functional enrichment
From the Differential Gene Expression Analysis, 16,129 DEGs were identified between
normal samples and lumA breast cancer samples, which then were used for Moonlight2R’s
primary layer. PRA enabled the identification of putative driver genes with two distinct
regulatory patterns, illustrated in Figure 4.4. These patterns were: (i) increased prolif-
eration and decreased apoptosis, exemplified by genes such as CCNB2 [74] and RAD51
[75]; and (ii) decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis, exemplified by genes such as
MEF2C [76] and SCARF1 [77].
It was hypothesized that genes exhibiting pattern (i) act as OGs, promoting tumor growth
by enhancing proliferation and suppressing programmed cell death. Conversely, genes ex-
hibiting pattern (ii) function as TSGs, restraining cancer development by reducing prolif-
eration and promoting apoptosis.
Following this analysis, Moonlight2R predicted 365 oncogenic mediators, which were di-
vided into 140 putative OGs and 216 putative TSGs (Table 4.2). See Supplementary Table
A.2 for the detailed list. Moreover, the expression of 313 (86%) of the predicted driver
genes was regulated by mutated TFs, giving them a central role in shaping the oncogenic
landscape of lumA breast cancer.
These findings provide valuable molecular targets for further validation in lumA breast
cancer research. The identified OGs could be therapeutic targets for inhibition, while the
TSGs could be investigated for restoration in targeted therapies. Moreover, TF mutations
may not only serve as potential biomarkers but also as therapeutic targets, as they may
orchestrate oncogenic networks that sustain tumor growth and survival.
Building on
this, the second layer of analysis employs the TFinfluence function to further investigate
how mutated TFs regulate the expression of the predicted oncogenic mediators, providing
deeper insights into the transcriptional mechanisms driving tumorigenesis.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
27
==PAGE:38==
apoptosis
proliferation of cells
FLT1
SCARF1
MECOM
SOX18
FHL5
CRYAB
IFI16
ENG
SOX7
ETS2
CXCL10
ERG
EPAS1
UGCG
FOXC1
PRNP
FABP5
ATF3
SERPINE1
KLF9
PER1
PDK4
SAA2
NT5E
PTGDS
PTGIR
ETV1
S100B
TAGLN
HMOX1
CCR7
ZFP36
WASF3
GSTP1
HPSE
BMP2
FOS
SATB1
TWIST1
HOXA4
VEGFD
SOCS2
IL6
SGK1
S1PR1
CXCR2
F2R
EGR1
VIM
SOD2
SNAI3
LOXL4
HBEGF
PCK1
TLR4
DAB2
PLB1
CCR5
FABP4
JUNB
LEP
PLD1
COL4A4
ALDH1A2
KLF2
MEF2A
ITGB2
RGN
BGN
VCAN
FGFBP1
GSTA1
HGF
OAS1
ITGAX
ADH1A
TBX18
IL1R1
EPSTI1
FGF2
MET
NR2F1
EGFR
DDX58
SFRP1
CXCR3
GFAP
FLI1
SLIT2
CD40
EDNRB
TGFBR3
DST
ADAMTS1
LPL
NES
OXTR
DLL4
RUNX1T1
TNFRSF1B
LIPE
RNASE2
TGFB1
PODXL
CXCL12
HSD17B11
ADIPOQ
EPHA2
MYEF2
AFP
SYP
DIRAS3
RAB3A
PGK1
CERS2
EPCAM
MMP11
LRBA
KCNN4
S100A11
TUBB3
STIM1
CD22
CR2
CXCL14
MUC1
MPL
CDK5R1
TSHR
SMYD1
RUNX2
PIGR
OCLN
COP1
ACTA2
KLF6
NME1
MMP7
CEBPA
YBX1
RBM38
COL11A1
CHEK2
GATA3
CDH2
DACT2
KLF5
HDAC4
FN1
SDC1
COL10A1
ACOT7
DNMT3B
CRABP1
CENPH
BRCA1
TK1
CKS2
KPNA2
CCNE1
CHEK1
CDC25A
RRM2
BIRC5
PLK1
RAD51
BUB1B
PRC1
FOXM1
KIF2C
MAD2L1
FANCA
BRCA2
UBE2S
CIP2A
MKI67
MYBL2
EXO1
CDKN3
TTK
TOP2A
BLM
E2F1
−5
0
5
Value
0
20
40
Color Key
and Histogram
Count
Figure 4.4: Heatmap depicting the predicted TSGs and OGs in lumA breast cancer alongside their associated
biological processes. Hierarchical clustering was conducted using the Euclidean distance matrix. Biological processes
with increased Moonlight Gene Z-scores are highlighted in red, while those with decreased scores are shown in blue.
Table 4.2: Summary of Differential Expression Analysis and Driver Genes Predictions
Count
DEGs
16,129
Predicted Oncogenic Mediators
365
- OGs
140
- TSGs
216
4.5
TF Influence Analysis
Moonlight2R’s secondary TF mutational layer, implemented in the TFinflunce function
presented here, allowed one potential mechanistic explanation of the differential gene ex-
pression profile. It was found that the expression of 313 (86%) of the predicted oncogenic
mediators was regulated by mutated TFs. This resulted in the classification of 11 desta-
bilizing mutations in 7 TFs that regulate the expression of TSGs. (Table 4.3)
When a TF activates the expression of a TSG, its loss of function can result in reduced
TSG expression, promoting cancer progression by impairing the tumor’s capacity to inhibit
proliferation and induce apoptosis. Conversely, if the TF represses the expression of a TSG,
its destabilization could lead to increased TSG expression, theoretically counteracting
tumor growth.
The effect of a destabilizing mutation in a TF of a TSG could serve
as compelling evidence that this mutation not only destabilizes the TF itself but also
drives changes in TSG expression, thereby promoting differentiation of cells and inhibiting
28
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:39==
apoptosis.
For OGs, a destabilized TF that activates the expression of an OG might lead to decreased
OG expression, which could suppress oncogenic processes like proliferation. However, if
the TF represses an OG, its destabilization may cause increased OG expression, thereby
driving tumor progression. The analysis did not identify any particular OG regulated by
mutated TF.
The findings were further validated through comprehensive bibliographic review to confirm
their relevance and potential functional impact and are further discussed in the following
sections.
Table 4.3: TF Influence Analysis: Moonlight2R’s secondary TF mutational layer, implemented in the TFinflunce
function.
Destabilizing mutations on TFs that target TSGs or OGs are identified.
Their type of interaction is also
included.
TF
Moonlight
Clas-
sification of tar-
get
Interaction
Type
Targets
Destabilizing
Mutations
ATM
TSG
Activation
DUSP1
L2780R
FOXA1
TSG
Activation
APOB
W214C
NF1
TSG
Activation
FOS
L529P
RUNX1
TSG
Activation
MECOM, CD34
G141R,
P76S
SMARCA4
TSG
Activation
MECOM
L1500P
SMARCA4
TSG
Repression
FOS
L1500P
STAT3
TSG
Activation
IL6,
CCL2,
EGFR,
HMOX1,
FOS,
STAT1,
LEP,
SOCS3,
FGF2,
GFAP, JUNB, TWIST1,
AKAP12,
CCL11,
TGFB1, HGF, PPARA,
F2R, S1PR1, ZFP36
W564C
STAT3
TSG
Repression
IL6, OAS1
W564C
TP53
TSG
Activation
EGFR,
ATF3,
DUSP1,
IGFBP3, TRIM22, FLT1,
CAV1, EPHA2, GSTP1,
CRYAB,
IFI16,
S100B,
VCAN
V157G,
Y126C,
Y234C,
L257R
TP53
TSG
Repression
ABCB1,
FGF2,
MET,
KLF2
V157G,
Y126C,
Y234C,
L257R
4.6
Bibliographic Research of Resulting Mutated TFs &
Structural Visualization
4.6.1
ATM
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene encodes a serine/threonine protein kinase that
plays a crucial role in the cellular response to DNA damage, particularly double-strand
breaks [78].
ATM activates the expression of the TSG DUSP1 and lumA patients were found to bear
the L2780R mutation serving as mechanistic indicator. The L2780R mutation lies within
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
29
==PAGE:40==
the PI3K/PI4K domain of the ATM protein, a region essential for its kinase activity
(Figure 4.5a). It refers to a missense mutation where leucine (L), a non-polar, hydrophobic
residue is replaced by arginine (R), a positively charged, hydrophilic residue (Figure 4.5b).
While L2780R is reported as uncertain in ClinVar, it was classified damaging by MAVISp
in accordance with other classification methods, such as AlphaMissense and loss of function
prediction by DeMaSk, as shown in Figure 4.5c.
However the specific effects of the L2780R mutation on ATM protein function have not
been characterized in the scientific literature yet. Notably thought, mutations in the ATM
gene and loss of its function have been associated with increased susceptibility to various
cancers, including breast cancer, raising significant concerns regarding their implications
for patient risk assessment and management [79, 80, 81].
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.5: (a) The lollipop plot, generated with maftools, illustrates the positional distribution of mutations in the ATM
protein, highlighting mutations located in key functional domains such as the TAN domain, the catalytic domain (PI3Kc)
and the FAT domains, used as a structural scaffold or as protein-binding domain. Each lollipop represents a mutation’s
protein position, with its height indicating recurrence frequency and colors indicating mutation types. The mutation of
interest is labeled. (b) Structural representation of FOXA1 protein generated using PyMOL, showing the destabilizing
mutation in red. (c) Dotplot and a summary of the effect of the mutations on the single modules of the MAVISp framework,
dividing them in structural/functional effects.
30
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:41==
4.6.2
FOXA1
Forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1) gene encodes a pioneer TF essential for regulating gene
expression by modifying chromatin structure, thereby allowing other TFs to access DNA
[82]. FOXA1 was found to activate the expression of the TSG APOB and cancer samples
were found to bear the W214C mutation serving as mechanistic indicator. Tryptophan
(W) 214 is within the forkhead domain of FOXA1 (Figure 4.6a) and is substituted with
cysteine (C). This change is replacing a bulky, hydrophobic, and aromatic side chain
with a smaller, polar, and reactive thiol group (Figure 4.6b). Analysis classify W214C as
damaging based on the MAVISp STABILITY module and the LONG_RANGE allostery
module, aligned with the Alphamissense classification. Additionally, tools like DeMask
and GEMME predict loss of function (Figure 4.6c).
Notably, other disruptions in this region are found in literature to alter its function to
regulate chromatin accessibility, perturb normal luminal epithelial differentiation programs
and are a hallmark of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancers, like lumA [83].
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.6: (a) Positional distribution of mutations in FOXA1, visualized using maftools. The lollipop plot highlights
mutations located in key functional domains, such as Fork_Head_N (Forkhead Nterminal region), FH (Forkhead domain),
and HNF_C (Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 3 Cterminal domain).
The mutation of interest is labeled.
(b) Structural
representation of FOXA1 protein generated using PyMOL, showing the destabilizing mutation. (c) Dotplot and a summary
of the effect of the mutations on the single modules of the MAVISp framework, dividing them in structural/functional effects.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
31
==PAGE:42==
4.6.3
NF1
The NF1 gene encodes neurofibromin, a GTPase-activating protein that negatively regu-
lates the Ras signaling pathway, thereby influencing cell growth and differentiation. NF1
is one of the largest human genes, with a myriad of possible mutations, which have been
identified by TCGA in approximately 3% of all breast cancers sequenced, with a higher
prevalence in luminal or ER+HER2- subtypes, suggesting a potential role in luminal breast
cancer pathogenesis [84].
LumA sample was found bearing destabilizing L529P mutation in NF1 -replacing leucine
(L) with the hydrophilic proline (P)- and consequently disrupting the protein’s hydropho-
bic core (Figure 4.7b). NF1 was found to activate the TSG FOS. ClinVar reports this
variant as pathogenic/likely pathogenic in accordance with destabilising Alphamissense
classification and loss of funtion DeMask prediction (Figure 4.7c).
It is worth mentioning that mutations in neurofibromin or its absence can result in the
accumulation of phosphorylated MAPK and activated Ras, which have been associated
with the development and progression of breast cancer [85].
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.7: (a) Lollipop plot visualization of NF1 gene mutations using the maftools package. The plot depicts the dis-
tribution of mutations across the NF1 gene, with key domains annotated for context like Ras GTPase-activating domain
(RasGAP) and lipid binding domain (SEC14). Each lollipop represents a mutation’s genomic position, with its height indi-
cating recurrence frequency and colors indicating mutation types. (b) Structural representation of NF1 protein generated
using PyMOL, showing the destabilizing mutation. (c) Dotplot and a summary of the effect of the mutations on the single
modules of the MAVISp framework, dividing them in structural/functional effects.
32
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:43==
4.6.4
RUNX1
RUNX1 is a TF that plays a crucial role in hematopoiesis, the process of blood cell
formation. It is essential for the development and maintenance of hematopoietic stem
and progenitor cells, which give rise to all blood cell lineages.
RUNX1 regulates the
differentiation of these stem cells into various blood cells. Disruptions in RUNX1 function
can lead to hematological malignancies, such as leukemia [86].
RUNX1 was found to activate the TSGs MECOM and CD34, while lumA cancer samples
were found bearing the P76S and G141R that serve as mechanistic indicators. Both
mutations occur within the Runt domain, as shown in Figure 4.8a, a region essential for
DNA binding and heterodimerization with the β subunit [87]. G141R is reported as uncer-
tain in ClinVar, while MAVISp classified both as damaging, in accordance with EVE and
Alphamissense classifications, and GEMME loss of funtion predictions. DeMask addition-
ally predicts loss of function for G141R (Figure 4.9). The P76S mutation is replacing the
rigid, cyclic proline (P) with a flexible, polar serine (S), which can disrupt local folding
and increase hydrophilicity, while in G141R the small, non-polar glycine (G) residue is
replaced with the larger, polar arginine (R) (Figure 4.8b), and even though mutations in
this TF are in association with familial platelet disorders and myeloid malignancies [88,
89], specific in-depth studies on this particular mutations remain limited.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: (a) Lollipop plot visualization of RUNX1 gene mutations using the maftools package. The plot depicts the
distribution of mutations across the RUNX1 gene, with key domains annotated for context. The RUNT domain, essential
for DNA binding and heterodimerization, is prominently shown, indicating its critical functional role. The Runx inhibition
domain, involved in interactions with functional cofactors, is also annotated. Each lollipop represents a mutation’s genomic
position, with its height indicating recurrence frequency and colors indicating mutation types. (b) Structural representation
of RUNX1 protein generated using PyMOL, showing the destabilizing mutations within the Runt domain.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.9: (c) Dotplot and a summary of the effect of the mutations on the single modules of the MAVISp framework,
dividing them in structural/functional effects.
4.6.5
SMARCA4
The SMARCA4 gene encodes the BRG1 protein, a pivotal component of the SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling complex, which plays a crucial role in regulating gene expression
by modulating chromatin structure [90]. SMARCA4 was found to activate the expression
of the TSG MECOM and repress the TSG FOS while bearing the destabilizing L1500P
mutation in it bromodomain (Figure 4.10a). Leucine (L), a hydrophobic amino acid with
a nonpolar side chain, is replaced by proline (P), a unique amino acid known for intro-
ducing kinks in protein structures due to its rigid cyclic structure (Figure 4.10b). Both
STABILITY and LONG_RANGE modules classified L1500P as damaging, in accordance
with AlphaMissense classification and DeMask prediction (Figure 4.10c).
In breast cancer, SMARCA4 mutations have been associated with cisplatin resistance
and the development of metastatic triple-negative breast cancer. Specifically, SMARCA4
inactivation has been linked to the activation of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
and Hippo-YAP/TAZ pathways, which are known to promote cancer progression [91, 92].
34
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:45==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.10: (a) Lollipop plot visualization of SMARCA4 mutations using the maftools package. The plot depicts the
distribution of mutations across the SMARCA4 protein, with protein domains annotated for context such as Bromodomain
(Bromo_SND2L2). Each lollipop represents a mutation’s protein position, with its height indicating recurrence frequency
and colors indicating mutation types. The mutation of interest is labeled. (b) Structural representation of SMARCA4
protein generated using PyMOL, showing the destabilizing mutation. (c) Dotplot and a summary of the effect of the
mutations on the single modules of the MAVISp framework, dividing them in structural/functional effects.
4.6.6
STAT3
Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) translocates to the nucleus
to regulate genes involved in cell growth, survival, and differentiation [93].
STAT3 activates the expression of 20 TSGs (IL6, CCL2, EGFR, HMOX1, FOS, STAT1,
LEP, SOCS3, FGF2, GFAP, JUNB, TWIST1, AKAP12, CCL11, TGFB1, HGF, PPARA,
F2R, S1PR1, ZFP36) and represses the expression of 2 TSGs (IL6, OAS1). Functioning
as both an activator and repressor complicates the effect of destabilizing mutations: loss
of activation could disable protective TSG pathways, while diminished repression could
inadvertently restore inhibitory TSG functions. Sample bearing the destabilizing W564C
mutation in the SH2 domain of STAT3 was found, as shown in Figure 4.11a. This mutation
substitutes a tryptophan (W) residue with cysteine (C), likely destabilizing the domain by
disrupting its hydrophobic core and potentially enabling aberrant disulfide bond formation
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
35
==PAGE:46==
(Figure 4.11b). Figure 4.11c further highlights that W564C, in addition to being classified
as damaging by MAVISp, exhibits loss-of-function predictions from GEMME and DeMask.
Moreover, this residue is part of an early folding region, underscoring its critical role
in stabilizing initial structural elements that guide the assembly of the larger, native
structure.
The predicted effect of such mutation aligns with the studied role of SH2 domain mutations
in oncogenesis, as seen in various hematologic malignancies [94], emphasizing its potential
contribution to tumor progression through disrupted signaling pathways.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.11:
(a) Lollipop plot visualization of STAT3 mutations using the maftools package.
The plot depicts the
distribution of mutations across the STAT3 protein, with protein interaction domain (STAT_int), coiled coil domain
(STAT_alpha), DNA binding domain (STAT_bind) and SRC homology 2(SH2_STAT3) domains annotated for context.
Each lollipop represents a mutation’s protein position, with its height indicating recurrence frequency and colors indicating
mutation types. The mutation of interest is labeled. (b) Structural representation of STAT3 protein generated using Py-
MOL, showing the destabilizing mutation. (c) Dotplot and a summary of the effect of the mutations on the single modules
of the MAVISp framework, dividing them in structural/functional effects.
4.6.7
TP53
The TP53 gene encodes the tumor suppressor protein p53, which plays a critical role in
regulating cellular processes, including the cell cycle, apoptosis, and DNA repair [95].
36
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:47==
Specific mutations, Y126C, V157G, Y234C, and L257R, have been identified as key
mechanistic indicators. TP53 was found to activate the expression of 13 TSGs (EGFR,
ATF3, DUSP1, IGFBP3, TRIM22, FLT1, CAV1, EPHA2, GSTP1, CRYAB, IFI16,
S100B, VCAN) and repress the expression of 4 TSGs (ABCB1, FGF2, MET, KLF2).
This dual role of TP53 as both an activator and repressor complicates its functional
impact.
Destabilizing mutations can simultaneously disable protective TSG pathways
and potentially restore inhibitory TSG functions, highlighting the complexity of TP53’s
regulatory roles.
All identified mutations reside within the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of TP53 (Figure
4.12a), which spans residues 102–292 and is essential for p53’s function as TF that main-
tains genomic stability. Mutations in this domain are prevalent in breast cancer and are
broadly categorized into three groups [95, 96]:
• DNA-contact mutations: Affect residues directly interacting with DNA.
• Moderately destabilizing mutations: Induce local distortions on the DNA-binding
surface.
• Highly destabilizing mutations: Cause global protein unfolding and significantly
reduce thermodynamic stability.
The mutations identified in this study (Y126C, V157G, Y234C, and L257R) belong to
the third category, characterized by pronounced destabilizing effects by MAVISp and in
accordance with EVE, Alphamissense and loss of function prediction by DeMaSk and
GEMME. It is worth noticing that only Y234C is reported as pathogenic/likely pathogenic
in ClinVar, with the rest of them classified as uncertain (Figure 4.12c).
- Y126C: This mutation resides within the hydrophobic core of the DBD. Substituting
tyrosine (Y), a polar residue, with cysteine (C) could introduce reactivity and disrupt
hydrogen bonding, significantly destabilizing the protein. Additionally, MAVISp predicts
destabilising effect in the phosphorylatable site and in the allosteric free energy through
the PTM and LONG_RANGE modules.
- V157G: Located in the L2 loop—a region crucial for DNA interaction—this mutation
replaces valine (V) with glycine (G), potentially reducing loop rigidity.
- Y234C: Similar to Y126C, this mutation may disrupts hydrogen bonding and hydropho-
bic interactions, destabilizing the protein’s core. This mutation is also predicted to have a
damaging impact on the protein’s allostery through LONG_RANGE module , impairing
its ability to regulate activity through conformational changes. Residue 234 is considered
part of early folding region, furthermore highlighting its structural importance.
- L257R: This mutation replaces leucine (L) with the charged residue arginine (R), po-
tentially weakening the hydrophobic contacts necessary for stabilizing the DBD. Similarly
with residue 234, it is part of early folding region, suggesting their importance in ensuring
correct and efficient folding.
Visualization of these mutations highlights their concentration within the DBD and un-
derscores their critical role in TP53 dysfunction (Figure 4.12b).
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
37
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.12: (a) Lollipop plot of the positional distribution of TP53 mutations in breast cancer patients, visualized using
maftools. Annotated protein domains include P53_TAD (transactivation domain), P53 (DNA-binding domain, DBD), and
P53_tetramer (tetramerization domain). All identified damaging mutations are localized within the DBD. (b) Structural
representation of the TP53 protein generated using PyMOL, highlighting the destabilizing mutations within the DBD. (c)
Dotplot and a summary of the effect of the mutations on the single modules of the MAVISp framework, dividing them in
structural/functional effects.
38
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:49==
4.6.8
Value of Findings
Mutated or dysregulated TFs represent a unique class of drug targets and the discovery of
destabilizing mutations in TFs highlights their intricate involvement in the progression of
luminal A breast cancer. Mutations identified such as L2780R in ATM, W214C in FOXA1,
L529P in NF1, P76S and G141R in RUNX1, L1500P in SMARCA4, W564C in STAT3,
and various DNA-binding domain mutations in TP53 (Y126C, V157G, Y234C, L257R)
are predicted to destabilize essential functional domains, disrupting their transcriptional
regulation and contributing to oncogenesis.
While computational tools like MAVISp and AlphaMissense provided valuable predictions
regarding the structural impacts and pathogenicity of these mutations, their clinical classi-
fications often remain uncertain or inconsistent. This discrepancy highlights the necessity
for comprehensive experimental validation to elucidate the precise functional consequences
of these variants.
Even though the occurrence of the above mutations is rare in the studied dataset, mecha-
nistic insights strongly indicate oncogenic potential, making them biologically meaningful,
especially for personalized medicine applications. Multiple approaches to target TF ac-
tivity have been recently demonstrated, both preclinically and, in some cases, clinically.
It is feasible that molecules capable of activating TF activity could be developed, making
it possible to increase the activity of tumor-suppressor transcription factors that are re-
duced in expression and/or activity in specific cancers [97, 98, 99, 100]. These innovations
in drug development hold great promise to yield agents with unique properties that are
likely to impact future cancer treatment. Therefore understanding how these destabilizing
mutations affect protein function and contribute to cancer development is crucial. Such
insights can inform the development of targeted therapies aimed at targeting the dysfunc-
tional TF, restoring its normal function or counteracting the oncogenic pathways activated
by these mutations.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
39
==PAGE:50==
40
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:51==
5
Conclusion
In conclusion, the integrative analysis conducted in this study provides mechanistic indi-
cators of cancer driver genes associated with mutated TFs in lumA breast cancer patients,
shedding light on how specific mutations in TFs contribute to oncogenesis. Somatic mu-
tation analysis revealed extensive genetic variability in TFs, with the majority of analyzed
lumA samples harboring at least one TF mutation. Notably, while missense mutations
were prevalent within TFs, only a minority were classified as structurally destabilizing,
suggesting that other mutation types also play a role in cancer progression.
Notably,
GATA3, despite being the most mutated TF with mutations identified in 20% of the sam-
ples, exhibited a majority of alterations that were not missense, underscoring the variable
mutational spectrum across TFs.
Functional analysis using Moonlight2R identified hallmark cancer-associated pathways
such as cell proliferation, migration, and immune dysregulation, reinforcing established
lumA tumor biology while highlighting the immune microenvironment’s critical role. Ad-
ditionally, 365 cancer driver genes were predicted, shedding light on distinct regulatory
patterns that govern cell proliferation and apoptosis. Importantly, TF influence analy-
sis identified seven destabilized TFs (ATM, FOXA1, NF1, RUNX1, SMARCA4, STAT3,
TP53) in lumA cancer samples, with downstream effects on TSGs. Notably, no TFs har-
bored stabilizing mutations that further activated the expression of OGs. These findings
elucidate the functional contributions of destabilized TFs to lumA biology and underscore
their potential as key regulators of tumor progression.
While detailed analyses of the resulting mutations have provided valuable insights, it
is essential to acknowledge that the gold standard for understanding the impact of a
mutation relies on experimental evidence demonstrating its functional consequences in
cellular processes. Bioinformatic approaches, while powerful, have inherent limitations in
definitively determining the biological effects of mutations. Instead, this method provides a
robust framework for prioritizing mutations for functional validation, guiding experimental
efforts to uncover their mechanistic roles in oncogenesis.
It has to be noted, that an inherent feauture of MAVISp is that it focuses on the structured
or ordered regions of proteins, as referred before. These regions typically correspond to
well-characterized domains with stable secondary and tertiary structures. However, many
critical TF interactions arise from intrinsically disordered regions, which are less well-
defined but play significant roles in mediating interactions with DNA, cofactors, and other
TFs. By excluding these regions, this framework may overlook mutations that disrupt these
disordered interactions, potentially underestimating their contribution to transcriptional
regulation and cancer.
Another noteworthy consideration is the incomplete coverage of TFs in the MAVISp
database. Expanding curation efforts to include a broader array of TFs will likely yield ad-
ditional insights. In addition, implementing the LOCAL_INTERACTION module for the
target driver DNA would enhance the assessment of TF-driver complex stability by evalu-
ating changes in binding free energy, adding valuable insights into TF binding interactions
and their role in oncogenesis.
Lastly, it has to be taken into account that the overall effect of a destabilizing TF muta-
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
41
==PAGE:52==
tion is also influenced by its dual roles in gene regulation, as TFs often govern multiple
genes with opposing functions, potentially activating oncogenic pathways while suppress-
ing tumor-suppressive pathways, or vice versa like TP53 and STAT3. Additionally, the
regulatory network’s redundancy can allow other TFs or pathways to compensate for the
destabilized TF, maintaining OG or TSG activity levels.
Furthermore, within hetero-
geneous tumors, different cancer cell subpopulations may react to TF destabilization in
diverse ways, further complicating the consequences of such mutations.
Given these complexities, further research is necessary to fully understand the conse-
quences of destabilizing mutations in TFs. Future studies should investigate how these mu-
tations affect other molecular layers through multi-omics analyses, interact with broader
regulatory networks, compensate for or amplify their effects, and influence distinct cancer
subpopulations. Such insights will be critical for predicting mutation-specific outcomes
and developing targeted TF therapeutic strategies that address these multifaceted mech-
anisms.
42
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Shaosen Zhang et al. “Tumor initiation and early tumorigenesis: molecular mech-
anisms and interventional targets”. In: Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy
2024 9:1 9.1 (June 2024), pp. 1–36. iSSN: 2059-3635. DOi: 10.1038/s41392-024-
01848-7. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41392-024-01848-7.
[2]
Geoffrey M Cooper. “The Development and Causes of Cancer”. In: (2000). URL:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK9963/.
[3]
Balabhadrapatruni V.S.K. Chakravarthi, Saroj Nepal, and Sooryanarayana Varam-
bally. “Genomic and Epigenomic Alterations in Cancer”. In: The American Journal
of Pathology 186.7 (July 2016), p. 1724. iSSN: 15252191. DOi: 10.1016/J.AJPATH.
2016.02.023. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4929396/.
[4]
Moritz Gerstung et al. “The Temporal Order of Genetic and Pathway Alterations
in Tumorigenesis”. In: PLOS ONE 6.11 (Nov. 2011), e27136. iSSN: 1932-6203. DOi:
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0027136. URL: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?
id=10.1371/journal.pone.0027136.
[5]
Moritz Gerstung et al. “The evolutionary history of 2,658 cancers”. In: Nature 2020
578:7793 578.7793 (Feb. 2020), pp. 122–128. iSSN: 1476-4687. DOi: 10.1038/s41586-
019-1907-7. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1907-7.
[6]
Stefan Enroth et al. “Cancer associated epigenetic transitions identified by genome-
wide histone methylation binding profiles in human colorectal cancer samples and
paired normal mucosa”. In: BMC cancer 11 (Oct. 2011). iSSN: 1471-2407. DOi:
10.1186/1471-2407-11-450. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22011431/.
[7]
Ilir Sheraj, N. Tulin Guray, and Sreeparna Banerjee. “A pan-cancer transcriptomic
study showing tumor specific alterations in central metabolism”. In: Scientific re-
ports 11.1 (Dec. 2021). iSSN: 2045-2322. DOi: 10.1038/S41598-021-93003-3. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34211032/%20https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
34211032/?utm_source=chatgpt.com.
[8]
Carlos Martínez-Ruiz et al. “Genomic–transcriptomic evolution in lung cancer and
metastasis”. In: Nature 2023 616:7957 616.7957 (Apr. 2023), pp. 543–552. iSSN:
1476-4687. DOi: 10.1038/s41586- 023- 05706- 4. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41586-023-05706-4.
[9]
Yangying Zhou et al. “Proteomic signatures of 16 major types of human cancer
reveal universal and cancer-type-specific proteins for the identification of potential
therapeutic targets”. In: Journal of Hematology and Oncology 13.1 (Dec. 2020),
pp. 1–15. iSSN: 17568722. DOi: 10.1186/S13045-020-01013-X/FIGURES/6. URL:
https://jhoonline.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13045-020-01013-x.
[10]
Yang Woo Kwon et al. “Application of Proteomics in Cancer: Recent Trends and
Approaches for Biomarkers Discovery”. In: Frontiers in Medicine 8 (Sept. 2021),
p. 747333. iSSN: 2296858X. DOi: 10.3389/FMED.2021.747333/BIBTEX. URL: www.
frontiersin.org.
[11]
Abdulmalik Idris Koya and Sherif A. Ibrahim. “Carcinogenesis”. In: StatPearls (Oct.
2024). URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK604463/.
[12]
Collin J. Tokheim et al. “Evaluating the evaluation of cancer driver genes”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113.50
(Dec. 2016), pp. 14330–14335. iSSN: 1091-6490. DOi: 10.1073/PNAS.1616440113.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27911828/.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
43
==PAGE:54==
[13]
Fabio Vandin. “Computational Methods for Characterizing Cancer Mutational Het-
erogeneity”. In: Frontiers in genetics 8.JUN (2017). iSSN: 1664-8021. DOi: 10.3389/
FGENE.2017.00083. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28659971/.
[14]
Mark D.M. Leiserson et al. “CoMEt: a statistical approach to identify combinations
of mutually exclusive alterations in cancer”. In: Genome biology 16.1 (Aug. 2015).
iSSN: 1474-760X. DOi: 10.1186/S13059-015-0700-7. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/26253137/.
[15]
Anna Leigh Brown et al. “Finding driver mutations in cancer: Elucidating the role
of background mutational processes”. In: PLoS Computational Biology 15.4 (2019),
e1006981. iSSN: 15537358. DOi: 10. 1371 /JOURNAL .PCBI. 1006981. URL: https:
//pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6508748/.
[16]
Soojeong Chang, Sujin Yim, and Hyunsung Park. “The cancer driver genes IDH1/2,
JARID1C/ KDM5C, and UTX/ KDM6A: crosstalk between histone demethylation
and hypoxic reprogramming in cancer metabolism”. In: Experimental and Molecular
Medicine 51.6 (June 2019). iSSN: 20926413. DOi: 10.1038/S12276-019-0230-6.
[17]
Haishan Lin et al. “KDM5c Promotes Colon Cancer Cell Proliferation Through the
FBXW7-c-Jun Regulatory Axis”. In: Frontiers in oncology 10 (Sept. 2020). iSSN:
2234-943X. DOi: 10.3389/FONC.2020.535449. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/33042830/.
[18]
JGraph. draw.io. 2021. URL: https://www.drawio.com/.
[19]
Francisco Martínez-Jiménez et al. “A compendium of mutational cancer driver
genes”. In: Nature Reviews Cancer 2020 20:10 20.10 (Aug. 2020), pp. 555–572.
iSSN: 1474-1768. DOi: 10.1038/s41568-020-0290-x. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41568-020-0290-x.
[20]
Musalula Sinkala. “Mutational landscape of cancer-driver genes across human can-
cers”. In: Scientific Reports 2023 13:1 13.1 (Aug. 2023), pp. 1–14. iSSN: 2045-2322.
DOi: 10.1038/s41598-023-39608-2. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-
023-39608-2.
[21]
Ben Kinnersley et al. “Analysis of 10,478 cancer genomes identifies candidate driver
genes and opportunities for precision oncology”. In: Nature Genetics 2024 56:9 56.9
(June 2024), pp. 1868–1877. iSSN: 1546-1718. DOi: 10.1038/s41588-024-01785-9.
URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-024-01785-9.
[22]
Peter J. Campbell et al. “Pan-cancer analysis of whole genomes”. In: Nature
578.7793 (Feb. 2020), pp. 82–93. iSSN: 1476-4687. DOi: 10.1038/S41586-020-1969-6.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32025007/.
[23]
Feng Li et al. “Effects of Multi‐Omics Characteristics on Identification of Driver
Genes Using Machine Learning Algorithms”. In: Genes 13.5 (May 2022), p. 716.
iSSN: 20734425. DOi: 10.3390/GENES13050716/S1. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/articles/PMC9141966/.
[24]
Wenyi Zhao et al. “MODIG: integrating multi-omics and multi-dimensional gene
network for cancer driver gene identification based on graph attention network
model”. In: Bioinformatics 38.21 (Oct. 2022), pp. 4901–4907. iSSN: 1367-4803.
DOi: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTAC622. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btac622.
[25]
Jie Lyu et al. “DORGE: Discovery of Oncogenes and tumoR suppressor genes
using Genetic and Epigenetic features”. In: Science Advances 6.46 (Nov. 2020),
pp. 6784–6795. iSSN: 23752548. DOi: 10.1126/SCIADV.ABA6784/SUPPL{\_}FILE/
ABA6784{\_}SM.PDF. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.aba6784.
[26]
Olivier Collier, Véronique Stoven, and Jean Philippe Vert. “LOTUS: A single- and
multitask machine learning algorithm for the prediction of cancer driver genes”.
44
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:55==
In: PLOS Computational Biology 15.9 (2019), e1007381. iSSN: 1553-7358. DOi: 10.
1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1007381. URL: https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?
id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007381.
[27]
Mona Nourbakhsh et al. “A workflow to study mechanistic indicators for driver
gene prediction with Moonlight”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 24.5 (Sept. 2023).
iSSN: 14774054. DOi: 10.1093/BIB/BBAD274. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bib/
bbad274.
[28]
Feng Li et al. “A network-based method for identifying cancer driver genes based
on node control centrality”. In: Experimental biology and medicine (Maywood, N.J.)
248.3 (Feb. 2023), pp. 232–241. iSSN: 1535-3699. DOi: 10.1177/15353702221139201.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36573462/.
[29]
Yong Jin Heo et al. “Integrative Multi-Omics Approaches in Cancer Research: From
Biological Networks to Clinical Subtypes”. In: Molecules and Cells 44.7 (2021),
p. 433. iSSN: 02191032. DOi: 10.14348/MOLCELLS.2021.0042. URL: https://pmc.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8334347/.
[30]
Sajib Chakraborty et al. “Onco-Multi-OMICS Approach: A New Frontier in Cancer
Research”. In: BioMed Research International 2018.1 (Jan. 2018), p. 9836256. iSSN:
2314-6141. DOi: 10.1155/2018/9836256. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
full/10.1155/2018/9836256%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/
2018/9836256%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2018/9836256.
[31]
Multi-omics data integration: Combining genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics,
and other omics data - Omics tutorials. URL: https://omicstutorials.com/multi-
omics-data-integration-combining-genomics-transcriptomics-proteomics-and-other-
omics-data/.
[32]
Yang Woo Kwon et al. “Application of Proteomics in Cancer: Recent Trends and
Approaches for Biomarkers Discovery”. In: Frontiers in Medicine 8 (Sept. 2021),
p. 747333. iSSN: 2296858X. DOi: 10.3389/FMED.2021.747333/BIBTEX. URL: www.
frontiersin.org.
[33]
A E ; Mohr et al. “Navigating Challenges and Opportunities in Multi-Omics Inte-
gration for Personalized Healthcare”. In: Biomedicines 12.7 (July 2024), p. 1496.
iSSN: 22279059. DOi: 10.3390/BIOMEDICINES12071496. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/articles/PMC11274472/.
[34]
Indhupriya Subramanian et al. “Multi-omics Data Integration, Interpretation,
and
Its
Application”.
In:
Bioinformatics
and
Biology
Insights
14
(2020),
p. 1177932219899051. iSSN: 11779322. DOi: 10.1177/1177932219899051. URL: https:
//pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7003173/.
[35]
Zhipeng Tao and Xu Wu. “Targeting transcription factors in cancer: from “un-
druggable” to “druggable””. In: Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.) 2594
(2023), p. 107. iSSN: 19406029. DOi: 10.1007/978- 1- 0716- 2815- 7{\_}9. URL:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9724592/.
[36]
Zeyaul Islam et al. “Transcription Factors: The Fulcrum Between Cell Development
and Carcinogenesis”. In: Frontiers in oncology 11 (June 2021). iSSN: 2234-943X. DOi:
10.3389/FONC.2021.681377. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34195082/.
[37]
Justin Ashworth et al. “Structure-based predictions broadly link transcription factor
mutations to gene expression changes in cancers”. In: Nucleic acids research 42.21
(Dec. 2014), pp. 12973–12983. iSSN: 1362-4962. DOi: 10.1093/NAR/GKU1031. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25378323/.
[38]
Helka Göös et al. “Human transcription factor protein interaction networks”. In:
Nature Communications 2022 13:1 13.1 (Feb. 2022), pp. 1–16. iSSN: 2041-1723.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
45
==PAGE:56==
DOi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28341-5. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-
022-28341-5.
[39]
H. Billur Engin, Jason F. Kreisberg, and Hannah Carter. “Structure-Based Analy-
sis Reveals Cancer Missense Mutations Target Protein Interaction Interfaces”. In:
PLOS ONE 11.4 (Apr. 2016), e0152929. iSSN: 1932-6203. DOi: 10.1371/JOURNAL.
PONE.0152929. URL: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.
pone.0152929.
[40]
Hafumi Nishi et al. “Cancer Missense Mutations Alter Binding Properties of Pro-
teins and Their Interaction Networks”. In: PLOS ONE 8.6 (June 2013), e66273.
iSSN: 1932-6203. DOi: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0066273. URL: https://journals.
plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0066273.
[41]
Daniel Chasman and R. Mark Adams. “Predicting the functional consequences of
non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms: structure-based assessment of
amino acid variation”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 307.2 (Mar. 2001), pp. 683–
706. iSSN: 0022-2836. DOi: 10.1006/JMBI.2001.4510.
[42]
Vasily Ramensky, Peer Bork, and Shamil Sunyaev. “Human non-synonymous SNPs:
server and survey”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 30.17 (Sept. 2002), p. 3894. iSSN:
03051048. DOi: 10.1093/NAR/GKF493. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC137415/.
[43]
Henning Stehr et al. “The structural impact of cancer-associated missense mutations
in oncogenes and tumor suppressors”. In: Molecular Cancer 10 (May 2011), p. 54.
iSSN: 14764598. DOi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-54. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
articles/PMC3123651/.
[44]
Matthew J. Ellis et al. “Whole-genome analysis informs breast cancer response to
aromatase inhibition”. In: Nature 2012 486:7403 486.7403 (June 2012), pp. 353–
360. iSSN: 1476-4687. DOi: 10.1038/nature11143. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/nature11143.
[45]
Giovanni Ciriello et al. “The molecular diversity of Luminal A breast tumors”. In:
Breast Cancer Research and Treatment 141.3 (Oct. 2013), p. 409. iSSN: 01676806.
DOi: 10.1007/S10549-013-2699-3. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC3824397/.
[46]
Samah El Ghamrasni et al. “Mutations in Noncoding Cis-Regulatory Elements Re-
veal Cancer Driver Cistromes in Luminal Breast Cancer”. In: Molecular Cancer
Research 20.1 (Jan. 2022), pp. 102–113. iSSN: 15573125. DOi: 10.1158/1541-7786.
MCR-21-0471/673063/AM/MUTATIONS-IN-NON-CODING-CIS-REGULATORY-
ELEMENTS. URL: /mcr/article/20/1/102/674956/Mutations-in-Noncoding-Cis-
Regulatory-Elements%20https://dx.doi.org/10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-21-0471.
[47]
Xiao wei Du et al. “Comprehensive analysis of the cancer driver genes in breast
cancer demonstrates their roles in cancer prognosis and tumor microenvironment”.
In: World Journal of Surgical Oncology 19.1 (Dec. 2021), pp. 1–10. iSSN: 14777819.
DOi: 10.1186/S12957-021-02387-Z/FIGURES/6. URL: https://wjso.biomedcentral.
com/articles/10.1186/s12957-021-02387-z.
[48]
Xinhui Li et al. “Uncovering the Subtype-Specific Molecular Characteristics of
Breast Cancer by Multiomics Analysis of Prognosis-Associated Genes, Driver
Genes, Signaling Pathways, and Immune Activity”. In: Frontiers in Cell and Devel-
opmental Biology 9 (July 2021), p. 689028. iSSN: 2296634X. DOi: 10.3389/FCELL.
2021.689028/BIBTEX. URL: www.frontiersin.org.
[49]
Rakesh Kumar et al. “Structural and conformational changes induced by mis-
sense variants in the zinc finger domains of GATA3 involved in breast cancer”.
In: RSC Advances 10.65 (Oct. 2020), pp. 39640–39653. iSSN: 20462069. DOi: 10.
46
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:57==
1039/D0RA07786K. URL: https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2020/ra/
d0ra07786k%20https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2020/ra/d0ra07786k.
[50]
Hina Qayoom et al. “Targeting mutant p53: a key player in breast cancer patho-
genesis and beyond”. In: Cell Communication and Signaling 2024 22:1 22.1 (Oct.
2024), pp. 1–14. iSSN: 1478-811X. DOi: 10.1186/S12964-024-01863-9. URL: https:
//biosignaling.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12964-024-01863-9.
[51]
Arnaud Guille, Max Chaffanet, and Daniel Birnbaum. “Signaling pathway switch
in breast cancer”. In: Cancer Cell International 13.1 (June 2013), pp. 1–5. iSSN:
14752867. DOi: 10.1186/1475- 2867- 13- 66/FIGURES/3. URL: https://cancerci.
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1475-2867-13-66.
[52]
Maaike P.A. van Bragt et al. “RUNX1, a transcription factor mutated in breast
cancer, controls the fate of ER-positive mammary luminal cells”. In: eLife 3.Novem-
ber (Nov. 2014), e03881. iSSN: 2050084X. DOi: 10.7554/ELIFE.03881. URL: https:
//pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4381933/.
[53]
Matteo Arnaudi et al. “MAVISp: A Modular Structure-Based Framework for Pro-
tein Variant Effects”. In: bioRxiv (Nov. 2024), p. 2022.10.22.513328. DOi: 10.1101/
2022.10.22.513328. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.10.22.
513328v5%20https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.10.22.513328v5.
abstract.
[54]
Javier Delgado et al. “FoldX 5.0: working with RNA, small molecules and a
new graphical interface”. In: Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 35.20 (Oct. 2019),
pp. 4168–4169. iSSN: 1367-4811. DOi: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTZ184. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30874800/.
[55]
Valentina Sora et al. “RosettaDDGPrediction for high-throughput mutational scans:
From stability to binding”. In: Protein science : a publication of the Protein Society
32.1 (Jan. 2023). iSSN: 1469-896X. DOi: 10.1002/PRO.4527. URL: https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36461907/.
[56]
Lasse M. Blaabjerg et al. “Rapid protein stability prediction using deep learning
representations”. In: eLife 12 (May 2023). iSSN: 2050-084X. DOi: 10.7554/ELIFE.
82593. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37184062/.
[57]
Nilah M. Ioannidis et al. “REVEL: An Ensemble Method for Predicting the
Pathogenicity of Rare Missense Variants”. In: American journal of human genetics
99.4 (Oct. 2016), pp. 877–885. iSSN: 1537-6605. DOi: 10.1016/J.AJHG.2016.08.016.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27666373/%20https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/27666373/?dopt=Abstract.
[58]
Daniel Munro and Mona Singh. “DeMaSk: a deep mutational scanning substitu-
tion matrix and its use for variant impact prediction”. In: Bioinformatics 36.22-23
(Apr. 2021), pp. 5322–5329. iSSN: 1367-4803. DOi: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/
BTAA1030. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa1030.
[59]
Elodie Laine, Yasaman Karami, and Alessandra Carbone. “GEMME: A Simple and
Fast Global Epistatic Model Predicting Mutational Effects”. In: Molecular biology
and evolution 36.11 (Nov. 2019), pp. 2604–2619. iSSN: 1537-1719. DOi: 10.1093/
MOLBEV/MSZ179. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31406981/%20https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31406981/?dopt=Abstract.
[60]
Jonathan Frazer et al. “Disease variant prediction with deep generative models
of evolutionary data”. In: Nature 2021 599:7883 599.7883 (Oct. 2021), pp. 91–95.
iSSN: 1476-4687. DOi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04043-8. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41586-021-04043-8.
[61]
Jun Cheng et al. “Accurate proteome-wide missense variant effect prediction with
AlphaMissense”. In: Science 381.6664 (Sept. 2023). iSSN: 10959203. DOi: 10.1126/
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
47
==PAGE:58==
SCIENCE.ADG7492/SUPPL{\_}FILE/SCIENCE.ADG7492{\_}DATA{\_}S1{\_
}TO{\_}S9.ZIP. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.adg7492.
[62]
Daniele Raimondi et al. “Exploring the Sequence-based Prediction of Folding Initi-
ation Sites in Proteins”. In: Scientific reports 7.1 (Dec. 2017). iSSN: 2045-2322. DOi:
10.1038/S41598-017-08366-3. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28821744/
%20https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28821744/?dopt=Abstract.
[63]
Heonjong Han et al. “TRRUST v2: an expanded reference database of human and
mouse transcriptional regulatory interactions”. In: Nucleic acids research 46.D1
(Jan. 2018), pp. D380–D386. iSSN: 1362-4962. DOi: 10.1093/NAR/GKX1013. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29087512/.
[64]
Melissa J. Landrum et al. “ClinVar: public archive of relationships among sequence
variation and human phenotype”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 42.Database issue
(Jan. 2014), p. D980. iSSN: 03051048. DOi: 10.1093/NAR/GKT1113. URL: /pmc/
articles/PMC3965032/%20/pmc/articles/PMC3965032/?report=abstract%20https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3965032/.
[65]
Simon A. Forbes et al. “COSMIC: somatic cancer genetics at high-resolution”. In:
Nucleic acids research 45.D1 (Jan. 2017), pp. D777–D783. iSSN: 1362-4962. DOi:
10.1093/NAR/GKW1121. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27899578/.
[66]
John G. Tate et al. “COSMIC: the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer”. In:
Nucleic Acids Research 47.D1 (Jan. 2019), pp. D941–D947. iSSN: 0305-1048. DOi:
10.1093/NAR/GKY1015. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1015.
[67]
Jianjiong Gao et al. “Integrative analysis of complex cancer genomics and clini-
cal profiles using the cBioPortal”. In: Science Signaling 6.269 (Apr. 2013). iSSN:
19450877. DOi: 10 . 1126 / SCISIGNAL . 2004088 / SUPPL{\ _ }FILE / 2004088{\ _
}TABLES2.XLS. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scisignal.2004088.
[68]
Mihaly Varadi et al. “AlphaFold Protein Structure Database: massively expanding
the structural coverage of protein-sequence space with high-accuracy models”. In:
Nucleic Acids Research 50.D1 (Jan. 2022), pp. D439–D444. iSSN: 0305-1048. DOi:
10.1093/NAR/GKAB1061. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1061.
[69]
Josh Abramson et al. “Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions
with AlphaFold 3”. In: Nature 2024 630:8016 630.8016 (May 2024), pp. 493–500.
iSSN: 1476-4687. DOi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07487-w. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41586-024-07487-w.
[70]
Matteo Tiberti et al. “MutateX: an automated pipeline for in silico saturation mu-
tagenesis of protein structures and structural ensembles”. In: Briefings in bioin-
formatics 23.3 (May 2022). iSSN: 1477-4054. DOi: 10.1093/BIB/BBAC074. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35323860/.
[71]
L. Schrödinger and W DeLano. PyMOL | pymol.org. 2020. URL: https://www.
pymol.org/.
[72]
Anand Mayakonda et al. “Maftools: efficient and comprehensive analysis of somatic
variants in cancer”. In: Genome Research 28.11 (Nov. 2018), pp. 1747–1756. iSSN:
1088-9051. DOi: 10.1101/GR.239244.118. URL: https://genome.cshlp.org/content/
28/11/1747.full%20https://genome.cshlp.org/content/28/11/1747%20https:
//genome.cshlp.org/content/28/11/1747.abstract.
[73]
Douglas Hanahan. “Hallmarks of Cancer: New Dimensions”. In: Cancer Discovery
12.1 (Jan. 2022), pp. 31–46. iSSN: 2159-8274. DOi: 10.1158/2159- 8290.CD- 21-
1059. URL: /cancerdiscovery/article/12/1/31/675608/Hallmarks-of-Cancer-New-
DimensionsHallmarks-of%20https://dx.doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-1059.
[74]
Abrar I Aljohani et al. “Upregulation of Cyclin B2 (CCNB2) in breast cancer con-
tributes to the development of lymphovascular invasion”. In: American Journal of
48
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:59==
Cancer Research 12.2 (2022), p. 469. iSSN: 2156-6976. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/articles/PMC8899993/.
[75]
Rongrong Wu et al. “High RAD51 gene expression is associated with aggressive
biology and with poor survival in breast cancer”. In: Breast cancer research and
treatment 193.1 (May 2022), p. 49. iSSN: 15737217. DOi: 10.1007/S10549- 022-
06552-0. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8995390/.
[76]
Sara Caetano et al. “MEF2C and miR-194-5p: New Players in Triple Negative
Breast Cancer Tumorigenesis”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences
2023, Vol. 24, Page 14297 24.18 (Sept. 2023), p. 14297. iSSN: 1422-0067. DOi:
10.3390/IJMS241814297. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/24/18/14297/
htm%20https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/24/18/14297.
[77]
Daniel A. Patten et al. “Prognostic Value and Potential Immunoregulatory Role of
SCARF1 in Hepatocellular Carcinoma”. In: Frontiers in Oncology 10 (Sept. 2020),
p. 565950. iSSN: 2234943X. DOi: 10.3389/FONC.2020.565950/FULL. URL: https:
//pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8336907/.
[78]
K. K. Khanna et al. “ATM, a central controller of cellular responses to DNA dam-
age”. In: Cell Death & Differentiation 2001 8:11 8.11 (Oct. 2001), pp. 1052–1065.
iSSN: 1476-5403. DOi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400874. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/4400874.
[79]
Zu Ye et al. “Function and Molecular Mechanism of the DNA Damage Response
in Immunity and Cancer Immunotherapy”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 12 (Dec.
2021), p. 797880. iSSN: 16643224. DOi: 10.3389/FIMMU.2021.797880/BIBTEX. URL:
www.frontiersin.org.
[80]
Marta Seca and Steven A. Narod. “Breast cancer and ATM mutations: treatment
implications”. In: Hereditary Cancer in Clinical Practice 22.1 (Dec. 2024), pp. 1–5.
iSSN: 18974287. DOi: 10.1186/S13053-024-00300-9/PEER-REVIEW. URL: https:
//hccpjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13053-024-00300-9.
[81]
ATM-associated
cancer
risk
—
Knowledge
Hub.
URL:
https : / / www .
genomicseducation.hee.nhs.uk/genotes/knowledge-hub/atm-associated-cancer-risk/.
[82]
Kenneth S. Zaret and Jason S. Carroll. “Pioneer transcription factors: establishing
competence for gene expression”. In: Genes & Development 25.21 (Nov. 2011),
p. 2227. iSSN: 08909369. DOi: 10.1101/GAD.176826.111. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/articles/PMC3219227/.
[83]
Amaia Arruabarrena-Aristorena et al. “FOXA1 Mutations Reveal Distinct Chro-
matin Profiles and Influence Therapeutic Response in Breast Cancer”. In: Cancer
cell 38.4 (Oct. 2020), pp. 534–550. iSSN: 1878-3686. DOi: 10.1016/J.CCELL.2020.08.
003. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32888433/.
[84]
Marsha D. Wallace et al. “Comparative oncogenomics implicates the neurofibromin
1 gene (NF1) as a breast cancer driver”. In: Genetics 192.2 (Oct. 2012), pp. 385–
396. iSSN: 00166731. DOi: 10.1534/GENETICS.112.142802/-/DC1/GENETICS.112.
142802-1.PDF. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3454871/.
[85]
Yoon-Sim Yap et al. “The NF1 gene revisited – from bench to bedside”. In:
Oncotarget 5.15 (July 2014), pp. 5873–5892. iSSN: 1949-2553. DOi: 10 . 18632 /
ONCOTARGET . 2194. URL: https : / / www . oncotarget . com / article / 2194 / text /
%20https://www.oncotarget.com/article/2194/.
[86]
Motoshi Ichikawa et al. “A role for RUNX1 in hematopoiesis and myeloid leukemia”.
In: International journal of hematology 97.6 (June 2013), pp. 726–734. iSSN: 1865-
3774. DOi: 10.1007/S12185-013-1347-3. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
23613270/%20https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23613270/?utm_source=chatgpt.
com.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
49
==PAGE:60==
[87]
Takashi Nagata and Milton H. Werner. “Functional mutagenesis of AML1/RUNX1
and PEBP2β/CBFβ define distinct, non-overlapping sites for DNA recognition and
heterodimerization by the runt domain”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 308.2
(Apr. 2001), pp. 191–203. iSSN: 0022-2836. DOi: 10.1006/JMBI.2001.4596.
[88]
Raman Sood, Yasuhiko Kamikubo, and Paul Liu. “Role of RUNX1 in hematolog-
ical malignancies”. In: Blood 129.15 (Apr. 2017), pp. 2070–2082. iSSN: 1528-0020.
DOi: 10.1182/BLOOD-2016-10-687830. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
28179279/.
[89]
David Cabrerizo Granados et al. “The clinical phenotype of germline RUNX1 muta-
tions in relation to the accompanying somatic variants and RUNX1 isoform expres-
sion”. In: Genes, chromosomes & cancer 62.11 (Nov. 2023), pp. 672–677. iSSN: 1098-
2264. DOi: 10.1002/GCC.23184. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37303296/
%20https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37303296/?utm_source=chatgpt.com.
[90]
Sophie M. Navickas et al. “The role of chromatin remodeler SMARCA4/BRG1 in
brain cancers: a potential therapeutic target”. In: Oncogene 2023 42:31 42.31 (July
2023), pp. 2363–2373. iSSN: 1476-5594. DOi: 10.1038/s41388-023-02773-9. URL:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41388-023-02773-9.
[91]
Kristina Mardinian et al. “SMARCA4: Implications of an altered chromatin-
remodeling gene for cancer development and therapy”. In: Molecular cancer ther-
apeutics 20.12 (Dec. 2021), pp. 1535–7163. iSSN: 15388514. DOi: 10.1158/1535-
7163.MCT-21-0433. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8643328/.
[92]
Jihyun Kim et al. “Smarca4 depletion induces cisplatin resistance by activating
yap1-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in triple-negative breast can-
cer”. In: Cancers 13.21 (Nov. 2021), p. 5474. iSSN: 20726694. DOi: 10 . 3390 /
CANCERS13215474/S1. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8582548/.
[93]
Priscilla A. Furth et al. “Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 as a key
signaling pathway in normal mammary gland developmental biology and breast
cancer”. In: Breast Cancer Research 13.5 (Oct. 2011), pp. 1–14. iSSN: 14655411. DOi:
10.1186/BCR2921/FIGURES/4. URL: https://breast-cancer-research.biomedcentral.
com/articles/10.1186/bcr2921.
[94]
Steven M. Holland et al. “ STAT3 Mutations in the Hyper-IgE Syndrome ”. In: New
England Journal of Medicine 357.16 (Oct. 2007), pp. 1608–1619. iSSN: 0028-4793.
DOi: 10.1056/NEJMOA073687/SUPPL{\_}FILE/NEJMOA073687-SA1.PDF. URL:
https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa073687.
[95]
Andreas C. Joerger, Thorsten Stiewe, and Thierry Soussi. “TP53: the unluckiest of
genes?” In: Cell Death & Differentiation 2024 (Oct. 2024), pp. 1–6. iSSN: 1476-5403.
DOi: 10.1038/s41418-024-01391-6. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41418-
024-01391-6.
[96]
Andreas C Joerger et al. “Structures of p53 Cancer Mutants and Mechanism of
Rescue by Second-site Suppressor Mutations*”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry
280 (2005), pp. 16030–16037. DOi: 10.1074/jbc.M500179200. URL: http://www.rcsb.
org/.
[97]
John H. Bushweller. “Targeting transcription factors in cancer — from undruggable
to reality”. In: Nature reviews. Cancer 19.11 (Nov. 2019), p. 611. iSSN: 14741768.
DOi: 10.1038/S41568-019-0196-7. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC8820243/.
[98]
Zhipeng Tao and Xu Wu. “Targeting transcription factors in cancer: from “un-
druggable” to “druggable””. In: Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.) 2594
(2023), p. 107. iSSN: 19406029. DOi: 10.1007/978- 1- 0716- 2815- 7{\_}9. URL:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9724592/.
50
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:61==
[99]
Huarui Cui, Morgan Stilgenbauer, and Angela N. Koehler. “Small-Molecule Ap-
proaches to Target Transcription Factors”. In: Annual Review of Cancer Biology 8.1
(June 2024), pp. 395–415. iSSN: 24723428. DOi: 10.1146/ANNUREV-CANCERBIO-
062722-012209/CITE/REFWORKS. URL: https://www.annualreviews.org/content/
journals/10.1146/annurev-cancerbio-062722-012209.
[100]
Jamie V. Shiah, Daniel E. Johnson, and Jennifer R. Grandis. “Transcription Factors
and Cancer: Approaches to Targeting”. In: Cancer journal (Sudbury, Mass.) 29.1
(Jan. 2023), p. 38. iSSN: 1540336X. DOi: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000639. URL:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9881838/.
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
51
==PAGE:62==
52
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:63==
A
Supplementary
Table A.1: List of TFs that target the driver genes from Moonlight2R and
their total number of missense mutations identified in the Somatic Mutation
Analysis of the MAF file.
TF
Total Missense Mutations
TP53
26
APC
16
CHD8
11
NCOR1
10
FOXA1
9
NF1
9
RUNX1
9
CTCF
8
NCOA6
8
BRCA1
7
HCFC1
7
CREBBP
6
EP300
5
GATA3
5
KAT6A
5
MTF1
5
NR3C2
5
POU4F2
5
STAT6
5
ATF2
4
DNMT1
4
ESR1
4
FOXM1
4
FOXP2
4
GLI1
4
HDAC4
4
HDAC5
4
HIPK2
4
ISL1
4
NCOA3
4
NELFCD
4
PER2
4
PGR
4
PPARG
4
SALL4
4
SOX6
4
SP4
4
TCF4
4
TRPS1
4
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
53
==PAGE:64==
ZEB2
4
ZFHX3
4
ZNF300
4
ATM
3
BCL6
3
E2F1
3
E2F3
3
ELF1
3
ESR2
3
ETS1
3
FOXD3
3
FOXO4
3
HDAC1
3
HIF1A
3
HSF1
3
ING1
3
NAB2
3
NFKB1
3
NFKB2
3
PARP1
3
POLR1A
3
PRDM1
3
PROX1
3
RBL1
3
RBMX
3
RFWD2
3
SF1
3
SMARCA4
3
STAT4
3
STAT5A
3
TFAP2A
3
TP53BP1
3
TRRAP
3
ZEB1
3
ZHX2
3
ZNF148
3
APEX1
2
AR
2
ARNTL
2
ARNTL2
2
ATF3
2
CLOCK
2
CREB5
2
DACH1
2
DNMT3A
2
E2F7
2
ELK1
2
ELL
2
EPAS1
2
ERF
2
54
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:65==
ETS2
2
EWSR1
2
FOSL2
2
GLI2
2
HBP1
2
HEY2
2
HIRA
2
IFI16
2
ILF3
2
IRF9
2
KLF10
2
LRRFIP1
2
MECP2
2
MED1
2
MEN1
2
MYB
2
MYBL2
2
MYCN
2
NFYA
2
OTX2
2
PAX8
2
PHOX2B
2
PIAS4
2
RBBP7
2
RBL2
2
SATB1
2
SIN3A
2
SMAD4
2
SP100
2
SP2
2
SP3
2
SPI1
2
SREBF2
2
STAT1
2
STAT3
2
SUZ12
2
TCF7L2
2
TFAP2B
2
TNFAIP3
2
TSC22D3
2
ZBTB2
2
ZFP36
2
ZNF160
2
ZNF382
2
AATF
1
ARNT
1
ATF4
1
CDX2
1
CEBPZ
1
CITED2
1
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
55
==PAGE:66==
CREB1
1
CTNNB1
1
DDB2
1
DLX5
1
E2F6
1
E2F8
1
EAPP
1
EHMT2
1
ERG
1
ETV6
1
FHL2
1
FOS
1
FOXA2
1
FOXO3
1
FOXP3
1
HDAC2
1
HDAC9
1
HES1
1
HEY1
1
HMGA2
1
HNF1B
1
HNF4A
1
HNF4G
1
HOXA1
1
HOXA10
1
HOXC6
1
IRF1
1
IRF3
1
IRF7
1
KLF4
1
KLF5
1
KLF8
1
LMO4
1
MAZ
1
MEF2A
1
MEF2D
1
MITF
1
MSC
1
MSX2
1
MTA2
1
NFAT5
1
NFE2L2
1
NFYC
1
NR1I2
1
NR4A1
1
NR5A2
1
PA2G4
1
PAX5
1
PAX6
1
PCGF2
1
56
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:67==
PIAS1
1
PIAS2
1
PIAS3
1
PITX2
1
PKNOX1
1
POU2F2
1
POU5F1
1
PPARA
1
RB1
1
RBPJ
1
RELA
1
RELB
1
RUNX2
1
SIRT1
1
SIRT2
1
SKIL
1
SLC2A4RG
1
SMAD3
1
SMURF2
1
SNAI1
1
SNAI2
1
SOX4
1
SP1
1
SPDEF
1
SREBF1
1
SRF
1
STAT5B
1
TBP
1
TCF12
1
TCFL5
1
TFCP2
1
TGIF1
1
TRERF1
1
UHRF1
1
XRCC5
1
ZBTB7A
1
ZMYND11
1
ZNF143
1
ZNF217
1
ZNF24
1
tiny
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
57
==PAGE:68==
Table A.2: Summary of TSGs and OGs predicted by Moonlight2R
Category
Genes
TSGs
CCND2, IL6, SGK1, CCL2, CDK20, EGFR, ETV1, HMOX1,
VIM, FOS, PER1, SERPINE1, IGF2, ATF3, PCK1, ID1, DDR2,
IRF7, DUSP1, ESR1, CD80, IRF4, FOXC1, IGF1, STAT1,
HPSE2, HEPH, IGFBP3, HSD17B11, ITGAX, LEP, SOCS3,
ABCB1, OXTR, SAA2, NR2F1, NR5A2, SNAI2, MX1, TGFBR3,
HOXA9, PLD1, SOD2, IRS2, BMP2, FGFR1, HIC1, PDK4,
FGF2, HPSE, HYAL1, RUNX3, FLI1, TEK, MECOM, GFAP,
THBD, TRIM22, CCR7, FLT1, ETS2, ADAMTS1, ENG, ERG,
VWF, DCT, JUNB, KDR, CASP1, EGR1, TGFBR2, ETS1,
ALDH1A1, SATB1, TWIST1, SOX7, APOB, MSX1, CXCL12,
PDGFA, CYP11A1, FABP4, MYOCD, MET, SRPX, BST2,
PTGFR, ADH1A, CAV1, DAB2, MEF2C, EGR2, PDGFRA,
SFRP1, MMP28, RECK, MEF2A, SLC2A4, SLIT2, AKAP12,
PTGDS, PROX1, EPHA2, EDNRB, HBEGF, ITGB2, NT5E,
TIMP2, WASF3, PLB1, KL, RNASE2, KLF9, ANGPT1, NGF,
CD40, CXCL10, DDX58, DST, SOCS2, IFNGR1, TNFRSF1B,
SLC8A3, CCR5, FABP5, CD14, CDH5, GPA33, FGFBP1,
EPSTI1, COL4A4, GSTP1, GPNMB, KIT, TAGLN, CTLA4,
PRNP, LMO2, HLA-E, NES, KLF2, G0S2, GSTA1, FHL5, BGN,
CCL11, CCL22, CD86, CFI, CXCR2, VEGFD, FLT4, IL18,
LIPE, LPL, PLIN1, TF, SELP, SOX18, CALD1, RPS6KA3,
HOXA7,
ZEB2,
LHX6,
PTGIR, TBX18,
ADIPOQ, CD36,
ERO1A, EPAS1, NRP1, CD34, SNAI3, ADAMTS5, CFH, DLL4,
ADAM12, TGFB1, RUNX1T1, NTRK3, ADGRE5, HGF, ID4,
IRF5, LOXL4, MMRN1, RGN, SLC19A3, UGCG, WIF1, TLR4,
LRP1, PPARA, F2R, OAS1, S1PR1, ZFP36, PRF1, CNR1,
IL1R1, ALDH1A2, CXCR3, CD2, CRYAB, HOXA4, MCAM,
IFI16, S100B, VCAN, LILRB1, LILRB4, TNFRSF21, PODXL,
DNAJB4, MEOX2, SCARF1
OGs
MYC, PCNA, RFC3, DNMT1, CDC6, CDH1, CDH2, MUC1,
CCNE1, PER2, CCND1, POLB, NDC80, FOXM1, MMP1,
CHEK1, FCER2, ASPM, MAD2L1, SPP1, GFER, TNFAIP6,
COL11A1, CCNE2, MMP13, CCNA2, PPARGC1A, BRCA1,
BRCA2,
MMP7,
TNFSF11,
CEBPA, BIRC5,
ASF1B, AU-
RKA, CDK1, CHEK2, DBF4, DIRAS3, FANCA, KIF2C, LRBA,
MYBL2, PLK1, RBM38, RRM2, TOP2A, TYMS, UHRF1,
PCLAF, MCM10, RAD51, TTK, E2F1, CDK5R1, FN1, PLAUR,
RBL2, STIM1, UBE2S, EZH2, CRABP1, COL10A1, WNT11,
BLM, CIP2A, FBXO32, MPL, CCNB1, RECQL4, RUNX2,
MYEF2, SMYD1, ACTA2, OCLN, PGK1, TGFB3, NOX1,
CDC25A, UMOD, AFP, PCSK9,
IL11,
KRT10,
HSD17B6,
GJA1, MMP3, SMN1, STMN1, CERS2, PTTG1, JUND, IL7,
TK1, CDC25C, UBE2C, MCM2, MCM4, MCM6, EPCAM,
GATA3, RGS4, SDC1, DACT2, PTPN6, CORO1C, KLF6,
RAB3A, TSHR, SYP, DLX5, THY1, ACSL1, LGALS1, E2F2,
DNMT3B, PIGR, KCNN4, TUBB3, COP1, FADD, MKI67,
KLF5, NFAT5, HDAC8, CENPH, CXCL14, DNASE2, HDAC4,
MMP11, NDUFV2, ACOT7, CD22, NME1, S100A11, CCL17,
CR2, EXO1, ALB, CCNB2, E2F7, PRC1, YBX1, CDC20,
CDKN3, CKS2, KPNA2, ARF1, BUB1B
58
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
==PAGE:69==
Integrating Structural and Omics Data to Predict Cancer Driver Genes
59
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 101
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
