==PAGE:1==
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT
Power Amplifier MMIC
Using Low­Loss Power Combination and Inter­
stage Matching Techniques
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
Using Low­Loss Power Combination and Interstage Matching Techniques
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Anton Boldrup Birn
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Space Research and Technology, Ørsteds Plads,
building 348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
ii
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Anton Boldrup Birn, MSc Electrical Engineering, DTU
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Revised Design Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Design tools, EM setup & DRC constraints
9
2.1
Design Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
EM Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
DRC Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Slotline structures
13
3.1
Fundamentals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Discontinuities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Microstrip to Slotline Transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Slotline simulations ­ Schüppert’s study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
Balun & Power Combiner
29
4.1
Balun
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Power Combiner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Power Cell
39
5.1
Biasing point
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3
Load Pull Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Passive components
45
6.1
Input Power Splitter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
Output Power Combiner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.3
Interstage matching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.4
Passive Components Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7
Two­Way Combined, Two­Stage Amplifier
61
8
Conclusion
63
8.1
Project Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Bibliography
65
A Appendix A
67
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The overall objective of the project is to develop power amplifier monolithic microwave
integrated circuits (MMICs) with high­efficiency in D­band (110 – 170 GHz). A possible
future application of these power amplifier MMICs are in 6G wireless backhaul in mobile
networks. In figure 1.1 the proposed D­band spectrum is shown along with W­ and E­
band.
Figure 1.1: Spectrum for wireless backhaul in mobile networks
The European ”SHIFT” project has proposed the D­band for future 6G applications as
it is adequate for the necessary bandwidth requirements to serve very high data rate
needed [1]. As part of the ”SHIFT” project, the III­V Lab developes state­of­the­art Indium
Phosphide (InP) DHBT technology. DTU is a collaborator and subcontractor to the III­V
Lab with the purpose of using this technology to develop high effeciency power amplifiers.
The requirements for future 6G communications are quite demanding. An example of
these requirements are shown in table 1.1. The table shows the required specifications
for a future scenario with a base station commmunicating with a mid­sized complex such
as a shopping mall. It also contains a set of requirements for a demonstrator. These
are more relaxed. The 20% PAEmax scenario requirement is set to achieve above 10%
PAEmax at 6dB back­off output power.
Given these requirements, this study aims to achieve at least the demonstrator output
power specifications, while maximizing the PAEmax as close to the scenario’s 20% as
possible. Finally, size is also restricted, as the spacing between beamforming array ele­
ments should not exceed λ/2 to avoid grating lopes. Given that λ ≈2mm @ 140 GHz,
the chip cannot exceed a size of ≈1mm. This is often not possible in practice, so inno­
vative packaging solutions with a single chip containing several power amplifiers driving
sub­arrays of beamforming antennas are being proposed.
1.1
Technology
III­V Lab has a 0.5­µm InP DHBT technology, which offers three different devices, each
one with a different emitter length. The 5µm device has a performance of fT /fmax ≈
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
1
==PAGE:10==
Demonstrator KPI
Scenario targets
Required for demo
Data rate
2 channels ­ 60 Gbps
1 channel 30 Gbps
Bandwidth
10 GHz
2×5 GHz in dual polarization
Range
100 m
5 m
Freqeuncy of operation
≈140 GHz
≈140 GHz
Modulation order
64 QAM
16 QAM
Transmit power
18 dBm OP1dB
16 dBm OP1dB
Transmit efficiency
20% PAEmax
10% PAEmax
Table 1.1: Specifications for scenario
380/520 GHz when biased at Vce = 1.6V and Jc = 7mA/µm2 [2]. The performance is
plotted in figure 1.2. In addition, performance is limited by breakdown voltage BVceo =
4.2V and knee­voltage Vk ≈0.8V . Overall, the devices are safe to bias at VCE = 2.4V
and JC = 4.3mA/µm2
Figure 1.2: fT and fmax of 0.5­µm InP DHBT technology vs IC @ VCE = 1.6V [2]
In figure 1.3, the cross­sectional stackup of the technology is shown. It is noted that three
Au­based metalisation layers are offered as well as Nickel­Chromium thin­film resistors
with resistance: 40Ω/square and Silicon nitride MIM capacitors.
1.2
Previous work
Recent work published as a master’s thesis [3], studied the pseudo­differential common­
base power cell with neutralization capacitors using the 0.5 µm technology from III­V Lab.
Inspired by the work in [4], an optimized 2­finger power cell layout was constructed using
thin­film microstrips, which achieved 4.6 dB gain, 26.1% PAE and 18.1 dBm Pout,OP1. The
layout of the cell is shown in figure 1.4. Being differentially driven, the cell requires a balun
at both input and output.
2
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.3: 0.5­µm InP DHBT process’ cross­sectional stackup [2]
Figure 1.4: Layout of 2­finger power cell [3]
Based on this design methodology a 1­finger power cell was similarly developed and
implemented together with the 2­finger cell in a two­way conbined three­stage power am­
plifier MMIC. The amplifier topology is shown in figure 1.5. The first stage consists of a
1­finger power cell, while the second and third stage are 2­finger topologies. The differ­
ential signals used in the power cells were created using sub­quarter­wave baluns. For
input power combining and output power splitting, tee­junction matching networks were
implemented. For interstage matching, simple L­matching networks were implemented
for impedance matching and MIM­capacitors provided the AC ground, while a quarter­
wave stub provided the DC ground.
Figure 1.5: Diagram of two­way combined three­stage power amplifier topology [3]
The layout floorplan proposed is shown in figure 1.6. This floorplan does not adhere to
chip­size or design rules for the InP DHBT technology and is purely for illustrative pur­
poses.
The performance if the topology is shown in table 1.2 as well as in figure 1.7. Despite
excellent performance of the individual power cells, the overall performance is less im­
pressive. Upon closer investigation, it is noticed that high losses are predominantly in
the passive elements (input/output baluns and interstage matching). These losses signif­
icantly reduce the gain by 7.4 dB, resulting in a large drop in PAE.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.6: Floorplan of two­way combined three­stage power amplifier topology [3]
(a) S­parameters
(b) Amplifier performance
Figure 1.7: Two­way combined three­stage amplifier will all layouts included: simulation
results [3]
Table 1.2: Two­way combined three­stage amplifier performance at 140 GHz [3]
The insertion loss of the passive elements is given in table 1.3. It is noted that a signif­
icant loss contribution comes from interstage matching. The losses are mainly a result
of metallic conductor losses, due to thin conductors. Also, the dielectric stackup has a
quite low thickness, which is contributing to large losses. Consequently, a redesign of the
passive elements is necessary to reduce losses for a better amplifier performance.
1.3
Revised Design Approach
This study aims at improving performance from the previous work described in the pre­
vious section. To address the challenges, several changes are made in the approach of
4
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:13==
Table 1.3: Losses of passive elements [3]
the design. This section will provide an overview of the changes made and explain the
reason behind these.
1.3.1
Dielectric Constant and Design Frequency
The previous design was based on a substrate dielectric constant ϵr = 2.9. However,
subsequent experimentation showed a significant downshift in the operating frequency of
the comparable design. To accommodate this, a slightly larger dielectric constant ϵr = 3.4
is proposed. In addition, the design frequency is raised from 140 GHz to 145 GHz to better
fit the D­band slot from 141­148.5 GHz.
1.3.2
Power Cell
Given that a new dielectric constant is presented, the previously designed power cells will
need a small adjusting. This applies specifically to the neutralization capacitors, which due
to the increased dielectric constant, can be reduced while maintaining same capacitance.
However, this slightly changes the overall behavior of the power cells, so new load­pulls
and power sweeps are necessary for optimal impedance matching.
1.3.3
Amplifier Topology
In the previous design, a two­way combined, three­stage power amplifier was proposed.
The two­way combined topology was necessitated due to the limited output power of the
last cell. With non­ideal components, the output power wouldn’t fulfill the 16 dBm mini­
mum. This two­way combined design is maintained, especially for the future requirement
of 20 dBm of output power as proposed in the base station scenario.
On the other hand, the use of three stages may not be necessary. The available source
power is delivered by the AFM12 Active Frequency Multiplier from Radiometer Physics
[5]. This component is able to output somewhat high levels of power (see figure 1.8).
From this graph it is noted that a minimum of 8 dBm is available from the source in the
entire D­band. A large­signal characterization of the frequency multiplier has been carried
out (see figure 1.9). This demonstrated that additional losses incured by external compo­
nents necessary for the demonstrator would ultimately place a realistic available source
power at 8 dBm throughout the whole band. With this level of available source power, the
use of several driver stages is redundant. Conclusively, in regards to the design specs
of the demo, one of the driver stages of the power amplifier can be removed while still
maintaining adequate output power.
The topology of the redesigned power amplifier is a two­way combined two­stage ampli­
fier, shown in figure 1.10. Removing one of the stages will reduce DC power consump­
tion, increasing the PAE. However, it should be noted that this will come at the sacrifice
of small­signal gain.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.8: AFM12 110­170 +10 Output Power between 105 GHz and 175 GHz [5]
Figure 1.9: Test setup for large­signal characterization of AFM12 device. The Isolator is
not present in the photo.
6
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.10: Power amplifier new topology
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
7
==PAGE:16==
1.3.4
Slotline Balun Components
In the previous chapter, the investigation of performance degradation showed that passive
components were the main cause of large losses.
A recent study [6] presents a SiGe BiCMOS power amplifier in the 142­182 GHz band,
which has an interesting power combining technique at the output. This technique com­
prises of a slotline based balun, which contains impedance transformation. The study
presented the output power combiner with a loss of ≈1 dB.
Another very similar slotline based balun is presented in [7] using a 250 nm InP technology.
This paper presents one configuration used both as input power splitting, output power
combining and interstage matching. The losses are very low, especially at the input side,
where 0.5 dB loss is achieved.
In both studies, the slotline based technique shows several additional advantages: The
area needed for the slotline baluns is significantly less than other components such as
microstrip stubs or transformers. Also, the E­field of the slotline is orthogonal to that of
the microstrip, which results in a built­in block of the DC­bias, removing the need for a dc­
blocking capacitor between power cells. A more detailed description of the slotline balun
will be presented in the later chapters.
8
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:17==
2
Design tools, EM setup & DRC
constraints
2.1
Design Tools
The design is based on the framework in [3]. As such, many similar tools are used in this
continuation. The main tool used for designing, simulating and validating is the Keysight
Advanced Design System (ADS) software program. The software offers many built­in
tools which are paramount in the design. The redesigned of the power cell requires tools
within ADS:
• DC simulation
• S­parameter simulation
• Harmonic­Balance simulation
• Load­Pull Simulation setup
• Power Sweep simulation setup
• Momentum EM simulation solver
• EM co­simulation
In addition, Cadence Virtuoso is implemented for further design verification. Specifically,
the Assura Physical verification tool is used to do ”Design Rule Check” (DRC), which
ensures the design is physically possible to manufacturer. In this manner, DRC check
applies the manufacturer’s constraints to the design and provides feedback on possible
errors.
2.2
EM Setup
2.2.1
Technology stackup
In this design, two new stackups are presented for EM Momentum simulation (see figure
2.1). They both represent the III­V Lab 0.5 µm InP technology stackup presented in figure
1.3. The stackup in figure 2.1a is used for the redesign of the power cells, while the
stackup in figure 2.1b is used for the design of all passive elements; input power divider,
output power combiner and interstage matching.
Metal 2 and 3 as well as all vias are identical in both stackups. Likewise are all substrates
identical. The only difference between the two stackups is the metal 1 layer, which is a
strip plane in 2.1a, but a slot plane in 2.1b. To maintain consistency and similarity, the
resistor is kept as slot in stackup 2.1b, however it is not used and could be removed. It is
also noted, that the cover is removed from the 2.1b stackup. This has to do with the way
the slot plane is configured. It will be further explained in the following section.
Metal 1­3 as well as vias are implemented as TiAU conductor with conductivity σ = 3.333×
107 S/m. Metal 3 has a thickness of 1.2 µm, while metal 1 and 2 are modelled as thin
sheets. The substrates between the metal layers are Polyimide with ϵr = 3.4 and tanδ =
0.005. As seen in the III­V lab stackup, the NiCr resistor is placed at the same level as
metal 1. This is also implemented in this stackup, where a NiCr layer with resistance of
40 Ω/square is placed in the same place as metal 1. To model the MIM capacitor, the
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
9
==PAGE:18==
Polyimide layer between metal 1 and 2 is separated into two having widths of 1.7235 µm
and 0.0765 µm. This allows for a metalization layer, ”capa”, which represents the MIM
capacitor, to be placed between the two metal layers as per figure 1.3. Under metal 1 is a
0.035 µm, Si3N4­layer with ϵr = 6.825. Under this layer again, the InP substrate is placed
with a thickness of 160 µm and ϵr = 12.56 and tanδ = 0.0002.
(a) Strip plane stackup
(b) Slot plane stackup
Figure 2.1: Layer stackups for redesign
2.2.2
Slot plane configuration
The slot plane is a feature in the Momentum EM simulator, which is uniquely designed for
slotline EM simulations. The solver uses the equivalence principle, which is a common
principle in electromagnetism. Based on the uniqueness principle of Maxwell’s equations,
the principle states that a given volume of electric­ and magnetic field sources enclosed
by a surface S can be replaced with surface electric and magnetic current distributions
running along S [8]. This allows substitution of the original problem with another, which is
easier solved.
In the Momentum solver, only the E­field in the slot is considered, ignoring the current flow
10
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:19==
in the wide ground plane. The E­field is modeled as an equivalent magnetic current. As
a result, simulation of slotline signal propagation as well as aperture coupling is greatly
optimized thus reducing simulation time. This comes at the expense of accuracy, as
the ground plane is assumed infinite and it consists of PEC conductor. Since the return
current losses in the ground plane are not included due to the PEC approximation, there
will be approximation deviations. However, given the large width of the ground plane,
the approximation is less severe than a PEC signal line, and considering the alternatively
large computational demands as well as long simulation times that occur when including
a wide ground layer as a strip plane, the slot plane is considered the viable option[9]. The
infinite ground plane is also the reason why the cover needs to be removed, as it creates
ambiguities in ground reference points.
The slot plane is routed as a ”negative” plane, meaning that anywhere the trace is drawn,
the plane will be removed. This allows direct excitation in the slot with a TML port. The
layout view, 3D previewer and post simulation visualization are shown in figure 2.2.
(a) Momentum layout view
(b) Momentum 3D previewer
(c) Momentum Visualization
Figure 2.2: ADS Momentum view of slot plane
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3
DRC Constraints
The layout of this design is guided by the physical limitations of production. This means
widths and separations of traces have limits which needs to be kept. The constraints are
mainly focused at conductors and vias. Table 2.1 presents the major design rules, which
need to be followed. The resolution of the ADS design is 0.5 µm, which is larger than
Assura’s 0.25 µm, further mitigating potential minimal sizing.
Constraints
Metal 1
Metal 2
Metal 3
Via 1
Via 2
Minimum width (µm)
4
4
6
­
­
Minimum separation (µm)
4
4
6
4
10
Minimum area (µm2)
­
­
­
3 × 3
4 × 4
Minimum metalization (µm2)
­
­
­
7 × 7
12 × 12
Table 2.1: DRC Constraints of metal layers and vias
It should also be noted, that a layer called ”ViaT” is used to encapsulate Via 1. The layer
serves no purpose to the design, but it is necessary to clear DRC. The minimum area of
this layer is 4 × 4, and if the area of Via 1 is increased, ViaT must be at least 1 µm longer
than Via 1 on all sides.
Vcap does not work as a classical via as it is drawn in the stackup. Instead it represents
a metalization layer, which is one half of the MIM­capacitor. It is used to connect the
bottom side of the MIM capacitor ”capa”, to the ground, ”metal 1”. As such, it takes the
dimensions of the MIM capacitor for that design. The layer ”metal 2” is placed on top of
the MIM­capacitor.
Finally, the circle shape is impossible to realize, as it has infinite resolution of curvature.
To imitate this shape, a polygon is created instead (see figure 2.3).
(a) The ideal circle
(b) Polygon representation
Figure 2.3: DRC constraints on a circle vs. polygon
12
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:21==
3
Slotline structures
3.1
Fundamentals
The most basic configuration of a slotline is composed of a planar conductor on top of a
dielectric substrate. A slot is etched into the conductor, separating it into two conductors
(see figure 3.1). This slot acts as a transmission line, guiding the propagating signal.
The mode of propagation is non­TEM, which is in contrast to the quasi­TEM microstrip
[10]. The H­field traveling in the direction of propagation and the E­field in the transverse
direction across the slot as illustrated in the figure 3.2. However, a small longitudinal
component of the E­field is also present. It has been shown that the magnitude of this
component is an order of magnitude smaller than the transverse E­field component, thus
justifying a TE propagation approximation [11]. The slotline consists of two conductors,
which draws similarities to the microstrip, and as a result, it does not have a certain cutoff­
wavelength [12].
Figure 3.1: Cross­section of slotline. Conductors (blue), substrate (green).
Figure 3.2: Field distribution in the slotline [12]
From figure 3.2 it is seen that the fields are not confined within the slotline. Instead they
extend both into the air above and into the substrate below. Depending on the thickness
of the substrate, the field can also extend below it. Given a sufficiently high substrate
permittivity (ϵr ≈10−30) the fields will be closely confined near the slotline. If we define an
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
13
==PAGE:22==
infinitely thick substrate with relative permittivity εr, the effective relative dielectric constant
as well as the guided wavelength can be described as [13]:
εr,eff = εr + 1
2
(3.1)
λs
λ0
=
1
√εr,eff
=
√
2
εr + 1
(3.2)
These simple expressions hold true for a substrate which has a thickness greater than or
equal the cutoff­thickness (hc) given by:
( h
λ0
)
c
=
1
4 · √εr −1
(3.3)
The interpretation of the cut­off thickness is similar to that of the cutoff thickness for tra­
dition waveguides. This thickness is the minimum thickness needed to support a TE0
surface­wave mode. However, this mode leads to increased losses, so to cut this mode
off, slotline stackups usually maintain substrate thickness below this [12]. As a result,
scientists and engineers have developed more comprehensive expressions for electrical
parameters where substrates maintain thickness below this.
3.1.1
Electrical parameters
The non­TEM nature of the slotline results in electrical parameters such as Z0 and vp
to be frequency dependent. Despite this, various closed­form solutions have been pro­
posed[12]. These are obtained using curve fitting to both analytical and numerical anal­
yses [14] [15]. Their region of usage is limited to certain values of permittivity as well as
geometrical dimensions (W and h). They are represented in Appendix A, table A.1 and
A.2.
3.1.2
losses
The losses in the slotline can be divided into three: conductor losses (αc), dielectric losses
(αd) and radiation losses (αr). These are caused by imperfect dielectric substrate, finite
conductivity and geometry. The conductor­ and dielectric losses have been thoroughly
studied in [16]. The findings are shown in figure 3.3. It is clear that the dominant source
of loss is conductor losses, which are frequency­ and width dependent, as the losses
increase with frequency, but decrease with slot width. This suggests that a wider slot
will have lower conductor losses, however widening the slot changes guided wavelength
and characteristic impedance. To mitigate this, substrate thickness can be increased,
however, as explained previously, a very thick slot will excite surface modes that leak into
the substrate[16].
3.2
Discontinuities
3.2.1
Short end
Like microstrips, slotlines have the ability to form distributed components. The short end
is constructed by recombining the two conductors thus terminating the slotline (see figure
3.4). At the interface between slot and conductor, the fields experience a discontinuity,
which causes magnetic energy to be stored [12]. This magnetic energy buildup results in
an inductive reactance, which can be expressed as X0. Following the formula for input
impedance looking into the other end of the slotline becomes [17]:
Zin = Z0
jX0 + jZ0tan(βl)
Z0 −X0tan(βl)
(3.4)
14
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Condctor losses (solid) and dielectric losses (dashed).
Specs for the test setup were: h = 0.635mm, ϵr = 9.8, σ = 4.1·107S/m, tanδ = 2·10­4[12]
As a result, the short ended slotline can be used to create distributed inductors. In figure
3.5, an EM simulation of the short end slotline is made to obtain input impedance. The
slotline has a width of 18 um corresponding to a characteristic impedance of 50Ω. The
length of a slotline is swept and the normalized input impedance is plotted. The sweep
shows an inductive reactance, which increases proportionally to an increased length until
around 170 um at which there is a phase shift indicating the quarter­wave length.
Figure 3.4: Slotline with end shorted: H­field (red), surface current (black)
3.2.2
Open End
The ideal open ended slotline is achieved by tapering the conductors until the end of the
plane is reached (see figure 3.6a). It is hard to implement, as it requires separating the
entire ground plane into two and removing a large amount of ground plane. Alternatively,
an open can be implemented using a disc­shaped cut­out (figure 3.6b). This open end be­
haves as a parallel resonator, where the resonant frequency can be adjusted by adjusting
the diameter of the disc. By increasing the diameter of the disc such that the resonance
frequency is lower than the operating frequency a capacitive reactance is achieved.
Figure 3.6c shows the hybrid between the taper and disc, having a taper which terminates
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Short end
(b) Disc
Figure 3.5: EM simulation of short end slotline input impedance vs slot length
in half a disc. It has the same behavior as the disc, however its tapered feed reduces the
area needed to form the open compared with the disc [18].
(a) Taper
(b) Disc
(c) Hybrid
Figure 3.6: Various slotline open end implementations
In figure 3.7 the disc is drawn with dimension parameters along with its equivalent circuit
and its circuit parameters. To further analyze the characteristics of this structure, an EM
simulation sweep is done to extract equivalent circuit parameters. The simulation results
are shown in figure 3.8. While the slotline width is kept at 4 um, the diameter of the disc
and slotline length is swept.
It is noted that the resonance frequency is inverse proportional to the diameter. This
indicates that a capacitive behavior of an open end is achieved only if the diameter is suf­
ficiently large. To complement, a longer slotline feeding into the disc will also decrease the
resonant frequency. It is also noted that the Q­factor of the disc increases with diameter
and slotline feed length. This would indicate that for wide­band matching, a smaller disc
with shorter slotline feed is preferred, but for lower losses, a bigger disc and longer feed
is required.
The inductance and capacitance shows three different regions, each dependent on the
diameter as well as the slot feed length. Firstly, there is a region, where the inductance
increases, while the capacitance remains constant. Then follows a region where the in­
ductance drops, while the capacitance increases. Finally, the last region is similar to
the first, in that the inductance increases and the capacitance remains constant. It ap­
pears that the middle region with inductance drop and capacitance increase experiences
16
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:25==
some excitation of a mode, which is suppressed in the other regions. This explains the
non­ideality of the disc, as it does not represent a perfect open. It is also noted that the
resonator behavior approaches that of the short end, when the disc diameter approaches
slot width.
(a) Open end layout
(b) equivalent cicuit
Figure 3.7: Disc open­ended slotline layout and its equivalent circuit.
3.3
Microstrip to Slotline Transition
The transition from microstrip to slotline is quite interesting and has some advantageous
properties when coupling. The transition has been extensively investigated [19, 20, 21].
To further study the transition, we analyze the configuration in figures 3.9 and 3.10. A
microstrip is passed above the ground layer which has a slot etched at a 90◦angle into it.
The microstrip is excited and the interface from microstrip to slotline is analyzed.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) Resonance frequency vs disc diameter
(b) Q­factor vs disc diameter
(c) Inductance vs disc diameter
(d) Capacitance vs disc diameter
Figure 3.8: EM simulation of slotline in figure 3.7 to obtain parameters for equivalent
circuit.
18
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.9: EM fields and surface currents of even mode microstrip excitation
Figure 3.10: EM fields and surface currents of odd mode microstrip excitation
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
19
==PAGE:28==
When the microstrip experiences an even mode excitation (figure 3.9), the magnetic fields
cancel in the slot and no E­field is excited across the slot. However, when the microstrip
is excited with an odd­mode signal (figure 3.10), the magnetic field couples to the slot­
line, which induces an electric field across the slot, thus exciting a TE propagating wave
through the slot. The microstrip and slotline are orthogonally routed to achieve maximum
coupling. The suppression of the E­field under even mode result in great rejection of
common­mode signals.
Consider the transition along with equivalent circuit shown in figure 3.11. At point A, the
microstrip stub can be terminated in an open, short or an arbitrary impedance. The slotline
stub terminates in a short end with the discontinuity inductance represented as Ls. We
can express the total reactance of the microstrip stub and slotline stub as:
jXM = Z0m
jXA + jZ0mtan(βl)
Z0m −XAtan(βl)
(3.5)
jXS = Z0s
jωLs + jZ0stan(βl)
Z0s −ωLstan(βl)
(3.6)
If we load the slotline (at point ”OUT”) with an impedance, we can do a parallel­to­series
transformation of the load and slotline impedance:
Req = ZL · X2
S
Z2
L + X2
S
Xeq = Z2
L · XS
Z2
L + X2
S
(3.7)
If we assume output matching (ZL = Z0s) and we transform the equivalent impedance to
the input side of the transformer, we get:
R
′
eq = n2 Z0s · X2
S
Z2
0s + X2
S
X
′
eq = n2 Z2
0s · XS
Z2
0s + X2
S
(3.8)
Now, by combining these with the microstrip input impedance, we get the total input
impedance as seen from the node ”IN” [6]:
RIN = R
′
eq = n2 Z0s · X2
S
Z2
0s + X2
S
(3.9)
XIN = XM + X
′
eq = XM + n2 Z2
0s · XS
Z2
0s + X2
S
(3.10)
Finally, the input reflection coefficient is[12]:
ΓIN = RIN −Z0m + jXIN
RIN + Z0m + jXIN
(3.11)
From this it is noted that for optimal bandwidth, XIN should be minimized. To achieve this,
we note from (3.10) that XM should be minimized and XS should be maximized. From
(3.5), XM is minimized by creating a zero length, shorted microstrip stub or a quarter­
wave open­ended stub. Similarly, from (3.6), a shorted quarter­wave slotline stub or a
zero­length, opened stub will maximize XS.
20
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:29==
An extensive study of the microstrip slotline transition in [20] has found that optimal band­
width performance is achieved when Z0m = 2.618 · Z0s for the shorted slotline stub and
opened microstrip stub.
(a) Microstrip to slotline transition
(b) equivalent circuit
Figure 3.11: Microstrip to slotline transition along with equivalent circuit
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
21
==PAGE:30==
3.4
Slotline simulations ­ Schüppert’s study
In order to confirm the validity of the ADS momentum EM simulation tool, as well as
investigating the transition presented in chapter 3.3, an analysis of [20] is made.
The study focuses on a double transition, where a microstrip­to­slotline transition is placed
back­to­back (see figure 3.12). This allows for an easier experimental setup, as both
input and output terminals are microstrip. The analysis compares various configurations
of microstrip stubs and slotline stubs on bandwidth performance. Every configuration is
designed for 5 GHz and analyzed in the range of 1­16 GHz.
Figure 3.12: Top view of the double microstrip­slotline transition
Schüppert uses an alumina substrate with ϵr = 9.7 placed between to conducting layers.
The article does not state the conductor material, however it does state that copper was
used as via routing. Thus, a reasonable assumption is that the same material was used
as microstrip­ and ground plane conductor.
In ADS the stackup is created as shown in figure 3.13. The conductor is a 35 um thick
copper with σ = 5.8 · 107 S
m and the substrate is 0.635 mm thick.
22
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.13: ADS stackup for Schüppert study reproduction
This simulation will reproduce 4 microstrip­to­slotline transitions. These are shown in
figures 3.14. Schüppert plotted the results for all 4 structures in [20, figures 10 and 18].
Common for all 4 configurations are:
• Wm,feed = 0.57mm (Z0m ≈50Ω)
• Ws,feed = 0.05 (Z0s ≈50Ω
• lm,feed = 5.7 mm
• ls,sep = 15 mm
The configurations in 3.14a and 3.14b contain quarter­wave stubs. The microstrip stub is
terminated in an open, while the slotline stub is terminated in a short. In 3.14a the width
of both stubs correspond to a characteristic impedance if 50 Ω. However, in 3.14b, the
characteristic impedance of the microstrip is scaled down by a factor of 2.618 to achieve
better bandwidth performance[20].
Configurations 3.14c and 3.14d utilize and open­ended disc as the slotline stub. As de­
scribed in chapter 3.3, this can represent and open­circuit, if the radius is large compared
to the slotline width. The microstrip in 3.14c has a soldered short, while in 3.14d, the
microstrip is terminated in an open stub with a disc shape. The microstrip disc geometry
achieves better bandwidth performance than the rectangular stub.
The layout dimensions of all configurations are given in table 3.1.
Layout dimensions
3.3a
3.3b
3.3c
3.3d
Wm,stub
0.57 mm
3 mm
–
–
lm,stub
5.7 mm
5.2 mm
–
–
Ws,stub
0.05 mm
0.05 mm
–
–
ls,stub
7.3 mm
7.3 mm
–
–
dm,stub
–
–
–
5 mm
ds,stub
–
–
6 mm
6 mm
Table 3.1: Layout parameters of configurations in figure 3.14.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
23
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.14: Layout of 4 different back­to­back microstrip to slotline configurations.
24
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:33==
The simulation results are shown along with the compared study in figure 3.15 and 3.16.
It is observed that there is generally fine agreement between the simulated results and
the experimental results. In particular, the results in 3.15 with quarter­wave shorted stubs
show very similar characteristics. The lower characteristic impedance of the microstrip
stub effectively removed the large ripple around 3 GHz providing a more flat response.
In figure 3.16, the simulated results show overall good agreement with experimental re­
sults at the lower end of the spectrum. Above 10 GHz, it is observed that the results
deviate somewhat. A reason for this could be that unwanted modes are excited, possi­
bly due to the non­idealities of the slotline open end. It is also possible, that the small
overlapping circular ends creates unwanted coupling.
Overall, the EM momentum simulation tool allowed reproduction of the experimental ob­
servations made by Schüppert. This provides basis for further development of the microstrip­
slotline transition.
For clarity, all further EM simulations in remaining chapters of this report will use the setup
explained in chapter 2.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
25
==PAGE:34==
(a) Theoretical (–) and experimental (△) results of Schüppert fig 10[20]
(b) Simulation results of corresponding configurations 3.3a and 3.3b.
Figure 3.15: Schüppert figure 10 results (a) and simulation reproduction (b)
26
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:35==
(a) Theoretical (–) and experimental (△) results of Schüppert fig 18[20]
(b) Simulation results of corresponding configurations 3.3c and 3.3d.
Figure 3.16: Schüppert figure 18 results (a) and simulation reproduction (b)
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:37==
4
Balun & Power Combiner
4.1
Balun
As explained in section 3.3, an odd­mode excited microstrip will couple its magnetic field
to the slotline. As such, it behaves similar to that of a transformer, which couples mag­
netically, between two coils. However, the property of the microstrip­slotline transition to
suppress the E­field across the slot when the microstrip is excited with an even­mode
signal, makes this coupling uniquely different from the transformer coupling. In fact it
provides a major advantage, since it yields very high rejection of common­mode signals
and noise. This rejection is less present in the transformer coupling, when the overlap­
ping coils have parasitic capacitances, which causes transfer of common­mode signal
and noise [6].
This advantage of the microstrip­slotline transition leads to the development of the slot­
line in a balun structure. These baluns have been demonstrated to have excellent perfor­
mance on loss, size, amplitude­ and phase balance [6, 7]. The articles demonstrate two
different balun types ­ one with the short end slotline, and one with a slotline terminated
in the open ended disc. Each balun type is explained in the following section.
4.1.1
Shorted Slotline Balun
The shorted slotline balun is shown in figure 4.1. The balanced side (A) consists of a
differentially driven microstrip, routed across a slot in the ground plane. The unbalanced
side (B) is the slotline, which is connected on one end to a folded slotline stub. The folded
structure minimizes radiation losses and preserves optimizes space. As the microstrip is
differentially driven, a virtual ground is present at the center of the microstrip­to­slotline
transition. This works as ground for the signal propagating in the microstrip. Another
virtual ground is found at the very end of the folded slotline, where the phase difference
between each branch creates the ground.
Figure 4.1: Layout of shorted balun structure.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
29
==PAGE:38==
The balun can be represented with the equivalent circuit is shown in figure 4.2(a). Sim­
ilar to the representation in figure 3.11b, this representation depicts the transition as a
transformer with turns ratio n:1. The microstrip is modelled as two series inductors (Xm)
connected to each end of the primary side of the transformer. Each inductor represents
each half of the microstrip from the virtual ground. The folded slotline stub is modeled as
two parallel inductors (Xs) connected across the secondary side of the transformer. Each
parallel inductor represents each branch of the folded slotline.
(a) Equivalent circuit
(b) Xs transformed to primary side
(c) Non­ideal transformer
Figure 4.2: Equivalent circuits of the shorted slotline balun
30
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:39==
By transforming the slotline inductors to the primary side, we get the equivalent circuit in
figure 4.2(b). This representation is the equivalent of the non­ideal transformer shown in
figure 4.2(c), where [6]:
k2 =
Xs
Xm + Xs
(4.1)
Lp =
Xm
2πf(1 −k2)
(4.2)
Ls =
Xmk2
2πf(1 −k2)n2
(4.3)
4.1.2
Design and tuning
The balun design is based on the equivalent circuit, determining the values of both Xm
and Xs, and thereafter calculating microstrip­ and slotline parameters using formulas 3.5
and 3.6. In [6], it is explained how Z­parameters can assist the tuning. This is a result of
the non­ideal transformer having Z­parameters[22]:
[v1(s)
v2(s)
]
= s
[ L1
M12
M21
L2
] [i1(s)
i2(s)
]
= s
[
L1
k√L1L2
k√L1L2
L2
] [i1(s)
i2(s)
]
=
[z11(s)
z12(s)
z21(s)
z22(s)
] [i1(s)
i2(s)
]
M12 = M21 = k√L1L2 is valid for the reciprocal case, where:
M12 = M21 ⇒Z12 = Z21
Using the expression, the equivalent circuit in figure 4.2(c) can be expressed as:
2Lp = z11
s
(4.4)
2Ls = z22
s
(4.5)
2k =
z12
√
LpLss
(4.6)
For simplicity, ignoring ohmic losses gives:
Lp = Im(z11)
4πf
(4.7)
Ls = Im(z22)
4πf
(4.8)
k =
Im(z12)
√
LpLs4πf
(4.9)
Extracting Z­parameters from the EM simulation and using (4.7) ­ (4.9), the slotline balun
becomes tunable. However, an important note is the complexity of geometry and coupling
(consider the figure 4.3). If a large slotline inductance (Xs) is needed, the length of the
folded slotline must be increased. This is only possible within the confines of port A, as
the slotline cannot extend into neighboring layout. As a result, the primary direction for
lengthening the slotline is transversely. At a certain point, the slotline extends underneath
the microstrip, which creates multiple points of coupling (shown with red circles). This
changes the coupling factor, which influences the Z­parameters, thereby also changing
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: Shorted balun with multiple points of coupling
Lp and Ls. Consequently, tuning with the Z­parameters can be difficult, when multiple
coupling points are introduced.
The inductive reactance of the shorted slotline makes the balun ideal for matching capac­
itive impedances, where the shorted slotline and capacitor can be tuned. However, the
balun offers limited matching options with inductive impedances.
4.1.3
Opened Slotline Balun
The opened slotline balun is very similar to the shorted, however instead of the folded
slotline stub, an open disc structure is implemented. The balun is shown in figure 4.4.
The equivalent­ and transformed circuit are shown in figure 4.5. The equivalent circuit
is quite similar to that of the shorted slotline balun, in that the transition and microstrip
inductors are the same. However, the slot disc resonator is modeled as a parallel RLC­
circuit. Transforming the inductor of that resonator to the primary side (figure 4.5(b)) it is
possible to substitute with the non­ideal transformer equivalent (figure 4.5(c)). Although
similar to the non­ideal of the shorted slotline balun, it is seen that the capacitor ”Cs” and
resistor ”Rs” are components, which weren’t presented in the previous model.
32
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: Layout of open balun structure.
4.1.4
Design and tuning
Given the less­obvious correlation between the physical layout and the equivalent circuit
(especially the resonator), designing based on equivalent components becomes more
complex. Instead, a more simple approach is proposed in [7]. The method is to terminate
the unbalanced port in a 50­ohm impedance and plot the differential port impedance as
a sweep of the slot open disc diameter. A similar setup is shown in figure 4.6, where port
”P3” designates the unbalanced port, while ”P1­P2” is the differential port. The input ad­
mittance ”Zin1” looking into the differential port is investigated as a sweep of the diameter
”dbalun” from 20 µm to 80 µm. The microstrip is routed around the slot disc with ”Lm” des­
ignating the length of the microstrip wrap­around. An additional piece of microstrip ”∆m”
is added and included as a sweep parameter to investigate the influence of the microstrip
length. The microstrip is made of a stacked metal 2 and metal 3 with vias to increase the
conductor area (see figure 4.7).
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) Equivalent circuit
(b) Ls transformed to primary side
(c) Non­ideal transformer
Figure 4.5: Equivalent circuits of the opened slotline balun
34
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:43==
(a) Layout with ports and dimensions of balun
sweep
(b) ADS EM co­simulation setup
Figure 4.6: Setup of opened slotline input impedance simulation
The simulation is done as an ”S­parameter” simulation at the single frequency; 145 GHz.
The results are shown in figure 4.8. The plot shows the upper plane of the smith chart.
Similar to the results in [7], it is noted that the input impedance moves in a clockwise
manner as the diameter of the balun increases. The microstrip length influences the
location of the input impedance, as a longer microstrip yields a larger impedance.
Using the balun diameter as well as the microstrip length, the balun can be designed such
that the input impedance is placed near an optimal load or source impedance for a given
power cell.
Contrary to the shorted slotline balun, the opened balun has the ability to match both in­
ductive and capacitive impedances, because of the built­in resonator. With that in mind,
the opened balun has limited tuning options, as the resonator is determined by the diam­
eter of the open disc and slot feed length. Shown in figure 3.8, achieving high levels of
capacitance can be challenging, as it requires a long slotline feed and a large area.
4.2
Power Combiner
The slotline balun shown in the previous section can be used as part of a power combiner.
A top view of the layout is shown in figure 4.9. The combiner consists of two identical
shorted slotline baluns placed beside each other. The folded slotline is denoted ”Slot
1”, while the microstrip constituting the feed of the balanced port is denoted ”Line 1”.
The unbalanced port of each balun is fed through ”Slot 2” to another slotline­microstrip
transition, where ”Line 2” couples, and the output is registered at port ”Pout”. The point
”X” denotes the termination of the ”Line 2” microstrip. This point can be terminated in a
ground, open or another impedance[6].
It is noted that the two baluns are excited 180◦out of phase, which results in ”Slot 2” being
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Metal 1 (ground plane)
(b) Metal 2
(c) Metal 3 with vias
Figure 4.7: Metal stackup of balun
Figure 4.8: Impedance smith chart plotted as a sweep of balun diameter and microstrip
length
in­phase when they meet. As a result, the point at which they meet (Right below Line 2)
is a virtual open­circuit. The equivalent circuit is shown in figure 4.10, where optimal
impedances have been connected to the differential ”PA” ports, while a load is connected
to the port ”Pout”.
It is noted that because ”Slot 1” is a shorted slotline and ”Slot 2” is terminated in a virtual
open, the are represented as an inductor (Lslot1), and a capacitor (Cslot1), respectively.
Another interesting point is the ”Slot 2” to ”Line 2” transition, which is a parallel power
combination, because of the in­phase ”Slot 2”. If ”Line 2” is implemented as a 50­Ohm
microstrip, with X being a via directly into the slot plane, the last transformer has approx­
imately 1:1 turn ratio [6].
While the figure and the equivalent circuit represent the power combiner with shorted slot­
line baluns, the power combiner using open disc baluns has the same working principle.
36
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.9: Figure of power combiner with shorted slotline baluns
Figure 4.10: Equivalent circuit of power combiner with shorted slotline baluns
The slot combiner is shown in figure 4.11. In this configuration, a microstrip with a charac­
teristic impedance of 50Ωis connected through a via directly into the ground plane. The
design approach of the full power combiner is quite iterative. First, the balun is matched to
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
37
==PAGE:46==
a capacitive, equivalent impedance (ZEQ) placed at the unbalanced side. Hereafter, the
output combiner is created and EM simulated to match that impedance. If not achievable,
the equivalent impedance is adjusted to fit the slot combiner, and the balun is tuned after
this new impedance value. Finally, both components are designed as one total combiner.
It is important to note that the iterative nature of this method is quite laborious as balancing
ideal matching with realizable dimensions can be difficult and require compromises.
Figure 4.11: Top view of balun (left) and slot combiner (right)
38
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:47==
5
Power Cell
This chapter will explain the redesign of the 1­ and 2­finger power cell used in the two­
way combined, two stage power amplifier. Since the power cell design in [3] showed good
performance, they are largely reused. However, the increased dielectric constant allows
the reduction of neutralization capacitors, offering more gain.
5.1
Biasing point
The DC biasing conditions remain largely unchanged with VCE = 2.4V and ICmax =
30mA. From [23] it is shown that the InP DHBT technology achieves highest PAE when
biased in class AB with conduction angle around 190◦­210◦resulting in VBE = 0.857V −
0.8915V [3]. The previous work showed the second stage having a tendency to saturate
early. Initial iterations of this topology showed the same tendencies, so the second stage
is biased with slightly lower base­emitter voltage. The base­emitter voltages are:VBE,1F =
0.8905V , VBE,2F = 0.86V .
5.2
Stability
The neutralization capacitors serve to stabilize the power cell throughout the whole D­
band. To analyze the stability, Rollet’s stability factor is used. Using the ”Large Signal
S­Parameter” simulation setup in an EM co­simulation of the power cell (see figure 5.1),
Rollet’s stability factor is analyzed. The capacitor is tuned directly in the layout and the up­
dated layout is applied in the co­simulation. Results are shown in figure 5.2. To maximize
the gain, very little stability headroom is kept. Although the stability criterion is marginally
met in the entire D­band, instability is present in frequencies below this band. This is
shown in extended band simulations in figure 5.2c and 5.2d. The passive components
surrounding the power cells are responsible for maintaining out­of­band stability.
Figure 5.1: Power cell EM co­simulation for stability analysis
Figures 5.3 and 5.4 show the original and revised layouts with new capacitor dimensions.
It is noted that the layout of the 2­finger has additional narrowing of the metal 3 trace from
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
39
==PAGE:48==
the neutralization capacitors to the emitter legs of the transistor. This is adjusted because
the original trace did not meet DRC requirements of minimal metal 3 separation.
40
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:49==
(a) D­Band ­ 1 finger power cell
(b) D­band ­ 2 finger power cell
(c) Extended band ­ 1 finger power cell
(d) Extended band ­ 2 finger power cell
Figure 5.2: Stability factors and maximum gain of the 1­ and 2 finger power cells.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
41
==PAGE:50==
(a) Original layout: 1 finger
(b) Revised layout: 1 finger
Figure 5.3: Layout of the original and redesigned 1 finger power cell.
(a) Original layout: 2 finger
(b) Revised layout: 2 finger
Figure 5.4: Layout of the original and redesigned 2 finger power cell.
42
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:51==
5.3
Load Pull Simulation
Given that a stage has been removed, the two remaining stages are designed for max­
imum gain. To determine the optimal load and source impedances of the power cells,
load pull simulations are used. These load pulls are created using the template ”1­Tone
Load Pull Simulation: Constant Available Source Power” from ADS DesignGuides. Re­
ferring back to section 1.3.3, the available source power level is around 8 dBm. Splitting
this power into the two­way topology, reduces the power by 3 dBm. Assuming the input
power splitter can achieve losses in the vicinity of [7], it would be safe to assume 1 dB
loss. This means that the input power is around 4 dBm. This will be the power level to
which the 1 finger power cell is designed. The load pull and power sweep is shown in
figure 5.5. This yields the performance: gain = 6.4 dB, PAE = 28.2% and Pout = 11.9 dBm
at OP1dB.
(a) Load pull contours:
Pout (red) and PAE
(blue)
(b) Power sweep of the 1­finger power cell
(c) Dynamic Load lines of the 1­finger power cell
Figure 5.5: Load pull, power sweep and load line of 1 finger cell.
Continuing from this stage, the second stage 2­finger power cell load pull, power sweep
and dynamic load lines are shown in figure 5.6. It is designed to operate at an input power
around 10.5 dBm. It is noted that the gain shows an increase, which is indicative of the
point at which the power cell enters AB­class operation.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
43
==PAGE:52==
(a) Load pull contours:
Pout (red) and PAE
(blue)
(b) Power sweep of the 1­finger power cell
(c) Dynamic Load lines of the 1­finger power cell
Figure 5.6: Load pull, power sweep and load line of 2 finger cell.
5.3.1
Performance table
Conclusively, the power cells have the performance specs shown in table 5.1. It is noted
that both power cells have a capacitive optimal source impedances. Following the prin­
ciple of maximum power transfer, this would suggest that the input impedances of the
power cells are inductive.
Cell
Φ
Gain [dB]
PAE [%]
Pout [dBm]
ZS
ZL
1 Finger
189◦
6.4
28.2
11.9
24.608 −j24.038
5.726 + j26.136
2 Finger
190◦
5.6
27
16
11.955 −j19.941
4.423 + j10.766
Table 5.1: Power cell performance and optimal impedances
44
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:53==
6
Passive components
This chapter will go through the design of input power splitter, output power combiner
as well as interstage matching. To evaluate the performance of the baluns and power
splitters/combiners, mixed mode S­parameters are used. For all 2­ports, insertion loss,
amplitude­ and phase balance are calculated using[24]:
ILport3(dB) = −20 · log10(Sdm),
where
Sdm =
1
√
2(S31 −S32)
(6.1)
ABport3(dB) = 20 · log10
(|S31|
|S32|
)
(6.2)
PBport3(◦) = Phase(S31) −Phase(S32)
(6.3)
For the 1:4 power splitter as well as the 4:1 power combiner, insertion loss and isolation
is calculated using:
ILport5(dB) = −10 · log10(|S51|2 + |S52|2 + |S53|2 + |S54|2)
(6.4)
Isolation(dB) = min
[
S13(dB), S23(dB), S14(dB), S24(dB)
]
(6.5)
6.1
Input Power Splitter
When designing the input power splitter, it is noted that the optimal source impedance
is capacitive (see table 5.1). As a result, the power cell has an inductive impedance.
As a consequence, the shorted slotline balun is not ideal, as it offers poor matching for
inductive impedances. Thus, the opened slotline balun is chosen.
The balun for the splitter is designed with the ground layer ”metal 1” containing the slot,
while metal 2 and metal 3 constitute a stacked microstrip. The stackup is seen in figure
6.1. As a result of the DRC requirements, the circle shape of the balun is replaced with
an octagon. The stack, consisting of metal 2 and 3, provides a larger conductor surface.
In addition, it also allows for the input to be connected to metal 2, while having the DC
bias feed in metal 3. The slot is designed with a 10 mum width. Metal 2 and 3 both have
a width of 14μm to allow metalization for the vias.
(a) Metal 1 with output pin
(b) Metal 2 with input pins
(c) Metal 3 with DC bias pins
Figure 6.1: Metal stackup of input balun
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.2: EM co­simulation setup of the input balun
The simulation setup for the input balun as well as the input power splitter is shown in
figures 6.2 and 6.3. The design problem is to design for a ZEQ, which provides the best
overall performance of both components. This is an iterative process, which involves
retuning and refining both components and updating ZEQ.
In figure 6.2, the balun differential port is connected to two single­ended terminals with
optimal input impedances given by: (Zin,opt = Z∗
S,opt). The unbalanced port is connected
to a terminal with Z∗
EQ as impedance. The balun is designed to achieve minimum insertion
loss given this impedance.
In figure 6.3, the splitter is connected to a 50­ohm impedance at the input port. The
output ports terminate in single­ended impedances, ZEQ. Using the ”optimization”­tool
from ADS, ZEQ is found to minimize insertion losses and maximize output return losses.
With the impedance of ZEQ = 82+j27 both components perform as shown in figure 6.4. It
is seen that quite good insertion loss is obtained. The balun is a little mismatched, though.
Figure 6.4b shows extremely good amplitude­ and phase balance. With an amplitude
balance below 0.1 and a phase balance below 1◦, the balun performance results are
close to those observed in [7]. The input splitter has roughly 0.3 dB insertion loss as well
as plus 35 dB input return loss.
When combining the balun and splitter into one layout, a degradation in performance
is observed, possibly due to non­ideal isolation. As a result, further tuning is required to
achieve optimal performance. The final layout as well as EM co­simulation setup is shown
in figure 6.5. The complete layout has a total area of 200µm × 119µm.
46
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.3: EM co­simulation setup of the input splitter
The results of the EM co­simulation is shown in figure 6.6. at 145 GHz, it is shown to have
insertion loss of 0.77dB and input return loss of 19 dB while the minimum isolation of the
splitter is 13 dB.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
47
==PAGE:56==
(a) Input balun ­ losses
(b) Input balun ­ amplitude and phase balance
(c) Input power splitter ­ losses
Figure 6.4: Results of EM­cosimulation of input balun and splitter
48
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:57==
(a) Layout of full input power splitter
(b) Co­simulation setup for the full input power splitter
Figure 6.5: Layout top view and simulation setup for input power splitter
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.6: Performance resultsof input power splitter
6.2
Output Power Combiner
The output power combiner contains shorted slotline baluns described in section 4.1.1. It
is designed with the ground layer ”metal 1” containing the slot, while metal 2 and metal
3 constitute a stacked microstrip. The stackup is seen in figure 6.7. Outside of providing
larger conductor surface, the metal 2/3 stack also allows for the input to be connected to
metal 2, while having the DC bias feed in metal 3. The slot is designed with a minimum
width within DRC limits. To account for mitered corners, this width is set at 6µm. Metal 2
and 3 both have a width of 12µm to allow minimal metalization for the vias.
(a) Metal 1 with output pin
(b) Metal 2 with input pins
(c) Metal 3 with DC bias pins
Figure 6.7: Metal stackup of output balun
The simulation setup for the balun and power combiner is shown in figure 6.8 and 6.9,
respectively. In figure 6.8 both input ports are given the conjugate of the optimal load
impedance from table 5.1. The DC bias is fed through a 1nH inductor serving as an
RF choke, while 300fF capacitors serve as RF grounds. The output is terminated in the
impedance ZEQ. This impedance is determined as the optimal impedance to compromise
between the balun losses and combiner losses.
In figure 6.9, the combiner is connected to a 50­ohm impedance at the combined port. The
differential ports terminate in single­ended impedances, ZEQ. Using the ”optimization”­
50
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:59==
tool from ADS, ZEQ is found to minimize insertion losses and maximize output return
losses.
The design problem is design for a ZEQ, which provides the best overall performance of
the two.
The simulation results of the balun setup in figure 6.8 with ZEQ = 24 −j32Ωis shown
in figure 6.10. With a loss of 0.5 dB and 32 dB matching, the balun is well optimized
designed. However, realizing the impedance of ZEQ = 24 −j32Ωis not viable for the
combiner, as it requires very long slotlines which cause large attenuation losses and re­
quires a large area. Following this is an iterative design of the combiner to obtain a new
ZEQ after which the balun is redesigned and the process is repeated.
Figure 6.8: The simulation setup of the output balun
The final design is demonstrated in figure 6.11. The dimensions show the combiner in­
cluding MIM capacitors have the dimensions 260µm × 86µm. The MIM capacitors serve
as proper grounding for the RF­signal. The simulation results are shown in figure 6.12.
Although slight mismatch is observed, the combiner has more than 30 dB output return
loss, which is acceptable. The minimum isolation is 13 dB. Finally, it shows an insertion
loss of around 1 dB.
6.3
Interstage matching
The interstage matching is designed as back­to­back baluns connected through a slot­
line ”Slot A” (see figure 6.13). The equivalent circuit in figure 6.13b shows the circuit of
the two baluns as well as the input­ and output impedances. The parallel impedance
representation is calculated using a series­to­parallel conversion:
Rout = R2
L + X2
L
RL
= 5.7262 + 26.1362
5.726
= 125Ω
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.9: The simulation setup of the output combiner
Xout = R2
L + X2
L
XL
= 5.7262 + 26.1362
26.136
= 27Ω⇒Cout =
1
2πfXout
=
1
2π145GHz · 25Ω= 40fF
Rin = R2
S + X2
S
RS
= 11.9552 + 19.9412
11.955
= 45Ω
Xin = R2
S + X2
S
RS
= 11.9552 + 19.9412
19.941
= 27Ω⇒Lin = Xin
2πf =
27Ω
2π145GHz = 30pH
The shorted slotline balun is chosen at the output of the first amplifier, while the opened
slotline balun is chosen at the input of the second. This way the shorted slotline balun
works ideally for matching the capacitive output impedance, while the opened slotline
balun is better suited the inductive input impedance. It is noted that the opened slotline
balun can work for both capacitive and inductive impedances, and thus could also be
placed at the output of PA1.
The design procedure is to design each balun to match the balanced port of Zin and Zout to
an unbalanced port of 50Ω(see figure 6.14). The two resistors of the optimal input/output
impedances are represented in the terminals.
The corresponding simulation results are shown in figure 6.15. Interestingly, while the
shorted balun is able to match to the 50Ωimpedance, the opened balun is not able to do
so. Although some error is present in the tuning, it is also hypothesized that the char­
acteristics of the open ended balun brings a limitation, as the capacitance doesn’t scale
linearly with disc diameter. On the contrary, the open ended balun achieves better band­
width match ,than the shorted slotline balun.
When combining the two baluns, additional tuning is required as well as the addition of
DC paths and a MIM capacitor. The final layout is shown in figure 6.16. It is noted that the
52
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:61==
(a) Combining­ and return loss of balun
(b) Amplitude­ and phase balance
Figure 6.10: Performance of output balun
DC paths are routed quite far. The reason for this is the MIM capacitor, which is placed
as close to the output balun as possible.
The
6.4
Passive Components Summary
The overall performance of the passive elements at 145 GHz are summed in table 6.1.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
53
==PAGE:62==
Component
Insertion Loss [dB]
Return Loss [dB]
Input Power Splitter
0.77
19
Interstage Matching
1.56
15
Output Power Combiner
1.01
30
Total
3.34
64
Table 6.1: Performance of passive components at 145 GHz
54
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:63==
(a) Layout of full output combiner
(b) Co­simulation setup for the full output combiner
Figure 6.11: Layout top view and simulation setup for output combiner
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.12: Performance of full combiner
(a) Layout of full output combiner
(b) Co­simulation setup for the full output combiner
Figure 6.13: Top view and equivalent circuit of the interstage matching circuit
56
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.14: Simulation setup for individual balun design
(a) Insertion loss of the baluns in figure 6.14
(b) Smith chart of reflection co­
efficient from the unbalanced
port
Figure 6.15: Results of EM co­simulation of individual baluns matched to 50Ω
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.16: Top view of the interstage matching structure
Figure 6.17: EM co­simulation setup for interstage matching
58
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.18: EM co­simulation results
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:69==
7
Two­Way Combined, Two­Stage
Amplifier
The full amplifier is shwon in figure 7.1). It is EM­cosimulated to determine the perfor­
mance. The performance is shown in figure (see figure 7.2).
Figure 7.1: The simulation setup for the full amplifier setup
The performance at 145 GHz is compared to previous work in table 7.1. It shows a gain
decrease of 5.4 dB. This is mainly due to the removal of the third stage. Despite thi, the
amplifier is able to deliver almost the same output power, with only 0.4 dBm difference.
Finally, the amplifier shows a significant efficiency improvement with 17.2% PAE at OP1dB
and 9.7% at 6dB output power back­off point.
GainOP1dB [dB]
Pout,OP1dB [dBm]
PAEmax[%]
PAEOP1dB [%]
PAEOBO­6dB [%]
This work
8
18
17.2
17.2
9.7
[3]
13.4
18.4
14.2
13.9
7.7
Table 7.1: Performance comparison with previous work
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) Gain, Pout and PAE @ 145 GHz vs swept input power
(b) S­parameter simulation
Figure 7.2: Results of EM co­simulation of the complete amplifier design.
Input [dB]
IMtotal [dB]
Output [dB]
This work
0.77
1.56
1.01
[3]
1.46
4.35
1.33
Table 7.2: Loss of passive elements comparison with previous work
62
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:71==
8
Conclusion
8.1
Project Summary
This study showed the use of microstrip­slotline baluns as promising alternatives for low­
loss passive structures. A D­band two­way combined, two stage power amplifier based
on the 0.5­µm InP DHBT technology from III­V Lab was designed using these structures
as passive components.
Based off a previously designed power amplifier, the study aimed at improving the ef­
ficiency. Firstly, a re­configuration of the substrate was made to change the dielectric
constant from 2.9 to 3.4, because of previous experiences with the operating frequency
downshifting. Additionally, the design frequency was increased from 140 GHz to 145
GHz.
The previous work was analyzed to determine key areas of improvement. This analy­
sis concluded that the main areas for improvement were the passive structures, as the
power cells were already optimized. Further, the analysis of the source power revealed
a high level of available source power, resulting in a removal of a stage in the amplifier.
Consequently, a two­way combined, two­stage amplifier was proposed.
The slotline was investigated as a promising transmission line because of its low­loss
properties. Main theory subjects such as mode of excitation, electrical parameters, losses
as well as discontinueties were presented supported with simulations. In addition, the
transition from microstrip to slotline was analyzed and simulated comparing the results
with those obtained in a previous study.
The microstrip­slotline transition was implemented in two different balun structures, each
having a unique slotline discontinuity. One consisted of a shorted slotline balun, while the
other consisted of an open­ended slotline balun. The structures were analyzed and key
topics such as equivalent circuits, design methods, matching limitations were discussed.
These important considerations were included when designing subsequent passive struc­
tures.
The power combiner structure was presented as a combination of two baluns connected
via a slotline. The structure was presented with a top­down view as well as an equivalent
circuit. The combiner was split into two components: balun and combiner. A design
procedure was presented, where each part was individually matched to an equivalent
impedance representing the other component, before being combined in a single layout.
It was noted, that the procedure appeared rather iterative, and the combined layout would
need retuning.
The 1­ and 2­finger power cell layout from the previous work was edited, reducing the
neutralization capacitor to fit the new dielectric constant. Hereafter, load pull simulations
and power sweeps provided the optimal source­ and load impedances for the redesigned
power cells. The 2­finger power cell was biased deeper into AB, because of early gain
compression.
An input power splitter was designed using the open­ended balun structure in the power
combiner topology. The balun and splitter were individually designed to fit a common
equivalent impedance, after which they were combined in a complete layout. Using mixed­
mode s­parameters, key performance metrics such as insertion loss, phase­ and ampli­
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
63
==PAGE:72==
tude balance as well as isolation were simulated. Hereafter, the output power combiner
was designed in a similar fashion, however using the shorted slotline balun.
The interstage matching was designed using two baluns: 1 shorted slotline balun and 1
oponed slotline balun in a back­to­back configuration. They were individually matched to
an unbalanced 50­ohm impedance and then combined.
The two­way combined, two­stage amplifier was simulated to determine the overall perfor­
mance. It showed 8 dB gain, 18 dBm output power and 17.2% PAE at OP1dB. Comparing
with the previous work, the performance showed a reduction of gain due to the lacking
third stage. However the PAE increased by 3.3%, while the output power decreased by
0.4 dBm. OVerall, the design met the requirements for the demonstration, and showed
the low­loss properties of the slotline in passive components.
8.2
Future Work
The study presents the slotline as an optimal element for low­loss passive elements. How­
ever, finalizing the design in a tape­out ready format, where all elements are combined is
a natural extension of this work. Since padding losses are not included in results, there
is some unaccounted loss. In addition, it could be argued that the
Future works should be focused on further optimization of the
64
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Shift Key Design Thinking. Shift Key Design Thinking ­ Unlock Digital Innovation.
https://www.shiftkdt.eu/. Accessed: 2025­01­26.
[2]
Romain Hersent et al. “InP DHBT Linear Modulator Driver With a 3­Vppd PAM­
4 Output Swing at 90 GBaud: From Enhanced Transistor Modeling to Integrated
Circuit Design”. In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques 72.3
(Mar. 2024), pp. 1618–1633. DOI: 10.1109/TMTT.2023.3305150.
[3]
Pawel Drazkowski. “High­Efficiency D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMICs”.
MA thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2024.
[4]
Jeff Shih­Chieh Chien, Wonho Lee, and James F. Buckwalter. “High­Efficiency 200­
GHz Neutralized Common­Base Power Amplifiers in 250­nm InP HBT”. In: IEEE
Journal of Microwaves 3.2 (Mar. 2023), pp. 715–725. DOI: 10.1109/JMW.2023.
3249203.
[5]
Radiometer Physics. RPG AFM ­ Active Frequency Multiplier. Version 03.20. 2020.
URL: https://www.radiometer-physics.de/products/mmwave-and-terahertz-products/
frequency-multipliers/active-frequency-multipliers.
[6]
Xingcun Li et al. “A High­Efficiency 142–182­GHz SiGe BiCMOS Power Amplifier
With Broadband Slotline­Based Power Combining Technique”. In: IEEE Journal
of Solid­State Circuits 57.2 (Feb. 2022), pp. 371–382. DOI: 10.1109/JSSC.2021.
3107428.
[7]
Eythan Lam et al. “A Two­stage Two­way­combined 220­GHz Power Amplifier With
17.1% PAE in a 250­nm InP HBT Process”. In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques 72.1 (Oct. 2024), pp. 189–192. DOI: 10.1109/TMTT.2024.
3383861.
[8]
Sembiam R. Rengarajan and Yahya Rahmat­Samii. “The Field Equivalence Princi­
ple: Illustration of the Establishment of the Non­Intuitive Null Fields”. In: IEEE An­
tennas and Propagation Magazine 42.4 (Aug. 200), pp. 122–128.
[9]
Keysight Technologies, Inc. Advanced Design System 2017 Documentation. Avail­
able as a user manual for ADS 2017. © Keysight Technologies. Keysight Technolo­
gies. Santa Rosa, CA, USA, 2017. URL: http://edadocs.software.keysight.com/
display/ads2017.
[10]
Seymour B. Cohn. “Slot Line on a Dielectric Substrate”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Microwave Theory and Techniques 17.10 (1969), pp. 768–778.
[11]
Jeffrey B. Knorr and Klaus­Dieter Kuchler. “Analysis of Coupled Slots and Coplanar
Strips on Dielectric Substrate”. In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques MTT­23.7 (July 1975), pp. 541–548. DOI: 10.1109/TMTT.1975.1128577.
[12]
K. C. Gupta et al. Microstrip Lines and Slotlines. 2nd. Boston, MA: Artech House,
1996. Chap. 5.
[13]
Janis Galejs. “Excitation of Slots in a Conducting Screen above a Lossy Dielectric
Half Space”. In: IRE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation 10.6 (Nov. 1962),
pp. 436–444. DOI: 10.1109/TAP.1962.1137845.
[14]
R. Janaswamy and D.H. Schaubert. “Characteristic Impedance of a Wide Slotline
on Low­Permittivity Substrates”. In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques 34.8 (1986), pp. 900–902.
[15]
Ramesh Garg and K.C. Gupta. “Expressions for Wavelength and Impedance of a
Slotline”. In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques 24.8 (1976),
pp. 532–533.
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
65
==PAGE:74==
[16]
Rozzi T et al. “Hybrid Modes, Substrate leakage, and Losses of Slotline at Millimeter­
Wave Frequencies”. In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques
38.8 (1990), pp. 1069–1078.
[17]
David M. Pozar. Microwave Engineering. 4th. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., 2012. ISBN: 978­0­470­63155­3.
[18]
Chramiec J. “Reatances of Slotline Short and Open Circuits on Alumina Substrate”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques 37.10 (1989), pp. 1638–
1641.
[19]
Jeffrey B. Knorr. “Slot­Line Transitions”. In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory
and Techniques 22.5 (May 1974), pp. 548–554. DOI: 10.1109/TMTT.1974.1128234.
[20]
Bernd Schuppert. “Microstrip/Slotline Transitions: Modeling and Experimental In­
vestigation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques 36.8 (Aug.
1988), pp. 1212–1221. DOI: 10.1109/TMTT.1988.1131776.
[21]
A. Podcameni and M. L. Coimbra. “Slotline­Microstrip Transition on Iso/Anisotropic
Substrate: Broadband Design”. In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques 29.1 (Jan. 1981), pp. 80–82. DOI: 10.1109/TMTT.1981.1131167.
[22]
Jens Vidkjær. RF­Circuits, Concepts and Methods. Class Notes for RF­Communication
Circuits, Chapter II. Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
[23]
Jeff Shih­Chieh Chien. “High­Efficiency Sub­THz Transmitters”. PhD thesis. Univer­
sity of California Santa Barbara, Mar. 2023. URL: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/
5sx7q1wx.
[24]
David E. Bockelman and William R. Eisenstadt. “Combined Differential and Common­
Mode Analysis of Power Splitters and Combiners”. In: IEEE Transactions on Mi­
crowave Theory and Techniques 43.11 (Nov. 1995), pp. 2627–2632.
66
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:75==
A
Appendix A
Table A.1: Slotline dispersion Parameters for high permittivity substrates
High ϵr solutions (2% accuracy):
9.7 ≤ϵr ≤20
0.02 ≤W/h ≤1.0
0.01 ≤h/λ0 ≤(h/λ0)c
Case 1: 0.02 ≤W/h < 0.2
λs
λ0
= 0.923 −0.448 loge ϵr + 0.2W
h
−
(
0.29W
h + 0.047
)
loge
( h
λ0
· 103
)
Z0 = 72.62 −35.19 loge ϵr + 50(W/h −0.02)(W/h −0.1)
W/h
+ loge
(
W/h · 103)
[44.28 −19.58 loge ϵr]
−
[
0.32 loge ϵr −0.11 + W
h (1.07 loge ϵr + 1.44)
]
−
(
11.4 −6.07 loge ϵr −h
λ0
· 103
)2
Case 2: 0.2 ≤W/h ≤1.0
λs
λ0
= 0.987 −0.489 loge ϵr + W
h (0.111 −0.002ϵr)
−
(
0.121 + 0.094W
h −0.0032ϵr
)
loge
( h
λ0
· 103
)
Z0 = 113.19 −53.55 loge ϵr + W
h [114.59 −51.88 loge ϵr]
+20
(W
h −0.29
) (
1 −W
h
)
+
[
0.15 + 0.29 loge ϵr + W
h (2.07 loge ϵr −1.42 loge ϵr)
]
−
(
10.25 −51 loge ϵr −h
λ0
· 102
)2
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
67
==PAGE:76==
Table A.2: Slotline dispersion Parameters for Different Scenarios
Low permittivity solutions:
2.22 ≤εr ≤9.8
0.0015 ≤W/λ0 ≤1.0
0.006 ≤h/λ0 ≤0.06
Case 1:
0.0015 ≤W/λ0 ≤0.075
and
2.22 ≤ϵr ≤3.8
λs
λ0
= 1.045 −0.365 ln(ϵr) + 6.3(W/h)ϵr(0.945)
238.64 + 100W/h
−
(
0.148 −8.81(ϵe + 0.95)
100ϵr
)
ln(h/λ0)
Z0 = 60 + 3.69sin
((ϵr −2.22)π
2.36
)
+ 133.5 · ln(10ϵr)
√
(W/λ0)
+
−
[
0.32 loge ϵr −0.11 + W
h (1.07 loge ϵr + 1.44)
]
−
(
11.4 −6.07 loge ϵr −h
λ0
· 103
)2
68
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
==PAGE:77==
Enhanced Efficiency of D­Band InP DHBT Power Amplifier MMIC
69
==PAGE:78==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
