==PAGE:1==
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work
Environment
Network Analysis of Workplace Seating Arrangements
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
Network Analysis of Workplace Seating Arrangements
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Weronika Ewa Strączek
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This study examines the social dynamics of a hybrid work environment by analyzing office
seating arrangements in a large Danish company. As hybrid work becomes more com­
mon, it is important to understand its impact on workplace relationships. The research
examines how seating arrangements reflect and influence social relationships, and aims
to explore the development of work friendships and communities over time.
The study uses a dataset of desk bookings spanning one year. An unsupervised clus­
tering model and a null model are used to infer friendships based on seating patterns,
with validation through distance analysis and feature prediction. Social network analysis
and dynamic community detection methods are applied to understand the evolving social
patterns.
The results show that employees tend to sit near certain colleagues and form distinct
social clusters. Frequent office attendance correlates with a higher number of inferred
friendships. Friend communities do not change drastically from month to month, and
some are static throughout the year. The analysis shows that some employees act as
central bridges in the social network, allowing for broader interactions at work. In addi­
tion, friendship reciprocity is often unbalanced, with one person more likely to adjust their
seating to be near another.
These findings shed light on how hybrid work affects workplace relationships and con­
tribute to our understanding of human social behavior at work.
ii
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:4==
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis aims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Effects of hybrid and remote working . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Social network analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Inferring social ties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Gap in research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Dataset
7
3.1
Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Office characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Data cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Inferring Friendships
15
4.1
The shuffling method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Method comparison and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Properties of Friendships
25
5.1
Friendship network analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Seating entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.3
Friendship reciprocity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4
Gender of friendships
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6
Dynamic Communities
31
6.1
Dynamic community detection and matching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
Communities over 12 months . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7
Discussion
39
Acknowledgements
41
Bibliography
43
A Data Cleaning
47
B Calculating Seat Distances
51
iv
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:6==
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
In today’s society, work has become a big part of our daily lives ­ for some people it
even dictates how they identify themselves. As work starts to compete with our home
life for time and attention, relationships with colleagues become more important, with
some research suggesting they have replaced the connections we used to have with
our neighbors [1]. Studies have shown that these relationships influence job satisfaction
levels [2], increase the feelings of accomplishment, pride and purpose [3], as well as
make employees more committed to their workplace [4]. In addition, it is becoming more
common for people to keep work relationships in their personal lives even after they retire
[5], showing that they can have a long­lasting impact.
However, the COVID­19 pandemic has significantly changed the work environment in
many companies. Many jobs became remote or hybrid, meaning employees would come
into the office only a few days of the week. Interestingly, even though the pandemic has
significantly popularized the idea of hybrid work, also called flexi­work, it is not an entirely
new concept ­ research discussing its pros and cons as well as general attitudes towards
the idea can be found as far back as the 1980s [6, 7]. This move has fundamentally
changed the way colleagues interact and collaborate with each other, making them heavily
dependent on telecommunications.
As companies adapt to these changes, they are often taking the opportunity to save money
by reducing their office space, since property costs are typically the second highest ex­
pense after employee salaries [8]. This, in turn, has created the need for desk­sharing,
where workstations are shared by several people and typically booked on a daily ba­
sis [9]. While the impact of the hot­desk approach on employee satisfaction and work
relationships has been the subject of several studies, the results have been mixed, with
some studies suggesting an overall positive experience [9] and others more negative [10].
What is clear, however, is that the way we manage our day­to­day work relationships is
changing as a result of these office redesigns and the move to telecommunications.
1.1
Thesis aims
This project began as an exploration of a dataset containing desk bookings made by em­
ployees of a large Danish company over the course of a year. Inspired by the importance
of work relationships and the changes introduced by hybrid work, my aim was to explore
work friendships based on seating choices in the office, knowing that employees were
able to see which seats had been already reserved and by whom. Although I did not
have clear hypotheses set in the beginning, my main goal was to understand the evolu­
tion of work friendships and communities over time, and the influence of factors such as
gender, in­person attendance, friendship reciprocity, and seating entropy. These findings
help explain human social behavior at work and clarify the impact of hybrid work on social
patterns in the workplace.
This thesis explains the process of the performed analysis. The first sections provide an
overview of related work in the field, describe the dataset used for the analysis, explain
the data cleaning process, and characterize the office space where the analysis is based.
In Section 4, I explain the process of inferring friendships between employees, comparing
and selecting different methods. Section 6 presents the network of friends resulting from
the inferred friendships and analyzes its various properties. In the next section, I describe
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
1
==PAGE:8==
the process of detecting dynamic communities within the temporal network and exam­
ine their evolution over the months. Finally, I discuss the main findings of my analysis,
weighing the successes and areas for improvement in the process.
1.2
Ethics
Before diving into the analysis, it is important to consider the ethics of conducting research
on real­world data. Because the base dataset comes from a real company and real peo­
ple, certain precautions must be taken. First, it is important to note that the data was
ethically obtained with the company’s consent. The employees who are the subject of the
data, were informed about the data being shared. In addition, it was stored on a secure
drive before and during the analysis, and always accessed using a secure connection
through a VPN. Most importantly, since the original data contained personal information,
the dataset was anonymized ­ all names were removed and each person’s email was re­
placed with an arbitrary user ID. In addition, all office area names and locations that could
potentially identify the company were also encoded with an ID.
The personal data used in the analysis has been anonymized and the encryption key has
been deleted to ensure the process was irreversible. The anonymization allows the data
to be used for ethical research purposes as long as appropriate measures are taken to
protect the data. No research has been conducted beyond what is described in the report,
meaning that the use of the data is documented. The research was conducted with no
malicious intent and no harm was done to the people the data is about.
Taking all of this into account, there should be low security risk in proceeding with the
analysis. However, there are still ethical concerns about how this study might affect em­
ployees and workplace dynamics. Analyzing seating arrangements and social relation­
ships could make employees feel that they are being watched or expected to behave in
a certain way. If the study finds that certain seating arrangements promote teamwork
or productivity, managers may implement seating policies that limit employee autonomy.
There is also a risk that the results could highlight or reinforce social divisions in the work­
place, making some employees feel excluded. Because of these concerns, it is important
to use the results carefully and ensure that they help create a better work environment
without limiting privacy or personal choice.
2
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature review
Since my thesis focuses on exploring the seat­booking dataset in a large company, ex­
amining work relationships in a hybrid work environment, and using network analysis, I
had to review the literature from several different angles.
On the one hand, it was important to examine the work done on the transition to hybrid
and remote work modes and how it affects employees’ well­being, daily work, and re­
lationships. Understanding this can shed light on important issues and pain points that
may affect the analysis of social connections in a hybrid workplace. On the other hand,
it is important to explore the field of social network analysis and dynamic community de­
tection to gain an overview of the available methods and established frameworks that
could influence the methods of my analysis. It is also beneficial to explore the intersec­
tion of studies on hybrid workplaces using network analysis to understand the work that
has already been done and to verify that my research fills a gap in the literature and is
not redundant. Finally I look at the methods used to infer social ties from geographical
and temporal data, as these can guide my approach to inferring friendships from the seat
booking system.
2.1
Effects of hybrid and remote working
Many studies have examined the transition to remote and hybrid work models, especially
after the COVID­19 pandemic. Researchers have focused on understanding its impact
on employee well­being, organizational outcomes, communication dynamics, and sus­
tainability.
Research found that employees now have higher expectations for flexible work arrange­
ments, which are associated with improved well­being due to better work­life balance [11].
It also shows that hybrid work reduces turnover and increases job satisfaction [12]. How­
ever, managers often struggle to adapt to these new work models, which require them to
develop new skills and more trusting management strategies to maintain employee perfor­
mance and well­being. It has been stressed that managers and organizational leadership
need to provide a social environment to increase employees’ sense of connection and
purpose, as the potential for social interactions is reduced when employees work from
home [11]. Interestingly, some research found that employees were more likely to to at­
tend the office when their managers or teammates were present, also highlighting the
importance of effective leadership and in­person team coordination [13].
It has been also found that remote and hybrid work can lead to more siloed collaboration
networks, meaning that teams operate in isolation and do not transfer knowledge across
the organization [14], even though it can often lead to increased virtual communication
within teams [12]. Additionally new hires in remote environments initially have a harder
time expanding and diversifying their social networks, especially when their jobs rely less
on extensive collaboration, and take a longer time to get their networks to the same levels
as tenured employees [15]. Not only collaboration can be disadvantaged by hybrid and
remote work, but also creativity and innovation ­ videoconferencing reduces the produc­
tion of creative ideas compared to in­person interactions, though it does not affect the
ability to select which ideas to pursue [16]. These restrictions on the generation of ideas
are important because creativity is crucial to innovation.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
3
==PAGE:10==
The concept of desk­sharing also has significant implications for employees and work
culture. Most studies unanimously agree that open plan offices and hot­desking increase
noise and unwanted interruptions while decreasing personal space and privacy, which is
perceived negatively [9, 10, 17]. Some employees also report difficulties in finding team
members and securing a desk when the office is full. However, the overall attitude of
employees towards the concept has inconsistent evaluations. Some studies find that the
overall rating of the work environment increases in desk­sharing scenarios [9], while oth­
ers conclude with negative evaluations and even noting that it decreases the opportunity
for friendship in the workplace [10]. An interesting observation has also been made about
the influence of age on the perception of hot­desking and open plan offices. Older gen­
erations have a more negative view of the concept than younger ones [17], pointing to
the fact that people are becoming more flexible in the workplace. Soon enough, there
might come a generation completely accustomed to the reported reduction in privacy and
limited personal space [10].
Another important consideration is sustainability. While remote and hybrid work can re­
duce carbon emissions from decreased commuting, it can also have negative side ef­
fects that offset these benefits. Employees need to set up secondary office space in their
homes, which can lead to increased energy and resource consumption. In addition, with
less need to be in the office, employees may move further away from the office, which
could increase car ownership and the need for air travel for on­site social events for vir­
tual teams. Overall, the research concludes that it is difficult to assess the sustainability
impact of hybrid and remote working. [11]
2.2
Social network analysis
Social network analysis (SNA) is a methodological approach to studying the structure of
social relationships through network and graph theories that dates back to the 1930s.
It involves representing individuals or groups as nodes and their interactions as edges,
allowing the analysis of network properties such as density, centrality, and clusters. [18]
Since it will serve as the basis for most of my analysis, it is important to understand the
current methods of SNA, especially with the added temporal resolution that makes the
network dynamic.
2.2.1
Temporal networks
Temporal networks are a type of network in which the timing of interactions between en­
tities is explicitly considered. Unlike static networks, which aggregate interactions over
time, temporal networks keep the sequence and timing of these interactions. [19]
The timing of interactions can significantly affect system dynamics and processes such as
the spread of information or behavior patterns. Temporal networks can be categorized into
two types: contact sequences, which represent interactions between entities at specific
time points, and interval graphs, which represent both the timing and duration of these
interactions. Various methods exist for studying temporal networks without projecting
them into static networks by aggregating interactions, a common practice that can lead to
significant information loss. However, there are some exceptions to this approach. One
straightforward method to analyze temporal networks is to derive multiple static graphs by
accumulating contacts over set time intervals. While this method can still discard some
information, it is useful when the network’s topology is more important than the exact
temporal aspects. Additionally, the literature on static graphs is significantly larger, making
them easier to analyze. [19]
The method of dividing the network into a sequence of snapshots, where edges are ac­
4
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:11==
cumulated over fixed intervals, has been studied extensively. Choosing the right interval
length for analysis is crucial, as incorporating the temporal dimension adds value to the
analysis of social network dynamics, but an incorrect interval length can introduce signif­
icant bias [20]. This method is particularly useful in the context of dynamically changing
social networks in a workplace ­ for example some studies use static communication net­
work snapshots accumulated over weekly intervals to analyze socialization in a company
following employee departures [21].
2.2.2
Dynamic Community Detection
A community, in the context of network analysis, is a subgraph of a network that contains
nodes that are more connected to each other than to the rest of the network [22]. Since the
concept was introduced in 2002 [23], many algorithms have been developed to address
the problem of detecting community structures in networks. One such algorithm, designed
to deal with complex networks, is Infomap [24]. Infomap finds communities in networks by
simulating random walks and tracking how information flows through the network. It uses
a coding system to describe these walks in a compressed form, and aims to minimize the
length of this description in order to identify groups of closely connected nodes [25].
However, typical community detection methods designed for static networks are not as
useful in temporal networks, where the community structure can change over time. To
address this issue, new frameworks and methods have been developed to adapt static
community detection to temporal networks. Researchers identify seven operations on
communities that can occur over time: growth, contraction, merging, splitting, birth, death,
and resurgence [22]. The role of these dynamic community detection algorithms is to
discover which operations happen to which communities over time.
There are many approaches to classifying the different methods of dynamic community
detection, for instance Cazabet, Rossetti, and Amblard (2017) [22] define:
Instant Optimal This approach is based on the community structure identified for a net­
work at a given time. For each static network snapshot, a community is detected
using traditional detection algorithms and then matched to the communities from a
previous snapshot.
Temporal Trade­off This method balances the community structure at a given time with
the history of communities found in previous time steps. It uses the network from the
current snapshot and the communities from the previous snapshot to detect current
communities.
Cross­time This approach considers the entire temporal evolution of the network. It per­
forms a singular community detection that takes into account the dynamic nature of
the network and provides the decomposition for all snapshots.
The Instant Optimal approach is the simplest and allows reuse of traditional commu­
nity detection techniques, although it has some disadvantages, such as the instability of
static community detection algorithms, which can produce different results with minimal
changes in the network. [22]
One of the instant optimal methods is proposed by Greene, Doyle, and Cunningham
(2010) [26]. Their approach allows the use of any preferred static community detection
algorithms and presents an algorithm for effectively matching communities between each
snapshot. The algorithm uses a similarity function ­ the Jaccard coefficient ­ to compare
the likeness of two sets of nodes belonging to each community. Based on this, it decides
whether the community from the current time step matches any community from the pre­
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
5
==PAGE:12==
vious time step. The Jaccard coefficient is calculated by dividing the number of nodes
common to both sets by the number of nodes in either set.
2.2.3
Social network analysis in workplace
Network analysis is a useful tool for understanding relationships and employee interac­
tions in the workplace. Many studies have used this field to gain insight into various orga­
nizational dynamics. For example, Gamba et al. (2024) highlight the impact of employee
turnover on socialization networks, emphasizing the need for strong communication links
to mitigate disruptions [21]. Similarly, Reagans and Zuckerman (2001) show that net­
work density and heterogeneity can enhance team productivity by fostering stronger ties
and integrating diverse perspectives [27]. In addition, Cross, Borgatti, and Parker (2002)
use network analysis to map informal networks and identify key players and potential
bottlenecks to improve collaboration [28]. Grosser, Lopez­Kidwell, and Labianca (2010)
examine the influence of different types of ties on gossiping behavior, providing valuable
insights into the social dynamics within organizations [29]. Finally, Podolny and Baron
(1997) examine how network structure and content affect career mobility, showing that
larger, sparser networks can provide better access to diverse information and resources
[30].
2.3
Inferring social ties
Inferring social ties from communication or proximity data is a complicated task.
De
Choudhury et al. (2010) highlight this challenge, noting that real­world social ties are
not directly observable and must be inferred from events such as physical interactions or
communication records [31]. They stress the importance of selecting suitable techniques,
as the network structure can differ significantly based on the chosen approach. While their
method of inferring social ties by finding an optimal threshold for an edge, such as a min­
imum number of interactions, is not relevant to my project, the issues they discuss very
much are.
Crandall et al. (2010) infer social ties using co­occurrence data from the same geographic
locations at similar times [32]. They develop a model to estimate the likelihood that two
individuals know each other based on their repeated geographic coincidences, finding
that even a few of them can indicate a high probability of a social tie. However, their
model requires ground truth data ­ information on who is actually friends with whom ­ to
calculate the necessary parameters. Similarly, Cranshaw et al. (2010) create a model
to predict friendships using users’ location data and Facebook friends lists [33]. They
calculate features for each user pair that describe their mobility patterns and then train
classifiers to predict friendships based on these features. Although they achieve good
results, their model also requires ground truth data for training.
2.4
Gap in research
Significant research has been done on the effects of remote and hybrid work models,
as well as the importance of social ties at work and the influence of concepts like desk­
sharing on work relationships. However, there is still a lack of understanding about how
social connections and communities change over time in these environments. The study
by Charpignon et al. (2023) comes closest in terms of topic, as it examined the attendance
patterns of employees in a hybrid work office [13], it did not explore the social relationships
between them and how they evolve. My study of social ties, what influences them and
how they evolve over time will try to fill that gap.
6
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:13==
3
Dataset
The dataset used in my analysis represents office seat bookings made by employees of
a large Danish company. Initially, it spanned bookings from April 14, 2021, to July 6,
2022. However, to focus on full­month data and simplify the analysis, I decided to limit
the analysis to a full year period, starting from the first full month of data ­ from May 1,
2021, to April 30, 2022. This section will describe the dataset in detail and explore some
basic statistics of the booking data, as well as explain the pre­processing and cleaning of
the data that was done before the analysis.
3.1
Description
The dataset contains 18 data fields that provide information about the user, the seat
booked, and the booking details, as shown in Table 3.1. The user information includes
their identifier and gender, while the booking information covers the identifier, area, sta­
tus, and various temporal fields related to the creation and target date of the booking. The
booking status field was ultimately ignored because many users never updated their book­
ing status, for example, checking in but never checking out. Seat information consists of
its unique name, which is also used as an identifier and includes the area code and seat
number, and two sets of coordinates. Fields seat.xcoord and seat.ycoord are assumed to
be the current seat coordinates in the system, while seat.bad_x­ and seat.bad_ycoord are
the coordinates at the time of booking, which I will use later to calculate distances between
seats. The naming of specific fields is explained later in the Data Cleaning section.
The dataset includes 23,511 bookings made over the course of a year. According to
Figure 3.1a, March 2022 saw the highest number of bookings, exceeding 4,000, while
Table 3.1: Fields from the dataset used in the analysis.
Field Name
Description
user.id
Unique numerical identifier of the user making the booking.
user.is_female
Gender of the user. 1 if female, 0 if male, 99 if undetermined
booking.id
Identifier of the booking.
booking.created_at
Date and time when the booking was created.
booking.date
Date for which the booking was made.
booking.year
Year for which the booking was made.
booking.quarter
Quarter for which the booking was made.
booking.month
Month name for which the booking was made.
booking.day
Day of the month for which the booking was made.
booking.day_in_week
Day of the week for which the booking was made.
booking.weekday
Weekday name for which the booking was made.
booking.area
Office area for which the booking was made.
booking.status
Status of the booking: Reserved, Checked­in or CheckedOut.
seat.id
Unique seat name for which the booking was made.
seat.(x/y)coord
Last visible X and Y seat coordinates in the system. Indicate
the position of the seat on the area picture, measured in pixels.
seat.bad_(x/y)coord
X and Y seat coordinates at the time of booking. Indicate
the position of the seat on the area picture, measured in pixels.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
7
==PAGE:14==
(a) Total number of bookings per month
(b) Total number of bookings per weekday
(c) Sum of number of bookings per weekday calculated for every month
Figure 3.1: Bookings distributed over different time frames. Panel (a) displays the pat­
terns for each month of the year from May to April, while panel (b) shows the patterns
aggregated over weekdays. Panel (c) joins both time resolutions together, displaying the
flow of booking numbers for different weekdays throughout the months. Vacation and hol­
iday season seem to greatly impact the booking numbers, as July and December show
significant dips. Middle of the week seem to be favored for coming into the office, with
Thursdays in March 2022 being the most popular weekday overall.
May, July, and December 2021 were the least popular months. The summer vacation
period in July and the holiday season in December and January significantly influenced
these trends. Additionally, a surge in COVID­19 cases in Denmark in January, followed
by the lifting of restrictions on February 1st, possibly explains the low office attendance in
January and the subsequent spike in February.
Employees most often preferred to come into the office during the middle of the week,
Tuesday through Thursday, as shown in Figure 3.1b. This mid­week preference suggests
that these days may be considered the most productive or convenient for office work, with
the days around the weekend being slower. Although Tuesdays were the most popular
day for office attendance overall, when looking at individual months, Thursdays were the
most popular weekday in March 2022, as shown in Figure 3.1c. While this difference
again confirms that employees tend to prefer coming into the office in the middle of the
week, it also suggests that employee attendance patterns are flexible and may change
depending on the season, workload, meetings, or personal schedules.
The patterns of office attendance are quite interesting, as shown in Figure 3.2. On av­
erage, there are just over 92 people in the office, assuming that everyone present has
8
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.2: Office attendance. While attendance fluctuates smoothly on most days, there
are some unusual spikes in office attendance, such as in late October 2021.
reserved a seat. It mostly reflects the weekly patterns from Figure 3.1c, with attendance
changing fairly smoothly from day to day, with weekly fluctuations, indicating a consistent
pattern of office use. However, there are some unusual spikes on certain days, such as
late October 2021, when attendance suddenly jumps to 217, the second highest of the
year. This spike could be the result of a special event or meeting that required more
employees to be present. The maximum attendance was recorded on March 3, 2022, a
Thursday, which could explain the previously mentioned popularity of Thursdays in March.
Interestingly, the most common number of people in the office is 64, which is slightly be­
low average, meaning that while the average attendance is 92, the office is often less
crowded. The graph also shows three distinct phases of attendance: a smaller curve from
May to August, a middle curve from August to December, and the biggest curve from Jan­
uary onward, reflecting varying levels of office activity throughout the year. These phases
also correspond almost directly to the office availability shown in Figure 3.4, where ar­
eas 02/12/22/32 are mainly available for booking until August, and are then replaced by
areas 04/14/24/34 from August to January. The last phase, starting in January, has the
largest amount of available office space, which is reflected in the largest attendance. As
mentioned before, we can also see a clear influence of COVID­19 in the period between
(a) Bookings per employee
(b) Bookings per seat
Figure 3.3: Distribution of bookings for employees and seats. A significant number of
employees rarely come to the office, with over 200 employees making less than 10 book­
ings throughout the year, and the most active users coming to the office over 175 times,
which is still only about 70% of all working days. The distribution of seat bookings shows
that while a significant number of seats were booked less than 10 times, some seats are
clearly more popular in the office, being booked over 100 times.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.4: Booking widows for the office areas. Areas were unavailable for booking in
different months dues to re­design process. Areas 02/12/22/32 were available for booking
almost interchangeably with areas 04/14/24/34.
the last week of January and the beginning of February, as the office attendance almost
doubles between these weeks. Attendance in April is also uneven, as Denmark has a
number of public holidays around Easter.
Of the 814 unique employees who booked seats, 562 were included in the friendship
analysis because the rest made fewer than 10 bookings. This fraction of infrequent visitors
also covers the largest bar in the employee booking distribution in Figure 3.3a, with the
rest of the distribution decreasing steadily. The distribution is heavy tailed, with the most
active office visitors making more than 150 seat bookings over the course of the year.
Those employees and their friendship patterns will be explored in later sections. In total,
the most active person was in the office 184 days ­ about 73 percent of all 252 business
days between May 1, 2021 and April 30, 2022 (excluding weekends and holidays). Given
this, and the fact that users made an average of just under 29 bookings per year, the data
suggests a general preference for remote work, with many employees rarely coming into
the office.
The distribution of bookings per seat in Figure 3.3b shows a more consistent pattern, with
several interesting peaks. Similar to the distribution of user bookings, the largest peak in
this distribution represents seats that have been booked relatively infrequently ­ less than
10 times. If we ignore these rare seat bookings, the distribution is almost bell­shaped,
with two notable peaks, one representing seats booked about 30 times, and the other
representing seats booked about 70 times, mainly in the 03 and 12 areas. This unusual
spike of more than 30 seats booked roughly 70 times indicates a higher popularity of
certain seats. One in particular, 13_33, was booked 122 times and occupied almost 50
percent of the year, while the average user occupied just over 11 different seats throughout
the year.
3.2
Office characteristics
The office is made up of 13 areas spread over several floors. In this section, I will describe
the structure of the different areas and the booking patterns over the one­year period, as
these influence how different communities of friends change over time depending on the
area in which they reside.
Most of the areas in the office are open and L­shaped, with desks arranged in groups
of 6 or 4. Figure 3.5 shows examples of different floor plans that are representative of
most areas. All seats that have been booked at least once are marked with colored dots:
10
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:17==
purple dots correspond to the most popular seats, those that have been booked the most
times, blue dots represent the least popular seats, and red dots represent the remaining
seats.
Interestingly, the most popular seats in all areas shown are corner seats, where the
worker’s back is to the wall. The least popular seats tend to be near doors or aisles,
suggesting that employees generally feel more productive when they are not disturbed by
people walking by. In most cases, the areas are quite spacious, with desks clustered in
different sections. The exception is area 24 in Figure 3.5c, which is small and enclosed,
with only three groups of desks. There are two such areas in the office, the second of
which is slightly larger but still tightly packed.
Area 13 stands out with the highest number of reservations, just under 3,500, and has a
layout similar to Figure 3.5a. One reason for its popularity may be that unlike the other
areas, which had about a 4­month break for remodeling or were unavailable at the begin­
ning or end of the period, as seen in Figure 3.4, area 13 had only a 3­month break and is
(a) Floor plan of area 02
(b) Floor plan of area 14
(c) Floor plan of area 24
(d) Floor plan of area 33
Figure 3.5: Floor plans of example areas. The areas vary in layout and size ­ some areas
consist of only 18 seats arranged in 3 groups, while others have over 55 seats spread
across an L­shaped space. The most popular seats in each area are marked with purple
dots, while the least popular seats are marked with blue dots.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
11
==PAGE:18==
also quite large.
Area 24, on the other hand, is the area with the lowest number of bookings as it is the
smallest and was only available for 6 of the 12 months. Areas 04/14/24/34 were all only
available for about half of the year, as they were excluded from the booking system from
the beginning of 2022 until at least the end of the analysis period. It is worth noting that
the period in which they were available for booking was also the period in which many
other areas were being rebuilt, meaning that they may have been more popular during
this period due to the limited options. Areas 01 and 22 were the next least booked areas,
probably because area 01 was not available for reservation after October 2021 and area
22 is the second smallest.
3.3
Data cleaning
The initial dataset from the company’s seat reservation system was quite messy, for ex­
ample, some seats were marked as ”test seats” and only booked once, there were rows
in the dataset that did not reflect a seat booking because they had empty seat or area
data, or the information about the user making the booking was not consistent ­ some
usernames matched multiple emails, and some emails matched multiple usernames. In
addition, I did not receive the dataset directly from the company ­ it had already been
organized and pre­processed by other researchers, so my understanding of the data was
based on their analysis as well as examining the values and field names. Since neither I
nor the researchers had an explanation for any of the fields in the dataset, there may be
potential errors in how different information is interpreted. In this section, I will mention
the main steps taken to clean the dataset, and the exact, detailed process of exploring the
meaning of the different fields as well as the cleaning done is described in Appendix A,
as it was a very manual and lengthy procedure.
The researchers contributed to the process of organizing the data. As mentioned above,
they mainly focused on understanding what different fields in the dataset meant, but they
also, for example, removed the booking rows that did not belong to a seat, or imposed a
threshold eliminating seats booked less than 3 times, to ensure that none of the unusual
or test seats could influence the results.
My data cleaning process started with anonymizing the personal user data by removing
names and encoding emails as numeric identifiers ranging from 100 to 999. The encoding
key file was then deleted to ensure that the process was irreversible. Area names and seat
IDs, which originally contained the letters of the office building, were also encoded with
numeric identifiers in order to ensure the company’s anonymity. I removed unnecessary
fields, such as an ’at office’ flag that had the same value for all rows. In addition, I changed
the field names for clarity. For example, the name ”Column1.Seat.XCoord” has been
changed to ”seat.xcoord”.
I also found 20 duplicate bookings made by the same user for the same seat on the same
day. These were most likely system errors, as most of the duplicates were registered
within a minute of each other. These duplicates were deleted, leaving the earliest reser­
vation in place. Similarly, five bookings made for a Sunday were also deleted, as they did
not reflect normal office usage. Most of the data was already sorted by booking creation
date, but there were some outliers, so I re­sorted all the rows to make sure the data was
in a consistent order. To eliminate noise that could bias the results, I only included users
with more than 10 bookings in the friendship analysis.
A major challenge in preprocessing the data was understanding the seat coordinates.
Each seat had two sets of coordinates with initially cryptic names in the original dataset:
12
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:19==
Column1.XCoord, Column1.YCoord, Column1.Seat.XCoord, and Column1.Seat.YCoord.
After investigation, which is also described in the Appendix A, it was found that these
coordinates correspond to pixel locations on the area floor plan displayed in the reserva­
tion system. Initially, the Column1.Seat coordinates were assumed to be correct, while
the purpose of the other set was unknown. As a result, I changed the field names to
seat.xcoord and seat.ycoord, and seat.bad_xcoord and seat.bad_ycoord, respectively.
However, my further analysis revealed that the ”bad” coordinates likely represented the
coordinates at the time of booking, while the others were linked to the seat database entry
and reflected the current seat coordinates as seats were moved over time. Even though
the ”bad” name was kept, these were the coordinates later used in the analysis.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
13
==PAGE:20==
14
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:21==
4
Inferring Friendships
With the data prepared for analysis, the first challenge was to infer relationships between
employees, which I refer to in this thesis as friendships. Since there was no ground truth
about who was actually friends with whom, many methods described in the literature, such
as those by Crandall et al. (2010) [32] and Cranshaw et al. (2010) [33], could not be used
directly, but their ideas and concepts inspired some of my methods. Another problem
was that friendships were inferred primarily from attendance data, which provided more
information about employees who visited the office more often, introducing some bias.
Despite my efforts to address these issues and validate my methods, as described later,
they are not perfect and may contain inaccuracies.
4.1
The shuffling method
The first approach is in part inspired by the reference models for temporal networks de­
scribed by Holme and Saramäki (2012) [19]. They discuss several network null models,
such as Randomized Edges or Randomly Permuted Times, in which event sequences are
randomized or rearranged to eliminate any time­based patterns and relationships. This
method can be used to determine whether an observed pattern could have happened by
chance, or whether it is likely to be significant.
Similarly, I attempted to create a null model for each possible pair of employees to inves­
tigate if their shared office attendance was coincidental or the result of a positive relation­
ship or close work ties. For each pair, I randomly shuffled the office attendance days of
both employees 1,000 times and checked how many days overlapped each time. The
intersection value for each shuffle could then be compared to the actual number of com­
mon days. To identify significant pairs that might share a friendship, I counted the number
of repetitions where the inferred number of common days was greater than the actual
number, and then divided this by the total number of replicates (1,000). This produced a
value between 0.0 and 1.0 representing the significance of office co­occurrence, similar to
a statistical p­value. I kept only those pairs with a p­value less than 0.01, which indicates
significance.
(a) Distribution for employees 623 & 110
(b) Distribution for employees 220 & 942
Figure 4.1: Random Co­Occurrences Distribution produced by the shuffling method. In
panel (a), there is an example of an insignificant pair, since the actual number of co­
occurrences falls close to the distribution peak, and therefore its P­value is higher than
0.01. In panel (b), on the other hand, there is an example of a significant pair, where the
P­value is less than 0.01.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.1 shows two examples of the distributions described. Figure 4.1a shows a non­
significant pair with the actual number of common days close to the peak of the distribution
and a high p­value above 0.7. Figure 4.1b shows a significant pair, where the actual
number of common days is far beyond the peak of the distribution, with a p­value of 0.006,
which also means that only 6 out of 1,000 times the random number of common days was
higher than the actual one.
This selection process identified 24,601 significant pairs out of a total of 157,641 pair
combinations, or just over 15.5%. However, the method still did not address the problem
that if one employee in the pair was in the office much more frequently than the other, then
almost all of the days that the other employee was present would be common days, which
could still be coincidental. To account for this, I adjusted the null model and computed a
Jaccard index for each pair, which generally measures the similarity of sets. As mentioned
in the literature review, the Jaccard index, also known as the Jaccard coefficient, was
used by Greene, Doyle, and Cunningham (2010) in their dynamic community matching
algorithm [26]. It is calculated by dividing the number of elements common to both sets
by the number of elements in either set. If we define A1 as the set of dates one employee
comes into the office and A2 as the set of dates the other employee is present, the Jaccard
index would be calculated as:
J(A1, A2) = |A1 ∩A2|
|A1 ∪A2|
(4.1)
If the Jaccard index value is very low, it indicates that the number of common days is
relatively small compared to the total number of possible days one of the employees
could come into the office. This could mean that either the employees rarely come to the
office together, or the presence of one employee overpowers the other. Filtering out both
cases makes sense in my model, so I added an additional restriction that the Jaccard
index for the pair should be greater than 0.1. This filtered out an additional 312 pairs from
the previously selected significant pairs.
Finally, it is important to keep in mind that the data used for analysis comes from a large
company with multiple floors and areas. Therefore, the fact that two employees come into
the office at the same time does not necessarily mean that they have interacted or even
know each other. To account for this, I added a third constraint: of all the times the two
employees came into the office together, at least 75 percent of those times must be in the
Figure 4.2: Retention of pairs based on the percentage of times two employees come
into the same area together. The retention is almost linear, meaning there is no clear
threshold that should be chosen.
16
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:23==
same area. To determine the appropriate threshold for this constraint, I first plotted the
retention of pairs based on the percentage of times two employees come into the same
area together, as seen in Figure 4.2, hoping to see a significant drop in pair retention at
a certain threshold. However, pair retention showed an almost linear pattern, so the 75%
threshold was chosen based on the desirable number of pairs retained after applying this
threshold. This threshold also seemed logical, since if a pair came to the same area three
quarters of the time, it could be assumed that their co­occurrences were significant and
that they probably knew each other.
After applying these restrictions, there were 3,642 significant pairs that could be classi­
fied as friends by the method. This represents 2.32% of all possible pair combinations,
indicating that the method found 2.32% of employee pairs to be friends.
4.2
Clustering
After constructing the null model, I also wanted to infer friendship using a different method
to compare the two and pick the better performing one. The second method was inspired
by Cranshaw et al. (2010), who calculated a set of features for each pair and trained a
model to classify pairs as friends or not [33]. Since I did not have ground truth data to train
a classifier on, I could not apply their method directly. Instead, I used an unsupervised
machine learning technique, clustering, to divide the pairs into two clusters representing
friends and non­friends.
The first step was to select and calculate a set of features to use. I ended up using 12
features to infer friendships with clustering, all of which are described in Table 4.1. Initially,
I tried out many more features related to co­occurrence locations of employees based on
the Cranshaw paper, such as entropy, frequency, or user count values. However, these
features did not translate well to my dataset, where employees appeared in only one
location (office area) per day, not multiple, and the clustering done using them did not
produce reliable results. The location­specific features were replaced by five attendance
features describing the busyness of the area, and instead of TFIDF values, which were
also used by Cranshaw, a Jaccard Index feature was computed to measure the similarity
of employee attendance. Unlike the previous method, this Jaccard value also took into
account the different areas where people sat, not just the days they were in the office.
All of these selected features generally describe the circumstances in which the pair of
employees were co­located, such as whether they usually meet in one or more areas,
whether there are many other people around them, and whether they meet on regular
weekdays or throughout the week. These characteristics hopefully describe the nature of
the co­locations well enough to classify them into the correct groups.
The 12 features were then standardized, as they were very different in scale, and then
clustered. The standardization was done using the StandardScaler class from the Python
Scikit­learn package [34], which takes a group of values, calculates their mean and stan­
dard deviation, and then scales each value by removing the calculated mean and dividing
the result by the standard deviation. I first tried several unsupervised clustering algo­
rithms, but in the end two were considered: K­means [35] and BIRCH (Balanced Iterative
Reducing and Clustering using Hierarchies) [36]. Both algorithms were chosen because
they perform well on large datasets and are well documented. K­Means works by parti­
tioning the data into k clusters by minimizing the variance within each cluster, while BIRCH
incrementally builds a hierarchical tree structure to cluster large datasets efficiently. K­
means was primarily used as a benchmark because it is a relatively simple and widely
used algorithm. For both algorithms, a Python Scikit­learn package implementation was
used. The only parameter explicitly set while running the algorithms was the desired num­
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
17
==PAGE:24==
Table 4.1: Features used for the clustering methods.
Feature Name
Description
NumColoc
The number of co­location observations of the two users.
NumLocations
The number of distinct areas where the users were co­located.
NumWeekdays
The number of distinct weekdays when the users were co­
located.
NumMutualNeighbors
The number of distinct people who have been co­located with
both users.
NeighborhoodOverlap
The number of people who have been co­located with both
users divided by the number of people who have been co­
located with either user.
LocationOverlap
The total number of distinct places visited by both users divided
by the total number of places visited by either users.
Jaccard
Similarity measure, described in Section 4.1
AvgAttendance
The average of number of users present in the area each time
users were co­located.
MedAttendance
The median of number of users present in the area each time
users were co­located.
VarAttendance
The variance of number of users present in the area each time
users were co­located.
MinAttendance
The minimum number of users present in the area found from
all the times users were co­located.
MaxAttendance
The maximum number of users present in the area found from
all the times users were co­located.
ber of clusters, which was 2. As a result, the K­means algorithm divided the employees
into two clusters, one of size 27,506 and the other 14,563. The BIRCH algorithm pro­
duced one cluster of size 39,588 and the other 2,481, which is much closer in proportion
to the shuffling method.
To analyze the clustering algorithms, I used the SHAP package (SHapley Additive exPla­
nations) [37]. It relies on the concept of Shapley values from game theory, and measures
how important each feature is to the final prediction of the model. Specifically, a Kernel­
Explainer was used, which is a model­agnostic method for estimating SHAP values. The
plot in Figure 4.3a summarizes the importance of the features for K­means clustering.
The left side of the plot shows the impact of the value of each feature on the output, while
the right side shows the impact of the feature itself. The three most important features
for the K­means algorithm were NeighborhoodOverlap, VarAttendance, and NumMutual­
Neighbors. High values of these features pushed the prediction toward the friend label,
suggesting that friend pairs have large, diverse social circles at work. However, these
may not be typical indicators of friendship.
The BIRCH SHAP analysis in Figure 4.3b is more straightforward. A high number of co­
locations for a pair could normally be a strong indicator of friendship, which is reflected
in the plot with NumColoc being the second most important feature. The number of loca­
tions is the most important characteristic, with high numbers pushing the model to predict
the friend label. This suggests that the more distinct locations the pair is observed in to­
gether, the less likely their co­location is a coincidence. The third most important feature
is NumMutualNeighbors, similar to the K­means case. In general, the first two features
18
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:25==
(a) SHAP values for K­Means clustering
(b) SHAP values for BIRCH clustering
Figure 4.3: SHAP values for the clustering methods, which indicate the influence and im­
portance of the features on the prediction result. For the K­Means algorithm, the most
important features were NeighborhoodOverlap, VarAttendance and NumMutualNeigh­
bors, while for the BIRCH algorithm they were NumLocations, NumColoc and NumMutu­
alNeighbors.
had much more influence than the others. Interestingly, all the attendance features were
in the last five places, suggesting that they are not that important.
After comparing the feature importance and the number of pairs in the two clusters classi­
fied by each algorithm, I decided to use the results of BIRCH clustering. K­means cluster­
ing assigned too many friend labels, and in general it does not handle well cases where
the features of the classes are very different and unbalanced in size.
4.3
Method comparison and validation
This left me with two methods: the shuffling method, which predicted 3,642 pairs of
friends, and the clustering method, which predicted 2,481 pairs of friends. Interestingly,
only 514 pairs matched between the two methods, while the rest were unique to each.
This suggests that the two methods produced quite different results and could be easily
compared.
In Figure 4.4, we can see the visualization of all the pairs that had at least one co­
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
19
==PAGE:26==
(a) K­Means predictions
(b) The shuffling method pre­
dictions
(c) BIRCH predictions
Figure 4.4: Projection of features in 2D space using UMAP, with colors indicating label
predictions. The K­Means algorithm classified the most observations as friends, while
BIRCH was much more conservative. The shuffling method is shown here for reference,
as it did not base its predictions on the features, but all three methods classified friends
from similar regions.
occurrence in the same area, with the colors indicating whether the pair was marked
as friends or not. The visualization is based on the features selected for the clustering
methods using UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Re­
duction) [38]. UMAP is an algorithm that reduces the dimensionality of the data, similar
to PCA, but handles complex data better and allows for a clearer visualization, which is
why it was used in this case.
Interestingly, the shuffling method seems to be somewhere between BIRCH clustering
and K­means in terms of which data points it classified as friends. K­means classified most
of the points in the southwest cluster group and over half of the points in the large middle
cluster as friends. In contrast, BIRCH was much more conservative, selecting a portion
of the southwest cluster and a small part of the middle cluster. The shuffling method
considered points from the same clusters as K­means, with some additional points in the
cluster right of the middle, but in much more conservative numbers, bringing it slightly
closer to BIRCH.
What is fascinating is that the shuffling method method selected the friend pairs without
using the features for clustering, but still came up with very comparable results. This
shows that all methods seem to identify a similar pattern in the data.
4.3.1
Distance validation
To compare and validate the two methods, I calculated the distances between the seats
where people were sitting in the office. I did this for all possible employee pairs, for the
times when both members of the pair were present in an area. The assumption was
that if employees were friends or worked closely together, they would choose to sit close
together. While this is not a perfect validation method, as external factors can influence
seating choices, I hoped that overall patterns would emerge to confirm the validity of one
or both methods.
The goal was to calculate Euclidean distances based on the seat coordinates in each
booking, meaning the straight­line distance. However, there were two challenges: first,
the coordinates for each area depended on the floor plan image attached to the booking
20
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:27==
(a) Average distance distribution
(b) Median distance distribution
Figure 4.5: Distance distribution comparison: The shuffling method vs. Clustering. While
the non­friend mean and median distributions look similar for both methods, the BIRCH
clustering friend distribution values drop more steadily as the distances increase, indicat­
ing a better separation into friends and non­friends.
system, which had different dimensions for each area. This made it impossible to initially
compare distances between areas because of the different scales. In addition, the areas
had been redesigned throughout the year, so the floor plan image and scale could change
even within one area. To address these issues, I identified date thresholds after which the
floor plan clearly changed, and calculated distances for each period separately. Assuming
that the types of desks used in the office had comparable dimensions, I selected a pair
of adjacent seats for each period and area and treated that distance as the base unit
value. All other distances within that area and period were divided by this value, resulting
in a distance dictionary where the base value 1 represented the distance between two
adjacent desks in each area and period, allowing all seat distances to be compared. The
detailed process of finding the thresholds and calculating the distances can be found in
Appendix B.
When comparing the average and median distances in Figure 4.5, the two methods ap­
pear quite similar. The distribution of distances for non­friends is almost identical for both
methods, which makes sense since the vast majority of non­friends were the same in
both classifications. The average distance distribution for friends in Figure 4.5a showed a
similar shape for both methods, peaking at distances between 2 and 3 and then declining.
Comparing the friend distribution to the non­friend distribution, the non­friend distribution
peaked further, in the 5­6 distance bar, indicating that friends sat closer together on aver­
age in both methods. However, the shuffling method distribution remained high until the
7­8 bar before decreasing, while the clustering distribution began to fall earlier, suggesting
that more pairs classified as friends in the shuffling method sat farther apart (7­10 desks
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
21
==PAGE:28==
(a) Attendance and distance patterns for random friends.
(b) Attendance and distance patterns for random non­friends
Figure 4.6: Comparison of distance patterns for randomly selected friends and non­friends. A value of ­1
(Only One Present) means that only one of the users was present that day, and a value of ­2 (Diff Areas)
means that they were sitting in different areas of the office. In this example, friends have a significantly
lower average distance for each pair, while the average distance for non­friends is often more than 5 units,
symbolizing the distance of 5 desks.
22
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:29==
away) than in the clustering model. Similarly, the median distance distribution in Fig­
ure 4.5b showed a comparable pattern for both methods until the 6­7 bar, after which the
shuffling method distribution rose slightly while the clustering distribution fell continuously,
further confirming the better results of the clustering method.
I also examined the distance patterns for a set of randomly selected employees from
the clustering method. Figure 4.6a shows the attendance and distance patterns for four
randomly selected friends, while Figure 4.6b shows the same for four randomly selected
pairs of non­friends, with the condition that the employees had at least 10 co­occurrences.
Comparing the two figures, it is clear that non­friends tend to have much higher distances
than friends. For friends, the average distance line usually does not exceed 5, while for
non­friends it often does, even reaching 10 in the latter case. However, it is worth noting
that this is not true in all cases. There are friends with an average distance close to 10
and non­friends with an average distance close to 2.
All in all, when we look at the distance distribution, we can say that it validates the inferred
friendships. It does not necessarily validate them at the individual friendship level, as it is
normal for a pair of friends to be further apart from each other from time to time. Based
on the distance comparison of the two methods, I decided to proceed with the friends
inferred by the BIRCH clustering method. Nevertheless, this validation showed that both
methods gave reasonably valid results.
4.3.2
Feature prediction
As an alternative way to validate the choice of clustering for inferring friendships and to
validate the features used for clustering, I decided to train a machine learning model on
the features from the first 80% of the booking data. This data spanned from May 1, 2021
to March 14, 2022. The goal was to predict the number of co­occurrences for pairs in
the remaining 20% of the booking data, that is, after March 14, 2022, based on the other
features.
For this task, I chose the Random Forest Regressor [39] from the Python Scikit­learn
package [34]. A Random Forest Regressor uses many decision trees to predict output
values, making it less likely to overfit and less sensitive to noise in the data. It works by
training each tree on a random subset of the data and features. I chose this algorithm
Figure 4.7: Prediction of the number of co­occurrences based on other features. The
model was trained on the first 80% of the data points and tested on the last 20%. While
the predictions for the lower values are accurate, the precision decreases from value 13
due to the lack of sufficient data in the training set.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
23
==PAGE:30==
because it is well known, well documented, and can handle many input features. I set the
number of trees in the forest to 1,000, which balanced computational power, time, and
quality of results.
The prediction results are shown in Figure 4.7. The x­axis represents the actual Num­
Coloc values, and the y­axis represents the predicted values. A gray dashed line marks
the perfect prediction for each value. As can be seen, the lower values are predicted quite
well, with the median (marked by the white line on the box plot) falling close to the optimal
prediction point. Predictions become less accurate for values above 11, especially be­
tween 13 to 17 and 19 to 21. This may be due to the training data set, where over 93% of
the data represent entries with NumColoc values between 1 and 12, while only about 5%
represent values between 13 and 22. Given this, I can confidently say that the predictions
are quite accurate when there is enough training data.
Although the number of co­occurrences does not directly indicate a friendship relationship,
it does provide confidence in the features used for clustering.
24
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:31==
5
Properties of Friendships
After inferring friendships from the dataset, I identified 2,481 friend pairs, including 404
unique employees who have at least one friendship. This is out of the 562 employees
considered for analysis, that is, those who booked within the selected year period and
had more than 10 bookings. On average, an employee has approximately 12 friends, with
the maximum number of friends for a single employee being 58. To better understand the
structure and dynamics of these friendships, I will analyze the network created by these
friends and examine various characteristics of the friendships in this section.
5.1
Friendship network analysis
These employees and their friendships can be visualized as a network, where each node
represents an employee and the edges between them represent a friendship, as shown
in Figure 5.1b. The size of each node in the graph depends on its degree, so the more
friendships an employee has, the larger their node will be. The color of the node repre­
sents a property called seating entropy, which will be discussed in a later section.
When we look at the friendship network, we see that employees cluster into smaller,
denser groups. In addition, the network is divided into six separate components ­ there
are three pairs of employees completely disconnected from others on the right side of
the plot and a group of three on the top left. The fifth group is much larger, consisting
of 14 nodes at the top of the plot, including nodes such as 179, 557, and 910. The last
main component consists of the rest of the workers, who are all connected through their
friends. This means that a path can always be found between any pair of employees in
the main component. The average shortest path length of just over four indicates that, on
average, it takes about four steps to travel between any two employees in the component,
suggesting that information can spread relatively quickly through friends.
(a) Employee attendance and degree dynamics
(b) The friend network
Figure 5.1: Representation of the friend network and its dynamics. In both plots, the color
symbolizes the seating entropy. In panel (a), the relationship between employee degree
and attendance is plotted ­ the more times a person comes to the office, the more friends
they have. Panel (b) shows the network of friends, with some nodes clearly grouped into
clusters.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.2: The friend network with high­
lighted top three nodes from each of the
centrality measures.
By analyzing the centrality measures of the net­
work ­ degree centrality, betweenness central­
ity, and closeness centrality ­ we can identify
nodes that are particularly important for the
network structure. The top three nodes from
each measure are marked with different col­
ors according to the centrality measure in Fig­
ure 5.2 as well as with a bold label in both
plots in Figure 5.1 to highlight their importance.
For degree centrality, which identifies influen­
tial nodes with the highest number of direct con­
nections, the top three nodes are 382, 555,
and 964.
For betweenness centrality, which
identifies people who act as bridges between
different parts of the network, the top three
nodes are 964, 962, and 819. For closeness
centrality, which identifies employees who can
spread information quickly because they have
the shortest paths to all other nodes, the top
three nodes are 964, 962, and 555. As can be seen, most of the top nodes appear on
more than one list, emphasizing their importance.
Although some hub nodes can be identified in the network by degree centrality, with the
degrees of these nodes far above the network average, the inferred network of friendships
is not a scale­free network, as its degree distribution does not follow a power law. The
degree assortativity of the network is close to zero, around 0.05, indicating that nodes
do not tend to connect with other nodes of similar degree. This suggests a diverse net­
work structure with a mix of connections between high and low degree nodes. In addition,
the density of the network is around 0.03, indicating that the network as a whole is quite
sparse. The average clustering coefficient of the nodes is quite high, just over 0.63, sug­
gesting that employees tend to form tight­knit groups of friends. The community aspect
of the friendships will be explored in a later chapter.
Interestingly, when we examine the relationship between employee degree and office
attendance in Figure 5.1a, we see that most of the important nodes identified by centrality
also have high attendance. In general, there is a linear relationship between degree
and attendance: the higher the attendance, the higher the degree. However, there are
exceptions, such as employee 179, who has one of the highest attendance rates, but a
relatively low number of friends. Even employee 819, who is identified as an important
bridge person, has a relatively low degree considering their attendance. At the other end
of the spectrum are employees such as 482, who has a relatively high degree despite
being in the office less than 50 times a year.
5.2
Seating entropy
Seating entropy is a property that describes the variability of the seats that each employee
normally selects in the office. The higher the entropy value, the more uncertain it is which
seat they would choose on a given day. It was calculated using the formula for Shannon
entropy [40, 41], which defines uncertainty for a given event. If we define an event where
an employee chooses a particular seat on a given day as Si, and the probability of this
event occurring as p(Si), then the entropy H for each employee’s set of these events S
26
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:33==
throughout the year is defined as:
H(S) = −
n
∑
i=1
p(Si) log2 p(Si)
(5.1)
Here, n represents the number of events for an employee throughout the year, or the
number of days he came to the office.
Entropy is expressed in units of bits. Bits are the basic unit of information in computing and
represent the number of binary digits needed to encode information. If there are 0 bits,
no digits are needed because there is no variability. For example, if the entropy is 3, then
3 binary digits are needed to encode the information, which means there are effectively
23 = 8 equally possible places for a person to sit. An entropy of 0 means that there is
no uncertainty in seat selection, indicating that the employee always chooses the same
seat. The maximum seat entropy found for an employee is just over 5.1 for employee
962, meaning that there are just over 34 equally possible seats that this employee would
book. However, this does not mean that this is the maximum number of seats booked by
a person, which is generally 44 different seats booked by employees 962 and 365.
In the graphs in Figure 5.1, each employee’s seat entropy is marked with an appropriate
color ­ the lighter the color, the higher the entropy. When analyzing the relationship be­
tween degree and seat entropy, there is no clear pattern. Nodes with a degree of 45 or
higher, representing the top 10 nodes with the highest degree, all have seating entropy
values in the upper half of the range, from about 2.47 to 4.77. This suggests that people
with many friends do not tend to stay in one seat. However, it should be noted that all of
these employees have attendance of 120 or more, which could also mean that they use
more seats because they come to the office more often. The lack of relationship between
degree and seat entropy is supported by the fact that employees with low degrees (5 or
less) have seat entropy values ranging from 1.17 to 4.81.
An interesting fact revealed by seating entropy is that each employee has different seating
preferences. Some employees prefer to sit in a small, selected set of seats and do not
move much, such as employees 381 and 497, who have one of the highest attendance
rates but low seating entropy (1.46 and 1.68, respectively), meaning that they choose
between about 3 seats with equal probability. On the other hand, there are employees
with significant office attendance who have very high seat entropy, such as employee 964
with an entropy of about 4.77. Interestingly, this employee was also identified as the most
bridging employee who can spread information quickly, where seat entropy may have
played a role.
5.3
Friendship reciprocity
Another friendship property worth examining is friendship reciprocity. It is a metric that is
calculated for each pair of friends and represents whether one member of the pair prefers
to sit next to the other more often than the other, or whether it is balanced. It was calculated
based on the seat booking creation times for both people in the pair. For each person in
the pair, I counted the number of co­occurrences they had in the same area, where they
booked after the other person, meaning they knew the other person was already sitting
there. Then the smaller of the two values was divided by the larger, resulting in the so­
called friendship reciprocity ratio, which ranges from 0 to 1. If we define Ce0 as the count
of times employee e0 booked after employee e1, and Ce1 as the count of times employee
e1 booked after employee e0, their friendship reciprocity FR can be represented as:
FR(e0, e1) = min(Ce0, Ce1)
max(Ce0, Ce1)
(5.2)
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
27
==PAGE:34==
(a) Employee degree and average reciprocity
dynamics
(b) Visualization of friendship reciprocity of ran­
dom employees
Figure 5.3: Friendship reciprocity characteristics. While the values of each employee’s
average friendship reciprocity mostly oscillate below 0.55 indicating one­sided friendships,
the look into the individual reciprocity for randomly chosen users reveals, that every user
has a mix of friendship reciprocity values.
A ratio of 0 means that the friendship is completely one­sided, as one person did not book
after the other even once, while a ratio of 1 means that the friendship is perfectly balanced,
as both people booked after the other the same number of times. For example, a value
of 0.5 would mean that one person booked twice as much as the other.
In Figure 5.3b, we can see the distribution of reciprocity ratios for 16 random employees,
depending on their degree. Each employee has a mixture of reciprocity ratios with their
friends. While some employees tend to have more one­sided friendships, such as em­
ployee 962 with a degree of 30, others have more balanced friendships, such as employee
592 with a degree of 10. There is no single employee in this set with either completely
balanced or one­sided friendships. In total, over 300 pairs have a reciprocity below 0.05,
while only about 80 pairs have a ratio of 0.95 or higher. In addition, about twice as many
pairs have a ratio below 0.5 as above 0.5, suggesting that most friendships are one­sided
rather than balanced. The average ratio for all pairs is 0.367.
Figure 5.3a shows the average reciprocity ratio per employee, paired with a red trend line,
which is made up of the average of the plotted values calculated for each of the 5 degree
bins. For employees with lower degrees, the average friendship ratio varies significantly.
However, for employees with higher degrees, it stabilizes in the range between 0.1 and
0.55, meaning that no employee with a high degree has an average ratio above 0.55.
There are at least three employees with degrees above 45 who have an average ratio
below 0.2, indicating that on average one person in their friendships books four times as
much as the other, although it is not specified in which direction.
5.4
Gender of friendships
Another aspect to consider is the gender distribution of friendships. Among the 562 em­
ployees considered for inferring friendships, male employees slightly lead with 53.6% of
the total, while female employees account for 45.9%. A very small group of employees
have an unknown gender. This distribution is shown in Figure 5.4a.
28
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:35==
(a) Gender distribution of em­
ployees
(b)
Gender
distribution
of
friendships
(c) Gender distribution of ran­
domly created friendships
Figure 5.4: Gender distribution of employees, inferred friendships, and randomly created
friendships between the same employees for comparison. The slight advantage of male
employees influences the number of male and mixed friendships, putting female friend­
ships in the minority.
The gender of friendships was determined by analyzing the gender of both employees
in each pair.
Possible friendship genders are Female (both employees are female),
Male (both employees are male), and Mixed (employees of opposite gender or unknown
gender). Just under half of all friendships are mixed, as shown in Figure 5.4b. Male­
only friendships account for 29.4% of the total, while female­only friendships account for
23.5%, reflecting the overall dominance of male employees. This distribution indicates
that no single gender has a greater tendency to form friendships in the office, with the
distribution being quite balanced. In addition, this is supported when comparing the distri­
bution of gender among friends and randomly generated friends from the same employee
set in Figure 5.4c. The values in both distributions are almost equal, the difference being
less than 2 percent in each category.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
29
==PAGE:36==
30
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:37==
6
Dynamic Communities
One of the main goals of the project was to understand how work relationships evolve
over time in a hybrid work environment. Given the many unknowns in the data, it would
be challenging to study the exact evolution of individual friendships, including when they
formed and how they may have ended. However, one way to analyze workplace rela­
tionships is to examine tight­knit communities of friends over time. In this section, I will
present my methods for doing so and the analysis of the dynamic communities I found
over the course of 12 months.
6.1
Dynamic community detection and matching
As mentioned in the literature review, many techniques have been developed to detect
dynamic communities in a temporal network. While the use of Instant Optimal methods,
which perform static community detection independently on each network snapshot and
then match them together, is not perfect and can be unstable, it provides a simple and
effective framework for dynamic community detection, which is why I chose this method.
First, in order to perform dynamic community detection on the network, I had to construct
the network snapshots for each of the time windows, which consisted of only a fraction
of the nodes and edges active at that time. For the analysis, I decided to divide the
network into 12 snapshots, one for each month from May 2021 to April 2022. Friendships
were inferred based on the entire year, so to decide which friendships were active at
given times, I again looked at the co­occurrences of friends. For each monthly snapshot,
I checked which inferred friend pairs had at least one co­occurrence in the same area
during that month. If so, their friendship was treated as active in that month, resulting in
a list of active links for each month, with some months missing some employees entirely.
Each active link was assigned a weight for each month, depending on the number of co­
occurrences each pair had in that month. It is important to note that if an employee is
missing from the network in a given month, it does not necessarily mean that they did
not come to the office at all; it simply means that they did not interact with friends in that
month, which could be caused by various reasons.
On the 12 network snapshots, I independently performed static community detection us­
ing the Infomap algorithm mentioned earlier in the literature review [24]. Infomap was
chosen because it is a popular algorithm suitable for weighted graphs. Based on infor­
mation theory, it captures the flow of information within the network, potentially reflecting
the underlying collaboration between employee friends in each community. In addition,
according to Lancichinetti and Fortunato (2009), Infomap was the best performing com­
munity detection algorithm among those tested at the time, based on the benchmarks
they chose [42].
The process of identifying and matching communities was based on the method proposed
by Greene, Doyle, and Cunningham (2010) [26], also mentioned in the literature review.
The steps were as follows:
1. Prepare network snapshots for all 12 months and conduct static community detec­
tion on each using the Infomap algorithm.
2. For the first month snapshot:
(a) Assign the communities found by the Infomap algorithm without any changes.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
31
==PAGE:38==
(b) Initialize the set of fronts F that will represent the latest set of employees
present in each community
3. For each subsequent month:
(a) For each community found by Infomap for the current month, find all matching
communities from the fronts F based on the Jaccard similarity measure.
(b) If no matches are found for a community, create a new one and assign it an
unused index.
(c) Check if any communities from the front set have been matched to more than
one community in the current month. If so, the old community has split into
new ones. Assign new indices and remove the old community from the list of
fronts.
(d) Check if any communities from the current month have been matched to more
than one old community in the fronts. If so, the old communities have merged
into a new one. Assign a new index and remove the old communities from the
list of fronts.
(e) For all other communities matched to one old community, assign the old com­
munity index.
(f) Update all newly created communities to the list of fronts F. Update the lists
of employees in the existing communities to include the current ones.
This process returns communities for each month assigned to each employee. A com­
munity may continue, merge, split, or disappear, and in some cases it may reappear and
continue. The Jaccard similarity measure requires a theta parameter, which serves as a
threshold for qualifying a community as matching or not. If the intersection of both sets
of employees divided by the union of both sets produces a value greater than the theta,
the community is considered a match. The theta value used in the matching process was
0.6, meaning that both sets of employees must be more than 60% similar.
6.2
Communities over 12 months
The dynamic community detection and matching process detected 62 distinct commu­
nities over time. Most months had between 7 and 12 communities, with the exception
of August, which had only 4 communities. Each month also had a pool of missing em­
ployees who were not interacting with their friends that month, ranging from as few as 37
employees to as many as 252. The exact structure of each month’s community is shown
in Figure 6.1a. In all 12 network graphs, the nodes have the same positions as in the
overall friend network graph in Figure 5.1b.
Assigning colors to all 62 communities in such a way that no two similar colors are placed
in the same month, adjacent months, or in larger, important communities proved chal­
lenging. Therefore, I prioritized differentiating colors within the months themselves and in
larger communities that are important because of their continuity across months or later
reappearance.
As seen in the communities plot, some communities have different indices even though
their structure looks similar from month to month. For example, the orange community
18 in November changes to the greenish community 42 in December and then back to
18 in February. This is because a significant number of nodes are not present in Decem­
ber and January, so the Jaccard similarity measure with a threshold of 0.6 did not qualify
32
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:39==
(a) Dynamic communities over 12 months
(b) Employee flow between communities
Figure 6.1: Dynamic communities detected over 12 months. In panel (a) all nodes have the same positions
between months for easier comparison. While the communities change over the course of 12 months, there
are some structures that remain stable, such as community 18 in the lower quarter of the network plot.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
33
==PAGE:40==
them as matching. This shows a trade­off in the community matching method: lower­
ing the threshold can result in too many community splits from month to month, while a
high threshold sometimes fails to match communities that should match. However, using
network visualization, we can still see patterns in the flow of communities.
As seen in Figure 6.1b, community 18 is not the only one that reappears after a few
months. Community 11, detected in the first month, May, reappears in November after be­
ing absent for four months. There is a lot of continuity between different months. Months
9, 10, and 11 have almost identical community structures with some minor changes. Sim­
ilarly, the months of March and April have 8 of the same churches, and even February
could be added to the group, except that it contains a few smaller churches that merge
into one large church of 60 a month later. Some month transitions are more dramatic.
From May to June, most of the communities are new, as many people appear for the first
time in the June snapshot. Interestingly, some of these new communities disappear after
June, such as communities 15 and 20, which never reappear.
When you examine the behavior of the top 3 bridge employees over the 12 months, dif­
ferent patterns emerge. Employee 964, identified as the top bridging person, is present
throughout the 12 months. In some months, he is part of only one community and con­
nects to many other nodes, while in other months, he connects to two other communities,
such as in July, where he connects to communities 23, 26, and 22, or in March, where
he connects to communities 60, 18, and 61. Notably, the community transition between
October and November shows the smaller purple community in the lower left merging with
the larger gold community, with employee 964 being one of the only links between them.
Another identified bridge person, employee 962, is not present in the first three months
of communities. They appear in August with a low degree and grow rapidly the following
month. Interestingly, they do not bridge different communities, but rather different employ­
ees, as they have links to at most one other community. Similarly, the last top bridging
employee, 819, also bridges a maximum of one other community. Only four employees
bridge more than one other community in some months: employee 964, employee 114 in
September, employee 275 in November, and employee 664 from September to Novem­
ber.
Looking at the overall flow between communities from month to month, there is a clear re­
lationship between changes in communities and overall changes in number of bookings,
as shown Figure 3.1a. May and July, which had lower booking numbers, were followed
by spikes in June and August, respectively, which are reflected in the significant changes
in communities between May and August. The following three months, from September
to November, saw bookings stabilize and the community structure also remained almost
unchanged. December and January saw significant declines in bookings, leading to sig­
nificant community shifts, followed by stabilization for the remaining months. This rela­
tionship can also be seen when looking at the number of missing employees per month
­ months with more missing employees brought more destabilization to the community
structure.
Overall, the community structure does not change drastically. From month to month, sim­
ilar clusters of employees belonging to the same communities can be identified, even
though their community index may change or the community may split or merge with an­
other. In every single month, there is a clear community in the bottom quarter of the plot.
Sometimes it gets smaller, like in January, where a small part splits off into a smaller com­
munity, and sometimes it shrinks in number and gets a different index, but the underlying
structure remains. Similarly, the rest of the plot does not see significant changes from
34
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:41==
month to month. Some communities merge or split as some bridgers activate their friend
links, but overall there are no major shifts in structure.
6.2.1
Office area dependency
The relationship between the number of bookings and changes in the communities is
clear when we consider that active links were selected based on the co­occurrence of
friendship pairs. The more people came into the office in a given month, the higher the
chance that their friendship link would be active that month. However, some changes in
communities can also be explained by office rearrangements.
In Figure 3.5, we can see the areas that people in each community visited throughout
the month. In the first three months, most communities were connected to only one, and
at most three, areas simultaneously. From August to December, there were significant
changes in the areas, with larger communities often being spread across four different
areas on the same days. Interestingly, as mentioned in the office description section,
different office areas were available for booking at different times, as shown in Figure 3.4.
For example, from August through December, areas 02, 12, 22, and 32 were unavailable,
while areas 04, 14, 24, and 34 were available. This probably meant that many employees
who normally used the first group of areas had to move to the second group. Since the
layouts and capacities of these areas were different, it is likely that some communities
were split into different areas. After January, most communities returned to occupying
one or two areas, with the exception of the large community 60 in March and April. This
pattern suggests that the restructuring of the offices and the availability of different areas
had a significant impact on the structure and dynamics of the communities.
Even when comparing the flow of employees between communities in Figure 6.1b, we
can see a relationship with the area availability:
• May to June: Areas 03, 13, and 23 were no longer available. Communities 1, 3, 4,
and 6, which were located in areas 02, 13, and 23 (as shown in Figure 3.5), merged
into a larger community 13.
• July to August: Areas 02, 12, 22, and 32 were no longer available. Communities
21, 22, 23, and 26, which were located in areas 01, 12, and 02, merged into the
dominant community 27.
• September to October: Areas 03, 13, 23, and 33 became available again. Com­
munity 9, which was present in May, reappeared and resided in areas 13 and 33 in
October.
• December to January: Areas 02, 12, 22, and 32 became available again. Com­
munity 17 reappeared and resided in area 22.
These patterns show how much each community depends on a common space to meet.
6.2.2
Communities validation
Since there was no ground truth to validate which friendships were inferred correctly, I had
no quantitative way to validate the correctness of the communities found. However, in the
data I received from the researchers I also had information about a group of employees
who were a part of two closely knit teams. One group consisted of employees 610, 201,
161, 680, and 231, while the other group consisted of employees 118, 591, 712, 267,
and 152, with employee 780 working as part of both teams. In addition, employees 852,
196, 702, 146, and 863 were known to work with both groups. Of these 16 employees,
2 made fewer than 10 bookings, so they did not qualify for friendship inference. Of the
remaining 14, only 5 had no friends inferred. As detailed in Table 6.1, most of these cases
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.2: Areas attended by employees belonging to each community throughout the months. While at
the beginning and end of the period, the communities seem to be largely based in one or two areas (with the
exception of a large community 60 in March and April), the period between August and December brings a
great deal of destabilization, with communities often spread over four areas in one day.
36
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:43==
Table 6.1: Insight into the friendships of a group of employees who work closely together
Employee
Team
Inferred friends / reason
610
1
196, 780, 591, 231, 863, 152, 852, 834
201
1
591
161
1
Made only 6 bookings.
680
1
No friends inferred, reason unknown.
231
1
591, 610
118
2
Came into the office only from February 2022.
591
2
196, 780, 231, 863, 610, 152, 852, 201, 805, 834
712
2
Made only 5 bookings.
267
2
Came into the office only from April 2022.
152
2
196, 591, 610, 631, 275, 664, 168, 508, 924, 834, 947, 303, 805,
220, 233, 969
780
1&2
591, 610
852
Other
591, 863, 610, 805
196
Other
591, 610, 152, 508, 834
702
Other
Came into the office only from end of January 2022.
146
Other
Came into the office only from January 2022.
863
Other
591, 610, 852, 834
are likely due to the fact that the employee did not have any booking data before 2022.
One employee, 680, had enough bookings and came into the office throughout the year,
but had no friends inferred. Employees with no inferred friends are shown in bold in the
table, and all employee IDs are colored according to their team.
As can be seen, the majority of the employees from the group described above have
other employees from the group as their friends. Interestingly, only one employee from
the group, 152, has a majority of friends from outside the group, while the others have
a majority or all friends from within the group. There is also no team­specific pattern;
employees from team 1 often have friends from team 2 and vice versa. This indicates the
closeness of the group, where everyone works closely with everyone else.
This can also be seen in the communities identified over the months. In Figure 6.1, all of
these employees are marked with a yellow border and an asterisk next to their ID, and can
be found in the top right of each plot. The group of employees appears in every monthly
plot except for July, which was probably a vacation month. In all months, the group is rec­
ognized as a single community, with May and June even showing a separate community
(10 for May, 15 for June) just for these employees, since they have no connections to any
other employees. Besides employee 152, who seems to be the group’s main bridge to
other employees, some employees are also friends with employees 834, 805, and 508.
During the months when most of these connections are active (August through Decem­
ber), the group is part of a larger community. However, starting in January, the size of
their community shrinks, and only the popular node 152 bridges the group to the rest of
its assigned community, showing that it is a tightly knit group.
Based on this information, I can say that except for employee 680, who had no inferred
friends, my friendship inference and community detection methods, while not perfectly
precise, are quite correct.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
37
==PAGE:44==
(a) Dynamic communities over 12 months
(b) Gender of friendships in communities
(c) Gender distribution in communities
Figure 6.3: Comparison of community structure and friendship gender. No communities
of any significant size contain friendships with only one gender, but some are dominated
by male friendships, such as community 52 in January.
6.2.3
Gender in communities
As before, while analyzing the characteristics of friendships, I took note of the gender
dynamics. In different communities, we can examine the overall gender distribution in
them. Although gender is not a dynamic property in this context, we can observe how
gender dynamics change over months as different friendships are activated at different
times.
Comparing the community structures in Figure 6.3a with the gender of each friendship link
in Figure 6.3b, where dark blue links symbolize male­only friendships, purple links sym­
bolize mixed­gender friendships, and light pink links represent female­only friendships,
we see that all communities of significant size have a mix of genders in their friendships.
Some smaller communities are single­gender, such as the separate community in May
and June dedicated to the employees of the teams described in the previous section,
which shows only female friendships in those months. There are also some large com­
munities that are predominantly one gender, such as community 52 in January, where
most of the friendships are male.
Overall, the dominance of male friendships in the network is evident, as the majority of
densely connected clusters have more visible male and mixed­gender friendships. Ex­
amples include the orange community 18 in June and the teal community 56 in February.
From the gender plot, we can also clearly see the density of connections between each
cluster. In the overwhelmingly large cluster in August, there are still four smaller substruc­
tures connected by a handful of employees who are likely very strongly connected and
pull the whole community together.
38
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:45==
7
Discussion
This study provides insights into how office relationships evolve through the lens of office
attendance in a hybrid work environment. It addresses the existing gap in research by ex­
ploring how office attendance influences social connections at work and the broader work­
place community. Key findings suggest that friendship group dynamics evolve smoothly
without many drastic changes, and that the main influences on them are external factors
such as vacation seasons or illness that affect attendance rates, as well as changes in
office structure that disrupt seating dynamics. Some community structures remain rel­
atively static throughout the year, suggesting that employees do not drastically change
their social circles from month to month. Changes appear to occur gradually, with new
employees joining and others leaving the friend network. Most employees tend to interact
in tightly knit groups without branching out to sit near other, unknown people, supporting
Yang et al.’s (2022) findings that hybrid work can lead to more siloed interactions at work
[14]. However, we observe some so­called bridging individuals who, either because of
their personality or job role, have more diverse social circles and act as hubs for the com­
pany’s social network.
Other factors in employee friendships reveal the nature of work collaboration. A study
of friendship reciprocity, based on seat booking times between pairs of friends, found
that while on average friendships tend to be more one­sided, with one person wanting
to sit next to the other more often, this is not a uniform distribution across a person’s
friendships. Most people have a set of friends with whom they have a more balanced
relationship, and then other friends with whom the relationship is more one­sided. Gender
did not play a significant role in the structure of friendships. While there are more male
and mixed friendships than female, this is proportional to the overall gender makeup of
the employees in the dataset and does not indicate any bias.
Interestingly, there is no clear relationship between how adventurous people are with their
seating choices and the number of friends they have. Initially, I expected that the more
seats people used, the more people they would meet, and therefore the more friends they
would have. However, this was not the case. While some employees with a significant
number of friends had high seating entropy, others had low seating entropy, indicating no
relationship.
However, it is important to note that this study has limitations. The friendship inference
was done without the possibility of definitive quantitative validation, meaning that I could
not verify that the friendships found were true based on ground truth data. In addition,
the community detection for each month was based on network snapshots that were con­
structed primarily from friend links based on attendance. If there was less presence in
the office due to external factors such as increased pandemic restrictions, the inferred
friendship links would also change, even though employees may have maintained close
collaboration through telecommunication tools. Therefore, the friendships found in this
study are based solely on physical interaction and presence in the office. It is also worth
mentioning that the period analyzed coincided with the COVID­19 pandemic in Denmark,
which influenced office attendance patterns. If the study had been conducted during an­
other period, the results might have been different.
Another confounding factor is the uncertainty of the data. The dataset itself was messy,
with no guarantees about what each field meant and the mechanics behind it. For ex­
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
39
==PAGE:46==
ample, the dataset had a field for the status of the reservation, which indicated either
Reserved, CheckedIn, or Checked­Out. However, I had no information about when the
status should normally be changed to Checked­Out and why many bookings were still
marked as CheckedIn. Since it was probably the employees’ responsibility to mark their
presence in the office by checking in, I was also not sure that the current status was cor­
rect. There were many bookings with the status Reserved, but there was no way to verify
whether most of them meant that someone forgot to check in or did not come to the office
that day. Similar uncertainty existed with the seat coordinate data, the interpretation of
which was mainly based on the analysis described in the data cleaning section and related
appendices. I cannot be 100% certain that the analysis is correct. With more certainty,
the seat distance information could probably be used more extensively in the analysis.
In terms of using the distance data, if I had more time, I could have used it to validate
friendships more accurately. For example, I could have used the Naive Bayes technique
to compare the distance patterns between friends and non­friends [43]. By calculating
the probability that each distance belongs to one group or the other, I could identify any
inconsistencies in my initial labels and validate my method for inferring friendships.
In a perfect scenario, I would make some changes to the way I conducted my study. Be­
cause the dataset was based only on physical attendance at the office, it represented only
one aspect of workplace friendships. Therefore, I would combine office attendance data
with employee telecommunication data to fill in the friendship information gap when em­
ployees choose to work from home. Based on this information and given some ground
truth data about the friendships, I would compute different features representing atten­
dance and communication patterns and use machine learning techniques to classify em­
ployee pairs as friends or non­friends on a monthly basis. Inferring friendships indepen­
dently each month would ensure that the evolution of communities over the months is
based on actual friendship dynamics and is more independent of external factors. Fi­
nally, I would experiment with using cross­time dynamic community detection algorithms
that consider all network snapshots at once, which could potentially detect more consis­
tent communities than the community matching algorithm I used. I would also use more
months of data than I originally did. While using only full months of data was a good de­
cision, in retrospect, limiting the analysis period to one year was not ideal. It was done
mainly for the perceived completeness of the analysis, representing a ”closed” period,
and including an additional two full months of data might have provided more friendship
insights, especially for employees who appeared later in the dataset.
Nevertheless, given the limitations of the data and time constraints, the results of this study
provide a valuable insight into the physical aspect of the social dynamics of a hybrid work­
place. The results are consistent, and qualitative validation on the group of employees
working closely together, most of whom were classified as friends within one community,
proved the validity of my methods.
In the future, it may be worthwhile to conduct a similar study to see if the stability of
communities persists over a longer period of time. It would be beneficial to introduce the
interplay of job seniority into the friendship mix to see how workplace hierarchy affects
collaboration. In addition, I could focus more on exploring friendship reciprocity. For now,
I explored whether friendships overall are more balanced or one­sided, but it was not
indicated which person in the friendship is more reciprocal. Are there employees who
”chase” others more and employees who seem to be unusually popular in the workplace,
or is it more evenly distributed with everyone having a set of people they seek out and a
set of people who seek them out?
40
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:47==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my professor at the Technical University of Denmark, Sune Lehmann,
for his guidance and invaluable feedback throughout my thesis. I would also like to ex­
press my gratitude to the researchers at the Copenhagen Center for Social Data Science
(SODAS), Sofie Læbo Astrupgaard and Helene Willadsen, who inspired the project and
provided insights that were crucial throughout the thesis.
I am also deeply grateful to my parents and grandparents for always supporting me in my
studies, and to my sister, who is a constant source of inspiration and motivation for my
personal and academic growth.
Finally, I want to thank my partner, my flatmates, and my closest friends for their invaluable
support during my thesis. They made the whole academic experience at DTU fun and
memorable.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
41
==PAGE:48==
42
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Eric Dahlin, Erin Kelly, and Phyllis Moen. Is work the new neighborhood? Social
ties in the workplace, family, and neighborhood. Sept. 2008. DOI: 10.1111/j.1533-
8525.2008.00133.x.
[2]
Henk Flap and Beate Völker. Goal specific social capital and job satisfaction Effects
of different types of networks on instrumental and social aspects of work. 2001.
[3]
Randy Hodson. Work life and social fulfillment: Does social affiliation at work reflect
a carrot or a stick? June 2004. DOI: 10.1111/j.0038-4941.2004.08502001.x.
[4]
Susan R. Madsen, Duane Miller, and Cameron R. John. “Readiness for organiza­
tional change: Do organizational commitment and social relationships in the work­
place make a difference?” In: Human Resource Development Quarterly 16 (2 June
2005), pp. 213–234. ISSN: 10448004. DOI: 10.1002/hrdq.1134.
[5]
Rabina Cozijnsen, Nan L. Stevens, and Theo G. Van tilburg. “Maintaining work­
related personal ties following retirement”. In: Personal Relationships 17 (3 Sept.
2010), pp. 345–356. ISSN: 13504126. DOI: 10.1111/j.1475-6811.2010.01283.x.
[6]
Gerardine DeSanctis. “Attitudes toward telecommuting: Implications for work­at­
home programs”. In: Information
Management 7 (3 1984), pp. 133–139. ISSN:
0378­7206. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0378- 7206(84)90041- 7. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0378720684900417.
[7]
Ilan Salomon and Meira Salomon. “Telecommuting: The employee’s perspective”.
In: Technological Forecasting and Social Change 25 (1 1984), pp. 15–28. ISSN:
0040­1625. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0040- 1625(84)90077- 5. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0040162584900775.
[8]
Jon Steiner. “The art of space management: Planning flexible workspaces for peo­
ple”. In: Journal of Facilities Management 4 (1 2005), pp. 6–22. ISSN: 14725967.
[9]
Jungsoo Kim et al. “Desk ownership in the workplace: The effect of non­territorial
working on employee workplace satisfaction, perceived productivity and health”. In:
Building and Environment 103 (July 2016), pp. 203–214. ISSN: 03601323. DOI:
10.1016/j.buildenv.2016.04.015.
[10]
Rachel L Morrison and Keith A Macky. “The demands and resources arising from
shared office spaces”. In: Applied Ergonomics 60 (2017), pp. 103–115. ISSN: 0003­
6870. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2016.11.007. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0003687016302514.
[11]
Maral Babapour Chafi, Annemarie Hultberg, and Nina Bozic Yams. “Post­pandemic
office work: Perceived challenges and opportunities for a sustainable work envi­
ronment”. In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 14 (1 Jan. 2022). ISSN: 20711050. DOI:
10.3390/su14010294.
[12]
Nicholas Bloom, Ruobing Han, and James Liang. “How Hybrid Working From Home
Works Out”. In: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No.
30292 (2022). DOI: 10.3386/w30292. URL: http://www.nber.org/papers/w30292%
20http://www.nber.org/papers/w30292.pdf.
[13]
Marie­Laure Charpignon et al. “Navigating the new normal: Examining coatten­
dance in a hybrid work environment”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 120.51 (2023), e2310431120. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2310431120. eprint:
https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.2310431120. URL: https://www.pnas.
org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2310431120.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
43
==PAGE:50==
[14]
Longqi Yang et al. “The effects of remote work on collaboration among information
workers”. In: Nature Human Behaviour 6 (1 2022), pp. 43–54. ISSN: 2397­3374.
DOI: 10.1038/s41562-021-01196-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01196-
4.
[15]
Yulin Yu et al. “Large­Scale Analysis of New Employee Network Dynamics”. In: ACM
Web Conference 2023 ­ Proceedings of the World Wide Web Conference, WWW
2023. Association for Computing Machinery, Inc, Apr. 2023, pp. 2719–2730. ISBN:
9781450394161. DOI: 10.1145/3543507.3583400.
[16]
Melanie S. Brucks and Jonathan Levav. “Virtual communication curbs creative idea
generation”. In: Nature 605 (7908 May 2022), pp. 108–112. ISSN: 14764687. DOI:
10.1038/s41586-022-04643-y.
[17]
James C. McElroy and Paula C. Morrow. “Employee reactions to office redesign:
A naturally occurring quasi­field experiment in a multi­generational setting”. In: Hu­
man Relations 63 (5 May 2010), pp. 609–636. ISSN: 00187267. DOI: 10.1177/
0018726709342932.
[18]
John Scott. “Social network analysis: developments, advances, and prospects”. In:
Social Network Analysis and Mining 1 (1 Jan. 2011), pp. 21–26. ISSN: 18695469.
DOI: 10.1007/s13278-010-0012-6.
[19]
Petter Holme and Jari Saramäki. Temporal networks. Oct. 2012. DOI: 10.1016/j.
physrep.2012.03.001.
[20]
Aaron Clauset and Nathan Eagle. Persistence and periodicity in a dynamic proximity
network. Nov. 2012. arXiv: 1211.7343 [physics.data-an]. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1211.7343.
[21]
David Gamba et al. “Exit Ripple Effects: Understanding the Disruption of Socializa­
tion Networks Following Employee Departures”. In: WWW 2024 ­ Proceedings of
the ACM Web Conference. Association for Computing Machinery, Inc, May 2024,
pp. 211–222. ISBN: 9798400701719. DOI: 10.1145/3589334.3645634.
[22]
Rémy Cazabet, Giulio Rossetti, and Frédéric Amblard. “Dynamic Community De­
tection. Encyclopedia of Social Network Analysis and Mining”. In: Encyclopedia of
social network analysis and mining (2017), p. 10. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7163-
9_383-1ï. URL: https://hal.science/hal-01665098v1.
[23]
M Girvan and M E J Newman. “Community structure in social and biological net­
works”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99 (12 June 2002).
doi: 10.1073/pnas.122653799, pp. 7821–7826. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.122653799. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.122653799.
[24]
Daniel Edler, Anton Holmgren, and Martin Rosvall. The MapEquation software pack­
age. https://mapequation.org. 2025.
[25]
Martin Rosvall and Carl T Bergstrom. “Maps of random walks on complex networks
reveal community structure”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
105 (4 Jan. 2008). doi: 10.1073/pnas.0706851105, pp. 1118–1123. DOI: 10.1073/
pnas.0706851105. URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0706851105.
[26]
Derek Greene, Dónal Doyle, and Pádraig Cunningham. “Tracking the evolution of
communities in dynamic social networks”. In: Proceedings ­ 2010 International Con­
ference on Advances in Social Network Analysis and Mining, ASONAM 2010. 2010,
pp. 176–183. ISBN: 9780769541389. DOI: 10.1109/ASONAM.2010.17.
[27]
Ray Reagans and Ezra W. Zuckerman. “Networks, Diversity, and Productivity: The
Social Capital of Corporate RD Teams”. In: Organization Science 12 (4 2001), pp. 502–
517. ISSN: 10477039. DOI: 10.1287/orsc.12.4.502.10637.
[28]
Rob Cross, Stephen P Borgatti, and Andrew Parker. “Making Invisible Work Visible:
Using Social Network Analysis to Support Strategic Collaboration”. In: California
44
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:51==
Management Review 44 (2 Jan. 2002), pp. 25–46. ISSN: 0008­1256. DOI: 10.2307/
41166121. URL: https://doi.org/10.2307/41166121.
[29]
Travis J. Grosser, Virginie Lopez­Kidwell, and Giuseppe Labianca. “A social net­
work analysis of positive and negative gossip in organizational life”. In: Group and
Organization Management 35 (2 Apr. 2010), pp. 177–212. ISSN: 10596011. DOI:
10.1177/1059601109360391.
[30]
Joel M Podolny and James N Baron. “Resources and Relationships: Social Net­
works and Mobility in the Workplace”. In: American Sociological Review 62 (5 1997),
pp. 673–693. ISSN: 00031224. DOI: 10.2307/2657354. URL: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/2657354.
[31]
Munmun De Choudhury et al. “Inferring relevant social networks from interper­
sonal communication”. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
World Wide Web. Association for Computing Machinery, 2010, pp. 301–310. ISBN:
9781605587998. DOI: 10.1145/1772690.1772722. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
1772690.1772722.
[32]
David J. Crandall et al. “Inferring social ties from geographic coincidences”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107
(52 Dec. 2010), pp. 22436–22441. ISSN: 00278424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1006155107.
[33]
Justin Cranshaw et al. “Bridging the gap between physical location and online social
networks”. In: Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on Ubiqui­
tous Computing. Association for Computing Machinery, 2010, pp. 119–128. ISBN:
9781605588438. DOI: 10.1145/1864349.1864380. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
1864349.1864380.
[34]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit­learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Ma­
chine Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[35]
J MacQueen. “Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate obser­
vations”. In: Proceedings of 5­th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics
and Probability/University of California Press. 1967.
[36]
Tian Zhang, Raghu Ramakrishnan, and Miron Livny. “BIRCH: an efficient data clus­
tering method for very large databases”. In: SIGMOD Rec. 25.2 (June 1996), pp. 103–
114. ISSN: 0163­5808. DOI: 10.1145/235968.233324. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
235968.233324.
[37]
Scott M Lundberg and Su­In Lee. “A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predic­
tions”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30. Ed. by I. Guyon
et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017, pp. 4765–4774. URL: http://papers.nips.cc/
paper/7062-a-unified-approach-to-interpreting-model-predictions.pdf.
[38]
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approx­
imation and Projection for Dimension Reduction. 2020. arXiv: 1802.03426 [stat.ML].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426.
[39]
Leo Breiman. “Random forests”. In: Machine learning 45 (2001), pp. 5–32.
[40]
C. E. Shannon. “A mathematical theory of communication”. In: The Bell System
Technical Journal 27.3 (1948), pp. 379–423. DOI: 10 . 1002 / j . 1538 - 7305 . 1948 .
tb01338.x.
[41]
Du­Yih Tsai, Yongbum Lee, and Eri Matsuyama. “Information Entropy Measure for
Evaluation of Image Quality”. In: Journal of Digital Imaging 21 (3 2008), pp. 338–
347. ISSN: 1618­727X. DOI: 10.1007/s10278-007-9044-5. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10278-007-9044-5.
[42]
Andrea Lancichinetti and Santo Fortunato. “Community detection algorithms: A com­
parative analysis”. In: Phys. Rev. E 80 (5 Nov. 2009), p. 056117. DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevE.80.056117. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.80.056117.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
45
==PAGE:52==
[43]
Mehran Sahami et al. “A Bayesian approach to filtering junk e­mail”. In: Learning
for Text Categorization: Papers from the 1998 workshop. Vol. 62. Citeseer. 1998,
pp. 98–105.
46
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:53==
A
Data Cleaning
This appendix describes the detailed process of pre­processing and cleaning the data,
as well as the research conducted to understand the meaning of various data fields in
the dataset used for this thesis. The dataset, which was not obtained directly from the
company it belongs to, had previously been organized and pre­processed by other re­
searchers; I will describe some of the steps they took to provide a clear understanding
of how the data was processed, as this served as the basis for my understanding of the
dataset.
One of the first things the researchers did was look at the different seats and how they
were represented. There were several rows in the data with no associated seat or area,
which was intriguing since the data came from a seat booking system. The purpose
of booking without a seat remains unknown. One possible explanation may be related
to another field in the dataset ­ an ’AtOffice’ flag with values of 0 or 1. All rows with a
value of 0, indicating that the employee was not in the office that day, had empty seat
information. This indicates that these were days when employees marked themselves
as working from home and therefore did not need to reserve a seat in the office. There
were 1,724 such rows scattered throughout the time period, involving approximately 200
users. Since these rows represented only 5 percent of the total data and likely reflected
the activity of users who were not in the office, it was decided to remove them from the
analysis.
Originally, each seat in the dataset was represented by a seat name and a unique numeric
seat ID. Some seats had the same name but different IDs. After examining the data and
relying on my knowledge of databases, I deduced that the ID most likely represented an
auto­incremented database ID that had to be unique, while the name was a field that
could be assigned by the administrator. Therefore, when some seats were removed from
the system and then added back, they retained the same name but received different IDs
because they were separate database entries. Similarly, mistakes could have been made
when entering data that resulted in identical names for multiple seats.
In the entire dataset, there were 7,939 instances where seats with the same name but
different IDs were booked for the same day. In addition, there were 63 instances where
the same seat with the same ID was booked for the same day. Sixteen of these 63 cases
were likely system errors, as they were created by the same person within less than a
minute of each other. Of the remaining 47 cases, 24 involved at least one booking made
on the same day as the target date, indicating that the seat became available that day.
The remaining 23 bookings remain unexplained, but their number is small enough not to
be a problem.
Ultimately, the researchers decided to consider seats based on their names rather than
their database IDs. This decision was made in part because the exact purpose of the
seat ID field had not been explored at that time. In addition, it might have been beneficial
to treat seats that were essentially the same but in different positions as one. However,
this assumption caused considerable confusion when exploring the coordinates of each
booking, which will be described later. Some seats had very odd names that did not match
the naming convention of other seats in the area, such as those with ”dropdown” or ”test”
in their names.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
47
==PAGE:54==
To avoid including incorrect booking data in the analysis, all seats with mismatched area
names (e.g., a seat named ”02 ­ 2” placed in area 12 instead of 02) and seats that were
booked less than three times were removed from the bookings. Each seat was then given
a new name ID to standardize the naming convention, formatted as ”<area code>_<seat
number>”.
Originally, each booking also had two coordinate sets attached to it: Column1.Seat.XCoord
and Column1.Seat.YCoord, as well as Column1.XCoord and Column1.YCoord. For sim­
plicity, I’ll refer to these as the seat and row coordinates. A deep dive analysis was done
by the researchers, with later additions by me, to understand the purpose of each field. It
was found that for almost every seat, the coordinate sets changed throughout the booking
data, with the row coordinates changing much more frequently than the seat coordinates.
In most cases, the seat coordinates changed only once, while the row coordinates often
changed up to five times per seat.
By plotting the seats based on their coordinates, it was determined that the coordinates
represent the position of each seat on the floor plan image displayed in the booking sys­
tem. Due to the uncertainty of the meaning of each coordinate and the frequent changes
in the row coordinates, the researchers based their further data exploration on the seat
coordinates. Seats with changing seat coordinates were split into separate seats with an
additional index, formatted as ”<area code>_<seat number>_<seat index>”. However,
since it was important for me to really understand the seat coordinates for later use in
distance calculations, I looked into the coordinates a bit more.
What I found was that changes in the seat coordinates did not indicate a real change
in the system. These seats were previously described as having the same name but
different database IDs, and were later merged into one seat. This merging caused the
entries to have different seat coordinates, while in the database these seats were likely
represented as separate entities. By analyzing the field names, I deduced that all fields
beginning with ”Column1.Seat” (e.g., ”Column1.Seat.Id”, ”Column1.Seat.Name”, ”Col­
umn1.Seat.XCoord”) were likely related to a seat table in the database that contained
up­to­date information for all seats. My vision of the database, as described here, can
also be seen in Figure A.1.
When users made a reservation, the current seat coordinate was probably stored in the
row coordinates, and the link to the seat ID in the database was also saved. At the time
the data was exported for analysis, any links to external tables, such as seat or area
information, were probably retrieved and inserted into the booking row. If the seat was
moved to different positions in the system, the latest seat coordinate stored in the seat
coordinate fields probably did not match some of the row coordinates for older bookings.
My theory is supported by the fact that for most bookings for a seat, the most recent
bookings usually have matching seat and row coordinates.
One problem with my theory is that the row coordinates sometimes jitter a bit through­
out the bookings. For example, they might change for two bookings, then revert to the
previous one, and then change again. In addition, some rows have row coordinates set
to 0. I explain this by suggesting that the row coordinate was probably updated with the
current seat coordinate when employees made changes to the booking, such as checking
in. Therefore, for some rows where an employee made a change, the row coordinate was
updated to the newest one, while for rows where there were no changes, it remained the
old one. If the seat was removed from the system after the employee had already booked
it and then checked in, it was probably updated to 0 coordinates because it did not have
a corresponding seat entry.
48
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.1: Visualization of the database as inferred from the dataset fields and their
names. While it is almost certain that this is not the exact structure of the database,
the diagram was created with the purpose of illustrating my understanding of how the
relationships between different fields work, and most importantly, the difference between
the Column1.Seat and the Column1 coordinates.
This theory cannot be confirmed for sure because we do not know the exact workings of
the system, but this is what I assumed while working with the data. Therefore, when calcu­
lating the distances, I used the row coordinates as they represented the seat coordinates
at the time of booking.
After receiving the data, the first thing I did was to anonymize the dataset. I decided to use
employee emails as the key instead of usernames, since usernames simply represented
the employee’s name and sometimes changed throughout the dataset. However, the
emails were not clean either, as several users had different emails associated with the
same name. While it was possible that these were different people who happened to
have the same name, my analysis of the emails suggested otherwise. In many cases, the
email username was the same, but the email domain was different. In other cases, the
email username appeared to be an extension of another email username, such as one
letter added or an extended version of the employee’s name. Most importantly, none of
the different emails were used twice on the same day, and in most cases they were used
in different time periods, suggesting that the person’s email had simply changed.
Therefore, when cleaning up the data, I treated these emails as belonging to the same
person. The usernames were then deleted from the dataset, and the emails were encoded
as arbitrary numeric IDs for which the key was deleted. The area and seat names were
also encoded to preserve the anonymity of the company, as they originally contained
building names.
In the process of cleaning up the dataset for ease of use, I renamed most of the data
fields and removed some others. I translated some of the temporal fields whose names
and values were in Danish and removed the ’AtOffice’ flag, as all the remaining rows had
only one value ­ 1. During the renaming process, which was done before my exploration
of the seat coordinates, I named the seat coordinates seat.xcoord and seat.ycoord for
simplicity, while the row coordinates were named seat.bad_xcoord and seat.bad_ycoord.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
49
==PAGE:56==
Despite the ”bad” suffix in the name, these were ultimately the coordinates used in the
analysis.
In addition, there were 19 seat bookings in the dataset that were known to belong to the
researchers working with the company on this project. These rows were deleted because
they did not represent actual employees of the company.
Finally, I examined the Column1.Status field to understand the patterns of when users
checked in and out of the system. There were a total of 19,816 rows of bookings with
the status ”Checked­In”, 1,484 rows with the status ”Reserved”, and only 200 cases with
the status ”CheckedOut”. The status ”CheckedOut” could mean either that the user was
done using the seat and checked out, or that the user canceled the seat reservation for
that day. The second explanation is less likely.
Since I did not know the exact mechanism of what each status meant or when the status
changes occurred, and because I knew that if it was the employee’s job, the data might
be unreliable as people often forget to update their status, the status field was ultimately
not considered in the analysis. I assumed that all seat reservations were actually used.
In the end, since I wanted to use data from full months and a full year, I extracted the
bookings from the time period I was interested in. This dataset was then used for the
project.
50
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:57==
B
Calculating Seat Distances
This appendix describes the process of calculating and scaling the distances between
seats for each area. As noted in the cleaning process description in Appendix A, the
coordinates for each seat represented the pixel coordinates in each area floor plan image
where the seat was placed. Because each area had images of different dimensions,
calculating any distance and comparing it across areas required scaling to the same range
of values.
First, however, the issue of changing seat coordinates had to be addressed. A significant
number of seats had been moved at certain points, and some areas had been redesigned.
This led to a situation where calculating distances based on the most recent coordinates
would not work, as the seat could have completely different distances to others at an
earlier point in time. This situation is illustrated in Figure B.1a, which shows the seats
based on coordinates before and after September 10, 2021. Seat 02_1 has moved its
position, changing its distance to seats like 02_11. Therefore, I first needed to find the
date thresholds for each area to mark the time periods of different area configurations.
Initially, I wanted to solve this problem with an automated algorithm. The algorithm I
(a) Area 02 before and after threshold
date
(b) Area 32 before and after all threshold dates
(c) Area 33 before and after threshold
date
(d) Area 34 before and after all threshold dates
Figure B.1: Example areas before and after the thresholds dates. In panel (a) we can see
clear layout changes, with the after stage perfectly matching the floor plan image. In panel
(c) the layout before is empty as there were no bookings done before the remodeling. In
panels (b) and (d) there are the two areas who had two distinct thresholds. While for area
34 the secondary threshold was reasonable, since the layout changes between each time
period, area 32 could have been left only with the general threshold of 10th of September
2021.
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
51
==PAGE:58==
created checked the dataset sorted by booking creation date, row by row to see if the
coordinates changed, and counted the number of changes for each seat. The idea was
that the number of thresholds for each area should be equal to the maximum number
of changes a seat had in that area. It then iterated through each seat in an area that
had any changes, recorded the dates of the changes and the dates of the last bookings
before the changes, and based on these values for all seats in the area, tried to find the
corresponding thresholds.
However, due to significant jitter in the data and instances where seats were moved by
very small values (e.g., 0.33 pixels) that didn’t change much on a large scale but affected
the algorithm, it didn’t produce meaningful values. Even after discarding small changes,
there were too many meaningless shifts in the seat coordinates.
As a result, I switched to a more manual approach. I plotted the booking times for all seats
in each area and looked for clear changes. I examined the booking data for selected seats
to understand the patterns of coordinate changes. I also plotted all seats on the actual
floor plan map, similar to the plots in Figure B.1, and looked for irregularities. While this
approach was very time consuming, it gave me the most confidence in the distances I
was later able to calculate.
From my analysis, I identified the thresholds as shown Figure B.2. For the areas shown in
Figure B.2a and Figure B.2b, the thresholds were straightforward. All of these areas had
a significant 3­4 month gap in bookings, which I assumed was the remodeling period. I
found a common threshold for all eight areas, which was September 10, 2021. As you can
see in Figure B.1a and Figure B.1c, which show sample areas before and after this date,
the seating arrangement is completely different. Area 33 in Figure B.1c is also shown
as an example because it is the only area of the eight that had no bookings before the
remodel, so the area before the threshold has no seats marked.
It is worth noting that almost every one of these areas had some minor seat changes
beyond these thresholds. However, after plotting the seating arrangements for all possible
time periods, the seating arrangements did not change significantly, meaning that overall
the seats had the same relative placement, even though the image scale and coordinates
changed slightly. For simplicity’s sake, I decided not to account for these minor changes,
since the distances would remain relatively the same.
However, as shown in Figure B.2a, I identified an additional threshold for area 32. Initially,
after plotting the area for these periods, as shown in Figure B.1b, I thought that some seats
had changed position between the first and second period. Therefore, I decided to keep
the additional threshold and calculate the distances separately. However, after a closer
look, I realized that there were no layout changes during this period, so I could have just
kept the general threshold for area 32.
Areas 04, 14, 24, and 34, shown in Figure B.2c, were more difficult to understand. These
areas were only available for bookings during the 4­5 month period from August to January
and did not initially show any clear changes, except for area 34, which has some bookings
returning in June 2022 and therefore has a separate threshold identified as January 17,
2022. I initially planned to leave the rest of the areas without any changes or thresholds.
However, when I examined the coordinates of some randomly selected seats in these
areas, I still noticed some changes. Finally, I identified a general threshold for these
areas on October 4, 2021, where there were some noticeable layout changes. These
changes can be seen in Figure B.1d, where the layout before and after October 4th are
slightly different.
52
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:59==
(a) Thresholds found for areas 02/12/22/32
(b) Threshold found for areas 03/13/23/33
(c) Thresholds found for areas 04/14/24/34
Figure B.2: Booking periods with thresholds marked for the areas. While threshold for ar­
eas in panels (a) and (b) are mostly clear, occurring during a big gap in bookings, thresh­
olds for areas in panel (c) were more hard to find.
Area 01 is the only one that had no identified changes and therefore did not require a
threshold.
With these thresholds identified for each area, I created a distance dictionary between
all possible seats in each time period for each area. The distance that I calculated is a
simple Euclidean distance, which represents the distance in a straight line. Given a seat
with coordinates (x1, y1) and another with coordinates (x2, y2), it can be calculated using
the formula:
d =
√
(x1 −x2)2 + (y1 −y2)2
(B.1)
Once that was done, I had the distances between any seats in any area. However, there
was still the problem of different scales between areas. To mitigate this, for each area and
for each time period, I manually selected a pair of seats that were located at desks that
were next to each other. Assuming the company had desks of similar dimensions, this
pair would serve as the new ”1” unit for each area. Each individual distance in all periods
was divided by the corresponding selected ”1” distance. As a result, all seat distances in
all areas could be compared. In addition, the distance values were easy to understand:
a value of 1 would mean 1 desk away, a value of 2 would mean 2 desks away, etc.
It should be noted that retrieving distances for all friends’ co­occurrences in an area was
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
53
==PAGE:60==
not entirely smooth. There were many cases where bookings were created between area
changes for areas with thresholds inside the booking period, such as 32, 04, 14, 24, and
34. Some seats were present in one period but not in another, causing distance retrieval
errors when seats were not from the same period. Ultimately, I implemented a series of
fallbacks to ensure the most accurate distance retrieval:
1. For each employee in the current pair, the booking creation date was considered, as
I primarily used creation dates to find thresholds. Each creation date was matched
to the corresponding time period.
2. If both time periods matched, the correct distance from the given time period was
returned.
3. If the time periods did not match, the target date of the booking was considered and
matched to the appropriate time period. This step essentially selected the correct
time period from the previous two.
4. For the identified period, an attempt was made to return a distance. If both seats
booked by the employee were in the dictionary for that time period, the distance was
returned.
5. If one of the seats was not in the dictionary for that time period, the other time period
was used to retrieve the distance.
6. If this also failed, which happened for a few co­occurrences, the last fallback was to
use the distances calculated based on the seat coordinates, i.e. those associated
with the current seat position in the system.
In this way, I was able to retrieve the distance for each pair of coworkers. While the pro­
cess is not perfect and there is room for error, it served its purpose for validating friend­
ships.
54
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
==PAGE:61==
Examining Social Dynamics in a Hybrid Work Environment
55
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
