==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management, and Economics
Master Thesis
Matheuristics for Liner Shipping Network Design
Alex Daði Reynisson (s222551)
Bergur Ástraðsson (s222545)
Helgi Kristjánsson (s223436)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management, and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45254800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the development of eﬀicient matheuristic approaches for the Liner Shipping
Network Design Problem (LSNDP) with the objective of maximizing the network’s profits. We ex-
plore two distinct initial network strategies: a flow-first approach utilizing backbone flow through
a relaxed network, and a network-first method using greedy construction heuristics. This compara-
tive analysis provides insights into the impact of initial solution quality on subsequent optimization
outcomes.
The core of our solution framework is an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) algorithm
enhanced by Multi-Commodity Flow optimization. The ALNS implementation features both struc-
tural operators (repair and destroy methods) for network modification and specialized operators
for vessel deployment and speed optimization. A key feature is the integration of MCF feedback
within the ALNS framework, creating a dynamic system that continuously learns from cargo flow
patterns to guide the search process.
Additionally, we explore the theoretical bounds of LSNDP through exact methods, developing a
Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) model that, while computationally intensive for larger instances,
provides valuable insights into what can and cannot be done.
Computational experiments across various Liner-Lib instances demonstrate the effectiveness of our
matheuristic approaches, particularly for complex optimization problems where exact methods be-
come intractable.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our deepest gratitude to all those who have supported and guided us
throughout the course of this thesis. This work was a collaborative effort between three students:
Alex Daði Reynisson and Bergur Ástráðsson, both completing their Master’s in Business Analytics,
and Helgi Kristjánsson, completing a Master’s in Industrial Engineering and Management.
We are immensely thankful to our supervisor, Richard Lusby, for his invaluable guidance, construc-
tive feedback, and continuous encouragement. His expertise and mentorship have played a critical
role in shaping this thesis and helping us achieve our goals.
This thesis was carried out in collaboration with Maersk, and we are especially grateful for the
support provided by the company and the team. A very special thanks goes to Natalia Rezanova,
our key contact at Maersk, for her unwavering assistance, practical insights, and commitment to
our project. Her contributions have been fundamental to the successful completion of this work.
Lastly, we would like to thank our families and friends for their patience, understanding, and en-
couragement throughout this journey.
This thesis was completed on January 26th, 2025.
Thank you all.
Alex Daði Reynisson, Bergur Ástráðsson and Helgi Kristjánsson
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Data
5
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Network Representation
8
4.1
Nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Edges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Generating Initial Rotations
12
5.1
Greedy network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.2
Backbone Flow Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.3
Generating rotations from backbone flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Multi-Commodity Flow
20
6.1
Edge Flow Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2
Column Generation Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7
Metaheuristics
28
7.1
ALNS Components and Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.2
Destroy operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.3
Repair Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.4
Fleet Management Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.5
ALNS Framework Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.6
Parameter Tuning and Experimental Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8
Exact methods
47
8.1
Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.2
Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.3
A Complete MIP Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.4
A Simplified Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
9
Results
62
9.1
Baltic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.2
WAF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
9.3
Mediterranean
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
9.4
Pacific . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
9.5
Asia-Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
9.6
World Small . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
9.7
World Large . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
10 Discussions
72
10.1 Performance of the ALNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
10.2 Exact Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
10.3 Penalty for Forfeiture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
11 Conclusion
76
12 Future work
78
12.1 Multi-Commodity Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
12.2 ALNS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
12.3 Exact methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
Bibliography
81
Appendix A
83
Network Structs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
Appendix B
85
Simplified Model for EM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The liner shipping network design problem (LSNDP) involves determining which set of vessel ser-
vices should be operated where, when, and in what order to achieve the optimal result. The set
of vessel services are cyclic sailing routes for a fleet of container vessels that transport multiple
commodities. Cyclic meaning that they start and end in the same location.
But what does one consider optimal? There can be many ways to approach a problem such as
this. Someone might look at this from an environmental standpoint and conclude that the optimal
solution would be the one where the emission of harmful greenhouse gasses would be kept to a
minimum. Someone else might take the side of the consumer and say that the optimal solution
would service the most clients and deliver the most amount of goods across the network at hand.
The third individual, who might be the owner of the shipping company looking to optimize its set
of services, might take a capitalistic stance on this issue and say that the optimal solution is the
one that brings them the highest amount of profit.
In this thesis, the role of the shipping company owner will be assumed, and the profit-driven perspec-
tive will be examined. If the shipping company in question is only servicing a very small network,
i.e., only a handful of ports, then the problem is fairly easy to solve using brute force. However,
the ambitious owner sees opportunities everywhere and wants to expand the company’s network.
And, as the network grows, the problem of optimizing its set of vessel services very quickly becomes
NP-hard.
Although the problem can become NP-hard just by adding some ports, clients, and demands, other
layers can also be added to the problem. Layers that make it exponentially more complex but simul-
taneously more realistic. Layers such as having the number of vessels per service not fixed, setting
time restrictions on cargo delivery, considering container shortages, empty container re-deliveries,
and even seasonal demand fluctuations or even the weather, to name a few.
To attempt to solve the problem, even in its simplest form, a detailed dataset is required. The
most important part of that data is likely the supply and demand of cargo between ports. The
lack of access to data is what many consider to be the main reason for scarcity when it comes to
logistical planning tools based upon or within the field of liner shipping. This is in contrast to
other transportation business sectors like airlines, railways, and trucking companies, where such
tools have, for years, enhanced performance. Anyone can buy a plane, train, or bus ticket, and
although the price of those tickets might not directly reflect the cost of sending cargo with those
forms of transportation, a lot of data in those sectors has been publicly available for a long time.
However, paying a shipping company to transport a container with some cargo is not on everyone’s
daily to-do list, and some of this data can be extremely sensitive to the shipping company’s opera-
tions. Therefore, these companies have historically kept their cards close to their chest, and their
data away from their competitors. Resulting in the aforementioned scarcity of logical planning
tools available to the liner shipping industry.
This all changed in 2013 when a benchmark suite (Brouer et al., 2013) for liner shipping network
design problems was made available to researchers and others, largely thanks to Maersk. Since then,
==PAGE:8==
1 Introduction
2
the data has been used for multiple reports, articles, and papers exploring different approaches to
solving the LSNDP with varying results.
The scientific research, algorithmic experimentation, and programming implementation of optimiza-
tion heuristics and methods that will be covered in the chapters to come are all done with the aim
of investigating how matheuristics could be utilized to optimize networks in the LSNDP - Or, in
our case, maximize profits.
An effective approach to the LSNDP will need to consider a wide range of different aspects to make
the implementation as close to the real world as possible, while remaining eﬀicient. Brouer et al.
(2013) dives deeply into these aspects, shedding light on the key features. For the purpose of our
implementation, the most relevant considerations will be applied, but others will be chosen to be
ignored. For instance, containers are assumed to be of the same type and measured in forty feet
equivalent units (FFE). Additionally, cabotage and embargo rules are not taken into consideration
and there is no limit on the amount of transshipments. Port stays are fixed to a single day regard-
less of vessel size or port productivity. This can be justified since larger vessels generally visit more
productive ports than smaller vessels resulting in proportionate times in port. Each demand in
the benchmark suite is provided with a maximal transit time which will be respected here. Lastly,
the rotations, which are a sequence of ports that the vessels visit, will retain a weekly frequency,
meaning that a two week long rotation has to be assigned two vessels.
This thesis aims to develop an eﬀicient matheuristic approach for the LSNDP, with the primary ob-
jective of maximizing the profitability of liner shipping networks. As part of this development, the
thesis investigates the influence of initial network configurations on the overall optimization process.
To explore this influence, two distinct strategies for generating initial networks are implemented
and compared: a flow-first approach, utilizing backbone cargo flow through a relaxed network, and
a network-first approach, employing greedy construction heuristics. This comparative analysis is
undertaken to understand how the starting solution’s characteristics can affect the performance of
subsequent optimization methods.
The central component of the proposed solution framework is an Adaptive Large Neighborhood
Search (ALNS) algorithm, enhanced by Multi-Commodity Flow (MCF) optimization using column
generation techniques. The ALNS implementation features a range of structural operators, includ-
ing both destroy and repair methods, specifically designed for network modification. Furthermore,
specialized operators are integrated to optimize vessel deployment and vessel speeds within the
designed network. A key aspect is the incorporation of MCF feedback directly into the ALNS
framework, resulting in a dynamic and adaptive system. This integration enables the algorithm
to learn continuously from changing cargo flow patterns, leveraging this information to guide the
search process more effectively.
To also provide a theoretical understanding of the LSNDP’s limits, the thesis explores exact solu-
tion methods by developing a Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) model specifically for network
design. While computationally intensive for larger problem instances, this MIP model offers valu-
able insights into the inherent complexities and boundaries of optimal network solutions.
The
effectiveness of these developed matheuristic approaches is then evaluated through computational
experiments performed on a variety of Liner-Lib benchmark instances.
This thesis was created in collaboration with the Asset Movement Optimization team at Maersk.
Although the thesis was fundamentally an academic venture, both parties shared an interest in
researching and developing strategies to improve and optimize networks. Thus, the vast knowledge
and experience of the Maersk team helped guide the thesis in the right direction and even select
some of the methods used based on what would be relevant to explore in the real-life Liner Shipping
Network Design world of today.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The LSNDP has been studied since the early 90’s but not immensely. Brouer et al. (2013) reported
that the application of operations research is limited in contrast to other transportation sectors.
The lack of its adoption in the context of containerized liner shipping is expected to relate to the
implicit complexities of the LSNDP and particularly the lack of access to data. To address the issue
at hand Brouer et al. (2013) introduces several data instances that follow the operational structure
of the global industry along with valuable insight into the LSNDP’s domain. These data instances,
referred to as Liner-Lib, are publicly available. Finally, they present a reference model to enable
insightful comparisons of different methods implemented and to encourage further algorithmic im-
provement.
The reference model provided by Brouer et al. (2013) is a base integer programming model that
serves as an extension of a model presented by Álvarez (2009). By extending the flow balance
equations in the model they are able to account for so-called butterfly rotations, where a port (the
butterfly port) within the rotation is visited more than once (most often only twice), which are
regularly used in reality, but mention that in doing so transshipment costs become more diﬀicult
to handle. Additionally, they ensure either weekly or bi-weekly frequency by adding constraints
to the route generation. These extensions aim to capture a more realistic representation of liner
shipping operations used in practice. Brouer et al. (2013) do provide maximal transit time for each
demand in their benchmark suite of data instances to allow for inclusion in future models but do
not incorporate them in their own model.
Notteboom (2006) dives specifically into the role that time plays in liner shipping network design
and how critical it can be both for carriers and customers. Parameters that liner companies need
to have in mind when designing their network and schedules are discussed and emphasis on the
importance of short transit time and high schedule reliability is apparent. The main findings high-
light that port congestion greatly affects schedule reliability encouraging carriers to allow for more
flexibility in their networks and the time that is spent at ports is high, making a number of port
calls a key factor in determining overall transit time.
Agarwal and Ergun (2008) developed an integrated model that is able to route cargo and schedule
ships simultaneously. They present three different solution approaches to solve their mixed integer
linear program which include a greedy heuristic, column generation, and benders decomposition
where the two latter reach solutions of comparable quality. They maintain a weekly frequency and
cargo is able to transship between routes. However, their model ignores the cost of transshipping
since they state that handling such cost while considering the network design and cargo routing is
not trivial. Based on their findings, they conclude that the presented model could potentially help
the development of improved routes for up to a 100 ship fleet and suggest an approach to extend
the model to include transshipment cost, which would increase the model complexity considerably.
In his paper, which includes the model that serves as a foundation for the model by Brouer et al.
(2013), Álvarez (2009) acknowledges that the service frequency is a crucial aspect in liner shipping,
although does not enforce any frequency requirements himself. Rather he allows a service, or a
run, as he defines it to deploy any amount of vessels as long as the amount of available vessels is
not depleted which will directly determine the frequency by dividing the duration of the run with
==PAGE:10==
2 Literature Review
4
the quantity of vessels deployed. The lack of a fixed weekly frequency, which is generally used in
containerized liner shipping, potentially misses out on valuable advantages mentioned by Brouer
et al. (2013) such as allowing total integration of customer supply chains through fixed departures,
simplified network planning and more convenient transshipments. The proposed approach is two-
phased and by fixing/eliminating a part of the constraints of the model it transitions into a pure
multi-commodity flow problem to be solved in each iteration to acquire the cost of the network
which is then optimized through a tabu search algorithm.
Álvarez (2009) carries out a performance benchmark where his proposed heuristic is tested against
an exact branch and bound algorithm on the same model. He reports that in small experiments
of 5-7 ports, the heuristic uses most of the time on route generation but as the problem scope in-
creases solving the container flow becomes the most time-consuming. Karsten et al. (2015) propose a
method to handle exactly that part of the popular two-phase approach, that is the multi-commodity
flow problem. The proposed method allows for the inclusion of the transit time of cargo which ne-
glecting could lead to unrealistic network utilization since cargo could be routed on long detours,
not acceptable in reality (Brouer et al., 2013). They use path formulation to represent the problem
enabling the usage of delayed column generation to obtain necessary paths through solving a series
of resource constrained shortest path problems as subproblems. By solving the subproblems with a
label setting algorithm transit times can be dynamically handled. Later, Brouer et al. (2015) used
the path formulation with column generation to solve the MCF with transit time restrictions and
report a satisfactory performance.
Besides solving both elements of the two-phase approach with heuristic methods, to allow for much
faster evaluation of the networks, Krogsgaard et al. (2018) introduce a new method to generate
initial solutions. A backbone flow is found by flowing containers through a relaxed network with
a direct connection available between all ports. The edge costs of the network are dynamically
decreased as the flow increases such that the flow will consolidate on much fewer edges than avail-
able. From the backbone flow, rotations are generated based on the amount of flow on the edges
such that edges with high flow are prioritized. Profitable initial solutions are reported, showing
promise with this method and providing their algorithm with a good starting point. Krogsgaard
et al. (2018) report the first solution to the largest instance provided in Liner-Lib and, compared
to Brouer et al. (2013), report a better solution for four of the remaining six instances.
In terms of metaheuristics for this problem, our approach was guided by a review of relevant litera-
ture, beginning with the foundational Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) heuristic and progressing
to the ALNS framework introduced by Pisinger and Røpke (2010). To inform our ALNS implemen-
tation, we examined studies. Limited time for parameter tuning necessitated leveraging insights
from existing literature and informed estimations for parameter selection (Christiansen et al., 2021).
The versatility of ALNS was confirmed through reviewing its successful applications in diverse do-
mains, including Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP) (Liu et al., 2024), Pickup and Delivery Problems
with Time Windows (PDPTW)(Ropke & Pisinger, 2006), and crucially, Liner Shipping Network
Design Problems (Agarwal & Ergun, 2008; Bredmose & Jørgensen, 2022; Hellsten et al., 2020).
These prior applications of ALNS, including feeder network design and LSNDP with transit time
constraints, validated its suitability for our research. This literature review aﬀirmed ALNS as a
robust and versatile metaheuristic for the complexities of the LSNDP, justifying its adoption and
guiding key aspects of our implementation.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 3
Data
3.1
Data
The benchmark suite, mentioned in chapter 2, provided by Brouer et al. (2013) will serve as the
input data throughout this project.
It was developed according to publicly available and past
data for Maersk Line and is meant to support method and model implementations for the LSNDP.
Due to the numerous amount of constraints and variables in the real-world applications of Liner
Shipping, this dataset might be considered a simplified version of the problem (still a very complex
one). The Liner-Lib, as they call it, contains seven instances (geographical areas) varying in size
and nature. The instances that will be solved in this project are shown in table 3.1 along with some
of their properties. TVC is the total vessel capacity and TWD is the total weekly demand.
Table 3.1: Overview of the instances solved in this project
Category
Instance
Ports
Demands
Vessels
TVC(FFE)
TWD(FFE)
Single hub
Baltic
12
22
6
3.400
4.904
WAF
20
37
42
28.700
8.541
Multi hub
Mediterranean
45
365
20
14.800
7.545
Trade-lane
Pacific
40
722
100
151.800
44.180
AsiaEurope
114
4.000
176
425.900
76.944
World
WorldSmall
47
1.764
263
611.800
138.247
WorldLarge
197
9.630
501
1.071.100
138.914
The smallest instances, Baltic and WAF, are single-hub instances where Bremerhaven and Algeci-
ras, respectively, serve as hubs. They have considerably fewer ports and demands compared to the
other instances where Baltic has 12 ports and 22 demands and WAF has 20 ports and 38 demands.
The Mediterranean instance can be categorized as a multi-hub instance where Algeciras, Tangier,
and Gioia Tauro serve as hubs. In terms of total weekly demand, this instance is comparable to
the smallest instances but the demand structure is more complicated, with far more different de-
mands with very few containers. There are two trade-lane instances provided in the Liner-Lib data
set, Pacific and Asia-Europe, that represent the vast flow between major geographical areas where
Pacific connects Asia and the US and Asia-Europe, as the name suggests, connects Asia to Europe.
Lastly, there are two world instances, World Small and World Large, with 47 and 197 seven main
ports, respectively, identified by Maersk Line(Brouer et al., 2013).
To facilitate a comprehensive analysis across varying operational conditions, each instance was fur-
ther expanded into Low and High variants. The High variant was generated by decreasing the
Time Charter (TC) rates by a factor of 0.8 and subsequently increasing the vessel quantity by a
factor of 1.2, rounded to the nearest integer. Conversely, the Low variant was created by increasing
TC rates by a factor of 1.4 and reducing vessel quantity by a factor of 0.8, again rounding to the
nearest integer. This methodology for generating Low and High capacity variants is consistent
with the approach outlined in the benchmark paper by Brouer et al. (2013). The base variant will
referred as Med.
Given that we could only find a single source that attempted and succeeded at solving the World
Large instance, we will not expect to find deep and meaningful results there; the instance size is
==PAGE:12==
3.1 Data
6
too big. An ambitious attempt will be made and any interesting results will be reported.
The sections that follow include the structure of the data instances contained in Liner-Lib. The
notation used here is similar to the notation presented by Brouer et al. (2013) and may be used
throughout the report. Data in the Liner-Lib that is not relevant for this project is not displayed
here, such as cabotage region.
3.1.1
Ports
All ports in the instances are uniquely identified using a five-character identifier called UNLOCODE.
It is a composition of the starting characters of different fields such as name, country, and region.
The list of ports also includes their geographical coordinates and max draft limits δP , indicating
what type of vessels are able to visit the ports. Various costs are included in the port list. These
costs are the costs of loading or unloading a single FFE container cP
m, the cost of transshipment
between two rotations for a single container cP
t , the fixed cost of visiting or calling a port cP
f and
lastly the variable port call cost per container cP
v . A complete overview is shown in table 3.2.
Table 3.2
Ports
P
UNLOCODE
aP
Name
nP
Latitude
xP
Longitude
yP
Max Draft
δP
Un(load) Cost
cP
m
Transshipment Cost
cP
t
Fixed Port Call Cost
cP
f
Variable Port Call Cost
cP
v
3.1.2
Vessels
Table 3.3 contains an overview of the data related to the vessel classes. The capacity uV is in FFE,
and the TC rate T V is in USD and is a daily fixed rate per vessel. The TC rate includes basic costs
that come with running a vessel on a daily basis such as crew cost, maintenance, and repair. The
design draft δV is in meters and all the speeds, min speed sV
min, max speed sV
max and design speed
vV
∗are in knots. The fuel consumption at design speed fV
∗and when idle in port fV
0 are in metric
tons and Suez fee sV and Panama fee pV is in USD.
The fuel consumption, also known as bunker consumption, has a substantial impact on the cost
structure of the network.
Brouer et al. (2013) provide a formula for the calculation of bunker
consumption F based on what speed is being utilized by the vessels. F can be estimated by the
following function:
F(s) =
( s
vV∗
)3
· fV
∗
(3.1)
In equation 3.1 the speed s can take any value between the min speed sV
min and max speed sV
max of
vessel V. vV
∗and fV
∗are still the design speed and fuel consumption at design speed.
==PAGE:13==
3.1 Data
7
Table 3.3
Vessels
V
Vessel Class
vV
Capacity
uV
TC rate
T V
Draft
δV
Min Speed
sV
min
Max Speed
sv
max
Design Speed
vV
∗
Fuel consumption, Design Speed
fV
∗
Fuel consumption, Idle
fV
0
Quantity of Vessels
qF
Suez Fee
sV
Panama Fee
pV
3.1.3
Demand
The cargo demand data structure is depicted in table 3.4. Each demand instance contains the
origin port OK of the demand followed by the destination port DK. The amount of containers in
FFE to transport is shown in the quantity dK and the freight rate rK indicates the revenue per
container in USD. Each demand instance also has a maximal transit time tK in weeks.
Table 3.4
Cargo Demand
K
Origin Port
OK
Destination Port
DK
Quantity
dK
Freight Rate
rk
Maximal Transit Time
tK
3.1.4
Distance
The distance data shown in table 3.5 will contain the origin port OD and destination port DD.
Each origin and destination pair has a distance dd in nautical miles and a draft limit δD associated
with it. Suez traversal sD and Panama traversal pD are simply a binary indicator of whether or not
this origin-destination pair traverses the canals. Therefore, the distance data has multiple entries
for each pair based on draft limits and canal traversal.
Table 3.5
Distance
D
Origin Port
OD
Destination Port
DD
Draft
δD
Distance
dD
Suez Traversal
sD
Panama Traversal
pD
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 4
Network Representation
Given the nature of the LSNDP a crucial part is how the network is structured. Multiple ways exist
to represent the network based on different considerations of each LSNDP. However, the rotations
generated through the solution process of the problem must be easily transformed into a graph
structure so the multi-commodity flow can be calculated. In order to construct the graph from
the rotations correctly, some information must be readily available. Firstly, the type of vessel that
services the rotations. Each rotation is assumed to be assigned a single type of vessel that will
determine the capacity of the rotations. Additionally, vessels have different operating speeds that
help determine the rotation duration and the time of individual voyage edges which is necessary in
our implementation. Secondly, the ports visited in each rotation must be gathered in the sequence
they are serviced. In our implementation, a port can be visited more than once in any given rota-
tion meaning that for rotation r the set of port calls for that rotation Qr contains each port call q.
The sequence of port calls will determine the total distance of the rotation so taking the speed of
the assigned vessel into account, the amount of vessels needed to ensure a weekly frequency is found.
The network representation implemented here can be described with a graph G = (N, E) where N
is a set containing all nodes of the graph and E is a set containing all edges of the graph. the sets
of nodes and edges can then be divided further based on their purpose. The nodes of the graph
that are used to represent the ports can be split into four categories as follows:
4.1
Nodes
• Source Nodes - They are generated for each port p ∈P in the instance and will only have
outgoing edges. These nodes are directly connected to the departure nodes and belong to the
set of all source nodes Ns.
• Sink Nodes - They are generated for each port p ∈P in the instance and will only have
ingoing edges from the arrival nodes. These nodes belong to the set of all sink nodes Nz
• Arrival Nodes - For any given rotation r with port calls q ∈Qr arrival nodes are generated
for each port call. If a rotation visits a port more than once the amount of arrival nodes will
correspond to the number of visits. These nodes belong to the set Na
• Departure Nodes - Similarly, for any given rotation r with port calls q ∈Qr departure
nodes are generated for each port call. If a rotation visits a port more than once the amount
of departure nodes will correspond to the number of visits. These nodes belong to the set Nb
The complete set of nodes of the graph is a collection of all the different types of nodes such as
N = Ns ∪Nz ∪Na ∪Nd. If P is the set containing all ports in the network and Qp is the set
containing port calls in port p we can determine the size of N, that is the total number of nodes in
the graph, in the following way:
|N| = 2 · |P| + 2 ·
∑
p∈P
|Qp|
Since there are source and sink nodes generated for each port call in the network, the number of
ports is multiplied by two. Each port call has a unique arrival and departure node, so the number
==PAGE:15==
4.2 Edges
9
of port calls in each port is multiplied by two.
To summarize, each port has one set of source and sink nodes, but each port call within a port has a
unique set of arrival and departure nodes. Meaning, that if the same port appears twice in a rotation,
that port will have two separate port calls, both containing their set of arrival and departure nodes.
4.2
Edges
To connect the nodes introduced above, five different types of edges are defined depending on what
kind of operation is being utilized and to correctly account for cost, time, capacities, etc.
• Voyage - These edges represent the direct voyage from one port’s departure node to another
port’s arrival node. The set of voyage edges can be defined as Ev = {(i, j)|i ∈Nr
a, j ∈Nr
d, r ∈
R}. Here, i and j are the departure and arrival nodes, respectively, of rotation r ∈R and
correspond to consecutive port calls in the rotation. Nr
a and Nr
d are the sets of arrival and
departure nodes of rotation r. The time te for edge e ∈Ev is calculated based on the speed
assigned to the rotation and the distance. There is no cost associated with the voyage edges
in the graph as the cost that stems from operating the vessels does not depend on the amount
of cargo. The capacity of these edges is based on the rotation’s vessel capacity.
• Load - These edges are connected to the departure nodes from the source nodes and represent
the loading of cargo onto the vessels. The set of load edges can be defined as El = {(sp, j)|i ∈
Np
d, p ∈P}. Here, sp is the source node of port p and Np
d is the set containing departure
nodes of the same port. The time te for edge e ∈El is set to one day. Literature where time
constraints are considered in solving the LSNDP is scarce and this value is retrieved from
Karsten et al. (2015). The cost of loading is port specific and retrieved from the data, cP
m.
Load edges have unlimited capacity.
• Unload - These edges are connected from the arrival nodes to the sink nodes and represent
the unloading of cargo from the vessels. The set of unload edges can be defined as Eu =
{(i, zp)|i ∈Np
a, p ∈P}. Here, zp is the sink node of port p and Np
a is the set containing
arrival nodes of the same port. The cost of unloading is the same as loading, cP
m and the time
of unload edges is zero as it is assumed to be accounted for in the internal edges. Unload
edges have unlimited capacity.
• Internal - To connect the arrival and departure nodes of each port call q, we use internal
edges defined by the set Ei = {(i, j)|i ∈Nq
a, j ∈Nq
d, q ∈Qr, r ∈R}. Here, Nq
a and Nq
d
represent the arrival and departure nodes of some port call q. The cost of the internal edges
is zero. The time te for edge e ∈Ei is set to one day and the capacity is based on the capacity
of the rotation associated with the edge.
• Transshipment - When two or more rotations meet in a port, transshipment edges allow
for cargo transshipments between those rotations. These edges connect the arrival node of
a rotation’s port call to the departure node of another rotation’s port call in the same port
and are defined by Et = {(i, j)|i ∈Nrp
a , j ∈Nwp
d , p ∈P, r, w ∈R, r ̸= w} Here, Nrp
a
and
Nwp
d
are the arrival and departure nodes of rotations r and w, respectively, in port p. Cost
of transshipping cargo is also port specific and retrieved from the data, cP
t . The time te for
edge e ∈Et is set to three days as per Karsten et al. (2015) and the capacity is unlimited.
• Forfeited - We have forfeited edges to account for cargo that has to be forfeited due to time
restrictions, capacity, or unprofitability. They are defined by Ef = {(i, j)|i ∈Nk
s , j ∈Nk
z , k ∈
K} such that for each commodity k ∈K there is a forfeited edge from its source node Nk
s to
==PAGE:16==
4.2 Edges
10
its sink node Nk
z so each commodity can be forfeited. The capacity of these edges is equal to
the demand, dK. No extra cost is added for forfeiting cargo.
The complete set of edges can, therefore, be defined as the set E = Ev ∪El ∪Eu ∪Ei ∪Et ∪Ef and
if K is the set of demands the total amount of edges in the graph can be calculated in the following
way:
|E| = |K| + 4 ·
∑
p∈P
|Qp| +
∑
p∈P
(|Qp|2 −|Qp|)
There is a forfeited edge for each commodity, accounted for with |K| and for each port call in port
p ∈P four edges are generated, that is load, unload, internal, and voyage. The last part of the
equation accounts for the transshipment edges. For each port call q in the set of port calls in port
p, Qp, its arrival node is connected to all departure nodes of overlineq ∈Qp giving the following
number of transshipment edges ∑
p∈P (|Qp|2 −|Qp|) in port p.
A visual representation of a hypothetical rotation with four different port calls, A, B, C, and D
can be seen in figure 4.1. All the node types that were introduced above are included in the figure
along with all edge types needed for the example. As this is a single rotation no transshipment
edges are needed. Figure 4.2 shows how cargo can move between rotations when they meet in a
port. A rotation’s arrival node is connected directly to the departure node of another rotation’s
departure node when they have a port call in the same port. The example in figure4.2 only shows
how transshipment edges are connected for two rotations but the idea works the same for multiple
rotations.
Figure 4.1: Rotation visualization
==PAGE:17==
4.2 Edges
11
Figure 4.2: Transshipment representation for two rotations
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 5
Generating Initial Rotations
Several sources highlight the impact of the initial solution on the final solution quality. For example,
Brouer et al. (2014) state that the Pacific instance, a moderately complex LSNDP instance from
Liner-Lib, is ”very dependant on the quality of the initial solution” (p. 129). The matheuristic
used in the study struggled to find high-quality solutions for this instance, often getting stuck in
local minima, suggesting the initial solution heavily influences the search trajectory. As mentioned
earlier, this project, along with a greedy initial network structure, uses a ”reversed approach”,
meaning that the containers are flown first through a relaxed network which forms the backbone
flow used to construct the initial rotations.
A particularly popular algorithmic approach in liner shipping network design is the two-phase
approach. This approach either consists of designing a network of rotations for a given fleet of
vessels and then flowing cargo through the network or creating a backbone flow by flowing the
cargo through a relaxed network and then designing the rotations to match the flow. Most of
the aforementioned algorithms use the first version of this approach. However, Krogsgaard et al.
(2018) utilized the second and claimed that it gave them ”a better initial solution than starting
from scratch, and the relaxed network reflects the ideas behind a physical internet of having a
distributed multi-segment inter-modal transport” (p. 358).
To begin with, this project set off to solely follow in the footsteps of Krogsgaard et al. (2018) using
a flow-first approach. But, due to an extended research period, the initial network was not ready
from the start. Simultaneously, a couple of redesigns for the network setup (redesigns aimed to
simplify programming and optimize run times), caused the initial greedy network, created to test
the ALNS, to be delayed. Because of the research and delays the two different initial solutions were
completed not too far apart from each other.
Usually, in situations like this, delays would be a nuisance. However, since the greedy network
seemed to give promising solutions, the completion of these two networks presented an opportunity.
Now, the project could, along with its previous goals, also examine the difference between these
two opposite versions of the two-phase approach. Run a flow-first developed network through the
same heuristics as an ambitious greedy network and explore the differences.
5.1
Greedy network
The foundation in the development of the greedy initial network was to prioritize profitable edges
when choosing port call destinations for the rotations. The edge profitability was based on cargo
revenue, vessel capacity, and all aﬀiliated costs for adding the edges to the rotation. To be more
specific, the method used was to randomly sort the available vessels into groups and for each group
to serve a rotation. With the number of vessels for each rotation known, the maximum duration of
each rotation was also known. The rotations were constructed one at a time, with each rotation’s
vessel group chosen randomly.
At first, a rotation would have two edges, from one port to another and right back. These two were
also based on profitability. To demonstrate, imagine that the rotation’s vessel capacity allows it
==PAGE:19==
5.1 Greedy network
13
to carry a given quantity of demand (A →B). In return for the delivery, there would be a certain
amount of revenue, and subtracting all the fixed and variable costs of the journey (A > B > A)
from that revenue would show the profit for delivering the maximum quantity of demand (A →B)
and nothing else.
For each rotation, the highest profit demand, and its edges would be selected as that rotation’s first
demand and first set of edges. The idea here was that this would either cause the rotation to travel
only a short and low-cost distance or if the distance were longer, the revenue would be worth it.
After that, a set of two or three edges at a time were added to the rotation, always between the
rotation’s last port and its first port. Each time ensuring circularity and that the maximum dura-
tion for the rotation would not be exceeded.
For each port call addition, the most profitable set of edges was always selected. This could mean
one of four possibilities as demonstrated in 5.1. For simplicity’s sake, the earlier example will be
used again.
1. If demand (B →A) exists, that edge could be added. Should another port call be added later,
it would be after A, thereby creating a butterfly rotation: (A > B > A > ? > A).
2. If a demand (B →C) exists, that edge could be added. With the following edge being from
the demand’s destination, C, to the rotation’s first port, A. Should another port call be added
later, it would be between C and A: (A > B > C > ? > A).
3. If a demand (C →A) exists, two new edges could be added. First, the vessel would sail empty
from B to the demand’s origin port, C. Then, between C and A, to fulfill the demand. Again,
should another port call be added later, it would be after A, thereby creating a butterfly
rotation: (A > B > C > A > ? > A).
4. If a demand (C →D) exists, two new edges could be added. First, the vessel would sail
empty from B to C. Then, between C and D, to fulfill the demand. Should another port call
be added later, it would be between D and A: (A > B > C > D > ? > A).
Figure 5.1: Rotation edges addition options.
Which option would be selected and to fulfill which demand would again be based on profit just
like with the first two edges. The same process would then be repeated until no port calls can
be added without exceeding the rotation’s maximum duration. Note that, the construction of the
==PAGE:20==
5.2 Backbone Flow Implementation
14
greedy network, and the backbone network follow the constraint that only one butterfly port is
allowed, disallowing more than one duplicate port in the rotation to better simulate real-world
Marine Logistics.
After all rotations had been constructed, the unused capacities on the rotation edges were exam-
ined and used if possible. For example, a rotation might include two ports that have some unmet
demand between them, but the rotation doesn’t go directly between the two; one or more port calls
might be between them. But, if there is unused capacity on the edges between them, then this
capacity would be used to fulfill the demand in question. The most profitable demand is always
selected when choosing cargo to fill the free capacity if multiple demands are available.
After inter-rotation unused capacity has been exploited, a similar method is used to add trans-
shipment between ports. For this to happen, two rotations must share a port that could be used
as a transshipment port. Additionally, one of the rotations must also include a demand’s origin
port, and the other rotation must include the same demand’s destination port. Again, the most
profitable demand is always chosen if multiple demands are available to utilize the free capacity on
the edges to and from the transshipment port for the respective rotations.
When no demand can be added to any of the rotations, the network is complete.
The idea behind this greedy method is prioritizing high-revenue cargo and low-cost journeys in
hopes of maximizing profit while still fulfilling as much demand as possible. The networks this
method produces will not be perfect, nor will they always be profitable. They are simply supposed
to give a decent starting point for the matheuristic algorithms.
5.2
Backbone Flow Implementation
Seeing as there are many different ways of generating initial solutions, it is diﬀicult to accurately
determine which one is best suitable. What remains certain, though, is that an initial solution is
needed for our implementation to work and the originality of the method developed by Krogsgaard
et al. (2018) intrigued us. The idea is simple and proved to generate effective initial solutions for
the World Small instance. The idea is to get an image of how the containers would want to flow
through a network without having any restrictions caused by the rotations such as capacity or
unavailability of ports. With complete freedom caused by the nature of the relaxed network, which
will be introduced shortly, containers do have the option to flow freely from origin to destination.
5.2.1
Relaxed Network
The creation of the relaxed network serves as the foundation for generating the backbone flow,
which allows us to evaluate how the containers flow from their origin to their destination.
In
essence, the relaxed network is a fully connected directed graph where nodes represent ports and
edges the potential shipping legs between those ports. Unlike the detailed network structures that
include many different types of nodes and edges with various costs, capacities, and functionalities,
the relaxed network intentionally simplifies the representation. Each port is modeled as a single
node, and edges connect every port to every other port within the dataset of the given instance.
This approach eliminates the need for other node types, such as arrival and departure nodes, which
play an important role in modeling the detailed vessel and container movement but are unnec-
essary at this stage. The goal is to analyze how containers flow through the network based on
demand. The relaxed network can be defined by a graph Gr = (N, E), where N = {i|i ∈P} and
E = {(i, j)|i, j ∈P, i ̸= j}. Here, P is the set of ports in the given instance.
==PAGE:21==
5.2 Backbone Flow Implementation
15
As previously mentioned, the key concept of the backbone flow is to see how the containers gather
on the edges with no restrictions. This means that the edges in Gr will not have any capacity and
maximal transit times of commodities will be ignored when generating the backbone flow. We want
the flow to consolidate on a few edges in comparison to the total number of edges available which
would indicate that having those edges in the rotations generated later on, is highly favorable. We
believe that including time restrictions in the backbone, flow might obscure or limit consolidation
too much, leading to poor results when generating the rotations from the flow.
A decisive feature of the backbone flow algorithm is the pricing of the edges in Gr as it should
incentivize the containers to group together.
The cost function suggested by Krogsgaard and
Thorsen (2016) will be implemented here as it captures the fact that it is more economical to
transport large amounts of containers compared to a small amount.
As the load on the edge
increases, the cost slowly decreases such that the initial container will be most costly. For any edge
(i, j) its cost cij at a certain load lij can be calculated as follows:
cij = c0
ij
(cu
ij
c0
ij
) lij
u
Here, c0
ij and cu
ij represent the cost of flowing the first container and the container flown when the
vessel used for cost calculations has reached its capacity u, respectively. Contrary to Krogsgaard
and Thorsen (2016), that uses the same vessel class for all instances, we calculate the average vessel
capacity in each instance to determine what vessel class is most suitable. The number of different
types of vessel classes differ between instances and the vessel class closest to the average capacity
is chosen. An overview of the chosen vessel classes for each instance is in table 5.1. The total cost
of an edge cT
ij, which is used to determine c0
ij and cu
ij is highly dependent on the chosen vessel class
and is calculated by:
cT
ij = cf + ca
TC + cc + 1
2(ci + cj)
The total cost of an edge is derived under the assumption that design speed is used by the vessels
where cf is the fuel cost, ca
TC is the accumulated TC rate(daily fixed cost) depending on the duration
and cc is the canal cost. An edge in the relaxed network will go the shortest distance between ports
i ∈P and j ∈P, which could mean traversal through one or both of the canals. That leaves the
port call cost which can be broken down in the following way
ci = cf
i + cv
i · u + cTC + ci
f
where cf
i is the fixed port call cost, cv
i is the variable port call cost based on the vessel’s capacity u.
It is assumed that a vessel stays a single day in port and is accounted for by adding the daily fixed
cost cTC. Finally, ci
f is the idle fuel consumption while the vessel is in port. Each edge only accounts
for half of the port call cost for each port it visits since a port will always have another ingoing or
outgoing edge that shares the cost, and the total port call cost is thus accounted for. Based on the
definition of the edge costs one might notice that transshipments are not taken into the calculation.
Krogsgaard and Thorsen (2016) mention that accounting for transshipment costs is diﬀicult to
do accurately and skip it altogether. It is reasonable to state that an accurate representation of
those costs is hard to achieve in the current network structure but it could be interesting to see
how the flow consolidates if some kind of implementation of transshipment costs is performed. A
simple way is to look at historical data and find major hub ports where transshipments are likely
to occur and add a cost to the edges connected to those ports. A random factor could determine
if the cost is added to symbolize that not all the containers are transshipped. Given that previous
results generated by using the method as it is have shown great promise and that the backbone
flow solution is only meant as an initial solution transshipments will not be addressed at this time.
==PAGE:22==
5.2 Backbone Flow Implementation
16
Table 5.1: Average Vessel Capacities
Instance
Averagage Capacity
Vessel Class
Baltic
567
Feeder 450
WAF
683
Feeder 800
Mediterranean
740
Feeder 800
Pacific
1518
Panamax 1200
World Small
2326
Panamax 2400
Asia Europe
2420
Panamax 2400
The cost of flow the first container c0
ij and the container at capacity cu
ij through edge (i, j) are
derived from the total cost of an edge cT
ij in the following way:
c0
ij = acT
ij
u
cu
ij = bcT
ij
u
The purpose of the parameters, a and b, is to scale the average cost of the edge
cT
ij
u . The values
chosen for these parameters are a = 10 and b = 0, 001, as recommended by Krogsgaard and Thorsen
(2016). What that means is that the first container that flows through an edge will cost ten times
the average cost and the container that flows on capacity limit will cost considerably less, or 0,1%
of the average cost. Note that even though there is a certain capacity u based on the vessel choice,
the edges do not include any capacity, as mentioned earlier, and u is just used for cost calculations.
That being said, the flow on the edges might exceed the capacity of the largest vessels that operate
on the rotations generated from the backbone flow by a large margin. As the backbone flow is
only meant to indicate what edges are attractive and should be utilized, this is not an issue at this
stage. Later on, when rotations have been constructed, the actual flow of cargo is determined with
respected capacities.
Figure 5.2 shows how an actual example of container costs for an edge from DEBRV(Bremerhaven)
to ESALG(Algericas) in the World Small instance where the chosen vessel class is Panamax 2400.
In figure 5.2(a) the development of the cost function as the flow increases is shown. At a load
of 600 FFE, which is 25% of the vessel’s capacity, the cost of flowing a container is equal to the
average cost. More interestingly, figure 5.2(b) shows how the accumulated container cost on the
edge intersects with the total edge cost at 655 FFE, just over 27% of the vessel’s capacity. The total
cost of the edge is thus accounted for at a relatively low load, and at that point, the curve starts to
saturate which might lead to a high degree of consolidation. At a full load, the accumulated cost
of flowing the containers exceeds the total cost of the edge by around 8,7%, which is considered to
be reasonably close.
==PAGE:23==
5.2 Backbone Flow Implementation
17
(a) Development of cost function as load in-
creases
(b) Accumulating container cost compared to to-
tal cost
Figure 5.2: Edge between DEBRV and ESALG
After defining the relaxed network and introducing the cost structure, it is possible to flow the
containers through the network. Given the nature of the cost function, which decreases as con-
tainer flow increases, individually flowing the containers one by one is the most sensible thing to
do, so that the most accurate picture of the backbone flow can be established. This means that a
shortest path problem is defined and solved for every container in the instance and edge costs are
adjusted after each iteration. All edge costs in Gr are initialized subject to zero flow by using the
cost function and a demand is chosen at random from the list of remaining demands. By using
Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm the shortest(cheapest) path from origin(Ok) to destination(Dk,)
based on current edge costs, is found. The flow on the edges used in the path is increased by one
and afterwards, the edge costs are updated based on the added flow. Finally, the demand that was
chosen is decreased by one, and the algorithm terminates after all containers have made their way
through the network. The backbone flow algorithm 1 is shown below.
Algorithm 1 Backbone Flow
Require: Relaxed graph(network) Gr
1: c(e) ←Initialize all edge costs based on zero flow
2: while still remaining demands do
3:
k ←randomly chosen demand
4:
path ←Dijsktra(Gr, Ok, Dk, c(e))
5:
for edge ∈path do
6:
flow on edge increased by 1
7:
c(edge) calculated with increased flow
8:
end for
9:
remaining demands for k decreased by 1
10: end while
When the algorithm terminates the resulting flow is significantly influenced by the order in which
the demands are flown since they are randomly chosen in each iteration. In an attempt to offset
this problem, the algorithm is run ten times and the final flow on each edge is the average flow over
the ten runs. For the larger instances, with over 130000 containers, run times of a single iteration
of algorithm 1 could get up to 90 seconds, which could lead to extensive run times obtaining the
average flow. In an attempt to counter the long run times another option would be to flow containers
in batches, to speed up the algorithm, where batch size depends on the size of the individual
demands. Preliminary results when using batch sizes did not show promise as consolidation on
edges was too excessive which caused problems when generating rotations from the backbone flow.
Therefore, containers will be flown individually, and longer run times accepted as it gives better
initial solutions.
==PAGE:24==
5.3 Generating rotations from backbone flow
18
5.3
Generating rotations from backbone flow
The backbone flow, created from the relaxed network, shows the routes that cargo takes depending
on demand between ports. The backbone flow implementation prioritizes routes that utilize high-
demand edges, demonstrating the actual dynamics of demand flow. This focus on high-demand
routes helps create rotations that maximize ship eﬀiciency and minimize operating costs. The gen-
eration of vessel rotations from the backbone flow transforms the cargo flow patterns into practical
shipping routes. Inspired by the work of Krogsgaard et al. (2018), we adopt a greedy heuristic
approach that balances eﬀiciency with computational simplicity. This method ensures the quick
creation of candidate rotations, increasing the likelihood of identifying effective initial solutions
while considering runtime.
In our implementation, we employ sequential generation of rotations rather than parallel generation.
Specifically, the algorithm constructs one rotation one at a time, iteratively adding unserved edges
with the greatest demand to the current rotation. The largest vessels are chosen first to ensure that
high-demand edges are serviced by vessels with suﬀicient capacity while respecting constraints such
as draft limits in ports and canals. To maintain a weekly schedule typical in the shipping industry,
we assign one vessel for each week of the rotation. For example, if the duration of the rotation is
set for 4 weeks, then four vessels will be assigned to that rotation.
5.3.1
Duration Constraints and Randomization
To introduce variability and ensure diverse initial solutions, the duration of each rotation is selected
randomly within predefined intervals, as seen in table 5.2, which summarizes the maximum duration
intervals for different vessel classes. These intervals reflect practical operational considerations, such
as typical voyage lengths for different vessel types.
Table 5.2: Allowed Duration of Rotations Based on Vessel Class
Vessel Class
Max Length Interval (Weeks)
Super Panamax (7500 FFE)
[4, 10]
Post Panamax (4200 FFE)
[7, 14]
Panamax (2400 FFE)
[6, 12]
Panamax (1200 FFE)
[4, 10]
Feeder (800 FFE)
[2, 8]
Feeder (450 FFE)
[2, 5]
This randomization strategy allows us to generate broader solution space by varying the lengths of
rotations within reasonable bounds.
5.3.2
Sequential Generation of Rotations
The backbone flow method constructs initial shipping network rotations by sequentially prioritizing
routes that align with significant cargo demand, aiming to eﬀiciently utilize larger vessels on primary
flow paths. The process begins by considering vessel classes in descending order of capacity, from
Super Panamax to Feeder class. For each vessel class, the algorithm attempts to create rotations
until all available vessels of that class are assigned, respecting operational duration limits for each
rotation based on the vessel type.
To initiate a rotation, the algorithm first identifies the unserved shipping route (edge) with the
highest cargo flow, marking the start of the rotation along a major demand corridor. A direct
return edge is initially added to the starting port to form a basic closed loop, ensuring initial
feasibility in terms of duration. Subsequently, the algorithm iteratively expands this rotation as
long as the total duration remains within limits. In each step, the current return edge is replaced to
extend the route. Edge selection during expansion is strategic, prioritizing cargo flow maximization.
==PAGE:25==
5.3 Generating rotations from backbone flow
19
The algorithm first attempts to find a ”forward” edge from the current last port, leading to a new
port and increasing cargo flow, evaluating all available and eligible edges while avoiding immediate
backtracking. The forward edge with the highest cargo flow is chosen.
If no suitable forward edge is found, the algorithm broadens its search to include ”backtracking”
edges, re-examining all available edges, even those towards previously visited ports, again prioritiz-
ing cargo flow. Furthermore, if direct edge extensions are not viable, the algorithm seeks an ”inflow
path” towards the home port. This involves finding intermediate ports with high cargo flow routes
directed homewards. For each potential intermediate port, the algorithm evaluates the time and
flow implications of routing through it for the return leg, ensuring duration constraints are met
and selecting the path that maximizes cargo flow back to the home port. This allows for eﬀicient
detours to reconnect with major flows and the rotation’s origin. Rotation expansion continues until
adding another edge would exceed the maximum duration. At this point, the rotation is finalized,
and the algorithm proceeds to generate the next rotation, addressing remaining unserved high-flow
edges, potentially with the same or a smaller vessel class. This approach, guided by cargo flow and
incorporating strategic edge selection with forward, backtracking, and inflow path considerations,
aims to create eﬀicient initial rotations aligned with demand, providing robust starting solutions
for further optimization, while maintaining computational eﬀiciency.
This approach, while straightforward, ensures that high-demand edges are covered first using the
largest vessels. The simplicity of the sequential generation process also aids in quick computation,
making it suitable for generating a wide range of candidate solutions, as emphasized by Krogsgaard
et al. (2018).
5.3.3
Results of Initial Solution From Backbone Flow
The quality of the approach was tested by generating five different backbone flows for the World
Small instance and creating 20 different networks from each of them. To obtain a solution value
the multi-commodity flow(introduced in chapter 6) is solved and the solution values in table 5.3
signify the profit/loss of the networks.
Table 5.3: Results from backbone flow algorithm for the World Small instance. Profit/loss in M$
Best Solution
Average Solution
Median Solution
Worst Solution
Flow 1
-29,8
-39,4
-40,1
-47,9
Flow 2
-40,1
-37,1
-35,7
-52,3
Flow 3
-41,7
-48,9
-49,3
-54,5
Flow 4
-37,7
-46,2
-46,4
-50,4
Flow 5
-27,7
-39,7
-40,8
-51,9
None of the solution values resulted in a profitable solution in this instance(World Small). This
is partially due to time restrictions when flowing containers through the network using the multi-
commodity flow algorithm as we observed that profitable solutions could be generated when time
constraints were relaxed. The first column shows the best solution across all flows with Flow 5
showing the least loss of -27,7M$, while Flow 3 has the most loss, in terms of the best solution,
at -41,7M$. Similarly, there is also variation in the average solution values with Flow 2 showing
the most favorable average outcome and Flow 3 the least favorable at -48,9M$. Regarding median
and worst solution values, Flow 3 remains the least profitable, with the worst median and overall
solutions. This indicates that the selection of backbone flows and the random factor in rotation
duration when generating the network from the flow significantly impact the network’s eﬀiciency.
Note that these results do not reflect the initial solutions results in chapter 9 since those are from
different runs.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 6
Multi-Commodity Flow
The role of the MCF problem is crucial in the context of the LSNDP. Given a network provided
by rotations, a solution to the MCF problem will demonstrate how the cargo should flow and thus
bring forth valuable information e.g. transshipment points, (un)met demand, what rotation(s) con-
tainers belong to, and revenue/costs associated with transporting containers through the current
network. The network construction phase of the two-phase approach is then able to utilize the
information gathered which is vital for further network development.
The MCF problem receives a complete network as described in chapter 4 and aims to find the
most profitable flow while respecting demand-specific time restrictions, vessel capacities, and other
constraints. To visualize this a small example is shown in figure 6.1 with two rotations, R1 and
R2, three ports, DEBRV, DKAAR, and FIRAU, and three commodities, K1, K2, and K3. The
network is significantly simplified for ease of comprehension, containing only voyage edges and a
single node for each port. However, when solving it all edges are assumed to be in place. We
base our example on data from the Baltic instance with accurate costs, distance, and times but
the demand data which includes the origin and destination, amount, revenue, and maximal transit
times is generated to fit the example. Each rotation is assigned the vessel class Feeder 450 which
determines the capacity of the edges. Table 6.1 includes an overview of the demand data including
the time in transit for the commodities and table 6.2 is an overview of the costs. Note that D1
has to be transshipped where the rotations meet in DKAAR with a transshipment time of 72 hours.
Table 6.1: Overview of the commodities used in the small example
Commodity
Orig
Dest
Dem
Rev
Max Time(h)
Transit Time(h)
K1
DEBRV
FIRAU
450
2.750
240
174
K2
DEBRV
DKAAR
450
1.200
240
37
K3
DKAAR
FIRAU
450
1.200
120
65
Table 6.2: Handling and transshipment cost for ports in the small example
Port
(Un)load Cost
Transhipment Cost
DEBRV
199
121
FIRAU
196
146
DKAAR
429
203
Finding the optimal flow solutions, based on maximizing profit, for this example is straightforward.
Each of the commodities can either be forfeited or take a single path, so by subtracting the costs
from the revenue for each of them, the expected profit per container is established.
Since the
containers are assumed to be of the same type, having the same handling and transshipment costs,
the vessel will always be filled with the demand of the highest revenue if feasible. All demands in
our example are 450 which is equal to the capacity of the edges and therefore two scenarios exist.
Either flowing all of K1 by transshipping between rotations in DKAAR or flowing all of K2 and K3.
As can be seen from table 6.1 none of the commodities will violate their maximal transit times so
it is just a matter of which demand fulfillment will generate the most profit. K1 pays for loading in
==PAGE:27==
6.1 Edge Flow Formulation
21
DEBRV, transhipping in DKAAR, and unloading in FIRAU, resulting in 2152 profit per container.
K2 pays for loading in DEBRV and unloading in DKAAR, K3 loading in DKAAR and unloading
in FIRAU, resulting in 572 and 575 profit per container, respectively.
In figure 6.1(2) the maximum transit times are set to be as in table 6.1 where it shows that flowing
all of K1 is optimal with a profit of 968400 compared to 516150 if K2 and K3 had been fulfilled.
Figure 6.1(3) shows the optimal solution if the maximal transit time of K1 is restricted further and
set to be less than 174. By reducing the maximal transit time, the path that K1 could initially
take becomes infeasible and K1 cannot be fulfilled. Hence, the most profitable option now is to
transport both demands K2 and K3, resulting in considerably less profit.
Figure 6.1: Two rotations and flow solutions for the small example
6.1
Edge Flow Formulation
The MCF problem can be formulated in several ways depending on specific requirements and the
formulations are typically either edge or path-based, subject to what kind of approach will be
adopted to solve the problem. Ahuja et al. (2014) mention that various approaches have been in-
troduced by researchers including price-directive decomposition, resource-directive decomposition,
and partitioning methods.
Krogsgaard et al. (2018) implement a price-directive decomposition
method where the capacity constraints are Lagrangian relaxed and the use of an edge’s capacity
then penalized in the objective function. In that case, an edge based formulation is ideal and in
accordance with our problem it can be formulated based on the model in Karsten et al. (2015) in
the following way:
Sets
N
All nodes of the graph
E
All edges of the graph
U
All unload edges of the graph(U ⊂E)
K
All commodities
==PAGE:28==
6.1 Edge Flow Formulation
22
Parameters
dk
Demand of commodity k ∈K
rk
Revenue for commodity k ∈K
cij
Cost of edge (i, j) ∈E
uij
Capacity of edge (i, j) ∈E
Ok
Origin of commodity k ∈K
Dk
Destination of commodity k ∈K
Decision Variables
xk
ij
Amount of commodity k ∈K using edge (i, j) ∈E
Minimize
∑
(i,j)∈E
∑
k∈K
cijxk
ij −
∑
k∈K
∑
(i,j)∈U
rkxk
ij
(6.1)
Subject to
∑
k∈K
xk
ij ≤uij
∀(i, j) ∈E
(6.2)
∑
j∈N
xk
ij −
∑
j∈N
xk
ji = 0
∀i ∈N/{Ok, Dk}, ∀k ∈K
(6.3)
∑
j∈N
xk
ij −
∑
j∈N
xk
ji = −dk
i = Dk, ∀k ∈K
(6.4)
∑
j∈N
xk
ij −
∑
j∈N
xk
ji = dk
i = Ok, ∀k ∈K
(6.5)
xk
ij ≥0
∀(i, j) ∈E, k ∈K
(6.6)
Here, the objective function 6.1 aims to minimize the cost related to flow while including the rev-
enue generated from containers that reach their final destination. The objective corresponds to
maximizing profit where a negative objective value will signify a profitable solution. Constraint 6.2
ensures that the combined flow of all commodities on an edge does not exceed the edge’s capacity.
Constraints 6.3 - 6.5 ensure flow conservation for nodes aside from origin and destination nodes
of commodities, for all origin nodes and all destination nodes, respectively. Lastly, the decision
variable is linearly defined in 6.6 which allows for a fraction of containers to be flown through the
network. However, vessels usually carry very large amounts of containers and a fractional solution
will not have a significant effect. With the demands being fixed, the uncertainty in the predicted
demand versus the demand, in reality, will outweigh the errors stemming from allowing a fractional
amount of containers (Karsten et al., 2015). Furthermore, in their paper, Brouer et al. (2011) do
not enforce time constraints in their cargo allocation model but conclude that most solutions are
in fact integral and that simply finding the floor value of fractional solutions yields a gap of less
than 0,01% when considering the objective value.
Brouer et al. (2011) formulate their problem both edge-based and path-based to allow for compari-
son of the two different formulations. They use both models to solve seven different instances over
five different time periods and the results they obtained guided us in the direction of column gen-
eration. They use delayed column generation to solve the path-based model and report that CPU
times are significantly less using the column generation algorithm, even for the smallest instances.
However, as noted before, Brouer et al. (2011) disregard transit times in their implementation.
Cost and time are usually considered to be the most vital factors when it comes to achieving a
competitive network design (Karsten et al., 2015) and both are within the scope of this project.
The next chapters will introduce the column generation approach and how it is implemented with
maximal transit times.
==PAGE:29==
6.2 Column Generation Approach
23
6.2
Column Generation Approach
A commonly seen approach when solving the LSNDP is column generation and has been adopted
by Agarwal and Ergun (2008), Brouer et al. (2011) and Brouer et al. (2013) to name a few examples.
It is a well-established optimization technique within in operations research known for its ability
to handle large-scale problems effectively. In short, a master problem is defined which corresponds
to the path flow formulation which is then reduced, and new variables are dynamically generated
by solving a subproblem. Karsten et al. (2015) suggests how the edge flow model can be turned
into a path flow model and shows how the time constraints can be handled in the subproblem.
6.2.1
Path Flow Formulation
Here we display the path-based formulation inspired by the one found in Karsten et al. (2015) and
demonstrate how the problem can be reduced or restricted with only a few of the total variables.
Previously the flow variable for each commodity was defined for each edge but now it is defined
for each feasible path through the network. The additional sets, updated parameters, and decision
variables followed by the model are depicted below.
Sets
P
All feasible paths
P k
All feasible paths for commodity k ∈K
P k
f
Forfeited path(edge) of commodity k ∈K
P k(e)
All feasible paths for commodity k ∈K using edge e ∈E
P(e)
All feasible paths that using edge e ∈E
Parameters
dk
Demand of commodity k ∈K
rk
Revenue for commodity k ∈K
cp
Cost of path p ∈P
uij
Capacity of edge (i, j) ∈E
Decision Variables
xp
Amount of specific commodity on path p ∈P
Minimize
∑
k∈K
∑
p∈P k
cpxp −
∑
k∈K
∑
p∈P k/P k
f
rkxp
(6.7)
Subject to
∑
p∈P(e)
xp ≤uij
∀(i, j) ∈E
(6.8)
∑
p∈P k
xp = dk
∀k ∈K
(6.9)
xp ≥0
∀k ∈K, p ∈P k
(6.10)
This formulation contains |E|+|K| constraints compared to |E|+|K||N| in the edge based model.
However, generally speaking, the number of variables may be exponential in this case, highlighting
the need to decompose the problem further. In our model, as it is now which will be referred to
as the master problem(MP), the objective function 6.7 still minimizes costs with the inclusion of
revenue and the cost parameter cp is the cost of a feasible path p. A feasible path is either a direct
edge from the source node to the sink node of the destined demand, meaning forfeited demand,
or some traversal through the network with associated costs and revenue. Constraint 6.8 ensures
that flow on all paths that use a certain edge does not exceed the edge’s capacity since the set P(e)
contains all feasible paths that use edge e. Constraint 6.9 ensures that the combined flow on all
==PAGE:30==
6.2 Column Generation Approach
24
feasible paths for a commodity equals the commodity’s demand. The path variables in 6.10 are
positively linearly defined as in the edge-based formulation.
6.2.2
Solution Approach
After having defined the MP we can now introduce the concept of delayed column generation which
revolves around providing the MP with a restricted set of path variables that leads to a feasible
solution. That is, a restricted master problem(RMP), when solved with a reduced set of columns,
P k, for each commodity, there exists a feasible solution using some or all of the columns generating
dual variables from both constraint sets. From constraint 6.8 we get the dual variables λij for all
edges and from constraint 6.9 we get πk for all commodities. Initially, P k will consist of all forfeited
paths, P k
f , as it provides a feasible solution since all commodities have a designated forfeited path
and the capacity of the edge in those paths is set equal to the demand. The transit times of those
paths are set to the maximal transit time of the commodities as it will ensure feasibility but remain
unattractive.
The dual variables play a significant role throughout the process as they guide the generation of
new columns(path variables) that should be added to P k before the RMP is solved again. They
do so by incorporating them in the calculation of the reduced cost of a path which indicates if the
path can lead to an improvement of the current RMP solution. In our case, the reduced cost of a
path p ∈P can be defined as follows:
cp =
∑
(i,j)∈E(p)
(cij −λij) −πkp −rkp
(6.11)
In equation 6.11 E(p) contains all edges of path p and kp is the commodity related to that path.
Remember that each feasible path is associated with a certain commodity. By definition(Ahuja
et al., 2014), when a new path has been generated from the complete set of feasible paths(that do
not already exist in the RMP) and has a reduced cost of cp < 0 it could potentially improve the
current solution if added to the reduced set of columns. If, however, no feasible paths are found
to meet that criteria and cp ≥0 then the optimal solution to the RMP using the reduced set of
columns P k also serves as the optimal solution to the original problem.
The process of finding new feasible paths for the commodities with negative reduced cost or es-
tablish that no such paths exist will constitute the subproblem of the delayed column generation
algorithm. In general, the subproblem can be represented as an ordinary shortest path problem
where the objective is to minimize the reduced cost of a path through the network, with edge
weights corresponding to cij −λij and subtracting πk and rk to complete the calculation of the
reduced cost. Various methods exist to solve such a problem including Dijkstra’s algorithm as used
to solve the subproblem presented by Brouer et al. (2011). As we wish to include transit time in
our model, considerably increasing the problem’s complexity, a different method is chosen which
is a labeling algorithm. The effectiveness of such algorithms applied to shortest path problems
with resource constraints has shown great potential, also in combination with column generation
as reported by Feillet et al. (2004). The fundamentals of the labeling algorithm, inspired by Feillet
et al. (2004) and Karsten et al. (2015) are detailed in chapter 6.2.3.
The column generation algorithm 2 shows how the RMP and the labeling algorithm 3 work together.
The reduced set of columns P k is first initialized with the forfeited edges to provide the RMP with
a feasible solution so the first dual variables can be generated. Then, for each commodity, the path
with the most negative reduced cost is found(if such a path exists) and added to the reduced set
of columns. Solving the RMP again to generate new dual variables makes it possible to keep the
==PAGE:31==
6.2 Column Generation Approach
25
process going until there are no more paths with negative reduced costs for any commodity and
the algorithm terminates.
Algorithm 2 Column Generation
Require: Graph G
Require: Revenues rk for all k ∈K
Require: Maximal transit time Tk for all k ∈K
1: P k ←Initialize with forfeited edges
2: while paths added do
3:
πk, λij ←solve RMP with P k
4:
for k ∈K do
5:
bestLabel, L ←LabelingAlgortihm(G, k, Ok, Dk, λij, Tk)
6:
if bestLabel ̸= ∅then
7:
path ←RetrievePath(bestLabel, L)
▷Backtrack through predecessors
8:
pathCost ←CalculateCost(path, λij)
9:
cp ←pathCost −πk −rk
10:
if cp ≤0 then
11:
P k ←path
12:
end if
13:
end if
14:
end for
15: end while
6.2.3
Labeling Algorithm for Sub Problem
The shortest path problem with resource constraints(SPPRC) has for several decades been an ac-
cessory to successful implementations of column generation algorithms(Irnich & Desaulniers, 2005).
There exist many eﬀicient algorithms to solve such problems based on its properties with Dijkstra
and Bellman-Ford likely the most well known. Karsten et al. (2015), though, suggests using a
labeling algorithm since the inclusion of time constraints increases the problem’s complexity con-
siderably and will be adopted here. In our SPPRC we have two resources to consider, transit time,
which is our constrained resource since it is bounded in the destination nodes of the commodities,s
and reduced cost, which is unconstrained and minimized in the algorithm.
As the name suggests, the algorithm makes use of labels that keep track of necessary information as
they are extended. Labels are extended until they reach the desired destination or it is known that
they will not result in a feasible path. If it is certain that other labels will provide a better path,
that is other labels dominate the label in question, that label will not be kept nor extended further.
That gives rise to two important features of the labeling algorithm, the extension and dominance
of labels. A label is on the form l = (c, t, n, p) where c and t are the accumulated cost and time,
respectively, n is the current node of the label and p is the node’s predecessor. A label can only
be extended if the extension from node n to the next reachable node results in a total time that is
less than the commodity’s maximal transit time.
A significant part of the algorithm is maintaining the number of labels relatively small by the
use of a dominance rule, which is able to determine if a label is unnecessary and can be deleted.
Getting rid of useless labels will cause the algorithm to terminate faster as fewer labels need to be
considered. If a label la is to dominate label lb both resources, cost and time, have to be considered.
It needs to hold that cost(la) ≤cost(lb) and time(la) ≤time(lb). If both labels have reached the
same node and the dominance rule holds then label lb can be discarded. The algorithm checks for
dominance when a new label is created. If no labels yet exist at the same node a dominance check
==PAGE:32==
6.2 Column Generation Approach
26
is not applicable and the label is kept. When labels at the same node do already exist, a dominance
check is conducted to determine if any label at the node dominates the new label and if not, the
new label is kept and any labels that the new label dominates are deleted.
The complete labeling algorithm 3 is executed for each commodity k ∈K. It requires the complete
network which is represented by a graph structure G containing edge costs and time, the dual vari-
ables for each edge, λij, and the specific demand k with its associated origin(Ok), destination(Dk)
and maximal transit time(T). At the end of the algorithm, only the label with lowest cost(with
respect to the dual variables) is returned, along with the complete set of labels, so the path can be
retrieved by backtracking through the predecessors.
Algorithm 3 Labeling Algorithm
Require: Complete graph G with edges E[G]
Require: Dual variables λij
Require: k, Ok, Dk, T
1: PQ ←Create priority queue with cost as priority and initialize with Ok
2: L ←Create a set of vectors for labels to extend initialized with first label at Ok
3: bestLabel ←∅
4: while PQ ̸= ∅do
5:
n ←first node in PQ based on lowest cost
6:
Remove n from PQ
7:
Ln ←Get all existing labels at n
8:
for l ∈Ln do
9:
if n = Dk and l.time ≤T and l.cost < bestLabel.cost then
10:
bestLabel ←l
11:
continue
12:
end if
13:
for each edge(n, v) ∈E[G] do
14:
newTime ←l.time + edge.time
15:
if newTime ≥T then
16:
continue
17:
end if
18:
newCost ←l.cost + edge.cost −λedge
19:
newLabel ←Create label at node v with n as predecessor, newTime and newCost
20:
if no label exists at node v then
21:
Lv ←newLabel
22:
PQ ←v
23:
else if newLabel is not dominated by any label in Lv then
24:
Remove labels in Lv that newLabel dominates
25:
Lv ←newLabel
26:
PQ ←v
27:
end if
28:
end for
29:
end for
30: end while
31: return bestLabel, L
Consider the graph in figure 6.2 with 4 nodes A, B, C and D. The network from the graph is not
realistic in any way rather just to give insight into the algorithm. The parenthesis on the edges
indicate the resources time and cost, respectively. To demonstrate the functionality of the labeling
algorithm we will use it to find the best label representing the shortest path through this graph,
originating in A(Ok) and terminating in D(Dk) with a maximal transit time of T = 5.
==PAGE:33==
6.2 Column Generation Approach
27
Figure 6.2: Caption for the figure goes here.
Initially PQ will contain A with cost 0 such as PQ = [(A, 0)] and L is created for the first label
such as L = [[(l1A)]]. A is then removed from PQ and its label is extracted from L. A has two
outgoing edges to nodes B and C and traversing them will not go over the time limit so a new cost
is calculated and two new labels are created, l1B and l1C. No labels yet exist at either B or C so
L = [[(l1A)][(l1B)][(l1C)]] and PQ = [[B, 1][C, 2]]. B will be extracted next from PQ since it has
a lower cost hence it is first in the queue. B only has one label associated with it to be extended
and two outgoing edges to C and D. We can see that going from B to D will result in breaking
the time limit since 1 + 5 > 5 so that label is not created. Going from B to C is feasible and a
new label l2C is created at node C with time 1 + 2 = 3 and cost 1 + 2 = 3. The new label is not
dominated by the already existing one for node C since l1C.time > l2C.time so we add it to the
existing set of labels for node C. Now L = [[(l1A)][(l1B)][(l1C), (l2C)]] and PQ = [[C, 2]]. Note that
the cost for node C in PQ is not updated since the cost in the new label is higher. C is extracted
from PQ and both its labels from L. The first label is extended and a new label at node D, l1D, is
created with cost 2 + 1 = 3 and time 4 + 1 = 5 which is added straight to L since no labels exist
at node D. D then goes into PQ. The second label at C is extended creating l2D and gets a cost
of 3 + 1 = 4 and time of 3 + 1 = 4. Now since there already exists a label at node D a dominance
check has to be applied resulting in that l1D.time > l2D.time and l2D.cost > l1D.cost so both labels
are kept. Only node D remains in PQ and is extracted along with both its labels from L. Since
both labels are at the destination node Dk they go in the first if statement to check for feasibil-
ity and ultimately l2D will be chosen and returned as bestLabel since it has the lower cost of the two.
After implementing the proposed solution approach, including time restrictions in the MCF problem,
the small example introduced at the start of the chapter was constructed and solved with the
algorithm. The results matched the initial expectations previously presented, where the infeasible
solutions caused by time restrictions were avoided, based on different maximal times and the profit
maximizing solution was found. The practical value of the column generation approach, combined
with the labeling algorithm, was thereby established and could be tried and tested in combination
with the ALNS meta heuristic.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 7
Metaheuristics
In optimization problems of significant complexity, exact methods such as mixed-integer program-
ming models theoretically guarantee optimal solutions through exhaustive evaluation of the solution
space. However, for problems like the LSNDP, the computational intensity of such methods be-
comes prohibitive due to the combinatorial explosion of possible solutions, even on a small portion
of the problem, as demonstrated later in chapter 8. As mentioned in chapter 1, this problem is
an NP-hard problem, meaning that it has an astronomical complexity that is further compounded
when incorporating operational constraints such as vessel class assignments, capacity limitations,
and scheduling requirements.
The practical limitations of exact methods in handling such vast solution spaces have led to the
development and refinement of metaheuristic approaches. These algorithms, including Simulated
Annealing, Tabu Search, and ALNS, offer systematic frameworks for exploring complex solution
spaces eﬀiciently. Their ability to find near-optimal (very good) solutions within reasonable compu-
tational timeframes has established them as fundamental tools in operational research, particularly
in transportation optimization problems such as Vehicle Routing (VRP) and Pickup and Delivery
with Time Windows (Liu et al., 2024; Ropke & Pisinger, 2006).
One of the most compelling advantages of metaheuristics lies in their inherent flexibility, which
allows developers to tailor the algorithm to address the specific needs and characteristics of the
problem at hand. Unlike exact methods’ rigid mathematical frameworks, metaheuristics provide
a customizable approach where operators, parameters, and strategies can be adapted to capture
problem-specific nuances. With that being said, this flexibility makes the quality of the results
heavily dependent on the implementation of the metaheuristics in use.
Among the most effective metaheuristics is the ALNS, first introduced by Pisinger and Ropke
in their foundational work on LNS. ALNS is an extension of LNS, which gradually improves the
network by iteratively destroying and repairing the solution. ALNS builds on this by incorporat-
ing multiple operators, dynamically chosen in each iteration based on weights that are updated
through a scoring system reflecting their performance. This mechanism allows ALNS to systemati-
cally explore large solution spaces and adapt to problem-specific needs, avoiding local optima and
enhancing eﬀiciency (Pisinger & Røpke, 2010).
For the LSNDP context, ALNS presents several compelling advantages that align with our re-
search objectives. Its framework naturally accommodates the development of specialized operators
tailored to the core decisions in network design: structural changes like port insertion/removal
and operational optimizations such as vessel deployment and speed.
The algorithm’s adaptive
weight mechanism ensures eﬀicient solution space exploration by prioritizing effective operators
while maintaining suﬀicient diversity in the search process. Furthermore, ALNS’s proven effective-
ness in similar large-scale transportation optimization problems provides a strong theoretical and
practical foundation for our implementation.
==PAGE:35==
7.1 ALNS Components and Mechanisms
29
7.1
ALNS Components and Mechanisms
Before we dive deeper into the framework design of our ALNS algorithm, explained in section
7.5, let us first introduce its core components, which are mechanisms of the ALNS, its operators,
and their utility functions (in the next section) and how they interact with the MCF. As already
mentioned, traditional ALNS uses multiple destroy and repair operators to iteratively alter and
optimize the solution. Our implementation of the ALNS for this thesis introduces a systematic
categorization of operators that reflects both the problem’s complexity and the need for specialized
strategies. The algorithm differentiates between structural operators, which fundamentally alter
the network structure, and fleet management operators (non-structural operators), which optimize
operational parameters within existing network configurations, such as the vessel assignments and
their speeds. This categorization arose from the dual nature of LSNDP optimization, where network
design decisions are naturally linked to operational eﬀiciency considerations.
At the same time, as it’s important to have strategic operators that modify the solution with
the goal of increasing profits, it is equally important to incorporate stochasticity or randomness.
This randomness helps the algorithm escape local optima by allowing the exploration of suboptimal
solutions that may ultimately lead to better outcomes. This dual role ensures the algorithm balances
exploration and exploitation effectively. Stochasticity is included both through dedicated random
operators and within heuristic operators.
This blend ensures exploration by allowing random
modifications while guiding the search using problem-specific knowledge.
7.1.1
Utility Functions
The purpose of the structural destroy and repair operators is to modify the rotations port sequences
by removing or inserting port calls to the rotations. For this process of removing or inserting port
calls to be consistent, we built streamlined utility functions that all operators use to update the
network and maintain feasibility. With these utility functions in place, building a new operator
only requires building new heuristic that selects which port to insert, remove, or which rotation to
modify, enabling us to test and identify the most effective methods within the ALNS algorithm.
The core utility functions are as follows:
updateRotationDistance
This function accepts two distinct ports as input and returns the shortest distance between them,
along with canal information. As outlined in Chapter 3.1, the data contains the distances between
each port for every available path. These paths contain the Panama Canal and Suez Canal, both or
neither of these canals. After an internal discussion with a Maersk representative, vessels typically
follow the shortest path in real-world liner shipping, even when alternative routes may offer cost
savings. This aligns with the operational goal in liner shipping to minimize transit times to allow
more demand to be fulfilled and minimize fuel consumption. Based on this observation, we assumed
that vessels always travel the shortest distance.
updateOptimalSpeedDuration
To ensure that the weekly service schedule is maintained, the total number of vessels must match
the overall duration of the rotation measured in weeks. Since service schedules operate on a weekly
basis, a non-integer rotation duration, such as 4.5 weeks, necessitates assigning a whole number
of vessels to maintain the weekly frequency. In this example, five vessels are required, implying
that vessels may experience periods of idleness within the rotation cycle to synchronize with the
weekly schedule. To save costs, it would be beneficial to slow the ship down and, therefore, save
fuel costs so that the duration matches exactly 5 weeks. Or, speed the vessel up to 4 weeks, freeing
up one vessel and potentially saving costs. This is exactly was this function does. It calculates the
necessary speed and total rotation cost for both slowing the vessel down to match the next integer
above and speeding it up to match the integer below. If both speeds are within the maxSpeed and
==PAGE:36==
7.1 ALNS Components and Mechanisms
30
minSpeed of the vessel, then it chooses the one with the lower cost. If the faster speed exceeds the
limit, we choose the slower speed. If they both exceed the limit, we default to minSpeed, as that
is for sure more cost-effective than the previous speed (unless the previous speed was the minSpeed.
updateVessels
As the duration changes when inserting or removing a port call, we need to track the number of
vessels assigned to each rotation and the number of available vessels in the network. The ALNS
operators are constantly restructuring the rotations, meaning that they get shorter or longer, and
are constantly adding vessels to the pool or taking vessels from the pool, if available. This function
takes in the newly constructed rotation and gets its new duration and number of vessels before
the change (which is still within the rotation struct as it hasn’t been updated). It then adds/or
removes depending on the vessel change. Given that there are enough vessels in the available pool,
the network fleet update can be represented in the following way:
AvailableV esselsclass −=
⌈RotationDuration
168
⌉
−CurrentV essels
We divide RotationDuration by 168 to convert it from hours to weeks, as the duration is stored in
hours, and then apply the ceiling function to round it up to the nearest whole number. If there is
no available vessel to account for the duration change, the function returns false, indicating that
the port call insertion or removal was unsuccessful.
updateRotationCost
With the modified rotation, we update the fixed costs such as the portCallCost, bunkerIdle, bunker-
Fuel, totalTC and canalCost based on the updated rotation data.
The rotation costs can be
expressed as follows:
The rotation cost can be expressed as follows:
PortCallCost =
∑
p∈P
cP
f +
∑
p∈P
(
Crotation · cP
v
)
Here, cP
f represents the fixed port call cost, cP
v is the variable port call cost per unit of container
flow (FFE), and Crotation is the capacity utilization for the rotation.
BunkerIdleCost = |P| · fV
0 · FuelCostPerTon
Here, |P| is the total number of ports in the rotation, fV
0 is the idle fuel consumption in tons per
day, and FuelCostPerTon is a known constant.
SailingTime = Trotation −(|P| · 24)
Here, Trotation represents the total duration of the rotation in hours, and 24 hours are allocated for
each port call.
BunkerFuelCost = Tsailing ·
(
fV
24
)
· FuelCostPerTon
Here, Tsailing is the sailing time in hours, and fV represents the fuel consumption at the vessel’s
operational speed. The value of fV is derived using Equation 3.1.
TimeCharterCost =
(Trotation
24
)
· T V
Here, T V is the daily fixed time charter rate, and Trotation is the total rotation duration in hours.
CanalCost = sV · nSuez + pV · nPanama
==PAGE:37==
7.1 ALNS Components and Mechanisms
31
Here, nSuez and nPanama represent the number of Suez and Panama Canal crossings, respectively.
sV and pV denote the Suez and Panama Canal fees.
Note, that the function does not calculate the TotalRotationCost, but its imp
removePortCallFromRotation!
All destroy operators follow the same standardized process of removing a port call. This function
is the main function in that process and is responsible for executing all necessary steps to remove
the port call from the network while maintaining feasibility. Its input is the port call to remove
in the format (arrivalID, departureID), along with the corresponding rotation, in the format of a
Rotation struct (see appendix 12.3.2). This function removes the port call arrival and departure
nodes from and each edge connected to them in the network graph, along with all relevant data of
that port call in the network. This function has two main constraints/rules:
• A port call cannot be removed from a rotation if it only has two port calls. This prevents
the creation of a single port rotation, which is not really a rotation as the vessel wouldn’t go
anywhere (obviously).
• If a port call being removed has the same port next to it on both sides, that port would have
two consecutive port calls in the rotation, which is not allowed. In those cases, we also remove
the latter portcall of that port. For example, consider a rotation: For example, consider the
rotation:
A →B →A →C
If port B is removed, the resulting rotation sequence would be:
A →A →C
To ensure that the rotation does not contain consecutive calls to the same port, the second
instance of port A is removed, yielding the updated rotation:
A →C
This process is repeated until the rotation sequence no longer contains consecutive calls to
the same port.
Each destroy operator is designed to function independently, without relying on a repair operator
to fix the gap created in the rotation by removing a port call. Therefore, when a port call gets
removed, we create a voyage edge between the ports adjacent to the removed port. This approach
maintains consistency across the network, as not all repair operators are designed to target the
affected rotation specifically. By closing the gap immediately upon removal, we streamline the
process and ensure uniformity in handling modifications to the rotation. Subsequently, the rotation
distance, duration, speed, and costs are updated using the aforementioned utility functions. Having
described how port calls are removed, let’s look at the different destroy operators that determine
which port calls in which rotations get removed.
addPortCallToRotation!
This function serves as the primary mechanism for inserting new port calls into existing rotations
within the network. The input is the port call to be inserted, the rotation struct, the port UNLocode,
and the position number of the insertion). Each port insertion repair operator calls this function to
insert the port or check the feasibility of a port insertion. It starts with an initial feasibility check
concerning the following constraints.
Vessel Draft Constraint:
• If the vessel’s draft exceeds the port’s maximum allowable draft
Port Sequence Constraints:
• Only one butterfly port (number of duplicate ports is less than one).
==PAGE:38==
7.2 Destroy operators
32
• The port immediately preceding and succeeding the inserted port in the rotation must differ
from the inserted port to avoid consecutive calls to the same port.
• The newly created voyage legs leading to and from the inserted port should not already exist as
legs within any other rotation in the network. This ensures the operator introduces genuinely
new connections and avoids redundant paths, as implied in the initial network generation in
chapter 5
If these constraints hold, the port is inserted at the desired position. This involves removing the
existing voyage edge between the ports where the new port is being inserted, creating new arrival
and departure nodes for the inserted port, and establishing voyage edges to and from the new port.
It subsequently calls the updateRotationDistance, updateVessels, and updateVessels. If updateVessels
fails to update the vessels, due to insuﬀicient available vessels within the specified rotation vessel
class to accommodate the port insertion, the function returns false, indicating that the port call
insertion was unsuccessful.
7.1.2
MCF Feedback
Having established the utility functions that ensure feasibility and consistency during network mod-
ifications, we now turn to the important role of the MCF model in guiding the ALNS search process.
Since the algorithm’s objective is to maximize profits, evaluating how containers flow through the
network is important to determine the revenue generated from fulfilling demand. Without this infor-
mation after each iteration, the ALNS would only evaluate solutions based on network costs, which
may not truly reflect the highest profits. As explained in chapter 6, the MCF tracks container
movement throughout the network, revealing not only the revenue generated but also detailing
which demands are met and which are not. This data serves as a guideline for the ALNS algorithm
and its operators. It allows us to find the network’s profit after each iteration of the ALNS and
decide whether to accept this new solution. The heuristics and methods used by the operators
utilize this data to find which ports to insert or remove, target the least profit rotations, find the
flow and profit on individual edges, and determine vessel utilization along with other insights. This
will all be covered in detail in the next sections.
7.2
Destroy operators
The destroy operators remove ports or port calls from the network.
randomPortDestroy As the name might suggest, this destroy operator selects random ports
within the network and removes all port calls of that port. To increase the stochasticity, the num-
ber of ports to remove from the network is randomly chosen between 1-5% of the total number of
ports in the network (across all rotations), with a minimum of 1 port. This adaptive destruction
rate ensures appropriate scaling across different instance sizes while maintaining enough network
structure for meaningful reconstruction. The randomness in both port selection and destruction
rate helps the algorithm escape local optima by creating diverse perturbations in the network struc-
ture.
longestRotationRandomDestroy
Here, we target the rotation with the largest number of port calls in the network by randomly
removing a single port call from that rotation. This destruction approach is based on the principle
that longer rotations often have more potential for optimization, as they are more complex and
may contain ineﬀicient port sequences. Additionally, it helps maintain a more balanced distribu-
tion of port calls across rotations, preventing the emergence of excessively long rotations that could
be operationally challenging in real-world scenarios due to increased vulnerability to delays and
==PAGE:39==
7.2 Destroy operators
33
complicated fleet management.
randomBadPortsDestroy
This operator, along with the subsequent one, is designed to operate based on a shared logic
that targets the removal of underperforming port calls characterized by low flow, profitability, and
utilization from the rotation. By doing that, the algorithm can remove unnecessary port calls that
do not provide any value and only drive up the costs.
At its core, the operators use a scoring system that evaluates port calls based on their operational
eﬀiciency and profitability. This evaluation combines cargo flow utilization relative to vessel capacity
and profit generation into a single performance metric:
score =
(
flow
capacity
)
·
(
1 + max
(
0,
profit
rotationCost
))
The scoring formula evaluates the relative eﬀiciency of each port call by calculating the ratio of
the total flow (defined as the sum of inflow and outflow) at a given port to the vessel’s capacity.
This ratio is then multiplied by a profit factor specific to the port.
In cases where the profit
factor is negative, the multiplier is set to 1.
It creates a balanced assessment that prioritizes
high-utilization port calls and those generating substantial profit. The operator evaluates each
port call individually, identifying underperforming ports based on their score. Port calls showing
very low performance (score < 0.1) are marked for removal, while those maintaining acceptable
levels of utilization and profitability are preserved within the rotation. By removing those ports
based on both utilization and profitability metrics, the operator creates opportunities for repair
operators to discover more eﬀicient network configurations. If all scores are above 0.1, then no
removal is necessary and no action is taken. It’s worth noting that the threshold of 0.1 could be
higher. While not systematically tuned, the selected threshold and parameters were obtained from
practical observations and provided suﬀicient network modification.
These operators also have the capability to remove an entire rotation if all ports within that rotation
are identified as underperforming. In those cases, the rotation’s flow, utilization, and profitability
are very low, and the network is probably better off without it. Eliminating such rotations improves
overall network eﬀiciency and frees up vessels, enabling them to be assigned to other rotations.
The randomBadPortsDestroy method selects a random rotation and removes any underperforming
port calls within it. This increases the randomness of the algorithm, ensuring it can target any
rotation in the network and explore a broader range of potential improvements.
textbfleastProfitRotationBadPortsDestroy
This operator follows the same logic as the randomBadPortsDestroy to identify underperforming
port calls for removal but differs in its approach to selecting the target rotation. Instead of choosing
a rotation randomly, this operator calculates the profitability of each rotation across the network
and specifically targets the rotation with the lowest profit.
Directly targeting the least profitable rotation introduces a level of strategic modifications to the
port call removal phase of the algorithm. While random methods, such as randomBadPortsDestroy,
enhance the exploration of the solution space, focusing on the lowest profit rotation ensures that
the algorithm is consistently addressing the biggest ineﬀiciencies.
These two operators, randomBadPortsDestroy and leastProfitRotationBadPortsDestroy, illustrate
how the MCF is utilized as feedback within the algorithm’s operators. By using the cargo flow data
provided by the MCF, these operators can calculate the profits of individual rotations and port
calls. This integration ensures that decisions regarding port and rotation removal are informed
by the actual flow dynamics and profitability metrics within the network, enhancing the overall
effectiveness of the optimization process.
==PAGE:40==
7.3 Repair Operators
34
7.3
Repair Operators
The repair operators in the ALNS implementation form a diverse set of strategies for reconstruct-
ing and improving the liner shipping network after destructive operations. These operators can be
categorized into two main groups: Port bridging repair and port insertion. Their main difference is
that the Port bridging repair operators, portBridgingRepair and unmetDemandPortBriding, fix the
”gap” created in the destroy process. Meaning that they always target the affected rotation directly
and try to insert ports to ”close” the gap. It’s important to recall that while destroy operators
structurally ’close’ the rotation by creating a direct voyage edge after removal, the bridging repair
operators conceptually ’reopen’ this gap. They simulate the scenario as if the rotation were still
’open’ at the point of removal and attempt to insert a port call at the location where the removed
port was previously situated. The two operators in this category differ in the methods and heuris-
tics used to find which port to insert. On the other hand, the port insertion operators try to insert
a port from a priority list, but the heuristic of which rotation is inserted differs. The fundamental
difference between those two categories is that the bridging operators know what rotation to repair
but not what port to insert, and the port insertion operators know what port to insert (using the
priority list) but not which rotation.
7.3.1
Bridging Repair Operators
portBridgingRepair
This operator addresses removals caused by destroy operations by specifically targeting rotations
with removed port calls and attempting to bridge the resultant gaps. This operator iterates through
the ’loose port’ pairs, representing the ports next to the removed port. For each such pair, the
operator seeks to identify a suitable intermediate port for insertion. The selection of a port to
bridge gaps in disrupted rotations is guided by a scoring mechanism evaluating geographical and
unmet demand-related factors. For each potential port, a composite score is calculated:
totalScore = 0.4 · distanceScore + 0.6 · demandScore
The score components are defined as:
• Distance Score: distanceScore =
1
1+deviation, quantifying geographical suitability. deviation is
the absolute difference between (d(from, potential)+d(potential, to)) and d(from, to), where
d(a, b) is the distance between ports a and b. Lower deviation yields higher scores.
• Demand Score: demandScore =
totalUnmetDemand
maxDemandInstance, quantifying potential unmet demand.
totalUnmetDemand is the sum of unmet demands between the potential port and the loose
port pair. Normalized by the maximum demand in the instance (maxDemandInstance),
higher scores indicate greater demand potential.
Weights in totalScore prioritize demand (0.6) over geography (0.4). The higher weight assigned to
demandScore reflects the primary objective of the repair operator to prioritize addressing unmet
cargo demand, while geographical proximity remains a secondary, yet important, consideration.
The normalization parameter maxDemandInstance is instance-specific. Weights and normalization
were empirically chosen, without systematic fine-tuning, yet effectively guided port insertion for
improved network performance.
The port with the highest score across these criteria is then considered for insertion at a position
immediately following the ’from’ port of the loose pair, effectively reconnecting the disrupted ro-
tation segment. Prior to insertion, the operator performs checks to prevent the introduction of
duplicate port calls within the rotation and to avoid creating vessel paths that are already present
in other rotations, ensuring the feasibility and novelty of the repair.
Implementing the portBridgingRepair operator is justified by its targeted and heuristic-driven ap-
proach to network reconstruction. Focusing on bridging identified gaps created by destroy operators
==PAGE:41==
7.3 Repair Operators
35
eﬀiciently directs the repair process to areas of immediate need within the disrupted solution. The
scoring mechanism, incorporating geographic and demand-based factors, ensures that the inserted
ports are not arbitrary but are strategically chosen to enhance connectivity and potentially capture
missed demand.
unmetDemandPortBriding
In contrast to the portBridgingRepair operator, which selects ports for bridging based on a com-
posite score, the unmetDemandPortBriding operator prioritizes ports directly linked to existing
unmet cargo demand. Like portBridgingRepair, this operator targets rotations with ’loose port’
pairs resulting from destroy operations, aiming to reconnect these disrupted segments. However,
instead of scoring potential ports based on a broad set of criteria, the operators iterate through
origin-destination pairs with unmet demand, sorted by demand quantity. For each loose port pair,
it considers unmet demand pairs, if the origin of the unmet demand pair is within the disrupted
rotation, then it attempts to insert the destination port, and wise versa. This logic aims to directly
address identified demand deficits by inserting ports that can facilitate the fulfillment of these un-
met flows within the context of the disrupted rotation.
The rationale for the unmetDemandLoosePortInsert operator lies in its demand-centric approach
to repair.
By directly targeting ports involved in unmet demand flows, this operator seeks to
eﬀiciently rectify service gaps and improve the network’s ability to satisfy cargo transport require-
ments. This strategy is particularly valuable as it focuses repair efforts on areas where network
deficiencies are explicitly identified by the MCF, potentially leading to more immediate and im-
pactful improvements in solution quality compared to more general port insertion heuristics. While
loosePortChainRepair uses a broader scoring function to evaluate port candidates, unmetDemand-
LoosePortInsert adopts a more focused approach, directly leveraging unmet demand information
to guide the insertion of ports within disrupted rotation segments.
7.3.2
Port Insertion Repair Operators
Distinct from the port bridging operators, the port insertion operators do not target rotations based
on destroy operations but instead aim to improve network eﬀiciency by inserting high-priority ports
from the Priority List, as described here below. All insertion repair operators use the same process
of finding a port to insert but differ in how they choose the rotation to insert in.
7.3.2.1
Priority List
The priority list used by the port insertion repair operators is a strategically curated ranking of
ports, designed to guide the insertion process towards ports with the greatest potential to enhance
the liner shipping network. This list is derived from the unmet cargo demand. The underlying
logic is to prioritize ports associated with high levels of unfulfilled demand and significant po-
tential revenue generation, thereby directing the repair operators to consider insertions that can
effectively address network ineﬀiciencies and improve profitability. To construct this priority list,
the algorithm first identifies origin-destination pairs where demand is not fully met. To construct
the priority list, the algorithm analyzes the unmet demand from the MCF solution. It aggregates
the total unmet demand originating from each port across all origin-destination pairs. Ports are
then ranked in descending order based on this total unmet demand volume, ensuring that ports
associated with the largest quantities of unfulfilled cargo are prioritized for insertion.
==PAGE:42==
7.3 Repair Operators
36
7.3.2.2
Port Selection
From this list, a subset of top-ranked ports is selected as insertion candidates. Specifically, the
algorithm selects the top 25% of the priority list (rounded to the nearest integer and capped at 30).
Furthermore, the selected subset of top-ranked ports is shuffled. This randomization introduces an
element of stochasticity, preventing the algorithm from being strictly deterministic in its choice of
insertion port. By exploring different ports from the top tier of the priority list in a randomized
order, the algorithm increases the likelihood of escaping local optima and discovering diverse, po-
tentially beneficial network configurations, even if ports slightly lower in the priority ranking might,
in some cases, yield superior insertions.
7.3.2.3
Insertion position
Once a port is selected from the priority list for insertion, the next step is choosing the best position
for this insertion within a rotation. The algorithm addresses this through a function designed to
identify the insertion point that minimizes the added sailing distance to the existing rotation. For
each potential insertion point within the rotation, the function calculates the additional distance
incurred by inserting the chosen port at that location. This calculation considers the existing leg
distances and the new distances created by inserting the port, ensuring that draft constraints are
respected for the newly formed legs. The position that results in the smallest increase in the overall
rotation distance while adhering to operational constraints is then selected as the optimal insertion
point.
The rationale for consistently choosing the shortest possible distance for port insertion is grounded
in the operational and economic realities of liner shipping. Minimizing sailing distance directly re-
duces fuel consumption, lower operational costs, and potentially shorter transit times. While other
factors, such as port congestion or specific demand patterns, could theoretically be considered,
prioritizing minimal distance provides a robust and generally applicable heuristic. Inserting ports
at the shortest possible distance maintains the eﬀiciency of the existing rotations, preventing un-
necessary detours that could negatively impact schedule reliability and overall network performance.
shortestRotationInsert
This operator identifies the rotations with the fewest port calls. If multiple rotations have the same
minimum number of port calls, it randomly selects one rotation from this group. Next, it selects a
port from the Priority List (as described in section 7.3.2.3) and tries to insert it in the rotation. If
unsuccessful, it tries to insert it into the next random rotation from the group. If it cannot insert
this port in any rotations, it tries the next port from the Priority list. This process is repeated
until a successful insertion or when all ports have been exhausted.
The implementation is based on the assumption that shorter rotations might offer promising oppor-
tunities for beneficial port insertions. It also holds hands with the longestRotationRandomDestroy
of trying to balance the number of port calls across the network. Furthermore, by randomly select-
ing from the shortest rotations, the operator introduces an element of exploration while maintaining
operational eﬀiciency, contributing to the diversification of the search process within the ALNS al-
gorithm.
leastProfitRotationInsert
This operator ranks rotations by profit, selecting the 25% least profitable as insertion targets. Each
port from the priority list iterates through these low-profit rotations until a successful insertion
has been made. By targeting rotations with the poorest profits, this operator aims to restructure
these routes, using high-priority port insertions to improve their profitability and overall network
contribution. The rationale for selecting the 25% least profitable rotations is to focus repair efforts
==PAGE:43==
7.4 Fleet Management Operators
37
on a manageable subset of underperforming routes, allowing for targeted improvements without
overly disrupting the more profitable segments of the network.
randomRotationInsert
As the name states, this operator inserts a port to a random rotation. It starts by choosing a
port from the Priority List. Then, it randomly picks a rotation and tries to insert the port at the
shortest distance position. If insertion fails, it tries another random rotation. This continues until
a successful insertion or all rotations are exhausted for the current port. If all rotations fail for a
given port, the operator moves to the next port on the priority list and repeats the process. This
random rotation selection supports the algorithm exploration of insertion possibilities across the
network.
closestRotationInsert
Here, we focus on geographically strategic network expansion by inserting ports from the priority
list into rotations that are geographically proximate to the port being inserted. For each port on the
priority list, the operator identifies geographically closest rotations using a function that calculates
the minimum distance from the port to any port within a rotation. The operator randomly selects
one from the closest rotations and attempts to insert the priority port.
This process repeats
for a subset of the top closest rotations until a successful insertion is achieved. By prioritizing
geographically close rotations for port insertion, we can enhance regional network density and
potentially capture demand within specific geographical clusters.
7.4
Fleet Management Operators
Vessel-based operators complement structural modifications by focusing on operational optimization
within established network configurations. These operators are divided into two categories: Vessel
Swap Operators, focusing on swapping vessel types of two rotations, and Speed Optimization,
focusing on optimizing the vessel’s speed, as the names imply. These operators, targeting vessel
deployment and speed optimization, enable fine-grained improvements in network eﬀiciency without
altering fundamental connectivity patterns.
7.4.1
Vessel Swap Operators
Effective vessel assignment is an important factor for rotation eﬀiciency and profitability. Some
rotations may be structurally good but mismatched with their assigned vessel class, resulting in
either over- or under-utilization.
Over-utilized rotations occur when flows on the voyage edges
reach vessel capacity, hindering demand fulfillment and reducing network revenue.
Conversely,
under-utilized rotations have consistently low flow compared to vessel capacity. These rotations
are unnecessarily costly due to the higher operating expenses of larger vessel classes.
To improve vessel assignments, we implemented two vessel swap operators, randomVesselSwap and
lowHighUtilizationVesselSwap.
Both operators aim to identify and execute feasible vessel class
swaps between two rotations, but they differ in their rotation selection methods.
Both operators perform the same feasibility checks before executing a swap. First, a direct swap is
possible if both rotations already use distinct vessel classes and have the same number of vessels. If
vessel counts differ, rotations are categorized as rotationMore (more vessels) and rotationLess (fewer
vessels). Feasibility then relies on whether rotationLess’s vessel class can cover rotationMore’s route
while maintaining a weekly schedule. This involves checking if increasing the speed of the vesselLess
to match rotationMore’s duration remains within the maximum speed limit. If speed limits are not
exceeded, the swap is feasible. If the maximum speed is reached, the operator calculates if addi-
tional vessels of the vesselLess class are needed to maintain the schedule at maximum speed. The
==PAGE:44==
7.4 Fleet Management Operators
38
swap is deemed feasible if suﬀicient vessels are available in the network’s vessel pool. Finally, upon
a feasible swap, the operators update rotation attributes, including duration, vessel assignments,
and network fleet availability (using the utility function in section 7.1.1), accounting for any vessels
added or removed from the available pool.
randomVesselSwap The randomVesselSwap operator explores fleet optimization by randomly
attempting to swap vessel classes between rotations. It iteratively selects two random, distinct
rotations and checks if a vessel class swap is feasible, as per the previously outlined criteria. Up
to 50 attempts are made to find a feasible pair or until all possible pairs have been explored. If a
swap is feasible, it is executed, updating vessel assignments. This stochastic approach promotes the
exploration of diverse fleet configurations. The limit of 50 attempts prevents excessive search time
in scenarios where feasible swaps are sparse while still providing a reasonable chance to discover
beneficial reassignments through randomization, allowing suﬀicient exploration of random pairings.
lowHighUtilizationVesselSwap This operator strategically rectifies vessel assignment imbal-
ances. First, it assesses each rotation’s utilization, calculating metrics like maximum, minimum,
average utilization, capacity, and maximum flow. Rotations are then classified: ’overutilized’ if any
edge reaches 100% utilization, and ’underutilized’ if average utilization is below 50% with no edge
exceeding 70%. Candidate swap pairs combine over- and underutilized rotations, excluding those
with capacities within 80% of each other. Pairs are scored based on how well the underutilized
vessel’s capacity matches the overutilized rotation’s flow and the potential utilization improvement.
Ranked by score, the operator tests each pair for feasible vessel swaps and executes the first success-
ful one. This approach balances network vessel utilization by reassigning vessels from underutilized
to overutilized rotations.
The 100% overutilization threshold flags crucial bottlenecks. The underutilization criteria (average
below 50%, max below 70%) identifies consistently low-demand routes, avoiding misclassification
due to localized high utilization. Excluding swaps with >80% capacity ratios prevents marginal
gains. The scoring system prioritizes effective redeployment, equally weighting capacity match and
utilization gain. These parameters, informed by practical network observations, guide the opera-
tor to reassignments that improve fleet eﬀiciency and network profitability by directly addressing
under- and over-utilization scenarios.
7.4.2
Speed Optimization
Speed optimization operators refine network eﬀiciency by adjusting vessel speeds within existing
rotation structures. These operators leverage the flexibility in vessel speed to minimize operational
costs or enhance service levels without altering port call sequences. Both of the two speed opti-
mization operators follow the same process of adjusting vessel speeds, which requires recalculating
voyage edge transit times, rotation duration, required vessel count, and, consequently, rotation
costs.
randomSpeedModification
This operator introduces stochasticity into speed settings to explore the solution space. This op-
erator randomly selects a rotation and modifies its current vessel speed by a random percentage
between -50% and +50%, ensuring the new speed remains within the vessel’s feasible speed range
(minimum and maximum speed). This modification is attempted up to 10 times. If a feasible
speed adjustment is found, the operator updates the rotation’s speed, voyage edge times, vessel
assignments, and costs accordingly. These random adjustments of speed settings allow the algo-
rithm to save costs by slowing vessels down or increasing revenue by fulfilling unmet demand that
might have been constrained due to transit time. The limit of 10 attempts balances computational
==PAGE:45==
7.5 ALNS Framework Design
39
eﬀiciency with the probability of finding a beneficial random speed adjustment.
adjustSpeedForUnmetDemand
This operator strategically adjusts vessel speeds to directly address unmet demand. This operator
iterates through the top unmet demand origin-destination (OD) pairs, ranked by demand quantity.
For each pair, it identifies a rotation serving both the origin and destination ports. If such a rotation
is found and its current vessel speed is below the maximum limit, the operator calculates the speed
required to meet the specified transit time for the unmet demand OD pair. If this required speed
is feasible (within the vessel’s maximum speed), the operator increases the rotation’s vessel speed
to this calculated value. This adjustment reduces transit time for the targeted OD pair, aiming
to improve service levels and potentially capture previously unmet demand, thereby increasing
revenue. The operator focuses on the top 10 unmet demand pairs to prioritize adjustments for the
most significant demand deficits within the network.
7.5
ALNS Framework Design
This section details the design of our ALNS algorithm framework.
The framework provides a
structured approach for exploring the solution space by iteratively applying the operators presented
in sections 7.2 and 7.3 to modify the solution to maximize profits. This section will outline the
core components of the framework, including the algorithm overview, termination criteria, the
simulated annealing acceptance method, and the adaptive weight system that guides the search
process.
Understanding these elements is crucial for comprehending how the ALNS algorithm
seeks high-quality solutions for this complex problem.
7.5.1
Algorithm Overview
The ALNS algorithm is a metaheuristic optimization technique that systematically explores the
solution space by repeatedly destroying and repairing parts of the current solution, as mentioned
in section 7.1.
This iterative process allows the algorithm to escape local optima and discover
improved solutions. Algorithm 4 presents the pseudo-code for the implemented ALNS approach,
outlining its logical flow and key parameters.
The algorithm, illustrated in Algorithm 4, refines solutions iteratively through destroy and repair
or fleet operations. Each iteration involves the probabilistic selection of a destroy operator and a
repair or fleet operator. This probabilistic selection is guided by adaptive weights, which are dy-
namically adjusted based on the historical performance of each operator. The operators’ selection
is adaptive, favoring operators that have historically led to improved solutions. When a structural
operator is selected, a destroy operator first destroyes the current solution s′, and subsequently, the
repair operator reconstructs a new candidate solution s′. Conversely, if a fleet operator is chosen,
it is directly applied to s′ without applying a destroy operator beforehand. The operator selection
is detailed in section 7.5.5. As explained in sections 7.3 and 7.4, repair operators modify existing
rotation configuration while fleet operators explore modifications to the fleet deployment. The MCF
model then evaluates the objective value (profit) of the newly generated solution s′. The decision
to accept s′ as the new current solution is based on Simulated Annealing (SA). SA compares its
objective value to that of the current solution s and the best solution found so far, sb, or accepting a
worse solution with a probability derived from a temperature T (detailed in Section 7.5.3. Operator
weights are updated adaptively using the ‘updateWeights‘ function (detailed in Section 7.5.4) and
performance scores {δ1, δ2, δ3}. The temperature T is gradually reduced in each iteration, and the al-
gorithm terminates upon reaching a predefined condition, returning the best solution sb discovered.
==PAGE:46==
7.5 ALNS Framework Design
40
Algorithm 4 ALNS Implementation
Require: Current solution s, best solution sb, destroy operators Dfunc = {dop}, repair and fleet
operators Rfunc = {rop, fop}, temperature T, cooling rate α, scoring dictionary {δ1, δ2, δ3}
Ensure: Best solution sb.
1: noImprCount = 0
2: while NOT Terminate : do
3:
it += 1
4:
noImprCount += 1
5:
s′ ←s
6:
select d ∈Dfunc and r ∈Rfunc using getOperators(s′)
7:
if r = rop then
8:
s′, destroyed ←dop(s′)
9:
s′, success ←rop(s, destroyed)
10:
else
11:
s′, success ←fop(s′)
12:
end if
13:
if success then
14:
s′ ←MCF(s′)
15:
if s′.Obj > sb.Obj then
16:
sb ←s′
17:
s ←s′
18:
δ ←δ1
19:
noImprCount = 0
20:
else if s′ >= s then
21:
s ←s′
22:
δ ←δ2
23:
else if accept(s′, s, T) then
24:
s ←s′
25:
δ ←δ3
26:
else
27:
δ ←0
28:
end if
29:
updateWeights(r, d, δ)
30:
end if
31:
32:
T ←T · α.
33:
if noImprCount = 200 then
34:
Terminate
35:
end if
36: end while
37: return Best solution sb.
==PAGE:47==
7.5 ALNS Framework Design
41
7.5.2
Termination Criteria
The algorithm runtime is controlled by specific termination criteria to ensure a balance between
solution quality and computational time. Two conditions dictate the algorithm’s termination: a
maximum runtime of one hour and a maximum of 200 consecutive iterations without any improve-
ment in the best solution found so far. Due to a shortage of time, the runtime limit of one hour
provides a practical constraint, allowing the algorithm to explore the solution space while ensuring
results are obtained within a reasonable timeframe. The iteration limit of 200 unchanged iterations
serves as a plateau detection mechanism. This criterion recognizes that after a certain number of
iterations without improvement, the algorithm might have reached a plateau in the search land-
scape. For smaller instances, the algorithm is likely to converge and reach the plateau termination
criteria. This expectation comes from the reduced solution space and fewer decision variables in
smaller problem instances, leading to faster convergence for iterative algorithms like ALNS. The
runtime limit provides a cap on computational effort for larger, more complex instances, allowing
us to generate multiple solutions for each instance for analysis.
7.5.3
Acceptance Criteria
The acceptance criterion within the ALNS framework plays an important role in guiding the search
process, determining whether a newly generated solution is accepted and becomes the basis for
subsequent iterations. This implementation employs a simulated annealing approach, balancing ex-
ploration and exploitation of the solution space. Simulated annealing provides a robust mechanism
for escaping local optima and is common practice in many Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) and
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) algorithms (Pisinger & Røpke, 2010). If a newly
generated solution s′ yields a strictly higher objective value than the current best solution sb, it
is automatically accepted as the new best solution and also becomes the current solution for the
next iteration. Furthermore, if s′ is not strictly better than the current best solution but is at least
as good as the current solution s, it is also accepted as the new current solution. This ensures
that the algorithm always moves towards better or equally good solutions. To escape local optima
and explore a wider range of solutions, simulated annealing introduces a probabilistic acceptance
of solutions that are worse than the current solution. This probabilistic acceptance is governed by
the Metropolis criterion, where the probability of accepting a worse solution is calculated as:
p = e
∆
T ,
(7.1)
where ∆represents the difference in objective values between the new solution and the current solu-
tion (∆= Obj(s′)−Obj(s)), and T is the current temperature. A higher temperature increases the
probability of accepting worse solutions, promoting exploration, while a lower temperature reduces
this probability, favoring exploitation of promising regions.
The initial temperature, T0, is a critical parameter in simulated annealing as it significantly influ-
ences the algorithm’s behavior at the beginning of the search. For each problem instance, T0 was
fine-tuned to ensure appropriate initial exploration. Setting an appropriate initial temperature is
essential because it dictates the algorithm’s willingness to accept deteriorations in the objective
value at the start. If T0 is too high, the algorithm might behave like a random search, while if
it is too low, it might prematurely converge to a local optimum. To determine a suitable initial
temperature, we employed a method based on estimating the typical magnitude of objective value
changes between iterations. The initial temperature was calculated using the following formula:
T0 = −∆E
ln(p),
(7.2)
where ∆E represents the mean of the absolute differences in objective values observed over a number
of iterations.
==PAGE:48==
7.5 ALNS Framework Design
42
As the algorithm progresses, the temperature is gradually reduced using a cooling rate α, where
Tnew = Told ·α, and 0 < α < 1. The cooling rate determines how quickly the temperature decreases.
A higher value of α, closer to 1, results in slower cooling, allowing the algorithm to explore more
extensively at higher temperatures for a longer duration. Conversely, a lower α leads to faster
cooling, causing the algorithm to converge more quickly. The gradual reduction of temperature is
essential for simulated annealing to effectively transition from exploration to exploitation. Initially,
at higher temperatures, the algorithm is more likely to accept worse solutions, facilitating the explo-
ration of diverse regions of the solution space. As the temperature decreases, the algorithm becomes
more selective, increasingly favoring better solutions and intensifying the search within promising
regions identified during the exploration phase. This controlled cooling process is fundamental to
the simulated annealing acceptance criterion, enabling the ALNS algorithm to effectively navigate
the complex solution landscape of the liner shipping design problem.
7.5.4
Adaptive Weight System
The algorithm dynamically adjusts the selection probability of each destroy and repair/fleet oper-
ator based on their historical performance during the search. After each iteration of the ALNS,
the weights associated with the utilized destroy and repair/fleet operators are updated based on a
scoring system. This system assigns scores based on the outcome of applying each operator, thereby
reinforcing the selection probability of operators that contribute to finding better solutions.
The scoring system employs three distinct delta values, {δ1, δ2, δ3}, as detailed in Table 7.1 each
corresponding to a different level of solution improvement. Table 7.1 summarizes the score assigned
to operators based on the outcome of the iteration. If none of these conditions are met (i.e., a worse
solution is not accepted), the operators receive a score of δ = 0.
Table 7.1: Delta Scoring System
Score (δ)
Condition
δ1
New best solution found (s′.Obj > sb.Obj)
δ2
New current solution accepted, but not a new best solution (s′ ≥s and s′.Obj ≤sb.Obj)
δ3
Worse solution accepted (acceptance via simulated annealing)
0
Solution not accepted
It is worth noting that in some ALNS implementations, such as that described by Ropke and
Pisinger (2006), the score for accepting a worse solution (δ3) is sometimes set higher than the score
for accepting a better current solution (δ2). This strategy prioritizes exploration by more heavily
rewarding operators that lead to escaping local optima, even if it means temporarily accepting
worse solutions. The specific values chosen for δ1, δ2, δ3 parameters in this implementation Section
7.6.
The weights of the operators are updated using an exponential smoothing method. This approach
ensures that the weights adapt to the evolving performance of the operators throughout the search
while also retaining some influence from past performance. Exponential smoothing prevents rapid
fluctuations in operator weights and provides a more stable adaptive mechanism.
The weight
update is performed after each iteration using the following formula:
wnew
op
= (1 −λ) · scoreop + λ · wold
op ,
(7.3)
where wnew
op
is the updated weight for operator op, wold
op is the previous weight, scoreop is the average
score obtained by operator op since the last weight update, and λ is a parameter known as the
reaction factor (0 ≤λ ≤1).
The reaction factor λ controls the degree to which past weights
influence the new weight. A higher value of λ gives more weight to the previous weight, resulting in
slower adaptation, while a lower λ emphasizes the recent average score, leading to faster adaptation.
Exponential smoothing provides a balanced approach to learning operator performance. It allows
the algorithm to react to recent successes of operators, increasing their selection probability, while
==PAGE:49==
7.5 ALNS Framework Design
43
also maintaining a degree of inactivity to prevent over-reacting to short-term fluctuations in perfor-
mance. This stability is important for maintaining a robust search process and avoiding premature
convergence to potentially suboptimal regions of the solution space.
After updating the scores
and usage counts for the operators, and applying the exponential smoothing formula to adjust
the weights, the weights are normalized to ensure they sum to one, thus forming a probability
distribution for operator selection in the subsequent iterations.
7.5.5
Operator Selection Process
The operator selection process in our ALNS implementation employs a hierarchical approach that
extends beyond simple weight-based selection. While traditional ALNS implementations typically
select operators directly based on their adaptive weights, our method introduces a structured group-
ing mechanism that better aligns with the distinct nature of liner shipping network design opera-
tions. This approach is motivated by the observation that certain types of operations, particularly
those modifying network structure, require different usage patterns compared to operations that
fine-tune existing routes.
The selection process operates through a two-tier hierarchy. At the top level, operators are cate-
gorized into two groups: structural operators that modify network topology (e.g., port insertions
and removals) and modifying operators that adjust existing route properties (e.g., vessel swaps and
speed modifications). Each group g is governed by three key parameters: minimum usage ratio
rmin
g
, maximum consecutive uses cmax
g
, and cooldown period pcool
g
, as shown in Table 7.2. These
parameters were initially set based on educated guesses reflecting the anticipated differences in opti-
mal usage frequency between structural and modifying operators and subsequently refined through
limited preliminary experimentation.
The selection begins by calculating group eligibility based on usage statistics and cooldown periods.
For each group g, the average operator weight wg is computed as:
wg =
1
|Og|
∑
i∈Og
wi
(7.4)
where Og represents the set of operators in group g and wi are their individual adaptive weights.
Groups in cooldown periods are temporarily excluded from selection. Among eligible groups, selec-
tion probability is proportional to their average weights, ensuring that groups containing historically
successful operators are favored while maintaining the minimum usage ratios defined in Table 7.2.
Once a group is selected, an operator is chosen from within that group using the original adaptive
weights but normalized only within the group context. This second-tier selection maintains the
adaptive nature of ALNS while operating within the structural constraints imposed by the grouping
mechanism. The consecutive use counter for the selected group is then updated, and if it reaches
its maximum value, the group enters its cooldown period as specified again, in Table 7.2.
This hierarchical approach offers several advantages over direct weight-based selection. First, it pre-
vents the algorithm from becoming overly focused on one type of operation, even if those operators
show temporarily superior performance. Second, it ensures that the algorithm maintains a balanced
exploration-exploitation pattern appropriate for the liner shipping domain, where both major net-
work modifications and minor route adjustments are necessary for finding high-quality solutions.
Finally, the cooldown mechanism forces periodic switches between operator types, promoting solu-
tion diversity while still respecting the learned operator performances through the weight system.
==PAGE:50==
7.6 Parameter Tuning and Experimental Results
44
7.6
Parameter Tuning and Experimental Results
7.6.1
Parameter Configuration and Tuning
The Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) algorithm, as implemented for the liner shipping
design problem, involves numerous parameters that can influence its performance. These param-
eters span the core ALNS framework components, such as the simulated annealing settings and
operator weight adaptation, and the specific parameters within the destroy, repair, and fleet oper-
ators, including scoring functions and heuristic choices, as detailed in sections 7.2,7.3 and 7.4. Due
to the inherent complexity of the parameter space and the limited timeframe available for exhaus-
tive experimentation, systematic parameter tuning was not performed. Therefore, the parameter
tuning process adopted a pragmatic approach, drawing upon insights from existing literature on
ALNS (such as Bredmose and Jørgensen (2022), Hellsten et al. (2020), and Pisinger and Røpke
(2010)) and using educated estimations to guide parameter selection. Certain parameters, deemed
less sensitive or where literature provided strong guidance, were fixed at the outset. These fixed
parameters are summarized in Table 7.2.
Parameter
Description
Value
Core ALNS Parameters
λ
Weight adjustment decay for operator weights
0.995
α
Cooling rate for simulated annealing
0.99
Nmax
Maximum iterations without improvement
200
tmax
Maximum runtime in minutes
60.0
Operator Group Parameters
rstruct
min
Minimum usage ratio for structural operators
0.7
rmod
min
Minimum usage ratio for modifying operators
0.1
cstruct
max
Maximum consecutive uses of structural group
5
cmod
max
Maximum consecutive uses of modifying group
1
pstruct
cool
Cooldown period for structural group
0
pmod
cool
Cooldown period for modifying group
5
Table 7.2: Fixed parameters in the ALNS implementation across all problem instances.
However, two parameter sets were identified as particularly impactful on the ALNS algorithm’s
search behavior: the delta scoring parameters, used to reward operator performance as described
in Section 7.5.4, and the initial temperature (T0) for the simulated annealing acceptance criterion
(Section 7.5.3). These parameters were systematically fine-tuned. The tuning methodology involved
running a single iteration of the ALNS algorithm for each combination of parameter settings, across
each geographical region (defined in Chapter X) and using both the greedy initial network and the
backbone initial network as starting solutions. This approach allowed for an eﬀicient, albeit not
exhaustive, exploration of the parameter space to identify promising configurations.
7.6.1.1
Scoring Parameters (δ)
Three distinct sets of delta scoring parameters were evaluated, aiming to understand the sensitivity
of the algorithm to different reward structures for operator performance. These sets are presented
as dictionaries, where δ1 corresponds to the score for finding a new best solution, δ2 for finding a
new current solution that is not the best, and δ3 for accepting a worse solution.
• δ1: [33, 9, 13] This set was inspired by the work of Røpke and Pisinger Ropke and Pisinger,
2006, which notably employs a higher reward for accepting worse solutions (δ3) than for finding
a new current solution (δ2). This strategy puts an emphasis on exploration, encouraging the
algorithm to escape local optima even at the cost of temporarily accepting solutions with
lower objective values.
==PAGE:51==
7.6 Parameter Tuning and Experimental Results
45
• δ2: [10, 5, 1] This set represents a more traditional scoring approach where the rewards
are monotonically decreasing with the quality of the accepted move. The highest score is
assigned for finding a new best solution, followed by a lower score for improving the current
solution, and the lowest score for accepting a worse solution. This configuration prioritizes
exploitation, focusing the search on improving upon already good solutions.
• δ3: [10, 7, 4] Similar to delta2, this set also follows a traditional decreasing reward structure.
However, the ratios between the scores are different. Compared to delta2, delta3 increases the
relative reward for finding a new current solution (δ2) compared to accepting a worse solution
(δ3). This aims to strike a balance between exploration and exploitation, still rewarding better
solutions more significantly but providing a more substantial motive for improvements in the
current solution than simply escaping local optima.
The performance of the ALNS algorithm under each of these scoring parameter sets was evaluated,
and the results are summarized in Table 7.3.
Region
Scoring 1
Scoring 2
Scoring 3
[33, 9, 13]
[10, 5, 1]
[10, 7, 4]
backbone / greedy
backbone / greedy
backbone / greedy
Baltic (Hundred K)
5.84 / 6.14 / 6.11
5.93 / 5.82 / 5.83
5.83 / 5.79 / 5.79
4.83 / 5.53 / 4.53
4.53 / 3.82 / 3.83
5.85 / 6.37 / 5.67
WAF (M)
3.2 / 4.1 / 3.6
3.9 / 3.3 / 3.3
3.5 / 3.6 / 3.3
4.2 / 4.4 / 3.7
4.0 / 4.0 / 3.7
3.8 / 3.2 / 3.5
Mediter. (Hundred K)
-2.60 / -1.10 / -3.78
-3.27 / -3.98 / -3.58
-3.91 / -4.87 / -4.40
-11.96 / -16.92 / -15.66
-4.86 / -1.58 / -2.78
-3.65 / -1.65 / -4.55
Pacific (M)
-7.3 / -6.1 / -7.6
-3.3 / -2.7 / -3.4
-5.6 / -4.6 / -5.8
-10.1 / -8.4 / -10.5
-2.1 / -1.7 / -2.1
-1.9 / -1.6 / -2.0
EuropeAsia (M)
-6.0 / -5.0 / -6.3
-5.9 / -4.9 / -6.1
0.3 / 0.3 / 0.2
-18.3 / -15.2 / -19.0
-12.0 / -10.0 / -12.5
-10.3 / -8.6 / -10.7
WorldSmall (M)
-41.1 / -34.3 / -42.9
-0.5 / -0.4 / -0.5
-22.0 / -18.3 / -22.9
7.0 / 8.7 / 6.5
12.4 / 15.5 / 11.6
11.8 / 14.7 / 11.0
Table 7.3: Scoring dictionaries results
The scoring dictionary results presented in the table show an interesting trend across different
instance sizes. Notably, for the smaller instances, such as Baltic, WAF and Mediterranean, the
scoring dictionary [33, 9, 13] (Scoring 1) appears to yield more favorable outcomes, as indicated by
the highlighted values. Conversely, when considering larger instances like Pacific, EuropeAsia, and
WorldSmall, the performance tends to shift towards the other two scoring dictionaries, [10, 5, 1]
(Scoring 2) and [10, 7, 4] (Scoring 3). These latter two dictionaries, representing more traditional
scoring approaches, seem to be more effective for the larger, more complex problem instances. This
suggests a potential dependency of the optimal scoring dictionary on the scale and characteristics
of the instance being evaluated.
7.6.1.2
Initial Temperature (T0)
The initial temperature (T0) in simulated annealing is a critical parameter as it directly controls the
probability of accepting worse solutions at the beginning of the search. As discussed in Section 7.5.3,
a suitable T0 allows for suﬀicient initial exploration of the solution space. Following the methodology
described in Equation 7.2 and setting the desired initial acceptance probability p = 0.5, the initial
temperature was determined based on the average fluctuation in objective values (∆E) observed
during initial iterations for each instance. We took inspiration from Bredmose and Jørgensen (2022)
for the value of p = 0.5, meaning that there is a 50% chance of accepting a solution that is worse
by ∆E at the start of the search. This gives the algorithm a good opportunity to accept worse
solutions and escape local optima.
==PAGE:52==
7.6 Parameter Tuning and Experimental Results
46
The resulting initial temperatures, tuned for each instance, are presented in Table 7.4.
Region
Value
Baltic
187.717
WAF
485.442
Mediterranean
122.975
Pacific
902.334
Europeasia
2.801.549
WorldSmall
3.398.727
WorldLarge
2.001.221
Table 7.4: Region Values
It is important to note that all parameter tuning measurements and evaluations were conducted
using the MED data instance, representing the base problem instances. This instance is
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 8
Exact methods
An approach to the LSNDP suggested by Maersk was using exact methods to obtain a high-quality
network design. To the best of the team’s knowledge, this had not been tried before on the data
instances provided in Liner-Lib, except very recently by Google’s Operations Research Team. They
had in fact used this approach to achieve previously unseen results. However, in Google’s article
(Galle & Tangl, 2020), the researchers do not detail how these methods were implemented.
The approach is fundamentally a Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) heuristic, a well-known heuris-
tic that consists of a destroy and a repair method, respectively. The destroy method destructs a
part of the solution while a repair method rebuilds it. What is unique about this approach is the
repair method where the idea is to ’freeze’ or ’fix in place’ selected sections of the solution, thereby
reducing the problem size and simplifying it enough so that a MIP model and a solver can optimize
what remains ’flexible’.
In Google’s article, Galle and Tangl (2020) only explain this by a single sentence stating that they
”fixed parts of the solution (e.g., ”this vessel will visit Los Angeles on alternate Tuesdays”) before
applying either of the methods described above. This improves scalability by reducing the search
space” (Methods section). The methods they refer to are Double Column Generation and CP-SAT
(constraint programming solver), which the researchers used.
Pisinger and Røpke (2010) touch on the use of solvers in their book and say that ”using a MIP
solver for performing the repair step is becoming increasingly attractive because these solvers be-
come increasingly powerful with every released version. The MIP approach has the advantage that
repair methods for complex applications can be implemented quickly. A potential drawback is that
extra care regarding the degree of destruction is necessary as the repair method otherwise could
become extremely slow” (p. 409).
With the rapid evolution of solvers in mind, their use to develop a good liner shipping network
seems like an attractive option. Therefore, Maersk’s suggestion of examining exact methods in this
thesis project was considered and finally chosen as one of its subject matters.
8.1
Research
As mentioned in the previous section, there is not a lot of information available on how this method
has been or could be implemented. But there are some options. For example, various sections or
elements in the solution can be fixed in place: parts of the network’s cargo flow, certain variables,
selected routes, or even entire rotations within the network, to name a few. In the example Galle
and Tangl (2020) provide within the noted sentence, they do, however, mention fixing a route for
a selected vessel, so perhaps that is what they did.
But there are more factors to consider. Two of which being, how repeatedly this is executed and if
the fixed sections are chosen at random or systematically chosen one after another, or maybe some
mixture of the two. This will be examined in later sections.
==PAGE:54==
8.2 Development
48
A typical LNS has a destroy method that contains an element of stochasticity so that different parts
of the solution are destroyed each time the method is invoked, but that does not necessarily apply
here. Clearly, these factors are worth looking into, that is, if the core process can be executed at all.
As exciting as this approach may be, it is undoubtedly very complex, not to mention computation-
ally heavy, especially going Google’s route of using double column generation. The aforementioned
article even noted that they ran their algorithm on multiple machines simultaneously. Nevertheless,
implementing exact methods in a more general fashion is attempted so that it could be, at least
partially, examined.
8.2
Development
This chapter will use certain terms repeatedly to avoid any misunderstanding; here is how these
terms are defined going forward:
• A rotation - A set of voyage arcs between ports that together make a fully connected circular journey
for a given quantity of vessels of a certain type.
• Edge - The connection between nodes (ports) in the fixed rotations.
• Arc - The connection between ports in the created rotations.
• Fixed rotations - The rotations in the inserted network. The solver can not change these rotations’ vessel
routes or port call order; they are simply part of the input parameters and are viewed as a set of nodes
and edges on a graph.
The solver can, however, change the cargo flow on these rotations when it comes to what is either
transshipped from or onto these rotations.
• Created rotations - The rotations that the model and the solver try to create.
• Port call - Each time a vessel visits a port (calls a port).
• A butterfly rotation - A rotation where a port within the rotation is visited more than once over the
whole circulation.
• Cargo route - The route a certain quantity of cargo (containers) takes through the network on its way
from its origin to its destination. This route might be contained entirely within one rotation, or the
cargo might be transshipped and traverse two or more rotations within the network.
• Inbound transshipment - A flow of cargo that is picked up by a fixed rotation and transshipped onto a
created rotation where it is delivered.
• Outbound transshipment - A flow of cargo that is picked up by a created rotation and transshipped onto
a fixed rotation where it is delivered.
• Direct flow - A flow of cargo that is picked up and delivered by a created rotation, i.e., is not transshipped.
• A solution - A network combined with a set of cargo routes.
8.2.1
First Steps
At first, while cautious optimism still prevailed, the plan was to use exact methods as a repair
method within ALNS. More specifically, to pair it with a destroy method, and the combination of
those two would act as a potential option in each iteration of the ALNS algorithm.
The thought was that the formulated model and the MIP solver would be so eﬀicient that the
process could be implemented without disrupting the runtime of the ALNS too much.
The attribute selected to destroy and repair was one or more entire rotations within the solution.
More specifically, randomly selected rotations from a pool of the less profitable rotations within
the solution. An attribute that, at the time, seemed very manageable and not too computation-
ally complex to destroy and repair. Later, it became clear that choosing this attribute was too
==PAGE:55==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
49
ambitious. To simplify the scenario slightly, the model would only be able to create rotations for
a single vessel type.
The remaining rotations in the solution cover some of the available demands and thereby limit
the demands the created rotations could fulfill. They also use some of the vessels available in the
LSNDP instance. However, these two are really the only datasets or parameters being restricted.
The created rotations can, for example, still visit any of the ports, just like if the solver had been
set to be used to optimize an empty network.
8.2.2
Destroy Method
The destroy method that was created, removed one or more rotations from a network completely,
along with all cargo routes that were transshipped into or out of those rotations in the solution. As
previously stated, the destroyed rotations were selected based on their profitability and the number
of rotations in the given solution. If the solution had more than six rotations, the less profitable
half of them would be at risk; if it had less than six, only the most profitable one would be safe.
The number of rotations destroyed was partly random but also based on the number of rotations
in the solution.
With the rotations removed, the vessels they had been using were free to be redistributed and
utilized.
Furthermore, the demands they had fulfilled were now up for grabs, along with any
demands the network had not fulfilled prior to the removal.
8.2.3
The Algorithm
Although the plan was to use the destroy method and the rotation creation model as a part of
ALNS, the combination of the two was also supposed to be able to run independently, especially
during development.
The idea was to formulate the algorithm surrounding the two so that it would iterate multiple
times through the process of removing and creating rotations. Since the destroy method should be
able to remove more than one rotation and the model should be able to create more than one ro-
tation, the algorithm was not limited to keeping the same number of rotations as the initial solution.
The algorithm will be examined further in later sections, but in theory, after enough iterations, this
process should result in an optimal network of rotations for the instance provided.
8.3
A Complete MIP Model
The first attempt to create a repair method to pair with the destroy method was to create a com-
plete MIP model with all the necessary variables and constraints.
In Icelandic, there is an old saying that could roughly be translated as ”not attacking the battlement
where it’s lowest” and refers to being ambitious. This could also be used to refer to the idea of
creating a complete MIP model to solve an instance of LSNDP and only limiting the number of
vessels available, vessel types, and the set of unmet demands.
==PAGE:56==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
50
8.3.1
The Data
In addition to the updated set of available vessels and remaining demands, the model also uses
fundamental information about the ports and distances.
Information that was also utilized to
develop the initial network for example.
P : Set of all ports [duplicated - see section 8.3.5, constraint (5)]
i, j, h ∈P
K : Set of all unmet demands
k ∈K
V : Set of available vessel types [only one vessel type chosen]
v ∈V
Although the set V is included, this is only so that the model will have access to various important
vessel details such as draft and speed information. The vessel type is for each iteration of running
the model through the solver, as has already been mentioned, has be predetermined. To be exact,
the vessel type that has the most available vessels in each iteration is chosen.
In addition to the datasets from the benchmark suite, there is some new data that the model
requires with each iteration - Details on the existing/fixed rotations in the solution and how cargo
could be transshipped between them and the created rotations. That is where datasets O, D, and
E come in.
O : All paths from a demand’s origin port to a transshipment port for each demand
ω ∈O
D : All paths from a transshipment port to a demand’s destination port for each demand
δ ∈D
E : All edges in the fixed rotations and the available capacity on each edge
e ∈E
Figure 8.1: Transshipments between a created rotation and a fixed rotation
Figure 8.1 shows an example of these paths from datasets O and D:
• The blue square is a rotation that the model is creating. Its port calls are (1, 2, 5, 6).
• The black triangle is a fixed rotation in the input solution. Its port calls are (2, 3, 4).
==PAGE:57==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
51
• Two demand flow routes are visible in the figure;
– One demand goes from port 1 to port 4, taking the route 1 - 2 - 3 - 4, shown by the
dotted arrows.
– The other goes from port 3 to port 5, taking the route 3 - 4 - 2 - 5, shown by the solid
arrows.
• The (1 →4) demand is picked up by the created rotation and transshipped to the fixed
rotation. The path it takes on the fixed rotation is 2 - 3 - 4, shown by the red arrows. This
path would be one of the paths included in dataset D.
• The (3 →5) demand is picked up by the fixed rotation and transshipped to the created
rotation. The path it takes on the fixed rotation is 3 - 4 - 2, shown by the green arrows. This
path would be one of the paths included in dataset O.
• The edges (2,3), (3,4), and (4,2) would all be included in dataset E.
• Notice that the edge (3,4) carries both the outbound transshipment of demand (1 →4) and
the inbound transshipment of (3 →5). Therefore, the edge capacity of (3,4) must be higher
than the sum of these cargo route quantities.
Path details for each path in O and D are also provided within the datasets. These details include
the following: Which (fixed) rotation the path was on, the path’s starting and end ports, the path’s
vessel capacity, the path’s duration, the path’s variable cost, and finally, a list of all edges on the
path.
Three important aspects to note here are, firstly, that the model will only allow for one transship-
ment per cargo route. Secondly, it looks at transshipments between the created rotations and the
fixed rotations, but it does not look at transshipments between the created rotations if more than
one rotation is created. Thirdly, the model does not consider creating transshipments between two
fixed rotations.
These limitations differ from the approach taken in the MCF and ALNS. They are mainly added
to decrease complexity, but the first one can also be justified by saying that transshipping cargo
multiple times is rarely desirable in reality. Also, with the limitation of only one transshipment per
cargo route, the maximum demand delivery time can be ignored, since it would never be exceeded
with only one transshipment.
The algorithm and model were set up so that they should be able to change the number of rotations
in the network, as noted in (8.2.3). For example, destroy a rotation that uses multiple vessels and
create multiple shorter rotations using the available vessels if that would be optimal. Or, opposingly,
destroy two or three rotations and create one longer rotation, again, if that were optimal. So, if
the algorithm were to run repeatedly, the optimal rotation quantity would be found at some point.
This repetition, along with the rotation selection for the destroy function are important aspects of
the algorithm as mentioned in (8.1).
After the optimal rotation quantity would be found, each iteration would simply destroy one rotation
and create a single rotation in its place, and with that being able to transship cargo to all the other
rotations. This, therefore, provides another reason for limiting the transshipments so excessively.
==PAGE:58==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
52
8.3.2
The Parameters
dk : Unmet demand for origin-destination pair k
origink : Origin port for demand k
destk : Destination port for demand k
revenuek : Revenue per unit of demand k
distij(cn, cp, cs, cb) : Distance between ports i and j (with canal options)
drafti : Maximum draft at port i
draftcp : Maximum draft for the Panama Canal
av : Number of available vessels
draftv : Draft of the vessel
capv : Capacity of the vessel
speedv : Speed of the vessel
ω1, δ1 : rotation ID for path ω, δ
ω2, δ2 : starting port for path ω, δ
ω3, δ3 : end port for path ω, δ
ω4, δ4 : vessel cap for path ω, δ
ω5, δ5 : total travel time (without transshipment time) for path ω, δ
ω6, δ6 : cost (not including load/unload and transshipment cost) for path ω, δ
ω7, δ7 : all internal an voyage edges on path ω/δ
8.3.3
The Decision Variables
zr : Binary variable indicating if rotation r is used
nr : Number of vessels assigned to rotation r
xijr : Binary variable indicating if port j follows port i in rotation r
cnijr : Binary variable indicating if rotation r uses no canals from port i to j
cbijr : Binary variable indicating if rotation r uses both canals from port i to j
cpijr : Binary variable indicating if rotation r uses only the Panama canal from port i to j
csijr : Binary variable indicating if rotation r uses only the Suez canal from port i to j
fijkr : Flow of demand k from port i to j in rotation r
tiijkωr : Inbound transshipment flow of demand k from port i to j through external path ω
toijkδr : Outbound transshipment flow of demand k from port i to j through external path δ
==PAGE:59==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
53
8.3.4
The Objective Function
As stated in the introduction to this thesis, this project aims to maximize the profit of the networks
at hand. The model’s objective function, therefore, reflects that.
Maximize:
Z =
∑
k
(
∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
i=origink
fijkr +
∑
i,j,ω,r
i̸=j
j=destk
origink=q2
tiijkωr +
∑
i,j,δ,r
i̸=j
i=origink
destk=q3
toijkδr
)
· revenuek
(Revenue)
A key component for the revenue side of the function is to count only each demand flow once. Since
each flow might traverse multiple arcs on its way from its origin to its destination, and the function
must look at all arcs, it must be clear if and when a flow of demand can be counted towards revenue.
In this case, direct flows and outbound transshipments are counted on the arcs that start at the
origin of the demand in question. In contrast, inbound transshipments are counted on the arcs that
end at the destination of the demand in question.
The cost side of the objective function includes the following:
−
∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
xijr · port_call_cost_fixedi
(Fixed port call cost)
−
∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
xijr · capv · port_call_cost_ffei
(Variable port call cost)
Fixed port call cost based on each port call in a rotation. This is also the case for variable port
call cost, however, there the size of the vessel used by the rotation is also taken into account.
−
∑
k
(
∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
i=origink
fijkr +
∑
i,j,ω,r
i̸=j
i=ω3
origink=ω2
tiijkωr +
∑
i,j,δ,r
i̸=j
i=origink
destk=δ3
toijkδr
)
· load_per_ffeorigink
(Loading cost)
−
∑
k
(
∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
j=destk
fijkr +
∑
i,j,ω,r
i̸=j
j=destk
origink=ω2
tiijkωr +
∑
i,j,δ,r
i̸=j
j=δ2
destk=δ3
toijkδr
)
· unload_per_ffedestk
(Unloading cost)
−
∑
i
(
∑
j,k,ω,r
i̸=j
i=ω3
origink=ω2
tiijkωr +
∑
j,k,δ,r
i̸=j
i=δ2
destk=δ3
tojikδr
)
· transshipment_per_ffei
(Transshipment cost)
Loading cost is based on the cargo quantity picked up at each port, and unloading cost is based on
the cargo quantity delivered at each port. Similarly, the transshipment cost is based on the cargo
quantity transshipped at each port.
==PAGE:60==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
54
−
∑
i,j,k,ω,r
i̸=j
i=ω3
origink=ω2
tiijkωr · ω6
(Handling cost on inbound paths)
−
∑
i,j,k,δ,r
i̸=j
j=δ2
destk=δ3
toijkδr · δ6
(Handling cost on outbound paths)
The handling cost on external transshipment paths is based on the cargo quantity transshipped to
or from each path.
−
∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
xijr · distij(cn, cp, cs, cb)
speedv · 24
· bunkerv · 600
(Sailing fuel cost)
−
∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
xijr · idle_consv · 600
(Idle fuel cost)
The fuel cost is split in two, the vessel’s sailing time in the rotation and the time the vessel sits idle
in a port. The fuel usage for the vessel type is given as units per day, and the fuel price is a fixed
600 per unit.
−
∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
xijr · distij(cn, cp, cs, cb) + 24
speedv · 24
· TCv
(TC cost)
The TC cost is calculated from a daily fixed price based on the vessel type and the total duration
of the rotation in question.
−
∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
(
panamav · cpijr + suezv · csijr + (panamav + suezv) · cbijr
)
(Canal cost)
Finally, the canal cost is based on if and how often a vessel uses the available canals on its arcs
between ports in the rotations.
==PAGE:61==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
55
8.3.5
The Constraints
The constraints can be split into four groups: Rotation constraints, Flow constraints, Transship-
ment constraints, and Vessel constraints.
Rotation constraints:
(1) ∑
r zr ≤av
The number of rotations created can’t exceed
the number of available vessels.
(2) ∑
i,j
i̸=j
xijr ≤|P| · zr
∀r
If rotation r is created, its number of arcs has
to be less than or equal to the number of
ports.
(3) ∑
i,j
i̸=j
xijr ≥2 · zr
∀r
If rotation r is created, its number of arcs
must be at least two since the rotation must
be circular.
(4) ∑
i
i̸=h xihr = ∑
j
j̸=h
xhjr
∀r, h
The number of arcs going to port h in
rotation r must equal the number of arcs
from port h on rotation r.
(5) ∑
i
i̸=h xihr ≤1
∀r, h
There can only be one arc going into port h
on rotation r.
(6) cnijr = 0
∀i, j, r : i ̸= j
(i, j, 0, 0) /∈dist
If there is no arc available between ports i
and j that uses neither canal, then the
rotation r can’t choose such an arc.
(7) cbijr = 0
∀i, j, r : i ̸= j
(i, j, 1, 1) /∈dist
If no arc is available between ports i and j
that uses both canals, then the rotation r
can’t choose such an arc.
(8) cpijr = 0
∀i, j, r : i ̸= j
(i, j, 1, 0) /∈dist
If no arc is available between ports i and j
that utilizes the Panama Canal, then the
rotation r can’t choose such an arc.
(9) csijr = 0
∀i, j, r : i ̸= j
(i, j, 0, 1) /∈dist
If no arc is available between ports i and j
that utilizes the Suez Canal, then the
rotation r can’t choose such an arc.
(10) cnijr + cpijr + csijr + cbijr = xijr
∀i, j, r : i ̸= j
If rotation r uses an arc between ports i and j,
then one of the canal options must be chosen.
(11) ∑
i,j∈S
i̸=j
xijr ≤|S| −1
∀r : zr = 1
∀S ⊂P, S ̸= ∅
There can be no disconnected subtours in the
rotation.
Two rotation constraints are worth elaborating further on, number (5) and number (11).
Constraint (5) might be odd to someone who is very familiar with LSNDP since it prevents the
creation of butterfly rotations, and butterfly rotations can be very profitable in some cases. But
this constraint is added due to the rotation variable xijr being binary. If a port were to be visited
twice by the same rotation, followed by a different port each time, the algorithm could get stuck
in a loop since it might not know which port would be next.
To prevent this and to increase
==PAGE:62==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
56
traceability, the list of ports is duplicated, and each instance gets a unique ID.
Constraint (11) ensures subtour elimination. It should be noted that subtours and butterfly rota-
tions are not the same thing. As explained above, butterfly rotations visit the same port at least
twice, creating connected loops. Subtours are circular loops that are not connected and, therefore,
infeasible.
For large problems, some subtour elimination methods are impractical to implement. Therefore,
the Lazy Constraints approach was chosen. Instead of explicitly adding all subtour elimination
constraints at the beginning, these are added dynamically as needed during the solution process.
While other methods might add continuous variables or other features to the model, exponentially
increasing the complexity, the lazy constraints reduce the size of the initial model and improve
computational eﬀiciency. Although, it should be pointed out that Lazy constraints require solvers
capable of dynamic constraint generation, but most modern solvers have this capability.
The callback procedure for the Lazy constraints is as follows: For each active rotation r, an active
arc is identified, from that arc, the connected arcs are traversed, and if any unvisited arcs remain
after a complete traversal, the set S of disconnected ports is identified, and a subtour elimination
constraint for set S is added.
Flow constraints:
(12) fijkr ≤dk · xijr
∀r, i, j, k, i ̸= j
For direct flow of demand k to exist between
ports i and j for rotation r, then rotation r
must contain an edge that goes from i to j.
Furthermore, the direct flow can’t exceed the
quantity of demand k, which is still unmet.
(13) ∑
i,j
i̸=j
i=origink
fijkr ≤dk
∀k, r
Direct flow of demand k can only start at
demand k’s origin port.
(14) ∑
i,j
i̸=j
j=destk
fijkr ≤dk
∀k, r
Direct flow of demand k can only end at
demand k’s destination port.
(15) ∑
i
i̸=h fihkr = ∑
j
h̸=j
fhjkr
∀r, h, k :
h ̸= origink,
h ̸= destk
Direct flow of demand k going to port h must
equal the direct flow of demand k going from
port h unless h is demand k’s origin or
destination port.
(16) ∑
i,j
i=origink
i̸=j
fijkr = ∑
i,j
i̸=j
j=destk
fijkr
∀k, r
Direct flow of demand k that is picked up
must equal the direct flow of demand k that
is delivered.
(17) ∑
i,j,r
i̸=j
j=destk
fijkr + ∑
i,j,ω,r
i̸=j
j=destk
origink=ω2
tiijkωr + ∑
i,j,δ,r
i̸=j
i=origink
destk=δ3
toijkωr ≤dk
∀k
(Total demand)
All the flow constraints focus on the direct flow except constraint (17). Constraint (17) also includes
the transshipment variables and ensures that the total quantity of demand k fulfilled by the created
rotations does not exceed the total unmet quantity of demand k. Just like in the objective function,
this constraint makes sure only to count each cargo flow once.
==PAGE:63==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
57
Transshipment constraints:
Respectively, the constraints for the inbound transshipments and the outbound transshipments are
almost identical to constraints (12)-(16) for the direct flow.
• A flow-arc linking constraint similar to constraint (12).
• An origin constraint similar to constraint (13), where:
– A transshipment port for the inbound transshipments.
– The origin is the demand’s origin port for the outbound transshipments.
• A destination constraint similar to constraint (14), where:
– The destination is the demand’s destination port for the inbound transshipments.
– A transshipment port for the outbound transshipments.
• A flow conservation constraint similar to constraint (15), for all ports:
– That are not the transshipment port or the demand’s destination, in the case of inbound
transshipments.
– That are not the demand’s origin or the transshipment port, in the case of outbound
transshipments.
• A flow balance constraint similar to constraint (16), that ensures:
– That the quantity picked up at not the transshipment port equals the quantity delivered
at the demand’s destination, in the case of inbound transshipments.
– That the quantity picked up at not the demand’s origin equals the quantity delivered at
the transshipment port, in the case of outbound transshipments.
These constraints, in this order, will be numbered (18)-(22) for the inbound transshipments and
(23)-(27) for the outbound transshipment.
(28) ∑
i,j,k,ω,r
i̸=j
e∈ω7
origink=ω2
tiijkωr + ∑
i,j,k,δ,r
i̸=j
e∈δ7
destk=δ3
toijkδr ≤cape
∀e ∈E
(Path capacity)
Constraint (28) tackles the edge capacity on the external transshipment paths mentioned in the
exploration of 8.1. That is, the sum of all transshipped cargo, regardless of whether it is inbound
or outbound, that traverses an external path that includes edge e can’t exceed the edge capacity
of edge e.
==PAGE:64==
8.3 A Complete MIP Model
58
Vessel constraints:
(29) nr ≤av
∀r
The number of vessels rotation r uses can’t
exceed the number of available vessels.
(30) ∑
r nr ≤av
The number of vessels used across all created
rotations can’t exceed the number of
available vessels.
(31) ∑
k fijkr + ∑
k,ω
origink=ω2
tiijkωr + ∑
k,δ
destk=δ3
toijkδr ≤capv
∀i, j, r :
i ̸= j
(Vessel capacity)
(32) ∑
i,j
i̸=j
(
xijr · distij(cn,cp,cs,cb)
speedv
)
+ ∑
i,j
i̸=j
xijr · 24 ≤nr · 24 · 7
∀r
(Rotation duration)
(33) draftv ≤draftj + M(1 −xijr)
∀i, j, r :
i ̸= j
(Port draft)
(34) draftv ≤draftcp + M(1 −(cpijr + cbijr))
∀i, j, r :
i ̸= j
(Canal draft)
The constraint (31) ensures that the sum of all cargo transported across any single arc in the rota-
tion can’t exceed the vessel capacity.
One of the preconditions of the LSNDP is that demands are serviced weekly. Therefore, for a
rotation to be viable, a vessel must attend each port call in the rotation once per week. Although
the vessel speed can be modified, and a scale is provided for each vessel type, the model always uses
the vessel’s design speed. With that, it is easy to calculate the duration of each arc in a rotation.
For simplicity’s sake, it is assumed that each port call takes 24 hours. Constraint (32), therefore,
ensures that the sum of all arc durations and all port call durations for the rotation r can’t exceed
the maximum duration of the rotation, which is simply the number of vessels it uses multiplied by
the hours in a week.
Constraint (33) ensures that if a rotation travels to port j by any available arc, the draft of the
vessel can’t exceed the draft of port j. The big M method is used so that the inequality is only
valid if the rotation visits port j.
In the data, there are only two canals available: the Panama Canal and the Suez Canal. Fur-
thermore, in the data, the Panama Canal is the only one that has a given draft. Therefore, the
model only has one constraint, constraint (34), to handle canal draft restrictions. But, an identical
constraint for the Suez Canal would be easy to implement. The constraint in question ensures that
if rotation r uses the Panama Canal when going between ports i and j, the draft of the vessel used
by rotation r can’t exceed the draft of the Panama Canal.
8.3.6
The Outcome
As discussed in the introduction to this chapter and the research section, the premise of the exact
methods implementation is that the problem will be restricted significantly so that a solver can
optimize the non-restricted part of the problem rather comfortably. But as was noted in section
8.2.1. the problem, in this case, was barely restricted. Some demands might have been fulfilled, and
the number of vessels available was lower, but that is not enough to make the problem manageable
==PAGE:65==
8.4 A Simplified Model
59
for a solver.
It did, therefore, not come as a surprise that the solver did not manage to provide an optimal
solution. Even for the smallest instances, it struggled significantly.
However, the work was not for nothing. Having a fully formulated model was very helpful in grasping
the problem and getting a handle on all its different factors and limitations. Many components of
the model were also very helpful in the next steps of experimentation using exact methods to solve
the LSNDP.
8.4
A Simplified Model
After some experimentation and discussion in relation to what optimization strategies should, or
could, possibly be added, it was decided to significantly simplify the complete model in hopes that
it would provide some feasible solution. It was clear that for a problem that is so loosely restricted,
even a simplified version of a model would not be enough; the problem would still be too large.
But perhaps the solver could handle the smallest instances, and this simplified model could work
as a ”proof of concept”.
Since the number of constraints and variables, especially, considerably increases the computational
complexity of a model, the first change was to limit them as much as possible.
The first idea was to remove the multiple options when going between two ports. In the real world,
a shipping company will most likely choose to sail the shortest distance available, and if it has to
use a canal along the way, it will do so and pay the fee. Since the simplified model will likely only
handle the smallest instances, the canals won’t even come into play.
The next step was to amend the destroy method to have it remove only one rotation and then to
have the solver aim to create also just one single rotation. This would partially void the idea of
finding the optimal rotation quantity, mentioned in section 8.3.1, as this would limit the model’s
capabilities to create longer rotations out of multiple shorter ones. Thereby, it would also make it
less likely that the final solution would utilize the transshipment options to optimality.
This simplification decreases the dimensions for most of the variables by one; for example, xijr
becomes xij. This, in turn, lowers the computational complexity of the problem significantly.
The model now takes in a solution that has some available vessels from a rotation that has been
removed and tries to create a single rotation using some or all of those vessels. The resulting rota-
tion can only fulfill demands directly.
The final change was to remove the duplicate ports that allow for the creation of butterfly rotations
as was covered in section 8.3.5 under rotation constraints. Without the duplicate ports, a feasible
solution could be found within a reasonable amount of time for the two smallest instances, but if
they were included, only the smallest instance would give a feasible solution.
Many of the key constraints from the complete model (8.3.5) remain in the simplified version with
the necessary changes made to the variable dimensions. These constraints are as follows: (4), (5),
(11)-(17), (29) and (31)-(33).
The updated and simplified model is included in the appendix (12.3.2).
With these significant changes to the model, some changes needed to be made to the algorithm
as well. Of course, the algorithm would still iterate repeatedly through the destroy and repair
functions, always looking to improve the solution, but the simplification created some challenges.
==PAGE:66==
8.4 A Simplified Model
60
The updated version can be seen in algorithm 5. In all, three main changes were made.
The first change was to confront the lack of transshipments. Since the model did not consider them,
the solution the algorithm would provide after multiple iterations would most likely not include
any transshipments, and a network without any transshipments is unlikely to be fully optimal. To
counteract this, the MCF function that had already been developed for the project was utilized.
The function is called after each iteration to optimize the flow through the resulting network.
Algorithm 5 Exact Methods
Require: Initial solution
1: Initialize it_count, no_impr_count
2: while no_impr_count < 20 do
3:
iteration_counter ←iteration_counter + 1
4:
if no_impr_count = 7 and it_count < 20 then
5:
Remove all rotations
6:
for i = 1 to available_vessels do
7:
Optimize rotation speeds and free up under-utilized vessels
8:
Create and solve MIP model
9:
Add rotation
10:
end for
11:
else
12:
Standard rotation removal
13:
Create and solve MIP model
14:
Add rotation
15:
end if
16:
for i = 1 to available_vessels do
17:
Optimize rotation speeds and free up under-utilized vessels
18:
Create and solve MIP model
19:
Run solver and add rotation
20:
end for
21:
Send network through MCF
22:
Update metrics and best solutions
23: end while
24: Output best solutions and metrics
The second change was to add a bit of ”force” to the selection process within the destroy method.
Originally, the function was set to ignore the most profitable rotations while still keeping a hint
of randomness (8.2.2). However, the algorithm was most likely only going to tackle the smallest
instances, which would have the lowest number of rotations, so there would be fewer options when
it came to selecting a rotation to destroy.
To take advantage of this fact, the algorithm first does as originally planned and keeps the most
profitable rotations. But, once the improvements have plateaued, the destroy function removes all
rotations in the network and starts building it from scratch, one rotation at a time.
One could argue that this should have been the setup of the algorithm from the get-go for the cases
of the smallest instances.
The final change was to take care of a situation where there were still available vessels remaining
after the model had created a new rotation. The original model was formulated to be able to create
multiple rotations, but the simplified model can only create one. So, the destroy function could
remove a rotation that uses multiple vessels, and the model only creates a rotation that uses some
of them — Resulting in some available vessels remaining after a few iterations.
==PAGE:67==
8.4 A Simplified Model
61
To account for this, if one or more vessels are available at the end of an iteration, the model is
called upon again to try and create another rotation. If the model is successful, rotation is added
to the network. This is repeated the same number of times which equals the number of vessels
remaining. However, prior to the model being called again, the vessel speeds in the rotation are
optimized using an operator developed for the ALNS (7.4.2). Optimizing the vessel speeds in the
rotations might free up one or more extra vessels to be used by the model.
The stopping criteria for the algorithm is when there have been 20 iterations in a row without any
improvements to the best solutions.
In the ALNS portion of this project, Simulated Annealing was implemented. Due to both frame-
works being repetitive and slightly similar, one could argue that something like Simulated Annealing
could/should have been used here as well. But again, due to the fact that the solver would only
tackle the smallest instances, a more ”Brute Force”/Greedy approach was deemed suﬀicient.
This simplification worked to the degree that was hoped for. The solver could return solutions for
the two smallest instances if the set of ports was not duplicated. Thereby eliminating the option
of creating butterfly rotations. It would only solve the smallest instance when port duplication is
included.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 9
Results
In chapter 3 the LSNDP instances from Liner-Lib that this project focuses on were briefly intro-
duced. The proposed ALNS algorithm was tested on all of those instances and each of the variants,
Low, Med, High. Although it’s a common practice not to run results on the data instance that
was used to fine-tune, we thought it would be a useful measure to include the Med instance, which
was used for fine-tuning. Two methods for generating initial solutions were introduced as well in
chapter 4 and the performance of the algorithm was tested on both methods and results compared.
The results are presented in a table for every region. The number of replications performed for the
smaller instances, Baltic, WAF, Mediterranean and Pacific is 10 and 5 replications are done for
the larger instances World Small and Asia-Europe. Init Obj is the objective value of the initial
solution(profit/loss). It should be noted that since the MCF problem is defined as a minimization
problem, costs are positive and revenue is negative, meaning that a profitable solution to the MCF
is negative. This is adjusted when calculating the overall objective value, with network costs in-
cluded, so profitable solutions in the tables below have a positive objective value. Best Obj is
the highest objective value obtained over the replications, Avg and Std Dev are the average best
objective value and standard deviation over the replications. ∆is the absolute increase from the
initial objective to the best objective. Objectives represent weekly profits. #IR and #FR are the
initial and final number of rotations for the initial and best solution.
The remaining metrics all adhere to the best found solution. TR is the transshipment ratio which
is the total number of transshipments divided by the total amount of delivered containers. This
means that the ratio can go above 100% since there is no limit on how many times a container can
be transshipped. PR is the port ratio which is the number of unique ports in the network divided
by the number of ports in the instance. AVU is the average vessel utilization. It indicates how
much of the vessels’ capacity is utilized on average, that is how full the vessels are on the voyage
edges. FD represents the forfeited demand, calculated as number of containers that are forfeited
divided by total number of containers, and APR is the average number of port calls in a rotation.
As noted in 8.4, the exact methods approach only yielded results for the two smallest instances,
Baltic and WAF. There are 5 replications performed for each variant and each initial solution
method. These results are presented here below along with and compared to the aforementioned
ALNS algorithm results.
All replications performed with the ALNS algorithm have a maximum runtime of one hour. Addi-
tionally, if there have been no improvements in the best objective found so far for 200 consecutive
iteration the algorithm terminates. The termination criteria for EM is 20 consecutive iterations
without any improvement.
==PAGE:69==
9.1 Baltic
63
9.1
Baltic
Table 9.1: Baltic results - ALNS: Init Obj, Best Obj, Avg, Std Dev and ∆are all in USD
(Backbone)
(Greedy)
Metric
LOW
MED
HIGH
LOW
MED
HIGH
Init Obj
490.064
584.374
671.366
443.605
363.959
478.860
Best Obj
626.093
713.657
712.525
546.177
680.777
616.777
Avg
512.994
663.020
677.823
461.855
593.384
519.258
Std Dev
45.554
43.221
13.510
32.693
51.068
49.019
∆
136.029
129.283
41.159
102.572
316.818
137.917
#IR
3
2
3
2
3
2
#FR
3
2
3
2
3
2
TR(%)
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
PR(%)
58%
58%
50%
33%
50%
33%
AVU(%)
91%
91%
85%
97%
76%
96%
FD(%)
31%
31%
33%
50%
44%
50%
APR
3,3
5
3,3
3
2,7
2,5
The results for the Baltic instance using the ALNS algorithm are displayed in table 9.1. Both initial
solution methods result in a profitable initial solution for all variants of the instance, and might be
considered as fairly good relative to the Best Obj. The backbone flow performs better than greedy
in terms of Init Obj for all variants and results in a more profitable solution in all cases as well.
The number of rotations does not change and transshipments do not occur. The PR ranges from
33% - 58% so generally port inclusion in the best found networks is not very high. AVU is above
90% in all cases except the High variant in the backbone and Med variant in the greedy, where it
is 85% and 76%, respectively. The FD is pretty consistent based on inital solution method, around
30% for the backbone and around 50% for the greedy.
Table 9.2: Baltic results - EM: Init Obj, Best Obj, Avg, Std Dev and ∆are all in USD
(Backbone)
(Greedy)
Metric
LOW
MED
HIGH
LOW
MED
HIGH
Init Obj
490.064
178.522
671.366
443.605
467.108
478.860
Best Obj
706.273
775.948
751.134
760.108
772.436
822.390
Avg
661.465
737.547
717.522
666.395
748.526
788.369
Std Dev
25.272
33.077
16.842
46.856
42.797
26.007
∆
216.209
597.426
79.768
316.503
305.328
343.530
#IR
3
3
3
2
2
2
#FR
2
3
3
3
3
3
TR(%)
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
PR(%)
50%
58%
58%
58%
67%
58%
AVU(%)
88%
89%
87%
87%
89%
87%
FD(%)
50%
39%
39%
38%
37%
38%
APR
3,5
3
3,3
3
3,3
3
Table 9.2 shows the results for the Baltic instance using Exact Methods.
Looking at the best
==PAGE:70==
9.2 WAF
64
objectives for each variant in both initial networks, EM seems to have ALNS beat. One notable
difference is the final number of rotations in the network. For the Med variant with the backboneflow
initial network, and for Low and High variants with the greedy initial network, the best ALNS
solution only had two rotations. The best EM solution had three rotations across all variants and
initial networks except backbone Low. This is due to the fact that the ALNS allows for the creation
of butterfly rotations, whereas EM does not. And since all of the demands in the Baltic instance
are either going to or coming from DEBRV, it is more profitable to have three rotations that all
stop at DEBRV instead of two that can each only have one port-call there.
Even though the model is very simplified, as covered in 8.4, it is still logical that the EM approach
would get better results than the ALNS in such a small instance like Baltic. Instead of a heuristic
making a calculated change, the solver is finding the absolute optimal rotation to add to the network
in each iteration. And with there being no real benefits of transshipments in this instance, due to
the fact that all demands are going either to or from DEBRV, the MIP model’s greatest weakness
is a non-factor.
9.2
WAF
Table 9.3: WAF results - ALNS: Init Obj, Best Obj, Avg, Std Dev and ∆are all in USD
(Backbone)
(Greedy)
Metric
LOW
MED
HIGH
LOW
MED
HIGH
Init Obj
2.940.013
2.525.718
2.904.136
2.876.110
3.017.310
3.527.138
Best Obj
4.088.861
5.065.939
5.079.149
4.201.341
5.125.633
5.415.526
Avg
3.686.324
3.880.361
3.883.448
3.884.590
4.630.219
4.790.260
Std Dev
227.128
540.652
671.348
246.552
381.131
446.186
∆
1.148.848
2.540.221
2.175.013
1.325.231
2.108.323
1.888.388
#IR
11
12
15
7
10
11
#FR
8
8
10
6
9
10
TR(%)
5%
12%
11%
0%
0%
1%
PR(%)
60%
65%
80%
40%
60%
65%
AVU(%)
47%
51%
36%
68%
56%
52%
FD(%)
30%
17%
9%
39%
19%
14%
APR
2,9
4,6
4,7
2,5
2,7
2,7
In table 9.3 the results for the WAF instance using the ALNS algorithm are shown. When using
the greedy method for an initial solution, the algorithm finds the most profitable solutions for all
variants, compared to using the backbone flow method. Overall, there are more port calls in rota-
tions, on average, for the backbone which leads to much higher TR. Transshipments only occur in
the High variant for greedy with a very low TR of 1% as all demands are either from or to a single
hub, just like in the Baltic instance.
==PAGE:71==
9.2 WAF
65
Table 9.4: WAF results - EM: Init Obj, Best Obj, Avg, Std Dev and ∆are all in USD
(Backbone)
(Greedy)
Metric
LOW
MED
HIGH
LOW
MED
HIGH
Init Obj
287.424
2.929.518
2.694.771
2.649.978
3.116.292
3.727.193
Best Obj
4.858.349
5.004.129
5.393.331
4.495.283
5.044.805
5.239.163
Avg
4.587.862
4.828.213
5.128.608
4.314.970
4.925.049
5.218.759
Std Dev
197.867
145.030
168.276
122.211
123.973
15.985
∆
4.570.925
2.074.611
2.698.560
1.845.305
1.928.513
1.511.970
#IR
12
12
18
8
11
10
#FR
7
8
8
9
9
10
TR(%)
7%
6%
5%
10%
6%
2%
PR(%)
65%
75%
80%
70%
70%
75%
AVU(%)
62%
57%
54%
58%
53%
53%
FD(%)
23%
18%
20%
17%
17%
17%
APR
3,4
3,5
4,4
3,2
3,1
2,9
Table 9.4 shows the results for the WAF instance using EM. Unlike the previous instance, where
EM was dominant, the two heuristics now divide the variants evenly. The WAF instance is signifi-
cantly larger than Baltic but, as mentioned here above, also relies on one central hub being either
the origin or destination of all demands in the form of ESALG. However, since there are more ports,
more demands, and more vessels, the utilization of transshipments is a larger factor than in the
Baltic instance.
Since the MIP model in EM does not take transshipments into account at all, the only reason
that the MIP solver would create two or more rotations that would share the same port (other
than ESALG) is that it is profitable to transport cargo directly to or from that port and that
there is enough unmet demand that it can be split between two or more rotations. So, although
the MCF helps optimize the flow through the network the EM provides, it might only be able to
transship at a limited amount of ports. Limiting the network and the profit measurably. Still, as
the statistics show, the instance is small enough so that some ports are shared between rotations,
some transshipments are executed, and EM provides higher profits than the ALNS in three out of
six variants.
With that being said, an educated guess would be that as the instances would grow, the solution
quality of the EM in its current formulation would drop. The transshipment- and butterfly- lim-
itations would simply be too costly. However, WAF is the largest instance that the solver could
handle.
==PAGE:72==
9.3 Mediterranean
66
9.3
Mediterranean
Table 9.5: Mediterranean results: Init Obj, Best Obj, Avg, Std Dev and ∆are all in USD
(Backbone)
(Greedy)
Metric
LOW
MED
HIGH
LOW
MED
HIGH
Init Obj
-1.010.572
-1.237.680
-1.581.873
-1.377.805
-1.832.604
-2.448.932
Best Obj
-845
28.472
47.158
12.374
44.188
79.674
Avg
-376.024
-529.713
-367.883
-624.363
-317.536
-246.004
Std Dev
268.194
560.045
591.382
469.957
459.291
274.740
∆
1.009.727
1.266.152
1.629.031
1.390.179
1.876.792
2.528.606
#IR
5
9
10
5
6
7
#FR
1
1
1
2
1
2
TR(%)
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
PR(%)
8%
10%
8%
15%
13%
28%
AVU(%)
18%
19%
31%
27%
51%
48%
FD(%)
96%
95%
96%
93%
93%
89%
APR
3
4
3
3
5
5,5
To the best of our knowledge, profitable solutions have not been found for the Mediterranean
instance, with or without transit time considerations. The results for that instance are shown in
table 9.5. Initial solutions all result in a loss, but profitable solutions are obtained in all cases except
for the Low variant when using the backbone. However, the algorithm is consistently shrinking the
networks as it struggles to find profitable networks with a high port inclusion. As can be seen from
the FD ratio the amount of forfeited demand is extremely high, ranging from 89% up to 96%. This
is likely due to the complicated demand structure of this instance, with over 350 demand pairs
having only around 20 containers, on average, which makes it challenging to generate economical
networks. This is noticeable when comparing the PR in the High variant for both initial solution
methods. Only 8% of all ports are included in the backbone and 28% in the greedy. However the
FD is not very far from each other being 96% and 89%, respectively.
==PAGE:73==
9.4 Pacific
67
9.4
Pacific
Table 9.6: Pacific results: Init Obj, Best Obj, Avg, Std Dev and ∆are all in USD
(Backbone)
(Greedy)
Metric
LOW
MED
HIGH
LOW
MED
HIGH
Init Obj
-7.972.413
-7.630.877
-7.978.126
-11.622.334
-10.293.135
-10.750.495
Best Obj
-2.769.717
-800.420
-3.468.597
-1.525.779
896.900
-112.226
Avg
-3.947.829
-3.991.581
-4.071.158
-3.372.004
-1.932.301
-3.157.358
Std Dev
977.111
2.165.294
590.338
1.030.953
1.495.730
1.873.087
∆
5.202.696
6.830.457
4.509.529
10.096.555
11.190.035
10.638.269
#IR
18
21
23
14
16
21
#FR
15
20
21
13
14
19
TR(%)
44%
51%
46%
24%
43%
46%
PR(%)
67%
67%
80%
38%
31%
47%
AVU(%)
35%
38%
32%
41%
40%
39%
FD(%)
51%
53%
34%
58%
60%
56%
APR
5,9
4,1
6,4
4,2
3,6
4
The results for the Pacific instance are displayed in table 9.6. The initial solutions result in a loss
for all variants and both methods. Interestingly, the most profitable solutions seen here are not for
the High variant as has previously been the case. This might be because the Pacifc region is, just
like the Mediterranean, a rather unprofitable instance, so adding more vessels to the fleed will only
result in increased costs over increased profits. The heuristic is not able to generate any profitable
solution using the backbone, but the least loss occurs in the Med variant. A profitable solution is
found for greedy in the Med variant and it is observed that for both of those cases the network, in
terms of number of rotations, is not shrinking much but in terms of the APR there is a noticeable
decrease in average number of port calls per rotation from initial to final solution.
==PAGE:74==
9.5 Asia-Europe
68
9.5
Asia-Europe
Table 9.7: Asia-Europe results: Init Obj, Best Obj, Avg, Std Dev and ∆are all in USD
(Backbone)
(Greedy)
Metric
LOW
MED
HIGH
LOW
MED
HIGH
Init Obj
-41.266.792
-43.024.161
-48.882.545
-24.724.178
-13.611.523
-17.566.480
Best Obj
9.008.549
13.939.602
14.031.202
2.668.962
11.236.131
8.154.087
Avg
3.691.871
2.197.078
2.485.565
-5.851.782
5.878.859
4.354.618
Std Dev
4.509.529
9.710.135
9.192.704
6.539.680
7.463.680
4.789.534
∆
50.275.341
56.963.763
62.913.747
27.393.140
24.847.654
25.720.567
#IR
31
36
46
23
31
38
#FR
30
20
31
22
27
37
TR(%)
103%
50%
81%
91%
88%
145%
PR(%)
49%
26%
41%
33%
35%
55%
AVU(%)
43%
38%
49%
45%
51%
36%
FD(%)
53%
72%
57%
59%
56%
46%
APR
5,9
5,5
5,3
6
5,6
6,9
The results for the Asia-Europe instance are seen in table 9.7. Large differences are noticeable in
terms of initial objective values in favor of the greedy method. This can partially be explained by
higher network costs using the backbone method since all available vessel resources will always be
exhausted. Also, the greedy method prioritizes profitable cargo as rotations are being constructed
while the backbone only tries to get a picture of the flow based on cost and creates rotations af-
terwards. Looking at the standard deviation, which is higher than the average in all cases, it is
evident that the objective values obtained over the replications vary significantly. However, the
ALNS is able to find profitable solutions across all variants, where the most profit is realized for
Med in the backbone. There, 72% of total demand is forfeited, and vessels are only 38% full when
sailing, on average.
The TR is low in the most profitable case compared to the other cases where transshipped contain-
ers are 50% of all delivered containers which is most likely due to the low PR value, stating that
only 26% of all ports are included in the network. The second lowest TR value is 81% and rises up
to 145% for the High variant for the greedy, indicating that multiple containers are transshipped
more than once.
Figure 9.1 shows how the objective value develops over nearly 700 iterations for the Med variant us-
ing the backbone flow method as an initial solution. After around 490 iterations the best objective
is found and the algorithm then terminates 200 iterations later since it cannot improve the objective.
The revenue and network cost are also visible and after around 150 iterations the revenue starts to
exceed the network cost indicating that the networks are becoming increasingly economical while
remaining eﬀicient in terms of cargo flow.
==PAGE:75==
9.5 Asia-Europe
69
Figure 9.1: Development of best objective value with network cost and revenue - Asia-Europe,
Med, Backbone
The network for the solution from figure 9.1 is displayed on figure 9.2.
Figure 9.2: Network from best solution - Asia-Europe, Med, Backbone
==PAGE:76==
9.6 World Small
70
9.6
World Small
Table 9.8: World Small results: Init Obj, Best Obj, Avg, Std Dev and ∆are all in USD
(Backbone)
(Greedy)
Metric
LOW
MED
HIGH
LOW
MED
HIGH
Init Obj
-37.868.199
-32.586.274
-34.180.195
5.783.274
5.106.665
9.331.315
Best Obj
15.634.750
21.694.458
33.359.387
21.071.324
21.726.398
34.856.858
Avg
-6.034.887
7.447.610
17.438.766
13.368.210
14.504.919
23.130.034
Std Dev
16.057.889
12.077.118
9.207.944
5.892.531
6.216.246
9.691.469
∆
53.502.949
54.280.732
67.539.582
15.288.050
16.619.733
25.525.543
#IR
35
51
65
36
41
51
#FR
33
48
64
36
35
51
TR(%)
79%
83%
93%
105%
89%
88%
PR(%)
75%
87%
96%
75%
70%
79%
AVU(%)
52%
50%
46%
51%
51%
40%
FD(%)
61%
42%
37%
49%
48%
48%
APR
4,3
4,4
4
4,9
5,5
4,1
A similar pattern can be observed here with respect to the initial objective values from the two
different initial solution methods. The greedy consistently generates initial networks with a con-
siderably higher objective value than the ones generated from the backbone flow. Looking at the
results from the left side of the table(backbone), the ALNS is able to make significant improvements
with an average increase in profit over 58M USD, without shrinking the network greatly. For the
Med and High variants, the number of rotations decreases by three and one, respectively, and the
average number of port calls per rotation shows little to no change from initial to best found solution.
Comparing the results from the Med variant of both initial solution methods there are some ob-
servable similarities. Their objective values(profits) are extremely close, at around 21,7M USD
and the AVU is around 50%. However, the network resulting from using the backbone as initial
solution contains considerably more rotations with fewer port calls per rotation and higher PR,
87% compared to 70% in the greedy.
==PAGE:77==
9.7 World Large
71
9.7
World Large
Table 9.9: World Large results: Init Obj, Final Obj and ∆are all in USD
Metric
(Greedy)
Init Obj
-77.394.403
Final Obj
-7.434.212
∆
69.960.191
#IR
77
#FR
69
TR(%)
135%
PR(%)
32%
AVU(%)
31%
FD(%)
68%
APR
4
After all results from the above instances had been gathered, we decided to tackle the World Large
instance, more out of a mere curiosity rather than anything else. Tests were only conducted with
a greedy initial network (due to quicker compute time) and a single replication. For this curiosity
test, we didn’t have any stopping criteria other than the plateau criteria (no improvement in 200
iterations). After 15 hours of running, we observed that the solution’s best objective had started
converging (as seen in figure 9.3), leading to a manual termination. Table 9.9 demonstrates that the
algorithm successfully increased the objective value from -77,4M USD to -7,4M USD while mostly
conserving the network’s size. It’s worth noting that very few have reported results on this instance,
due to its massive size and infeasible runtime. While we were not able to achieve multiple results
and statistics, we still wanted to present the results from this single run.
Figure 9.3: Development of best objective value with network cost and revenue - WorldLarge,
Med, Greedy
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 10
Discussions
10.1
Performance of the ALNS
The Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) algorithm demonstrated success in enhancing
the profitability of container shipping networks across all tested instances and variants.
While
the degree of improvement varied, ranging from substantial gains to more modest increases, the
algorithm consistently pushed solutions towards higher profit margins. When compared against a
benchmark solution from Brouer et al. (2013), the ALNS algorithm exhibited superior performance
in smaller problem instances. However, it did not surpass the benchmark on the larger and more
complex Asia-Europe and WorldSmall instances. It is crucial to acknowledge that this comparison
is not directly conclusive due to differences in objective function formulations. The benchmark
employed a penalty-based system for unfulfilled demand, which inherently guides the optimization
process towards different solution characteristics compared to our penalty-free profit maximization
approach.
10.1.1
Strenghts and Weaknesses
The algorithm seemed to work especially well when used with initial network solutions that started
with negative profits. These networks, often burdened by many ineﬀicient and unprofitable routes,
were easily improved. The ALNS algorithm effectively found and fixed these ineﬀiciencies by regu-
larly removing the underperforming ports and strategically adding more profitable port calls. This
success might be due to the capability of the operators to incrementally decrease the network’s size
by removing a rotation if all ports within it were selected for removal. Additionally, as explained
in section 7.2 we remove port calls of a rotation unit there are no two consecutive port calls of
the same port. This helps reduce network complexity in a targeted way, prioritizing overall profit
over a large but possibly ineﬀicient network coverage. A clear example of this was seen in the
Mediterranean instance (as described in the results chapter in section 9.3), which was identified as
a less profitable operating area, as well as in the benchmark by Brouer et al. (2013). In this case,
the ALNS algorithm refined the network to a single, highly optimized rotation, suggesting that a
smaller network structure produced better profits by having multiple rotations. We also see this
clearly in the results tables in chapter 9 where the number of rotations almost always decreases
after the ALNS.
However, a limitation of the ALNS algorithm lies in its capability to expand the network beyond
a certain point. If the state of the solution that is being optimized requires the addition of new
ports (adding more ports then are being removed) or the lengthening of existing rotations (in terms
of port call frequency), the current operator set is not capable of performing such actions. This
potential constraint in network expansion could contribute to performance plateaus observed during
the optimization process, suggesting an area for future research and operator development.
10.1.2
Operators performance
The table presents the performance of different destroy and repair operators used in the opti-
mization process. Looking at the destroy operators, it’s clear that targeting less profitable rota-
tions by removing poorly performing ports (leastProfitRotationBadPortsDestroy) is the most
==PAGE:79==
10.1 Performance of the ALNS
73
Table 10.1: Performance of Destroy and Repair Operators
Group
Operator
Avg Weight
Times Best
Std Dev
Destroy
leastProfitRotationBadPortsDestroy
0.2972
17
0.1301
Destroy
longestRotationRandomDestroy
0.2434
8
0.1158
Destroy
randomPortDestroy
0.2424
5
0.0848
Destroy
randomBadPortsDestroy
0.217
6
0.1331
Repair
closestRotationInsert
0.2083
9
0.154
Repair
portBridgingRepair
0.1729
12
0.1359
Repair
unmetDemandPortBriding
0.1402
0
0.1167
Repair
leastProfitRotationInsert
0.1227
1
0.1549
Repair
randomRotationInsert
0.0765
1
0.0809
Fleet
randomSpeedModification
0.0848
6
0.1954
Fleet
randomV esselSwap
0.0796
3
0.1606
Repair
shortestRotationInsert
0.0501
1
0.073
Fleet
adjustSpeedForUnmetDemand
0.0369
2
0.1338
Fleet
lowHighUtilizationV esselSwap
0.0281
1
0.1173
effective strategy. This suggests that initial solutions often contain significantly ineﬀicient rota-
tions, and eliminating problematic ports from these rotations provides substantial improvement.
Interestingly, randomly removing bad ports (randomBadPortsDestroy) is the least effective, in-
dicating that targeted removal from low-profit rotations is key, rather than just random elimina-
tion. Both random port removal (randomPortDestroy) and random removal from long rotations
(longestRotationRandomDestroy) show similar, moderate effectiveness, suggesting that random
disruption can still be beneficial to some extent.
For repair operators, inserting ports into the closest rotation (closestRotationInsert) stands out as
the most beneficial structural repair. This implies that eﬀiciently integrating new ports into existing
routes with minimal disruption is a crucial repair strategy. The effectiveness of both port bridg-
ing operators (portBridgingRepair and unmetDemandPortBriding) highlights the importance
of addressing gaps created by the destroy operators within rotations. Considering fleet operators,
random speed adjustments (randomSpeedModification) show a moderate positive impact, sug-
gesting that exploring speed variations can uncover more profitable fleet configurations, either by
increasing demand fulfillment or reducing fuel costs. As expected, fleet operators generally have
lower weights than structural repairs, likely due to their cooldown periods which prioritize struc-
tural design changes before fleet optimization (as described in section 7.5.5. The limited benefit
of adjustSpeedForUnmetDemand and lowHighUtilizationV esselSwap is somewhat unexpected.
For instance, adjustSpeedForUnmetDemand might be less effective because unmet demand could
be better addressed by structural changes like adding ports or modifying routes rather than just
speed adjustments or the algorithm struggles to effectively link speed changes to demand fulfillment
in a beneficial way.
10.1.3
Backbone vs. Greedy Initial Network
This project explored initializing the ALNS algorithm with two distinct network construction meth-
ods: a greedy heuristic and a backbone flow approach. The initial networks from the backbone
flow, were more often superior than from the greedy heuristic in the smaller instances. However,
in the larges instances (Asia-Eurpope and WorldSmall), the greedy network produced significantly
better results than the backbone network. For example, in the Med variant of WorldSmall (Table
==PAGE:80==
10.2 Exact Methods
74
9.8), the backbone network’s initial objective was significantly worse (-32.586.274) compared to the
greedy network (5.106.665). This substantial difference likely stems from the backbone approach
prioritizing flow coverage based on demand, potentially leading to longer, less eﬀicient rotations
in geographically constrained regions like the Mediterranean compared to the more localized and
cost-focused greedy construction. However, despite these initial discrepancies, the ALNS algorithm
consistently converged to nearly identical best objective values regardless of whether it started from
a backbone or greedy network. Intriguingly, as seen in the Asia-Europe instance (Table 9.7), the
backbone network even achieved a superior final objective after ALNS optimization compared to
the greedy network, despite having a worse starting point. This suggests that while the greedy
heuristic provides a strong initial solution, the ultimate performance of the optimization process is
largely dictated by the capabilities of the ALNS algorithm itself, rather than being strictly limited
by the quality of the initial network configuration.
10.1.4
Computation time
A big bottleneck of the ALNS algorithm was the runtime. Although it matters less for the smaller
instances, as they were able to exit the algorithm by converging (along with replications for the
bigger instances), the larger instances took a long time to run, which is not ideal, as the ultimate
goal is being able to solve those instances effectively. The biggest reason for this is the use of
the MCF within the ALNS. Ideally, when using ALNS, you want to be able to run as many
iterations as possible or in other words, explore the solution space as much as possible. However,
when running an exact method, such as the MCF model in every iteration, that task becomes
challenging. Therefore, it might be worth using a faster alternate method to evaluate the network
objective within the ALNS, as discussed in the future works section 12.2.1.
10.1.4.1
Software and Hardware
The software and hardware can have a big impact on runtime and, therefore, the results, given that
the solution did not plateau. We used Julia, v11.1 as the runtime environment HiGHSv1.12.0 as
the solver for MCF, and Gurobiv1.3.1 as the solver for the exact methods. All tests were conducted
on a Macbook Pro with an M1 Pro chip and 16 GB of RAM.
10.2
Exact Methods
Although there seems to be a hint of doubt regarding Google’s approach to the LSNDP (Galle &
Tangl, 2020) within the liner shipping industry. Google’s resources, when it comes to computational
power and highly qualified individuals, can’t be underestimated.
After testing a few different ideas to implement exact methods to the LSNDP, without much suc-
cess, the conclusion is somehow still founded in optimism. Exact Methods is very likely a viable,
although advanced, way to tackle the problem. The question is just how one chooses to implement
it and/or how much time will have to pass before the solvers become advanced enough to handle
problems of this size and complexity eﬀiciently.
In this project, removing and creating an entire rotation was a challenge. But that is not to say
that it isn’t feasible; with more time and a better computer, the result might have been different.
As covered previously in this chapter, there are also other ways in which EM could be used. Other
attributes could be fixed, or, perhaps more importantly, as has been noted, the problem could be
more meaningfully restricted.
Perhaps this is what should have been done as soon as it was clear that the problem wasn’t restricted
enough. One idea that came from the Maersk team near the end was to create an entire rotation
==PAGE:81==
10.3 Penalty for Forfeiture
75
but limit the ports it could use to a given area. Thereby forcing the model to create a shorter ro-
tation, or at least one that ignores the option of traversing long, and possibly unprofitable distances.
Given some more time and resources, an attempt would have been made to try something of the
sort.
10.3
Penalty for Forfeiture
A common practice in existing literature is incurring a penalty for forfeited demand. Usually the
penalty is around 1000 USD for each container that does not reach its intended destination. The
purpose of the penalty is to discourage the forfeiture of containers to withhold customer satisfaction
and ensure a better utilization of available vessel capacity. Containers or whole demands that are
not fulfilled might lead to dissatisfied customers causing loss of future business. It is also meant to
represent the lost revenue opportunity that comes with forfeiture. However, the main focus here has
been to maximize the profit of the network based on the provided data, without trying to monetize
future or uncertain aspects. A penalty could easily be implemented given our current network
representation by adding the corresponding amount to the forfeited edges, but is not appropriate
in this thesis where the aim was how to generate profitable networks, where maximal transit times
are respected, even if that means high forfeiture of demand.
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 11
Conclusion
The primary focus of this thesis has been to develop a solution approach to solve the LSNDP with
transit time considerations based on two different methods to generate initial solutions. Both the
greedy initial network, which is constructed by prioritizing profitable cargo, and the initial network
generated from a backbone flow are used as initial solutions for the ALNS framework. The solution
approach can be described as two-phased since different components of the LSNDP are considered
separately, namely the network structure(ALNS) and the cargo flow(MCF). Even though these
components are dealt with separately, they remain close to each other in the sense that the feed-
back from the MCF is vital in terms of evaluating the networks and enhancing further network
development.
The greedy construction heuristic, which was initially intended to function as a support tool for
ALNS development solely, turned out to be an important feature of our LSNDP solution approach.
It enabled the research to compare the performance of the heuristic from two very different starting
points and give insight into how initial solutions affect the algorithm. While the greedy method
considers the flow of cargo and rotation generation simultaneously, the backbone flow method does
it separately. First, all of the cargo is flown through a relaxed network, a single container at a
time, and edge costs are adjusted after each container. The cost function is designed to incentivize
consolidation on edges, as the cost drops as flow increases, to detect edges that are likely favorable
to include when rotations are generated from the resulting flow. Given that these methods are very
different, the results vary greatly. In general, the backbone flow finds a better initial solution for
the smaller instances in terms of objective value. At the same time, the greedy method generates
significantly better solutions for the larger instances.
The MCF was solved using a column generation algorithm to evaluate the networks. This allowed
maximal transit times to be handled relatively simply, as they could be directly defined in the
column generation sub-problem. Considering the maximal transit time of the commodities aligns
the generated solutions better with operational realities in liner shipping as time, along with cost,
is usually considered the most important factor in achieving a competitive network design. The
implementation proved to be very effective in optimizing the cargo flow for the smaller instances,
allowing for a vast amount of iterations in the ALNS. However, as expected, as the networks grew
larger the computational time also grew considerably. Solving the MCF for a single network in the
World Small instance could take up to 14 seconds for the most complex network structures, limiting
the number of iterations ALNS is able to perform in the predefined running time. This is a drawback
in our implementation since generally, in the larger instances, the algorithm reaches its maximum
allowed runtime rather than terminating because of too many consecutive non-improving iterations.
The ALNS was tested on two different initial networks, generated from the backbone flow and
the greedy construction heuristic. It varies, based on which instance was being tested, and how
much the initial solution affects the outcome of the ALNS. In the smaller instances, Baltic, WAF,
Mediterranean and even the Pacific both initial solution methods were generating networks of simi-
lar quality in terms of profit/loss across all variants but usually the backbone flow performed slightly
better. This did not mean that more profitable networks were consistently found for the initial
solution with a better objective value, quite the opposite. The only instance that always found
the best solution from the better initial solution was the Baltic. In the other instances, mentioned
==PAGE:83==
11 Conclusion
77
before, the noticeable pattern then became that the ALNS found better solutions using the greedy
method, regardless of initial objective value.
For the two larger instances that we could conduct full tests on, Asia-Europe and World Small, the
situation started to transform. The initial objective values generated from the backbone flow were
considerably worse than from the greedy method in both instances. The resilience of the ALNS
algorithm shines through and it makes some impressive improvements, especially apparent in the
backbone flow, High variant, where the absolute increase in profit for Asia-Europe and World Small
is around 63M USD and 67M USD, respectively, resulting in very similar best objective values.
In general, the ALNS algorithm, when integrated with the MCF model as a feedback mechanism,
has demonstrated itself to be an effective method for optimizing the LSNDP. Across a range of
tested instances and variants, the ALNS consistently enhanced network profitability, showcasing a
capacity to navigate the complex solution space inherent in liner shipping. This effectiveness stems
from the algorithm’s ability to iteratively refine solutions, leveraging MCF feedback to guide the
search process towards regions of improved network eﬀiciency and profitability. While further re-
finements and explorations, as discussed in previous chapters, may be needed to address limitations
in computational time, network expansion, and objective convergence, the core framework of the
ALNS with MCF feedback establishes a robust and promising approach for tackling the complex
challenges of liner shipping network design optimization.
The Exact Methods approach might be categorized as the most experimental part of this thesis.
This approach was suggested by the Maersk team and was something that was not necessarily ex-
pected to work, but worth exploring. It was a way to make the thesis more in tune with the current
happenings and interests of the liner shipping industry. The main fault in the approach here was
not to restrict the problem at hand more thoroughly. The model tried to bite off more than the
solver could chew. Despite this issue and thanks to some simplifications, the MIP model, the solver,
and the algorithm built around them, managed to produce some good results. Results that, if any-
thing, prove that this is a viable way to solve problems like the LSNDP if it is implemented correctly.
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 12
Future work
12.1
Multi-Commodity Flow
Incorporating hard constraints on the transit time of each commodity, as has been done in this
thesis, is assumed to limit the amount of cargo that can be transported significantly. Due to limited
time, a structured analysis could not be performed. It would be interesting to analyze the revenue
increases if commodities were allowed some slack, especially in the case that it would be possible to
fulfill some demand if only a few more days were allowed. Delays are highly usual in liner shipping
and forfeiting demands that exceed the time limit by a small margin seems excessive.
In this regard, a possible alteration to the current solution approach of the MCF could be to model
the problem with soft time constraints as suggested by Trivella et al. (2021). As noted before,
all cargo routes that exceed the maximal transit time, even by a small amount, are discarded in
the current implementation. In contrast, the MCF with soft time constraints allows for explicitly
modeling trade-offs between transit time and cost by using penalty functions that discourage delays
and potentially offer discounts for early arrivals.
This implementation would not require a complete re-modeling as the path flow model could still
be applied, but changes in the objective function to account for the penalty are needed, resulting in
different reduced cost calculations. A less time consuming and perhaps a more sensible start would
be to look at weaknesses in the current implementation. The main weakness is that the column
generation algorithm can get quite time consuming caused by path generation in the labeling
algorithm. The labeling algorithm is executed for each commodity which is not ideal in the larger
instances where the number of commodities is in the thousands. Karsten et al. (2015) propose an
origin based algorithm, since it is very common that commodities have the same origin and the
number of ports is only a small fraction of the number of commodities in the larger instances. The
algorithm would take in a set of commodities with the same origin and executed for the commodity
with the highest maximal transit time. As a consequence, because of the nature of the algorithm, all
other paths to the destination of the remaining commodities will also be found and can be processed
after the algorithm terminates, to discard paths that break the transit time limit. It would be viable
to implement this given our network representation as there is a single source(origins) node and
sink(destination) node for each port.
12.2
ALNS
12.2.1
Repair Flow for ALNS
A significant bottleneck in the current ALNS implementation is the computational overhead of the
MCF problem, particularly for larger instances where the network complexity grows substantially.
One promising direction for future research is the implementation of a repair flow algorithm. The
repair flow approach maintains and incrementally updates cargo flows rather than solving the
complete MCF problem after each network modification. When the network structure changes, the
algorithm identifies affected paths and reroutes only the disrupted cargo flows using A* search with
capacity constraints while preserving the unaffected flows. While this approach may not guarantee
==PAGE:85==
12.3 Exact methods
79
the optimal cargo flow configuration that a full MCF solution provides, the benefits of the increased
speed might outweigh the drawbacks. A significant reduction in computational time could enable
the ALNS to explore many more network configurations in the same amount of time. This trade-off
between solution quality and computational eﬀiciency merits further investigation, as the ability to
evaluate more network configurations might outweigh the small decrease in cargo flow optimality,
potentially leading to better overall network designs.
12.2.2
Network shaking phase
As we have already demonstrated, the ALNS algorithm is effective in increasing the profits of a
given network. However, we saw a clear trend that the profit often plateaued, indicating that it was
stuck in local optima, and the algorithm was unable to modify the network to increase profits. An
effective method to help with this is to use a ”shake” heuristics. This heuristic would drastically
alter the network structure and then allow the ALNS algorithm to run again in the hopes that
it reaches new heights. This was seen implemented in a paper after Praseeratasang et al. (2019),
where they implemented an Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), to effectively ”shake” the current
solution and explore different neighborhoods to their ALNS algorithm.
12.3
Exact methods
As was covered in the introduction to 8 solvers are evolving quickly. Soon, they will perhaps be
able to handle the size and complexity of the Liner Shipping Network Design Problem with ease.
Until then, some other methods can be tested to help solvers and still give us feasible and promising
results. Besides simple yet logical ideas, like the one mentioned at the end of 10.2 where the Maersk
team suggested limiting the set of ports based on each port’s distance from a given point or perhaps
from the ports visited by the previously removed rotation, there are some other more advanced
methods also worth examining.
12.3.1
A Directed Time-Space Graph
Right before the end of this project, the Maersk team mentioned a paper that had not been discov-
ered nor read in research for this project. The paper is called ”Integrated Liner Shipping Network
Design and Scheduling” by Koza, Desaulniers, and Ropke Koza et al. (2020).
The paper covers an extremely clever approach to liner shipping network design and scheduling
where the problem is modeled over a directed time-space graph before a column- and row-generation
matheuristic is implemented.
After reading the paper, there is no doubt that elaborating on this approach and continuing where
the authors left off would be a viable next step in trying to use Exact Methods to solve the LSNDP.
12.3.2
Double Column Generation
In 8.2.2 and in Google’s article (Galle & Tangl, 2020), it is mentioned that Google claim to have
used double column generation in their use of exact methods to tackle the LSNDP. However, it is
not clear what this means, and there might even be conflicting ideas on what they mean by ”double
column generation”.
==PAGE:86==
12.3 Exact methods
80
One such idea is that by double, they mean layered or stacked column generation. In that case,
there would be one master problem and one sub-problem, but the sub-problem would act like a
master problem to a sub-sub-problem.
Another interpretation is that their algorithm had one master problem and two sub-problems
(instead of one). The first sub-problem might then be handling the rotation, while the second
sub-problem might be covering the cargo flow.
If either of these ideas is, in fact, what Google formulated, it is unknown, and only one paper was
discovered on the subject of DCG during the research phase of this project.
The paper was published by Deng and Jacquillat of MIT in December of 2023 and is called ”Co-
ordinating mobile network coverage and vehicle routing: a double column generation approach”
(Deng & Jacquillat, 2023). The paper explores a vehicle routing problem for two types of vehicles,
“mission vehicles” and “emitting vehicles,” in hopes of coordinating their schedules. The setup of
their DCG, like the second idea mentioned above, is a master problem with two sub-problems. In
their formulation, the sub-problems create a feasible schedule for the vehicle types, one for the
mission vehicles and the other for the emitting vehicles.
Another interesting option besides the directed time-space graph formulation to continue the explo-
ration of using exact methods to solve the LSNDS would be to try and tailor Deng and Jacquillat’s
DCG to the LSNDP - Perhaps, by looking at the vessels and the cargo as two separate entities and
using DCG to create feasible routes for both and slowly ”merging” them.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
Agarwal, R., & Ergun, Ö. (2008). Ship scheduling and network design for cargo routing in liner
shipping. Transportation Science, 42(2), 175–196. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1070.0205
Ahuja, R. K., Magnanti, T. L., & Orlin, J. B. (2014). Network flows: Theory, algorithms, and
applications (New international edition). Pearson Education.
Álvarez, J. F. (2009). Joint routing and deployment of a fleet of container vessels. Maritime Eco-
nomics & Logistics, 11(2), 186–208. https://doi.org/10.1057/mel.2009.5
Bredmose, L. E., & Jørgensen, L. (2022). Liner shipping network design with container flow con-
siderations [Master’s Thesis]. Technical University of Denmark.
Brouer, B. D., Alvarez, J. F., Plum, C. E. M., Pisinger, D., & Sigurd, M. M. (2013). A base integer
programming model and benchmark suite for liner-shipping network design. Transportation
Science, 48(2), 281–312. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2013.0471
Brouer, B. D., Desaulniers, G., Karsten, C. V., & Pisinger, D. (2015). A matheuristic for the
liner shipping network design problem with transit time restrictions. 9335, 195–208. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24264-4_14
Brouer, B. D., Desaulniers, G., & Pisinger, D. (2014). A matheuristic for the liner shipping network
design problem. Transportation Research. Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 72,
42–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2014.09.012
Brouer, B. D., Pisinger, D., & Spoorendonk, S. (2011). Liner shipping cargo allocation with repo-
sitioning of empty containers. https://doi.org/10.3138/infor.49.2.109
Christiansen, M., Hellsten, E., Pisinger, D., Sacramento, D., & Vilhelmsen, C. (2021). Liner shipping
network design. In T. G. Crainic, M. Gendreau, & B. Gendron (Eds.), Network design with
applications to transportation and logistics (pp. 469–505). Springer International Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64018-7_15
Deng, A., & Jacquillat, A. (2023). Coordinating mobile network coverage and vehicle routing: A
double column generation approach [Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.08341]. arXiv
preprint, 2312.08341.
Feillet, D., Dejax, P., Gendreau, M., & Gueguen, C. (2004). An exact algorithm for the elemen-
tary shortest path problem with resource constraints: Application to some vehicle routing
problems. Networks, 44(3), 216–229. https://doi.org/10.1002/net.20033
Galle, V., & Tangl, T. (2020). Heuristics on the high seas: Mathematical optimization for cargo ships
[Accessed: 2025-01-17]. Google Research Blog. https://research.google/blog/heuristics-on-
the-high-seas-mathematical-optimization-for-cargo-ships/
Hellsten, E. O., Sacramento, D., & Pisinger, D. (2020). An adaptive large neighbourhood search
heuristic for routing and scheduling feeder vessels in multi-terminal ports. European Journal
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
82
of Operational Research, 287(2), 682–698. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2020.04.050
Irnich, S., & Desaulniers, G. (2005). Shortest path problems with resource constraints. In Column
generation (pp. 33–65). Springer US.
Karsten, C. V., Pisinger, D., Ropke, S., & Brouer, B. D. (2015). The time constrained multi-
commodity network flow problem and its application to liner shipping network design.
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 76, 122–138. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2015.01.005
Koza, D. F., Desaulniers, G., & Ropke, S. (2020). Integrated liner shipping network design and
scheduling. Transportation Science, 54(2), 512–533. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2018.0888
Krogsgaard, A., Pisinger, D., & Thorsen, J. (2018). A flow-first route-next heuristic for liner ship-
ping network design. Networks, 72(3), 358–381. https://doi.org/10.1002/net.21819
Krogsgaard, A., & Thorsen, J. (2016). Route network design for liner shipping [Master’s Thesis].
Technical University of Denmark.
Liu, S., Sun, J., Duan, X., & Liu, G. (2024). Parallel adaptive large neighborhood search based on
spark to solve vrptw. Sci Rep, 14. https://doi.org/doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-74432-2
Notteboom, T. E. (2006). The time factor in liner shipping services. Maritime Economics & Logis-
tics, 8(1), 19–39. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.mel.9100148
Pisinger, D., & Røpke, S. (2010). Large neighborhood search (M. Gendreau, Ed.). Handbook of
Metaheuristics, 2, 399–420. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-1665-5_13
Praseeratasang, N., Pitakaso, R., Sethanan, K., Kaewman, S., & Golinska-Dawson, P. (2019). Adap-
tive large neighborhood search for a production planning problem arising in pig farming.
Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity, 5(2), 26. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.3390/joitmc5020026
Ropke, S., & Pisinger, D. (2006). An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the pickup
and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Science, 40(4). https://doi.org/
10.1287/trsc.1050.0135
Trivella, A., Corman, F., Koza, D. F., & Pisinger, D. (2021). The multi-commodity network flow
problem with soft transit time constraints: Application to liner shipping. Transportation
Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 150, 102342. https://doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2021.102342
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A
Network Structs
1 # Define custom types for node and edge metadata
2 @with_kw mutable struct NodeData
3
ID::Int64
4
type::NodeType
5
uNName::String
6
fromNode::Vector{Int64}
7
toNode::Vector{Int64}
8 end
9
10 @with_kw mutable struct EdgeData
11
fromtopair::Tuple{Int64, Int64}
12
fromNode::Int64
13
toNode::Int64
14
origin_dest::Tuple{String, String}
15
time::Float64
16
cost::Float64
17
rotationIDs::Union{Vector{Int64}, Nothing}
18
type::EdgeType
19
canal::CanalType
20
distance::Float64
21 end
22
23 @with_kw mutable struct Rotation
24
ID::Int64
25
capacity::Float64 # The max capacity for the rotation
26
vessel_assignments::Dict{RegionalFleet , Int64} # The vessel class and the number of
that vessel type assigned to the rotation
27
vessel_speed::Float64 = 0.0 # The speed of the vessels assigned to the rotation
28
butterfly::Bool # If the rotation is a butterfly node
29
ports::Vector{String} # The ports which are apart of the rotations
30
portCalls::Vector{Tuple{Int64, Int64}} = Vector{Tuple{Int64, Int64}}() # The port
calls in the rotation
31
leg_durations::Vector{Float64} = Vector{Float64}() # The duration of each leg in
the rotation
32
leg_distances::Vector{Distance} = Vector{Distance}() # The distance of each leg in
the rotation
33
distance::Float64 # The total distance in the rotation
34
duration::Float64 # The total duration a full round trip takes
35
portCallCost::Float64 # The total portcall cost for all the ports
36
bunkerIdle::Float64 # The total bunkerIdle cost for all the ports
37
bunkerFuel::Float64 # The total bunkerFuel used when sailing between all the ports
38
totalTC::Float64 # The total TC for all the ports. TC rate * duration
39
suez::Int64 # How many edges are using the suez canal
40
panama::Int64 # How many edges are using the panama canal
41
canalCost::Int64 # The total cost for using all the canals.
42 end
43
44 # Define the graph network structure using MetaGraphsNext
45 @with_kw mutable struct Network
46
graph::MetaGraph{Int64, SimpleDiGraph{Int64},Int64, NodeData , EdgeData} = MetaGraph
{Int64, SimpleDiGraph{Int64},Int64, NodeData , EdgeData}()
==PAGE:90==
Network Structs
84
47
node_id_counter::Int64 = 0
48
edge_id_counter::Int64 = 0
49
rotations::Vector{Rotation} = Vector{Rotation}()
50
ports::Dict{String, Port} = Dict{String, Port}()
51
demands::Dict{Tuple{String, String}, Demand} = Dict{Tuple{String , String}, Demand
}()
52
distances::Dict{Tuple{String, String}, Vector{Distance}} = Dict{Tuple{String ,
String}, Vector{Distance}}()
53
fleet::Dict{String, RegionalFleet} = Dict{String , RegionalFleet}()
54 end
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B
Simplified Model for EM
Objective function
Maximize:
Z =
∑
k∈K
(
∑
i,j
i̸=j
i=origink
fijk
)
· revenuek
(Revenue from all picked up demands)
−
∑
i,j
i̸=j
xij · port_fixedi
(Fixed port call cost)
−
∑
i,j
i̸=j
xij · capv · port_call_cost_ffei
(Variable port call cost)
−
∑
k∈K
(
∑
i,j
i̸=j
i=origink
fijk
)
· cost_fullorigink
(Loading cost)
−
∑
k∈K
(
∑
i,j
i̸=j
j=destk
fijk
)
· cost_fulldestk
(Unloading cost)
−
∑
i,j
i̸=j
(
xij ·
distij
speedv · 24 · bunkerv + xij · idle_consv
)
· 600
(Fuel cost)
==PAGE:92==
Simplified Model for EM
86
Constraints
∑
i
i̸=h
xih =
∑
j
j̸=h
xhj
∀h
(Flow conservation)
∑
i
i̸=h
xih ≤1
∀h
(Single predecessor)
∑
i,j∈S
i̸=j
xij ≤|S| −1
∀S ⊂P, S ̸= ∅
(Subtour elimination)
fijk ≤dk · xij
∀i, j, k, i ̸= j
(Flow-arc linkage)
∑
i,j
i̸=j
j=destk
fijk ≤dk
∀k
(Total demand)
∑
i,j
i=origink
i̸=j
fijk ≤dk
∀k
(Origin flow)
∑
i
i̸=h
fihk =
∑
j
j̸=h
fhjk
∀h, k : h ̸= origink, h ̸= destk
(Flow conservation)
∑
i,j
i̸=j
j=destk
fijk ≤dk
∑
i,j
i̸=j
j=destk
xij
∀k
(Destination flow)
∑
i,j
i=origink
i̸=j
fijk =
∑
i,j
i̸=j
j=destk
fijk
∀k
(Flow balance)
n ≤av
(Available vessels)
∑
k
fijk ≤capv
∀i, j : i ̸= j
(Vessel capacity)
draftv ≤draftj + M(1 −xij)
∀i, j : i ̸= j
(Port draft)
∑
i,j
i̸=j
(
xij · distij
speedv
+ xij · 24
)
≤n · 24 · 7
(Duration)
==PAGE:93==
==PAGE:94==
