==PAGE:1==
Design optimisation for improved robustness
and performance in Agile Automotive’s trans-
mission
Master Thesis
Vajk Olivér Vozári
February 2, 2025
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Auto-
motive’s transmission
Master Thesis
February 2, 2025
By
Vajk Olivér Vozári
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Nils Koppels Allé,
Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Construct, the Department of Civil
Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, in collaboration with
Agile Automotive ApS in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
Design and Innovation.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of composite materials,
finite element analysis and power transmitting machine elements.
Vajk Olivér Vozári - s223173
Signature
Date
ii
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
2025.02.02
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This paper investigates the possibility and feasibility of using composite materials instead
of metals for structural transmission components. The superior thermal and mechanical
properties, strength-to-weight ratio, and design flexibility of composites offer an attractive
alternative for various automotive components. However, they are not being utilised in
structural components in the transmission assembly, mostly due to cost and manufacturing
complexities, as well as material incompatibility. This master thesis’ - in collaboration with
Agile Automotive - findings aim to disprove that, and indicate that a composite design is a
feasible alternative to a metal bell housing. When compared in an extensive finite element
analysis, it outperforms the original assembly in terms of performance, and exhibits lower
stress concentrations, smaller deformations, all while achieving a 74% weight reduction.
The final remarks also indicate that while composites are currently not suitable for large-
scale production and offer worse end-of-life potential, the superior life cycle length and
eﬀiciency they offer can offset their negative impact and drive innovation to work towards
lessening them.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Tobias Eifler, Associate Professor, Supervisor
The main supervisor, assisted with the overall development phase and robust design
Claus Suldrup Nielsen, Laboratory Engineer, Co-supervisor
Co-supervisor, assisted with machine elements mechanics and FEA simulations
Tim Hansen, Agile Automotive CEO, Company contact
Main company contact, assisted with the setup and scoping of the project as well as the
intricate manufacturing processes of composites
Alfredo Esbrí Mateu, Agile Automotive Chief Engineer, Company contact
Company contact, assisted with the setup of FEA and making the design manufacturable
iv
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
• OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer
• FWD - Front-wheel-drive
• FEA - Finite Element Analysis
• CAD - Computer Aided Design
• Throwout / Release bearing - A bearing that pushes on the diaphragm springs of
the clutch assembly
• Diaphragm - Springs
• Ply - a layer of fibre, usually defined by its angle across the specimen
• Stack-up - multiple layers of fibres that can have the same of different angles
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
About the company
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Delimitations and assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Preliminary system assessment
5
2.1
Transmission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
System robustness and failure mode analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Composite materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Composite automotive parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Development framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Development
16
4.1
Concept development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
System-level design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Material choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Detailed design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Testing and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results
37
5.1
Original bell housing FEA results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Proposed bell housing FEA results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Conclusions and discussion
45
6.1
Trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Manufacturing possibilities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Potential limitations and future scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.4
Final remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Bibliography
50
A Appendix
53
A.1 Idea generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2 FEA results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.3 Fibre directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
vi
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The modern automotive industry is under constant demand for innovation, in pursuit
of better performance, eﬀiciency and reliability. One of the trailblazers of driving this
evolution is the increasing use of advanced composites - materials that exhibit outstanding
mechanical and thermal properties, high toughness and durability, corrosion resistance, the
list goes on, while being closer to the density of water than most metals. It is no secret that
composites have been used for decades in motorsport and high-end commercial vehicles
for chassis and aero elements, body panels, driveshafts, but virtually never for structural
components in the transmission. Despite the clear advantages that composites can offer
over metals; better strength-to-weight ratio, exceptional fatigue and heat stress resistance,
gearboxes and bell housings are predominantly manufactured from metals.
This begs the question: Why? What hinders the adoption of composites in transmission
structural components? The surface level answer is rather simple: cost. The raw material
cost and the complexity of manufacturing to create rather convoluted geometries limit
what is achievable with these materials. However, the ever-increasing advances that are
being made in this field warrant the re-evaluation of the use of composites.
Thus, this thesis investigates the robustness, feasibility and performance of a composite
bell housing design. The project aims to create a modular design that can be used to
adopt various gearboxes and improve its integrability with different configurations, while
enhancing vehicle performance and fuel eﬀiciency. The subject is one of the cars manu-
factured by Agile Automotive, who design and build road legal, two-seater race cars. The
study will include an all-encompassing literature review, the expertise of Agile in the man-
ufacture of composites, and an extensive finite element analysis to accurately assess the
structural integrity of the design and compare it to the currently used aluminium alloy
bell housing.
By offering extensive evidence in favour, this thesis will provide an advantageous perspec-
tive on the use of composite materials in powertrain components, and may pave the way
for the next step towards lighter, more reliable solutions.
1.1
About the company
Agile Automotive ApS is a race car manufacturer based in Vamdrup, Denmark. They
design, develop, and build road legal, open two-seater cars using their extensive knowledge
in composite materials. Thus, the cars are primarily made out of carbon fibre composites,
allowing for a lightweight, but stiff design, key factors in motorsports. They currently offer
two configurations of their SCX model, SCX Road and SCX Race. Both offer different
specifications that can be altered to the customers’ needs, as every single car is custom
made.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
1
==PAGE:9==
Agile SCX Road Car
Agile SCX Race Car
Type
Open two-seater mid-engined sports car
Open two-seater mid-engined sports car
Monocoque
Carbon fibre
Carbon fibre
Bodywork
Carbon fibre
Carbon fibre
Front crashbox
Carbon fibre
Carbon fibre
Add. safety
-
Steel tube roll cage according to FIA regulations
Suspension
Double wishbones and adjustable KW dampers
Double wishbones and adjustable KW dampers
Brakes
Standard cast iron discs and aluminium calipers
Standard cast iron discs and aluminium calipers
Engine
1.6L Ford EcoBoost 225 HP or 275 HP
1.6L Ford EcoBoost 225 HP, 300 HP or 400 HP
Transmission
6-speed manual gearbox
6-speed manual gearbox
Weight
From 580 kg dry, 40/60 distribution
From 600 kg dry, 40/60 distribution
Acceleration
3 sec 0-100 km/h (275 HP) and 4 sec 0-100 km/h (225 HP)
4 sec 0-100 km/h down to sub 3 sec
Top speed
240 km/h (275 HP) and 230 km/h (225 HP)
230-250 km/h
Table 1.1: Agile portfolio [1]
(a) Agile SCX Road
(b) Agile SCX Race
Figure 1.1: Agile portfolio [1]
1.2
Problem statement
Much like similar low-volume, boutique car manufacturers, such as Caterham, Ariel or
Zenvo,[2] Agile relies on OEM components when it comes to the powertrain. That is due
to the enormous costs and time it takes to develop such a system that small companies
cannot afford. Thus, they turn to already available resources that they can integrate in
their vehicle systems. However, albeit much more cost-eﬀicient and less risky, since the
components are not specifically designed for these systems, integration can be quite a
challenge, and the result may be more prone to variation than desired.
Such is the case with Agile’s Ford IB6 gearbox and transmission, usually featured in a
Ford Focus or Fiesta, especially in their more performance-focused, ST versions. 6-speed
manual FWD with a corresponding bell housing and an integrated differential. A solid
platform, but when subjected to altered configurations and higher loads it was not designed
to endure on a regular basis, components become more likely to fail. Agile reported sev-
eral instances of the clutch pedal ”falling in”. In other words, the pedal does not return
after being pressed. This of course renders the car incapable of changing gears, and the
transmission needs to be taken out and disassembled, which is a time-consuming task.
Once disassembled and examined, the clutch disk is observed to be burnt from excessive
friction, and the inside of the otherwise completely dry bell housing is covered in lubricant.
Correspondence with the company suggests a leaking slave cylinder, used for the actua-
tion of the clutch mechanism is to blame due to overheating components surrounding the
transmission assembly. This failure mode is a major problem that Agile wishes to address,
as the resulting time-loss and costs are significant.
2
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:10==
Furthermore, Agile focuses heavily on composite parts to improve the performance of
their car, and prefer carbon fibre to metal for as many components as possible. It gives
them greater control over their parts due to their expertise in composites as well as the
total freedom of integration through adaptable designs. Since the bell housing only serves
structural purposes; connect the gearbox to the engine, and house the clutch mechanism
and differential, it would be beneficial to opt for a modified version that allows for more
versatility while improving performance. Thus, two other focus areas were also introduced
to the project. These objectives aim to explore the significant performance gains that can
be achieved through a lighter design with improved cooling capabilities, as well as the
possibility of transitioning from the OEM transmission, and the freedom of choice regard-
ing gearboxes. This would of course shift the development direction towards a modular
assembly design.
The outlined objectives will be addressed via a custom part specifically designed for its
intended use case. A well designed platform can offer much more freedom, better perfor-
mance and adaptability moving forward. Furthermore, since performance for track cars
is highly desirable, saving weight on any component can result in faster acceleration and
better traction. Therefore, the benefits for implementing a custom design is three-fold:
1. A possibility to improve the robustness of the clutch engagement mechanism and
eliminate the potential issues caused by its failure
2. Weight savings, improved durability, and superior thermal performance through
composite materials
3. Modularity/Adaptability of the design enables compatibility with other configura-
tions and gearboxes
The problem statement is therefore as follows: To mitigate the assembly’s susceptibility to
failure under varying conditions as well as provide better adaptability and performance, a
transition to a custom, composite bell housing is proposed. The proposal aims to address
the current limitations of the system, and provide a more versatile platform for future
developments.
1.3
Objectives
This section details the research objectives for this project. Establishing such items is
imperative to define the project’s limitations, as well as reflect on results.
1.3.1
Objective 1
Determine the feasibility of a composite bell housing design through a literature review and
SMEs (Subject Matter Experts).
Explore currently available research and solutions specific to this matter, focusing on
design, materials and feasibility. Investigate the relationship between metal and composite
materials under certain loads. Identify key challenges and possible obstacles.
1.3.2
Objective 2
Improve the robustness and versatility of the assembly by developing alternative clutch
system architectures.
Utilise ideation and concept generation methods to arrive at various configurations that
improve the robustness of the current solution. Benchmark the concepts against durability,
structural integrity, ease of integration and versatility.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
3
==PAGE:11==
1.3.3
Objective 3
Develop a final concept for a composite assembly capable of reproducing similar character-
istics to its metal counterpart, and validate the concept via FEA simulations.
Develop a detailed CAD model based on pre-determined design constraints, such as mount-
ing points, load-bearing capability, and overall geometry. Investigate the assembly’s per-
formance under predefined worst-case scenario conditions using FEA simulations.
1.4
Delimitations and assumptions
Due to the complexity of the assembly and the limited time-frame of the project, certain
limitations of the scope and assumptions were introduced to simplify some of the elements,
as well as create a feasible workflow.
1. The limited data available to the company about their clutch failure introduced some
early obstacles to correctly and accurately identify the source of these problems,
especially because it may as well could be outside of the scope of the assembly.
Since it would have required extensive testing on the transmission while the car was
running to accurately determine the cause of failure, a decision was made to simplify
the problem. It was therefore assumed with a fairly high confidence level that the
main source of the clutch failure is due to overheating issues. This was determined
via failure mode and fault-tree analysis. The source of overheating is unknown and
out of scope.
2. This paper focuses on the structural performance of the assembly, and therefore it
was assumed that having an open bell housing will relieve the thermal stress that
the transmission and clutch mechanism is subject to.
3. Simulating an accurate real-life scenario in FEA would be too time-consuming to
predict, and therefore, with the help of the company, a worst case scenario was
created to introduce a safety factor in the design. This shall guarantee the structural
rigidity of the assembly.
4
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:12==
2
Preliminary system assessment
2.1
Transmission
To gain a clear understanding of the assembly in question, it is imperative to establish a
basic grasp on how transmissions work. In this paper, the focus will be on internal combus-
tion engines and manual transmissions. More specifically, the sections below will analyse
a mid-mounted front-wheel drive manual transmission with an integrated differential. Fig-
ure 2.1 shows that transmissions are linked to the engine through a bolted connection via
a bell housing. Power comes from the engine in the form of torque on the crankshaft. The
crankshaft is connected to the flywheel that is bolted to the engine’s side. Torque is then
transferred to the gearbox via a clutch mechanism. This particular system works based
on friction and pressure plates. When the clutch is engaged (clutch pedal is depressed),
the pressure plate presses the clutch against the flywheel firmly via the diaphragm springs
to establish lossless torque transfer. The torque is transferred through the input shaft,
where it can be manipulated by different gear ratios. The output torque of the gearbox
is then transferred to the differential via the output shaft, which then transfers it to the
driveshafts, then wheel hubs, and finally the wheels. [3]
Figure 2.1: Transmission schematic
Inversely, when the clutch is disengaged, the pedal is pressed to activate the mechanism
used to move the throw-out bearing. This can be done by using wires or hydraulic systems.
As mentioned above, this particular assembly uses hydraulic valves to operate the bearing.
There are two cylinders in this system, the clutch master cylinder and the clutch slave
cylinder. It can be a semi-hydraulic system that uses an external slave cylinder outside the
bell housing, or a full-hydraulic system that uses an integrated concentric slave cylinder
inside the bell housing.[4] This assembly features the latter, and its effectiveness will be
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
5
==PAGE:13==
evaluated in subsubsection 4.4.1.
When the clutch pedal is pressed, it pushes on the
master cylinder, and that pressure is then transferred to the slave cylinder, which moves
the release/throw-out bearing. The bearing pushes on the diaphragm’s springs, which due
to a seesaw effect pull the pressure plate back, releasing the clutch from the flywheel, and
seizing the connection between the gearbox and the engine. [3]
The pressure that needs to be applied by this system can be calculated based on the amount
of torque applied by the engine, as the clutch and diaphragm are designed according to the
maximum torque to be transmitted. Clutch engagement in this case can be characterised
by mechanical friction, and thus it can be expressed mathematically in two ways:
• Assuming uniform distribution of interface pressure (new clutch) [5]
• Assuming uniform rate of wear at interface (worn-in clutch) [5]
Torque can be calculated as an integration of the friction moment of a small surface element
2π · r · dr.
dT = 2π · r · dr · p · µ · r
(2.1)
T1 =
∫ro
ri
2π · p · µ · r2dr = µ · 2π
3 · (r3
o −r3
i ) · p
(2.2)
For uniform pressure, the total normal force acting on the areas can be expressed by:
F =
∫ro
ri
2π · p · r · dr = π(r2
o −r2
i ) · p
(2.3)
where ri is the inner, and ro is the outer friction radius, p is pressure, and µ is the frictional
coeﬀicient. Eliminating the unknown p, the total normal force as a function of torque is:
F = T1
3(r2
o −r2
i )
2(r3o −r3
i ) · µ
(2.4)
After a wear-in period, the wear rate can be assumed to be uniform across the entire
surface,
p · r = C
where C is constant
(2.5)
and the total normal force can be expressed by, again, a function of torque:
F =
T1
ri+ro
2
µ
(2.6)
In Equation 2.4 and Equation 2.6, the normal force at maximum torque is calculated with
the following parameters:
T1 = Tmax = 370 Nm
ri = 0.158 m
µ = 0.42
ro = 0.228 m
(2.7)
F = 4565 N(2.4)
F = 4515 N(2.6)
(2.8)
6
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:14==
Thus, it can be concluded that the equations converge to an approximately similar number.
Nevertheless, the equation of uniform pressure will be used going further, as it can be
applied more universally, and with a slightly higher safety margin.
According to Agile, the currently used clutch experienced slipping at 400 Nm of torque.
This is the phenomenon where the diaphragm’s springs do not provide enough clamping
force to allow for eﬀicient torque transfer through friction, and the clutch disk starts
slipping against the surface of the flywheel. Therefore, this input torque can be used as
a baseline of how much force the springs theoretically apply to the clutch. Recalculating
Equation 2.4 at 400 Nm,
F = 4935 N
(2.9)
The clutch is being pressed by a marginally less force than 4935 N. The hydraulic system
needs to produce a force of this magnitude to effectively disengage the clutch.
Gearboxes are used to enable vehicles to start from rest, disengage torque delivery, and
match the engine speed and torque to certain circumstances the vehicle can experience.
This is possible via gears of different sizes, usually in pairs in the range of three to seven
or even eight. This allows for various gear and transmission ratios, denoted with u and i
respectively [3, 6, 7, 8],
u = z2
z1
and
i = ωdriven
ωdriving
(2.10)
This allows for simultaneous speed and torque (inverse) amplification or reduction that
can be applied to different scenarios. As an example, in first gear, large torque values at
a low speed are necessary to overcome the inertia of the car’s mass when starting from
rest.
Thus, a low gear ratio is beneficial, a small input gear and a large output gear
results in low angular speed, but high torque. Consequently, to maintain large speeds at
the highway, not much torque is necessary, but a high output angular speed is necessary,
therefore gears five or six have a high gear ratio. Thus, the highest torque can be achieved
while the car is in first gear. The exact value of torque amplification can be found using
Equation 2.10, if the number of gear teeth are known. In this case, gear ratio is already
given by Ford. The first gear amplifies the torque by 14.24, which will be used later on
in the FEA simulations. What connects the gearbox to the engine and houses the clutch
assembly is the bell housing, as shown in Figure 2.1. This particular housing also has
an integrated differential, meaning the torque is also transferred from the gearbox to the
axles here. It houses the concentric slave cylinder that is used to actuate the clutch, and is
the main focus of this paper. The following sections will evaluate the source of the failure
as well as provide an overview on composite materials and the obstacles that limit the
fabrication of such components.
2.2
System robustness and failure mode analysis
”Robust Design is the designing of products, devices and production equipment so that their
performance is insensitive to different sources of variation, e.g. manufacturing variation,
external noise factors, degradation, etc.”[9] The concept of robustness can be a driving
factor behind design optimisation, as its objective is to improve performance and simul-
taneously minimise the effect of external noise.
Such a concept is present throughout
the entire development process, however, the earlier it is considered and introduced, the
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
7
==PAGE:15==
more reliable the results will be. Understanding and applying robust design principles
during the concept development phase can help refine product specifications and design
constraints. [10] The aim of this section is therefore to identify the sources of variation and
make the transmission assembly less prone to them while maintaining, or even improving
performance.
The external noise factors (or causes of variation) can be categorised into six different
sources:
1. Material stock
2. Manufacturing variation
3. Assembly variation
4. Ambient conditions
5. Time
6. Loading
2.2.1
Root cause analysis
Figure 2.2: Fish-bone schematic for clutch failure
To accurately determine the main sources of variation, which in this case are responsible
for the clutch failure, root cause analysis methodology was used. This method aims to
divide the different causes into categories, which then can be further investigated. The
first fish-bone in Figure 2.2 was created to assess what modes of failure are there for the
problem explained by the company; clutch fell in, transmission had to be taken apart
8
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:16==
and upon inspection, the clutch plate was burnt due to excessive friction, and there was
hydraulic fluid inside the bell housing. [11, 12]
Figure 2.3: Fault-tree analysis
Six modes of failure were identified: Components, Material, Mechanical, Manufacturing,
Environment, and Human (Drivers). In the Components category, causes of these failures
are mostly to do with any mishaps that can happen to the components during installation
or maintenance. Incorrect assembly for example can lead to uneven wear and premature
failure of the clutch plate. The Material category collects any causes to do with incorrect
material choice or quality for the specific application. Similarly in Manufacturing, since
most components are OEM, these types of causes are out of Agile’s control and therefore
hard to address.
Human-caused failures can have a negative effect on the lifetime of
components, however, it is assumed that the components were designed to withstand this
relatively small variation.
Thus, Mechanical and Environment-related failure modes were chosen as the most likely
candidates to cause premature breakdown. Out of tolerance ambient conditions can sig-
nificantly alter the performance and load capacity of the components and considering the
correspondence with Agile, are quite probable. Mechanical failure modes are somewhat
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
9
==PAGE:17==
interconnected with ambient conditions, as some can stem from high loads or excessive
temperatures.
Components, Material, Manufacturing and Human-based failure modes
were deemed non-critical, as they are not in the project’s intervention scope.
To further reinforce the correlation between the two most suspected failure modes, a
fault-tree diagram was also created that showcases the causality of ambient conditions.
Subjecting the clutch assembly to higher temperatures than it was designed for can intro-
duce a myriad of problems. In this case, one of the predicted scenarios are that the high
temperature inside the bell housing caused the plastic casing around the slave cylinder
to deform elastically. The high hydraulic pressure inside the cylinder would then start
leaking following the path of least resistance, the open gap of course. Upon disassembly
and inspection, there were no cracks or any plastic deformation to point towards a specific
failure case. The source of leaking was also not found. Since determining the extent and
source of the predicted excessive loads and temperature was not a possibility, the fault-tree
established these conditions as ground zero.
(a) Slave cylinder
(b) Gasket
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.4: Disassembled slave cylinder
2.3
Composite materials
Fibre-reinforced composite materials have been used for thousands of years by humanity,
and their application can range across vastly different industries from aerospace to auto-
motive to everyday objects such as bicycles and fishing rods. Their importance is defined
by their exceptional specific properties. Specific properties take a material’s density into
10
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:18==
account to better showcase strength, stiffness or toughness relative to other materials.
These outstanding properties are created by combining fibres that exhibit high strength
and stiffness in a matrix that is lightweight, distributes the stress applied to the composite,
and maintains structural integrity. [13, 14, 15]
Figure 2.5: Properties of various fibres and composites compared to aluminium
Fibres are generally lightweight and have a tiny cross-section, typically with diameters of
a few microns. They are stiff in tension but rather flexible due to their small diameter.
That flexibility is a function of its diameter, 1/D4.[13] There are many types of fibres, but
the most used ones are glass and carbon. Usually coupled with epoxy resin as the matrix,
these composites are incredibly strong and durable. Figure 2.5 shows that all fibre-based
materials possess a significantly higher tensile strength compared to the aluminium alloy
used to manufacture the original bell housing, while still being lighter as well.
Glass
fibre is the closest in terms of density (2600 kg/m3 to aluminium’s 2800kg/m3), the rest,
especially the commercially common carbon and aramid are much lighter, around 1600
kg/m3. These materials are great for lightweight structural applications, and are being
used in various industries.
The most popularly used matrices are usually polymer-based, largely due to their low
density and melting temperature. This allows for a simple impregnation process that does
not require high temperatures and pressures, which reduces costs. They are usually fairly
corrosive resistant, an important property in many applications. Since polymers have a
low elastic modulus, they provide excellent impact resistance for composites, as well as
allow for load transfer by shear between fibres, which is the driving factor behind the high
strength and stiffness of the material. [13]
What makes composites so strong is that all fibres are usually oriented along the designed
load path. In a simple tensile loading scenario, the fibres are aligned in a 0 degree angle to
be parallel with the tensile force. Since the fibres carry the load, the tensile strength of the
material is maximised. This of course also means that any load that is not along this path
will have a large effect on the composite, as the construction is weak in other directions due
to its anisotropic nature. Therefore, unidirectional fibre plies have high tensile stiffness,
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
11
==PAGE:19==
but low shear and torsional stiffness.
In order to prevent this, plies are stacked with
different angles to compensate for this weakness, or to better align the composite with
the load direction. Fibres can be laid at any angle, but the most commonly used plies
are 0/90/0/90 and ±45°, also called as biaxial. A biaxial fibre orientation will counter
the off-axis loads, resulting in a high shear and torsion stiffness, but will also have lower
tensile stiffness, as none of the fibres will be aligned with the tensile load path. [16, 17,
18]
Lastly, the final piece in the puzzle that makes composites extraordinary, is how the
residual stresses that build up in them over the curing process add to their tensile strength.
Since the two different materials making up the composite will have different thermal
expansion coeﬀicients, they are not free to expand and contract separately. This starts
the development of residual stresses that will be negative in the fibres and positive in the
matrix. This means that when a unidirectional fibre composite is experiencing tensile
loads, the load first has to overcome the negative residual stress in the fibres before it
actually has a tensile effect. [19]
Due to these unique properties, the automotive industry is one of the main industries
where composite materials are used wherever possible. While historically they have been
used limited due to mostly cost constraints, there has been a shift driven by the transition
towards electric vehicles. The adoption of composite materials can help achieve better
energy eﬀiciency and extend driving range. Extending the scope to all types of vehicles,
composites can offer significant improvements, such as corrosion resistance, better fuel
economy, impact resistance and more complex design choices. [13]
Cost and limited capabilities for large-scale production remain the primary barriers for
adopting such materials, as they offset the possible performance gains, favouring metals
and plastics as the more feasible choice. To overcome such barriers, technological advances
in innovative manufacturing techniques with faster production rates are essential. Never-
theless, composites are experiencing an upward trend in high-end performance and family
cars, and they highlight the potential for composites to drive the future of lightweight,
energy-eﬀicient, and sustainable automotive component design. [13]
2.3.1
Joining metals and composites
Joining two dissimilar materials such as composites and metals is a complex task. Fig-
ure 2.6 below shows what options there are. To achieve the most reliable construction, the
two materials may be bonded together with the use of adhesives, but that results in a per-
manent fixture that is not always preferred. The case is similar with riveting and similar
permanent mechanical joining methods, while they offer excellent bonding strength, they
cannot be removed and thus render the creation of modular designs impossible. Thus,
bolting and clamping are the best solutions to join composites to metals, which require
bolt holes that can weaken the structure of the composite.[20, 21] Furthermore, the phe-
nomenon of galvanic corrosion (explained below) can cause premature failure, and requires
special attention when designing assemblies that feature materials that are prone to it. As
an example, for this reason, aluminium bolts are never used to clamp carbon fibre com-
posites parts together.[14]
12
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.6: Joining metals to composites
2.3.2
Galvanic corrosion
Galvanic corrosion is an electrochemical process that occurs at the interface of dissimilar
metals or other materials. In this case, a carbon fibre epoxy composite and aluminium.
Aluminium gives away electrons due a difference in potential difference, that then form
Aluminium Hydroxide through an electrolytic process. This process corrodes the metal
mostly, but can damage the structure of the composite as well, which can accelerate
crack growth, cause premature failure, weaken the load-bearing capability of the parts,
and increase vibrations. While galvanic corrosion needs an electrolyte, such as water to
effectively start, the humidity in the air is enough for the two parts to react with each
other. Thus, one has to assume that within this assembly, galvanic corrosion is a significant
threat. To combat this, a non-conductive barrier/isolation layer is usually added. This
layer can be paint, however, in this case, due to the amount of vibration, the paint may
chip and wear off, which would start the galvanic corrosion. Therefore, the most effective
way of dealing with it is to add a non-conductive layer on top of the carbon fibre composite
in the form of glass fibre. This can be easily done over the course of the bonding process
by laying a thin, extra layer of glass fibre in the mould as the first and last layer, encasing
the carbon fibre to eliminate contact between it and the aluminium. [14, 22]
2.4
Composite automotive parts
Composite parts are used extensively in the automotive industry due to their rigidity,
strength and low weight. Due to the low weight, they also improve fuel eﬀiciency greatly.
A 10% reduction in weight can increase fuel eﬀiciency by up to 7%, as well as lower inertial
forces, which in turn can improve braking and acceleration.
[23] They show superior
mechanical properties: high strength-to-weight ratio, damage tolerance, buckling strength
and stiffness, as well as better thermal and corrosion resistance. [15, 24, 18] Composites
are used in many subsystems of a vehicle:
• Engine parts, such as pistons, driveshafts and gears due to their superior thermal
properties as well as low wear rates [25, 26]
• Brake systems, such as brake pads and linings, as they offer better thermal stability
and wear-resistance, resulting in a harder, lighter system [27]
• Suspension and chassis, as they offer a lighter and tougher solution that wear slower
and increase safety [28]
• Panels, bumpers, wings, any body items for a lightweight, rigid construction that
are more impact resistant than metals.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
13
==PAGE:21==
However, none of the articles that were investigated mentioned using composites to create
transmission casings, more specifically bell housings. A literature search specifically car-
ried out on composite bell housings yielded no results on DTU Findit, Elsevier, Science
Direct, Springer. Two articles were found about composite gearboxes, one for Honda’s
F1 composite gearbox used in 2004, and a master thesis about a composite gearbox for
an LMP1 car.[29, 30] Both reported significantly better performance, lighter construction,
and adherence to acceptance criteria. Still, no advances have been made towards creat-
ing transmission components out of composites, even though it was established that they
offer a better solution than metals for all potential requirements of a bell housing. They
have better thermal performance, superior strength-to-weight ratio, impact-, wear-, and
fatigue-resistance. So why is that? It is rather unclear as to why that is the case, but
the complexity of these parts could be one of the reasons. Composites are hand-laid in a
mould, which means overhangs, and tiny, complex geometries are hard, if not impossible
to achieve and requires expert craftsmanship. Furthermore, composites are rather costly
compared to metals, both in raw material and manufacturing costs.
This could deter
many vehicle designs, as they aim for cost-effectiveness.
Finally, since composites are
anisotropic, fibre direction, ply setup and layup must be carefully designed and simulated
to ensure that it performs as intended, else the drop in mechanical properties can result in
a catastrophic failure. Nevertheless, this paper’s objective is to prove that composite bell
housings offer a great alternative to metals, especially in a performance vehicle setup.
14
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:22==
3
Methodology
3.1
Development framework
A well-defined development process is crucial to assure the quality of the outcome. While
there are many ways to define such a process, the general development process outlined by
Ulrich et al. 2019 [10] and Pahl et al. 2007 [31] describes the most important steps rather
accurately. The process then can be modified to suit the application, in this case, the
manufacturing and commercialisation of the resulting assembly was given a lesser focus,
as the focal point of this paper is feasibility and system-level robustness.
1. Planning: The modified design and development process is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
It begins with an introductory planning phase, mainly focusing on research such as
literature reviews, as well as scheduling, time management, and project outlines.
2. Concept development: In this phase, the design requirements, specifications, as
well as the engineering characteristics of the system are established. Based on these,
alternative solutions are generated and evaluated, and one or more concepts are
selected for further work.
3. System-level design: This part of the process analyses the transmission’s system
architecture and decomposes the assembly into subsystems and components. More
specifically, this phase focuses on material selection and properties, and interface
establishment and integration. The output shall include specification for material
selection, rough geometry and integration plan.
4. Detailed design: This is where the iterative process begins, as the design is fully
developed using the results of the stages above, as well as the stage below. Iterations
are generated and then tested in the next stage, and based on the results, the design
is modified once again to address potential shortcomings.
5. Testing and validation: As explained above, using FEA, real-life scenarios are sim-
ulated to assess the functional performance and structural integrity of the developed
assembly, in direct comparison to the current solution.
3.2
Planning
Figure 3.1: Development stage-gate model
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
15
==PAGE:23==
4
Development
This section explores the entire development process of a new composite bell housing. De-
signing such a complex assembly, such as a transmission bell housing requires establishing
a well-defined overview. Following a structured methodology aids the designer in keep-
ing the myriad of interactions between the subsystems in mind while providing creative
toolsets to arrive at an innovative solution.
4.1
Concept development
This section aims to create a baseline of ideas that can be used to generate feasible concepts
as well as establish the design requirements as early as possible. The ideation phase started
with the usual fuzzy front end, with lots of different takes on how to make the design
integrable, what connection types could be used, and most importantly, what geometry
would be the most optimal. First, the original bell housing’s geometry was analysed.
4.1.1
Original bell housing overview
Figure 4.1: Original assembly
From Figure 4.1, it can be easily deduced that it has a fairly complex geometry, that is
hard to simplify due to the connections, reinforcements, and other problematic protrusions.
The inside of the bell houses the failing concentric slave cylinder as well as the entire clutch
assembly: clutch plate, flywheel, diaphragm, and input shaft, shown in Figure 2.1. To
16
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:24==
create a simple, detailed overview, a schematic (Figure 4.2) was made about the assembly.
This was later used to identify the connection points, geometrical constraints and problems.
Figure 4.2: Original assembly schematic
4.1.2
Design requirements
In order to find the most suitable system architecture, it is imperative to establish suitable,
and more importantly, applicable design requirements. The House of Quality (or QFD) is
an effective method for such a process, and will be demonstrated in this section. It was
first developed by Toyota in 1972 [32, 33] to translate customer needs into quantifiable
metrics that engineers can use to design components. It is a conceptual map that organises
the specifications and goals of a product as well as itemise customer needs based on their
importance. It can also compare and benchmark several competitors, a section that will
not be explored in this paper. The House of Quality in Figure 4.3 was created based on
the needs of Agile as well as the objectives outlined in the introduction. Each category
of ”Demanded Quality” aims to assess these, and weight was given based on a feasibility
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
17
==PAGE:25==
approach. The requirements were made to act as guidelines, to shape the scope of the
project. As such, it was important not to be too restrictive, but still give boundaries
to the design task. As an example, the original bell housing weighs 18.7 kg, and based
on the density difference between aluminium and carbon fibre, it is a fairly reasonable
assumption that the assembly can achieve a 50% reduction in weight. The results of the
House of Quality show what Quality characteristics should be prioritised based on their
weight and diﬀiculty to accomplish.
Based on the inputs and the results in gray, one
can keep in mind the reliable clutch mechanism, the robustness of the design to achieve
promising FEA results, and suﬀicient cooling when creating the concepts.
Figure 4.3: House of Quality
18
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:26==
4.2
System-level design
The creation and development of system-level concepts established the foundations for the
detailed design phase. Schematics were generated for an easier overview of the process,
and a total of three distinct design directions were conceived. An iterative approach was
applied throughout the project, therefore several versions of each concept were created
to assure optimal outcomes. Each concept was derived through the design requirements,
interface and connection point constraints.
4.2.1
Interfaces and mounting points
There are three main interfaces and a sub-interface in the assembly that need to be adhered
to. They are all constrained in 3D space, and thus their dimensions and distance to other
objects cannot be changed. The only exception is the unique interaction of Interfaces 3
and 4. Furthermore, there are many mounting points on the assembly, each having a
specific task, and therefore, it is a complex task to group them and identify what can and
cannot be altered.
(a) Gearbox-side
(b) Engine-side
Figure 4.4: Interface constraints
Interface 1 (Figure 4.4b) is the mounting face for the engine. Several bolt connections
ensure that the torque transmitted is withstood. The position of them cannot be changed,
but the depth can be, which will be an important design decision later on.
Interface 2 (Figure 4.5) is an ambiguous connection between the cover of the differential
and the bell housing.
The position of the output shaft is locked, but the connection
between the two housings is freely alterable. However, there is a crucial mounting point
where the dog bone is connected to the assembly. This link is responsible for eliminating
any torsional movement of the housing and gearbox, and the highest load is applied here.
This connection needs to have high stiffness to endure such a load, this can be derived from
the thick ribs around the points connecting to both the bell and the differential house.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.5: Interfaces schematic
Interface 3 (Figure 4.4a) is the mounting face for the gearbox, and the main design chal-
lenge of this paper. As one of the design requirements is modularity, more specifically
the ability to mount different gearboxes to the same assembly, its position and geometry
within the assembly are crucial and highly complex. Its mounting points are constrained
in their position relative to each other, but their distance to the engine is free, allowing
for creating a design with a shorter transmission, which is a desirable outcome. As this
interface is interlinked with Interface 4, their position relative to each other may also be
changed depending on the type of gearbox.
Figure 4.6: Protrusions
Some gearboxes, such as the Ford IB6, shown in Figure 4.6 have bearing faces and corre-
sponding shafts that protrude inside the bell housing, making Interface 3 a 3-dimensional
20
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:28==
feature. The largest feature protrudes 49.5 mm inside the bell housing. Other gearboxes,
such as the one in Figure 4.7 feature a completely flat, 2-dimensional feature for connecting
the gearbox to the bell housing.
(a) Engine-side
(b) Gearbox-side
Figure 4.7: Flat gearbox connection of a BMW M49 transmission [34]
This discrepancy obstructs the modularity aspect of the design greatly. To reduce the
complexity, schematics (Figure 4.5) with the most important variables were created to
gain a system-level overview.
Interface 4 (Figure 4.5) is a sub-interface that depends on the geometry of the gearbox.
As mentioned above, its height reduces to zero if the gearbox connection is flat. However,
with other gearboxes, it becomes a crucial interface, and its position will be based on
Interface 3.
While there are other mounting points of interest that can be examined, their position is
not as constrained as the ones mentioned above, and therefore they are out of the scope
of this paper.
4.2.2
System-level concept generation
Using Figure 4.5, several concepts were generated to satisfy the design and interface re-
quirements. They were made iteratively, and therefore some are building on top of each
other after initial assessments showed their shortcomings. The three main directions are
as follows:
Figure 4.8: Concept 1
Concept 1 was the simplest of all three, create two connection interfaces at the engine and
at the gearbox (Interfaces 1 and 3), and connect the two in any way possible, as shown in
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
21
==PAGE:29==
section A.1. It uses an ”adapter plate” made out of metal that matches the geometry of
gearbox, which can then be the connection point to the composite bell housing.
Figure 4.9: Concept 2
Concept 2 introduces the geometrical issues that the gear shaft axles and bearing housings
pose. Their position and protrusion inside the housing reduces the number of possibilities
greatly.
The blue ring in Figure 4.6 shows why it would be impossible to generate a
symmetric geometry that can bypass these constraints, at least on the plane of the gearbox
connection. Thus, this concept aims to overcome this obstacle by raising the height of the
metal adapter plate, and consequently the connection point between said plate and the
bell housing. It however, leaves limited space for the clutch assembly.
Figure 4.10: Concept 3
Concept 3 is a hybrid solution that aims to minimise the amount of metal in the design
while still accounting for the protrusions. The Base in Figure 4.10 is a mock-up design
to show that the original shape of the bell housing is preserved to a degree. The main
limiting factor here is the geometrical clashes and sub-optimal integration of the bell
housing, differential housing, and adapter plate.
4.2.3
Concept evaluation
These concepts were evaluated with the use of a weighed matrix, Table 4.1. Such a matrix
is a great tool to emphasize the most important elements of the project goal.
Higher
weights were given to the categories that enabled the design to focus on modular solution
while still being manufacturable and structurally sound. The assessment categories were:
• Feasibility: this involves manufacturability, and ease of assembly
• Modularity: how much of the design would be compatible if components were to
change
22
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:30==
• Cost: material and manufacturing costs
• Structural rigidity: a preliminary assessment on how the structure would behave in
the FEA simulations
• Integration: how much of the design is compatible with the current assembly, how
much change does it require to install
• Adaptability: the ease of modifying the components to fit different configurations
• Expected weight: preliminary weight prediction
Weight (1-5)
Concept 1
Weighted score
Concept 2
Weighted score
Concept 3
Weighted score
Feasibility
4
2
8
5
20
5
20
Modularity
5
1
5
5
25
4
20
Cost
2
2
4
2
4
3
6
Structural rigidity
4
3
12
4
16
4
16
Integration
3
2
6
4
12
4
12
Adaptability
5
2
10
4
20
3
15
Expected weight
2
5
10
2
4
3
6
Total
17
55
26
101
26
95
Table 4.1: Weighted matrix for concept evaluation
Thus, concept 2 was chosen for further development due to its outstanding adaptability
and modularity, all while being one of the more feasible ideas.
4.3
Material choice
The construction needs to withstand complex loading cases, therefore it needs to be stiff,
strong and tough while being lightweight. Stiffness is defined by the material’s Young’s
modulus as well as the geometry of the part. Therefore, the design choices will be equally
significant to the material choice.
The material of the original bell housing is ENAC-
AlSi9Cu3(Fe)(Zn), grade ENAC-46500, an aluminium alloy specifically made for casting
parts, mostly machinery and automotive parts. Its base grade ENAC-46000 was found
in Granta Edupack and used in this analysis. As for the composite part, Agile provided
a material sheet with experimental data on a high-strength carbon fibre epoxy prepreg
woven fabric. Granta has a similar material in their database that are used for automotive
components. Its orientation is 0/90°, which is different from the one used in the FEA,
±45°. This should not affect the result, as tensile and similar tests are usually carried out
along the length of the specimen. This means that the experimental data will not reflect
the actual loading for the ±45°, as none of the fibres will be aligned with the loading
direction. On the other hand, twill 0/90° has its 0° fibres aligned, which results in higher
strength.
However, when loaded in the actual use case, if the design of the layups is
correct, the ±45° layup will exhibit similar strength to the twill 0/90°, as it will be laid
along the load path.
To start with the material choice, material indices can help gain a better overview on
the selection of materials, as it allows direct comparison for stiffness, strength, toughness,
etc.[35] For stiffness, the material index can be deduced from the following equations.
Stiffness is a function of both the material’s Young’s modulus and the part’s geometry.
For stiffness limited design using tensile loading mode, the material index is given as E
ρ .
[36] This can then be overlaid on a Young’s modulus / Density chart in Granta Edupack.
From the graph, the performance of the two materials can be compared directly.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.11: Young’s modulus vs. Density - Stiffness limited design material index
Figure 4.12: Yield strength vs. Density - Strength limited design material index
Figure 4.11 shows that the two materials perform similarly, with the carbon composite
slightly above the line when it is placed on the aluminium alloy. Thus, out of the two
materials, while the composite has slightly lower modulus, the relative material index
shows that by density, it is actually stiffer in this loading case.
To avoid the material yielding under the load, it needs to have high strength. This is
especially important for composites, as they are incredibly brittle materials, which means
they do not yield much before fracturing compared to metals, that are considered mostly
ductile at room temperature.
Therefore, it is critical that the load is below its yield
strength to ensure no failure happens. The material index for tensile loading this geometry
is given as σy
ρ . [35, 13, 36] Figure 4.12 shows that the high-strength carbon fibre epoxy is
24
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:32==
a lot stronger, and shall therefore safely withstand the loads applied, as it is known that
the aluminium alloy also does so without yielding.
Finally, in order to make sure that cracks do not propagate under loads, it is important to
assess the toughness of the materials and compare them. While it was already established
that the carbon fibre composite has higher strength to the aluminium alloy, cracks propa-
gate a lot more instantaneously in brittle materials, therefore the composite also needs a
high fracture toughness (KIC), which is a measure of how fast a crack grows under certain
stress intensities. From this, a material index can be derived K2
IC
E , which represents the
amount of energy required to cause a fracture. In other words, how much energy the mate-
rial can absorb before is fractures. [35, 36] Figure 4.13 shows that the composite material
is able to absorb a lot more energy than the aluminium, which is crucial to ensure no
fracture can occur.
Figure 4.13: Fracture toughness vs. Young’s modulus - Fracture limited design material
index
In conclusion, the material comparative analysis shows that the high-strength composite
material offers superior mechanical properties compared to the aluminium alloy. Better
specific stiffness, strength and fracture toughness while also offering a lightweight solution.
However, it is imperative to optimise the fibre directions of the layup design to effectively
withstand complex loading cases. Finally, it is also important to keep in mind the price
difference. Composite materials are costly, and price is the main reason it is being used
a lot less than metals, which are available in abundance. Figure 4.14 shows that this
particular composite is an order of magnitude more expensive per unit volume than its
metal counterpart. However, it also exhibits better thermal properties, which along with
the superior mechanical properties, warrants the higher price point.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.14: Price vs. Max. service temperature
4.4
Detailed design
Thus, with the final concept chosen and the material assessment complete, the generation
of component-level concepts could be started. This includes:
• design alternatives for different composite bell housings to be evaluated by FEA
• a fully developed solution for an adapter plate, used for matching the geometry of
the current gearbox, and alterable later for different gearboxes
• an alternative solution to the current clutch mechanism that eliminates the leakage
issues
Since the development process changed from linear to iterative, the sections below present
the final design of each subcomponent.
4.4.1
Component-level concept generation
Bell housing
Figure 4.15 shows the finalised version of the bell house cone. The iterations used in the
FEA can be found in Figure 4.26. There were three main directions:
• a complete, solid cone (cone 1) to assess the feasibility of the construction and focus
on the manufacturability of the design. It helped understand exactly how the cone
would behave under certain load conditions and provide a baseline overview of where
the stress concentrations could be.
• design two (cone 2) aimed to strategically remove as much material as possible to
reduce weight and increase its cooling capabilities. It also showed that the removal
of material increases stress concentrations if done incorrectly.
• the last cone (cone 3) was an experimental design to explore the behaviour of the
structure when aligning the ”branches” (the structure that remains after material
removal) with the anticipated load path.
26
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:34==
Each design was subjected to a comprehensive analysis to evaluate their performance both
in the transmission assembly and individually. The results gained from the FEA helped
create subsequent iterations to arrive at an optimised design. The modifications made
were thickness changes, filleting, branch shape and angle. The iterative process was used
to its fullest to ensure a structurally sound design was obtained.
Figure 4.15: Render of the final bell housing
Adapter plate
The finalised adapter plate is shown in Figure 4.16. It is the result of multiple iterations
throughout the entire development process, and includes the improvements that were
added based on the FEA: ribs, filleting, wall thicknesses. There is a base extrusion that
matches the geometry of the gearbox, and on top of that is an ”island” that accommodates
the bearing spaces that extrude inside the bell. The base extrusion can be changed freely to
match any gearbox’s connection geometry. Refer to Figure A.2 for a schematised showcase.
This island provides a flat surface where the bell can be mounted with four bolts. The
mounting points and the geometry of the differential cover were preserved from the original
bell housing. It matches the geometry of the original piece a lot, but manages to save a
lot of material, reducing the weight of the entire construction. The figure also shows that
the maximum number of bolts that can be used to connect the bell and the adapter plate
together is four, at least if it were to stay symmetric, due to the space constraints created
by the shaft and bearing housings.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
27
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.16: Renders of the final adapter plate
Clutch mechanism
Currently, the clutch is being engaged and disengaged via a concentric slave cylinder. The
bearing on the end of it is being pushed back by the diaphragm.
When the pedal is
pressed, the piston in the master cylinder transfers hydraulic pressure towards the slave
cylinder which pushes the bearing towards the clutch plate, lifting the diaphragm springs
and pulling the clutch plate away from the flywheel, disconnecting the torque delivery
from the engine to the gearbox, and effectively the wheels.
(a) Clutch engaged
(b) Clutch disengaged
Figure 4.17: Clutch mechanism schematic
Now, there are several advantages to such a construct. It is compact, self-centring, requires
less parts and provides a uniform, circular pressure on the bearing. However, since all
components have been integrated into one, it is more complex and therefore if it fails,
the entire mechanism fails. Furthermore, as explained above, this particular cylinder, the
OEM version provided for IB6 transmissions from Ford are prone to leaking even when
used in their intended conditions. The major issue here is that once it fails, since the entire
unit is inside the bell housing, it causes a chain reaction of failures, as the clutch plate
28
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:36==
gets contaminated, starts slipping, and fails. This means that upon failure, the entire
transmission needs to be taken out of the car and disassembled, and the parts mentioned
need to be replaced.
(a) Clutch mechanism with a fork
(b) Clutch mechanism with arms
Figure 4.18: Clutch mechanism schematic
(a) Clutch mechanism with a fork
(b) Clutch mechanism with arms
Figure 4.19: Clutch mechanism renders
On the other hand, there are assemblies that place the slave cylinder outside of the bell
housing, and use a clutch fork with a pivot point or arms (Figure 4.18) to operate the
clutch. These can be used both in push and pull clutch systems, can be maintained with-
out the complete disassembly of the transmission, and since they would be located outside
the bell housing, would eliminate the leakage issues. The bearing would click into a snap
fit type construction at the end of the fork. They are of course a lot less eﬀicient due to the
eccentricity between the diaphragm’s axis and the bearing’s movement. This would result
in a larger master cylinder or higher required input force from the driver, which - to some
extent - was a wish of customers according to Agile, as some characterised the current
clutch setup ”too soft”. Additionally, since it is made up of more parts, the probability
of failure would also increase. Still, a failure in one of components would not result in a
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
29
==PAGE:37==
catastrophic implosion, unlike in the concentric integrated version, and can be more easily
corrected.
There are two main concepts that were developed, both with robustness and Design for
Assembly/Disassembly principles in mind. First iteration of the external slave cylinder
clutch fork mechanism was a traditional fork, that is used in many vehicles. It uses a pivot
point to rotate around when pushed by the piston of the slave cylinder. It uses a seesaw
mechanism, therefore the force is accurately determined based on Figure 4.20. While it is
more commonly used, unfortunately the finalised adapter plate did not have the required
space and geometry to be fully integrable. The assembly/disassembly process was deter-
mined to be near impossible due to the lack of space. It would have necessitated removal
of material, and a resulting weakened structure, which eventually led to the dismissal of
the design.
Figure 4.20: Clutch mechanism force model
Thus, the second concept, shown in Figure 4.18b and Figure 4.19b was the chosen mech-
anism. It uses two arms that rotate around a barrel that is fixed to the adapter plate
with a screw. The arms are also fixed to the barrel with a screw, which provides an easy
disassembly process while using as little space as possible. Since the release bearing would
be actuated via a rotating motion rather than a seesaw motion, the accuracy is marginally
lower than with an actual fork, however, this compact design offers significant advantages
over the first concept in terms of space eﬀiciency and ease of disassembly. Therefore, the
second concept was chosen as the clutch actuation mechanism.
In order to achieve the same pressing force with a clutch fork-master-slave cylinder setup,
the following equations were created. The system comprises of the clutch master cylinder,
clutch release/slave cylinder, clutch fork that rotates around itself, and the throw-out
30
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:38==
bearing that is attached at the end of it. When the clutch pedal is pressed with a force
Finput, it is being amplified by the pedal ratio d5/d4. Therefore,
Fpedal = Finput · Pratio
(4.1)
This force can then be used to calculate the pressure induced inside the hydraulic system,
where then the surface area difference of the master and slave cylinder will result in a force
amplification.
Amaster = π ·
(Dmaster
2
)2
and
Aslave = π ·
(Dslave
2
)2
(4.2)
The pressure will therefore be:
P = Fpedal
Amaster
(4.3)
This pressure can then be used to calculate the force being exerted by the slave cylinder,
using the difference in areas. If the bore diameter of the master cylinder is 20mm and the
slave cylinder’s is 64mm:
Fclutch = P · Aslave = 5120N
(4.4)
Thus, based on section 2.1, with an input force of 100N, a pedal ratio of 5, and a master
cylinder bore diameter of 20 mm, the slave cylinder needs to be at least 64 mm to effectively
disengage the clutch.
Then, based on the chosen clutch actuation mechanism, slight
adjustments need to be made to optimise its function. Since the chosen mechanism is
rotation-based, it will not use a fullcrum, but the moment applied by the arms will have
to be precisely determined.
4.5
Testing and validation
To fully understand the behaviour of the composite part, Ansys Mechanical was used to
simulate how the part would react under a worst-case scenario. This scenario is supposed
to give an adequate safety factor to the design, as the assembly is rather unlikely to
experience such a load. Nevertheless, it is the highest load that will be exerted on the bell
housing and adapter plate besides impact loads, which are not in the scope.
The loading scenario detailed in subsubsection 4.5 shows that the highest torque that can
be exerted on the gearbox side of the adapter plate is 5300 Nm. It happens under the
assumption that only one wheel is connected to the road and the torque output of the
engine is at its maximum, 370 Nm. The gearbox is a rigid construction and the mounting
face of the bell housing is fixed to the engine with a similar setup.
To allow for the
addition of engine mounts, mock-ups of both the engine and gearbox were made to place
the mounts accurately.
The original bell housing was evaluated in simple simulation.
Since it is made out of
only one, isotropic material, an aluminium alloy, it is possible to use a bare-bones static
structural simulation. However, Ford does not provide CAD models that are useable for
simulations, they are only empty surface bodies. Converting them into actually useful
solids was not successful, therefore the most important areas/sections were recreated in
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
31
==PAGE:39==
a separate model. This was used to run the simulations on, and while not completely
accurate, it gives an acceptable baseline.
(a) Engine side (Redrawn)
(b) Gearbox side (Redrawn)
(c) Engine side (Original)
(d) Gearbox side (Original)
Figure 4.21: Redrawn and original bell housing body views
The setup for the composite design is more complicated.
First, the final geometry is
imported into Ansys Workbench; the adapter plate as a solid body and the bell housing
as a surface body.
This will allow for simpler and faster iteration of the plies.
Then
this geometry is used in Ansys Mechanical Composite Prep (ACP), where the meshing
controls, element sets, fibre orientation, and fibre stack-ups are defined. Once complete,
the mesh is imported into a static structural simulation along with the correct plies. Here,
the boundary conditions are set up, such as supports and loads. The final output will be
equivalent (von Mises) stress and displacement (in all three directions). The improvement
will be evaluated based on these numbers.
Figure 4.22: Workflow setup in Ansys
32
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:40==
The material used for the layups were given by Agile based on experimental data:
Elastic properties
Fabric
E1 (GPa)
E2 (GPa)
E3 (GPa)
G12 (GPa)
G13 (GPa)
G23 (GPa)
ν12
ν13
ν23
Bx ±45°
13.07
13.07
5
24.71
4
4
0.88
0.3
0.3
Table 4.2: Elastic properties of the Bx ±45° fabric
Boundary conditions
Setting up the boundary conditions correctly is imperative to achieve an accurate pre-
diction on how the assembly would behave in a certain scenario. Therefore, the most
important aspect of the worst-case scenario that this model is simulating is the appro-
priate application of loads. Additionally, the correct setup of contacts and supports can
significantly alter the outcome, so they were analysed in a free body diagram.
Figure 4.23: Free Body Diagram of the loading scenario
As established earlier, the maximum torque output achievable by the current configuration
is 370 Nm. This is the basis of the load approximation. The worst case scenario is a loading
case that has the following requirements:
1. only one driven wheel touches the ground, therefore all the torque is transferred to
it through the differential
2. car is in first gear, ensuring that the highest torque multiplication (14.24) is applied
3. the engine is assumed to be an infinitely stiff, rigid body
4. the gearbox is also rigid, and deforms with the bell housing assembly
5. the dog bone used to fix the entire transmission to the chassis is infinitely stiff
6. mounting bolts are infinitely stiff, so each bolted surface connection is assumed to
be bonded in FEA
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.24: Axis of rotation
Thus, using an input torque of 370 Nm with a 14.24 torque amplification when it exits
the gearbox and is transferred through the differential to the wheel, the resulting load will
approximately be 5300 Nm. This is the load that was applied to the face of the adapter
plate and the original plate. It acts mainly on the three engine mounts, as they are the
three fixed points in the entire assembly. The transmission rotates around an axis of the
two mounts (engine and gearbox), while the third mount in the adapter plate counteracts
this motion (Figure 4.24).
T = Tin · i = 370 Nm · 14.24 = 5268 Nm
Furthermore, the engine-side face of the bell housing was fixed to the engine and the
adapter plate-side face was bonded to adapter plate to allow for the analysis of the strength
of the structures, rather than the strength of the connections. Considering that the bolts
are infinitely stiff, this is a fair assumption.
Finally, the meshing of the surfaces needs to optimised to validate the results.
This
usually means starting from a fairly large element size and reducing it until the results
start converging to a value. While it is generally true that smaller mesh sizes equal more
accurate results, it is not always the case, and since they are much more computationally
expensive, they come with a drawback. Therefore, it is also about finding the balance
between obtaining adequate accuracy and short computational cycle. Certain methods,
such as sizing (larger element sizes on large faces where small element size is suboptimal)
and feature suppression may be used to reduce runtime. [37] It was however, rather simple
to converge to an acceptable value, as the student version of Ansys allows a low count of
elements, approximately 200.000. Therefore, reducing the elements any further does not
compute.
4.5.1
Simulation - Original bell housing
The model in Figure 4.25 was imported into Ansys Mechanical. Two bonded contacts, one
between the engine and the bell, and one between the bell and the gearbox were created.
The assembly was fixed in three places, A (engine mount), B (gearbox mount) and C (bell
34
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:42==
mount). A moment of 5300 Nm was applied to the face of the bell from the gearbox side,
as explained above.
Figure 4.25: Fixed supports locations
4.5.2
Simulation - New design
The new design used the same supports and loading setup with an additional bonded
contact between the adapter plate and the cone. As mentioned above, the workflow used
to predict the behaviour of the new composite design was based on Figure 4.22. There were
three iterations for the bell housing, a full cone to provide a baseline, and two modified
cones with removed material to save weight and improve the cooling capabilities of the
assembly.
(a) Full cone
(b) Cone with straight branches (c) Cone with angled branches
Figure 4.26: Cone iterations
Cone 1 (Figure 4.26a) is the base design to iterate from. It is the stiffest construction
aimed at providing a ballpark evaluation and the least number of plies needed. There are
geometrical constraints the plies need to satisfy, regardless of the simulated stiffness. The
face connecting to the adapter plate is set to be 4.2 mm and the face on the engine side
is set to be 12 mm. These values are not fixed, but altering them need to be done while
respecting a full length constrained at ~88 mm.
Cone 2 (Figure 4.26b) is aimed at improving weight reduction and thermal capabilities
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
35
==PAGE:43==
while maintaining structural integrity. It also removes the somewhat awkward interaction
of the bell housing cone and the starter motor space on the left side at the engine face.
Cone 3 (Figure 4.26c) is an experimental design choice that retains the structure of Cone
2, and aims to align the fibre direction better with the path of the torque load, and load
it in tension.
All three cones were evaluated with the same layer stack-ups at first, then each was altered
to better fit their structure.
The cones had to be separated into different surface profiles called element sets so that
each can have different thickness, ply stack-up and fibre orientation:
• Top brim - The engine-side face, extrudes top-side
• Top fillet - Curved surface, connects cone and the top brim, extrudes bottom-side
radially
• Top cone horizontal - lips of the cone surface, extrudes bottom-side, adding extra
thickness to the top brim
• Cone - The main curved cone feature, extrudes bottom-side
• Bottom fillet - Curved surface, connects cone and the bottom ring, extrudes bottom-
side radially
• Bottom - Adapter plate-side face, extrudes bottom-side
Finally, after the initial results, as they showed little deviation with differing layer values,
another, simplistic loading case was added to the cones only. This is because the assembly
mainly experienced higher loads in the mounting points, which left the cone’s structure
nearly unaffected. To better assess their performance relative to each other, a simple 400
Nm load was applied the cone’s gearbox side, and fixed completely on the engine side.
While it is not entirely representative, as the reaction forces would mostly appear on the
adapter plate, it provides a good benchmark platform to see which geometry is superior.
36
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:44==
5
Results
5.1
Original bell housing FEA results
Iteration
Torque applied (Nm)
Max. stress (MPa)
Max. displacement (mm)
Effective displacement (mm)
Mesh size (mm)
1
5300
188
0.06
0.03
20
2
5300
160
0.06
0.03
14
3
5300
222
0.06
0.03
12
4
5300
176
0.06
0.03
10
5
5300
158
0.06
0.03
8
6
5300
150
0.05
0.03
8
Table 5.1: FEA results of the original bell housing
The redrawn original bell housing performed quite well, but it was clear that it was miss-
ing a few reinforcements that were omitted from the model. Nonetheless, it was deemed
adequate to use as a baseline, as it behaved and deformed exactly as expected. After
converging the mesh to an acceptable level at about 8 mm element size and sizing some
of the larger faces, the value for stress converged to around 150 MPa. The maximum
displacement did not however change with the different element sizes and stayed at 0.06
mm. It is important to mention that this displacement is the result of the rotating mo-
tion of the entire assembly, thus the parts’ relative motion to each other, the effective
displacement was only half of that. What effective displacement means in this regard is
the displacement in the x and z directions. These two axes are parallel to the axis of the
driveshaft. The deformation in these directions is far more important, as it can result in
gears falling out of sync, increase the wear between components and essentially damaging
the entire transmission. That is true for every simulation for this scenario, as shown in
Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.1 shows that the largest displacement occurs around the fixture points of course,
as well as the points furthest from those points. The equivalent von Mises stress can be
seen in Figure A.4, which shows that the bell assembly is barely loaded. The relatively sub-
stantial displacement may be credited to the lack of ribs and other reinforcements around
the mounting points. The aluminium alloy used for this component is AlSi9Cu3(Fe)(Zn),
a relatively low strength alloy. Its tensile strength is 240 MPa, and this value can be used
for both tensile and compressive loads. Since tensile fracture is based on crack propagation,
tensile strength is always going to be lower then compressive strength, as cracks are closed
up via compression during a compressive load. Thus, 240 MPa was used for assessing all
loads experienced by the assembly. The loads do not exceed the tensile strength of the
material, therefore it can be assumed that the redrawn model matches the original bell
housing enough to be able to draw conclusions. Figure 5.2 below also shows how mesh
convergence was carried out to ensure the accuracy of the model, however as mentioned
above, it was limited in terms of allowable elements, which meant that for the assembly,
the lowest element size was 8 mm.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.1: Original bell housing displacement - 2000x scale
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
50
100
150
200
250
Iteration Number
Values
Maximum Stress (MPa)
Maximum Displacement (mm)
Mesh Size (mm)
Figure 5.2: Mesh convergence
38
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:46==
5.2
Proposed bell housing FEA results
Bell housing #1
Iteration
Cone
Brim
Bottom
Top Fillet
Bot Fillet
Torque (Nm)
Stress (MPa)
Displ. (mm)
Mesh Size
1
7
20
7
7
7
5300
24
0.006
20
5300
13
0.005
10
5300
11
0.005
8
2
5
20
7
5
5
5300
25
0.006
20
5300
13
0.005
10
5300
11
0.005
8
3
3
20
7
3
3
5300
25
0.006
20
5300
15
0.005
10
5300
11
0.005
8
Bell housing #2
1
7
20
7
7
7
5300
13.5
0.005
20
5300
16
0.005
10
5300
12
0.005
8
2
5
20
7
5
5
5300
13.8
0.006
20
5300
16
0.006
10
5300
12.6
0.005
8
3
3
20
7
3
3
5300
13
0.006
20
5300
15
0.006
10
5300
12
0.006
8
Bell housing #3
1
7
20
7
7
7
5300
18
0.005
20
5300
15
0.006
10
5300
12
0.005
8
2
5
20
7
5
5
5300
18
0.005
20
5300
15
0.005
10
5300
12
0.005
8
3
3
20
7
3
3
5300
19
0.005
20
5300
16
0.006
10
5300
12.5
0.005
8
Table 5.2: Layup performance of different iterations and mesh sizes
The results of the FEA for the new design show very little effect on the cones, which was to
be expected based on the original bell housing’s stress levels. Surprisingly, there was only
slight, insignificant variations in stress, and no deviation in displacement throughout each
iteration. Thus, it can be concluded that the new design outperforms the current solution
by an order of magnitude. It is to be taken with a grain of salt, but these results show that
the new design can exhibit similar (if not better) levels of load bearing capacity. Each cone
variation was assessed in nine separate simulations. This includes three different element
sizes and three different layer setups, so 27 in total. The brim and the bottom side had a
preset thickness and therefore could not be changed, so the variable layer thicknesses were
the cone itself, and the bottom and top-side filets. Table 5.2 shows the number of plies
applied to each of the element sets, one ply corresponds to one ±45° layer set, each 0.6
mm thick. The target was to reduce the number of stack-ups until the stress gets too high,
higher than the elastic modulus of the material. The value did not even reach a fraction
of it before reaching critically low thickness, therefore the design was deemed to satisfy
the structural design requirements. Furthermore, when assessing the design’s structural
integrity, the given material’s strength properties were also taken into account. As it can
be seen in Table 5.3 and cross-checking the failure values with the stresses in Table 5.2, it
can be deduced that the material will not fail in tension nor in compression if the fibres
are aligned with the path of the load.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
39
==PAGE:47==
(a) Undeformed
(b) Deformed
Figure 5.3: Rotating motion of the assembly (4000x scale)
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Adapter plate deformation (10kx scale)
Most of the deformation is experienced by the adapter plate, which induces a twisting
motion due to a bending load. This twists the plate, which in turn creates tensile and
compressive loads on the farther and closer end of the cone, respectively. This could be
explained by a lack of stiffness in the adapter plate, but also the lack of proper reinforce-
ment. Nevertheless, the deformation is rather insignificant to notably affect the structural
integrity of the assembly. Cone 1 shows a uniform stress distribution radially, which in-
creases slightly the further a point is from the fixture point in the adapter plate. Since the
cone is full, it does not exhibit any stress concentrations besides the bottom fillet. It is
also worth noting that it barely deforms, especially when compared to the adapter plate.
Nonetheless, it is imperative that the assembly deforms as little as possible to preserve
the meshing of the gears along with the driveshaft. According to the design requirements,
this level of deviation is acceptable.
Strength properties
Fabric
Xt (MPa)
Yt (MPa)
Xc (MPa)
Yc (MPa)
S12 (MPa)
Bx ±45°
126.35
126.35
100
100
226.98
Table 5.3: Strength properties of the Bx ±45° fabric
40
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.5: FEA: Bell 1 displacement (4000x scale)
The second cone iteration exhibits similar behaviour to the first one. Somewhat surpris-
ingly, the stress does not increase significantly in the expected stress concentration spot,
the edge of the branch. The bottom side, closer to the gearbox exhibits larger twisting
motion, due to the deformation of the adapter plate. The branches show minute signs of
buckling, however only at a micro-scale.
The final, experimental cone behaves rather similarly to the other two, showing a somewhat
larger buckling possibility. This is disproved by the displacement factor, as the amount
of deformation matches the other cones’. The removal of a significant amount of material
from cones 2 and 3 did not result in inferior load-bearing capabilities.
Figure 5.6: Cone 3 displacement
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
41
==PAGE:49==
Thus, in order to further assess the performance of the cones, a separate FEA analysis was
conducted. This time, only the cones were added. The engine side face was constrained
to a fixed support, and the gearbox side had a moment applied to it. This time, 400 Nm,
which is the theoretical maximum output of the engine under the assumption that the
clutch plate does not slip.
Bell housing #1
Iteration
Cone
Brim
Bottom
Top fillet
Bot fillet
Top cone horiz
Torque applied (Nm)
Max. stress (MPa)
Max displacement (mm)
Mesh size (mm)
1
7
20
7
7
7
7
400
10
0.006
8
1
7
20
7
7
7
7
400
10.2
0.006
6
2
5
20
7
5
5
5
400
11.5
0.008
8
2
5
20
7
5
5
5
400
12
0.008
6
3
3
20
7
3
3
3
400
14.6
0.01
8
3
3
20
7
3
3
3
400
14.9
0.01
6
Bell housing #2
Iteration
Cone
Brim
Bottom
Top fillet
Bot fillet
Top cone horiz
Torque applied (Nm)
Max. stress (MPa)
Max displacement (mm)
Mesh size (mm)
1
7
20
7
7
7
7
400
62
0.24
8
1
7
20
7
7
7
7
400
70
0.24
6
2
5
20
7
5
5
5
400
71
0.34
8
2
5
20
7
5
5
5
400
75
0.34
6
3
3
20
7
3
3
3
400
129
0.52
8
3
3
20
7
3
3
3
400
135
0.54
6
Bell housing #3
Iteration
Cone
Brim
Bottom
Top fillet
Bot fillet
Top cone horiz
Torque applied (Nm)
Max. stress (MPa)
Max displacement (mm)
Mesh size (mm)
1
7
20
7
7
7
7
400
153
0.9
8
1
7
20
7
7
7
7
400
176
0.9
6
2
5
20
7
5
5
5
400
260
1.6
8
2
5
20
7
5
5
5
400
268
1.7
6
3
3
20
7
3
3
3
400
463
4.1
8
3
3
20
7
3
3
3
400
480
4.2
6
4
15
20
7
15
15
15
400
84
0.35
8
4
15
20
7
15
15
15
400
86
0.35
6
5
10
20
7
10
10
10
400
130
0.49
8
5
10
20
7
10
10
10
400
132
0.51
6
Table 5.4
This simulation proved to be a more reliable source of determining the effects of removing
material, which in theory also introduces more stress concentrations. A total of 22 itera-
tions were made to ensure accuracy of the prediction, two different element sizes, 6 and 8
mm. As it can be seen in Table 5.4, the deformation increased by a factor of two, while
the stress levels remained similar, 15 MPa for cone 1 at three plies, a total 1.8 mm in
thickness. Figure A.11 shows that the fibres align with the compressive and tensile forces,
considering that the primary fibre direction is straight upwards along the face of the cone,
and the plies applied are at a ±45° angle. All other fibre orientation figures can be found
in section A.3. Since the strength of the ply is 126.35 MPa in compression and 100 MPa
in tension, even at only three plies, the construction is structurally sound.
Cone 2 and 3 however exhibit the power of stress concentrations induced by the sharper
corners.
While they save weight and allow for better cooling, at three plies, 1.8 mm
thickness they get close and even exceed the limits of the material. Cone 2 experiences
135 MPa and more than half a millimetre of deformation, and cone 3 experiences 480 MPa
and 4.2 millimetre of deformation. The bulk of this stress can be found in the corners of
the branches at the bottom of the cones as well as the top, as shown in Figure 5.8.
42
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.7: Deformation
Figure 5.8: Stress
Under these conditions, the design would fail. It would fracture at the bottom most likely,
resulting in a rather catastrophic failure. However, reverting back to five or seven plies
with cone 2, and the design becomes viable again. The displacement is rather large and
exceeds the design requirements threshold, however, this would not occur under normal
circumstances, as most of the deflection would be undone by the entire assembly being
able to rotate. The engine and transmission mounts have a rubber padding to take small
deflections and ensure that the transmission and driveshaft are aligned at all times. As
for cone 3, extra plies are needed to make a fail-safe design, namely 15 plies at 9 mm
thickness, which would add significant weight as well as material costs.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
43
==PAGE:51==
5.2.1
Iteration comparison
Thus, it is clear that the safest concept is the full cone, cone 1. However, in order to ensure
suﬀicient cooling and satisfy all design requirements, cone 2 is the most eﬀicient and elegant
solution. Cone 3 while an interesting approach, unfortunately does not provide enough
merit to validate its use case, especially how much added material it needs to function
safely and eﬀiciently. While it does not add significantly more weight compared to cone
1, the cost of the extra plies makes it inferior to cone 2.
Cone #1
Cone #2
Cone #3
3 layers
1.65 kg
1.22 kg
1.16 kg
5 layers
1.90 kg
1.31 kg
1.23 kg
7 layers
2.15 kg
1.39 kg
1.31 kg
15 layers
-
-
1.61 kg
Table 5.5
44
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:52==
6
Conclusions and discussion
In conclusion, the custom-made composite bell housing design outperforms the original
assembly in all relevant focus areas. Using cone 2 with seven layers of biaxial ±45° carbon
fibre and the adapter plate as the final assembly to benchmark, it exhibits the same
effective displacement as the original bell housing and a significantly lower stress. This
exceptional load-bearing capability is coupled with an outstandingly low weight, 4.93 kg
(out of which 3.54 kg is the adapter plate). Compared to Ford’s bell housing at 18.7 kg,
this is a 13.77 kg reduction on a single component. Four additional fasteners would be
needed to fix the bell to the adapter plate, which would add 160 g, therefore the final
weight saving is 13.61 kg. This is a 74 % weight reduction ratio.
Figure 6.1: Final assembly render
6.1
Trade-offs
The most obvious trade-off when switching from metal to composites is of course the
cost.
Factoring in only the material costs from Granta, the raw material cost of the
original bell housing is approximately 28.5DKK/kg · 18.7kg = 532.95DKK per piece.
The new design has both aluminium 28.5DKK/kg · 3.54kg = 101DKK and carbon fibre
289DKK/kg · 2.15kg = 621DKK, which has a final raw material cost of 722DKK. 2.15
kg was used, because the cone can only be manufactured as a full cone, then the remainder
needs to be cut away, which increases the costs. Thus, even though with 74% less weight
and material, the new design is 26% more expensive. However, the extra fuel eﬀiciency
and the extra durability may be able to offset some of these costs.
Furthermore, composites are currently not recyclable at all, which makes their end of life
considerations pose significant problems. The epoxy is a thermoset which means it cannot
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
45
==PAGE:53==
be remelted, therefore the bond can only be broken through expensive and energy-intensive
chemical processes. On the other hand, metals, especially aluminium has excellent recy-
cling properties, as it can be remelted and reformed infinitely. Thus, it is understandable
that companies prefer the materials that can help reduce their environmental impact. Nev-
ertheless, the superior fatigue strength and durability of carbon fibre may be an advantage
over metals, as they offer a longer lifecycle, which may be able to offset the negative impact
on the environment.
6.2
Manufacturing possibilities
The cones were made with Design for Manufacturing principles in mind.
The surface
bodies were used to freely control the number of layer used in the FEA and arrive at
the most feasible thickness. section A.3 showcases all named elements’ principal (green)
and transverse (red) fibre directions. When applying the ±45° biaxial fabric, the fibre
directions are at that angle when compared to the principle direction.
After a consultation with Agile, the manufacturing method was decided to be prepreg
layup. It ensures that the resin content is consistent throughout the part, which max-
imises performance due to its optimal fibre/resin volume fractions. It also helps achieve
uniform mechanical properties across the layers and different elements, which helps reduce
unwanted stress concentrations.
Figure 6.2: Brim layup
The element sets defined in subsection 4.5.2
have variable thicknesses for FEA, and are
the defining factors for the manufacturing
process. The brim layup is a circular layup
that aims to place the fibres in a radial di-
rection.
This should add some reinforce-
ment against torsional loads and improve
structural integrity.
This approach creates
a simple moulding process, which is essen-
tial to keep costs low. However, it requires
post-processing steps, such as machining the
cutouts, after the cone was laid in the mould
and cured as well. These cutouts include the
starter motor space in the top right corner, as
well as the bolt holes, which need to be pre-
cise to avoid any unnecessary stresses in the
component.
Finally, the height of the face
would need a slight draft angle to make sure
it is ejectable from the mould.
The cone will be laid on top of this brim surface and bonded together. It was created with
simple, tangential lines to ensure a smooth layup process. The red arrows in Figure 6.3
show how the biaxial ply can be applied in a single sweep, maintaining the correct fibre
orientation. This way, all other elements, horizontal lip of the cone, the top fillet, the
cone itself, the bottom fillet and the bottom ring can be applied via a continuous prepreg
fabric. The thickness of the brim provides the necessary height to reach to appropriate
dimensions to accurately connect to the engine, the horizontal line on the cone under the
brim face is to make sure that the fillets are in flush with the straight faces. The fillets
are therefore only variable along with the cone, as it was shown in Table 5.2.
46
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:54==
The part can then be cured, de-moulded, and post-processed. The resulting shape would
be the first iteration of the cone, and to form the second cone with the branches, the excess
material can simply be cut out. Cutting carbon fibre is more diﬀicult than aluminium,
as the fibres are more abrasive and wear down tools fast. It also introduces defects into
the parts, which can weaken the structure.
[38] This is especially true for the holes.
Through cyclic loading, the material can experience a reduction in static and fatigue
strength, although it is much less significant in compression. This assembly experiences
both cyclically, therefore the machining process will be imperative to ensure the holes
are drilled without introducing any additional cracks or stress concentrations. The KTH
method is supposedly one way to reduce axial force, and essentially remove chipping. [39]
Nevertheless, with proper care and equipment, this is the easiest way to form that shape,
even though it would result in some wasted material.
An alternative solution to that
would be a modified mould that follows the branch-shape of cones 2 and 3, however to
keep mould complexity to the minimum and to simplify the layup process, machining the
part post-cure is more optimal.
Figure 6.3: Cone layup
6.3
Potential limitations and future scope
There are many limitations that could be assessed in this assembly. First, the FEA, while
comprehensive regarding the two scenarios and gives accurate results to ensure the struc-
ture has adequate load-bearing capabilities, it does not take vibrations and potential im-
pact into account. As for vibrations, without any knowledge on the mean stress, its ampli-
tude and range, one can make an educated guess based on a Fatigue/Yield strength graph.
[40] The biaxial carbon fibre composite has both higher fatigue strength at 10.000.000 cy-
cles as well as higher yield strength, and therefore should exhibit better fatigue resistance
than the aluminium alloy. Since it is also lighter, the vibration-induced stresses will be
lower in the affected areas. Furthermore, based on Ansys’ material indices booklet, the
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
47
==PAGE:55==
material index for vibration limited design to maximise performance is E
ρ [41]. Reviewing
Figure 4.11 once again, it is clear that the composite part has superior mechanical prop-
erties and shall prove to be a more robust and eﬀicient solution compared to traditional
metal alloys.
However, to fully understand the behaviour of the design and assess its
strength, a prototype must be manufactured and tested on one of the cars. Only then can
substantial deductions be made.
Figure 6.4: Fatigue strength vs. Yield strength
6.3.1
Galvanic corrosion
As explained above, galvanic corrosion of the two parts must be paid attention to in order
to prevent premature failure. Therefore, along with the 7 plies of carbon fibre fabric, a
layer of glass fibre needs to be applied as the first and final layer. This would change the
dimensions of the cone, which would need to be altered in order to fit into the assembly
properly.
The model was made in a way to simply accommodate that change before
manufacturing.
6.3.2
Thermal expansion mismatch
While the temperature inside the bell housing should not reach high values, based on
the failure analysis, high heat is affecting the assembly from an unknown source. This
may cause large internal stresses that are generated by the thermal expansion mismatch
between the two materials. Due to the lack of information, an assumption of maximum 95
degrees Celsius was used. This estimation is based on the fact that Agile knows that the
water inside the engine does not boil, as that would point to other, rather critical issues.
The catalytic converter, which is on top of the bell housing, may play a role in raising the
temperature to a higher point, as it operates in the range of 200-600 °C. Without additional
information and further analysis, it is rather challenging to pinpoint the exact temperature
inside the bell housing. It is plausible that the radiant heat from the converter increases
the temperature, so 150 °C was used across the following examples. This is reinforced by
Figure 4.14, as the maximum service temperature range of the aluminium is 150-170°C.
At higher temperatures, the use of heat shields may be recommended.
To calculate the amount of expansion of the aluminium plate in the axial direction:
48
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:56==
∆l = Lo · α · (T1 −T0)
∆l = 1.935 × 10−4 mm
(6.1)
Where L0 is the original length equal to 60 mm, α is the thermal expansion coeﬀicient
of the aluminium ally equal to 21.5 · 10−6mm/°C, the temperature difference is 150°C.
Equation 6.1 shows that the expansion is insignificant to cause high residual stresses, as the
expansion is twenty thousandth of a millimetre. While carbon fibre is known for its almost
non-existent, negative expansion in the fibre direction, Granta shows this specific fabric to
expand at around a quarter of its aluminium counterpart, at α = 5.5 · 10−6mm. Using 80
mm as L0 and the same temperature difference, the resulting elongation is 6.6 millionth
of a millimetre based on Equation 6.2. This is also too low to cause significant residual
stresses that would overload the assembly, therefore the different thermal expansion of the
materials can be considered non-critical to the design process.
∆l = Lo · α · (T1 −T0)
∆l = 6.6 × 10−6 mm
(6.2)
6.4
Final remarks
The primary objective of this thesis was to demonstrate the feasibility of using composites
instead of metals in the transmission assembly. Through extensive material analysis and a
complete development phase, it was established that composites can offer an outstanding
alternative to metal through their superior thermal and mechanical properties, low weight
and design flexibility.
However, several obstacles need to be taken into account when developing such a compo-
nent. The cost factor and the low reproducibility limit the use of these materials on a
larger scale, which makes the adoption by large-scale manufacturers unlikely for now. The
greater negative impact of composites is also something to be aware of, as currently no
process is viable enough to sustain the increasing number of composite parts, which leads
to a greater environmental impact.
Nevertheless, the potential benefits outweigh the challenges associated with composites.
Innovative solutions are being developed constantly, and with the commitment of motor-
sports - such as Formula 1 - to sustainable solutions predict that it is only a matter of
time before recyclable, large-scale alternatives are discovered. Finally, this thesis proves
the feasibility of the composite bell housing and lays the foundation for further work.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
49
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
url: https://agileautomotive.com/car-models/.
[2]
Hannah Mason. “Composites end markets: Automotive (2024)”. In: Composites World
(2024). url: https://www.compositesworld.com/articles/composites-end-markets-
automotive-(2024).
[3]
D. Crolla and B. Mashadi. Vehicle Powertrain Systems. Wiley, 2011. isbn: 9781119961024.
url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=N8rrnOv_kBoC.
[4]
Valeo. Transmission Systems Clutch Hydraulics. url: https://www.valeo.com/en/.
[5]
Peder Klit. Machine Elements: Analysis and Design. eng. Vol. 214. Technical Uni-
versity of Demark, 2006, Forsk. pag. isbn: 8790416163, 9788790416164.
[6]
J. Happian-Smith. An Introduction to Modern Vehicle Design. Elsevier Science &
Technology Books, 2001. isbn: 9780750650441. url: https://books.google.dk/books?
id=36kg2DJiy7cC.
[7]
Richard G. Budynas and J. Keith. Nisbett. Shigley’s mechanical engineering design.
eng. McGraw-Hill Education., 2015, xxi, 1082 s. : ill. isbn: 0073398209, 0077591674,
9780073398204, 9780077591670.
[8]
Konstantinos Poulios. 41512 Lecture Slides Week 6 - Gear I - Geometry. Technical
University of Denmark, 2023.
[9]
Tobias Eifler. 41656 Lecture Slides Week 1 - Robust design fundamentals. Technical
University of Denmark, 2023.
[10]
K.T. Ulrich, S.D. Eppinger, and M.C. Yang. Product Design and Development.
McGraw-Hill Education, 2019. isbn: 9781260043655. url: https://books.google.
dk/books?id=0wpvxAEACAAJ.
[11]
Akhilesh Thakur Kartik. “Root Cause Analysis by Shainin Approach in Automo-
tive Manufacturing Sector: A Case Study”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Mechanical
Engineering (2021), pp. 247–256. doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-0942-8_23.
[12]
Edward D. Arnheiter and Jean E. Greenland. “Looking for root cause: A comparative
analysis”. eng. In: Tqm Journal 20.1 (2008), pp. 18–30. issn: 1754274x, 17542731.
doi: 10.1108/09544780810842875.
[13]
A.R. Bunsell, S. Joannès, and A. Thionnet. Fundamentals of Fibre Reinforced Com-
posite Materials. Series in Materials Science and Engineering. CRC Press, 2021. isbn:
9780429680939. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=MRwfEAAAQBAJ.
[14]
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Composite materials handbook volume 3. polymer
matrix composites materials usage, design, and analysis. 2002.
[15]
Fardin Khan et al. “Advances of composite materials in automobile applications – A
review”. eng. In: Journal of Engineering Research (kuwait) (2024). issn: 23071885,
23071877. doi: 10.1016/j.jer.2024.02.017.
[16]
P. Brøndsted, H. Lilholt, and Aa. Lystrup. “Composite materials for wind power
turbine blades”. eng. In: Annual Review of Materials Research 35.1 (2005), pp. 505–
538. issn: 15454118, 15317331. doi: 10.1146/annurev.matsci.35.100303.110641.
[17]
Hans Lilholt. 46420 Lecture Slides Week 1 - Topic 1: Introduction to composites.
Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
[18]
B. Harris. “A perspective view of composite materials development”. In: Materials
& Design 12.5 (1991), pp. 259–272. issn: 0261-3069. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
0261- 3069(91)90006- P. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
026130699190006P.
50
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:58==
[19]
Bent F. Sørensen. 46420 Lecture Slides Week 9 - Topic 9: Residual stresses and
multiple matrix cracking. Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
[20]
Dong-Jun Kwon, Jaehyun Park, and Hyeong-Min Yoo. “Enhanced Mechanical Join-
ing between Carbon-Fiber- Reinforced Plastic and Steel Plates Using the Clearance-
Filling Effect of Structural Adhesive”. In: Applied Sciences 13.7 (2023). issn: 2076-
3417. doi: 10.3390/app13074332. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/13/7/
4332.
[21]
Edwin Legdin. “Joining of metal and fiber composites”. MA thesis. KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, 2017.
[22]
B P Cai et al. “Experimental study of galvanic corrosion behaviour of carbon fi-
bre composite coupled to aluminium in artificial seawater”. In: Corrosion Engineer-
ing, Science and Technology 47.4 (2012), pp. 289–296. doi: 10.1179/1743278212Y.
0000000010. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1179/1743278212Y.0000000010. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1179/1743278212Y.0000000010.
[23]
Dipen Kumar Rajak et al. “Role of Composite Materials in Automotive Sector:
Potential Applications”. In: Advances in Engine Tribology. Springer Singapore, 2022,
pp. 193–217. isbn: 978-981-16-8337-4. doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-8337-4_10. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-8337-4_10.
[24]
Adil Wazeer et al. “Composites for electric vehicles and automotive sector: A re-
view”. In: Green Energy and Intelligent Transportation 2.1 (2023), p. 100043. issn:
2773-1537. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geits.2022.100043. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2773153722000433.
[25]
Jiancai Liu et al. “Study of the design and torsion performance for carbon fiber
composite material automobile drive shaft”. In: Proceedings of SAE-China Congress
2016: Selected Papers 23. Springer. 2017, pp. 303–312.
[26]
Ashwin Chopane et al. “Design and analysis of plastic gears in rack and pinion
steering system for formula supra car”. In: Materials Today: Proceedings 5.2 (2018),
pp. 5154–5164.
[27]
Hemalata Jena. “Study of tribo-performance and application of polymer composite”.
In: Automotive Tribology (2019), pp. 65–99.
[28]
Takashi Ishikawa et al. “Overview of automotive structural composites technology
developments in Japan”. In: Composites Science and Technology 155 (2018), pp. 221–
246.
[29]
Hexagon. “Lightweight, High Performance – Composites A Composite Gearbox”. In:
(2012). url: https://simulatemore.mscsoftware.com/a-composite-gearbox-for-formula-
1/.
[30]
Diogo André Baltazar Gonçalves Domingues. “Composite Optimization of Gearbox
Casing used in LMP1 race car under service and FIA regulation load cases”. MA
thesis. Tecnico Lisboa, 2015.
[31]
G. Pahl et al. Engineering design: A systematic approach. Springer London, 2007.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-84628-319-2.
[32]
Jens Chr. Jensen. Product development and innovation - lecture 2. University of
Southern Denmark, 2020.
[33]
G. Taguchi et al. Taguchi’s Quality Engineering Handbook. Wiley, 2005. isbn: 9780471413349.
url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=zc4mAQAAMAAJ.
[34]
url: https://www.vinkmotorsport.com/shop/bmw-e30/clutch-driveline-diff-bmw-
e30/clutch-housing-e30-m20-getrag-265/.
[35]
M.F. Ashby, H. Shercliff, and D. Cebon. Materials: Engineering, Science, Pro-
cessing and Design; North American Edition. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2013. isbn:
9780080994352. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=sqaH1CNY2isC.
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
51
==PAGE:59==
[36]
Rajan Ambat. 41656 Lecture Slides Week 3 - Materials selection - Stiffness and
strength. Technical University of Denmark, 2024.
[37]
Todor Zhelyazov. “Strategies to Improve Convergence After Degeneration of the Ini-
tial Finite Element Mesh”. eng. In: Structural Integrity 8 (2019). Ed. by EE Gdoutos,
pp. 159–161. issn: 25225618, 2522560x. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-21894-2_31.
[38]
S. Abrate and D.A. Walton. “Machining of composite materials. Part I: Traditional
methods”. In: Composites Manufacturing 3.2 (1992), pp. 75–83. issn: 0956-7143. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0956-7143(92)90119-F. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/095671439290119F.
[39]
Erik Persson, Ingvar Eriksson, and Leif Zackrisson. “Effects of hole machining defects
on strength and fatigue life of composite laminates”. In: Composites Part A: Applied
Science and Manufacturing 28.2 (1997), pp. 141–151. issn: 1359-835X. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S1359-835X(96)00106-6. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1359835X96001066.
[40]
Rajan Ambat. 41656 Lecture Slides Week 7 - Materials selection - Fatigue. Technical
University of Denmark, 2024.
[41]
Performance Indices Reference Booklet - Ansys. 2022.
52
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:60==
A
Appendix
A.1
Idea generation
Figure A.1: Idea collection 1
Figure A.2: Idea collection 2
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
53
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.3: Idea collection 3
A.2
FEA results
Figure A.4: Original bell housing stress (2000x scale)
54
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.5: Cone 1 stress
Figure A.6: Cone 2 displacement
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.7: Cone 1 displacement
Figure A.8: Cone 1 stress
56
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:64==
A.3
Fibre directions
Figure A.9: Bottom fibre directions
Figure A.10: Bottom fillet fibre directions
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.11: Cone fibre directions
Figure A.12: Top cone horizontal fibre directions
58
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.13: Top fillet fibre directions
Figure A.14: Brim fibre directions
Design optimisation for improved robustness and performance in Agile Automotive’s transmission
59
==PAGE:67==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.construct.dtu.dk
