==PAGE:1==
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for
Machine Learning
Mateusz Mazurkiewicz
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
ii
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs) emerge as the technology to drive the next generation of opti-
cal systems, performing the function of bulk optical devices in a miniaturized form. Their current
and anticipated applications range from telecommunications and sensing to energy-eﬀicient AI
hardware acceleration [1, 2]. This thesis presents design, modeling, and training of an optical AI
architecture, using optical resonant cavities in a PIC to enable temporal degrees of freedom, mini-
mizing the system’s spatial footprint on a thin-film photonic crystal substrate. The optical informa-
tion ”recirculates” through the circuit for the duration of the computation, giving the architecture
its name. The model of the Recirculating Optical Neural Network (ONN) is derived using Tem-
poral Coupled Mode Theory (TCMT), examined from control theory and Machine Learning (ML)
perspectives, and its learning and inference are demonstrated in simulation. This is achieved by an
end-to-end supervised learning on the parametrized model of the optical system. The robustness
of the prediction models to unaccounted delays in optical signal is tested with a Delay Differential
Equation (DDE) model of the circuit. The findings of the thesis point to coupled resonant cavities
and temporal degrees of freedom as potential building blocks for optical intelligence.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Machine Learning on electronic computers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Optical computing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Methodology
11
2.1
Temporal Coupled Mode Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Physical Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Delays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4
Optical Encoding of Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Results
33
3.1
Optical Nonlinearity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Coupled Cavities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Recirculating Optical Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4
Temporal Degrees of Freedom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5
Delays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4
Discussion
47
4.1
Realizing the Recirculating ONN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Recirculating ONN as a times series model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Recirculating ONN as a diffusion model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4
Potential applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
52
A Stability analysis of the Recirculating ONN
57
B
Iris dataset
58
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
In recent years, the field of computing has attracted enormous attention, with the computing com-
pany NVIDIA reaching a multi-trillion dollar market capitalization, and the semiconductor chips
supply chain playing an important role in the global economy [3]. This is accompanied—and
largely caused—by seemingly endless advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) enabled by increased
computational power and its more eﬀicient use [4]. In the computing landscape of the early 21st
century, optical computing is a nascent field, its advantages becoming manifest in research projects
and photonic startups. Motivating the development of this technology, there exists compelling ev-
idence that the physics of light can be exploited to build optical systems that complement and
eventually surpass electronic computers in many computational tasks [5].
This thesis presents the Recirculating Optical Neural Network (ONN), an AI architecture designed
for inference on Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs). The proposed optical system, illustrated in
Figure 1.1, is modeled, simulated, and used to train a set of Recirculating ONN classifiers. The
evaluation of these classification models is, by extension, the test of the optical circuit in simula-
tion for AI hardware acceleration. The results demonstrate that resonant cavities can be used as
spatially-compact devices [6] for Physical Neural Networks [7, 8] implemented in PICs, enabling
temporal degrees of freedom for the Recirculating ONN architecture, reducing the circuit’s spatial
footprint.
Figure 1.1: An illustration of the Recirculating ONN circuit, consisting of a multiport interferom-
eter of Clements’ design, with resonant cavities on one side, and reflectors on the other.
The subject of this thesis is twofold: it is the neuromorphic optical circuit and the computational
structure that it implements. The system dynamics of the circuit were derived using Temporal
Coupled Mode Theory (TCMT), and the Recirculating ONN models were trained by end-to-end
supervised learning on a parametrized optical model in simulation. The Physical Neural Network
approach, adopted in this thesis, erases the distinction between the hardware and the predictive
model, by applying the Machine Learning framework to the controlled physical system.
The relevant ML background is introduced in §1.1, emphasizing the historical co-development
of ML and computing hardware, examining examples of both early and the state-of-the-art AI
hardware accelerators, and identifying the key insights and design constraints in this domain.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
1
==PAGE:8==
In the second half of the 20th century, advancements in nanofabrication and the growing demand
for computational power drove the evolution of transistors from discrete devices into integrated
circuits with exponentially increasing transistor density, following the Moore’s Law [9]. Today,
developments in materials science and optics enable significant progress in integrated optical cir-
cuits, with substrates like Thin Film Lithium Niobate providing access to nonlinear properties [1],
and silicon photonics enabling the application of existing semiconductor manufacturing machines
and methods for making PICs [10, 11]. Optical hardware accelerators, made possible by PICs,
operate on fundamentally different principles than electronic computers, relying on optical effects
for computation. Figure 1.2 presents their general system architecture. §1.2 first introduces the
physical principles underlying optical computing and then provides an overview of state-of-the-art
in the integrated photonics technology.
Optical accelerator
Computer
Input parameters 
for calculation
Result of 
calculation
Passive devices
Source
Modulator
Digital signal
Optical signal
Optical
component
Electronic
component
Coherent light
Encoder
Readout
Pre-processing
Post-processing
Decoder
Controller
Photonic Circuit
Variable devices
Figure 1.2: A general architecture of a PIC-based hardware accelerator.
This chapter is followed by the methodology,§2, which applies TCMT to model the Recirculating
ONN PIC, constructs an optical model of such a circuit, and sets up the supervised learning prob-
lem. The system is examined from perspectives of both control theory, as a dynamical system,
and ML, as a computational structure. Models of instantaneous and delayed transmission of light
are applied to the circuit and compared. The PIC model is later verified in Appendix A using the
Lyapunov stability theory.
The results, §3, then present outcomes of TCMT numerical simulations and demonstrates training
and inference of the Recirculating ONN architecture in Machine Learning experiments. Tempo-
ral degrees of freedom and regularization techniques are evaluated. The robustness of the circuit
architecture to unaccounted delays in optical signals is quantitatively tested.
The discussion, §4, considers the requirements and design choices involved in realization of the
Recirculating ONN circuit, discusses possible optical AI models which can make use of the Recir-
culating ONN unit, and lists potential applications of the system, identifying critical aspects of the
design for each. The thesis is concluded in §5.
2
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:9==
1.1
Machine Learning on electronic computers
Prediction is the act of identifying and exploiting patterns in the available information, designated
by the random variable 𝑋, to conjecture about an unknown outcome 𝑌. The domain of 𝑋is often
called the sample space, or the input space, and its components are called features, while the domain
of 𝑌is called the label space, or the output space, and the actual answer 𝑦to a particular 𝑥sampled
from 𝑋is called the target. All possible pairs (𝑥, 𝑦) constitute the population, and 𝑘sampled pairs,
a set of prior empirical observations, form a dataset 𝑆= ((𝑥1, 𝑦1), (𝑥2, 𝑦2), . . . , (𝑥𝑘, 𝑦𝑘)) [12].
The ability to anticipate a beneficial or adverse outcome based on past experiences is universally
advantageous. The natural selection invented it in biological organisms, which is clearly visible in
the example of the ancestral memory of electrified fences across Czech-German border ingrained in
the local red deer population. The geographical pattern of the Iron Curtain was passed on through
generations of these herd animals and the associated anticipation of negative stimulus still pre-
vents the two populations from mixing, though the physical obstacle between them is no longer
present [13]. In the sphere of human economic activity, a story from ancient Greece tells of Thales
of Milanus, of the Thales’s theorem fame, correctly predicting a large crop of olives in the next
season, and making a fortune by acting early to monopolize the market of olive-oil presses [14].
Advanced prediction models are now widely used with similar and many other intents.
1.1.1
The Earliest Sparks of Electronic Intelligence
Machine Learning refers to framing of the prediction problem as an optimization problem, with
the correct predictor being the optimal solution. This involves parametrizing the prediction model
𝑓𝑤: 𝑋→𝑌and numerically determining parameters 𝑤that minimize the expected difference
between the predicted ˆ𝑦𝑖= 𝑓𝑤(𝑥𝑖) and the actual 𝑦𝑖. The advantages of engineered computing
devices for such numerical tasks became evident long before the advent of modern computing.
Babylonians used the abacus to eﬀiciently add large numbers. During World War II, American
aviators flying over German cities kept busy turning knobs and levers to input flight parameters,
which the mechanical bombsight used to predict the optimal time to drop a bomb. Such systems
were purpose-built for a single task, lethargically slow, and fundamentally limited in their function.
The use of vacuum tubes revolutionized computing by enabling reprogrammability. The wiring
of an electronic computer could be rearranged to make it perform a great range of useful opera-
tions. This technology was pioneered in top secret labs by the British and American militaries,
applied to break the Enigma encryption, calculate artillery trajectories, and help design the atom
bomb, and finally set free towards peaceful uses in the the post-war years, profoundly impacting
science, industry, and daily life. IBM 701, released in 1952, was that company’s first “produc-
tion” computer, which at the time meant that there were more than one of them. Based on the
von Neumann architecture, it featured a vacuum-tube-based Central Processing Unit (CPU) and
cathode-ray-based Williams Tubes for Random Access Memory (RAM). As a binary fixed-point
machine programmed in Assembly, each operation took 10s to 100s of microseconds [15]. Arthur
Samuel, a computer scientist at IBM, used the 701 to develop a checkers-playing symbolic AI pro-
gram. The upgraded version became the first program to be described as Machine Learning, as it
adjusted its heuristics based on past games, ultimately achieving human-level proficiency [16].
The symbolic AI approach exemplified by Samuel’s program contrasts with the sub-symbolic, or
“connectionist,” approach. The latter was first hypothesized by neuroscientists Warren McCulloch
and Walter Pitts in 1943 and systematically discussed in Alan Turing’s 1948 paper, “Intelligent
Machinery.” The pioneer of computer science envisioned brain-like machines, but tragically his
work was cut short by his death in 1954. Though, had he survived, he would likely not witness
more than rudimentary proofs of concept of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), as the early results
in the field were followed by a period of stagnation called “the neural network winter”, caused in a
large part by insuﬀicient computing power, before a resurgence in the 1980s.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
3
==PAGE:10==
1.1.2
Intelligent Machinery
A biological neuron is a nerve cell in an animal brain. Thoughts and behaviors arise from elec-
trochemical activity in the brain, and a neuron serves as the fundamental unit of this process. It
receives external information, processes it, and propagates stimuli by firing when a specific con-
dition is met. The artificial neuron generalizes this process mathematically, forming the building
block of complex neural circuits. The core idea of connectionism is that networks of such neurons
can learn by creating internal representations of concepts, embedded implicitly in the structure
and strength of connections, rather than explicitly defined in symbolic form. The McCulloch–Pitts
model of the neuron, in particular, operates in discrete time steps, admitting a number of inputs
𝑥1, 𝑥2, · · · , 𝑥𝑛, whose weighted sum is compared against a threshold 𝑏, with the sign of each weight
determining whether the associated stimuli 𝑥𝑖is excitatory or inhibitory. Learning involves adjust-
ing the weights 𝑤, and the output is determined by comparing the weighted sum to the threshold.
The Perceptron is an Artificial Intelligence program, consisting of a single McCulloch–Pitts neuron,
performing binary classification through supervised learning. With a dataset of 𝑘pairs (xi, 𝑦𝑖),
𝑖∈{1, 2, · · · , 𝑘}, sampled from some underlying population of interest, with xi ∈R𝑛and labels
𝑦𝑖∈{−1, 1} for notational convenience, the problem of Machine Learning is one of finding a
vector w ∈R𝑛and threshold 𝑏, such that for
ˆ𝑦𝑖:=
(
1
if ⟨w, xi⟩> 𝑏,
−1
otherwise,
(1.1)
the predictions satisfy ˆ𝑦𝑖= 𝑦𝑖. Mathematically, the predictor is a linear separator, dividing the
input space into two half-spaces using a parametrized hyperplane, and the task of learning is one
of finding the right parameters such that we can assign a label to each side.
0
5
10
𝑥1
0
5
10
𝑥2
Figure 1.3: A classification task with two input features, x ∈R2, and two labels, 𝑦∈{−1, 1},
which is solved by a McCulloch-Pitts neuron with weights w =
1
1𝑇and 𝑏= 10, equivalent to
drawing a decision boundary 𝑥2 = 10 −𝑥1 and assigning a label to each side.
This raises two important questions:
• Can parameters always be found to achieve perfect classification of entries in the dataset?
• Will the predictor generalize to new samples from the underlying population, which were
not included in the dataset used for learning?
These are the questions of learning and generalization. The theory to rigorously address them
emerged following the successful implementation of a Perceptron by Frank Rosenblatt, a psychol-
ogist at Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, who first simulated this computational structure in 1957
4
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:11==
on an IBM 704 computer. The mass-produced IBM 704 computer—–featuring increased memory,
faster computation, and floating-point arithmetic–—enabled him to simulate the Neural Network.
Encouraged by promising initial results, his team undertook the task of building the Mark I Percep-
tron machine, which was essentially as the first analog ML hardware accelerator. Its architecture,
termed alpha-perceptron, consisted of three layers:
• Input Layer: Comprising 400 sensory S-units that receive raw inputs.
• Hidden Layer: Composed of a larger number of Perceptrons with random weights—called
association A-units—increasing expressive power of the circuit without demanding more
computing power for training.
• Output Layer: Composed of few Perceptrons—called response R-units—with learnable weights
to generate the final system output.
The input to the prediction machine was the signal sensed by a 20×20 array of cadmium sulfide
photocells, opto-electronic devices from which the system derived its other name “Photopercep-
tron”. The measurement system enabled the machine to perform image classification, with a square
photograph, approximately the size of a passport portrait, secured in a small frame at the base of
the device. Each S-unit could be connected up to 40 A-units, the connections being wired ran-
domly in accordance with Rosenblatt’s strong belief that the retina was randomly connected with
the visual cortex, and his desire to mimic human perception closely. There now exists strong the-
oretical support for the common practice in Machine Learning of utilizing randomness. Basic
feature engineering can enable simple linear regression to fit complex distributions, and in absence
of user-defined features leveraging a priori knowledge in the domain, randomized features have
been shown to provide a good basis for further learning [12], a fact justifying random initialization
of weights in contemporary Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) as opposed to setting them uniformly
to a default value at the start of training [17]. The initial configuration of the Recirculating ONN
is similarly randomly sampled at the beginning of training, as described in §2.2.5.
The learnable weights of Mark I Perceptron from A-units to R-units were controlled by an array
of rotary potentiometers, variable resistors adjusted by electric motors according to the following
algorithm:
1. Select a random index from the database 𝑖∈1, · · · , 𝑘,
2. If 𝑦𝑖⟨w, xi⟩< 1 (data point is misclassified), adjust the weight 𝑤:= 𝑤+ 𝑦𝑖x𝑖.
These steps were repeated until the perceptron achieved suﬀicient accuracy. This optimization step
is in fact a special case of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), which uses a defined loss function,
equal either to the prediction error directly, or a surrogate that serves as a proxy metric for the error
but is easier to numerically optimize, and performs the adjustment of the weights w at the step 𝑡,
with the step size 𝛼𝑡:
w𝑡+1 = w𝑡−𝛼𝑡∇w𝑡loss   𝑓w𝑡(x𝑖), 𝑦𝑖
 .
(1.2)
This algorithm is often compared to a blind hiker trying to reach the bottom of the valley, as illus-
trated in Figure 1.4. Calculating the loss and its gradient for a network defined by a set of parameters
w is computationally expensive, hence the hiker cannot afford to measure swathes of the landscape
with a glance. The optimizer measures the loss in sequence forming the training trajectory, taking
stochastic steps biased towards the steepest gradient, decreasing loss signifying that the updated
parameters indeed reduce the error of the predictive model. The variations of this algorithm, ex-
tended by momentum terms, decaying step size, and other ideas to bolster rapid convergence to the
global minimum, are the most widely used and best performing optimizers for ML. Adam, used to
train Recirculating ONNs in §3.3, is one such example [18].
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
5
==PAGE:12==
𝑤1
𝑤2
Loss
(a) Optimization trajectory in the parameter space.
0
5
10
15
Step
Loss
(b) Loss reduction over optimization steps.
Figure 1.4: Illustration of gradient-descent based optimization algorithm for two different w ini-
tializations.
Let us now revisit the two questions posed earlier, about the Perceptron’s capabilities to learn and
to generalize. Empirical observations of these properties in Perceptrons guided the development
of the theory: mathematician Albert Novikoff delivered a rigorous proof in 1962 for the Percep-
tron making, in worst case, a finite number of mistakes before converging on optimal weights, if
the binary classification task is linearly separable. The proof of generalization came later, with
Vladimir Vapnik and Alexey Chervonenkis publishing their theory in 1974. A useful technique in
considering generalization ability of ML programs is algorithmic stability, which measures how
sensitive the learned predictor is to a single change in the training dataset. The question is whether
it would be the same if one data point was resampled from the population, or, interpreting it another
way, what is the expected difference in loss function between seen and unseen examples [12]. This
is the most popular methodology for evaluating AI’s performance1, and validation loss is used to
evaluate training of Recirculating ONNs in §3.
This early success created a lot of excitement about possibilities of Machine Learning. New York
Times wrote about the Perceptron in 1958:
Navy oﬀicers demonstrating a preliminary form of the device in Washington said they
hesitated to call it a machine because it is so much like a “human being without life.”
The machine was introduced as “the embryo of an electronic computer” expected to be able to
“perceive, recognize, and identify its surroundings” as it “grows wiser as it gains experience.”
Neural Networks were predicted to eventually “reproduce themselves on an assembly line [and] be
conscious of their existence” [21]. But the limitations of the early ANNs, dictated largely by the lack
of suﬀicient computing power and datasets, were a basis of credible skepticism among Artificial
Intelligence community. A notable critic, Marvin Minsky, wrote in 1969 book “Perceptrons: An
Introduction to Computational Geometry:”
In principle, connectionist networks offer all the potential of universal computing de-
vices. However, our examples of order and coeﬀicient size suggest that various kinds
1The desired capability of generative AIs is to synthesize new content. Training of such models can be segmented,
where first the models are trained to regurgitate the corpus of text used for training and later fine-tuned with Reinforce-
ment Learning to use the acquired general text processing abilities to instead hold bilateral conversations and answer
user prompts with useful, factual information [19]. Such ML projects require new ways of measuring generalization,
such as by designing benchmarks guided by combinatorics to ensure that the task required of the AI model is extremely
unlikely to have been contained within any training dataset [20].
6
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:13==
of scaling problems are likely to become obstacles to attempts to exploit that poten-
tial [22].
Indeed, small Perceptrons are limited in expressive power, with a single McCulloch-Pitts neuron
unable to learn something as simple as a XOR gate. While computers now are able to run SGD
with backpropagation using automatic differentiation across countless hidden layers, neither these
algorithms nor computer hardware capable of running them existed in the early days of ANNs.
Attempts at circumventing compute limitations with clever algorithms, such as sequentially training
isolated layers of a DNN, did not produce good enough results. Symbolic approach to Artificial
Intelligence thus dominated, garnering all capable researchers and available funding to produce
expert systems, rule-based programs capitalizing on domain knowledge of human experts to make
automatic predictions, also nicknamed “GOFAI” for “Good Old-Fashioned AI.”
This thesis features discussion of expressive power and scaling of the Recirculating ONN architec-
ture in §2.2.2, §2.4 and §3.
1.1.3
Solid State Switches
In the early 1960s, putting more than one transistor on a piece of semiconductor was
considered cutting edge. — Fabrication Engineering at the Micro- and Nanoscale,
Stephen A. Campbell, 2012 [23]
Vacuum-tube computers were bulky, unreliable, and diﬀicult to maintain, with their large, discrete
components connected by harnesses of wires. These systems required constant upkeep as vacuum
tubes frequently failed, especially during temperature fluctuations. While users attempted to mit-
igate these issues by running systems continuously, the fundamental limitations of vacuum tube
technology hindered scalability. The invention of semiconductor transistors by physicists at Bell
Labs in the late 1940s marked a transformative shift. Using semiconductor materials like silicon
and germanium, they developed a transistor design that allowed a small input current to control
a much larger output current, providing a compact, eﬀicient, and durable alternative to vacuum
tubes [3].
Semiconductor transistors became the preferred component for computer circuitry, and integration
of multiple miniature devices on a single chip enabled the exponential economies of scale. Nano-
lithography, the process of fabricating microscopic structures on semiconductor wafers, became
a cornerstone of modern electronics manufacturing. This process involves coating a wafer with a
light-sensitive photoresist, exposing it to a pattern of light through a photomask, and then chem-
ically etching or doping specific areas to create n-type and p-type regions. Over time, advance-
ments in lithographic techniques, such as extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography, have reduced
feature sizes to tens of nanometers, enabling billions of transistors to fit on a single chip. These
smaller transistors consume less power and have lower unit costs, driving the exponential growth
in computational capabilities [23].
The first integrated circuits were designed for specialized applications. However, the increasing
memory and computational power of these systems soon enabled the development of general-
purpose digital computers. An early example was the 1968 Central Air Data Computer onboard
F-14 fighter jet, but as it was kept in secret until the 1990s [24], and it was instead the Intel 4004
microprocessor that in 1971 led the development and commercialization of the technology. Some
scientists who worked on the early ANNs, disenchanted with a lack of progress in Machine Learn-
ing due to lack of compute, left for other fields, including computer engineering, by which they
contributed to the end of the “neural network winter.” One example was Ted Hoff, who for his
1962 PhD dissertation developed ADALINE, or Adaptive Linear Neuron, a variation on the Per-
ceptron architecture, and then, leaving stagnant AI for a more fertile research domain, co-invented
the Intel 4004 microprocessor. The capacity of microprocessors was increased, from 4 bits of data
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
7
==PAGE:14==
processed in an instruction cycle in Intel 4004, to 8-bit Intel 8080, 16-bit Intel 8086, 16/32-bit
Motorola 68000 in 1979, the invention of ARM architecture in 1985, with the Reduced Instruc-
tion Set Computer (RISC) processor design, and then dominance of Intel and AMD with 32-bit
x86 and 64-bit x86-64 processors in the Personal Computers (PC) space. ARM architecture, due
to superior power eﬀiciency over x86, took over the emerging smartphone market in the 2000s,
while Intel and AMD processors remained dominant in the desktop computer market [3, 25]. This
may soon change, with powerful ARM processors such as Snapdragon X Elite entering the newest
laptops.
However, CPUs are designed to process information sequentially, with limited threading for multi-
tasking across several programs. Graphical rendering for animation and video games, or calculating
the gradient of loss through layers of a DNN, require massive amount of parallelizable computation.
NVIDIA has emerged as a leader in this domain with its Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), which
are optimized for highly parallelizable workloads. NVIDIA’s ecosystem, built around its CUDA
software platform and advanced networking technology, supports interconnected computing clus-
ters for training large-scale AI, such as Large Language Models (LLMs) [26]. Current demands
in AI have driven the development of even more specialized hardware accelerators. Application-
Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs), such as Neural Processing Units (NPUs) and Google’s Tensor
Processing Units (TPUs), have reintroduced task-specific designs to meet the immense computa-
tional requirements of AI training and inference [27]. These systems offer higher performance and
energy eﬀiciency by tailoring their architecture to specific AI workloads.
The rapid scaling of AI has brought the economics of inference into sharp focus, challenging the
traditional internet business model predicated on near-zero marginal costs for serving additional
users. Unlike many digital services, modern AI applications—particularly those employing gener-
ative or agentic architectures—require substantial computational resources per query during infer-
ence. Models such as OpenAI’s o1 adopt iterative reasoning processes (e.g., chain-of-thought [28])
that allocate more compute resources to refine outputs. Consequently, compute eﬀiciency is be-
coming a critical bottleneck for commercialization of AI models. On 20th Jan 2025, DeepSeek
released a new LLM, DeepSeek R1 [19], which proved the continued importance of hardware-
software co-optimization in AI development. Featuring low-level customizations of GPUs’ core
computational units, allocating some of them exclusively to server-to-server communication in-
stead of computation, the Chinese company eﬀiciently trained and deployed a cutting-edge chatbot
AI [4], despite constrained access to computing resources due to U.S. sanctions.
1.2
Optical computing
Electronics are not the only medium capable of computation. As §1.1.1 has shown, they emerged
as an improvement over slower, less capable mechanical computers. A variety of different phys-
ical phenomena were offered as alternatives to the electrical semiconductor effects as a basis for
a computer. The results were varied. The Monetary National Income Analogue Computer (MO-
NIAC), for instance, used water flow regulated by valves to model economic processes. While
it provided valuable insights into the modeling of complex systems before electronic computers
became widespread, the “fluidic logic” proved impractical compared to the speed, scalability, and
eﬀiciency of electronic circuits.
Optical computation, on the other hand, offers orders-of-magnitude improvements in eﬀiciency for
many computational tasks [2, 29], the demand for which surged in the recent years with the rapid
development of Artificial Intelligence. Optical computing systems have the advantage of very fast
system dynamics, high bandwidth (∼500 THz compared to 5 GHz for electronic processors), and
nearly dissipationless propagation, enabling lower latency, higher throughput, and improved energy
eﬀiciency [5].
8
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:15==
Furthermore, PIC technology has seen substantial advances in the recent years. Leading computing
companies, such as NVIDIA and TSMC, are investing in the development of photonic chips, while
startups are driving innovation with novel systems and applications. As the design and manufac-
turing processes for photonic chips mature, the potential for optical computation to demonstrate
advantage over electronic processors in certain domains becomes increasingly feasible [5].
1.2.1
Optical information
Light is the preeminent source of information about the universe: we know about the distant stars
by observing the light they emitted. Astronomers measure its intensity and spectrum, place it on the
Hertzsprung–Russell Diagram, and cluster the data points together to infer information about the
underlying stellar processes emitting light with the measured properties. Human animal, like other
primates, is a visual creature, with stereostopic sight and brain processing visual depth cues for
orientation in the environment. A device that the humans made and launched in 2013, the LADEE
lunar orbiter, was outfitted with an optical payload, a Laser Communication Terminal (LCT) that
established an eﬀicient 622 Mbps downlink at an astronomical distance of 385000 kilometres [30].
LCTs work by encoding information into a directed beam of light, which can be measured by
another mobile LCT or an Optical Ground Station (OGS), for the contained information to be
decoded back into digital bits.
Electromagnetic waves offer multiple opportune properties for modulation, including amplitude,
phase, and frequency. Amplitude modulation, such as On-Off Keying (OOK), may be as simple
as turning a laser on and off to represent binary data. Data transmission can occur through free
space, as with SpaceX’s Starlink, or via guided modes, such as in undersea fiber-optic cables or
waveguides on integrated chips. Optical communication is already used in deep space missions,
commercially in optical interconnects in supercomputers, and potentially in Quantum Networks,
using quantum properties of light to set up communication between quantum computers and enable
qualitatively new capabilities with quantum sensing and algorithms, such as physically-provable
secure cryptography.
1.2.2
The Physics of Light
James Clerk Maxwell’s unification of electricity and magnetism in the mid-19th century marked
a milestone in classical physics. Building upon the experimental work of Faraday, Ampère, and
Gauss, Maxwell formulated a set of four equations that describe the behavior of electric and mag-
netic fields. Maxwell likened electromagnetic fields to incompressible fluids and used mechanical
constructs like gears and vortices to conceptualize their behavior, eventually arriving at an abstract
mathematical formulation of electromagnetism.
One of Maxwell’s innovations was the inclusion of the displacement current in Ampère’s law, which
led to the theoretical prediction of electromagnetic waves. These waves propagate at a finite speed
determined by the permittivity and permeability of free space, providing a theoretical explanation
for the speed of light (as will be elaborated on in §2.3). The resulting wave equations laid the
foundation for the classical understanding of light as an electromagnetic phenomenon [31].
Light possesses several physical characteristics that make it an exceptionally promising medium for
computation [5]. Its high frequency—on the order of hundreds of terahertz—enables bandwidths
vastly exceeding those of electronic processors, allowing for rapid signal processing. Unlike electri-
cal currents, which experience resistive losses, optical signals can propagate through free space or
guided media with minimal dissipation, performing computations by merely propagating through
the system. Optical signals experience little cross-talk, and, finally, quantum properties of light
can be accessed at room temperature.
While Maxwell’s equations describe light as a continuous wave, early 20th-century experiments,
such as the photoelectric effect, revealed its quantized nature. Einstein’s explanation of the effect
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
9
==PAGE:16==
introduced the concept of photons—discrete quanta of electromagnetic energy—bridging the gap
between wave and particle theories. Quantum Field Theory (QFT) refines this understanding by
describing electromagnetic fields as quantized systems. In QFT, photons are treated as excitations
of the underlying electromagnetic field, which itself is a quantum entity. Quantum Electrodynamics
(QED), a component of QFT, governs the interactions of photons with charged particles, offering
precise predictions for phenomena like spontaneous emission or virtual particle exchange. Unlike
classical models, QED incorporates the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, enabling a
more accurate description of interactions at atomic and subatomic scales. Maxwell’s equations
emerge as the macroscopic limit of QED, and are applicable in engineering applications such as
optical computing with classical information, as considered in this thesis.
1.2.3
Photonic Integrated Circuits
PICs are the optical analog of electronic integrated circuits, combining multiple optical compo-
nents on a single chip to perform a variety of functions such as signal processing, communication,
and sensing. By integrating devices like waveguides, modulators, detectors, and lasers onto a com-
mon substrate, PICs offer a compact and energy-eﬀicient platform for optical signal manipulation.
Their fabrication relies on processes adapted from the semiconductor industry, using techniques
such as photolithography, etching, and deposition to create precise optical structures [1]. Pro-
grammable photonic circuits, which incorporate reconfigurable components like phase shifters and
tunable couplers, enable dynamic control of optical pathways [32]. This flexibility allows a single
PIC to be adapted for multiple applications, potentially for general purpose computing with “Opti-
cal CPUs” [33], or programmable neuromorphic accelerators that can implement different sets of
weights for AI models inference [2].
The global integrated photonics market is experiencing significant growth, driven by advancements
in telecommunications, data infrastructure, and emerging applications in AI and optical computing.
Established semiconductor leaders such as Intel and Hamamatsu Photonics dominate foundational
photonic component development, while telecom giants like Nokia and Juniper Networks integrate
photonics into next-generation networking systems. Startups, such as Lightmatter, are also gaining
traction, promising AI acceleration and energy-eﬀicient computing with photonic circuits.
Advancements in material science have brought Lithium Niobate to the forefront of PIC develop-
ment. A versatile material with good electro-optic and nonlinear properties, it has played a crucial
role as a bulk crystal in high-speed optical communication and radio-frequency filtering. The thin-
film Lithium Niobate on Insulator (LNOI) is a promising option for fabrication of high-quality,
wafer-scale photonic circuits [1].
10
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:17==
2
Methodology
This chapter presents application of the Temporal Coupled Mode Theory to obtain a physical model
of the recirculating architecture (§2.1), sets up the learning problem based on optimal control of
the derived dynamical system (§2.2), discusses delays due to the propagation of light at finite speed
(§2.3), and encoding and decoding schemes (§2.4). The overview of key findings of this chapter is
presented in Table 2.1.
Section
Key findings
§2.1 Temporal Coupled Mode Theory
↰
§2.1.1 Waveguide
↰
§2.1.2 Multiport interferometer
↰
§2.1.3 Non-linear resonant cavity
↰
§2.1.4 Recirculating Optical Neural
Network
Derivation of physical models of optical devices using
laws of electromagnetism; Discussion of assumptions
and construction of the physical model of the Recircu-
lating ONN architecture.
§2.2 Physical Neural Network
↰
§2.2.1 DL based on optimal control
of dynamical systems
↰
§2.2.2 Controllability
↰
§2.2.3 Model complexity
↰
§2.2.4 Regularization
↰
§2.2.5 Learning
↰
§2.2.6 Evaluation
Application of the Recirculating ONN architecture for
a learning task; discussion of the circuit as a dynamical
system; formalization of conditions for and constraints
on learning; regularization and evaluation methods.
§2.3 Delays
↰
§2.3.1 Delay Differential Equations
↰
§2.3.2 DDE Model
Analysis of the impact of the finite speed of light on
the system dynamics; derivation of the delay model of
the Recirculating ONN circuit.
§2.4 Optical Encoding of Information
↰
§2.4.1 Amplitude Modulation
↰
§2.4.2 Phase Modulation
↰
§2.4.3 Bias Cavities
↰
§2.4.4 Other schemes
Discussion of encoding and decoding schemes for the
Recirculating ONN architecture; mathematical analy-
sis of the system’s degrees of freedom and controlla-
bility.
Table 2.1: Key findings by section of this chapter.
2.1
Temporal Coupled Mode Theory
Temporal Coupled Mode Theory (TCMT) is a formalism for describing dynamics of resonant op-
tical systems, widely used in their design. TCMT introduces a level of abstraction, describing
a photonic circuit in terms of isolated components with known dynamics, e.g. waveguides with
propagating modes or cavities with resonant modes [34].
Hierarchical levels of abstraction are a crucial method for design of electronic microchips, reduc-
ing design complexity and enabling design automation [35]. This thesis makes use of the same
approach, with details of optical devices abstracted away and replaced by models describing their
input-output behavior (Figure 2.1). The components of the recirculating architecture are defined in
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
11
==PAGE:18==
the framework of TCMT, and then used to construct the physical model of the recirculating optical
circuit system for ML.
Coupled Mode Theories describe physical systems in terms of energy transferred between their
eigenmodes, as determined by the coupling between them. The TCMT formalism in photonics
allows for easy introduction of symmetry constraints, the most common being: time-reversal sym-
metry, energy conservation, and Lorentz reciprocity [36]. These three are used in this section to
derive models of devices used in the circuit architecture.
Physical 
structure
Device
Circuit
System
Figure 2.1: Hierarchical design abstractions in Photonic Integrated Circuits. The illustrations for
Physical structure and Device layers reproduced directly from [1], and for System level from [37].
2.1.1
Waveguide
Optical waveguides are physical structures on PICs, confining the light in guided modes for trans-
mission across the circuit with minimal attenuation. Considering an isolated, lossless waveguide,
and drawing a closed surface Ω intersecting it twice, normal to the waveguide axis at points of
intersection (Figure 2.2), we first observe that due to translational invariance the modal electric
and magnetic fields have forms, respectively [38]
E𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) = e𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦) exp (i𝛽𝑗𝑧−𝑖𝜔𝑡),
(2.1a)
H 𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) = h𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦) exp (𝑖𝛽𝑗𝑧−i𝜔𝑡),
(2.1b)
where 𝛽𝑗is the propagation constant of the 𝑗th mode. Each forward propagating mode has a
corresponding backward propagating mode with 𝛽−𝑗= −𝛽𝑗.
Ω
a
b
z
Figure 2.2: An idealized waveguide intersected at 𝑧equal 𝑎and 𝑏by a closed surface Ω. The
waveguide axis is aligned with 𝑧axis and normal to Ω at points of intersection.
We define 𝑠𝑗,+(𝑧) as complex amplitude of the 𝑗th forward propagating mode at distance 𝑧, and
𝑠𝑗,−(𝑧) for the 𝑗th reverse propagating mode,
E𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) =

𝑠𝑗,+(𝑧) exp (i𝛽𝑗𝑧) + 𝑠𝑗,−(𝑧) exp (−i𝛽𝑗𝑧)

e𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦) exp (−i𝜔𝑡),
(2.2a)
H 𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) =

𝑠𝑗,+(𝑧) exp (i𝛽𝑗𝑧) + 𝑠𝑗,−(𝑧) exp (−i𝛽𝑗𝑧)

h𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦) exp (−i𝜔𝑡).
(2.2b)
12
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:19==
Since the surface Ω does not enclose any electrical charge, from Gauss’s law,
∮
Ω
E · dA = 0.
(2.3)
Designating intersection surfaces as Ω𝑎and Ω𝑏at 𝑎and 𝑏, assuming negligible evanescent field
and other radiative losses (no electric field outside of the waveguide), we have
∬
Ω𝑎
E𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑎, 𝑡) d𝑥d𝑦−
∬
Ω𝑏
E𝑗(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑏, 𝑡) d𝑥d𝑦= 0.
(2.4)
The minus sign is due to the normal vectors of the surface being opposite at the two intersection
surfaces. The expression simplifies to

𝑠𝑗,+(𝑎) exp (i𝛽𝑗𝑎) + 𝑠𝑗,−(𝑎) exp (−i𝛽𝑗𝑎)

−

𝑠𝑗,+(𝑏) exp (i𝛽𝑗𝑏) + 𝑠𝑗,−(𝑏) exp (−i𝛽𝑗𝑏)

= 0.
(2.5)
Taking Δ𝑧= 𝑏−𝑎,
𝑠𝑗,+(𝑏) = 𝑠𝑗,+(𝑎) exp (−i𝛽𝑗Δ𝑧),
(2.6a)
𝑠𝑗,−(𝑎) = 𝑠𝑗,−(𝑏) exp (−i𝛽𝑗Δ𝑧).
(2.6b)
Defining driving (input) modes si as ones entering the waveguide section enclosed by Ω, and scat-
tering (output) modes so as ones leaving:
si =
𝑠+(𝑎)
𝑠−(𝑏)

,
so =
𝑠−(𝑎)
𝑠+(𝑏)

.
(2.7)
We have equation of the form so = 𝑆si, where 𝑆is a scattering matrix:
so =
 0
𝑒iΔ𝜙
𝑒iΔ𝜙
0

si,
(2.8)
Δ𝜙being the phase accumulated as the light propagated through the channel.
2.1.2
Multiport interferometer
Interferometers are photonic devices that manipulate phase of input optical signals and enable
energy transfer between their waveguides to achieve controlled constructive or destructive inter-
ference. A mesh of variable phase shifters and beam splitters can be constructed to implement a
universal 𝑛x 𝑛interferometer (Figure 2.3), performing any linear transformation between 𝑛single-
mode channels [32].
We draw a closed surface Ω, intersecting 2𝑛waveguides with the same geometrical constraints as
in the previous section. Amplitude of the driving modes entering the device from one side 𝑠i,1,
𝑠i,2, ..., 𝑠i,𝑛form a vector
si,forward =

𝑠i,1
...
𝑠i,𝑛

,
(2.9)
while the driving modes from the other side, 𝑠i,𝑛+1, 𝑠i,𝑛+2, ..., 𝑠i,2𝑛, form si,backward. All 2𝑛driving
modes, 𝑛from each side, are arranged in a vector 𝑠i. Similarly, 𝑠o,1, 𝑠o,2, ..., 𝑠o,𝑛form so,backward,
and 𝑠o,𝑛+1, 𝑠o,𝑛+2, ..., 𝑠o,2𝑛form so,forward. All driving and scattering modes are arranged by their
waveguide.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
13
==PAGE:20==
Ω
Figure 2.3: A universal 5x5 multiport interferometer of Clements design [32]. Surface Ω is drawn
around it, normal to waveguide axes at points of intersection.
si =
 𝑠i,forward
𝑠i,backward

,
so =
𝑠o,backward
𝑠o,forward

.
(2.10)
The device allows to apply any unitary matrix 𝑈onto a vector of driving modes from one side,
and output the result on the other side: so,forward = 𝑈si,forward. Assuming an idealized multiport
interferometer without backscattering, in which all light propagates through the device to the other
side and none gets attenuated or reflected, we get an expression with a scattering matrix, s𝑜= 𝑆si,
so =
0
𝑈backward
𝑈
0

si.
(2.11)
Since the time-invariant model of the interferometer satisfies Lorentz reciprocity, the scattering
matrix is equal to its transpose, 𝑆= 𝑆𝑇. This is implied by the physical constraint [34, 39],
s′
i · s′′
o = s′
o · s′′
i ,
(2.12)
for scattering mode amplitudes s′
o and s′′
o of electromagnetic fields induced by driving modes with
amplitudes s′
i and s′′
i . Considering two electromagnetic fields, one with driving modes only on one
side, s′
i =
s′
0𝑇, and the second field with driving modes only on the other side, s′′
i =
0
s′′𝑇,
we have
s′
0
𝑇
𝑆
 0
s′′

=

𝑆
s′
0
 𝑇 0
s′′

.
(2.13)
The result yields 𝑈backward = 𝑈𝑇. Therefore the device necessarily implements the unitary matrix
transposed when light propagates in the reverse direction.
2.1.3
Non-linear resonant cavity
This section considers an electromagnetic cavity without gain or loss, a resonator structure con-
fining light, whose time-evolution operator yields 𝑛eigenmodes, amplitudes of which are defined
analogously to Equation 2.2 and listed in a vector,
A =

𝐴1
𝐴2
...
𝐴𝑛

.
(2.14)
The difference is that these modes are stationary, as opposed to the previously considered propa-
gating modes of waveguides. The system dynamics of a TCMT model of an isolated cavity are [40]
dA
d𝑡= i𝜔A,
(2.15)
14
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:21==
where 𝜔is a matrix whose diagonal entries are frequencies of each mode, and any off-diagonal
entries introduce coupling between the modes in the cavity. For a variable or a non-linear cavity, 𝜔
is found by a mapping from its parameter space onto a (sub)space of 𝑛× 𝑛matrices, 𝜔= 𝜔(𝑡, A).
For the presented Recirculating ONN design, Kerr nonlinearity is used, with the detuning frequency
change proportional to energy in the cavity, or the amplitude squared. For notational convenience,
the nonlinear cavities are modeled in form
dA
d𝑡= i [𝜔0 + 𝑓(A)] A = i𝜔A.
(2.16)
Ω
Figure 2.4: Nonlinear optical resonant cavity coupled with three waveguides. Again, closed surface
Ω is drawn around it, normal to input waveguide axes at points of intersection.
We introduce 𝑚single-mode waveguides coupled with the cavity, as illustrated in Figure 2.4, and
draw a closed surface Ω as in previous sections, to define the driving and scattered modes of the
enveloped system. The light incoming into the cavity can be reflected (experience phase change
and be sent back in an outgoing, scattering mode of the same waveguide), or enter into the cavity,
such that, in a general formulation [40]
dA
d𝑡= i𝜔A −ΓA + 𝐾𝑇si,
(2.17a)
so = 𝐶si + 𝐷A.
(2.17b)
Time reversal symmetry requires 𝐾= 𝐷and 𝐶𝐷∗= −𝐷, and energy conservation requires 𝐷+𝐷=
2Γ, where 𝐾and 𝐷are coupling matrices, 𝐶is the scattering matrix, and Γ is responsible for decay
of energy in the cavity.
Let us now consider an array of 𝑚single-mode nonlinear cavities, each coupled to a single-mode
waveguide, as a single device, contained within a closed surface Ω′. It can be functionally rein-
terpreted as a single multi-mode cavity with each mode isolated from others and uniquely coupled
with a single waveguide. Such system can be described with equations 2.17a and 2.17b, with off-
diagonal entries in Γ, 𝐾, 𝐶and 𝐷matrices all being equal to zero. With a diagonal matrix of
coupling constants
√
𝐾, applying previously stated constraints, we arrive at a system of equations:
dA
d𝑡= i𝜔A −𝐾
2 A +
√
𝐾si,
(2.18a)
so = −si +
√
𝐾A.
(2.18b)
To include the Kerr nonlinearity in this model, according to convention of Equation 2.16, we use
nonlinearity coeﬀicients 𝛼𝑖:
i𝜔A = i
h
𝜔0𝐼+ diag

𝛼1|A1|2, 𝛼2|A2|2, . . . , 𝛼𝑛|A𝑛|2i
A.
(2.19)
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
15
==PAGE:22==
2.1.4
Recirculating Optical Neural Network
The models of optical devices, derived from basic electromagnetism principles, are now used as
building blocks to construct a model of a circuit with the recirculating architecture. Variable de-
vices, such as phase shifters in the multiport interferometer or modulated coupling between cavities
and waveguides, make the optical system open-loop controllable, providing a basis for the use of
the circuit as an Optical Neural Network with temporal degrees of freedom. These aspects of the
design will be considered further in §2.2.
...
...
s
s
s   = -s
b               f
s f
s   
i,j
s o,j
A
U
j
Reﬂection
Multiport
interferometer
Nonlinear
cavities
i
o
Figure 2.5: Recirculating Optical Neural Network.
The derivation of the Recirculating ONN model relies on several assumptions and approximations.
In the waveguide model (§2.1.1), transmission is treated as lossless to simplify the derivation of
scattering matrix. This approximation neglects attenuating effects such as material absorption or
radiative losses, which can later be incorporated perturbatively by introducing attenuation terms
into the scattering matrices, as it is done in §2.2.4. Similarly, resonant cavities (§2.1.3) are modeled
as lossless systems, establishing a direct relationship between coupling matrices and energy decay
𝐷+𝐷= 2Γ from conservation of energy. Attenuation can be introduced to this model similarly to
waveguides. Energy conservation is explicitly imposed during the derivation of the devices’ basic
properties, and used to verify the model in Appendix A, but it is relaxed in later refinements of the
model, as described in §2.2.4 and §3.5.
For multiport interferometers (§2.1.2), backscattering is assumed to be negligible, limiting the
scope of the analysis to the first-order input-output behavior of the device. The models also as-
sumes instantaneous light propagation between components. This is discussed, and a delay model
derived, in §2.3. The delay term is the same in coupling of any two cavities, per assumption of per-
mutation invariance: any two cavities can be swapped out on the circuit, along with their associated
parameters, without any change to the circuit model.
The diagram of the ONN is shown in Figure 2.5. Using a model of an array of single-mode non-
16
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:23==
linear cavities, each coupled to a single-mode waveguide, derived in §2.1.3,
dA
d𝑡= i𝜔A −𝐾
2 A +
√
𝐾si,
(2.20a)
so = −si +
√
𝐾A.
(2.20b)
With symmetry of the scattering matrix of the multiport interferometer proven in §2.1.2, and taking
the reflection 𝑅= −𝐼,
si = 𝑈𝑇𝑅𝑈so = −𝑈𝑇𝑈so,
(2.21)
so = (𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈)−1√
𝐾A.
(2.22)
This yields:
dA
d𝑡= i𝜔A −
𝐾
2 +
√
𝐾𝑈𝑇𝑈(𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈)−1√
𝐾

A.
(2.23)
The time evolution operator of the system is therefore
F = i𝜔−
𝐾
2 +
√
𝐾𝑈𝑇𝑈(𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈)−1√
𝐾

.
(2.24)
2.2
Physical Neural Network
ANNs are capable of learning complex patterns, from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
classifying hand-written characters [41], to Transformer-based Large Language Models answering
arbitrary user queries, generating compilable code, and extracting information from other modali-
ties such as images or audio [26]. Expressive power of these computational structures comes from
the layer-to-layer propagation of information, and enables these networks to iteratively learn highly
complex functions from data [8].
Recent advancements in Machine Learning demonstrated that such expressive information propa-
gation can be also achieved in time evolution of dynamical systems, and that optimizing parame-
ters of continuous-time physical systems, based on optics, mechanics, or electronics, is suitable for
pattern recognition tasks and may offer significant eﬀiciency advantages over implementations of
ANNs on digital computers [8, 7]. Optical Neural Network constructed in the previous section is
an example of such Physical Neural Network.
2.2.1
Deep Learning based on optimal control of dynamical systems
Supervised learning can be framed as the problem of finding a mapping from input space 𝑋onto
target space 𝑌, such that given a dataset consisting of pairs (x𝑘, y𝑘), with x𝑘∈𝑋and y𝑘∈𝑌, for
𝑘∈{1, 2, · · · , 𝐾},
𝐺: x𝑘→y𝑘.
(2.25)
By employing a dynamical system with state r and time evolution operator F ,
d
d𝑡r(𝑡) = F r(𝑡),
(2.26)
with an encoded input
r(𝑡0) = encode(x𝑘),
(2.27)
the system evolves according to Equation 2.26 to reach a state satisfying
decode

r(𝑡end)

= y𝑘.
(2.28)
In case of the Recirculating ONN circuit, the time evolution operator F is dependent on time 𝑡,
state r, and, crucially, parametrization of the optical circuit u. For a programmable recirculating
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
17
==PAGE:24==
PIC, u may represent electronic signal for electro-optic components [42], optical weights for all-
optical devices [2, 43], or even mechanical vibration for acousto-optic devices [44]. For a PIC
manufactured without variable devices to perform inference on a single Recirculating ONN model,
u belongs to the PIC design space. u is a vector of optimized parameters of the circuit that shapes
the behavior of the light in the optical circuit:
d
d𝑡r = F (𝑡, r, u) r.
(2.29)
The control signal u can be constant vector, a function of time u(𝑡) for time-varying circuit param-
eters, but not a function of state r, since that would require the controller to complete a read-out of
the optical signal. Repeated optical-electronic conversion and processing, to complete the feedback
loop within the computation, can substantially diminish performance and eﬀiciency advantages [5].
This means that the problem of training the Recirculating ONN is an open-loop control problem1.
For a dynamical system, such as the Recirculating ONN, employed for Machine Learning, the
expressiveness of the information propagation in time can be understood by a comparison with
ResNet architecture (Figure 2.6). Residual Networks were first proposed to alleviate the empirically
observed training instability in very deep neural networks: increase of network’s depth eventually
leads to accuracy saturation, and then degradation. This is unexpected, in as far as deeper networks
are capable of exactly replicating workings of shallower networks, with a proof by construction:
the weights of the learned shallower model can be copied into first layers of the deeper model, and
the remaining layers made to implement the identity mapping.
ResNet building block
Euler discretization
of Neural ODE
Nonlinear
Time Evolution
Operator
Identity
×Δt
+
F
Weight layer
Nonlinearity
Identity
Weight layer
+
Figure 2.6: Comparison of basic building block of ResNet, adapted from [45], and the Euler dis-
cretization of the optical circuit’s dynamics. Propagation of information in continuous-time dy-
namical system can be thought of as an infinitesmal residual network.
The observed degradation thus arises not from limited representational power but from training
challenges such as exploding or vanishing gradients. Residual Networks mitigate these issues by
reparametrizing the model to learn a residual function. Instead of directly learning the mapping
H (x), they recast it to G(x) = H (x) −x and introduce a “shortcut connection”, adding the input
x to the layer’s prediction G(x) [45].
Let us now consider Euler discretization of Equation 2.26,
r(𝑡+ Δ𝑡) = r(𝑡) + Δ𝑡· F r(𝑡).
(2.30)
1If the intermediate values of the state (the continuous-time hidden layer of the recirculating optical network) could
be partially observed by a controller and used to generate commands to variable devices in the circuit, the Recirculating
ONN optimization could be reframed from supervised learning to end-to-end Reinforcement Learning problem.
18
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:25==
While Euler’s forward method is often insuﬀicient for accurate numerical evaluation of differential
equations, at limit lim Δ𝑡→0 it is exactly equivalent to the continuous-time system. Hence, it can
be used in the infinitesimal case to understand the information propagation in the continuous-time
system.
As illustrated in Figure 2.7, when enough temporal degrees of freedom are employed, the inference
is suﬀiciently long, and an appropriate encoding–decoding scheme is used, such that the computa-
tion can be performed within physical constraints (see §2.2.2 on controllability and reachability),
the Recirculating ONN achieves expressivity equivalent to that of a residual network. By exten-
sion, it matches the expressivity of a basic feed-forward neural network, which is known to be a
universal function approximator [46].
Classiﬁcation threshold
Depth
Readout
Input
Recirculating
ONN
ResNet
ANN
Figure 2.7: Illustrative comparison of information propagation through depth of a basic feed-
forward neural network, the ResNet, and the Recirculating ONN. The Recirculating ONN’s depth
corresponds to the continuous evolution of cavity states in time, while for ANN and ResNet it rep-
resents hidden layers. For the first one, plotted curve is a simulation of optical energy readout in a
Recirculating ONN trained for a classification problem (§3.3). For the last two, shape was freely
drawn for illustrative purposes.
In practice, however, several factors constrain ideal performance. For example, the modulation
speed of optical devices, the finite number of cavities (which correspond to the breadth of an ANN),
the total computation time, and the limited temporal degrees of freedom (analogous to the depth
of an ANN) are limited by physical and economic constraints. The task is to train a model that can
eﬀiciently approximate,
decode

r(𝑡end)

= ˆy𝑘≈y𝑘.
(2.31)
2.2.2
Controllability
Given the dynamical system presented in Equation 2.26, reachability addresses whether a final state
rreachable can be obtained from the given initial state rinitial after the interval [𝑡0, 𝑡end] by means
of some control signal u(𝑡). In other words, it concerns the question of existence of a set of circuit
parameters such that
r(𝑡0) = rinitial =⇒r(𝑡end) ≈rreachable.
(2.32)
The set of all such rreachable is denoted by X+ 𝑡0, 𝑡end; rinitial
. Controllability considers the con-
verse question of whether there exists u that drives rcontrollable to the specified final state rﬁnal. In
that case, the set of all initial states rcontrollable which can be controlled to arrive at rﬁnal under
some u(𝑡) is denoted by X− 𝑡0, 𝑡end; rﬁnal
 [47, 48]. These concepts are illustrated in Figure 2.8.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
19
==PAGE:26==
t0
tend
rinitial
rﬁnal
Controllable states
Reachable states
Figure 2.8: A diagram presenting sets of controllable and reachable states in a dynamical system.
For the Recirculating ONN, r(𝑡0) is determined by encode(x𝑘), and the system should be steered
by control signal (circuit parameters) u so that r(𝑡end) satisfies ˆy𝑘= y𝑘,
∃rout ∈X+
𝑡0, 𝑡end, encode(x𝑘)

such that
decode(rout) ≈y𝑘.
(2.33)
However, since the learning of Recirculating ONN is an open-loop control problem, this condition
must be satisfied for every data point (x, y) with system dynamics determined by a single control
signal u(𝑡)—we assume that the circuit cannot observe the input and decide which set of parameters
it will implement for that individual computation. This makes the condition for controllability of
the Recirculating ONN more complicated:
∃u(𝑡)∀𝑘∈{1, 2, · · · , 𝐾}
h
r(𝑡0) = encode(x𝑘) =⇒decode

r(𝑡end)

≈y𝑘
i
,
(2.34)
which can be also represented in an expanded vector form, as it is internally in PyTorch during an
inference step on a batch, applying the model element-wise, and then using a vector of many pre-
dictions ˆy =
y1
. . .
y𝑘
𝑇and the corresponding targets to calculate the loss to be minimized,
see §2.2.5.
As the previous section argued, the Recirculating ONN can be thought of as an infinitesimal resid-
ual network, and given enough time and suﬀiciently expressive temporal degrees of freedom, the
network should learn to approximate any input-output mapping, unless the symmetries or invari-
ance of the optical system prohibit it, which is addressed in §2.4. If the selected temporal degrees
of freedom prove to lead to poor scaling of performance for some applications, beyond replacing
them with another variable device, it is possible to expand the network in breadth (by adding more
bias cavities, see §2.18), extend it by ONN encoder and decoder layers, as discussed in §4.1, or
enable training of a bigger set of parameters of the optimized physical system to increase expres-
sivity in F achieved by u. There is an engineering trade-off between hardware design and achieved
exprissivity, and investigation of performance scaling with increasing degrees of freedom [49] may
be necessary to eﬀiciently train a large Recirculating ONN, as discussed in §4.1.
2.2.3
Model complexity
The primary degrees of freedom in the Recirculating ONN circuit are determined by the parameters
of the unitary transformation implemented by the multiport interferometer,
𝑈∈SU(𝑛),
(2.35)
satisfying𝑈∗𝑈= 𝑈𝑈∗= 𝐼. The special unitary group represents the span of multiport interferome-
ter configurations: the energy-preserving linear transformations of a vector of complex amplitudes,
20
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:27==
such as the circuit’s state A ∈C𝑛. Unitary matrices can be written as matrix exponential,
𝑈= 𝑒i𝐻,
(2.36)
where 𝐻is a Hermitian matrix. The diagonal elements of a Hermitian matrix are real, as they must
equal their complex conjugates, contributing 𝑛degrees of freedom. Hermiticity also constrains
the lower triangular elements in terms of the upper triangular elements, resulting in (𝑛2 −𝑛)/2
complex degrees of freedom, or equivalently 𝑛(𝑛−1) real degrees of freedom. The total number
of parameters required to describe the multiport interferometer implementing a unitary matrix is
𝑛2 −1, with one parameter subtracted to constrain the determinant of the matrix to 1.
Besides 𝑛2 −1 trainable parameters from the interferometer, a Recirculating ONN training can
vary the parameters of cavities: frequency, nonlinearity, coupling with waveguide, and can change
these properties across time by parametrization of the control signal, allowing us to define any
number 𝑚of degrees of freedom per cavity. Therefore, the total number of learnable parameters is
𝑛2+𝑛𝑚−1. Since some circuit configurations are diﬀicult to practically implement, such as varying
nonlinearity coeﬀicient across cavities integrated into a single PIC, the nonlinearity coeﬀicient
is optimized as one global variable in the presented models, and various others constraints are
implemented and tested in experiments presented in §3, limiting the expressivity of the model to
see whether the system can still effectively learn.
2.2.4
Regularization
The multiport interferometer is capable of implementing a unitary transform which results in each
cavity only being coupled with itself, such that Equation 2.20b and Equation 2.21 result in
𝑠𝑗,o = −𝑠𝑗,i +
p
𝐾𝑗𝐴𝑗
𝑠𝑗,i = −𝑒𝑖𝜃𝑗𝑠𝑗,o,
(2.37)
𝑠𝑗,o = 𝑒i𝜃𝑗𝑠𝑗,o +
p
𝐾𝑗𝐴𝑗,
(2.38)
where 𝜃𝑗is the phase shift accumulated by propagation through the interferometer of the optical
signal emitted from 𝑗th cavity. In particular, if 𝜃= 0, the result of formula can be interpreted as the
energy transferred from the cavity to the propagating mode in the waveguide enters a destructive
interference with itself. This can be more correctly modeled with transmission of light in waveguide
occurring at a finite speed, and not allowing the optical signal to instantaneously reflect twice (once
by the cavity, once on the other side) and cancel itself out at a single instance of time.
Naively, the consequence of applying the time-invariant modal field model is 𝐴𝑗= 0, which we
know to be false, as the optical energy cannot spontaneously cease to exist in presence of such a
waveguide. Delay models of the Recirculating ONN circuit are discussed in §2.3, however Delay
Differential Equation (DDE) solvers are much slower than Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE)
solvers [50], especially as the training requires differentiability for backpropagation. To use the
ODE model of the circuit, and make it possible to reliably numerically evaluate, we must regularize
it.
(𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈) can become singular or near-singular, most obviously with 𝑈= 𝐼, with above described
situation arising at every cavity, making the problem of finding the inverse in Equation 2.24 ill-
posed. To avoid impossible computations and improve eﬀiciency in case of near-singular expres-
sion, Tikhonov regularization can be implemented at cost of adding a small amount of bias [51].
Thus, the time evolution operator of the system becomes
F = i𝜔−
𝐾
2 𝐼+
√
𝐾𝑈𝑇𝑈

(1 + 𝜆) 𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈
−1 √
𝐾

,
(2.39)
for some small parameter 𝜆. Let us revisit Equation 2.21 adding a loss term corresponding to
attenuation of a signal, transversing the multiport interferometer forth and back, by 1 −𝛼
si = −𝛼𝑈𝑇𝑈so.
(2.40)
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
21
==PAGE:28==
We then have
si = −𝑈𝑇𝑈( 1
𝛼𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈)−1√
𝐾A.
(2.41)
Substituting 1 + 𝜆= 1
𝛼, and deriving the full systems dynamics of Recirculating ONN, we phys-
ically motivate the numerical regularization term as implemented by attenuation in the multiport
interferometer, arriving back at Equation 2.39.
Stochastic depth is another regularization technique, used for training DNNs, that randomly skips
layers during forward propagation [52]. This creates an ensemble of varying network depths, re-
ducing overfitting. Analogously, in Recirculating ONNs with temporal degrees of freedom, regu-
larization is achieved by randomly varying the computation time in training, but keeping it constant
for inference. As shown in §3.4, such regularization techniques can “incentivize” other properties
in training, such as temporal stability of the prediction, preventing the model from overfitting to
match the label at exact instance of time 𝑡end, with very different values immediately before and
after. It can be also thought of as data augmentation with noise [53].
2.2.5
Learning
The Recirculating ONN training is framed as an optimization problem, with a defined loss func-
tion Loss : 𝑌2 →R, equal to a chosen cost function, error metric, or a surrogate function that
approximates such:
minimize
E

Loss

decode r(𝑡end), y

subject to
r(𝑡0) = encode(x)
d
d𝑡r(𝑡) = F (𝑡, r(𝑡), u)r(𝑡),
(2.42)
where u ∈R𝑛is the optimization variable, and (𝑥, 𝑦) is a pair sampled from the population (the
input and the prediction target). Training of the network will be performed in-silico, using a TCMT
model of the PIC, see Figure 2.9.
Encoder
Controller
Optimizer
Dataset
Decoder
Photonic
Integrated
Circuit
input
prediction
learned parameters
parameters
Encoder
Decoder
Diﬀerential
equation solver
Loss 
function
input
label
prediction
(a) Training
(b) Inference 
Figure 2.9: Schematic representation of the Recirculating ONN training and inference processes.
(a) Training is performed with a simulation (differential equation solver) based on a TCMT model.
(b) Inference utilizes the learned parameters in a PIC.
22
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:29==
The encoder and decoder components can be as simple as a phase modulator and an optical energy
readout, or as complicated as large-scale ONNs of their own right (§4). Optical encoding of infor-
mation for the Recirculating ONN is discussed in §2.4, but the outputs of the system are a relevant
context for ML learning and evaluation.
Readout of optical energy in cavities is easy to visualize and implement, particularly for the clas-
sification task in which the Recirculating ONN’s prediction can be simply the cavity with most
energy at the end of computation. The Recirculating ONN models trained for classification are
optimized for the softmaxed optical energy distribution in the output cavities to match a one-hot
encoded label. Given a dataset consisting of a number of input-target pairs (x𝑘, y𝑘), where
x𝑘∈{⃝, △, □},
(2.43a)
y𝑘∈{“triangle”, “square”, “circle”},
(2.43b)
we can transform this categorical data by arbitrarily ordering the elements of the input and label
space and assigning a single-entry vector to each, creating two schemes, encode for x𝑘and decode
for y𝑘:
encode(⃝) =

1
0
0

,
encode(△) =

0
1
0

,
encode(□) =

0
0
1

,
(2.44a)
“triangle” = decode(

1
0
0

),
“square” = decode(

0
1
0

),
“circle” = decode(

0
0
1

).
(2.44b)
Such a scheme for categorical data is an example of one-hot encoding. Let us now proceed with a
dataset:
{(⃝, “circle”), (△, “triangle”), (⃝, “circle”), (□, “square”)}.
(2.45)
It is now trivial to find a matrix which maps encoded inputs to targets, based on the provided dataset,
and verify that it successfully performs the classification task by matching inputs to correct labels,
𝑈=

0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0

,
(2.46)
decode

𝑈encode ⃝
= “circle”,
(2.47a)
decode

𝑈encode △
= “triangle”,
(2.47b)
decode

𝑈encode □
= “square”.
(2.47c)
The problem of training a Recirculating ONN for classification is analogous, but the linear trans-
formation 𝑈is replaced by open-loop controllable system dynamics of a nonlinear optical system,
with SGD on the loss function to find optimal parameters, and both categorical and numerical in-
puts encoded into the initial optical signal phase (§2.16). For a dataset with 𝑚labels there are
𝑚output cavities, and their state at the end of computation is Aoutput(𝑡end) ∈C𝑚. Optical en-
ergy measurement yields |Aoutput(𝑡end)|2 ∈R𝑚, onto which softmax is then applied, converting a
vector of real numbers into a probability distribution.
To make the probability distributions generated by the model accurately match patterns in the
dataset, the parameters of the circuit are searched for that minimize the Cross-Entropy Loss, a
function quantifying the difference between two probability distributions, in this case between: the
Recirculating ONN predictions, and the 100% certain one-hot encoded labels from the dataset.
The combination of softmax and Cross-Entropy Loss is typical for ANN classifiers, and is mathe-
matically equivalent to optimizing Negative Log-Likelihood [12].
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
23
==PAGE:30==
Parameters of the circuit are initialized randomly, unless otherwise specified in the experiment,
such as in §3.3.3, where parts of the circuit are frozen to measure impact on the training. In par-
ticular the configuration of multiport interferometer in training is represented as a parametrized
unitary matrix, rather than a parametrized system of variable phase shifters, to avoid biasing the
optimization space toward banded unitary matrices by local interactions [54].
Backpropagation computes the gradient of the loss function with respect to the optimized param-
eters u by applying the chain rule through the network dynamics. For the Recirculating ONN, the
information propagates through time rather than through structure, as illustrated in Figure 2.10,
similarly to the hidden states of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). The task of optimizing the
system dynamics throughout the entire time period from 𝑡0 to 𝑡end, with the reward signal only
given at the end, is analogous to RNNs and Reinforcement Learning. A chess-playing AI only
learns whether its strategy was valid when it receives or delivers a checkmate, and the training
algorithm should eﬀiciently infer whether a critical mistake was made in the opening or the end-
game. This similarity, and potential advantages of Recirculating ONN for time series prediction,
are discussed in §4.2.
(a)
(b)
F
r(t+dt)
r(t)
u
r(t2)
r(t1)
F
u
F
u
F
u
Figure 2.10: “Unfolding” of the time evolution in the Recirculating ONN or recurrent steps in the
classical RNN (a). Contributions of u to the final output r(𝑡2) can be found by repeated application
of the chain rule via intermediate steps of the computation, such as by Euler discretization (b),
or more eﬀiciently approximated. In Reinforcement Learning, the control signal u is a learned
function of state r, implementing data-driven closed-loop control. Training of the Recirculating
ONN is an open-loop control problem, u signifying the parametrization of the optical system.
In the case of Recirculating ONN, this training is enabled by the torchdiffeq library, which
implements an eﬀicient, differentiable ODE solver, enabling the computation of the gradient,
∇uloss

decode Aoutput(𝑡end), y

,
(2.48)
for the entire evolution in time of the Recirculating ONN from input to readout. The gradient can
be calculated for a single sample from the dataset, a subset of samples (mini-batch), or a batch
containing the entire dataset at a time. Given the limited size of used datasets, the last one is used
for training of Recirculating ONNs. A single step in the training is presented in pseudocode:
# Given:
#
u
: vector of control parameters for u(t)
#
x
: model input
#
y
: target output
1. A0 ←encode(x)
# Encode input to obtain initial condition
24
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:31==
2. Solve IVP:
dA/dt = f(A, u(t)),
A(0) = A0
# Integrate to obtain trajectory A(t)
3. Â ←A(t1)
# Extract solution at final time t1
4. ŷ ←decode(Â)
# Decode final state to obtain prediction
5. L ←Loss(ŷ, y)
# Compute loss between prediction and target
6. dL/du ←dLoss/du
# Evaluate partial derivative of loss w.r.t. control parameters
7. u ←u - learning_step (dL/du)
# Gradient-based update for control parameters
2.2.6
Evaluation
In the learning setup outlined in the previous section (§2.2.5), the softmaxed optical energy dis-
tribution across output cavities is interpreted as the the predicted probability distribution over the
labels. §1.1.2 introduced training and validation losses as measures of the Neural Network training
performance, monitoring learning and generalization. For the models deployed to address real-
world problems, it is important to employ domain specific benchmarks that leverage human exper-
tise to evaluate the quality and robustness of models’ predictions [12, 55]. Bridging that space,
allowing us to better understand the predictive capabilities of the investigated optical system ap-
plied as a Physical Neural Network, are methods such as ROC and its associated AUC metric,
tracing their origin to signal processing but now widely used in statistics and ML to quantify the
statistical power of predictive models.
A
Histogram
Confusion Matrix
TP
TN
FP
FN
Figure 2.11: A signal detector assigns a score to a measurement, which is thresholded for classifica-
tion. Positive signals with score greater than treshold are True Positives (TP), and negative signals
with score below are True Negatives (TN). False Positives and False Negatives are the errors.
In the context of signal detection, the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve evaluates how
well the receiver discriminates between signal and noise. The desired binary output corresponds to
two competing hypotheses (Figure 2.11), which can be denoted as 1 (signal present) and 0 (signal
absent). The discrete decision is made by tresholding the score or probability assigned by the
signal detector. In many applications, False Negatives and False Positives may have very different
meaning, such as between erroneous diagnosis and missed symptom in the healthcare context.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
25
==PAGE:32==
The ROC curve (Figure 2.12) is the plot of the classifier’s TP as a function of FP, produced by
shifting the threshold from −∞to ∞. Every ROC curve contains points (0, 0) and (1, 1), which
correspond to classifying every input as negative or positive. Random guessing makes a line con-
necting these two points. For example, guessing positive 70% of the times falls on (0.3, 0.7). The
perfect classifier reaches the point at (0, 1), for 100% TP rate and 0% FP rate. Binary classifiers
fall in between these two limits, and the greater the Area Under Curve (AUC), the higher the dis-
criminatory power of the predictor.
TP
FP
Perfect classiﬁer
TP
FP
Always guess 1
Fair coin toss
Biased 
coin toss
Always guess 0
Figure 2.12: A ROC curve characterizes a binary classifier’s performance by plotting the true
positive rate against the false positive rate across a range of threshold values, enabling quantification
of its discrimination capability by AUC.
2.3
Delays
Propagation of changes in the electromagnetic field is described by the Maxwell’s equations. In
particular, taking the Faraday’s law, which relates the curl of the electric field to the time derivative
of the magnetic field,
∇× 𝐸= −𝜕𝐵
𝜕𝑡,
(2.49)
then applying a curl operator to both sides,
∇× ∇× 𝐸= −𝜕
𝜕𝑡(∇× 𝐵)𝑎
(2.50)
and using the Ampere’s law, relating the curl of the magnetic field to the time derivative of the
electric field: in the absence of current density,
∇2𝐸= −𝜇𝜖𝜕2
𝜕𝑡2 𝐸.
(2.51)
We recognize this as a wave equation, generically written as
𝜕2𝑢
𝜕𝑥2 = 1
𝑣2
𝜕2𝑢
𝜕𝑡2 ,
(2.52)
with 𝑣= (√𝜇𝜖)−1 representing the wave propagation speed derived from Maxwell’s equations. The
agreement of this result with empirically measured speed of light, first estimated from astronomical
observations in the 17th century, and then confirmed by direct, time-of-flight measurement by
Fizeau in 1848 [56], prompted Maxwell to identify light as an electromagnetic wave [31].
Today, the finite speed of light is exploited in technologies like GPS, where the transmission delay
of signals from satellites is used to precisely triangulate position of mobile devices. A notable
example of an optical circuit whose function relies on the time it takes for the light to travel from
26
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:33==
one side of the circuit to the other is IEX’s “speed bump”. A 61 km coil of optical fiber delib-
erately introduces a 700 microseconds round-trip delay to the stock exchange computer, negating
speed advantages of some high-frequency traders [57]. While the integrated recirculating circuit
architecture investigated in this thesis is orders of magnitude smaller than the IEX’s optical coil,
we evaluate delay’s impact on performed computation, assessing the instantaneous transmission
assumption for training of the circuit in simulation.
In deriving the input-output characteristics of a waveguide segment in §2.1.1, we assumed a steady-
state solution for the electromagnetic field, relating the time-invariant inputs, si, and outputs, so,
with a scattering matrix 𝑆(see Equation 2.8):
so = 𝑆si.
(2.53)
Under the instantaneous transmission assumption, this relationship is extended to time-varying
optical signals, si(𝑡), entering into the waveguide segment
so(𝑡) = 𝑆si(𝑡).
(2.54)
However, a more careful treatment must acknowledge that any change in si(𝑡) takes time to prop-
agate through the waveguide before it appears in so(𝑡). The output of the waveguide segment is
its prior input, that has traversed the waveguide at a speed 𝑐/𝑛. The limit of that speed, with
𝑛= 1 for vacuum, is 𝑐. The speed of light in vacuum defines the light cone, a geometric shape in
4-dimensional Minkowski space,
∥r∥2
𝜏
= 𝑐,
(2.55)
which divides the spacetime into two regions: one that could have been causally influenced by
the event, and another that could not have been, where r is distance from that event in 3 spatial
dimensions, and 𝜏is the time elapsed since the event. Using speed constraint 𝑐/𝑛instead, for
optical signal propagation in the waveguide material, and reducing the problem to one dimension
𝑧(the transverse direction of waveguide), we analogously obtain Figure 2.13 and
𝑧
𝜏= 𝑐
𝑛.
(2.56)
ct
z
segment of a waveguide
Figure 2.13: Light propagates through the waveguide at a finite speed.
Thus, we arrive at time-varying equivalent of Equation 2.8 for a waveguide of length 𝐿:
so(𝑡) = 𝑆si(𝑡−𝜏),
𝜏= 𝐿𝑛
𝑐.
(2.57)
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
27
==PAGE:34==
2.3.1
Delay Differential Equations
Optical device models introduced in §2.1 can be used to build a system model with a state vector
x(𝑡), consisting of complex amplitudes corresponding to stationary modes in devices constituting
that system. Without loss of generality, the dynamics of such a system can be described by ODEs,
as in Equation 2.24:
d
d𝑡x(𝑡) = 𝐹(x(𝑡)).
(2.58)
However, introducing delayed terms results in DDEs, where the system dynamics depend on the
past states of the system,
d
d𝑡x(𝑡) = 𝐹(x(𝑡), x(𝑡−𝜏1), x(𝑡−𝜏2), · · · ).
(2.59)
This shift from ODEs to DDEs can lead to qualitative changes in the system’s behavior. Delay
systems exhibit various special dynamical phenomena, such as oscillation in first-order differen-
tial equations, which are impossible with ODEs without delays, and can be regarded as infinite-
dimensional dynamical systems [8, 58]. For example, consider a simple delay oscillator described
by:
d𝑥
d𝑡= −𝑥(𝑡+ 𝜏)
(2.60)
If we remove the delay (i.e., 𝜏= 0), we get:
d𝑥
d𝑡= −𝑥(𝑡).
(2.61)
This is a simple first-order linear ODE with the solution
𝑥(𝑡) = 𝑥(0) exp(−𝑡),
(2.62)
which describes exponential decay towards zero, a stable equilibrium. However, in presence of
delay 𝜏, the system can periodically oscillate, be asymptotically stable, marginally stable, or unsta-
ble. Linearizing the system around a point in time and asserting the condition for marginal stability
yields 𝜏= 𝜋/2. Assuming initial history 𝑥(𝑡) = 0 for 𝑡< 0, and impulse excitation 𝑥(0) = 1, nu-
merical simulations of the system are shown for two parameters 𝜏in Figure 2.14.
0
200
400
Time
−2
−1
0
1
2
x(t)
(a) 𝜏= 𝜋/2 + 0.01.
0
200
400
Time
−2
−1
0
1
2
x(t)
(b) 𝜏= 𝜋/2 −0.01.
Figure 2.14: Numerical simulation of the delay system presented in Equation 2.60.
Another phenomenon unique to DDEs is propagation of discontinuities: a discontinuity in the
state vector x(𝑡) or its derivative at an initial time propagates periodically through the solution, as
determined by the delay terms. We later observe this behavior in §3.5, in the delayed Recirculating
ONN model with light injected into the cavities at 𝑡0.
28
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:35==
While this thesis only measures performance degradation in presence of delays of the Recirculating
ONN trained in-silico with ODE model, these properties of delay systems have been also exploited
to virtually construct an ONN in a physically single node using time-division multiplexing in [8].
Delay lines are also proposed for a design of an all-optical CPU in [33]. Therefore, they represent
as much of a obstacle as a potential opportunity for the development of ONNs.
2.3.2
DDE Model of the Recirculating ONN
The derivation of the Recirculating ONN’s TCMT model in §2.1.4 can be altered to include delay
terms, particularly the transversal time of the light through the multiport interferometer forth and
back, coupling cavities as described in Equation 2.21. Assuming that the coupling delay between
any two cavities is uniform and equal to 𝜏, we have
si(𝑡) = −𝑈𝑇𝑈so(𝑡−𝜏),
(2.63a)
so(𝑡) = −si(𝑡) +
√
𝐾A(𝑡),
(2.63b)
yielding
si(𝑡) = 𝑈𝑇𝑈

si(𝑡−𝜏) −
√
𝐾A(𝑡−𝜏)

.
(2.64)
Using Equation 2.20a,
si(𝑡) =
√
𝐾
−1 d
d𝑡A(𝑡) −i𝜔A(𝑡) + 𝐾
2 A(𝑡)

,
(2.65)
we obtain a DDE for A(𝑡):
d
d𝑡A(𝑡) = i𝜔A(𝑡) −𝐾
2 A(𝑡) +
√
𝐾𝑈𝑇𝑈
√
𝐾
−1 d
d𝑡A(𝑡−𝜏) −i𝜔A(𝑡−𝜏) −1
2𝐾A(𝑡−𝜏)

. (2.66)
With the optical nonlinearity, the 𝜔in expression 𝜔A(𝑡−𝜏) refers to frequency of the cavity
corresponding to the optical signal A(𝑡−𝜏), not A(𝑡). If any other parameters of the circuit are
time-varying, such as with modulated coupling 𝐾, they must be taken as functions of time in the
derivation of the delayed model.
2.4
Optical Encoding of Information
2.4.1
Amplitude Modulation
Information can be encoded into or decoded from the optical circuit using the amplitude of the
optical signal in the stationary eigenmodes of the resonant cavities, as illustrated in Figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15: Amplitude Modulation.
As demonstrated in Appendix A, the system conserves energy under all conditions and, when
attenuation mechanisms are included (§2.2.4), exhibits global asymptotic stability, converging to
zero energy state over infinite time. This inherent property implies that amplitude-modulated signal
resides within a positively invariant set—once a trajectory of the system enters a low-energy state,
it will never go back to a high-energy state. Thus, low-energy inputs cannot be transformed into
high-energy outputs without external energy sources. Decoding schemes must account for such
constraints to satisfy the condition for learnability formalized in Equation 2.34, e.g. by measuring
relative ratio of amplitudes between cavities, rather than the absolute quantities, or including a bias
cavity discussed in §2.4.3 as an available energy source or sink for the computation.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
29
==PAGE:36==
2.4.2
Phase Modulation
Phase modulation encodes optical information by altering the phase of light. This approach takes
advantage of how phase shifts respond to changes in cavity properties like refractive index or path
length (§2.1.1). An illustration of an phase-modulated input to the Recirculating ONN is presented
in Figure 2.16.
Figure 2.16: Phase Modulation.
Since the system dynamics (Equation 2.24) of the Recirculating ONN are invariant to changes in
phase of all cavities at the same time,
d
d𝑡A(A(𝑡), 𝑡) exp(𝑖𝜃) = d
d𝑡A(A(𝑡) exp(𝑖𝜃), 𝑡),
(2.67)
there is a symmetry constraint on the response of the system, such that
A′(𝑡0) = A(𝑡0)exp(𝑖𝜃) =⇒A′(𝑡end) = A(𝑡end)exp(𝑖𝜃).
(2.68)
The physical explanation for this property is that it is only the relative phase shift between cav-
ities that determines the energy transfer via coupling. This imposes a constraint on the allowed
mappings, unless an additional cavity is included with optical signal with “reference” phase. To
better understand the expressivity of the Recirculating ONN architecture, or the space of achiev-
able input-output mappings, in context of phase encoding, it is helpful to inspect the mathematical
structure of mapping between phase encoded input and arbitrarily decoded output. For a single
cavity, we have
encode(x) = 𝜙(x),
(2.69)
with a boundary condition
𝜙(x) + 2𝜋= 𝜙(x).
(2.70)
In other words, phase encoding on a single cavity is a mapping from an input space onto a point
on a circle. Phase encoding on two cavities is a mapping onto a Cartesian product of two circles:
encode : 𝑋→𝑆1 × 𝑆1 = 𝑇2,
(2.71)
or a torus. Let encoded phase in the first cavity 𝜙1 correspond to first angular coordinate on the
torus, and second encoded phase 𝜙2 to the other angular coordinate. The task of classification can
be thought of as painting the torus, color equal to decode A(𝑡end) for A(𝑡0) = encode(x). Correct
classification is achieved if the torus is painted the same way by time evolution in Recirculating
ONN and consequent decoding, as it is by
encode · 𝑋→𝑌,
(2.72)
for the underlying population of inputs and targets (𝑋,𝑌), that the Recirculating ONN aims to
approximate. The constraint expressed in Equation 2.68, translates to an invariance w.r.t. the
mapping by Recirculating ONN:
[Δ𝜙] =

(𝜙1, 𝜙2) ∈𝑇2  𝜙1 −𝜙2 ≡Δ𝜙
(mod 2𝜋)
	
.
(2.73)
This shows that this two-dimensional encoding only has one degree of freedom as far the Recir-
culating ONN is concerned, which is the phase difference between cavities. Going back to visual
30
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:37==
Figure 2.17: Constraint on mapping from space of naively phase encoded inputs (𝑆1 × 𝑆1 = 𝑇2)
onto the label space achievable by the Recirculating ONN architecture. Each curve on the surface
corresponds to a [Δ𝜙], which produce A(𝑡end) phase shifted along the curve.
analogy, we can only use such recirculating architecture to paint the torus in a stripes pattern, where
points along each stripe are successive decodings of the A(𝑡end) phase shifted linearly from 0 to
2𝜋, as visualized in Figure 2.172.
Adding a reference phase in a bias cavity embeds the encoding in 𝑇2 × 𝑆1 = 𝑇3, specifically onto
a cross section of the hypertorus for which 𝜙3 = 0, and for which the constraint (Equation 2.68)
applied to that hypertorus asserts no equivalence. Such encoding has two degrees of freedom,
phase shift between the first cavity and the bias cavity, and analogously for the second cavity. This
holds for any number of phase encoded input cavities, with embedding of 𝑇𝑛in 𝑇𝑛+1 making the
invariance constraint apply to a higher-dimensional space, without an impact on the embedded
space of phase encodings.
2.4.3
Bias cavities
Figure 2.18: Bias cavity.
The difference between presence and absence of bias cavity (Figure 2.18) is most clearly visible
in a single cavity system, which will be simulated and examined in §3.1. Without another optical
signal to interfere with, the only information processing possible is a phase shift as a function of
energy in the cavity. However, in presence of another optical signal from the bias cavity, the phase
in the original cavity also influences the computation. For large-scale networks, the circuit with a
bias cavity can “tell apart” two phase-encoded inputs, identical in every respect except that a phase
shift is applied uniformly to all cavities. Therefore the bias cavity adds another degree of freedom
to the possible input-output mappings by eliminating the symmetry described in Equation 2.68.
The role of the introduced bias cavity is very similar to the bias term in layers of the DNNs,
which shifts the hyperplane of the linear transform along the perpendicular axis by adding an input-
independent constant to the weighted sum (§1.1.2). As the bias cavity is coupled with others by
a multiport interferometer, it can be coupled with any subset of cavities and have different phase
shift for each of them. Through the computation, bias cavity can be a source of extra energy, or
energy can be removed from the output cavities by transfer to the spare cavity not used for output.
Crucially, bias cavities also increase the dimensionality of the transient state of the computation
2The Recirculating ONN performs a one dimensional computation, but the decoder still has access to the part of
the encoded input ignored by ONN (the phase shift along the curves in Figure 2.17), and a trained decoder could still
achieve an arbitrary mapping. But this approach strays into the territory of designing a problem for a network, rather
than designing a network to solve problems, and it is advantageous to eliminate any such constraints, allowing the
Recirculating ONN architecture to operate with a broader range of decoding schemes.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
31
==PAGE:38==
(analogous to the width of the hidden layers), as will become evident in §3.2 and §3.3.
The initial phase of the bias cavity 𝜙bias is set to zero, as the phase shift relative to any other cavity
is determined by the multiport interferometer. Setting bias cavity phase as a trainable parameter
would be redundant.
2.4.4
Other schemes
The inputs to the system can be encoded in any other parameters of the system, not just light in
the cavities; [59] proposes encoding scheme into physical parameters of the system which enables
direct measurement of gradients needed for training. This advancement can translate into great
acceleration of ONN training. Input can also be redundantly encoded, such as simultaneously into
initial optical signal in the cavity and the circuit’s parameters.
32
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:39==
3
Results
This chapter presents the results of numerical simulations of the Recirculating Optical Neural Net-
work circuit and evaluation of the trained models, based on the TCMT model and Machine Learn-
ing setup shown in the methodology, §2, which theoretically motivated the simulation setup of the
Recirculating ONN circuit simulation with: physically interpreted regularization term, phase mod-
ulation for the encoding scheme, bias cavities, and amplitude modulation for one-hot decoding of
categorical target.
First, the numerical simulation of TCMT model of a single nonlinear cavity (§3.1), and then mul-
tiple coupled nonlinear cavities (§3.2), are presented. The Recirculating ONN architecture is then
applied to a classification task in §3.3, and with temporal degrees of freedom with §3.4. The perfor-
mance degradation of the classifier model in presence of unaccounted delays in the circuit running
its inference is quantitatively measured in §3.5.
3.1
Optical Nonlinearity
Nonlinearities are fundamental to machine learning, enabling neural networks to approximate non-
linear functions essential for solving complex problems. Activation functions such as ReLU, tanh,
and sigmoid introduce these nonlinearities, selected based on their differentiability and their in-
fluence on gradient propagation. Nonlinear optical effects are critical are used to implement and
equivalent of such activation functions in ONNs. A direct analogy is between the activation func-
tion in a classical ANN and the nonlinear component of F in Figure 2.6. Fully optical nonlineari-
ties, such as those enabled by the Kerr effect, provide a scalable mechanism for achieving nonlinear
transformations directly within the optical domain, avoiding the bottlenecks of hybrid architectures,
which may convert a portion of the input optical signal into an analog electric signal [60, 5].
As introduced in the TCMT section on resonant nonlinear cavities, §2.1.3, the Kerr nonlinearity
coeﬀicient 𝛼changes resonant frequency of cavity proportionally the optical energy in the cavity,
𝜔𝑖= 𝜔0,𝑖+ 𝛼𝑖|𝐴𝑖|2.
(3.1)
s   
i
s o
A
Reﬂection
Nonlinear
cavity
Figure 3.1: A cavity coupled with itself via transmission through the waveguide, reflection, and
transmission back, accumulating a phase shift, 𝑠i = −exp(2i𝜙)𝑠o.
Let us consider a single-mode nonlinear cavity coupled to a single-mode waveguide which reflect
light back, adding a phase shift, as illustrated in Figure 3.1. With equations 2.18a and 2.18b:
d𝐴
d𝑡= i𝜔𝐴−𝐾
2 𝐴+
√
𝐾𝑠i,
(3.2a)
𝑠o = −𝑠i +
√
𝐾𝐴.
(3.2b)
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
33
==PAGE:40==
Introducing the self-coupling, equivalent to taking 𝑈= 𝑒𝑖𝜙in Equation 2.21,
𝑠i = −exp(2i𝜙)𝑠o.
(3.3)
Solving for 𝑠i,
𝑠i = −
√
𝐾exp(2i𝜙) (1 −exp(2i𝜙))−1 𝐴,
(3.4)
and deriving the ODE model of the cavity, simplifying the expression with exponentials to a cotan-
gent:
d𝐴
d𝑡= i

𝜔−𝐾
2
1
tan(𝜙)

|               {z               }
∈R
𝐴.
(3.5)
We can define a learning problem to shape the system’s input-output behavior by parametrizing
it and performing optimization, with 𝜔0, 𝛼, 𝐾, and 𝜙as the optimized variables. However, the
terms in system dynamics (Equation 3.5) involving 𝜔0, 𝐾, and 𝜙evaluate to single, constant scalar
value, reducing the system to two degrees of freedom, the second one being the additional phase
accumulated due the nonlinearity.
0.0
0.5
1.0
Time
−1
0
1
Amplitude
Re(A)
Im(A)
(a) Simulated time evolution of the cavity am-
plitude 𝐴(𝑡), computed using parameters from
Table 3.1.
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
|A|
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Accumulated phase shift
α = 2.0
α = 1.0
α = 0.5
α = 0.0
(b) Phase shift Δ𝜙as a function of the initial
cavity amplitude |𝐴| for varying Kerr nonlin-
earity coeﬀicients.
Figure 3.2: Simulated dynamics of the cavity model, including amplitude evolution and nonlinear
phase shift. Based on a numerical model with system dynamics as described in Equation 3.5.
Result of the one-cavity computation of length 𝑡end −𝑡0 is a phase shift Δ𝜙as a function of the
optical energy in the system, as shown in §2.4. A simulation with parameters listed in (Table 3.1
yields solution presented in Figure 3.2a. We then plot the achieved phase shift Δ𝜙as a function
of the initial cavity amplitude |𝐴|, under different values of the Kerr nonlinearity coeﬀicient in
Figure 3.2b.
In the subsequent sections, we will make use of such cavities freely coupled with each other, not just
themselves. Their interactions are time-varying with temporal degrees of freedom, and the outcome
of the computation is dependent on the transient behavior of the controlled system consisting of
coupled resonant cavities.
34
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:41==
Table 3.1: The nonlinear cavity parameters for simulation presented in Figure 3.2.
Parameter
Value
Waveguide phase shift 𝜙
𝜋/4
Dimensionless coeﬀicients
Characteristic timescale
Time of computation
1.0
time
Resonance frequency 𝜔0
1.0
time−1
Kerr nonlinearity coeﬀicient
1.0
time−1energy−1
Cavity-waveguide coupling factor 𝐾
1.0
time−1
3.2
Coupled Cavities
Network of coupled cavities extends the functionality of single-cavity systems by enabling energy
transfer between multiple nonlinear optical resonators. This configuration is proposed for large-
scale ONNs, as it allows the system to represent and process multidimensional data by distributing
energy between the connected cavities.
The cavities are coupled using a programmable multiport interferometer. The phase of signal
within each cavity dictates whether the interference between cavities is constructive or destruc-
tive. The optical nonlinearity enables direct reciprocal influence of amplitude and phase across
the nodes of the network. §2.1.4 contains the derivation of the Recirculating ONN TCMT model,
which was numerically implemented and simulated for a random set of parameters for a system
with six cavities in Figure 3.3a. Then, in Figure 3.3b, we plot the optical energy in one of the six
cavities at the end of the computation, as a function of the initial phase of the optical signal within
that cavity, for four randomly generated sets of circuit parameters. The nonlinearity coeﬀicient is
held constant at 𝛼= 1.0 across all simulated cavities.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Energy
Cavity modes
Total energy
(a) Optical energy in six coupled cavities
as a function of time for a random set of
parameters.
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
Initial Phase
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
|A|2(𝑡end)
(b) Optical energy in a selected cavity at the end of
the computation, as a function of the initial phase of
signal in that cavity, plotted for 4 random sets of circuit
parameters.
Figure 3.3: Simulated dynamics of six coupled cavities.
To isolate the impact of nonlinearity on the output of the computation, a random set of circuit
parameters is sampled and simulated for a range of nonlinearity coeﬀicients 𝛼in Figure 3.4a, and
then an isolated nonlinear cavity is simulated to find a steady-state response to driving signals of
different amplitudes, as a function of detuning 𝜔0.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
35
==PAGE:42==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Initial Phase
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
|A|2
α = 0.0
α = 0.5
α = 1.0
α = 2.0
(a) The impact of an optical nonlinearity on the optical
energy at end of a computation cycle in a selected cav-
ity, in a system of six cavities, as a function of initial
phase in that cavity.
−5
0
5
Detuning
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
|𝑠𝑜|2/|𝑠𝑖|2
|𝑠𝑜| = 0.5
|𝑠𝑜| = 1.0
𝛼= 0.0
(b) Simulated intensity response of an iso-
lated nonlinear cavity as a function of detuning,
against the theoretical solution for 𝛼= 0.
Figure 3.4: The optical nonlinearity in cavities. (a) demonstrates impact of nonlinearity on the
computation, while (b) considers input-output behavior of an isolated nonlinear cavity with pa-
rameters listed in Figure 3.2.
3.3
Recirculating Optical Neural Network
A synthetic dataset was generated for a binary classification task, designed to be not linearly separa-
ble, meaning that a straight line cannot divide the two classes in the feature space. The dataset was
divided into training, validation, and testing sets to monitor overfitting and evaluate generalization.
Figure 3.5 illustrates how the physical implementation of the ONN would perform inference in this
classification task.
Encoder
Bias Cavities
Output
Synthetic dataset
Prediction
Time evolution
Decoder
Input
Figure 3.5: The inference in the Recirculating ONN architecture.
The parameters of the Recirculating ONN are trained in-silico, based on a TCMT simulation of
the system. The learning task for the network is to classify points x in the two-dimensional feature
space with a label 𝑦∈{0, 1},
minimize
E

Loss

decode A(𝑡end), 𝑦

subject to
Equation 2.39
𝐴(𝑡0) = encode(x),
(3.6)
by optimizing the multiport interferometer configuration and cavity parameters. The training, con-
ducted as outlined in Table 3.2, produced a predictive model based on the Recirculating ONN
architecture, with a decision boundary shown in Figure 3.6.
36
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:43==
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
x
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
y
Figure
3.6:
The
input-label
mapping
achieved by a Recirculating ONN model
trained for binary classification on the
synthetic dataset.
Table 3.2: Training parameters.
Training setup
Encoding scheme
Phase
Decoding scheme
Energy one-hot
Loss function
Cross-Entropy
Optimizer
Adam [18]
Learning rate
2 × 10−3
Epochs
1400
Circuit parameters
Bias cavities
2
Regularization 𝜆
10−6
Time of computation
2.0
Computation of ROC (Figure 3.7a) and AUC metric shows that the Recirculating ONN without
temporal degrees of freedom performs about the same as the theoretical limit for a single-layer
McCulloh-Pitts Neuron, calculated by fitting the linear classification model directly to the test data.
The computational structure implemented by the neuromorphic optical circuit achieved AUC of
0.871, compared to 0.876 of the linear fit. Adding temporal degrees of freedom by parametriz-
ing time-varying 𝐾(𝑡) (see §3.4) improved the performance to AUC of 0.936, demonstrating that
adding degrees of freedom to the Recirculating ONN architecture improves its prediction capabil-
ities, leading to it outperforming the upper limit of linear classification.
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
(IV)
(III)
(II)
(I)
(a) ROC curve calculated based on 5000 unseen samples
from the synthetic dataset. (I) Random guessing. (II) Lin-
ear classifier fitted to the test data (the theoretical limit for
a single layer McCulloh-Pitts Neuron, see §1.1.2). (III) Re-
circulating ONN without degrees of freedom (single layer
equivalent).
(IV) Recirculating ONN with time-varying
cavity coupling coeﬀicient (multiple layers equivalent).
0
1
Predicted label
0
1
True label
285
7
25
283
(b) The confusion matrix on 600 unseen sam-
ples for the Recirculating ONN with temporal
degrees of freedom—(IV) in (a).
Figure 3.7: The discriminatory power of the trained classifier based on Recirculating ONN archi-
tecture.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
37
==PAGE:44==
3.3.1
The Dynamics of Prediction
In this model, numerical inputs are normalized to the range [0, 1] and then mapped onto the initial
phase space [0, 2𝜋] for 𝑛cavities, encode(x) ∈𝑇𝑛. Phases in the cavities are the input for the Initial
Value Problem, solved by the differentiable ODE solver using TCMT model of the optical circuit,
while the optical energies are uniformly set to 1. The system evolves for the defined computation
time, and the final output is determined through a one-hot decoding scheme, the distribution of
optical energies across the cavities used to identify the classification label, as described in §2.2.5.
The complete encoding-decoding scheme is illustrated in Figure 3.8a. An evolution in time of the
optical system used for classification is simulated and presented in Figures 3.8b and 3.8c.
Input Cavities
Bias Cavities
Discarded
Evolution of the 
system in time
Output Cavities
Phase
Modulation
Optical 
Energy 
Readout
(a) Different forms of optical information in the Recirculating ONN inference.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time
0
1
2
3
4
Energy
Cavity modes
Total energy
(b) Evolution of energy in the nonlinear
cavities in the trained circuit.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Energy
Fraction of energy in the target cavity
Classification threshold
(c) One hot decoding is performed with optical energy
on the two output cavities. The fraction of energy of
the output cavities that is in the cavity corresponding
to the correct label is plotted through the Recirculating
ONN computation.
Figure 3.8: (a): Encoding and decoding scheme for Recirculating ONN. (b) and (c): A point
sampled from the synthetic dataset, encoded into input optical signal, processed by the trained
Recirculating ONN in a TCMT simulation, has the amplitude of the optical signal in the target
cavity greater than the classification threshold. The data point is correctly classified.
38
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:45==
Each column of the unitary matrix𝑈determines how the energy of an input signal gets redistributed
to the scattering modes on the other side of the multiport interferometer. The full matrix 𝑈for a
trained circuit is visualized in Figure 3.9a. Then, strength of coupling between cavities via twofold
multiport interferometer transversal (𝑈𝑇𝑈) is visualized in Figure 3.9b. Since it is the magnitude
of the coupling, and not phase, which is plotted, the reflection term is inconsequential.
Multiport interferometer (U)
(a) Energy transfer via unitary matrix.
Cavity coupling (U𝑇U)
(b) Coupling between cavities.
Figure 3.9: Parameters of a trained multiport interferometer. Specifically, the magnitude squared of
the coupling is visualized, verified to sum to 1 for each column (conserving energy), and not phase
shift. For Figure 3.9a, the four nodes on top and bottom correspond to each side of the device. For
Figure 3.9b, each pair of nodes, on top and bottom, correspond to the same cavity.
3.3.2
Training Setup
This section outlines the implementation of the software for training Recirculating ONNs. The pro-
gram was developed using PyTorch, a widely adopted library for ML that provides eﬀicient tools
for automatic differentiation and GPU-accelerated computation. PyTorch’s modular architecture
enables the integration of components such as encoder, decoder, and optimizer in a systematic man-
ner. The framework incorporates torchdiffeq, a Python library offering differentiable solvers
for ODEs. These solvers allow ODE-based models to be directly included in the training process,
with support for backpropagation via the adjoint method.
Optimizer
Encoder
Decoder
Loss fn
ODE Solver
TCMT Model
Initial
condition
Parameters
Readout
Dataset 
Handler
Figure 3.10: Schematic diagram of the Machine Learning algorithm implemented to train Recir-
culating ONNs.
The data flow in the iterative training of Recirculating ONNs is shown in Figure 3.10. The process
begins with the dataset handler, which manages input data, sourced external repositories or syn-
thetically generated. The data is processed by the encoder, providing the initial condition for the
differentiable ODE solver, which integrates the system dynamics provided by the TCMT model
given parameters of the circuit updated iteratively by the optimizer, guided by the loss function,
minimizing the error between the decoded output and prediction target.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
39
==PAGE:46==
3.3.3
The Dynamics of Learning
The training of the Recirculating ONN architecture shows consistent decrease in loss on both the
training and validation datasets, demonstrating the model’s capacity to learn non-linearly-separable
decision boundaries and generalize.
The validation loss is sampled every fifth epoch, therefore it should be noted that low-frequency
oscillations in the validation loss plots may arise from aliasing due to sampling below the Nyquist
criterion of step-by-step training instabilities. However, in presented experiments, both aliased and
non-aliased oscillations are damped by taking the average of loss at each epoch for multiple runs,
and instead the statistical, not transient, aspects of learning in different configurations are evaluated.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Epoch
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
Validation Loss
Trained cavities, random U
Random cavities, trained U
Trained cavities and U
(a) Nonlinearity coeﬀicients are uniformly set to 1.0. Other parameters (cavity frequency, coupling with
waveguide, interferometer configuration) are randomly initialized and selectively trained, as specified in the
legend of the plot. Averages of 24 training runs.
0
500
1000
Epoch
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Validation Loss
Trained cavities, random U
0
500
1000
Epoch
Random cavities, trained U
0
500
1000
Epoch
Trained cavities and U
(b) Averages for each tested configuration plotted against individual training runs.
Figure 3.11: (a) Comparison of averages and (b) individual runs for each tested configuration.
Figure 3.11a compares training performance across three configurations of the Recirculating ONN
with an optical nonlinearity and two bias cavities applied to the synthetic dataset: trained mul-
tiport interferometer and random cavity parameters; trained cavities and random interferometer
configuration; and trained both parts of the circuit. Individual runs are presented in Figure 3.11b.
Subsequently, the Recirculating ONN was trained including parameterized nonlinearity (constrained
40
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:47==
only to positive values), uniform across all cavities, and compared to the Recirculating ONN with-
out any nonlinearities in Figure 3.12. As expected, the training performance with trained nonlin-
earity is better. The motivation for enabling training of a global nonlinearity coeﬀicient is that
input optical energies, or other circuit parameters, can be scaled to achieve the same ratios as the
trained model, but, on the other hand, heterogenous nonlinearities across cavities are diﬀicult to
practically implement.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Epoch
0.550
0.575
0.600
0.625
0.650
0.675
0.700
Validation Loss
𝛼= 0
Trained 𝛼
Figure 3.12: Results of experiment, where Recirculating ONNs are trained without nonlinearity,
and with uniform, trained nonlinearity in the cavities. All parameters are randomly initialized, with
exception of nonlinearity coeﬀicient set to 0.09. Average of 18 runs.
3.4
Temporal Degrees of Freedom
The Recirculating ONN architecture offers two primary ways of expansion to increase its expres-
sivity: in breadth, expanding spatial footprint of the circuit by adding more bias cavities, which is
equivalent to wider hidden layers; and in depth, adding temporal degrees of freedom and increas-
ing computation time, which are equivalent to increasing the number of hidden layers, keeping
the circuit the same but varying some of its parameters in time. In this section, we train models
with temporal degrees of freedom in cavity-waveguide coupling 𝐾(𝑡), as well as with stochastic
computation time for regularization, as described in §2.2.4.
3.4.1
Iris dataset
The Iris dataset, sourced from the UCI ML Repository, is a popular test case for statistical classi-
fication tasks. Comprising 150 samples of iris flowers categorized into three species (Iris setosa,
Iris versicolor, and Iris virginica), the dataset includes four morphological features: sepal length,
sepal width, petal length, and petal width. The dataset is visualized in Figure B.1 of Appendix B.
3.4.2
Prediction with temporal degrees of freedom
The dataset was divided into three sets: 120 samples for training, 15 for validation, and 15 withheld
from the process until the final test. The Recirculating ONN with one bias cavity and time-varying
coupling coeﬀicient 𝐾for each cavity, parameterized as a differentiable step function, successfully
learned the distribution and correctly classified the fifteen withheld test samples. The inter-cavity
coupling parameters and the inference step of the network are presented in Figure 3.13.
To examine the time-varying cavity-waveguide coupling coeﬀicients 𝐾(𝑡), we analyze parameters
of cavities from all trained models by their training configuration: no temporal degrees of freedom,
temporal degrees of freedom, and temporal degrees of freedom with stochastic computation time;
and we take the average value at the end of computation, ¯𝐾(𝑡end), as well as the average for the entire
computation time ¯𝐾. We define 𝜁= ¯𝐾(𝑡end)/ ¯𝐾and find it for 12 models trained with stochastic
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
41
==PAGE:48==
Cavity coupling (U𝑇U)
(a) Learned coupling between cavities.
0
1
2
Time
0
1
2
3
4
5
K
(b) Learned coupling coeﬀicients of each cavity, vary-
ing in time as differentiable step functions.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy
Cavity modes
Total energy
(c) Evolution in time of the Recirculating
ONN with temporal degrees of freedom.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Energy
Fraction of energy in the target cavity
Classification threshold
(d) Classification performed by the circuit.
Figure 3.13: Selected parameters of a Recirculating ONN with temporal degrees of freedom trained
on the Iris dataset are plotted in (a) and (b). A sample inference step is presented in (c) and (d).
computation time and 14 without. For the configuration without temporal degrees of freedom, 𝜁0
is trivially 1, as all coeﬀicients are constant in time.
In presence of stochastic computation time, 𝜁SD = 1.04, while without 𝜁= 1.44. This is visually
displayed in Figure 3.14a. Since coupling strength influences the magnitude of the energy transfer
in and from cavity, we expect that larger ¯𝐾(𝑡end) leads to greater d
d𝑡A(𝑡end). The loss function is
minimized when the decoded end state is equal to the target 𝑦at the end of computation, but with
stochastic computation time, the optimized quantity is
E

loss decode (A(𝑡)) , y  𝑡

,
(3.7)
across the distribution of random computation times. Therefore, while non-regularized model can
be optimized to assume target value exactly at the moment of readout, we expect the regularized
model to keep the prediction constant around the mean computation time,
d
d𝑡E decode(A(𝑡end) = 0.
(3.8)
42
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:49==
Fixed
Stochastic
Computation time
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
𝜁
(a) Coupling of cavities at the end of
the computation was reduced in models
trained with stochastic computation time.
NO/F
O/F
NO/S
O/S
Cavity / Computation time
0
2
4
6
8
| d
d𝑡|A(𝑡end)|2|
(b) The derivative of optical energy in Output (O) and Non-
Output (NO) cavities at 𝑡end for models trained with fixed (F)
and stochastic (S) computation time.
Figure 3.14: Examination of the temporal degrees of freedom in the trained models.
To confirm that, we sample 10 random inputs from the input space for each of the trained models
and plot the magnitude of derivative of optical energy at 𝑡end in output and non-output cavities,
for models trained with stochastic computation time and without. The results are plotted in Fig-
ure 3.14b. It shows that output cavities in models trained with fixed computation time have the
greatest derivative of optical energy towards the end of computation, which may be an undesirable
property in case of imprecise readout time. This shows that the design of the training of the Recir-
culating ONN can shape its various other properties, and that while in this case the regularization
technique did not result in improvement in generalization or the prediction certainty, it remains a
valuable design tool.
To examine the learned multiport interferometer configurations, we take cavity-cavity coupling
matrices (𝑈𝑇𝑈) of trained models by configuration and find the average for each parameter, and plot
it in Figure 3.15. The cavity coupling for the models without temporal degrees of freedom is more
banded, with stronger coupling with itself than with other cavities. The ratio of on-diagonal (self-
coupling) terms to total sum (both self-coupling and inter-cavity coupling) is 0.357 for the models
without temporal degrees of freedom, and 0.304 for models with temporal degrees of freedom.
Models trained with stochastic computation time yield 0.357, the same as models without temporal
degrees of freedom. This suggests that the cavities may become more coupled as the energy transfer
can be more finely controlled by other parameters through time, but the evidence is insuﬀicient for
any definite conclusion.
3.4.3
Training with temporal degrees of freedom
40 Recirculating ONNs were trained, 14 with temporal degrees of freedom, 14 without as a base-
line, and 12 with temporal degrees of freedom and stochastic computation time. The optimized
variables were: frequencies and coupling coeﬀicients, either fixed or varying in time, of each cavity,
one nonlinearity coeﬀicient for all cavities, as well as the multiport interferometer configuration.
The test showed improvement in performance with temporal degrees of freedom, but no noticeable
improvement with the stochastic regularization, as presented in Figure 3.16. The same experiment
was then repeated on a Tic-Tac-Toe Endgame dataset, also sourced from the UCI ML Repository,
with 9 features and 1 bias cavity for 10 cavities total. This model has 140 trainable parameters with
temporal degrees of freedom and 120 parameters without. The average of 12 baseline runs and 7
with temporal degrees of freedom, 4 of which were with stochastic depth, show that temporal de-
grees of freedom improve performance, but that the regularization by stochastic computation time
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
43
==PAGE:50==
Cavity coupling (no TDoF)
(a) No temporal degrees of free-
dom.
Cavity coupling (TDoF+SD)
(b) Temporal degrees of freedom
and stochastic computation time.
Cavity coupling (TDoF)
(c) Temporal degrees of freedom
(fixed computation time).
Figure 3.15: Comparison of learned multiport interferometer configurations. Average of each con-
nection for all models trained in that configuration.
is also unsuccessful in improving performance, as presented in Figure 3.16b.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Epoch
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
Validation Loss
Baseline
Temporal DoFs
Temporal DoFs (SD)
(a) Iris dataset. Averages from 40 training runs.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Epoch
0.60
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
0.70
Validation Loss
Baseline
Temporal DoFs
Temporal DoFs (SD)
(b) Tic-Tac-Toe Endgame dataset. Averages from 19
training runs.
Figure 3.16: Adding temporal degrees of freedom improves training of the Recirculating ONN on
the Iris and Tic-Tac-Toe Endgame datasets. In the Iris dataset, increase of validation loss in the
second half of the training for the baseline model suggests overfitting, as training loss continued
to decline. A more complex model, with temporal degrees of freedom, continues improving its
accuracy on unseen data. On the other hand, adding stochastic computation time for regulariza-
tion does not yield any substantial improvement in this case. With Tic-Tac-Toe Endgame dataset,
we similarly observe performance improvement with temporal degrees of freedom but not with
additionally attempted regularization.
3.5
Delays
Delayed model derived in §2.3.2, with parameters of the Recirculating ONN trained on ODE model
in §3.3, was implemented in a Python DDE solver library ddeint, with regularization term of orig-
inal predictive model present in form of attenuation (§2.2.4). The results of a repeated experiment,
first presented in Figure 3.8c, here with modelled delay, are shown in Figure 3.17. Qualitative
inspection of the cavity dynamics shows presence of phenomena characteristic of DDEs, as well
as robustness of the prediction.
44
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:51==
The degradation of performance of Recirculating ONN models in presence of delays is evaluated
quantitatively on 100 points sampled from the synthetic dataset, and presented in Figure 3.18.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time
0
1
2
3
4
Energy
Cavity modes
Total energy
(a) Evolution of energy in the nonlinear
cavities in the trained circuit in presence of
delay 𝜏= 0.1.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time
0.2
0.4
0.6
Energy
Fraction of energy in the target cavity
Classification threshold
(b) The dynamics of classification in a Recirculating
ONN circuit in presence of delays.
Figure 3.17: The point from synthetic dataset previously analyzed in Figures 3.8c and 3.8b is
simulated with delay. The piecewise appearance of the cavity energy is due propagation of dis-
continuities, characteristic of DDEs. Total energy in cavities does not stay constant, as in the time
between when optical signal is emitted from the cavity and it is absorbed by another cavity, its
energy is not in the cavities.
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
τ=0.0
τ=0.01
τ=0.3
τ=0.6
τ=1.0
(a) Small delays nudge the ROC curve, while larger ones
introduce substantial systematic error that causes the Recir-
culating ONN to underperform random guessing.
10−2
10−1
τ (log scale)
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
AUC
(b) The performance of the trained Recirculat-
ing ONN is stable with delays at least an order
of magnitude smaller than computation time,
and then decreases, reaching the level of ran-
dom guessing at 𝜏/(𝑡end −𝑡0) ≈0.35.
Figure 3.18: The degradation in performance of a trained Recirculating ONN model trained on an
ODE-based simulation, in presence of delays
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
45
==PAGE:52==
46
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:53==
4
Discussion
This thesis theoretically investigated the optical system as a spatially-compact ML hardware accel-
erator for inference, and demonstrated the training of the Recirculating ONN architecture in simu-
lation. As the system is a neuromorphic optical computer for AI acceleration, requiring low-level
optimization for ML workload, it must be realized in a close hardware-software co-development.
This chapter discusses possible directions that the Recirculating ONN could take.
4.1
Realizing the Recirculating ONN
Many insects have a larval form that is optimized for extracting energy and nutrients
from the environment and a completely different adult form that is optimized for the
very different requirements of traveling and reproduction. — Distilling the Knowledge
in a Neural Network, Geoffrey Hinton et al., 2015 [61]
The implementation of the system may be constrained by any of the following:
• Latency. Achieving minimal response times requires a limited computation time and high-
frequency modulators for temporal degrees of freedom.
• Power eﬀiciency. To physically demonstrate an energy eﬀiciency advantage, the selection
of variable optical devices may be restricted by their energy consumption per computation.
• Versatility. Some parameters of the circuit can be optimized for a variety of ML tasks and
then fixed in hardware, while others remain programmable so the circuit can support dif-
ferent AI models. At one extreme, every trained parameter is fixed, tailoring the circuit to
a single predictive model. At the other extreme, the PIC can use a programmable multi-
port interferometer to dynamically couple an appropriate number of cavities and adjust its
variable devices to run inference on any combination of small Recirculating ONN models
simultaneously, or, by communication with other PICs, a large Recirculating ONN virtually
on a number of circuits.
• Spatial size. The Recirculating ONN’s architectural advantage is that it enables temporal
degrees of freedom in the predictive model by modulation of control signals in time (§2.2),
as opposed to spatial degrees of freedom available in other ONN architectures, such as in
[2], which necessarily increase circuit’s size.
With these requirements in mind, the design process could move forward as follows:
1. Collect available degrees of freedom. Establish a taxonomy of available types of modula-
tors and other optical devices whose parameters can be optimized in training. For variable
components, note at what frequencies they can be modulated, as this will determine possible
temporal degrees of freedom.
2. Define encoding and decoding schemes. What kind of inference will the Recirculating
ONN perform? If input is encoded by modulation of light in the cavities, the dimensionality
of the data highly influences the spatial size of the circuit. It is also possible for the cavities to
take a lower-dimensional embedding of the input, e.g. by using another trained ONN as the
encoder. This can be conversely applied to decoding. It is important to analyze the degrees
of freedom and controllability of the encoding from the circuit’s perspective, as in §2.4.
3. Define the circuit design space. The proposed Recirculating ONN circuit can be thought
of as the optical equivalent of the classical RNN unit, see §4.2. Recurrent units are rarely
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
47
==PAGE:54==
used in isolation, but rather as parts of bigger AI architectures, such as in the Transformer
powering cutting-edge LLMs [26]. The coupled cavities of the Recirculating ONN may be
used as a building block for more elaborate ONN architecture, whether by including optical
encoder, as proposed in the previous point of the list, or by otherwise expanding the circuit.
4. Set up training. Define which parameters of the models are trainable. Consider the options:
end-to-end supervised learning, as in this thesis; semi-supervised learning, such as with
unsupervised autoencoder ONN [62] and a supervised classifier Recirculating ONN; model
distillation, where a larger classical ANN learns to solve the problem and the Recirculating
ONN is trained to clone the ANN’s outputs [61, 63]. For large Recirculating ONN models, it
may be prudent to investigate scaling of the performance of the model with various degrees
of freedom, to make sure that they are eﬀiciently allocated [49]. Automated hyperparameter
search, covering as much of the circuit design space as possible, could also greatly improve
the performance.
5. Define data flow. Eﬀicient data flow management is critical for minimizing energy con-
sumption and latency in Recirculating ONNs. Trained parameters for variable optical de-
vices, used for control of the temporal degrees of freedom, should be preferentially stored
within the device or accessed from integrated memory rather than an off-chip DRAM, to
reduce energy and latency access overhead. Weight-stationary data flow relies on perform-
ing inference repeatedly on the same set of weights, with different inputs [64]. Temporal
degrees of freedom in the Recirculating ONN are an example of the output-stationary data
flow, where the intermediate results stay in place (in the cavities), and the weights are changed
as the cavities undergo evolution under different system dynamics, and only the final result
goes off to be read-out and stored in an external memory1. For ONNs, optical weights en-
coding offers performance improvement over use of electro-optic devices [43], as do many
other solutions eliminating electric-optical conversions in the computation [5].
Future work will require iterative hardware-software co-design to validate these principles exper-
imentally, refine parameter training process, and explore hybrid architectures that integrate the
coupled resonant cavities of the Recirculating ONN architecture with other photonic or electronic
modules.
4.2
Recirculating ONN as a times series model
Time series datasets consist of observations over time, capturing how a process evolves and en-
abling identification of patterns and prediction of future states. Because the evolution of a system
may depend on many previous states, specialized approaches are required to effectively capture
these temporal correlations. RNNs are a widely used class of models for time series data, as they
maintain hidden states that encapsulate past context.
However, they process inputs at discrete intervals, unable to process asynchronous data streams. By
contrast, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) use event-driven communication through asynchronous
spikes realized in simulation or analog neuromorphic hardware [66]. This makes them well-suited
e.g. for event cameras in robotics, which capture brightness changes at each pixel independently
rather than producing fixed-rate frames [67].
Recirculating ONNs are conceptually similar to RNNs (Figure 4.1), with intermediate values of
the computation being equivalent to the hidden RNN layer. However, unlike RNNs, Recirculating
ONNs operate in continuous time, rather than discrete steps. The analog, continuous-time nature of
optical hardware means the system can admit continuous-time or asynchronous inputs, and produce
1A strategy successfully implemented by ShiDianNao hardware accelerator for CNNs was to fit all of the parameters
in an on-chip SRAM, with a result of 60x improvement in eﬀiciency [65].
48
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:55==
such outputs. A real-time Recirculating ONN with dedicated input and output cavities at each
instance can potentially offer lower latency, making it an appealing option for applications such as
robotics.
x(t1)
y(t1)
x(t2)
y(t2)
x(t3)
y(t3)
x(t4)
y(t4)
Recirculating ONN
Recurrent NN
x1
y1
x1
y1
x1
y1
Figure 4.1: Comparison of a classical RNN architecture and Recirculating ONN.
4.3
Recirculating ONN as a diffusion model
Diffusion models are generative DNNs that learn to synthesize images and video by iteratively
reversing a gradual noising process, gaining capability to transform random noise into desired
outputs [68, 69]. Denoising autoencoders (DAEs) are neural architectures trained to map noisy
inputs to clean reconstructions, preserving the original data structure [70]. Both models work in
the same dimensions: DAEs directly restore clean data from noisy inputs, while diffusion models
iteratively refine the output.
The iterative nature of transformation and preservation of dimensionality make them potentially
suited for Recirculating ONNs (Figure 4.2). Its dimensionality is similarly fixed across the net-
work’s depth, and any stochasticity in the computation time, such as by deliberate regularization
(see §2.2.4) or imprecise measurement, “incentivizes” the system to behave like a diffusion model
in the last part of the computation, rather than overfit its target state at a specific moment in time.
Data
Noise
Data
Noise
Injecting noise in the forward process
Generating samples in the backward process
Figure 4.2: Diffusion models are trained to reverse the noising process. Adapted from [68].
4.4
Potential applications
This section identifies key technologies and aspects of the recirculating design for several devel-
opment trajectories defined by potential applications.
4.4.1
Edge computing
Edge computing for AI inference involves deploying machine learning models directly on devices
or near data sources, such as smartphones, sensors, Internet-of-Things devices, or small distributed
data centers. This approach addresses latency sensitivity, bandwidth limitations, and privacy con-
cerns associated with centralized processing.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
49
==PAGE:56==
The AI model for Recirculating ONN hardware accelerator could be obtained by model distillation,
with a larger classical ANN trained on any arbitrary ML problem, and then ONN trained by end-to-
end supervised learning in simulation to replicate ANN’s outputs across the input space. Such an
optical circuit can comprise of the recirculating unit and feed-forward encoder and decoder ONN
layers, as presented in Figure 4.3. This architecture would be suitable for classification, real-time
time series prediction, or generative applications.
Evolution in time
with temporal 
degrees of freedom
Lower-dimensional
embedding
Modulator
Feed-forward
encoder
Feed-forward
decoder
Recirculating
unit
Read-out
Figure 4.3: Recirculating ONN architecture for edge inference, with trained auxiliary encoding
and decoding ONN layers, using multiport inteferometers for propagation between layers, and an
all-optical or electro-optical (with partial readout) nonlinearities as activation functions [2]. The
embedding used as input to the recirculating unit can be lower or higher dimensional, and is subject
to hyperparameter optimization. The sketch includes a bias cavity for the recirculating unit. The
feed-forward encoder can be trained in a supervised way with the rest of the circuit, or can be
pre-trained with unsupervised learning as a section of an autoencoder.
4.4.2
Generative AI acceleration
In this application, the Recirculating ONN serves as a memory component within a large genera-
tive model. The role is similar to that of RNN or Long Short-Term Memory unit, and makes the
proposed circuit would be an optical equivalent of a memristor [71], retaining context from previ-
ous text tokens or time series data. Each recirculating PIC would have many cavities that can be
reconfigured and connected arbitrarily via multiport interferometers and by optical communication
between chips. Such a design would enable the construction of virtual large-scale Recirculating
ONNs, where one model might span several PICs. The presence of delays is expected to be signif-
icant in both the design and operation of such optical clusters.
The encoding scheme should enable training in the optical system by direct measurement of loss
gradient (see [59]), as training in-silico by simulation could be prohibitively ineﬀicient for very
large models.
4.4.3
Microrobotics
This scenario is more speculative than the previous ones yet demonstrates the potential advantages
of the recirculating design. Microrobots can be directed by optical signals to perform tasks such
as mechanical actuation [72]. A spatially minimal Recirculating ONN could provide a substantial
increase in computational capacity for these systems. In this context, end-to-end supervised learn-
ing of the entire optical circuit in simulation, followed by manufacturing of the circuit with fixed
parameters, may be necessary to achieve the minimal size.
50
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:57==
5
Conclusion
This thesis has presented the design, modeling, simulation, and the results of application of the Re-
circulating ONN architecture to classification tasks. After positioning the proposed circuit within
a broader context in §1, a physical model was derived using TCMT and applied to an ML task in
§2. The Recirculating ONN was examined from both control theory and ML perspectives, includ-
ing detailed discussions of its degrees of freedom, learning constraints, encoding and decoding
schemes, and regularization strategies. In §3, Recirculating ONN models were trained and evalu-
ated in simulation, and both the training process and prediction dynamics of a trained model were
investigated. The discriminatory power analysis showed that the Recirculating ONN achieves ex-
pressivity matching that of a single-layer neural network, and that introducing temporal degrees of
freedom improves performance beyond that. The impact of stochastic computation time on model’s
training and prediction were tested, and the performance degradation in presence of unaccounted
delays was quantitatively evaluated using delay model of the optical circuit. Finally, §4 addressed
the potential applications, design requirements, and key enabling technologies necessary for suc-
cessful implementation of this system.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
51
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
Di Zhu et al. “Integrated photonics on thin-film lithium niobate”. In: Advances in Optics
and Photonics 13.2 (May 2021). ISSN: 1943-8206. DOI: 10.1364/aop.411024. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1364/AOP.411024.
[2]
R. Hamerly et al. “Large-Scale Optical Neural Networks Based on Photoelectric Multipli-
cation”. In: Physical Review X 9.2 (2019). DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevX.9.021032.
[3]
Chris Miller. Chip War: The Fight for the World’s Most Critical Technology. Simon & Schus-
ter, 2022. ISBN: 978-1982172008.
[4]
DeepSeek-AI et al. DeepSeek-V3 Technical Report. 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2412.19437.
[5]
Peter L. McMahon. “The physics of optical computing”. In: Nature Reviews Physics 5.12
(Oct. 2023). ISSN: 2522-5820. DOI: 10.1038/s42254-023-00645-5. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/s42254-023-00645-5.
[6]
Mingxiao Li et al. “Lithium niobate photonic-crystal electro-optic modulator”. In: Nature
Communications 11.1 (Aug. 2020). ISSN: 2041-1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-17950-7.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17950-7.
[7]
Logan G. Wright et al. “Deep physical neural networks trained with backpropagation”. In:
Nature 601 (2022). DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-04223-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-021-04223-6.
[8]
Genki Furuhata, Tomoaki Niiyama, and Satoshi Sunada. “Physical Deep Learning Based
on Optimal Control of Dynamical Systems”. In: Phys. Rev. Appl. 15 (3 Mar. 2021). DOI:
10 . 1103 / PhysRevApplied . 15 . 034092. URL: https : / / link . aps . org / doi / 10 . 1103 /
PhysRevApplied.15.034092.
[9]
Jack K Steehler. “Understanding Moore’s Law—Four Decades of Innovation”. en. In: J.
Chem. Educ. 84.8 (Aug. 2007).
[10]
Shupeng Ning et al. Photonic-Electronic Integrated Circuits for High-Performance Com-
puting and AI Accelerators. 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14806.
[11]
Sudip Shekhar et al. Roadmapping the Next Generation of Silicon Photonics. 2024. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15820.
[12]
Moritz Hardt and Benjamin Recht. Patterns, predictions, and actions: A story about machine
learning. 2021. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.05242.
[13]
BBC News. Czech deer still avoid Iron Curtain. Accessed: 2025-01-03. Apr. 2014. URL:
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-27129727.
[14]
Aristotle. Aristotle in 23 Volumes, Vol. 21. Trans. by H. Rackham. Harvard University Press;
London, William Heinemann Ltd., 1944.
[15]
Marshall William McMurran. Achieving Accuracy: A Legacy of Computers and Missiles.
Xlibris, 2009. ISBN: 1436381061.
[16]
Arthur L. Samuel. “Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers. I”. In:
Computer Games I. Springer, 1988. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4613-8716-9_14.
[17]
Aman Sinha and John C Duchi. “Learning Kernels with Random Features”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by D. Lee et al. Vol. 29. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2016. URL: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper _ files / paper / 2016 / file /
e70611883d2760c8bbafb4acb29e3446-Paper.pdf.
[18]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.” In:
ICLR (Poster). Ed. by Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun. 2015. URL: http : / / dblp . uni -
trier.de/db/conf/iclr/iclr2015.html#KingmaB14.
52
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:59==
[19]
DeepSeek-AI et al. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Rein-
forcement Learning. 2025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948.
[20]
Zhenting Qi et al. Quantifying Generalization Complexity for Large Language Models. 2024.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01769.
[21]
The New York Times. “Electronic ’Brain’ Teaches Itself”. In: The New York Times (July 13,
1958). Accessed via TimesMachine: 2024-02-03.
[22]
Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert. Perceptrons: An Introduction to Computational Ge-
ometry. MIT Press, 1969.
[23]
Stephen A. Campbell. Fabrication engineering at the micro- and nanoscale / Stephen A
Campbell, University of Minnesota. eng. Fourth edition. Oxford series in electrical and com-
puter engineering. Oxford University Press, 2013 - 2013. ISBN: 9780199861224.
[24]
Sarah Fallon. The Secret History of the First Microprocessor, the F-14, and Me. The Big
Story. Wired. Dec. 23, 2020. URL: https://www.wired.com/story/secret-history-of-the-
first-microprocessor-f-14/ (visited on 01/07/2025).
[25]
Brad Smith. “ARM and Intel Battle over the Mobile Chip’s Future”. In: Computer 41.5
(2008). DOI: 10.1109/MC.2008.142.
[26]
Wayne Xin Zhao et al. A Survey of Large Language Models. 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2303.18223.
[27]
Norman P. Jouppi et al. In-Datacenter Performance Analysis of a Tensor Processing Unit.
2017. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.04760.
[28]
Jason Wei et al. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models.
2023. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.
[29]
Febin P. Sunny et al. “A Survey on Silicon Photonics for Deep Learning”. In: J. Emerg.
Technol. Comput. Syst. 17.4 (June 2021). ISSN: 1550-4832. DOI: 10.1145/3459009. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3459009.
[30]
Matthew V. D’Ortenzio et al. “Operating LADEE: Mission architecture, challenges, anoma-
lies, and successes”. In: 2015 IEEE Aerospace Conference. 2015. DOI: 10.1109/AERO.
2015.7118961.
[31]
James Clerk Maxwell. “A dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field”. In: Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London 155 (1865).
[32]
William R. Clements et al. An Optimal Design for Universal Multiport Interferometers.
2017. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.08788.
[33]
Michael Kissner et al. “An All-Optical General-Purpose CPU and Optical Computer Ar-
chitecture”. In: Journal of Lightwave Technology 42.22 (Nov. 2024). ISSN: 1558-2213. DOI:
10.1109/jlt.2024.3458459. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2024.3458459.
[34]
Zhexin Zhao, Cheng Guo, and Shanhui Fan. “Connection of temporal coupled-mode-theory
formalisms for a resonant optical system and its time-reversal conjugate”. In: Phys. Rev. A
99 (3 Mar. 2019). DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.99.033839. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevA.99.033839.
[35]
Jan M. Rabaey, Anantha Chandrakasan, and Borivoje Nikolić. Digital Integrated Circuits:
A Design Perspective. 2nd. Prentice Hall, 2002. ISBN: 978-0130909961.
[36]
John D. Joannopoulos et al. Photonic Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light (Second Edition).
Princeton University Press, 2008. ISBN: 0691124566.
[37]
Ghent University Photonics Research Group. Reconfigurable Photonic Circuits. https://
photonics.intec.ugent.be/research/topics.asp?ID=197. Accessed: 2024-12-23. 2024.
[38]
A .W. Snyder and J. Love. Optical Waveguide Theory. 1st ed. Springer, 1983. ISBN: 0412099500.
[39]
Dirk Jalas et al. “What is – and what is not – an optical isolator”. In: Nature Photonics 7
(Aug. 2013). DOI: 10.1038/nphoton.2013.185. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.
2013.185.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
53
==PAGE:60==
[40]
Wonjoo Suh, Zheng Wang, and Shanhui Fan. “Temporal coupled-mode theory and the pres-
ence of non-orthogonal modes in lossless multimode cavities”. In: IEEE Journal of Quantum
Electronics 40.10 (2004). DOI: 10.1109/JQE.2004.834773.
[41]
Y. Lecun et al. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE 86.11 (1998). DOI: 10.1109/5.726791.
[42]
Georgios Sinatkas et al. “Electro-optic modulation in integrated photonics”. In: Journal of
Applied Physics 130.1 (July 2021). ISSN: 0021-8979. DOI: 10.1063/5.0048712. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1063/5.0048712.
[43]
P. Pintus, M. Dumont, V. Shah, et al. “Integrated non-reciprocal magneto-optics with ultra-
high endurance for photonic in-memory computing”. In: Nature Photonics 19 (2025). DOI:
10.1038/s41566-024-01549-1.
[44]
J. Beller and L. Shao. “Acousto-optic modulators integrated on-chip”. In: Light Science &
Applications 11.1 (2022). DOI: 10.1038/s41377-022-00928-z.
[45]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1512.03385.
[46]
Boris Hanin and Mark Sellke. Approximating Continuous Functions by ReLU Nets of Mini-
mal Width. 2018. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.11278.
[47]
Huashu Qin. “On the controllability of a nonlinear control system”. In: Computers & Math-
ematics with Applications 10.6 (1984). ISSN: 0898-1221. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
0898- 1221(84)90074- 9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0898122184900749.
[48]
Ronald M Hirschorn. “Controllability in nonlinear systems”. In: Journal of Differential
Equations 19.1 (1975). ISSN: 0022-0396. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0396(75)
90017-0. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022039675900170.
[49]
Jared Kaplan et al. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. 2020. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2001.08361.
[50]
Rachel Nicks, Robert Allen, and Stephen Coombes. Phase and amplitude responses for de-
lay equations using harmonic balance. 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.17356.
[51]
Per Christian Hansen. Discrete Inverse Problems: Insight and Algorithms. Fundamentals
of Algorithms FA07. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), 2010. ISBN:
978-0-89871-696-2. DOI: 10.1137/1.9780898718836.
[52]
Gao Huang et al. Deep Networks with Stochastic Depth. 2016. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1603.09382.
[53]
M. Eren Akbiyik. Data Augmentation in Training CNNs: Injecting Noise to Images. 2023.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.06855.
[54]
Sunil Pai et al. “Matrix Optimization on Universal Unitary Photonic Devices”. In: Physical
Review Applied 11.6 (June 2019). ISSN: 2331-7019. DOI: 10 . 1103 / physrevapplied . 11 .
064044. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.11.064044.
[55]
Kiri Wagstaff. Machine Learning that Matters. 2012. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1206.
4656.
[56]
Claudia Maraston. “A brief history of the speed of light”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 2877 (2024). DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2877/1/012067. URL: https://iopscience.
iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-6596/2877/1/012067.
[57]
Matt Turner. The New York Stock Exchange is slowing down trading for a key market. Ac-
cessed: 2024-12-21. Jan. 2017. URL: https://www.businessinsider.com/nyse-is-slowing-
down-trading-for-a-key-market-2017-1.
[58]
F. T. Arecchi et al. “Two-dimensional representation of a delayed dynamical system”. In:
Phys. Rev. A 45 (7 Apr. 1992). DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.45.R4225. URL: https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.45.R4225.
54
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:61==
[59]
Clara C. Wanjura and Florian Marquardt. Fully Non-Linear Neuromorphic Computing with
Linear Wave Scattering. 2023. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.16181.
[60]
Ian A. D. Williamson et al. “Reprogrammable Electro-Optic Nonlinear Activation Functions
for Optical Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics
26.1 (2020). DOI: 10.1109/JSTQE.2019.2930455.
[61]
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network.
2015. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.
[62]
Cyprien Gille, Frederic Guyard, and Michel Barlaud. Semi-supervised classification using
a supervised autoencoder for biomedical applications. 2022. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2208.10315.
[63]
Enric Boix-Adsera. Towards a theory of model distillation. 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2403.09053.
[64]
Cristina Silvano et al. A Survey on Deep Learning Hardware Accelerators for Heterogeneous
HPC Platforms. 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15552.
[65]
Zidong Du et al. “ShiDianNao: Shifting vision processing closer to the sensor”. In: 2015
ACM/IEEE 42nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). 2015.
DOI: 10.1145/2749469.2750389.
[66]
Kai Malcolm and Josue Casco-Rodriguez. A Comprehensive Review of Spiking Neural Net-
works: Interpretation, Optimization, Eﬀiciency, and Best Practices. 2023. URL: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2303.10780.
[67]
Bharatesh Chakravarthi et al. Recent Event Camera Innovations: A Survey. 2024. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2408.13627.
[68]
Andrew Melnik et al. Video Diffusion Models: A Survey. 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2405.03150.
[69]
Ling Yang et al. Diffusion Models: A Comprehensive Survey of Methods and Applications.
2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.00796.
[70]
Yabin Zhang et al. Point-DAE: Denoising Autoencoders for Self-supervised Point Cloud
Learning. 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.06841.
[71]
Pablo Alex Lázaro et al. Design and simulation of memristor-based neural networks. 2023.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11678.
[72]
Mark Jayson Villangca et al. “Light-driven micro-tool equipped with a syringe function”.
In: Light: Science & Applications 5 (2016). DOI: 10.1038/lsa.2016.148. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1038/lsa.2016.148.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
55
==PAGE:62==
56
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:63==
A
Stability analysis of the Recirculating ONN
This section examines energy conservation and stability in the recirculating Optical Neural Network
(ONN) model, following the proof strategy outlined in [40], where energy conservation is used
to constrain cavity parameters. The analysis verifies that energy is conserved in the model and
demonstrates the role of a regularization term, interpreted as attenuation, in stabilizing the system.
To verify energy conservation and analyze stability, we use 𝑉(𝑡), which represents the total optical
energy in the cavities at time 𝑡. For a system governed by dynamics Equation 2.39 (Equation 2.24
with regularization term):
d
d𝑡A = F A = i𝜔A −
𝐾
2 +
√
𝐾𝑈𝑇𝑈(𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈)−1√
𝐾

A.
(A.1)
The energy in cavity is equal to [40]
𝑉(𝐴) = ∥A∥2 = A†A =
𝑛
Õ
𝑖=1
|𝐴𝑖|2.
(A.2)
Taking the derivative of the energy:
d𝑉
d𝑡= dA†
d𝑡A + A† dA
d𝑡= (F A)† A + A† (F A) ,
(A.3a)
d𝑉
d𝑡= A† 
F † + F

A.
(A.3b)
Using the fact that 𝜆and 𝜔are real-valued,
F † + F = −𝐾−
√
𝐾
"
𝑈𝑇𝑈

(1 + 𝜆) 𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈
−1†
+

𝑈𝑇𝑈

(1 + 𝜆) 𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈
−1#
√
𝐾. (A.4)
Defining
𝐿= −
√
𝐾
−1(F † + F )
√
𝐾
−1,
(A.5)
we have
𝐿= 𝐼+

(1 + 𝜆) 𝐼−(𝑈𝑇𝑈)†−1
(𝑈𝑇𝑈)† + 𝑈𝑇𝑈

(1 + 𝜆) 𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈
−1
,
(A.6)

(1 + 𝜆) 𝐼−(𝑈𝑇𝑈)†
𝐿

(1 + 𝜆) 𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈

= (1 + 𝜆)2𝐼−𝐼.
(A.7)
The right side of the equation is equal to 0 for 𝜆= 0, which is satisfied only if (F † + F ) = 0,
meaning that the energy is exactly conserved if there is no attenuation in the circuit (§2.2.4), and
is otherwise a Hermitian matrix with positive eigenvalues (positive definite matrix), in that case
making the following expression negative definite:

(1 + 𝜆) 𝐼−(𝑈𝑇𝑈)† √
𝐾
−1(F † + F )
√
𝐾
−1 
(1 + 𝜆) 𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈

≺0.
(A.8)
Eigenvalues of a unitary matrix have norm 1, while eigenvalues of (1 + 𝜆)𝐼are equal to 1 + 𝜆> 1.
From the Weyl’s inequality we know that all eigenvalues of (1+𝜆)𝐼−𝑈𝑇𝑈must have positive real
parts, and the same for (1+𝜆)𝐼−(𝑈𝑇𝑈)†. With 𝐾also constrained to have only diagonal, positive
entries, the derivative of energy function is negative semidefinite for 𝜆> 0,
d𝑉(A)
d𝑡
< 0
∀A ∈C𝑛\ {0}.
(A.9)
Therefore, the optical energy function satisfies conditions for Lupanov function, showing that zero-
energy state is globally asymptotically stable equilibrium. These results verify that the derived sys-
tem dynamics without attenuation 𝜆conserve energy, while with attenuation the energy decreases.
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
57
==PAGE:64==
B
Iris dataset
2
3
4
sepal width (cm)
2
4
6
petal length (cm)
4
6
8
sepal length (cm)
0
1
2
petal width (cm)
2
4
sepal width (cm)
2.5
5.0
7.5
petal length (cm)
0
2
petal width (cm)
species
setosa
versicolor
virginica
Figure B.1: Iris dataset used to train and test the Recirculating ONN with temporal degrees of
freedom.
58
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
==PAGE:65==
Recirculating Photonic Integrated Circuits for Machine Learning
59
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.electro.dtu.dk
