==PAGE:1==
Tunnel influence on pipeline
A study on tunneling beneath pipelines in sands
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Tunnel influence on pipeline
A study on tunneling beneath pipelines in sands
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Tomasz Durjasz
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Brovej,
Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months Section for Geotechnics & Geology, De-
partment of Environmental and Resource Engineering, at the Technical University of Den-
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Tomasz Durjasz - s222733
Signature
Date
ii
Tunnel influence on pipeline
04-02-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The expansion of urban infrastructure demands robust assessment methodologies to
manage risks associated with tunneling near existing underground utilities. Finite Ele-
ment Analysis (FEA) is a common tool employed to assess the impact; however, it can
be too complex and time-consuming to implement at the initial stages of projects. This
study evaluates an alternative method, the Design-Oriented Linear Equivalent Approach
(DOLEA), which offers a more efficient tool for preliminary assessments.
This research presents a parametric study examining the interactions between tunnel-
induced soil displacements and adjacent buried pipelines in sands. DOLEA utilizes an
elastic-continuum analysis combined with iterative calculations of equivalent stiffness to
account for soil nonlinearity, providing an alternative approach for soil-pipeline interac-
tion assessment. The effectiveness of DOLEA is evaluated through comparisons with a
parametrically varied 3D finite element model.
The study covers scenarios with pipelines of varying diameters placed at different depths.
The responses of these pipelines are analyzed under different tunnel depths and diame-
ters, covering a range of cover-to-diameter ratios from 1.4 to 4.3, corresponding to rela-
tively shallow to medium-depth tunnels.
Additionally, the study investigates pipeline responses using both the Hardening Soil and
Hardening Soil Small constitutive models to assess their applicability in different soil be-
havior scenarios.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Tomasz Durjasz, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Varvara Zania, Academic Supervisor, [DTU - Technical University of Denmark]
Assaf Klar, External Supervisor, [Technion - Israel Institute of Technology]
Ben North, External Supervisor, [Ramboll]
I thank my supervisors, Varvara Zania and Assaf Klar, for their endless support, engage-
ment, patience, and dedicated time. Your mentorship has guided this academic endeavor
and provided me with invaluable knowledge.
I want to thank Ben North and the entire Ramboll Tunneling team for their support and the
opportunities they have given me in the past two and a half years.
Lastly, I thank my family, girlfriend, and friends for their support and patience. With your
encouragement, anything is possible.
iv
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Tunneling induced ground movements in greenfield condition . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Influence of Tunneling beneath buried pipelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Centrifuge test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Finite Element Moddeling (FEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5
Sand HS and HSsmall parameters for sands
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3
Methodology
23
3.1
Goal and Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
2D Model - Centrifuge Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
2D model - Greenfield Condition at Prototype Scale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.4
3D model - With pipeline at Prototype Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.5
Data extraction and conversion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.6
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.7
Design Oriented Linear Equivalent Approach (DOLEA) . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.8
Parametric study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4
Results
36
4.1
Models validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2
Parametric study - Greenfield conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.3
Parametric study - with burried pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5
Discussion
79
5.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
5.2
Modelling of the centrifuge test: validation of the model
. . . . . . . . . . . 80
5.3
Parametric study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
5.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
6
Further Steps and Recommendations
85
Bibliography
87
A Leighton Buzzard Sand - HS parameters calibration
89
A.1 PLAXIS SoilTest: Calibration of Hardening Soil Parameters . . . . . . . . . 89
B Parametric study
93
B.1 Greenfield condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
B.2 With burried pipe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Tunnel influence on pipeline
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Global urbanization has led to an increased demand for transportation infrastructure.
More roads are needed, but there is limited availability of surface space, leading to the
utilization of underground spaces. Tunnels are an obvious solution for that issue. They
are being constructed to provide a wider net of underground transportation interconnect-
ing densely populated cities through metro or road networks. Tunneling, however, poses
challenges to existing buildings and aging buried infrastructure, such as pipelines. Tunnel-
induced settlements can affect buried pipelines and risk being damaged or even destroyed
by large settlements, leading to safety hazards and costly repairs. Therefore, a better un-
derstanding of how tunneling impacts overlying infrastructure and the associated risks is
crucial.
Finite element analysis (FEA) is a widely used tool used to assess the risks posed by tun-
neling to buried infrastructure. However, detailed FEM models are time-consuming, com-
putationally expensive, and often require complex constitutive models to represent the
problem accurately. Defining the soil parameters can also be challenging (Mair and Tay-
lor (1999) [15]). The design-oriented linear equivalent approach (DOLEA), proposed by
Klar, Elkayam, and Marshall (2016) [10], offers an alternative tool addressing the problem.
DOLEA employs greenfield settlements as input and can assess the moments induced in
pipelines.
This thesis aims to evaluate the DOLEA approach through a comprehensive parametric
study, focusing on pipelines buried in unsaturated sands — a common scenario in coastal
cities. This study will assess the applicability of the DOLEA approach across a range of
scenarios, including varying tunnel depth, diameter, pipeline depth, and pipeline stiffness,
and it will also investigate the influence of tunneling on pipelines under various conditions.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
This chapter provides a comprehensive literature review, laying the foundation for this
thesis. Among the topics covered are settlement analysis and tunnel pipeline interac-
tion. Additionally, the use of centrifuge testing for prototype testing is discussed. The
background also includes information on finite element modeling topic. Furthermore, ad-
vanced constitutive models, such as the Hardening Soil (HS) and Hardening Soil Small
(HSsmall) models, are described.
2.1
Tunneling induced ground movements in greenfield
condition
Zhou (2014) [31] describes that during tunnel construction in greenfield conditions (no
buildings above the tunnel, no buried structure), the existing ground stresses are affected,
leading to ground movement towards the excavated tunnel. Babendererde (1991) [2] de-
scribes that in the case of closed-face tunneling, the face pressure of the tunnel is equal-
ized by the compression of the material (either by the excavated material if EPB or by
slurry if SS or mixed) behind the cutter head, resulting in a counter-pressure, which is
applied by the cutter head. However, it is inevitable for this counter pressure to be in
constant equilibrium with the in situ conditions, consequently leading to ground move-
ments towards the tunnel, both radial (around the tunnel) and longitudinal (towards the
face). Attewell, Yeates, and Selby (1986) [1] describes this movement resulting in surface
settlements trough. The three-dimensional settlements trough is shown in Figure 2.1. In
literature, the three-dimensional character of settlements is often presented in separate
transverse and longitudinal settlements.
2
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Three-dimensional settlement trough. (After Attewell et al. Attewell, Yeates,
and Selby (1986) [1])
According to Mair and Taylor (1999) [15] 1), the inability to equalize face pressure is not
the only source of ground movement. Others are: 2) the presence of an over-cutting
edge (bead) combined with a tendency of the machine to plough or yaw will lead to radial
ground movements, 3) the existence of a gap between the tailskin of the shield and the
lining, 4) deflection of the lining and 5) consolidation, these components are depicted in
Figure 2.2. All these factors result in ground loss, which is why, in tunnel engineering,
volume loss term is commonly used to describe the effects of tunneling.
Figure 2.2: Primary components of ground movements associated with shield tunneling
(after Mair and Taylor, 1999 Mair and Taylor (1999) [15])
Mair and Taylor (1999) [15] describes that the ground settlements differ depending on the
tunneling technique, skills, geological conditions, and cover-to-diameter ratio. Clays will
generally induce more prominent ground movements, leading to wider settlements trough
than in sands [15]. In Figure 2.3 failure mechanisms are depicted based on centrifuge
Tunnel influence on pipeline
3
==PAGE:12==
model tests by Mair, 1979 and Chambon and Corté, 1994. In sand conditions Marshall, R.,
A., and J. (2012) [18] shown that Vertical displacements for shallow tunnels are localized
near the tunnel centreline, whereas they are more spread out for deep tunnels; this results
in wider settlement troughs for deeper tunnels. Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8] has
shown that the density of the sand influences the soil arching and failure mechanisms
(Figure 2.6).
Figure 2.3: Observed failure mechanisms based on centrifuge model tests (Mair, 1979;
Chambon and Corté, 1994)
2.1.1
Volume loss
A common engineering practice to describe the effects of tunneling is by ground loss (Mair
and Taylor (1999) [15]). The ground loss in a transverse section can be expressed in two
ways. 1) at the ground surface, which is the ratio of the volume of the settlement per unit
length (Vs) and the tunnel notional area of the tunnel V0, and 2) at the tunnel periphery
which is the ratio of the soil ground loss around the tunnel (∆V ) and the notional tunnel
area of the tunnel. Both are expressed as a percentage. The equations for these volume
losses are expressed in Equation 2.2 Equation 2.3 respectively. In Figure 2.4, these
volume losses are depicted in a schematic drawing.
V0 = π · D2
t
4
(2.1)
Vl,s = Vs
V0
· 100
(2.2)
Vl,t = ∆V
V0
· 100
(2.3)
4
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the concept of soil and tunnel volume losses according to Franza
(2016) [7]
The Vl,s and Vt,s are generally the same in undrained clays; the volume of the settlement
trough does not vary with depth, and therefore, it is easier to assess the tunnel volume
loss by measurements taken at the surface. This is not the case in soil such as sands
and gravels, where shearing will cause dilation and volumetric strain, resulting in different
volume losses. This means the surface volume loss varies with depth in granular soils and
that assessing volume loss based on surface measurements will not provide an entirely
accurate measurement of subsurface volume loss (Marshall, R., A., and J. (2012) [18]).
In Figure 2.4, an idealized shape of the tunnel volume loss was shown. In reality, the
shape of the tunnel ground loss is close to elliptical. In clays, the elliptical is wider and
present at the lateral space of the tunnel(Loganathan and Poulos, 1998 Loganathan and
Poulos (1998) [14]). In sand, however, the ground loss is concentrated at the tunnel crown
(Marshall (2009) [16],Zhou (2014) [31]). The illustrations are shown in Figure 2.5
Figure 2.5:
Tunnel ground loss distribution according to Loganathan and Poulos
(1998) [14] and Zhou (2014) [31]
Volume losses also depend on the applied tunnelling technique. According to Mair and
Taylor (1999) Mair and Taylor (1999) [15], in open shield tunnelling in stiff London clays,
the volume loss reaches between 1% and 2%. In tunnels with concrete linings in London
Tunnel influence on pipeline
5
==PAGE:14==
Clays varied between 0,5% and 1,5%. For closed-face tunneling, such as mechanized
tunneling EPB or slurry shields, sands can be as low as 0,5% and in soft clays up to 1%
- 2% .
2.1.2
Soil Arching and failure mechanisms
Soil Arching was explained in Terzaghi (1943) [28] as pressure transfer from a yielding soil
mass to adjacent stationary parts. The yielding mass could be induced by the formation of
voids or the collapse of underground structures. Analyzing soil arching during tunneling
is useful for describing the propagation of strains and failure mechanisms.
According to Mair and Taylor (1999) [15], when comparing the arching mechanisms in
clays and sand, one would find that clays exhibit stronger arching effects than sand since
stresses are transferred to areas farther away from the excavation due to their cohesive
nature. This also confirms the wider settlement and failure mechanisms in Figure 2.3 and
wider ground loss distribution in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.6: Illustration of Id and C/D effects on arching mechanism and ground loss
propagation from Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8]
Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8] studied the influence of the sand’s relative density
and cover-to-diameter ratio on arching mechanisms. The key findings are illustrated in
Figure 2.6 and can be described as follows:
6
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:15==
1. The lower the soil density, the larger the size of the soil arch and the amount of soil
affected by narrowing.
2. For deep tunnels, the arching happens near the crown of the tunnel
3. For shallow tunnels, the arching affects a large zone of soil above the tunnel crown
arching almost all the way to the surface
4. In loose sands, the arch does not form, and two separate zones of shearing propa-
gate from the tunnel shoulders towards the surface.
2.1.3
Empirical prediction of ground displacements above tunnels
This settlement trough was first described for surface settlements using a Gaussian dis-
tribution curve by Peck, 1969:
Sv(x) = Smax · exp

−x2
2 · i2

(2.4)
Sv is the Vertical settlement, Smax is the maximum vertical soil settlement at the tunnel
centreline, x is the horizontal offset from the tunnel centreline, and i is the horizontal dis-
tance from the tunnel centreline to the point of inflection of the surface settlement trough.
The Gaussian curve has been shown to provide a good fit to many data sets of tunnel
settlement through data (Mair and Taylor (1999) [15]). The analysis of how i evolved,
provided insights into the effects of tunnel contraction at that specific depth (Vorster, Mair,
Soga, and Klar (2005) [30]). With further research i was found to change with depth and
increasing ground movement.
Since the Gaussian curve did not always provide an adequate fit in the sand and at
depths close to the tunnel (O’Reilly and New (1982) [21]). Vorster, Klar, Soga, and Mair
(2005) [29] proposed a modification to the Gaussian curve. The modified Gaussian curve
changed the standard Gaussian curve while maintaining the meaning of i as the distance
to the curve’s inflection point. A parameter α, which gives an additional degree of free-
dom to the location of the inflection point of the settlement trough shape was introduced
(Marshall (2009) [16]).
Sv(x) =
n
(n −1) + exp

α x2
i2
 · Smax
n = eα · 2α −1
2α + 1 + 1
(2.5)
The Shape function n, dependent on α, controls the profile’s width, and the α parameter
ensures that i remains the distance to the inflection point. This modification allows more
freedom in describing the settlement shape through data than the standard Gaussian
curve (Marshall (2009) [16]).
2.2
Influence of Tunneling beneath buried pipelines
Buried pipelines above constructed tunnels are subject to tunneling-induced ground dis-
placements, which result in induced stresses and movements in the pipeline. The inter-
actions between the tunnel-pipeline (global) and pipeline-soil (local) were described by
Vorster, Mair, Soga, and Klar (2005) [30], providing illustration (Figure 2.7) of evolving
mechanisms near the pipeline and tunnel. The global effect, M1, is due to the greenfield
Tunnel influence on pipeline
7
==PAGE:16==
response to tunneling characterized by increasing shear strains with depth. The soil state
influences this mechanism; the shear zone is wider in loose sands, resulting in higher
strains than in dense sands, as illustrated in Figure 2.6. Mechanism 2 involves gap for-
mation, observable as a rapid decrease in vertical contact pressure at the pipe invert.
Mechanism 3 results from a reduction in stability and soil stiffness due to gap formation.
After local failure, the gap may partially close, allowing the pipe to come into contact
with the soil again, potentially repeating the gap formation process as ground movement
increases (Vorster, Mair, Soga, and Klar (2005) [30]). Negative down-drag failure may
occur at the pipeline crown if the relative pipe-soil rigidity is sufficiently high (Mechanism
4). Finally, Mechanism 5 involves longitudinal pipe-soil interactions.
Figure 2.7: Schematic representation of global and local mechanisms influencing the
pipeline behavior. From Vorster, Mair, Soga, and Klar (2005) [30])
2.2.1
Moment calculation
Initially, the problem of the influence of newly constructed tunnels on the pipelines was
addressed in Attewell, Yeates, and Selby (1986) [1], where Winkler-type springs were em-
ployed to estimate the pipe-soil interaction. Later, Klar, Vorster, Soga, and Mair (2005) [11]
proposed a closed-form solution for the Winkler problem and provided a more rigorous
solution based on a pipeline within an elastic soil continuum, which was found to be
more conservative, resulting in higher bending moments (Klar, Elkayam, and Marshall
(2016) [10]).
Vorster, Klar, Soga, and Mair (2005) [29] extended this solution by employing modified
Gaussian for defining the shape of the settlements trough; this way, the stress within a
pipeline resulting from the displacements could be evaluated by assuming that the pipeline
partially follows the settlements trough (illustrated in Figure 2.8).
8
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.8: Greenfield displacement curve and influence of the pipeline. From Marshall,
Klar, and Mair (2010) [17])
Design-oriented linear equivalent approach (DOLEA) proposed by Klar, Elkayam, and
Marshall (2016) [10] incorporates these solutions and was validated against multiple cen-
trifuge tests. It provides a set of equations in an iterative process with a greenfield dis-
placement curve (modified Gaussian parameters specifically) as an input. It gives a mo-
ment induced in a pipeline as an output.
The maximum moment and the pipe displacement depend on the pipe rigidity. If the pipe
was infinitely flexible, it would simply follow the greenfield displacement, and the moment
Mmax,gf (Equation 2.7) can be used as an estimate of the bending moment in the pipeline,
resulting in the highest possible bending moment for a given greenfield displacement. Any
introduced rigidity to the pipeline will lead to a reduction of this value (Klar, Elkayam, and
Marshall (2016) [10]).
Here are the key equations used in the process:
Rigidity factor, R, is defined as:
R =
EI
i3r0Es
(2.6)
Where E is Young’s modulus of the material of the pipe, and I is the area moment of inertia
of the pipe cross-section. i is the Gaussian curve parameter representing the distance
between the tunnel axis and the inflection point. r0 is the pipeline cross-sectional radius
and Es is the soil stiffness (Young’s modulus).
The value of R reflects the relative stiffness between the pipeline and the surrounding
soil while incorporating the i influence of greenfield displacements through the modified
Gaussian curve parameter.
The Maximum bending moment is calculated in assuming the case where the pipeline is
following the greenfield displacement curve at the level of the pipeline:
Mmax,gf = EI 2α
n
smax
i2
(2.7)
Tunnel influence on pipeline
9
==PAGE:18==
Closed-form expression presented in Equation 2.8 is utilized, which was derived by fitting
results from elastic continuum analysis:
Mmax
Mmax,gf
=
1
1 + 1.1α
nfi (fdR)2/3
(2.8)
where: fd = (1 + 0.93zp/r0) / (1.07zp/r0) and fi = 2.18 (i/r0)−1/3
For the shear strains and out-of-plane shear strains are calculated employing fitted ex-
pressions according to Figure 2.9:
γa =
"
x1 + x2 ·
i2
(zt −zp)2 −x3 ·
i
zt −zp
C
#
smax
i
(2.9)
Figure 2.9: Fitted polynominal expressions used for calculating the shear strains. Klar,
Elkayam, and Marshall (2016) [10]
γj = 1.3δr
r0
= 1.3
h
1 −Λ

Mmax
Mmax,gf
i
smax
r0
= 0.39
 Mmax
Mmax,gf
0.115
ln
Mmax,gf
Mmax
 smax
r0
(2.10)
γeq =
q
γ2a + γ2
j
(2.11)
The last input is the stiffness degradation curve. This curve will help determine an appro-
priate soil stiffness value, considering its nonlinear dependency on shear strain.
The DOLEA, as described by Klar, Elkayam, and Marshall (2016) [10], involves several
iterative steps by applying the previously discussed linear elastic solutions:
10
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:19==
1. Determination of the greenfield displacement profile along with its modified Gaus-
sian parameters: Smax, i, and n.
2. Calculation of the associated shear strain, γa, using Equation 2.9 in conjunction with
Figure 2.9.
3. Computation of the equivalent shear strain, γeq, using Equation 2.11, setting γj to 0
during the initial iteration.
4. Derivation of the secant Young’s modulus by applying a suitable nonlinear relation-
ship or backbone curve based on the equivalent shear strain obtained in Step 3.
5. Calculation of the rigidity factor, R, by combining the secant soil stiffness derived in
Step 4 with EI, Smax, i, and n.
6. Determination of the moment ratio
Mmax
Mmax,gf using Equation 2.8.
7. Computation of the out-of-plane shear strain using Equation 2.10 and the moment
ratio from Step 6.
8. Iteration of step 3 with the updated γj value (instead of zero) and repetition of steps
3–7 until convergence of γeq and R is achieved.
9. Evaluation of the pipeline’s maximum bending moment using the greenfield dis-
placement profile and the converged R value with Equation 2.6.
2.3
Centrifuge test
Understanding the non-linear behavior of soil and the complex interactions between soil
and structural responses presents a significant challenge in geotechnical engineering.
These aspects can be examined in greater detail through site-based research, such as
monitoring the behavior of soil and structures (e.g., surface settlements or pipeline deflec-
tion during tunnel construction). However, real-world projects face physical and financial
constraints. As noted by Marshall (2009) [16], these challenges include:
• Real Project data is often restricted and hard to obtain. Moreover, it is usually in a
few specific locations (usually surface or tunnel surrounding), failing to capture the
full scope of soil and structural behavior;
• Monitoring is frequently deprioritized, impacting the quality of the data collected;
• Opportunities for site monitoring are limited by the number of suitable projects;
• The costs involved in site monitoring are typically substantial.
This necessitates using scaled model prototypes, which allow for studying geotechnical
problems in a controlled environment. However, a challenge arises with N-times down-
scaled models under normal gravity conditions: the stresses would not replicate field
behavior, as soil stresses would be N-times smaller. A more appropriate approach is to
scale up the gravity proportionally. It can be achieved using a centrifuge, which increases
gravity through an acceleration field.
By applying acceleration, specific parameters should be scaled accordingly. The cen-
trifuge scaling laws are shown in Table 2.1.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
11
==PAGE:20==
Parameter
metric unit
Scaling law (model/prototype)
Gravity
m/s2
N
Length
m
1/N
Area
m2
1/N2
Volume
m3
1/N3
Weight, Force
N = kgm/s2
1/N2
Density
kg/m3
1
Unit weight
N/m3
N
Stress and Pressure
Pa = N/m2
1
Strain
-
1
Bending stiffness, EI
N/m2
1/N4
Axial stiffness, EA
N
N4
Table 2.1: Centrifuge scaling laws
2.3.1
Centrifuge tests for tunnel research
Centrifuge technology is widely used for tunnel research. Vorster, Klar, Soga, and Mair
(2005) [29] validated the linear equivalent method within the elastic continuum solution for
pipe-soil interaction during tunnelling against centrifuge tests in sands, obtaining a good
agreement for the approach. Marshall, Klar, and Mair (2010) [17] used centrifuge tests
to explore the elastic continuum solution, revealing that soil behavior near tunnels and
pipelines is not elastic, specifically in the pipeline proximity. In Marshall, R., A., and J.
(2012) [18], the results of three centrifuge tests were used to analyze the effect of key ge-
ometrical and tunneling-related parameters on settlement trough shape patterns above
tunnels in sands. In Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8], the impact of soil density
and relative depth were studied. Vertical and horizontal displacement patterns were ob-
served, resulting from the soil’s capacity to develop and sustain an arching mechanism.
As a result, qualitative arching mechanisms linked to the C/D ratio and soil density were
proposed and illustrated in Figure 2.6.
Test description
The centrifuge consists of a beam centrifuge that applies increased gravitational forces to
a sample within a strongbox through rotation. The subcomponents of the centrifuge are
shown in Figure 2.10.
The experimental setup of the centrifuge test, as described by Zhou (2014) [31] for green-
field conditions and Marshall, Klar, and Mair (2010) [17] with the pipeline at the place,
consists of:
• Strongbox - A U-section box with an aluminum base and two aluminum side walls.
The back plate is also aluminium, while the front wall is made of Perspex, enabling
image-based techniques for plain-strain measurements. The box provides a rigid
and controlled environment for the test.
• Soil - The soil is prepared directly in the strongbox. For sands, a specific procedure
is followed to achieve the desired density.
• Tunnel - A tunnel model spans the width of the strongbox. It has a hollow inner
steel cylinder with enlarged diameters at both ends. The cylinder is covered by a
latex sleeve, creating a void between the cylinder’s outer surface and the sleeve’s
inner surface. This void is later filled with water and gradually extracted to simulate
volume loss. The tunnel ends are fixed in prepared voids within the front and back
walls.
12
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:21==
• Volume Loss Control System (see Figure 2.11) - As described, the void within the
tunnel model is filled with water, and its gradual extraction simulates volume loss.
Initially, the pressure inside the void is calibrated to equalize the estimated soil over-
burden pressure at the tunnel axis (Franza (2016) [7]). This balance is achieved by
adjusting the water height in a standpipe. The volume loss is controlled by rais-
ing the actuator head connected to the hydraulic cylinder system after the solenoid
valve was closed.
• Pipeline - According to Marshall, Klar, and Mair (2010) [17], half of the pipeline model
rests against the Perspex wall, representing a plane of symmetry. The pipeline ends
are not fixed to the side walls, allowing movement within the model while maintaining
realistic boundary conditions.
• Camera System - Digital cameras capture a wide view of the soil and pipes. The
cameras are remotely controlled from the centrifuge control room and synchronized
to ensure images correspond to specific tunnel volume loss values. Particle image
velocimetry (PIV) analyses soil and pipeline displacements along the Perspex wall’s
plane.
• Linear Variable Differential Transformers (LVDTs) - LVDTs measure vertical subsur-
face soil displacements at the middle of the box width. These measurements are
used to compare with camera-derived displacements to validate results.
• Gauges on Pipes - Gauges are mounted on the pipes to measure bending moments.
Figure 2.10: Geotechnical centrifuge in University of Nottingham from Ellis et al. (2006)
The centrifuge testing procedure for tunnel and tunnel-pipeline interaction analysis in-
volves the following steps: soil sample, tunnel model, and pipeline sample are carefully
prepared and assembled in the strongbox. Sand is then poured into the box, with density
calibrated through prior testing to achieve the desired preparation. Linear Variable Differ-
ential Transformers (LVDTs) are installed to monitor soil displacements, followed by the
Tunnel influence on pipeline
13
==PAGE:22==
camera system and water system setup, which controls volume loss during the test.
Figure 2.11: Schematic of fluid extraction setup in the centrifuge.
Next, the entire assembly is mounted onto a rigid base and securely fixed to the cen-
trifuge cradle. The centrifuge is gradually spun up from 1G to the target N-times gravity
to replicate field stress conditions accurately. Once at the desired gravity level, controlled
volume loss is initiated. Data from cameras, LVDTs, and pressure gauges are continu-
ously recorded throughout the process, capturing the response of the soil, tunnel, and
pipeline models under simulated conditions.
2.3.2
Considerations
When interpreting centrifuge test results as representative of actual tunneling construc-
tion, some of the factors need to be addressed:
1. Wall friction: Marshall (2009) [16] reported reduced soil displacements, by 10%-
15%, when using Perspex compared to glass, due to increased friction. This effect
was less pronounced at the soil surface. Furthermore, Particle Image Velocimetry
(PIV) measurements were generally lower than those from Linear Variable Differen-
tial Transformers (LVDT), suggesting an underestimation of displacements due to
friction at the Perspex interface. This boundary effect is crucial when relating tunnel
volume loss to displacements.
2. Wall deflection: Zhou (2014) [31] conducted a FEM analysis to examine the deflec-
tion of the perplex wall in a centrifuge test, documenting an average lateral deflection
of approximately 0.1 mm at 80g and a maximum deflection of 0.3 mm at the same
gravitational force. These results were only reported for the FEM analysis, with no
corresponding data from actual tests.
2.4
Finite Element Moddeling (FEM)
2.4.1
Modelling the centrifuge test
Song and Marshall (2020) [27] investigated how to model the boundary conditions for var-
ious centrifuge model tests. Pressure-controlled and displacement-controlled boundary
14
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:23==
was employed in the analysis to model the volume loss. A finite element analysis was
conducted and compared against the centrifuge test data. The hypoplastic constitutive
model was employed for the study. The numerical analyses performed were not able to
accurately replicate the zone of localized dilation at zones of high shear strain around the
tunnel (Song and Marshall (2020) [27]).
Moreover, modeling the spinup phase to induce the required gravity was documented
to have an influence. In the case of the pressure-controlled model, the internal tunnel
pressure at the tunnel spring line is greater than the horizontal soil pressure, and the soil
at the spring line is pushed outwards during the spin-up. The magnitude of settlements
recorded during the spinup for were always slightly bigger than for the model without the
spinup phase.
2.4.2
Hardening Soil and Hardening Soil small constutitive models
In geotechnical engineering, numerous constitutive models are available to simulate soil
behavior, each with advantages and limitations. The choice of a constitutive model de-
pends on the specific problem being analyzed, as different models are suited to different
types of soil behavior and loading conditions (Brinkgreve and Engin (2014) [5]).
This section introduces two advanced constitutive models: the Hardening Soil (HS) model
and the Hardening Soil Small-Strain (HSsmall) model. Both models account for the non-
linear behavior of soil, including stress-dependent stiffness and plastic yielding. The HSs-
mall model extends the HS model by incorporating the high stiffness of soils at very small
strains, which is particularly important for accurately predicting deformations in structures
sensitive to small-strain behavior (Benz (2007) [3]). The strain ranges relevant for different
geotechnical structures are illustrated in Figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: Schematic representation of the Hardening-Soil model framework, illustrating
the degradation of shear stiffness across different strain ranges. From Obrzud and Truty
(2018) [23].
Hardening Soil Model
Schanz, Vermeer, and Bonnier (1999) [26] presented the Hardening Soil advanced con-
stitutive model. The main mechanisms included are:
Tunnel influence on pipeline
15
==PAGE:24==
• Stress-dependent stiffness - The stiffness depends on the stress state
• Shear Hardening - The yield surface expands as plastic strains accumulate, captur-
ing the hardening behavior of soils under shear loading.
• Compression hardening - The yield surface expands as the soil compresses under
increasing stress, capturing the consolidation behavior of soils.
By implementing these mechanisms, Hardening soil can better simulate fine-grained,
granular, or organic soils, especially in cases where unloading—reloading parameters
govern, like in the scenario of settlement calculation or tunneling (Obrzud and Truty (2012) [22]).
The assumption of the Hardening Soil model is the Hyperbolic stress and strain relation-
ship (Figure 2.13):
ε1 =
qa
2E50
(σ1 −σ3)
qa −(σ1 −σ3)
for
q < qf.
(2.12)
Where q is the deviatoric stress, ε1 axial strain, qf is the ultimate deviatoric stress (For
which soil becomes perfectly plastic and yielding occurs), which is derived from the Mohr-
Coloumb failure criterion.
qf =
6 sin φp
3 −sin φp
(p + c cot φp)
qa = qf
Rf
.
(2.13)
qa describes the horizontal asymptote of the hyperbola. The relation is defined with Rf,
which is typically set to 0.9:
However the equation can also be rearranged to more clear asymptotic form:
q =
ε1
1
2E50 + ε1Rf
qf
(2.14)
And further:
q =
ε1
a + bε1
(2.15)
Which can be presented in the plot shown in Figure 2.13.
16
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.13: Hyperbolic relation of the q-ε curve for HS model.
The confining stress-dependent stiffness modulus for primary loading E50 is defined to de-
scribe the hyperbola since the initial stiffness is usually hard to determine in the laboratory
Schanz, Vermeer, and Bonnier (1999) [26]. E50 is defined:
E50 = Eref
50
 σ∗
3 + c cot ϕ
σref + c cot ϕ
m
(2.16)
where Eref
50 is the reference stiffness at given reference pressure σref , which is derived
from a triaxial test from mobilization of 50% of the maximum shear strength qf from the
stress strain curve (Schanz, Vermeer, and Bonnier (1999) [26]). It can be seen in the
equation that the stiffness is stress-dependent with σ3 - minor principal stress. Exponent
parameter m controls how the soil’s stiffness decreases with increasing stress. For sands,
parameter m is typically between 0.4 and 0.6, and 0.7 - 1 for clays Obrzud and Truty
(2018) [23].
In the Hardening Soil model stiffness for unloading-reloading is defined separately. A
similar rule applies to it using the reference modulus.
Eur = Eref
ur
 σ∗
3 + c cot ϕ
σref + c cot ϕ
m
(2.17)
The Eur is constant, and the unloading reloading path is fully elastic. The elastic strain
components are therefore given as:
εe
1 =
q
Eur
,
εe
2 = εe
3 = νur
q
Eur
.
(2.18)
Regarding the shear hardening law, two yield functions are defined by Equation 2.19 and
Equation 2.20, introducing an elastoplastic mechanism by implementing the plastic shear
strain γp parameter:
f12 = qa
E50
(σ1 −σ2)
qa −(σ1 −σ2) −2 (σ1 −σ2)
Eur
−γp
(2.19)
Tunnel influence on pipeline
17
==PAGE:26==
f13 = qa
E50
(σ1 −σ3)
qa −(σ1 −σ3) −2 (σ1 −σ3)
Eur
−γp
(2.20)
Where γp is defined as :
γp = εp
1 −εp
2 −εp
3
(2.21)
Since it is assumed that in the contractancy domain, the volumetric plastic strain εp
v =
εp
1 + εp
2 + εp
3 ≈0, we can simplify the equation:
γp = εp
1 −εp
2 −εp
3 =≈2εp
1
(2.22)
Schanz, Vermeer, and Bonnier (1999) [26] notes that the approximation for the volumetric
strains approximation is generally accurate for hard soils. However, they will never be
precisely zero.
The Hardening Soil Model implements the volumetric plastic mechanism for compression
hardening by introducing the cap yield surface, which helps close the elastic region, as
shown in Figure 2.14. Here, other parameters are introduced that control this mechanism:
Eref
oed and KNC
0
. The yield function is defined as:
fc = ˜q2
M2 + (p′)2 −p2
c
(2.23)
M parameter defines the shape of the cap and is KNC
0
dependent, ˜q2 is a special stress
measure for deviatoric stresses. pc is the isotropic pre-consolidation pressure whose
evolution is indirectly controlled by Eref
oed. Therfore both input parameters KNC
0
and Eref
oed
determine the shape of the yield cap.
Figure 2.14: Yield surfaces with the volumetric and shear mechanisms in the p - q plane.
The yield surface of the HS model can be represented in the principal stress space as
shown in Figure 2.15.
18
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.15: Shape of the total yield surface in principal stress space for the HS model
from PLAXIS Material Models manual V23 (2023) [24]
Hardening Soil Small Model
According to Benz (2007) [3] most soils exhibit much behavior at low strain levels (below
10E-3 ) than at typical engineering strain levels (ranging from 10E-3 to 10E-1) (see Fig-
ure 2.12). Furthermore, this stiffness degrades non-linearly with an increase in strain level.
Benz (2007) [3] described this behavior and implemented an extension to the Hardening
Soil model, naming it the Hardening Soil small model. HSsmall improves the prediction
of soil behavior from the very initial loading stage, particularly at very small strains, which
is suitable for applications where initial soil stiffness significantly impacts the performance
of geotechnical structures. The other difference is that while HS captures the soil be-
havior under isotropic compression using a linear elastic approach until yield, HSsmall
introduces plasticity, which better represents the real-life nonlinear behavior of the soil.
The HS-small model introduces the parameter of small strain shear stiffness, G0, to ac-
count for soils’ highly nonlinear elastic behavior at very small strains. Similarly to the
stiffness parameters of HS, it is stress-dependent:
G0 = Gref
0
 σ∗
3 + c cot ϕ
σref + c cot ϕ
m
(2.24)
According to (2023) [24], a sufficient agreement is found that a simple hyperbolic law can
adequately describe the stress-strain curve for small strains. A straightforward example is
the use of a smaller threshold shear strain as presented in Santos and Correia (2001) [25].
The authors employed a parameter γ0.7 at which the secant shear modulus Gs is reduced
to about 70 % of its initial value and proposed the following relation:
Gs
G0
=
1
1 + a
 γ
γ0.7

, where a = 0.385
(2.25)
The stiffness degradation curve can be plotted according to this realtion as shown in
Figure 2.16.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.16: Shear stiffness degradation curve. From Obrzud and Truty (2012) [22]
Summary
In Figure 2.17 from Nobakht Vakili, Barciaga, Alimardani Lavasan, and Schanz (2013) [20],
a comparison is shown between the Mohr-Coloumb (MC), HS, and HSsmall models based
on numerically simulated triaxial tests. The comparison demonstrates that while the HS
and HS-small models exhibit identical behavior at higher strains, the HS-small model
shows greater stiffness at lower strains.
20
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.17: Comparison of axial strain - deviatoric stress dependency for Mohr-Coloumb,
HS and HSS models, from Nobakht Vakili, Barciaga, Alimardani Lavasan, and Schanz
(2013) [20]
Limitations
According to Benz (2007) [3], both models are void ratio independent, so materials with
different densities should be modeled separately with different sets of parameters. HS
and HSsmall are also unable to reproduce softening effects associated with soil dilatancy
and soil destructuration.
2.4.3
Considerations and Model Validation
As noted by Mair and Taylor (1999) [15], numerical methods often provide poor predictions
of greenfield settlements above tunnels unless complex constitutive models are used.
However, these advanced models typically involve parameters that are difficult to evalu-
ate. Another critical aspect of FE modeling is the proper representation of actual boundary
conditions, often idealized in models. The main challenges in achieving an ideal repre-
sentation can be listed as follows:
1. Careful selection of the constitutive model for the specific case,
2. Proper consideration of input parameters,
3. Accurate boundary conditions,
4. Effective model validation.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
21
==PAGE:30==
Way of ensuring correct selection of the input parameters for the numerical analysis is
to numerically simulate the soil laboratory tests. It can be crucial for understanding the
behavior of the modeled soil and can be carried out as a validation process. Input pa-
rameters can be optimized to fit the test data best. However, the stress paths and strain
levels observed in laboratory tests can differ from the ones in real-world conditions.
Brinkgreve and Engin (2014) [5] suggests different ways of approach to validate the model
parameters and improving its accuracy. One of them is through the identification of the
dominant parameters that significantly impact the analysis. A sensitivity analysis can be
conducted to determine which parameters have the most significant influence. Identified
parameters should be given most attention during calibration.
Brinkgreve and Engin (2014) [5] also suggest ways of model validation:
• Comparison with real measurements
• Comparison with design charts
• Comparison with experience and common practice
• Comparison with simplified models, for example, with reduced dimensions, for ex-
ample, 1D vs 2D or 2D vs 3D
2.5
Sand HS and HSsmall parameters for sands
Brinkgreve, Engin, and Engin (2010) [4] proposes the empirical equations for HS and HSs-
mall for sands based on the relative density (RD, in %). The equations are as assuming
pref = 100 kPa:
Eref
50 = 60000 · RD/100

kN/m2
(2.26)
Eref
oed = 60000 · RD/100

kN/m2
(2.27)
Eref
ur = 180000 · RD/100

kN/m2
(2.28)
Gref
0
= 60000 + 68000 · RD/100

kN/m2
(2.29)
φ′ = 28 + 12.5 · RD/100
[◦]
(2.30)
ψ = −2 + 12.5 · RD/100
[◦]
(2.31)
Rf = 1 −RD/800
[−]
(2.32)
m = 0.7 −RD/320
[−]
(2.33)
22
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:31==
3
Methodology
3.1
Goal and Introduction
The primary goal of this project is to conduct a parametric study to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of the DOLEA approach proposed by Klar, Elkayam, and Marshall (2016) [10]
in unsaturated sand conditions. The parametric study aims to compare the moments
induced in pipelines, utilizing both the DOLEA approach and 3D FE analysis. This com-
parison spans various tunnel depths, diameters, and pipeline stiffnesses. Moreover, to
examine the tunnel-soil interactions under greenfield conditions—an essential factor for
understanding tunnel-pipeline interactions, the scenarios of varying depth and tunnel di-
ameter were investigated in the context of induced settlements over increasing volume
loss. The study employs Hardening Soil (HS) and Hardening Soil small (HSsmall) models.
Plain-strain conditions are assumed for the greenfield condition, and PLAXIS 2D is uti-
lized to derive the greenfield settlement data required to analyze pipeline responses using
the DOLEA approach. To ensure the model’s reliability, it undergoes validation using a
simulated centrifuge test under greenfield conditions. The choice of centrifuge testing is
motivated by the extensive availability of comparative data within the geotechnical litera-
ture.
Leighton Buzzard sand (fraction E) sand type is a commonly used sand in centrifuge test-
ing, for example, in studies by Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8], Klar, Elkayam, and
Marshall (2016) [10], and Marshall (2009) [16]. For this project, HS and HSsmall param-
eters specific to this sand type are calibrated. The calibrated parameters are used in the
centrifuge FE model, used for validation, and the results are compared with real data from
centrifuge tests, as documented in Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8]. Specifically,
the relation between tunnel-induced settlements, tunnel pressures, and tunnel volume
loss are used for comparison.
The next step involves implementing the code for the DOLEA algorithm. This algorithm
processes the displacements at the pipeline level from the full-scale prototype model gen-
erated in PLAXIS 2D. These displacements and the stiffness degradation curve serve as
inputs. The degradation curve is based on the used constitutive model - for HS it’s based
on the secant modulus derived from the hyperbolic stress-strain relation, for the HSs-
mall it is according to Equation 2.25. This setup completes the first step of obtaining the
maximum moment induced in the pipeline with DOLEA.
Subsequently, a PLAXIS 3D model is created for the same conditions as for DOLEA, but
with the pipeline included. The pipeline is modeled as a plate element. The maximum
moment derived from the model is compared against the values calculated using DOLEA
at the same tunnel volume loss levels.
The setup of models in PLAXIS 2D and 3D was facilitated through Python API scripting,
which allows for the parametric configuration of the model and the creation of multiple
models with varying parameters in a single loop. The intermediate processes of result
extraction and input for subsequent steps were automated using Python. The overall
steps of the methodology are visualized in a Figure 3.1, providing a clear overview of the
process.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.1: Flowchart of the Python code setup.
Detailed descriptions of the PLAXIS model setup methodology are outlined in section 3.2,
and the implementation of the DOLEA approach, along with the intermediate conversion
of inputs, is detailed in section 3.7.
3.2
2D Model - Centrifuge Test
The centrifuge model is used for validation and is configured using PLAXIS 2D (version
2023.2). The model’s dimensions replicate those of the hard box used in the centrifuge
tests, specifically matching the specifications of the Nottingham centrifuge (770mm x
311mm). This centrifuge was utilized in the studies referenced in Franza, Marshall, and
Zhou (2019) [8].
3.2.1
Boundary conditions
The model lateral boundaries are modeled as are normally fixed. The bottom boundary
is fully fixed, and the top boundary is free.
The following components/processes are modeled as follows:
• Tunnel: In the centrifuge test, the pressurized latex rubber represents the tunnel.
This boundary condition is simulated by applying a circular line load inside the tunnel
directed outward (see Figure 3.2). This line load is defined with two input param-
eters: a reference pressure at the tunnel axis level and a specified load increment
for varying depth. Since the water level in the standpipe represents this pressure,
the increment is set according to the unit weight of the water. The reference point
is set at the tunnel axis, and the pressure, with accordance to Zhou (2014) [31], set
equal the corresponding vertical pressure from the soil at this level.
• Centrifuge Induced Gravity: Induced gravity is applied using the option in PLAXIS
by increasing the ΣMweight calculation stage parameter, which is set according to
the number of times the gravity was increased in the centrifuge test.
24
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:33==
• Volume Loss: The line load inside the cluster is decreased step by step to model the
depressurization caused by the water extraction, consequently inducing the volume
loss to the model.
The visualization of the model is shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: PLAXIS 2D model of the centrifuge test with greenfield conditions.
3.2.2
Model stages
Stages within the model are modeled as follows:
1. Initial Stage: The K0 procedure initializes the soil stresses. The magnitude of
ΣMweight is set to 1, simulating normal gravitational conditions.
2. Spinup Stage: The magnitude of ΣMweight is adjusted to replicate the increased
gravity during the centrifuge spinup (75G). The circular soil cluster is deactivated,
and the load is activated. The reference tunnel load at the tunnel axis is calibrated to
counterbalance the vertical soil pressure at this level, adjusted by the gravity factor.
The incremental change in vertical direction considers the water unit weight and the
gravity factor.
3. Reduction Stages: The load is progressively reduced in subsequent stages to
mimic the effect of water extraction, which correlates to increased volume loss in
the experiment.
To evaluate the impact of the spinup phase on the results for the Hardening Soil small
(HSsmall) model, two scenarios are investigated: the first scenario involves not resetting
the small strains after the spinup phase, while the second scenario involves resetting the
small strains following the spinup phase. By comparing these two scenarios, the analysis
aims to better understand how the spinup phase influences the subsequent behavior and
stiffness of the soil in the context of centrifuge simulations.
3.3
2D model - Greenfield Condition at Prototype Scale
The prototype 2D model is configured similarly to the PLAXIS 2D centrifuge model.The
boundary conditions of the sides are normally fixed. The bottom boundary is fully fixed,
and the top boundary is free. This model, however, represents the prototype scale. There-
fore, the gravity is set to 1, and the dimensions are at a 1:1 scale.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
25
==PAGE:34==
In the 2D prototype scale model, boundary effects are minimized by extending the model
boundaries beyond those of the upscaled centrifuge dimensions. This adjustment is cru-
cial since the parametric study performed on these models requires boundaries to be ex-
tended based on tunnel depth and diameter parametrically. For that purpose, suggested
relations from Möller (2006) [19] are used. According to Möller (2006) [19], appropriate
model boundaries are for both 2D and 3D finite element analysis as a function of tun-
nel diameter and cover-to-diameter ratio C/Dt. For the width from the tunnel axis to the
lateral boundary in both 2D and 3D models, the following equation is proposed:
w = 2 · Dt · (w + C
D)
(3.1)
For tunnel diameter Dt ranging from 4m to 12m in the 2D model, the distance between the
tunnel invert and the bottom boundary should vary between 1.3 and 2.2 times the tunnel
diameter. In the models, the distance is taken as 1.4 times the tunnel diameter.
3.4
3D model - With pipeline at Prototype Scale
For simulating the conditions with a buried pipeline, PLAXIS 3D (version 2023.2) is uti-
lized.
3.4.1
Boundary conditions
This model, like the 2D model for greenfield conditions, represents the prototype scale
with gravity scaled to 1 and dimensions at a 1:1 scale. The volume loss, similarly to
the previous models, is simulated by reducing the surface load on a cylindrical surface
that spans between the front and back boundaries. The pipeline is modeled using plate
elements that extend between the sidewalls. A visualization of the model is shown in
Figure 3.3. The boundary conditions of the lateral boundaries are normally fixed. The
bottom boundary is fully fixed, and the top boundary is free.
In the 3D model, the distance between the tunnel invert and the bottom boundary is set to
1.4 times the tunnel diameter. This dimension is consistent according to the boundaries
of 1.1 - 1.45 suggested by Möller (2006) [19]. The length of the 3D model can determined
by the equation proposed by Möller (2006) [19]:
l = Dt · (12 + 13
3 · C
Dt
)
(3.2)
However, this value is given to account for the longitudinal settlement during the construc-
tion sequence of the tunnel excavation. In this project, the tunnel excavation sequence is
simplified — represented merely by volume loss rather than detailed excavation phases.
The length of the model is taken to extend 20 diameters of the pipeline. This sufficiently
extends to effectively capture the influence of pipelines on the settlements.
26
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.3: PLAXIS 3D full-scale model test with buried pipeline.
The pipeline is represented by a plate element which spans between the side boundaries
of the model, with the longitudinal axis aligning with the middle of the model length.
3.4.2
Model stages
The following stages are modeled with the following setup:
1. Initial stage: The K0 procedure initializes the stresses within the soil cluster. ΣMweight
is set to represent normal gravity conditions.
2. Tunnel installation: The soil cluster within the tunnel is deactivated, and the surface
load above the tunnel is activated. The surface load is set to counterbalance the
vertical soil pressure at the tunnel axis level. The incremental change in vertical
direction considers the water unit weight.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
27
==PAGE:36==
3. Pipeline installation: The soil within the pipeline cluster is deactivated, and the plate
elements (representing the pipeline) are activated.
4. Reduction stages: The load is progressively reduced in subsequent stages to mimic
the increasing volume loss.
In reality, the pipeline is typically in place before the tunnel; however, to minimize the
initial moments in the pipeline induced by the load activation, the tunnel is installed first.
Resetting the strains, state stiffness variables, and displacements after tunnel installation
ensures alignment with desired conditions.
3.5
Data extraction and conversion.
The tunnel volume loss (Vl,t), volume loss calculated from the settlement trough area
(Vl,s) at the surface and middle of the depth to the tunnel axis are calculated to analyze
the tunnel-soil interaction. Both are determined based on the extracted nodes’ coordi-
nates and displacement. Moment in the pipeline is determined based on the normal force
calculated. This section provides detailed description how was this carried out in the post
processing of the results.
3.5.1
Volume loss
Nodes are taken from the periphery of the tunnel edge in 2D models. For the 3D model,
a cross-sectional cut is made at the length of the pipeline axis, and nodes are taken from
the obtained surface. For each node at the periphery of the tunnel, the coordinates X, Y
(and Z in case of 3D model), along with displacement results Ux, Uy (Ux, Uz for 3D), are
derived for each calculated phase. Having the displacements in both directions allows for
the calculation of the area of a triangle formed by each consecutive pair of nodes and the
tunnel center using the formula:
Atriangle = 0.5 · |x1 · (y2 −y3) + x2 · (y3 −y1) + x3 · (y1 −y2)|
(3.3)
The total original area (A0) and the total displaced area (Adispl) are then calculated by
summing up the areas of the triangles:
A0 =
X
i
0.5 · |xc · (yi −yi+1) + xi · (yi+1 −yc) + xi+1 · (yc −yi)|
(3.4)
Adispl =
X
i
0.5·
xc · (ydispl,i −ydispl,i+1) + xdispl,i · (ydispl,i+1 −yc) + xdispl,i+1 · (yc −ydispl,i)

(3.5)
Where xc and yc are the coordinates of the tunnel axis. The illustration of the triangle and
point indexation and the areas covered are shown in Figure 3.4.
The change in area (∆A) is the difference between the original and displaced areas:
∆A = Aoriginal −Adisplaced
(3.6)
The volume loss percentage (Vl,t) at the tunnel level is then calculated as:
Vl,t =
∆A
A0

· 100%
(3.7)
28
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the triangle area covered for original and displaced cross-
sectional area and the indexation of points.
3.5.2
Volume loss at surface
The calculation of volume loss based on the settlement trough data Vl,s is calculated with
the following procedure. A cross-section is made at fixed y (or z in case of a 3D model)
very close to the surface, and the results Ux, Uy (Ux, Uz for 3D) are extracted. Having
that, we can calculate the area of the settlement trough by summing up the trapezoids:
As =
X
i
0.5 · (Uy,i + Uy,i+1) · (Xy,i+1 −Xy,i)
(3.8)
The illustration of the settlement trough and the trapezoids is shown in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Illustration presenting the calculation of the area of the settlement trough.
3.5.3
Moment in the pipeline
The bending moment M in the pipeline is defined as an integral:
Tunnel influence on pipeline
29
==PAGE:38==
M =
Z 2π
0
N(θ) · r · sin(θ) · dθ,
(3.9)
where N(θ) is the normal force at a given angle θ.
The pipeline’s bending moment calculation using results obtained from PLAXIS are, how-
ever, performed differently. This is because PLAXIS does not calculate the bending mo-
ment for the whole pipeline but rather the moment of the plate element. The moment
is calculated using the normal forces recorded at each node in the circumference. The
bending moment are then calculated by summing the contributions from discrete seg-
ments along the pipe’s circumference.
The hollow pipe is defined by its outer radius r and the location of its center axis at (yc, zc).
Each node on the pipe is represented by its coordinates (yi, zi) and the corresponding nor-
mal force Ni (kN/m). These data points are extracted from PLAXIS. Using this information,
the angular position θi of each point relative to the pipe’s center axis is calculated as:
θi =



















arctan

zi−zc
yi−yc

if yi −yc > 0,
arctan

zi−zc
yi−yc

+ π
if yi −yc < 0 and zi −zc ≥0,
arctan

zi−zc
yi−yc

−π
if yi −yc < 0 and zi −zc < 0,
π
2
if yi −yc = 0 and zi −zc > 0,
−π
2
if yi −yc = 0 and zi −zc < 0.
(3.10)
This ensures the angular position θi is assigned to the correct quadrant.
The pipe’s circumference is discretized (based on the nodes) into arc segments, with
length ∆li computed as:
∆li = θi · r
(3.11)
The contribution of each arc segment to the bending moment is then calculated as:
M ≈
n
X
i=1
Ni · ri · sin(θi) · ∆li,
(3.12)
3.6
Validation
The 2D FE model is validated by replicating the experiment documented in Franza, Mar-
shall, and Zhou (2019) [8], which investigated the behaviour of dense Leighton Buzzard
sand with a C/D ratio of 2.44 at 75G. The effectiveness of the model was assessed by
comparing the FEM results against the documented relationships between volume loss in
the tunnel and surface volume loss, maximum vertical displacement, and tunnel internal
pressure.
Since the study by Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8] was conducted on dense Leighton
Buzzard Sand Fraction E, the corresponding input parameters for that specific soil must
be used. Lanzano, Visone, Bilotta, and Santucci (2016) [12] suggests parameters for the
Hardening Soil and Hardening Soil Small models; however, these parameters are pro-
vided for a relative density of 75%, which does not align with the 90% relative density
30
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:39==
used in Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8]. Additionally, the values for G0 do not
agree with another study [6], which reports values up to 50% higher for Leighton Buzzard
Sand at a similar relative density. Therefore, this thesis attempts a calibration of these
parameters.
3.6.1
Hardening Soil model parameter calibration for Leighton Buzzard
Sand (Fraction e)
The calibration of the parameters was conducted in three steps. First, the initial parame-
ters were derived using the empirical equations proposed by Brinkgreve, Engin, and Engin
(2010) [4]. This was followed by a sensitivity analysis to gain a deeper understanding of
the critical HS and HS-small soil parameters for this case. With this information and a
clearer understanding of the problem, the final calibration was performed using triaxial
tests (drained triaxial compression) results from Lanzano, Visone, Bilotta, and Santucci
(2016) [12] and the PLAXIS SoilTest software. The results were validated, and the final
parameters were selected.
3.6.2
Mesh Convergence
In order to determine the optimal mesh size, a convergence analysis was performed for
the 2D centrifuge model as well as the 2D and 3D full-scale models. For the centrifuge
model, convergence was assessed by examining the relationship between volume loss
and tunnel pressure, and between volume loss and maximum vertical displacement at the
surface. For the 2D and 3D models, convergence was evaluated based on the maximum
bending moment induced in the pipelines. The 2D model employed the DOLEA approach
for the moment calculation, while pipeline moment for the 3D model’s was calculated
according to subsection 3.5.3.
3.7
Design Oriented Linear Equivalent Approach (DOLEA)
The DOLEA described in section 2.2 is implemented to calculate the maximum bending
moment in the pipeline.
The settlements trough is obtained from the greenfield 2D model results at the pipeline
axis level. The settlements trough is then fitted with the best possible modified Gaus-
sian curve using the scipy.optimize function curve_fit from a Python package. The
parameters of the fitted modified Gaussian curve serve as inputs to the algorithm.
The second input required for DOLEA is the stiffness degradation curve, which is essen-
tial for calculating the rigidity factor R (Equation 2.6). To determine this, the confining
stress (σ3) at the pipeline axis level is calculated. If the Hardening Soil model is used, the
stiffness degradation is derived using the relationship of E50 (at the corresponding σ3),
following the hyperbolic curve presented in Equation 2.15. In the case of the Hardening
Soil Small model, the initial small-strain stiffness G0 at the reference pressure is computed
using Equation 2.24. Together with the γ0.7 soil parameter, the degradation curve for the
HSsmall model is then implemented following Equation 2.25.
With both inputs of the modified Gaussian parameters and the degradation curve, the
DOLEA algorithm is implemented in Python as described in subsection 2.2.1. As an output
from DOLEA, the maximum moment is obtained.
3.8
Parametric study
The parametric study examines the effects of tunneling under greenfield conditions and
scenarios where pipelines are buried. In greenfield conditions, the settlement trough are
analyzed. For buried pipelines, the study compares moments induced in the pipeline
using the DOLEA method and 3D finite element (FE) analysis.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
31
==PAGE:40==
The study explores the varying tunnel cover-to-diameter ratio by varying the tunnel depth
with a fixed tunnel diameter or the diameter with a fixed depth. Three types of pipelines
are investigated with contrasting wall thicknesses to evaluate the range of stiffness from
minimal to maximal for each pipeline. The pipeline dimensions are chosen based on
specifications from a globally recognized pipe manufacturer brochure (Hyundai Steel [9]).
The first type of steel pipe, suitable for high-temperature applications up to 350°C, con-
forms to standards BS 3601, EN10217-1, and ISO9330-1. The second and third types
are designed for lower-pressure applications, such as conveying steam, water, gas, and
air, and are manufactured using roll bending.
Details of the study are outlined in subsection 3.8.1 for tunnel parameters and subsec-
tion 3.8.2 for pipeline parameters.
The study employs two constitutive models, HS and HSsmall, to investigate the response
of dense sand at a relative density of 90%. The parameters for these soil conditions are
derived from empirical equations provided by [4].
Dense
Id
%
90
γunsat
kN/m3
18.6
E50.ref
kPa
54E3
Eoed.ref
kPa
54E3
Eur.ref
kPa
162E3
G0.ref
kPa
121.2E3
γ0.7
-
1.10E-04
m
-
0.41875
ϕ
deg
39.25
ψ
deg
9.25
Rf
-
0.8875
Table 3.1: Sand HS and HSs model parameters used for the parametric study.
3.8.1
Greenfield
Three scenarios were investigated:
1. Varying tunnel depth with mixed diameter:diameter 5m at depths 13m, 18m, 24m
2. Varying tunnel diameter with fixed depth at 18 with diameter 5m, 6.7m, 9.3m
3. Varying tunnel diameter with fixed depth at 24 with diameter 5m, 6.7m, 9.3m
Three types of tunnels designated T1, T2, and T3, with diameters of 5m, 6.7m, and 9.3m,
respectively, represent sizes from a relatively small tunnel to a large-diameter tunnel. The
depths explored were 13m (D1), 18m (D2), and 24m (D3), with corresponding C/D ratios
ranging from 2.4 to 5.3. This range covers medium-deep to deep tunnels. The scenarios
investigated are summarized in Table 3.2.
32
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:41==
Dt
Zt
C/Dt
m
m
-
Scenario T1D1
5.0
13.0
2.1
Scenario T1D2
5.0
18.0
3.1
Scenario T1D3
5.0
24.0
4.3
Scenario T2D2
6.7
18.0
2.19
Scenario T3D2
9.3
18.0
1.44
Scenario T2D3
6.7
24.0
3.08
Scenario T3D3
9.3
24.0
2.08
Table 3.2: Tunnel parameters employed for the parametric study.
3.8.2
With burried pipeline
Figure 3.6 illustrates the dimensions investigated in the study, such as tunnel and pipeline
diameters (Dt, Dp) and the vertical distances between the pipe invert and the tunnel crown
(H).
Figure 3.6: Sketch of the geometry parameters used in the parametric study.
Three pipeline types with varying stiffness are analyzed for each set of tunnel parameters
outlined in subsection 3.8.1. The pipeline depths are selected based on the H/Dt ratio,
ranging from 0.9 to 3.6.
A coding system is employed to reference specific scenarios. ’P1’ denotes pipeline type 1,
’P2’ pipeline type 2, ’P3’ to type 3. ’S’ letter indicate the pipeline’s stiffness: ’S1’ represents
the lower stiffness, while ’S2’ the higher stiffness.
The first pipeline type, with a 610 mm diameter and suitable for high-temperature applica-
tions up to 350°C, is evaluated at two stiffness levels: EI = 1.1×105kN ∗m2 representing
a pipe with a 6.2 mm wall thickness, and EI = 2.9 × 105kN ∗m2 representing a pipe
with a 17.5 mm wall thickness. This pipeline is investigated at a depth of 3 meters. The
scenarios for pipeline type 1 are detailed in Table 3.3.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
33
==PAGE:42==
Pipeline type 1
Dt
Zt
C/Dt
Dp
Zp
H
H/Dt
m
m
-
m
m
-
-
Varying depth with diameter 5m
Scenario T1D1 P1
5.0
13.0
2.1
0.610
3
7.2
1.4
Scenario T1D2 P1
5.0
18.0
3.1
0.610
3
12.2
2.4
Scenario T1D3 P1
5.0
24.0
4.3
0.610
3
18.2
3.6
Varying Diameter at depth 18m
Scenario T1D2 P1
5.0
18.0
3.1
0.610
3
12.2
2.4
Scenario T2D2 P1
6.7
18.0
2.19
0.610
3
11.3
1.7
Scenario T3D2 P1
9.3
18.0
1.44
0.610
3
10.0
1.1
Varying Diameter at depth 24m
Scenario T1D3 P1
5.0
24.0
4.3
0.610
3
18.2
3.6
Scenario T2D3 P1
6.7
24.0
3.08
0.610
3
17.3
2.6
Scenario T3D3 P1
9.3
24.0
2.08
0.610
3
16.0
1.7
Table 3.3: Pipeline type 1 and accompanying parameters employed in the parametric
study.
The second pipeline analyzed features a larger 1626 mm diameter. This pipeline is ex-
amined at two different stiffness levels: EI = 4.1 × 106kNm2 for a pipe with a 12.5 mm
wall thickness and EI = 8.1 × 106kNm2 for a pipe with a 25 mm wall thickness. The
scenarios for this larger pipe are detailed in Table 3.4.
Pipeline type 2
Dt
Zt
C/Dt
Dp
Zp
H
H/Dt
m
m
-
m
m
-
-
Varying depth with diameter 5m
Scenario T1D1 P2
5.0
13.0
2.1
1.626
4
5.7
1.1
Scenario T1D2 P2
5.0
18.0
3.1
1.626
4
10.7
2.1
Scenario T1D3 P2
5.0
24.0
4.3
1.626
4
16.7
3.3
Varying Diameter at depth 18m
Scenario T1D2 P2
5.0
18.0
3.1
1.626
4
10.7
2.1
Scenario T2D2 P2
6.7
18.0
2.19
1.626
4
9.8
1.5
Scenario T3D2 P2
9.3
18.0
1.44
1.626
4
8.5
0.9
Varying Diameter at depth 18m
Scenario T1D3 P2
5.0
24.0
4.3
1.626
4
16.7
3.3
Scenario T2D3 P2
6.7
24.0
3.08
1.626
4
15.8
2.4
Scenario T3D3 P2
9.3
24.0
2.08
1.626
4
14.5
1.6
Table 3.4: Pipeline type 2 and accompanying parameters employed in the parametric
study.
The third pipeline analyzed is the largest, with a 2235 mm diameter suitable for diverse
applications. Two stiffness levels are considered for this pipeline: EI = 6.9 × 106kNm2
for a pipe with an 8 mm wall thickness and EI = 2.1 × 107kNm2 for a pipe with a 25 mm
wall thickness. The scenarios for this pipe type are detailed in Table 3.5.
34
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:43==
Pipeline type 3
Dt
Zt
C/Dt
Dp
Zp
H
H/Dt
m
m
-
m
m
-
-
Varying depth with diameter 5m
Scenario T1D1 P3
5.0
13.0
2.1
2.235
5
4.4
0.9
Scenario T1D2 P3
5.0
18.0
3.1
2.235
5
9.4
1.9
Scenario T1D3 P3
5.0
24.0
4.3
2.235
5
15.4
3.1
Varying Diameter at depth 18m
Scenario T1D2 P3
5.0
18.0
3.1
2.235
5
9.4
1.9
Scenario T2D2 PS
6.7
18.0
2.19
2.235
5
8.5
1.3
Scenario T3D2 P3
9.3
18.0
1.44
2.235
5
7.2
0.8
Varying Diameter at depth 24m
Scenario T1D3 P3
5.0
24.0
4.3
2.235
5
15.4
3.1
Scenario T2D3 P3
6.7
24.0
3.08
2.235
5
14.5
2.2
Scenario T3D3 P3
9.3
24.0
2.08
2.235
5
13.2
1.4
Table 3.5: Pipeline type 3 and accompanying parameters employed in the parametric
study.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
35
==PAGE:44==
4
Results
This chapter presents the validation of finite element (FE) analyses and the results of
the parametric study. The validation for the 2D centrifuge models, as well as the 2D and
3D full-scale models, is presented in section 4.1. The parametric study conducted under
greenfield conditions are detailed in section 4.2. Similarly, the parametric study involving
conditions with a buried pipeline are presented in section 4.3.
4.1
Models validation
This section presents the validation results for the centrifuge model. It begins with the
calibration results for the Leighton Buzzard sand parameters. It discusses the sensitivity
of the primary parameters within the Hardening Soil (HS) and Hardening Soil small strain
(HSsmall) models on soil behavior. Subsequently, the Finite Element (FE) model results
are compared with empirical data from Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8] to validate
the model’s accuracy. Additionally, this section includes mesh convergence studies for
the 2D centrifuge model and the 2D and 3D full-scale models, providing a rationale for
the chosen mesh sizes.
4.1.1
Centrifuge Model
Mesh convergence
Four mesh sizes (defined as coarssness factor in PLAXIS) were investigated in the con-
vergence analysis with the following designations: 0.03, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.5. In PLAXIS,
local mesh refinement is automatically applied at the perimeter of the tunnel to account for
the applied load. Additionally, the software adjusts the mesh near boundaries to ensure
accurate modeling of boundary conditions. Therefore, these specified sizes serve only
as reference values for input and do not directly correspond to the whole model. Details
of each investigated mesh, including the number of generated triangular elements and
corresponding number of nodes, are presented in Table 4.1.
Mesh size
No. of Elements
No. of Nodes
0.03
1324
10765
0.05
514
4217
0.1
110
933
0.5
26
225
Table 4.1: Generated meshes in the model and the corresponding number of elements
and nodes.
36
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:45==
The results of the mesh convergence analysis are presented in Figure 4.1. The figure
depicts six plots a - f:
(a) The relative tunnel pressure ratio, where σt represents the tunnel pressure and σ0,t
the initial tunnel pressure.
(b) Normalized tunnel pressure, where ρ denotes the soil density, g gravitational accel-
eration constant, N represents the number of times gravity was increased, and D
is the tunnel diameter.
(c) The maximum settlements normalized with the tunnel diameter at half the depth of
the tunnel axis, expressed as Z/Zt = 0.5.
(d) The maximum settlements normalized with the tunnel diameter at the surface level
where Z/Zt = 0.
(e) & (f) Illustrate the volume loss calculated from the settlements Vl,s plotted against
the tunnel volume loss Vl,t at half the depth of the tunnel axis and at the surface,
respectively.
In the FE model, the HS model was employed, using soil parameters that correspond
to sand at a 90% relative density. These parameters, derived from empirical relations
provided in Brinkgreve, Engin, and Engin (2010) [4], are listed in Table 4.2. It is clear that
the convergence criteria have been met for all plots with mesh sizes of 0.01 and smaller.
For a mesh size of 0.5, the volume loss calculated at the level Z/Zt = 0.5 was higher than
for other sizes, indicating that no nodes were found at the exact level and the closest ones
were used for calculations. The mesh size selected for the centrifuge analysis was set
at 0.05, to balance between computational efficiency and model resolution, avoiding both
excessively coarse and overly fine discretizations.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.1: 2D centrifuge model: Resulting mesh convergence. a) relative tunnel pres-
sure, b) Normalised tunnel pressure, Variation of normalised maximum settlement for c)
Z/Zt = 0.5 and d) Z/Zt = 0, Vl,s plotted against V l, t for e) Z/Zt = 0.5 and f) Z/Zt = 0
Leighton buzzard sand parameters calibration
The Leighton buzzard sand parameters according to Lanzano, Santucci de Magistris,
and Bilotta (2014) [13] , Brinkgreve, Engin, and Engin (2010) [4] were listed in Table 4.2.
According to [13] void ratio emax = 1.014 and emin = 0.613. This is also consistent to the
void ratios documented in Klar, Elkayam, and Marshall (2016) [10] where emax = 0.97 and
emin = 0.64. Based on the void ratio from [13] and assuming the specific gravity of sand
Gs is 2.65 and relative density Id = 90%, the dry unit weight γ = 15.7 is calculated using
the equation Equation 4.1.
38
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:47==
γdry = Gs · 9.81
1 + e
(4.1)
Where void ratio e, is calculated:
e = emin + (emax −emin) · (1 −Id)
(4.2)
Parameter
Units
Lanzano et al. [13]
Brinkgreve et al. [4]
Id
%
90
90
E50,ref
MPa
18.6
54
Eoed,ref
MPa
20.5
54
Eur,ref
MPa
62.16
162
m
-
0.4
0.42
G0,ref
MPa
72.7
121.2
γ0.7
-
5.8E-04
1.1E-04
ϕ
◦
39.42
39.25
ψ
◦
10
9.25
Table 4.2: Sand HS and HSsmall parameters according to the literature. pref = 100 kPa
The parameters derived from SoilTest calibration are detailed in Table 4.3. These param-
eters were obtained by linearly interpolating the results from simulating the drained triaxial
compression tests carried out on Leighton Buzzard sand at relative densities of 70% and
80%. The plots obtained from the simulation performed in PLAXIS SoilTest are presented
in section A.1.
It is evident that the resulting friction angle and the dilation angle are very high, there-
fore the chosen parameter were according to Brinkgreve et al. [4]. Since the results are
derived from triaxial tests, the parameters Eoed and Eur are not representative. Conse-
quently, only the calibrated value of E50 was used for the final results, with Eoed set equal
to E50, which is common practice according to [4]. The value of Eur was taken as twice
that of E50. The parameter m were adopted as suggested by [4].
Parameter
Units
Soiltest
Chosen
Id
%
90
90
E50,ref
MPa
30
30
Eoed,ref
MPa
46,32
33
Eur,ref
MPa
133,16
66
m
-
-
0.42
G0,ref
MPa
-
121.2
γ0.7
-
-
1.1E-04
ϕ
◦
46,3
39.25
ψ
◦
20,7
9.25
Table 4.3: Sand parameters from SoilTest calibration and chosen parameters. Results
for pref = 100 kPa
The results for the chosen parameters, are presented in Figure 4.2. Results from real
centrifuge test from Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8] for the corresponding test and
Tunnel influence on pipeline
39
==PAGE:48==
Leighton buzzard sand were plotted added for comparison. Three models were analyzed:
one using the HS model, a second employing the HSsmall model without the small strains
reset after the spin-up phase and a third with resetting the small strains.
When compared to the experiments documented by Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8],
the pressure response of the HS model showes identical behavior up to a Vl,t of 0.5% and
overpredicts the asymptote that indicates failure. The agreement regarding maximum
settlements was notably accurate for both the HS and HSsmall models when strains were
reset after the spinup phase. In terms of volume loss from settlements, Vl,s, the HSsmall
model performed better at half the tunnel depth but underpredicted Vl,s at the surface.
Conversely, the HS model accurately predicted Vl,s at the surface for tunnel volume losses
up to 1.7%.
The tunnel pressure-volume loss relationship reveals that the HSsmall parameters pro-
duced a significantly stiffer response. Notably, resetting the small strains after the spin-up
phase further increased stiffness. The results for HS and HSsmall with strains resetting
displayed identical maximum settlement depths. However, for Vl,s at the surface and half
the tunnel depth, the responses were similar for Vl,t up to approximately 1%. Beyond this,
the Vl,s was lower for the HSsmall with resetting the small strains, indicating a narrower
settlement trough compared to the other models.
40
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.2: Results for the centrifuge model for dense sand employing HS and HSsmall
constitutive models. Comparison to real centrifuge data from Franza, Marshall, and Zhou
(2019) [8]. a) relative tunnel pressure, b) Normalised tunnel pressure, Variation of nor-
malized maximum settlement for c) Z/Zt = 0.5 and d) Z/Zt = 0, Vl,s plotted against V l, t
for e) Z/Zt = 0.5 and f) Z/Zt = 0
In the plots depicted in Figure 4.3, Figure 4.4, and Figure 4.5, the stress paths for nodes
at the tunnel springline (a) and crown (b) are illustrated for the Hardening Soil (HS) model
and the Hardening Soil small (HSsmall) model, both with and without resetting the small
strains after the spinup phase. The plots display stress path during the loading and un-
loading phases, marked by changes in color representing tunnel volume loss, ranging
from 0% (purple) to 3% (yellow). During the spinup phase, at springline, all models ex-
hibit an increase in mean effective stress up to approximately -80 kPa, while deviatoric
stress reaches about 140 kPa. Following this phase, the models undergo deviatoric un-
loading, reducing deviatoric stress to approximately 60 kPa, with mean effective stresses
remaining nearly constant. Until this stage, the stress paths for all models are identical.
From this point, each model returns to the loading line experienced during spinup and
Tunnel influence on pipeline
41
==PAGE:50==
proceeds to unload, ultimately converging at the same stress state.
As for the node at the crown, all models exhibit an initial loading where mean effective
stress increases significantly, reaching values up to -200 kPa, and deviatoric stress peaks
at approximately 220 kPa. This initial phase corresponds to the spinup phase. Subse-
quently, the plots show a linear decrease, representing the unloading phase..
Figure 4.3: Stress path obtained from the centrifuge model with Hardening Soil model.
Figure 4.4: Stress path obtained from the centrifuge model with Hardening Soil small
model.
Figure 4.5: Stress path obtained from the centrifuge model with Hardening Soil small
model and resetting the small strains after the spinup phase.
42
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:51==
Sensitivity Analysis
The result of the Sensitivity analysis will be presented in this subsection. The parameters
investigated are as follows: for the HS: E50,φ ,ψ, and for the HSsmall: G0
Parameter: E50,ref
Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7 present results from a sensitivity analysis investigating the ef-
fects of varying E50,ref. The values examined were 36 MPa, 54 MPa, 64 MPa, and 80
MPa. The key difference between these figures lies in the multiplication factors applied
to Eoed,ref and Eur,ref. In Figure 4.6, Eoed,ref and Eur,ref were multiplied by factors of 1
and 2, respectively. Meanwhile, in Figure 4.7, these factors were set to 1 and 3. The
analysis indicates that changes in stiffness significantly influence tunnel-induced soil be-
havior, particularly affecting the pressure responses seen in plots (a) and (b). A difference
between these plots is observed when comparing the multiplication factor for Eur,ref: in
Figure 4.7, where the factor is higher, the response is noticeably stiffer for volume losses
around 0.5%. Additionally, the comparison of Eur,ref multiplication factors reveals that
for a factor of 3, the settlement trough area increases at both the surface and the middle
tunnel depth (plots (e) and (f)). However, there is no significant difference in the maximum
recorded settlements (plots (c) and (d)).
Tunnel influence on pipeline
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.6: Results for sensitivity analysis of E50,ref parameter at reference pressure
100kPa. Eoed,ref and Eur,ref multiplied by factor of 1 and 2. a) relative tunnel pressure,
b) Normalised tunnel pressure, Variation of normalized maximum settlement for c) Z/Zt
= 0.5 and d) Z/Zt = 0, Vl,s plotted against V l, t for e) Z/Zt = 0.5 and f) Z/Zt = 0
44
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.7: Results for sensitivity analysis of E50,ref parameter at reference pressure
100kPa. Eoed,ref and Eur,ref multiplied by factor of 1 and 3. a) relative tunnel pressure,
b) Normalised tunnel pressure, Variation of normalized maximum settlement for c) z/zt =
0.5 and d) z/zt = 0, Vl,s plotted against V l, t for e) z/zt = 0.5 and f) z/zt = 0 and c) z/zt = 0.5
Parameter: φ
Figure 4.8 presents results from a sensitivity analysis that examines the effects of varying
the friction angle (ϕ). The values investigated were 33, 36, 39, and 42 degrees. The anal-
ysis reveals that the friction angle significantly influences the failure asymptote. However,
it does not affect the maximum settlements, nor does it impact the area of the settlement
trough, whether at the surface level or at the mid-depth of the tunnel.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.8: Sensitivity analysis of φ. a) relative tunnel pressure, b) Normalised tunnel
pressure, Variation of normalized maximum settlement for c) Z/Zt = 0.5 and d) Z/Zt = 0,
Vl,s plotted against V l, t for e) Z/Zt = 0.5 and f) Z/Zt = 0
Parameter :ψ
Figure 4.9 presents results from a sensitivity analysis that focuses on the effects of varying
the dilation angle (ψ). The values investigated were 5, 7, 9, and 12 degrees. The results
show that the dilation angle does not impact the stiffness response in the pressure versus
volume loss plots, nor does it affect the settlements or the settlement trough area up
to approximately 1%. Beyond this point, the values of maximum settlements and the
trough area, both at the surface level and at the mid-depth of the tunnel, begin to vary
with different dilation angles. The trend suggests that the plastic strains are becoming
significant at approximately 1%, where we can see the dilation taking place. Lower dilation
46
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:55==
angles result in deeper maximum settlements and larger settlement trough areas.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.9: Results for sensitivity analysis of ψ parameter at reference pressure 100kPa.
a) relative tunnel pressure, b) Normalised tunnel pressure, Variation of normalized max-
imum settlement for c) Z/Zt = 0.5 and d) Z/Zt = 0, Vl,s plotted against V l, t for e) Z/Zt =
0.5 and f) Z/Zt = 0
Parameter: G0,ref
Figure 4.9 presents results from a sensitivity analysis examining the effects of varying the
initial shear modulus G0,ref at a reference pressure of 100 kPa. The values investigated
were 80 MPa, 100 MPa, 121 MPa, 145 MPa, and 180 MPa. This analysis was conducted
on a model that does not account for resetting the small strains after the spinup phase.
The results indicate that changes in G0,ref slightly affect the pressure response plots. Ad-
ditionally, G0,ref does not significantly influence the maximum vertical settlements and has
only a minor impact on the area of the settlement trough at both the surface level and at
48
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:57==
the mid-depth of the tunnel.
Figure 4.10: Results for sensitivity analysis of G0,ref parameter at reference pressure
100kPa. a) relative tunnel pressure, b) Normalised tunnel pressure, Variation of normal-
ized maximum settlement for c) Z/Zt = 0.5 and d) Z/Zt = 0, Vl,s plotted against V l, t for
e) Z/Zt = 0.5 and f) Z/Zt = 0
Tunnel influence on pipeline
49
==PAGE:58==
4.1.2
Full Scale Models 2D & 3D
4.1.3
Mesh convergence
Four mesh sizes were investigated in the convergence analysis with the following desig-
nations: 0.03, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.5. In Plaxis, mesh refinement is automatically applied at the
perimeter of the tunnel and pipeline to account for the applied load and plate. Therefore,
these specified sizes serve only as reference values for input and do not directly corre-
spond to the actual mesh sizes, which are typically smaller in the vicinity of the structures.
Details of each investigated mesh, including the number of generated triangular elements
and corresponding number of nodes, are presented in Table 4.4 for the 2D model and
Table 4.5 for the 3D model.
Mesh size
No. of Elements
No. of Nodes
0.03
1268
10317
0.05
494
4057
0.1
100
849
0.5
20
177
Table 4.4: Generated meshes in the 2D model and the corresponding number of elements
and nodes.
Mesh size
No. of Elements
No. of Nodes
0.03
38714
56184
0.05
32956
46256
0.1
31580
43662
0.5
31427
43575
Table 4.5: Generated meshes in the 3D model and the corresponding number of elements
and nodes.
In Figure 4.11a, the results for the convergence of maximum moments calculated based
on the extracted settlements at the pipeline level for the 2D model are presented. Mean-
while, Figure 4.11 shows the maximum moments calculated based on the normal forces
induced in the pipeline. From both plots, it is evident that the convergence criteria have
been met for all cases with mesh sizes of 0.1 and smaller. For a mesh size of 0.03, the
moment calculated from the 2D model exhibited slightly higher values starting from ap-
proximately 1.5% volume loss. For both the 2D and 3D models, a mesh size of 0.05 was
selected, as the plots confirm that convergence was achieved.
50
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: Mesh convergence results for 2D model (a) and 3D model (b).
4.1.4
Boundaries validation: Pipeline movement
Figure 4.12 shows the deflection of the pipeline corresponding to the maximum upward
movement recorded at the model boundaries, which occurred in the scenario T3D3 P3.
For a recorded volume loss of 1.5%, the maximum upward movement recorded at the
boundary was 0.7 mm, with a maximum downward movement of 50 mm at the pipeline
center.
Figure 4.12: Pipe deflections
4.2
Parametric study - Greenfield conditions
This section presents the results of the parametric study for greenfield conditions. Two
specific variations were included: varying tunnel depth and varying tunnel diameter. The
results are presented using two constitutive models, Hardening Soil (HS) and Hardening
Soil Small (HSsmall), to understand their impact on the predicted soil responses.
4.2.1
Varying depth
This subsection presents the result for scenarios where the tunnel diameter is set to 5
meters at depths (measuring to the tunnel axis) of 13m, 18m, and 24m. The respective
cover-to-diameter ratios are 2.1, 3.1, and 4.3.
In the analyses presented in Figure 4.13, it is evident that deeper tunnels are subject to
greater pressures. Plots c and d, reveal that shallower tunnels display greater maximum
vertical settlements. Up to a tunnel volume loss of 1%, the settlement trough area remains
relatively consistent across all scenarios. However, plots e and f indicate that beyond this
threshold, the settlement trough area increases with the depth of the tunnel, suggesting
that the width of the settlement trough broadens with increasing tunnel depth.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
51
==PAGE:60==
Comparing the Hardening Soil and Hardening Soil small models, it is observed that there
are no significant differences in the pressure response due to changing volume loss (plots
a and b) or in the normalized maximum vertical settlements between the two models (plots
c and d). However, the Vl,s vs Vl,t comparison reveals a slight difference between the
HSsmall and HS models. HSsmall yields smaller trough areas than the HS model at both
surface and mid-tunnel depths. This suggests that the settlement trough is narrower when
using the HSsmall model.
52
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.13: Soil response to 5m diameter tunnel with varying tunnel depth 13m, 18m,
24m. a) relative tunnel pressure, b) Normalised tunnel pressure, Variation of normalized
maximum settlement for c) Z/Zt = 0.5 and d) Z/Zt = 0, Vl,s plotted against V l, t for e) Z/Zt
= 0.5 and f) Z/Zt = 0
In Figure 4.14 and Figure 4.15, the settlement trough propagation with increasing tunnel
volume loss is plotted, normalized to the maximum observed settlements, for the Hard-
ening Soil (HS) model and the Hardening Soil Small (HSsmall) model, respectively. The
modified Gaussian curve is also fitted to the settlement trough at each recorded volume
loss.
The plots show that the fitting performs very well for volume losses up to 1.5% . How-
ever, in some cases, the maximum settlement tends to be overestimated. This can be
observed, for example, at C/D = 3.1 at the middle of the tunnel depth for both the HS and
HSsmall models, or at C/D = 2.1 at the middle of the tunnel depth for the HSsmall model.
For both models, the settlements at the middle of the tunnel depth are narrower than those
at the surface. This observation also indicates that the inflection point of the settlement
trough is closer to the tunnel as the depth increases.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.14: Variations of normalized settlement trough with changing volume loss. Tun-
nel diameter Dt = 5m with varying tunnel depths of 13m, 18m, and 24m. Hardening Soil
constitutive model used.
Figure 4.15: Variations of normalized settlement trough with changing volume loss. Tun-
nel diameter Dt = 5m with varying tunnel depths of 13m, 18m, and 24m. Hardening Soil
small constitutive model used.
To compare the characteristics of the settlement troughs for the HS and HSsmall models,
Figure 4.16 was created. This figure compares the settlement troughs directly on one
graph at volume loss levels: 0.1%, 0.4%, and 1.2%. These specific volume loss values
were selected because the settlement trough was recorded for most scenarios at these
54
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:63==
levels. Both axes were normalized: the vertical axis is normalized to the maximum set-
tlement, and the horizontal axis is normalized to the tunnel axis depth. From the plot, it is
evident that the HSsmall model results in narrower settlement troughs for all investigated
volume losses.
The same plot also allows for a comparison of settlement troughs at different tunnel depths
across the selected tunnel volume losses. It is apparent that, at very small volume losses
of 0.1%, there is minimal difference in the settlement trough characteristic regardless of
the depth at which the tunnel is excavated. This observation holds true for both the surface
level and the level at the middle of the tunnel depth. The differences become slightly more
noticeable as the tunnel volume loss increases, and the difference is even more apparent
when examining the settlement trough at the middle tunnel depth. For a tunnel volume
loss of 0.4%, it is evident that the deeper the tunnel, the wider the settlement trough. This
trend is consistent for both the HS and HSsmall models. For a tunnel volume loss of 1.2%,
however, settlements were not recorded for a tunnel depth of 13 m, but the same trend is
present for the recorded scenarios.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.16: Variations of normalized settlement trough at volume losses 0.1%, 0.4% and
1.2%. Tunnel diameter Zt = 5m with varying tunnel depth 13m, 18m, 24m.
56
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:65==
4.2.2
Varying tunnel diameter
This subsection presents the results for scenarios where the effect of changing the tunnel
diameter is analyzed at depths of 18 m and 24 m. The analyzed diameters were 5 m,
6.7 m, and 9.3 m. The respective cover-to-diameter ratios (C/D) for tunnels at an 18 m
depth were 3.1, 2.19, and 1.44, and for a 24 m depth, they were 4.3, 3.08, and 2.08.
First, the effect of diameter change at a depth of 18 m is analyzed and presented in
Figure 4.17. From plots c) and d), it is evident that larger tunnel diameters result in greater
maximum settlements at both the surface and the middle of the tunnel depth. For plots e)
and f), it can be observed that the settlement area measured at both the surface and the
middle of the tunnel depth is similar for all diameters up to approximately 1% volume loss.
Beyond this point, the influence of tunnel diameter on the settlement area becomes more
noticeable. The trend reveals that after 1% tunnel volume loss, smaller diameter tunnels
yield a larger Vl,s than larger tunnels.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.17: Soil response to tunnel at Zt = 18m with varying tunnel diameter 5m, 6.7m,
9.3m. a) relative tunnel pressure, b) Normalised tunnel pressure, Variation of normalized
maximum settlement for c) Z/Zt = 0.5 and d) Z/Zt = 0, Vl,s plotted against V l, t for e) Z/Zt
= 0.5 and f) Z/Zt = 0
In Figure 4.18 and Figure 4.19, the settlement trough propagation with increasing tunnel
volume loss is plotted and normalized to the maximum observed settlements for the HS
model and the HSsmall model, respectively. The modified Gaussian curve is also fitted
to the settlement trough at each observed volume loss.
The fitting shows very good agreement, particularly for the surface settlements prediction.
It also performs well for settlements at the middle tunnel depth across all scenarios, up
to a volume loss of 1.5%. However, beyond this threshold, the modified Gaussian curve
overestimates the recorded settlements. This overestimation is particularly evident for
scenarios with C/D ratios of 2.19 and 1.44.
58
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.18: Variations of normalized settlement trough with changing volume loss. Tun-
nel at Zt = 18m with varying tunnel diameters 5m, 6.7m, 9.3m. Hardening Soil constitutive
model used.
Figure 4.19: Variations of normalized settlement trough with changing volume loss. Tun-
nel at Zt = 18m with varying tunnel diameters 5m, 6.7m, 9.3m. Hardening Soil small
constitutive model used.
The settlements for specific tunnel volume losses were plotted in Figure 4.20 to directly
compare the settlement troughs. The settlement troughs are presented for volume losses
recorded in most cases, i.e., 0.1%, 0.6%, and 0.9%, for both settlements recorded at the
surface and at the middle of the tunnel depth.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
59
==PAGE:68==
For the small volume loss of 0.1% in the HS model, there is no significant difference in the
characteristics of the settlement trough when comparing tunnels of different diameters.
However, for the HSsmall model, the difference becomes more evident.
Specifically,
for the larger diameter tunnel (9.3m, C/D = 1.44), the settlement trough is noticeably
narrower than smaller diameter tunnels. This difference is obvious when examining the
settlements at the middle depth of the tunnel.
As the volume loss increases, the trend of larger diameter tunnels yielding narrower set-
tlement troughs becomes more pronounced for both the HS and HSsmall models. This is
most evident for a volume loss of 0.9%, particularly at the middle depth of the tunnel.
60
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.20: Variations of normalized settlement trough at volume losses 0.1%, 0.6% and
0.9%. Tunnel at Zt = 24m with varying tunnel diameters 5m, 6.7m, 9.3m.
Here, the effect of diameter change at a depth of 24 meters is analyzed and presented
Tunnel influence on pipeline
61
==PAGE:70==
in Figure 4.21. The tunnel diameters Dt are 5 meters, 6.7 meters, and 9.3 meters, with
corresponding cover-to-diameter ratios of 4.3, 3.08, and 2.08, respectively.
From plots (c) and (d), it is evident that larger tunnel diameters result in greater maximum
settlements at both the tunnel’s surface and middle depth. For plots (e) and (f), it can be
observed that the settlement area measured at both the middle depth and the surface is
similar for all diameters up to approximately 1% tunnel volume loss. Beyond this thresh-
old, the influence of tunnel diameter on the settlement area becomes more pronounced.
Specifically, the trend after 1% tunnel volume loss reveals that smaller diameter tunnels
yield a larger Vl,s than larger tunnels.
Figure 4.21: Soil response to tunnel at Zt = 24m with varying tunnel diameter 5m, 6.7m,
9.3m. a) relative tunnel pressure, b) Normalised tunnel pressure, Variation of normalized
maximum settlement for c) Z/Zt = 0.5 and d) Z/Zt = 0, Vl,s plotted against V l, t for e) Z/Zt
= 0.5 and f) Z/Zt = 0
The propagation of settlement troughs with the increasing tunnel volume loss, normal-
ized to the maximum recorded settlements for each scenario, is presented in Figure 4.22
(for the HS model) and Figure 4.22 (for the HSsmall model). The fitting of the modified
Gaussian curve is also plotted.
The fitting was very good for all cases in both the HS and HSsmall models. However, for
62
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:71==
cases with C/D ratios of 3.08 and 2.08 at volume losses of approximately 1.5% and above,
the modified Gaussian curve overestimated the maximum settlements at the middle depth
of the tunnel.
Figure 4.22: Variations of normalized settlement trough with changing volume loss. Tun-
nel at Zt = 24m with varying tunnel diameters 5m, 6.7m, 9.3m. Hardening Soil constitutive
model used.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.23: Variations of normalized settlement trough with changing volume loss. Tun-
nel at Zt = 24m with varying tunnel diameters 5m, 6.7m, 9.3m. Hardening Soil constitutive
small model used.
In Figure 4.24, the normalized settlement troughs for specific tunnel volume losses are
presented to directly compare the settlement troughs across the scenarios. The settle-
ment troughs are presented for volume losses most frequently recorded, namely 0.1%,
0.5%, and 1.2%, for both the surface level and at the middle depth of the tunnel.
For the small volume loss of 0.1% in the HS model, there is no significant difference in the
characteristics of the settlement trough when comparing tunnels of different diameters.
However, as the volume loss increases, the trend of larger diameter tunnels producing
narrower settlement troughs becomes evident for both the HS and HSsmall models. This
trend is most pronounced for a volume loss of 1.2%, particularly at the middle depth of
the tunnel.
When comparing the results from the HS and HSsmall models, it is evident again that the
HSsmall model produces narrower settlement troughs.
64
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.24: Variations of normalized settlement trough at volume losses 0.1%, 0.5% and
1.2%. Tunnel at Zt = 24m with varying tunnel diameters 5m, 6.7m, 9.3m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
65
==PAGE:74==
4.3
Parametric study - with burried pipeline
This section presents the results of the parametric study. As described in the methodol-
ogy (section 3.8), different pipeline diameters and stiffnesses, buried at varying depths,
were analyzed under changing tunnel conditions, including tunnel diameter and depth
variations. D1 corresponds to a tunnel depth of 13 meters, D2 to 18 meters, and D3 to 24
meters. T1 represents a tunnel diameter of 5 meters, T2 a diameter of 6.7 meters, and
T3 a diameter of 9.3 meters. The detailed information about the investigated scenarios is
outlined in Table 3.3, Table 3.4, and Table 3.5. The study was carried out on dense sands
at a relative density of 90%.
For each of the scenarios, the pipeline’s maximum bending moment was calculated us-
ing the DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D. As a reminder, in DOLEA, the greenfield settlement is
obtained at the pipeline axis level from a 2D PLAXIS model. The maximum moment in
the pipeline is calculated using a predefined stiffness degradation curve that aligns with
the one used in the corresponding FE model, and a set of equations implemented in the
algorithm (outlined in section 3.7). In contrast, the bending moment in PLAXIS 3D is de-
rived from the resulting normal forces induced in the pipeline. The detailed procedure for
this moment calculation is presented in section 3.5.
The results from both methods were plotted in Mmax vs. Vl,t relation and are provided
in the appendix section (section B.2). In this section, each scenario combination was
plotted on a single graph, comparing Mmax, DOLEA vs.Mmax, PLAXIS relation with
a 1:1 reference line to assess agreement between the two methods. Two additional red
reference lines were included to further evaluate deviations from this line, representing
deviation factors of 2 and 0.5. The propagation of the tunnel volume loss is visualized by
applying a color-coded scheme for each data point.
It should be noted that the tunnel volume losses presented in section B.2 do not perfectly
align with those in this section. The volume losses presented in this section were ob-
tained from interpolation between captured data points, allowing for a more continuous
representation of volume losses for values not directly recorded in the simulations.
The second type of plot represents the normalized results Mmax, DOLEA
Mmax, gf
vs Mmax, PLAXIS
Mmax, gf
. Normal-
ization is introduced with Mmax, gf, which is the maximum moment induced in the pipeline
if it were to follow the greenfield displacement. Similar graphs were used as an indication
of pipeline behavior in Klar, Elkayam, and Marshall (2016) [10], where the authors incor-
porated the ratio to derive the Interaction Reduction Index (IRI), defined as Equation 4.3.
The ratios
Mmax
Mmax, gf are plotted on the main axes, and the IRI is plotted on the supplementary
axes. The IRI ranges between 0 and 1, representing two extreme cases: an IRI equal to
0 indicates that the pipeline fully follows the greenfield displacement. In contrast, an IRI
equal to 1 corresponds to a fully rigid, non-deforming pipeline (Klar, Elkayam, and Mar-
shall (2016) [10]). These plots can, therefore, be used to quantify the interaction between
the pipeline and the soil, as they reveal the extent of bending moment reduction resulting
from the pipe-soil interaction (Klar, Elkayam, and Marshall (2016) [10]).
IRI = Mmax,gf −Mmax
Mmax,gf
= 1 −
Mmax
Mmax,gf
(4.3)
66
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:75==
4.3.1
Pipe with diameter 0.61 meters buried at depth 3 meters
Pipeline type 1 has a 0.61-meter diameter and is buried at a depth of 3 meters. The
notation S1 refers to a bending stiffness of 1.09E5 kNm2, while S2 represents the same
pipeline with increased thickness, corresponding to a bending stiffness of 2.86E5 kNm2.
In Figure 4.25, the results for Pipeline Type 1 are presented. From plots a and b, it is
clear that as the tunnel depth increases, the maximum bending moment in the pipeline
decreases. The higher stiffness pipeline experiences larger bending moments, with a
maximum of 300 kNm for T1D1 P1S2, compared to 100 kNm for T1D1 P1S1. The DOLEA
predictions generally yield higher bending moments compared to PLAXIS 3D model.
From plots c, d, e, and f, it is clear that as the tunnel diameter increases, the maximum
bending moment in the pipeline also increases. Similarly to plots a and b, the higher
stiffness pipeline experiences larger bending moments. The DOLEA predictions are gen-
erally higher than PLAXIS results. However, for low volume losses (less than 0.4%) at
depths T1 and T2 (D3), DOLEA underpredicts the maximum moments. The maximum
ratio Mmax, PLAXIS
Mmax, DOLEA does not exceed 2. For the same tunnel depth, in scenario T1D3 P1S1,
the tunnel was found to not influence the pipeline, yielding maximum moments close to
zero. For the same scenario with increased stiffness, only for tunnel volume losses higher
than 1.5% moments were recorded, with values around 12 kNm predicted by DOLEA
and 3 kNm predicted by PLAXIS. In summary, the DOLEA approach predicted the maxi-
mum moments reasonably well, except extreme cases with the smallest tunnel cover-to-
diameter ratio or where the tunnel had very little influence on the pipeline.
Figure 4.26 compares the ratio
Mmax
Mmax, gf between the DOLEA results and the 3D FE PLAXIS
models. DOLEA results, for scenarios T3D2P1 and T1D1P1 for both stiffnesses, yield
increasing IRI values with the increasing tunnel volume loss. These scenarios represent
the smallest tunnel cover-to-diameter ratios. For the remaining scenarios, the IRI values
for DOLEA remained very close to 0, indicating that the pipeline followed the greenfield
displacements and that the pipeline rigidity had very little influence. In contrast, the IRI
values based on PLAXIS results exhibited the opposite behavior. IRI values decreased
with increasing tunnel volume loss, indicating that the pipeline’s rigidity had less influence
as the volume loss increased.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 4.25: Comparative results of Mmax using DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D for Pipe P1
using HS model. a, b: results for varying tunnel depths with a tunnel diameter of 5m; c,
d: varying tunnel diameters at a depth of 18m; e, f: varying tunnel diameters at a depth
of 24m.
68
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:77==
Figure 4.26: Comparative normalized results of Mmax using DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D for
Pipe P1 using HS model. a, b: results for varying tunnel depths with a tunnel diameter of
5m; c, d: varying tunnel diameters at a depth of 18m; e, f: varying tunnel diameters at a
depth of 24m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.27: Comparative results of Mmax using DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D for Pipe P1
using HS small model. a: results for varying tunnel depths with a tunnel diameter of 5m,
b: normalized; c: varying tunnel diameters at depth of 18m d: normalized; e: varying
tunnel diameters at a depth of 24m, f: normalized.
The parametric study for the HSsmall model, presented in Figure 4.30, was performed
only on the lower stiffness (S1). The results were generally very similar to those obtained
using the Hardening Soil model, yielding almost identical maximum induced moments in
the pipeline and similar IRI values.
70
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:79==
4.3.2
Pipe with diameter 1,626 meters buried at depth 4 meters
Pipeline type 2 has a 1.626-meter diameter and is buried at a depth of 4 meters. The
notation S1 refers to a bending stiffness of 4.1E6 kNm2, while S2 represents the same
pipeline with increased thickness, corresponding to a bending stiffness of 8.1E6 kNm2.
Plots a and b in Figure 4.28 indicate that the maximum bending moment in the pipeline
generally decreases as the tunnel depth increases. The higher stiffness pipeline experi-
ences larger bending moments for the same volume loss, with a maximum of 3000 kNm
for T1D1 P2S2, compared to 2000 kNm for T1D1 P2S1. The DOLEA predictions gen-
erally yield higher bending moments compared to PLAXIS. However, for both pipelines,
the maximum moment was underpredicted by DOLEA when the volume losses exceeded
1%. The T1D1 scenario represents the smallest tunnel-to-diameter ratio.
The trend observed from plots c, d, e, and f, indicates that as the tunnel diameter in-
creases, the maximum bending moment in the pipeline also increases. Similar to plots
a and b, the higher stiffness pipeline experiences larger bending moments. The DOLEA
predictions are generally higher than PLAXIS results. However, for scenarios T2D3 and
T3D3, DOLEA underpredicts the maximum moments for tunnel volume losses larger than
1.5%. Additionally, for scenario T3D2 with both pipeline stiffnesses, DOLEA underpre-
dicts the maximum moments for volume losses lower than 0.5%.
Results for interpreting the pipeline-soil interaction are presented in Figure 4.29. It can
be observed that with increasing tunnel volume loss, the pipe-soil interactions reduce the
bending moments that would have been induced if the pipeline followed the greenfield
displacement (IRI is increasing). The IRI values for the corresponding volume losses are
higher for the stiffer pipeline. The only scenario in which PLAXIS predictions yielded de-
creasing IRI values with increasing volume loss was T3D3, starting from a tunnel volume
loss of approximately 1%.
The parametric study for the HSsmall model was performed only on the lower stiffness
values of the pipeline type 2. The results are presented in Figure 4.30. It is evident
that the results are very similar as for the HS model. However, for volume losses above
1% in scenario T1D1 P2S1 (plot a), the HSsmall model yielded higher moments in the
pipeline compared to the HS model. The same trend was observed for scenario T3D2
P1S1 (plot c). Additionally, when comparing IRI in plot b for scenario T1D1 P2S1, it can
be observed that the gradient at which the IRI is increasing with the tunnel volume loss is
slightly different: for the HSsmall model, the IRI values increase faster compared to the
IRI resulted from DOLEA.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 4.28: Comparative results of Mmax using DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D for Pipe P2
using HS model. a, b: results for varying tunnel depths with a tunnel diameter of 5m; c,
d: varying tunnel diameters at a depth of 18m; e, f: varying tunnel diameters at a depth
of 24m.
72
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:81==
Figure 4.29: Comparative normalized results of Mmax using DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D for
Pipe P2 using HS model. a, b: results for varying tunnel depths with a tunnel diameter of
5m; c, d: varying tunnel diameters at a depth of 18m; e, f: varying tunnel diameters at a
depth of 24m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure 4.30: Comparative results of Mmax using DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D for Pipe P2
using HS small model. a: results for varying tunnel depths with a tunnel diameter of 5m,
b: normalized; c: varying tunnel diameters at a depth of 18m d: normalized; e: varying
tunnel diameters at a depth of 24m, f: normalized.
74
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:83==
4.3.3
Pipe with diameter 2.235 meters buried at depth 5 meters
Pipeline type 3 has a 2.235-meter diameter and is buried at a depth of 5 meters. The
notation S1 refers to a bending stiffness of 6.9E6 kNm2, while S2 represents the same
pipeline with increased thickness, corresponding to a bending stiffness of 2.1kNm2.
In Figure 4.31, the results for Pipeline Type 3 are presented. From plots a and b, it is
clear that as the tunnel depth increases, the maximum bending moment in the pipeline
decreases. The higher stiffness pipeline experiences larger bending moments than the
lower stiffness pipeline.
The DOLEA predictions generally yield higher bending moments compared to PLAXIS,
except high volume losses (greater than approximately 1.5%) in scenarios T3D2 and
T3D3, which represent the lowest tunnel-to-diameter ratios (plots c, d, e, and f). From
plots c, d, e, and f, it is clear that as the tunnel diameter increases, the maximum bending
moment in the pipeline also increases.
The reduction of the moments due to pipeline-soil interaction is presented in Figure 4.32.
The behavior of the pipeline is similar to those described for pipeline 2, with increasing
volume loss, the pipe-soil interactions reduce the bending moments. The IRI values for
the corresponding volume losses are higher for the stiffer pipeline. The only scenario in
which PLAXIS predictions yielded decreasing IRI values with increasing volume loss was
T3D3 for both stiffnesses, starting from a volume loss of approximately 0.5%.
Parametric study for the HSsmall model was performed only on the lower stiffness values
of Pipeline Type 3. The results are presented in Figure 4.33. The results are again very
similar to those from HS. However, for volume losses above 1% in scenario T3D2 P2S1
(plot c), the HSsmall model yielded higher moments than the HS model. For T3D3, the
recorded volume losses were lower than those recorded for the Hardening Soil model,
and the same is true for T1D1. For both scenarios, the corresponding volume losses
resulted in higher maximum moments than the HS model had predicted.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure 4.31: Comparative results of Mmax using DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D for Pipe P3
using HS model. a, b: results for varying tunnel depths with a tunnel diameter of 5m; c,
d: varying tunnel diameters at a depth of 18m; e, f: varying tunnel diameters at a depth
of 24m.
76
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:85==
Figure 4.32: Comparative normalized results of Mmax using DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D for
Pipe P3 using HS model. a, b: results for varying tunnel depths with a tunnel diameter of
5m; c, d: varying tunnel diameters at a depth of 18m; e, f: varying tunnel diameters at a
depth of 24m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure 4.33: Comparative results of Mmax using DOLEA and PLAXIS 3D for Pipe P3
using HS small model. a: results for varying tunnel depths with a tunnel diameter of 5m,
b: normalized; c: varying tunnel diameters at a depth of 18m d: normalized; e: varying
tunnel diameters at a depth of 24m, f: normalized.
78
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:87==
5
Discussion
This chapter presents a summary of the study along with key findings. section 5.2 dis-
cusses the results of the use of FE modeling of the centrifuge test, outlining the approach
and key findings from the sensitivity analysis performed on the Hardening Soil (HS) and
Hardening Soil Small (HSsmall) constitutive model parameters. section 5.3 presents the
key insights from the parametric study on greenfield conditions and buried pipelines, and
the performance of the Design-Oriented Linear Equivalent Approach.
5.1
Summary
This thesis presented a 2D finite element model developed in PLAXIS to simulate a cen-
trifuge test using advanced constitutive HS and HSsmall. The model was designed to
replicate the centrifuge test conducted at the University of Nottingham and was validated
against experimental data from Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8].
To conduct the validation, the HS and HSsmall model parameters for Leighton Buzzard
Sand (fraction E) with a relative density of 90% had to be defined as this was the density
used in the experiment. A calibration was performed by fitting the triaxial compression test
performed by Lanzano, Visone, Bilotta, and Santucci (2016) [12], using PLAXIS SoilTest.
The obtained parameters were compared to those proposed in the literature. A sensitivity
analysis was conducted to investigate the influence of key soil parameters on tunnel-
induced deformations, including tunnel volume loss, pressure at tunnel perimeter, and
the settlement trough at both the surface and mid-tunnel depth.
The results showed that both the HS and HSsmall models provide accurate predictions for
maximum settlements as a function of tunnel volume loss and successfully estimated the
volume loss based on the surface settlement trough. In general HSsmall model tended to
predict a stiffer response and HS model provided a better estimation of depressurization
effects and soil stiffness reduction. One notable discrepancy was observed in the failure
asymptote: the finite element model predicted failure at a later stage than observed in the
experimental results.
In the second part of this thesis, a parametric study was conducted. Three tunnel diame-
ters were investigated: 5 m, 6.3 m, and 9.3 m, along with three tunnel depths (measured
to the tunnel axis): 13 m, 18 m, and 24 m, covering the range of cover-to-diameter ratio
between 1.4 to 4.3. For this study, a 2D finite element model with similar boundary condi-
tions to those of the centrifuge test but scaled to full prototype dimensions with extended
boundaries was employed. Both the Hardening Soil and Hardening Soil Small constitutive
models were used for dense sand at 90% relative density. The settlement trough shape
and the approximation with the modified Gaussian curve at the surface and at the middle
depth was studied across the configurations, showing general agreement with findings
from the literature.
In the other part of the parameteric study, for the same tunnel geometrical parameter
configurations, the influence on pipelines was investigated and to the DOLEA approach
was evaluated against predictions from 3D finite element models. The study considered
different pipeline configurations with pipeline diameters of 0.6 m, 1.6 m, and 2.3 m, buried
at depths of 3 m, 4 m, and 5 m, respectively. Two extreme, minimum and maximum,
stiffness values considered for each. The H/Dt ratio, where H is the distance between
Tunnel influence on pipeline
79
==PAGE:88==
the pipeline invert and the tunnel crown, and Dt is the tunnel diameter, was studied within
a range of 0.8 to 3.6.
The results indicated that increasing the tunnel diameter led to increasing maximum mo-
ments in the pipeline, while decreasing the tunnel depth also resulted in higher maximum
moments. Additionally, the maximum moments were higher for pipelines with greater
stiffness. DOLEA generally predicted higher maximum moments in the pipeline the H/Dt
ratio was larger than 1.4, being on the conservative side. For ratios lower than this value,
DOLEA tended to underpredict the maximum moments. However, this discrepancy was
observed only for volume losses exceeding 1%.
The study also included an analysis of pipe-soil interaction, specifically the changes in
the Interaction Reduction Index (IRI). In general, an increase in IRI was observed for both
DOLEA and 3D PLAXIS predictions with increasing volume loss, particularly for stiffer
pipelines (types 2 and 3). However, for pipeline type 1, the PLAXIS prediction exhibited
a decreasing trend in IRI with increasing volume loss. This behavior suggests that this
specific pipeline type was more prone to deflecting with propagating settlements, which
appears counterintuitive. The reasons for this behavior were analyzed in the discussion
section.
When comparing the HS and HSsmall models, it was found that HSsmall generally pre-
dicted higher maximum moments, specifically for volume losses greater than ≈1%.
The study involved the creation of 7 PLAXIS 2D models and 108 PLAXIS 3D models,
with full automation of model generation and result extraction using Python scripts and a
parametric approach.
5.2
Modelling of the centrifuge test: validation of the model
This section presents a discussion on the comparisons made between the finite element
model of the centrifuge test and actual centrifuge test data. The primary purpose of this
comparison was to validate the boundary conditions implemented in the model, ensuring
their applicability for further use in the parametric study. The discussion will focus on
describing the agreements and discrepancies sources observed in the soil response.
5.2.1
Leighton buzzard sand calibration
The calibration resulted in elasticity parameters E50, Eoed, and Eur that were higher than
those proposed by Lanzano, Santucci de Magistris, and Bilotta (2014) [13] but lower than
those derived empirically using equations from Brinkgreve, Engin, and Engin (2010) [4].
Notably, the parameters for ϕ and ψ turned out to be significantly higher than those re-
ported in both referenced sources.
There are several reasons for the poor agreement with the theoretical values. First, it is
important to acknowledge that the calibration of Leighton Buzzard sand parameters was
performed using only two closely spaced relative densities 70% and 80%. Therefore,
the relationship based on relative density, derived from extrapolation between these two
points, may not be representative. A dataset covering a wider range of relative densities
would provide a more robust calibration. Secondly, it is important to note that only the
E50 parameter can be considered representative since the calibration was based on the
deviatoric stress-axial strain results observed in the triaxial compression tests, and the
unloading-reloading phase was not included. The parameters Eoed and Eur should ideally
be determined from oedometer tests and unloading-reloading tests, respectively.
The decision to employ empirical relationships to estimate ϕ and ψ from Brinkgreve, Engin,
and Engin (2010) [4] was justified, given that the relationships established in Lanzano, Vi-
80
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:89==
sone, Bilotta, and Santucci (2016) [12] for Leighton Buzzard sand yielded nearly identical
results. The elasticity parameters from Lanzano, Visone, Bilotta, and Santucci (2016) [12]
were not directly adopted because the study did not propose a relationship with relative
density, providing parameters only for sand at 75% relative density. Additionally, their
results did not consistently align with the experimental data. The calibration effort in the
project proved to be a valuable exercise, showing the complexities involved in accurately
calibrating the soil parameters for advanced constitutive models.
5.2.2
Centrifuge model validation: 2D FE model vs real data
A comparison between the 2D finite model and the centrifuge test data for dense sand with
a tunnel-to-diameter ratio of 2.44, documented in Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8],
was conducted using three constitutive models: the Hardening Soil (HS) model, the Hard-
ening Soil Small (HSsmall) model, and the HSsmall model with reset state values after
the spin-up phase to account for strain propagation during model preparation. All sce-
narios showed good agreement with experimental data for maximum surface settlements
within the investigated volume loss range (up to 3%). The relationship between surface
volume loss (Vl,s) and tunnel volume loss (Vl,t) was well-predicted by both the Harden-
ing Soil (HS) and Hardening Soil Small (HSsmall) models. Notably, the HSsmall model
with reset strains slightly underpredicted Vl,s at the surface but provided a closer match
at mid-tunnel depth compared to the standard HS and HSsmall models, which tended to
overpredict these values. According to Marshall (2009) [16], the boundary friction between
the sand and the Perspex wall may affect the measurement of settlements, especially at
lower depths, and could lead to a slight underestimation of Vl,s values. This interaction
might explain the observed discrepancy.
The primary discrepancy lay in the pressure at which failure occurred. Experimental re-
sults from Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8] indicated failure at a stress ratio σt/σt,o ≈
0.75, whereas all numerical models predicted failure at σt/σt,o ≈0.81. Sensitivity analysis
of the friction angle revealed that the soil response is stiffness-governed up to a volume
loss of ≈0.6%, beyond which strength-governed behavior dominates. This discrepancy
could imply an overprediction of the friction angle in the model. However, a friction angle
of 39◦is reasonable for sands at a relative density of 90%.
According to the drained triaxial test reported by Lanzano, Visone, Bilotta, and Santucci
(2016) [12], Leighton Buzzard Sand exhibits strain softening behavior at strains exceeding
5%, which reduces the effective friction angle to values closer to the critical state of 33.4◦.
However, the hardening soil model used does not capture this softening behavior. To
explore possible reasons for the overprediction of the failure asymptote, an investigation
was conducted to determine if the strains had exceeded the softening threshold.
Strain measurements were taken at the tunnel crown and at the springline. The observed
axial and shear strains at a 3% volume loss were limited to 3% and 1%, respectively,
which are below the softening threshold. One potential explanation for the mismatch in
failure pressure may relate to the experimental boundary conditions. For instance, the
deflecting Perspex wall at the front boundary of the centrifuge hardbox, as documented in
Zhou (2014) [31], exhibited a maximum lateral deflection of 0.3 mm at 80g. Although this
deflection is small, it could have introduced localized strain effects that were not captured
in the 2D FE model. However, given that the length of the box was 147 mm, even this
contribution is unlikely to have caused the strains to reach 5%. Notably, the deflection of
the Perspex wall was not measured in a real test.
When comparing the different constutitive models, as expected, the HSsmall model ex-
hibited a stiffer response, and the HSsmall model with reset strains was even stiffer. This
Tunnel influence on pipeline
81
==PAGE:90==
highlights the importance of accounting for strain accumulation during the spin-up phase,
which reduces the initial small-strain stiffness (G0) of the soil.
5.3
Parametric study
This section presents the main study performed in this thesis. The parametric study per-
formed in greenfield conditions
5.3.1
Greenfield Conditions
The parametric study results showed good agreement with existing literature. As noted in
Marshall, R., A., and J. (2012) [18] and Franza, Marshall, and Zhou (2019) [8], increasing
tunnel depth resulted in a wider settlement trough, while larger tunnel diameters led to
narrower troughs.
When comparing the HS and HSsmall constitutive models, the maximum settlements
were identical. However, differences arose in the trough width: the HSsmall model yielded
narrower settlement troughs as volume loss increased. This behavior likely stems from
the HSsmall model’s incorporation of higher stiffness at small strains, which affected the
areas further away from the tunnel where strains are within a smaller range.
The fitted modified Gaussian curves provided a good estimation of the settlement troughs,
with a slight overestimation of the maximum settlements at tunnel volume losses >1%.
5.3.2
With Buried Pipeline
In scenarios where the pipeline was positioned close to the tunnel, the HS model occa-
sionally underestimated the maximum induced bending moments. However, this issue
was not found to be inherent to the model or the DOLEA approach itself, but rather from
the methodology used to calculate volume loss in 3D models. Volume loss was calcu-
lated based on the cross-section beneath the pipeline. When the pipeline is close to
the tunnel H/Dt < 1.4, it provides additional support that reduces vertical stresses on
the tunnel, leading to lower volume losses compared to those at the tunnel boundaries
(see Figure 5.1). Consequently, moments derived from PLAXIS were in fact higher and
were miss-assigned to lower volume losses. This discrepancy also explains the observed
decrease in IRI (Interaction Ratio Index) with increasing volume loss, as the mismatch be-
tween DOLEA and PLAXIS volume losses affects the results.
Figure 5.1: Pipeline influence on vertical soil movement. Tunnel Longitudial cross section
for Volume loss 1% for scenario T3D3 P2S1. Visualisaton from PLAXIS 3D.
82
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:91==
This behavior was found to occur in scenarios where DOLEA overpredicted maximum
bending moments at higher volume losses. Recalculating these cases with volume loss
measured at the tunnel boundaries (to capture true values) would improve accuracy and
perhaps yield results that proves DOLEA to be on the conservative side also for pipelines
that are relatively close to the tunnel (H/Dt < 1.4 ). Despite this limitation, DOLEA gen-
erally provided conservative predictions, generally providing a good approximation.
When using the HSsmall model, moments were generally higher than those from the HS
model for equivalent volume losses. However, at volume losses between 0.5% and 1%,
DOLEA predictions with HSsmall began yielding lower maximum moments than HS. As
shown in plots (Figure B.23, Figure B.21, Figure B.19, Figure B.17), this is caused by
a sudden gradient drop in the stiffness degradation curve. Specifically, at strains corre-
sponding to volume losses higher than 0.5%, the HSsmall model exhibits lower stiffness
values than HS (see Figure 5.2). This highlights the sensitivity of results to the parameter
γ0.7, which governs the shape of the stiffness degradation curve.
Figure 5.2: Stiffness degradation curves for HS and HSsmall for parameters used in the
parametric study (Table 4.2 according to Brinkgreve et al. [4]).
Each 3D PLAXIS model required approximately 2 hours for calculation and result ex-
traction. Modifying pipeline parameters (e.g., position, stiffness, diameter) necessitated
recalculation, adding another 2 hours per case. In contrast, the DOLEA approach took 15
minutes for model setup and greenfield displacement extraction. The DOLEA algorithm
itself can be coded in any programming language within 1 hour and used for any case,
making it significantly more time efficient than 3D finite element modeling.
Worth noting that the pipeline construction process and soil stress history were not mod-
eled. Additionally, the tunnel construction sequence (e.g., soil relaxation prior to exca-
vation, void filling with grout) was omitted. The models were simplified by recreating the
increasing volume loss by relaxation of the pressure within the tunnel cluster.
5.4
Conclusion
The following conclusions were drawn based on the study and findings of this thesis:
• The validation of the models adhered to best practices as suggested by Brinkgreve
and Engin (2014) [5], including checking mesh convergence, conducting sensitivity
analyses, and comparing with experimental data. These steps provided sufficient
evidence that the models were robustly prepared to be used for the parametric study.
• The 2D finite element model of the centrifuge test performed well with the applied
methodology of boundary conditions, where tunnel volume loss was represented as
Tunnel influence on pipeline
83
==PAGE:92==
decreasing pressure within the tunnel cluster. This approach successfully captured
the soil movement behavior induced by tunneling.
• DOLEA performed effectively in estimating the maximum bending moments induced
in pipelines for the studied range of H/Dt 0.8 - 3.6 and tunnel cover-to-diameter ratio
between 1.4 - 4.3. Predictions were generally conservative, providing a safe-sided
assessment.
• DOLEA demonstrated an ability to capture soil nonlinearity.
• The Hardening Soil small model predicted slightly higher maximum moments com-
pared to Hardening Soil due to its stiffer soil response.
• The selection of degradation curves for input into DOLEA requires careful attention,
as the algorithm relies on these curves to represent soil stiffness reduction. Inaccu-
rate or inappropriate curves may lead to significant errors in predicted moments.
• DOLEA offers substantial time savings compared to computationally demanding 3D
FE models.
84
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:93==
6
Further Steps and Recommendations
The following areas are proposed for future investigation:
• Study the effects of deflecting perspex wall during the centrifuge test as it might in-
fluence the induced strains in sands, reducing the elasticity and strength parameters
at large volume losses.
• Change the boundary conditions in the models and implement the construction se-
quence to model the volume loss. The construction sequence might vary the in-
duced strains and alternate the behavior in the vicinity of the tunnel.
• Explore scenarios applied in sands of different densities.
• Investigate the influence of specific soil parameters on the pipeline response to study
how each factor contributes to overall behavior, for instance, for the dilation angle.
• Investigate the effects of applying an interface between the pipeline and surrounding
soil, representing the friction. The friction can influence the soil-pipe interaction
dynamics.
• Conduct studies on concrete pipelines where soil-pipeline interaction could be more
substantial due to increased friction.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
85
==PAGE:94==
86
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
P.B. Attewell, J. Yeates, and A.R. Selby. “Soil Movements Induced by Tunnelling
and their Effects on Pipelines and Structures”. In: (Jan. 1986).
[2]
Siegmund Babendererde. “Tunnelling machines in soft ground: a comparison of
slurry and EPB shield systems”. In: Tunnelling and Underground Space Technol-
ogy 6.2 (1991), pp. 169–174. ISSN: 0886-7798. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
0886-7798(91)90063-A. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
088677989190063A.
[3]
Benz. Small-strain stiffness of soils and its numericalconsequences. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Stuttgart. Aug. 2007.
[4]
R. Brinkgreve, E. Engin, and H. K. Engin. “Validation of empirical formulas to derive
model parameters for sands”. In: June 2010. ISBN: 978-0-415-59239-0. DOI: 10.
1201/b10551-25.
[5]
R. B. J. Brinkgreve and E. Engin. “Validation of geotechnical finite element analysis”.
In: 2014. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16136561.
[6]
Antonio Cavallaro, Maugeri M., and Mazzarella R. “Static and Dynamic Properties
of Leighton Buzzard Sand from Laboratory Tests”. In: Mar. 2001.
[7]
A. Franza. Tunnelling and its effects on piles and its effects on piles and piled struc-
tures. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Nottingham. 2016.
[8]
A. Franza, A. Marshall, and B. Zhou. “Greenfield tunnelling in sands: the effects of
soil density and relative depth”. In: Géotechnique 69 (July 2019), pp. 297–307. DOI:
10.1680/jgeot.17.p.091.
[9]
HyundaiSteel. https://www.hyundai-steel.com/en/down/steelpipe.pdf. Tech. rep.
[10]
A. Klar, I. Elkayam, and Alec Marshall. “Design Oriented Linear-Equivalent Ap-
proach for Evaluating the Effect of Tunneling on Pipelines”. In: Journal of Geotech-
nical and Geoenvironmental Engineering 142 (July 2016). DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)
GT.1943-5606.0001376.
[11]
A. Klar, T. E. B. Vorster, K. Soga, and R. J. Mair. “Soil—pipe interaction due to tun-
nelling: comparison between Winkler and elastic continuum solutions”. In: Géotech-
nique 55.6 (2005), pp. 461–466. DOI: 10.1680/geot.2005.55.6.461.
[12]
G. Lanzano, C. Visone, E. Bilotta, and de Magistris F. Santucci. “Experimental As-
sessment of the Stress–Strain Behaviour of Leighton Buzzard Sand for the Calibra-
tion of a Constitutive Model”. In: Geotechnical and Geological Engineering 34 (Aug.
2016). DOI: 10.1007/s10706-016-0019-5.
[13]
Giovanni Lanzano, Filippo Santucci de Magistris, and Emilio Bilotta. “Calibration
of the mechanical parameters for the numerical simulations of dynamic centrifuge
experiments”. In: June 2014. ISBN: 978-1-138-00146-6. DOI: 10.1201/b17017-32.
[14]
N. Loganathan and H. Poulos. “Analytical Prediction for Tunneling-Induced Ground
Movements in Clays”. In: Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineer-
ing - J GEOTECH GEOENVIRON ENG 124 (Sept. 1998). DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)
1090-0241(1998)124:9(846).
[15]
R. J. Mair and R. N. Taylor. Theme lecture: Bored tunnelling in the urban environ-
ment. In 14th International conference on soil mechanics and foundation engineer-
ing, pages 2353–2385. (Hamburg, Balkema)). Jan. 1999.
[16]
A. M. Marshall. “Tunnelling in sand and its effect on pipelines and piles”. PhD thesis.
Jan. 2009, p. 250.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
87
==PAGE:96==
[17]
A. M. Marshall, A. Klar, and R. J. Mair. “Tunneling beneath Buried Pipes: View of Soil
Strain and Its Effect on Pipeline Behavior”. In: Journal of Geotechnical and Geoen-
vironmental Engineering 136.12 (2010), pp. 1664–1672. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)GT.
1943-5606.0000390.
[18]
A. M. Marshall, Farrell R., Klar A., and Mair R. J. “Tunnels in sands: The effect
of size, depth and volume loss on greenfield displacements”. In: Geotechnique 62
(May 2012), pp. 385–399. DOI: 10.1680/geot.10.P.047.
[19]
Sven Christian Möller. Tunnel induced settlements and structural forces in linings.
Univ. Stuttgart, Inst. f. Geotechnik Stuttgart, Germany, 2006.
[20]
Kamran Nobakht Vakili, T Barciaga, Arash Alimardani Lavasan, and Tom Schanz.
“A PRACTICAL APPROACH TO CONSTITUTIVE MODELS FOR THE ANALYSIS
OF GEOTECHNICAL PROBLEMS”. In: Aug. 2013.
[21]
M. P. O’Reilly and B. M. New. “Settlements above tunnels in the United Kingdom–
their magnitude and prediction”. In: Tunnelling ’82. Ed. by M. J. Jones. London:
Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, 1982, pp. 173–181.
[22]
R. Obrzud and A. Truty. A PRACTICAL GUIDEBOOK Z Soil.PC 100701 report. Z
Soil, 2012.
[23]
R. Obrzud and A. Truty. The hardening soil model- a practical guidebook, edition
2016, Technical Report Z Soil. PC. 100701, Zace Services Ltd. 2011. 2018.
[24]
PLAXIS 2D Material Models Manual. Version 23.02. 2023.
[25]
Jaime Santos and Antonio Correia. “Reference threshold shear strain of soil. Its
application to obtain an unique strain-dependent shear modulus curve for soil”. In:
Jan. 2001.
[26]
T. Schanz, P. Vermeer, and P. Bonnier. “Formulation and verification of the Hardening-
Soil Model”. In: June 1999.
[27]
G. Song and A. M. Marshall. “Centrifuge modelling of tunnelling induced ground
displacements: pressure and displacement control tunnels”. In: Tunnelling and Un-
derground Space Technology 103 (2020), p. 103461. ISSN: 0886-7798. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tust.2020.103461. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0886779820304156.
[28]
K Terzaghi. Theoretical Soil Mechanics. Wiley, New York. 1943.
[29]
E. Vorster, A. Klar, K. Soga, and R. J. Mair. “Estimating the Effects of Tunneling on
Existing Pipelines”. In: Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering
131 (Nov. 2005). DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)1090-0241(2005)131:11(1399).
[30]
Eduard Vorster, Robert Mair, Kenichi Soga, and Assaf Klar. “Centrifuge Modelling of
the Effect of Tunnelling on Buried Pipelines: Mechanisms Observed”. In: Jan. 2005,
pp. 327–333. ISBN: 978-0-415-39124-5. DOI: 10.1201/NOE0415391245.ch43.
[31]
B. Zhou. Tunnelling-induced ground displacements in sand. Ph.D. Thesis, Univer-
sity of Nottingham. 2014.
88
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:97==
A
Leighton Buzzard Sand - HS
parameters calibration
A.1
PLAXIS SoilTest: Calibration of Hardening Soil
Parameters
A.1.1
Drained Triaxial Tests Compression (DTC)
test included in optimisation
DTC_100_q_espa
DTC_200_q_espa
DTC_100_espv_espa
DTC_200_espv_espa
Relative Density
80,70%
70,20%
E50 ref
27,14
23,68
E oed ref
42,48
34,93
Eur ref
117,80
105,70
m
0,41
0,41
phi’
43,27
39,01
psi
17,73
14,73
relative error
11,90%
13,40%
Table A.1: Leighton Buzzard sand calibration results using PLAXIS SoilTest.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
89
==PAGE:98==
(a) DTC at confinig stress 100kPa. Deviatoric
stress vs Axial strain
(b) DTC at confinig stress 100kPa.
Volume
strain vs Axial strain.
(c) DTC at confinig stress 200kPa. Deviatoric
stress vs Axial strain.
(d) DTC at confinig stress 200kPa.
Volume
strain vs Axial strain.
Figure A.1: Calibration results for DTC. Blue - Calibrated plot, Orange - Original plot,
Green - plot using values from Lanzano, Visone, Bilotta, and Santucci (2016) [12].
90
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:99==
A.1.2
Relative density Relation
Figure A.2: Hardening Soil stiffness parameters with relative density based on Leighton
Buzzard sand calibration results using PLAXIS SoilTest.
Figure A.3: Hardening Soil friction angle relation with relative density based on Leighton
Buzzard sand calibration results using PLAXIS SoilTest.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
91
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.4: Hardening Soil dioaltion angle relation with relative density based on Leighton
Buzzard sand calibration results using PLAXIS SoilTest.
92
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:101==
B
Parametric study
B.1
Greenfield condition
Figure B.1: Soil response to tunnel diameter Dt = 5m with varying depth 13m, 18m,
24m. Variations of normalized settlement trough with horizontal distance and volume
loss. Hardening Soil constitutive model used.
Figure B.2: Soil response to tunnel diameter Dt = 5m with varying depth 13m, 18m,
24m. Variations of normalized settlement trough with horizontal distance and volume
loss. Hardening Soil small constitutive model used.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
93
==PAGE:102==
Figure B.3: Soil response to tunnel at Zt = 18m with varying tunnel diameter 5m, 6.7m,
9.3m. Variations of normalized settlement trough with horizontal distance and volume
loss. Hardening Soil constitutive model used.
Figure B.4: Soil response to tunnel at Zt = 18m with varying tunnel diameter 5m, 6.7m,
9.3m. Variations of normalized settlement trough with horizontal distance and volume
loss. Hardening Soil small constitutive model used.
94
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:103==
Figure B.5: Soil response to tunnel at Zt = 24m with varying tunnel diameter 5m, 6.7m,
9.3m. Variations of normalized settlement trough with horizontal distance and volume
loss. Hardening Soil constitutive model used.
Figure B.6: Soil response to tunnel at Zt = 24m with varying tunnel diameter 5m, 6.7m,
9.3m. Variations of normalized settlement trough with horizontal distance and volume
loss. Hardening Soil small constitutive model used.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
95
==PAGE:104==
B.2
With burried pipe
Figure B.7: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P1) with lower stiffness (S1) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel diameter of Dt = 5m (T1) across different depths: D1
= 13m, D2 = 18m, and D3 = 24m.
96
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:105==
Figure B.8: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P1) with lower stiffness (S2) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel diameter of Dt = 5m (T1) across different depths: D1
= 13m, D2 = 18m, and D3 = 24m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
97
==PAGE:106==
Figure B.9: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P1) with lower stiffness (S1) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 18m (D2) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
98
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:107==
Figure B.10: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P1) with lower stiffness (S2) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 18m (D2) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
99
==PAGE:108==
Figure B.11: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P1) with lower stiffness (S1) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 24m (D3) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
100
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:109==
Figure B.12: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P1) with lower stiffness (S2) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 24m (D3) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
101
==PAGE:110==
Figure B.13: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P2) with lower stiffness (S1) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel diameter of Dt = 5m (T1) across different depths: D1
= 13m, D2 = 18m, and D3 = 24m
102
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:111==
Figure B.14: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P2) with lower stiffness (S2) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel diameter of Dt = 5m (T1) across different depths: D1
= 13m, D2 = 18m, and D3 = 24m
Tunnel influence on pipeline
103
==PAGE:112==
Figure B.15: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P2) with lower stiffness (S1) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 18m (D2) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
104
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:113==
Figure B.16: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P2) with lower stiffness (S2) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 18m (D2) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
105
==PAGE:114==
Figure B.17: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P2) with lower stiffness (S1) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 24m (D3) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
106
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:115==
Figure B.18: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P2) with lower stiffness (S2) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 24m (D3) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
107
==PAGE:116==
Figure B.19: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P3) with lower stiffness (S1) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel diameter of Dt = 5m (T1) across different depths: D1
= 13m, D2 = 18m, and D3 = 24m
108
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:117==
Figure B.20: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P3) with lower stiffness (S2) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel diameter of Dt = 5m (T1) across different depths: D1
= 13m, D2 = 18m, and D3 = 24m
Tunnel influence on pipeline
109
==PAGE:118==
Figure B.21: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P3) with lower stiffness (S1) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 18m (D2) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
110
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:119==
Figure B.22: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P3) with lower stiffness (S2) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 18m (D2) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
111
==PAGE:120==
Figure B.23: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P3) with lower stiffness (S1) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 24m (D3) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
112
Tunnel influence on pipeline
==PAGE:121==
Figure B.24: Response of Pipeline Type 1 (P3) with lower stiffness (S2) under varying
volume losses, shown for a tunnel at depth Zt = 24m (D3) with different Diameters: T1 =
5m, T2 = 6.7m, and T3 = 9.3m.
Tunnel influence on pipeline
113
==PAGE:122==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
