==PAGE:1==
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella
Enteritidis using Bayesian analysis and machine
learning
Master Thesis
Nina Belusa
February, 2025
DTU National Food Institute
Research Group for Genomic Epidemiology
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Declaration of authorship
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Definition of terms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Objectives
1
2
Introduction
2
2.1
Salmonella Enteritidis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Bayesian Phylogeny . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Statistical modelling and machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methods
9
3.1
Genome data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Phylogeny . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Results
13
4.1
Quality and analysis of S. Enteritidis genomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Phylogeny of S. Enteritidis genomes and global transmission rates . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Factors influencing transmission of S. Enteritidis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Discussion
33
6
Conclusion
37
Supplementary
I
Supplementary files
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
Supplementary tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
Supplementary figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIII
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge my supervisor, Senior Researcher Pimlapas Shinny Leek-
itcharoenphon, for her constructive guidance in regard to the Bayesian analysis and the project
as a whole. I would also like to thank my supervisor, Senior Researcher Patrick Murigu Kamau
Njage, for his patient guidance and encouragement in the statistical modelling and machine
learning aspects. Finally, I would like to thank Professor Frank Møller Aarestrup for his valu-
able input at key points in the process.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
ii
==PAGE:4==
Declaration of authorship
I hereby declare, that the work submitted in this thesis is my own, except for where otherwise
indicated. The work was carried out between 1st of September 2024 and 1st of February 2025 in
fulfilment of the graduation requirements for a Master of Science (MSc) degree in Biotechnology
amounting to 30 ECTS.
Nina Belusa - s193760
Signature
1st of February, 2025
Date
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
ALE accumulated local effects.
BRT boosted regression trees.
DTW dynamic time warping.
ESS effective sample size.
GDP gross domestic product.
GLM generalized linear model.
GTR generalised time reversible.
iNTS invasive non-typhoidal Salmonella.
MAE mean absolute error.
MCMC Markov chain Monte Carlo.
MLST multilocus sequence typing.
MSE mean square error.
NGS next generation sequencing.
NTS non-typhoidal Salmonella.
RMSE root mean square error.
SNP single nucleotide polymorphism.
WGS whole-genome sequencing.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
iv
==PAGE:6==
Definition of terms
Asymmetric transmission rate
A transmission rate that differs depending on
the direction of transmission between two lo-
cations.
Bayesian
A statistical framework based on Bayes’ the-
orem that updates probabilities using prior in-
formation and observed data
.
Bootstrapping
A resampling technique that repeatedly sam-
ples from the data to better estimate the vari-
ability of statistical estimates
.
Burn-in
The initial part of a Markov Chain Monte Carlo
run that is discarded to ensure convergence
before sampling.
Clock model
Model that describes the rate at which substi-
tutions occur in molecular sequences
.
Consensus tree
A phylogenetic tree constructed by combining
all the sampled trees from a BEAST run, to
get the tree with the highest posterior for all
its clades
.
Convergence
The point during a Bayesian or iterative algo-
rithm where parameter values stabilize and
further iterations have minimal effect.
Discrete trait analysis
A method that models the evolution of cate-
gorical traits (e.g. geographic locations) in a
population
.
Dyadic variables
Variables describing pairs of units (e.g., trade
volume between two countries).
Feature selection
The process of choosing a subset of relevant
predictors to improve model performance or
interpretability.
Grid search
A method for systematically searching over a
range of hyperparameters to find the optimal
model configuration.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
v
==PAGE:7==
Likelihood
A measure of how well a particular model or
parameter set explains the observed data.
Monadic variables
Variables describing individual units (e.g.,
features of a single country).
Poisson distribution
A discrete probability distribution that ex-
presses the probability of a certain number of
events occurring in a fixed interval
.
Posterior
The updated probability distribution of a pa-
rameter based on both prior and observed
data
.
Predictor
An independent variable used to estimate a
dependent variable in a model
.
Prior
An initial belief or assumption about a param-
eter before new data is considered.
Regularization
Technique that adds a penalty term to a
model to reduce overfitting. L1 regularization
encourages fewer predictors and L2 regular-
ization shrinks coefficients for predictors.
Substitution model
A model describing how genetic mutations
(substitutions) occur over evolutionary time
.
Symmetric transmission rate
A transmission rate assumed to be the same
in both directions between two locations.
Test set
A subset of data used to evaluate a trained
model’s generalization to unseen data
.
Training set
A subset of data used to fit or train a machine
learning model.
Zoonosis
A disease transmitted from animals to hu-
mans.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
vi
==PAGE:8==
Abstract
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis (S. Enteritidis) is a leading cause of
food-borne illness globally. S. Enteritidis is a zoonotic pathogen and thus is transmitted to hu-
mans from animals, often through consumption of animal products such as eggs, poultry meat,
or pork. S. Enteritidis is mainly transmitted between animals, but many of the factors driving
this transmission remain poorly understood.
This project employed a novel data-driven approach to identify factors important for transmission
of S. Enteritidis. Bayesian phylogeny was used to infer transmission rates between countries,
based on publicly available whole-genome sequencing data of S. Enteritidis isolates. Transmis-
sion rates were inferred for both a total dataset containing all available S. Enteritidis genomes,
and for an animal dataset, containing only genomes from animals. A dataset consisting of pos-
sible predictor variables for transmission was constructed from entirely publicly available data.
Machine learning models were used to identify the most important factors for transmission of S.
Enteritidis.
The best-performing models identified trade in animal products - particularly eggs, poultry, and
pork - as the most important contributors to S. Enteritidis transmission, followed by climatic vari-
ables (temperature and rainfall) and land use factors such as changes in cropland, secondary
land, urban land and the proportion of managed pasture. However, the best machine learn-
ing model explained only about half of the variation in the transmission rates, which indicates
that there are other important factors driving the transmission of S. Enteritidis that have yet to
be identified. Nevertheless, this novel approach for studying transmission dynamics will only
become more powerful as the volume of publicly available data grows and computational tools
advance. The method could potentially be used to uncover unknown transmission factors for a
wide range of pathogens.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Objectives
Salmonella Enteritidis is one of the most common serotypes of Salmonella, posing a signif-
icant public health concern [1]. It is primarily transmitted to humans through eggs and poultry,
but the exact transmission dynamics remain unclear.
With the emergence of next-generation sequencing (NGS), biology is increasingly becoming a
data-driven discipline. Statistical modelling and machine learning methods can provide critical
biological insights and lead to important new discoveries. These methods are particularly useful
for uncovering complex relationships within large datasets [2].
This project aims to identify the driving factors for S. Enteritidis transmission. To achieve this,
publicly available whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data have been used to infer transmission
rates between countries using Bayesian phylogeny methods. These transmission rates were
then combined with country-level climatic or socio-economic data in machine learning models.
The results of this project can be used to direct more targeted studies to elucidate the transmis-
sion dynamics of S. Enteritidis. Furthermore, the project demonstrates how complex biological
problems can be explored using machine learning methods and publicly available data.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
2.1
Salmonella Enteritidis
Salmonella is a genus of gram-negative, facultative anaerobic, rod-shaped bacteria. The
most common species is S. enterica, which is divided into six distinct subspecies, out of which
subsp. enterica is again the most common. The subspecies are further divided into serovars
based on the diversity of lipopolysaccharide (O) antigens and heat-labile flagellar protein (H)
antigens. Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis is one such serovar. It will
henceforth be referred to as S. Enteritidis. [3].
Salmonella spp. can cause several different types of disease in humans. Typhoid and para-
typhoid Salmonella cause sustained fever accompanied by other symptoms such as chills, ab-
dominal pain, rash and nausea [4]. However, S. Enteritidis is a type of non-typhoidal Salmonella
(NTS). NTS causes gastrointestinal disease, also called Salmonellosis, where the patient will
develop fever, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, headaches, nausea and vomiting. In healthy adults,
the disease is self-limiting and most people recover without treatment within 10 days. In some
rare cases, if the patient is immunocompromised, the pathogen can also spread to the blood-
stream and cause life-threatening invasive NTS (iNTS). iNTS is accompanied by fever, respi-
ratory complications and hepatosplenomegaly (enlarged liver and spleen) [1, 4].
It is estimated that there are 93 million cases of Salmonellosis per year worldwide, and 155.000
deaths [5]. In the United States alone, it is estimated that there are one million cases per year
[6]. In 2023, salmonellosis was the second most common food-borne gastrointestinal disease
in the European Union, with 77.486 confirmed cases. S. Enteritidis is the most frequently re-
ported Salmonella serovar to infect humans [7, 8].
Salmonella is a zoonotic pathogen, which means that it is transmitted from animals to humans.
There are several different ways for humans to become infected with Salmonella. The most
common transmission route is via food. About 86% of the yearly estimated cases of Salmonel-
losis are food-borne [5]. Eggs and poultry meat are the main sources of food-borne Salmonella
disease. S. Enteritidis in particular is strongly associated with laying hens [7, 9–11]. Contami-
nation of chicken eggs can occur if the shell comes into contact with faeces from infected laying
hens. Once on the shell surface, S. Enteritidis can infiltrate through the pores of the shell into
the edible interior, or it can enter when the shell is cracked. It is also possible that the inside
of the egg is contaminated even before the egg is laid, if S. Enteritidis infects the reproductive
organs of the laying hen. A chick hatched from a contaminated egg will carry S. Enteritidis as
well, and eggs that are not heat-treated before consumption can transmit the pathogen to hu-
mans [12, 13].
Similarly to poultry, a range of other livestock - particularly pigs, but also cattle, sheep, and
goats - can harbour Salmonella in their intestinal tracts. When Salmonella infects animals, they
are often completely asymptomatic. Thus, the infection will often go unnoticed, and the animals
act as a reservoir for Salmonella. Infected animals shed Salmonella in their faeces, and thus,
one infected individual can quickly result in infection of the whole herd or flock [7, 14–16]. It has
also been shown that Salmonella can be transmitted across different species of animals, such
as chickens, pigs and buffaloes [17, 18].
There are a number of different ways in which Salmonella can spread between separate animal
populations. The animals might be infected via contaminated feed, from the environment or by
vectors such as insects, birds, dogs or cats [14, 15].
Once at the slaughterhouse, animal meat can also become contaminated with Salmonella
through cross-contamination during processing. If a single carcass contains Salmonella cells,
processing equipment might become contaminated and spread the pathogen to other car-
casses. Immersion chilling of poultry carcasses, in particular, has been identified as a major
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
2
==PAGE:11==
source of cross-contamination [19].
A number of different strategies are used in the food industry to prevent Salmonella infections.
These include thorough cleaning and disinfection in animal housing and food processing fa-
cilities, vaccination of poultry, quarantine of new animals before introducing them to a herd or
flock, heat treatment of animal feed, hot-water decontamination of carcasses and routine testing
for Salmonella. National surveillance programs also play a critical role by detecting outbreaks
early and taking measures to stop them. Additionally, educating consumers as well as restau-
rant and catering staff on food safety is essential, especially regarding handling of raw meat
products and avoiding raw or undercooked egg products unless they have been treated to elim-
inate Salmonella [16, 19, 20].
Consumption of animal products is not the only way humans may get infected with Salmonella.
Vegetables can become contaminated with Salmonella if they are exposed to faecal matter from
infected animals [14]. Salmonella has also been shown to pollute waterways such as oceans,
rivers, lakes and irrigation water, and this contamination has been linked to cases of Salmonella
in humans. The pollution happens when farm waste is not managed properly and runs off into
nearby bodies of water [21–23]. Another transmission source of Salmonella is direct contact
with animals. Transmission can come from livestock animals such as poultry, pigs and cat-
tle, as might be expected, but also from pets such as cats and dogs. A significant number of
Salmonella cases have also been associated with pet reptiles [24].
Altogether, Salmonella disease and its transmission patterns are incredibly complex, and much
remains to be understood about the transmission of this important zoonotic pathogen [9, 23].
2.2
Bayesian Phylogeny
2.2.1
Bayesian inference
Bayesian inference is a type of statistical inference that uses prior knowledge to infer prob-
ability distributions.
Bayesian inference is based on Bayes’ theorem, which states:
P(θ|D) = P(D|θ)P(θ)
P(D)
(2.1)
Where θ represents an unknown parameter whose probability distribution we want to infer
and D represents the observed data. P(θ) is the prior probability of the parameter. The prior
summarizes the prior knowledge of the parameter’s probability distribution. P(D|θ) is the prob-
ability of the data given the parameter, and is dubbed the likelihood. The likelihood summarizes
the information about the parameter from the observed data. P(D) is the marginal probability
of observing the data. This normalizes the posterior, ensuring it integrates to 1. Finally, P(θ|D)
is the probability of the parameter given the data, also termed the posterior. The posterior com-
bines the information from the likelihood and the prior [25].
Using Bayes’ theorem, we can update our prior knowledge of a parameter based on observed
data by calculating the posterior. The goal is to find the parameter value with the highest poste-
rior probability, by calculating the posteriors of different possible parameter values. It’s not just
single parameters that can be inferred in this way. Several different models, each with their own
parameter values, can also be compared based on their posterior probability [25]. In phyloge-
netic analyses, the model is made up of the tree topology and the substitution model. There
are a number of different model parameters that are also estimated, like branch lengths and
transition/transversion rates. The data is typically a nucleotide or protein sequence alignment
[25].
Bayesian statistics differ from the traditional frequentist statistics in several ways. An obvious
difference is the prior. Frequentist statistics are only concerned with the collected data, while
Bayesian statistics incorporate prior assumptions in the analysis, such as expert knowledge or
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
3
==PAGE:12==
historical data.
Furthermore, the frequentist approach always assumes that the observed data is only a part
of a larger dataset. Therefore, inferences are only ever made about the data, not about the
actual parameters - like how a p-value represents the probability of getting another dataset just
as extreme, if the null-hypothesis (that there is no statistical significance) is true.
This is different for Bayesian statistics. In the Bayesian approach, it is assumed that the col-
lected data is the only data about the parameter. And the probability distribution for the param-
eter can be updated once new data is available. This makes Bayesian inferences slightly more
intuitive, since they make direct statements about the parameter being studied. For example, a
95% credibility interval inferred from Bayesian methods has a 95% chance that the true mean
lies within the interval, while a 95% confidence interval from frequentist statistics indicates that
if the experiment were to be repeated over and over again, the true mean would be within 95%
of the calculated confidence intervals [25, 26].
2.2.2
BEAST
BEAST stands for Bayesian Evolutionary Analysis by Sampling Trees.
It is a software
used for inferring rooted phylogenies incorporating a time-scale, using Bayesian phylogenetic
analysis of molecular sequences. There are two versions of BEAST, the original version and
BEAST2. BEAST2 has a more modular framework, where extra functionalities can be added
through packages [27]. BEAST2 is used in this project.
Markov chain Monte Carlo
The basis of BEAST is the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm. MCMC is an al-
gorithm that samples again and again from the posterior distribution, and thus generates an
approximation of the distribution. It is not computationally feasible to calculate the exact distri-
bution, since calculating the marginal probability P(D) would require multidimensional integrals.
Instead, the MCMC algorithm starts by selecting random values in parameter space. Then, for
each parameter, it is proposed to change the parameter to a new value sampled from the area
around the current value. If the unnormalized posterior is higher with the new value, the change
is accepted. If the unnormalized posterior is not higher with the new value, the probability of
accepting the change is equal to the ratio of the unnormalized posteriors:
α = P(θ∗|D)
P(θ|D) = P(D|θ∗)P(θ∗)
P(D|θ)P(θ)
(2.2)
Where θ is the initial parameter value and θ∗is the proposed new parameter value. The difficult-
to-calculate P(D) cancels out in this ratio, so the MCMC algorithm avoids calculating it at all.
The algorithm repeats this method for many iterations, and the frequency with which it visits
each parameter value is directly proportional to their posterior probability. In this way, the gen-
erated samples will together form a histogram of the posterior distribution.
When comparing multiple different models, like BEAST does for different tree topologies, the
algorithm will generate both proposals for changes in parameters within the model and pro-
posals to move to another model. Each model will be sampled in proportion to their posterior
probability [25].
Setting up a BEAST analysis
Before running a BEAST analysis, there are a number of settings to specify, such as the
substitution model, the clock model and the priors.
Substitution models describe how mutations arise in nucleotide sequences. There are a range
of different substitution models to choose from. From the simple Jukes and Cantor (JC69) model
which assumes all nucleotide frequencies to be equal and all rates of change between different
nucleotides to be equal, to the generalised time reversible (GTR) model which has different
rates for all nucleotide changes and different nucleotide frequencies [28].
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
4
==PAGE:13==
The clock model defines the rate at which substitutions occur in the sequences. The simplest
clock model is the strict clock model, which assumes that all branches of the tree have the same
substitution rate. On the other hand, relaxed clock models allow the substitution rates to vary
across different branches. There are several types of relaxed clock models, where the rates
are drawn either from a log normal distribution or an exponential distribution [29].
In BEAST, a prior is also specified for the tree topology. This prior describes the expected
structure of the phylogenetic tree. In this project, a coalescent constant tree prior is used.
Coalescent tree priors describe how lineages merge backwards in time, and the coalescent
constant assumes that the effective population size was constant throughout time. Apart from
the tree prior, priors can also be specified for every parameter in the model, e.g. the rates of
nucleotide changes, the population size and so on. The exact parameters will depend on the
model [29].
Analysing BEAST results
After running BEAST, it is important to evaluate whether the MCMC chain has reached con-
vergence, meaning that it has reached a high-posterior region of the parameter space. This
is done using the program Tracer. Tracer is used to visualize trace plots, which plot the log
likelihood or sampled parameter values for each iteration. If the plotted values stay in the same
area for many iterations, with only small fluctuations, this indicates that convergence has been
reached. The initial samples, from before convergence is reached, are referred to as ’burn-in’
and are discarded.
The MCMC chain has to run for long enough to get a reliable estimate of the parameter values.
Since the sampled values from the MCMC chain has strong autocorrelation, they cannot be
regarded as independent samples. The effective sample size (ESS) is used to evaluate when
there are enough samples to get a reliable estimate. An ESS of 200 is commonly regarded as
sufficient to estimate the mean of a parameter [25].
Once satisfied that the MCMC chain has converged, the next step is to generate a ‘consensus
tree’ based on all the sampled trees. The program TreeAnnotator is used for this. TreeAnnota-
tor identifies the tree with the highest posterior support for all its clades across all the sampled
trees [27].
Discrete trait analysis in BEAST
In this project, transmission rates were determined between different countries using a dis-
crete trait analysis in BEAST. A discrete trait analysis allows the user to add a partition specifying
the location for each taxon. The traits evolve along the branches of the tree, independently of
the tree-generating process [30]. Transmission rates can also be inferred using structured co-
alescent models, which infers the transmission rates together with the phylogeny. However,
such models can become very complex if there are many different demes (countries, in this
case) [31].
2.3
Statistical modelling and machine learning
2.3.1
Bootstrapping
Traditionally, statistical inference relies on a single dataset of observed values from a larger
population. This dataset is viewed as an approximation of the true population, and is used
to calculate various statistics about the true population. However, this approach is based on
assumptions such as normality in the true population, which may not always hold true. Boot-
strapping allows us to estimate statistics from the population without these assumptions and
can provide more reliable estimates.
The idea of bootstrapping is to generate many independent samples from the same observed
data. Starting from a sample S of size n, which is representative of the real population. A
sampling distribution is created by resampling many times from sample S, where each sam-
ple is drawn independently with replacement. Typically around 1000 bootstrap samples are
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
5
==PAGE:14==
generated. The bootstrap samples can be viewed as approximating what would happen if we
could repeatedly sample from the true population. By computing the statistic of interest (e.g., a
mean, regression coefficient, or correlation) for each bootstrap sample, we can more accurately
estimate statistics such as the standard error or confidence intervals [32, 33].
2.3.2
Generalized Linear Models
In classic linear regression, a response variable Y is modelled as a linear combination of
predictors, plus an error term:
Y = β0 + β1x1 + ... + βnxn + ϵ
Where β represents regression coefficients and x represents the predictor variables. This type
of regression only works for data that meet specific criteria: The response variable must be
normally distributed, the variance must be constant, and there must be a linear relationship be-
tween the response variable and the predictors.
Many types of data do not meet these criteria, such as binary outcomes or count data. This is
where generalized linear models (GLMs) are applicable. GLMs extend linear regression to ac-
commodate non-normal distributions of the response variable, non-linear relationships between
the response variable and the predictors and non-constant variance.
There are three components to a GLM. A linear predictor, a link function and a probability dis-
tribution. These components vary depending on the type of GLM, such as normal, binomial,
Poisson or gamma. In this project, a Poisson GLM is used, so we will look closer at the com-
ponents for this model. The probability distribution describes the distribution of the response
variable. For Poisson regression, this is the Poisson distribution. The linear predictor is a
linear combination of the predictors, x, multiplied by a coefficient β, much like in classical linear
regression. The link function is what connects the linear predictor to the distribution of the
response variable. It ensures that the scale of the response variable fits the probability distri-
bution. For Poisson regression, a log link function is used. This ensures the response variable
is positive, which is a requirement in the Poisson distribution. Putting this together, Poisson
regression has the following equation (link function and linear predictor):
log(µ) = β0 + β1x1 + ... + βnxn
Where µ represent the predicted response variable, β are the coefficients and x are the predic-
tors [34, 35].
In the implementation of GLM used for this project, L2-regularization is used to prevent overfit-
ting. Overfitting is when a model fits the noise of the training data, instead of underlying patterns
in the data. An overfitted model is often very complex, so the idea of regularization is to penalize
more complex models. Two types of regularization are often used in machine learning: L1 and
L2 regularization. In L1 regularization, a penalty is added equal to the absolute value of the
coefficients. This encourages the model to include fewer predictors, and thus L1 regularization
can be used as a type of feature selection. In L2 regularization, a penalty is added equal to the
square of the coefficients. This will shrink the coefficients for less relevant predictors [36, 37].
2.3.3
Boosted Regression Trees
Boosted Regression Trees (BRT) is a type of machine learning model based on two algo-
rithms: decision trees and boosting.
Decision Trees
Decision trees are predictive models that work by partitioning the data into subsets based
on a series of binary splits. This explanation focuses on decision trees for regression tasks, but
they can be used for both regression and classification.
The decision tree starts at the root node, which contains all the input data (Figure 2.1). Then,
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
6
==PAGE:15==
the data is split into two internal nodes based on a certain decision rule. The decision rules are
properties of the predictors, such as a certain threshold of a specific predictor. The rule used
for the split is determined as the decision rule with the greatest reduction of a specified loss
function. For regression tasks, the loss function is typically the mean square error (MSE). So
the decision rule which leads to the lowest MSE of the resulting internal nodes is used to split
the data [38–41].
The process is repeated for the internal nodes, and these splits continue until a stopping criteria
is reached. A criteria could be that the data in the node have reached below a certain threshold
of MSE, or the tree has reached a predefined maximum depth. The final nodes of the tree are
referred to as leaf nodes, and they contain the predictions of the model.
Root node
Internal node
Leaf node
Leaf node
Yes
No
Internal node
Leaf node
Leaf node
Yes
No
Yes
No
Figure 2.1: Visualisation of a decision tree with root node, internal nodes and leaf nodes. At
each node is a decision rule which determines how the data gets split.
The maximum depth of the tree, also referred to as the tree complexity, controls the maxi-
mum number of splits for each branch in the tree. This parameter also controls whether inter-
actions between predictors are fitted. If the maximum depth is 1, only one predictor is used for
each prediction. If however the maximum depth is higher, several predictors can be included
on the same branch of the tree at subsequent splits, and in this way, interactions between pre-
dictors are also modelled [38–41].
One advantage of decision trees is that they come with an inherent feature selection - if a pre-
dictor is not important, it will not be selected to split the nodes. This also makes it possible to
calculate the importance of each predictor. The importance of each predictor in a decision tree
based model is calculated as the normalized sum of reduction of MSE across all splits involving
that predictor [42].
Decision trees have several other advantages as well. For example, they can be applied to
many types of data, they are intuitive to understand and they require relatively little computa-
tional power. However, the predictive performance of a single decision tree is not impressive
compared to other types of models, like GLMs. Furthermore, they are very sensitive to small
changes in the training data. For these reasons, decision trees are rarely used on their own,
but instead, included in ensemble methods [38–41].
Boosting
Boosting is a type of ensemble method. The general idea of ensemble methods is that
several weaker models can become strong when combined. Ensemble methods repeatedly
show high predictive performance in a range of different tasks.
Boosting is a way of sequentially combining weaker decision trees by letting each tree focus on
the parts of the data not explained well by the previous model.
Boosting relies on gradient descent. This means that in each iteration, it attempts to minimize
the gradient, which is the derivative of the loss function. For regression tasks where the loss
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
7
==PAGE:16==
function is often the MSE, this is equivalent to minimizing the residuals [39, 41].
In BRT models, the algorithm can be described as the following:
1. Start with a constant prediction R0, which minimizes the residuals, e.g. the mean of the y
values. This can be viewed as a decision tree with only one node.
2. Compute the residuals for every data point.
3. Fit a new decision tree on the residuals from the model. This means that the new tree only
models the part of the data that has not already been described by the model. In other
words, it corrects the mistakes of the previous model.
4. Add the new decision tree to the existing model.
5. Calculate new residuals.
6. Repeat step 2-5
The final model ends up being a linear combination of hundreds or thousands of decision
trees. That means that each prediction by the model is the sum of the predictions by all the
trees in the ensemble [39, 41].
The decision trees can end up quickly reducing the residuals by simply over-fitting the train-
ing data. For this reason, we want to move slowly down the gradient, meaning we keep the
contribution of each tree small. This is done by multiplying the predictions of each tree with a
learning rate, which is below one. Generally, a lower learning rate leads to better predictions,
but also increases the number of trees required. The maximum depth also has an impact on
the number of trees required. If the maximum depth is low, each tree will be relatively simple,
and more trees are needed for reliable predictions. If the maximum depth is high, each tree will
be more complex and might give more accurate predictions, so a smaller number of trees are
required [39, 41].
2.3.4
XGBoost
XGBoost stands for Extreme Gradient Boosting. Similarly to BRT, the XGBoost system also
builds upon gradient boosted decision trees. The difference is that XGBoost includes a number
of optimizations, which decreases computation time, makes it scale better to large datasets and
increases customization [43].
One of the optimizations in XGBoost is in the decision tree algorithm, when a decision rule is
chosen to split a node. In most other gradient boosted decision tree systems, the algorithm
evaluates every possible decision rule in order to find the best one. In XGBoost, an approxi-
mate algorithm based on percentiles is used instead, which makes it possible to only iterate a
subset of the possible decision rules. Further optimizations include better handling of sparse
data, which is data with missing values or many zeros. XGBoost also optimizes the sorting of
the data, which is required to select a decision rule before a split. Instead of sorting the data at
every node, the data is stored pre-sorted [43, 44].
XGBoost also introduces more parameters which can be used to optimize the model. For in-
stance, a parameter γ decides the minimum loss reduction required to perform further splits.
So a higher γ will result in less complex trees. XGBoost also supports two different types of
subsampling, which can be controlled by hyperparameters. The first, ’colsample_bylevel’, con-
trols the fraction of the predictors evaluated at each split. The second, ’subsample’, defines the
fraction of the predictors used to train individual trees [44].
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
8
==PAGE:17==
3
Methods
3.1
Genome data
All available assembled S. Enteritidis genomes were downloaded from the NCBI Genomes
database on the 4th of September 2024, along with metadata. Assemblies that did not have
information about the collection year or country were discarded, leaving 37.640 genomes. The
quality assessment tool QUAST (v5.2.0) [45] was used to evaluate the quality of the assemblies,
and genomes with a total length not between 4.5 and 5.5 Mb and more than 500 contigs were
discarded, leaving 37.331 genomes. KmerFinder [46–48] was used to check the species of
the genomes, and genomes that did not identify as S. enterica or had less than 90% query
coverage or template coverage to S. enterica were also discarded. This left 37.451 genomes.
This dataset will be referred to as the total dataset.
The multilocus sequence typings (MLSTs) of the genomes in the total dataset were determined
using mlst from T. Seemann (v2.23.0) [49].
From the total dataset, another dataset was created, consisting of all genomes for which the
metadata in either of the fields host, isolation source, food product type, IFSAC (Interagency
Food Safety Analytics Collaboration) category, ontological term or source type indicated that the
sample was taken from animals or animal meat. This dataset will be referred to as the animal
dataset. The metadata associated with each dataset is provided in Supplementary tables 1-2.
3.2
Phylogeny
3.2.1
Clusters
For both the total and the animal dataset, Mash (v2.3) [50] was used to create a distance
matrix of mash distances, from which a dendogram was constructed using the hclust function
in R. The tree was viewed with iTOL [51] and divided into clusters of closely related genomes
based on the Mash distance. Genomes that were not closely related to any other genomes were
discarded. In total, 70 clusters were identified for the total dataset, and 23 clusters were iden-
tified for the animal dataset. Clusters with a high number of genomes with zero Mash distance
between them were subsampled, so a single genome from the group of identical genomes was
retained and the others were discarded.
3.2.2
SNP alignments
For each cluster in both datasets, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified
and SNP alignments were constructed using CSI Phylogeny [52]. S. Enteritidis strain P125109
(GenBank accession no. NC_011294) was used as reference genome, similar to several other
papers [53, 54]. Clusters with a very high number of SNPs had outgroups removed.
Due to the computational expense of the BEAST analyses, clusters with over 600 genomes
were subsampled using a 10 SNP cut-off. Genomes that had 10 or less SNPs between them
were grouped together using NetworkX (v3.1.0) in Python and a single genome was retained
from each group, and the rest were discarded. CSI Phylogeny [52] was again used to generate
SNP alignments between the subsampled clusters. Gubbins (V2.3.4) [55] was used to filter out
positions of the alignments that have undergone recombination.
3.2.3
Initial BEAST analyses
BEAST2 (v2.7.7) [27] was used to construct timed phylogenies for each cluster. The GTR
substitution model was used along with a relaxed clock rate and a constant coalescent tree
prior. An example XML file with these settings can be found in the Supplementary files. These
model settings have previously been used for evolutionary analysis of S. Enteritidis genomes
[56–58].
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
9
==PAGE:18==
BEAST2 was run for 100-500 million iterations, depending on the cluster size and number of
SNPs, until convergence. Two clusters from the total dataset failed to converge after 500 itera-
tions. The two clusters were subsampled using the 10 SNP cut-off, after which they converged
successfully. One cluster with 45 genomes from the animal dataset failed to converge at all.
A consensus tree was constructed using TreeAnnotator from BEAST2 [27], using appropriate
burn-in for each cluster.
3.2.4
Getting transmission rates
In order to calculate the transmission rates of S. Enteritidis between countries, the BEAST2
package FixedTreeAnalysis was used. With this method, the already generated consensus tree
was used as the starting point for the analysis, and the phylogeny was not changed during the
analysis. The isolation country of each genome was specified as a discrete trait. The rates
were specified to be either symmetric or asymmetric. Example XML files can be found in the
Supplementary files. These analyses were run for each cluster, between 1-5 million iterations,
until convergence. The transmission rates were extracted from each cluster, using an appro-
priate burn-in. The transmission rates for each pair of countries were averaged over the values
from each different cluster.
For each country, transmission rates involving that country were summed together. For sym-
metric rates, all rates involving the country were included, and for asymmetric rates, only the
rates originating from the relevant country were included. The summed transmission rates were
normalized by dividing by the number of rates for each country.
In order to visualize the networks of transmission rates, network graphs were made using the
NetworkX package in Python. To generate the network graphs, kamada_kawai_layout was
used and edge weights were set as the inverse of the transmission rates. The script used to
generate the network graphs is provided in the Supplementary files
3.3
Modelling
3.3.1
Predictor dataset
A dataset consisting of 48 different predictor variables was collected. A full description of
the predictor variables and their sources can be found in Supplementary Table 12.
For each predictor variable, data was collected for all years from 1948 to 2024 or however
many years in that range were available. This is the range of years from which genomes was
collected. For the animal dataset, data from 1955 to 2024 was used, since this was the range
of collection years for the animal genomes.
The dataset has two different types of variables: the monadic variables are properties of the
individual countries, for instance the mean temperature, while the dyadic variables describe re-
lationships between countries, e.g. the amount of trade between two countries.
Locations for data collection
Since several of the predictor variables came with a resolution below country level, the
following approach was used to select which locations within each country to include in the
dataset: If specific locations, like cities or regions, were specified for the genomes isolated from
a country, those locations were used. If locations within the country were not specified, data
was downloaded from four different locations within the country. The locations were selected to
represent different Köppen-Geiger climate zones [59] within the country. For very small coun-
tries, which were covered by fewer than four 0.5°lat-lon grid cells, fewer than four locations were
selected.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
10
==PAGE:19==
Collecting monadic variables
For each country, data were collected for the following monadic variables, similar to the
approach of Zhang et al. [60].
• Temperature
• Precipitation
• Latitude
• Human population
• Gross domestic product (GDP)
• Land use
• Mammal species richness
• Livestock
• University count
Since the transmission rates are all dyadic, a method was needed to connect the monadic
predictors to the dyadic transmission rates. For the asymmetric rates, data from the origin
country was used. All countries and all years were included. For the symmetric rates, the
dynamic time warping (DTW) was calculated between the variables from each country. DTW
was calculated for all combinations of locations in the two countries. Since DTW is calculated
for a time series, it could not be calculated for variables that only had data for a single year, so
for these variables the absolute difference was used instead.
Collecting dyadic variables
For each country, data were collected for the following dyadic variables:
• Flights
• Trade of chicken
• Trade of duck
• Trade of beef
• Trade of pigs
All years were included in the dataset. To connect the dyadic variables with the symmetric
transmission rates, the values for each direction of a pair of countries was summed together.
The full predictor datasets used for the modelling are provided in Supplementary tables 7-10.
Bootstrapping
The above data preparation resulted in a large dataset with many different values for each
predictor, originating from different years and locations. Therefore, a bootstrapping approach
was used to determine the best data to use for the modelling.
For the symmetric data, a combination of locations is picked randomly for each country pair in
each bootstrapping iteration. The corresponding DTW values or absolute differences for the
predictor variables are used in the model for that iteration.
For the asymmetric data, a year is picked randomly for each predictor variable for each country
pair in each bootstrapping iteration. In the same iteration, a location is also picked randomly for
each country pair. The corresponding predictor values are used in the model for that iteration.
The bootstrapping data were divided into a training set and a test set, with a test size of 20%
, after which the predictor training and test sets were scaled using StandardScaler from scikit-
learn (v1.2.2) [61].
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
11
==PAGE:20==
3.3.2
Models
Three different models were tested and evaluated based on lowest root mean square error
(RMSE). The python scripts for each model, including the bootstrapping, can be found in the
Supplementary files.
Generalized linear model
A Poisson regression model was implemented using the PoissonRegressor class from scikit-
learn. ElasticNet-type regularisation was utilised, and GridSearchCV from scikit-learn was used
to select the L2 regularization strength. Five-fold cross-validation was used within the grid
search, and the best grid search model was selected based on RMSE.
Boosted Regression Trees
A BRT model was implemented using the GradientBoostingRegressor class from scikit-
learn. GridSearchCV from scikit-learn was used to optimize the maximum depth and the learn-
ing rate, with five-fold cross-validation, and the best grid search model was selected based on
RMSE.
XGBoost
An XGBoost model was implemented using the XGBRegressor class from xgboost (v1.7.4)
with the learning objective set to ’count:poisson’. Due to the high number of hyperparameters of
an XGBoost model and the time it would take to test all combinations of them, BayesSearchCV
from scikit-optimize (v0.10.2), which uses Bayesian optimization, was used to optimize hyperpa-
rameters. The hyperparameters included in the Bayesian search was the number of estimators,
the maximum depth, the learning rate, the subsampling fraction, the fraction of predictors used
for constructing each tree, L1 regularization strength, L2 regularization strength and the mini-
mum loss reduction required to split a leaf node. The Bayesian search ran for 50 iterations and
used five-fold cross-validation.
The models were run for 1000 iterations with differently sampled bootstrap data and the
progression of the best RMSE throughout the runs was checked to evaluate convergence. The
development of the best RMSE during each run can be viewed in Supplementary Figure 3.
Furthermore, the best parameter values identified by the grid searches and Bayesian searches
are provided in Supplementary Tables 13 to 15. Predictor effects were evaluated by accumu-
lated local effects (ALE) plots, created using the PyALE package (v1.2.0) [62].
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
12
==PAGE:21==
4
Results
4.1
Quality and analysis of S. Enteritidis genomes
All available assembled S. Enteritidis genomes were downloaded from the NCBI database,
totaling 38.835 genomes. After filtering out genomes missing information about sampling coun-
try or year, 37.640 genomes were left. Another 40 genomes were discarded due to poor se-
quencing quality. Finally, genomes that did not identify as S. enterica according to KmerFinder
were discarded. This left 37.331 genomes in the total dataset.
As described previously, S. Enteritidis is a zoonotic disease and thus is mainly transmitted be-
tween animals. While it can infect humans, it is not easily transmitted from human to human
[24]. For this reason, studying only genomes isolated from animals might give a clearer picture
of the actual transmission. An animal dataset was defined, containing the genomes isolated
from animals or animal meat, resulting in 7.746 genomes.
The total dataset contains genomes isolated from 80 different countries, while the animal dataset
contains genomes from 38 different countries. Figure 4.1 shows the distribution of genomes
from each continent for both the total dataset and the animal dataset. Furthermore, the 10
countries with the most genomes sampled are shown in Figure 4.2. The full country distribution
can be found in Supplementary Figures 1 and 2. It is worth noting that The United Kingdom and
the United States are particularly overrepresented in the total dataset, with 17.115 and 12.572,
respectively. In the animal dataset, The United States is overrepresented, with 5.985 genomes
sampled.
Figure 4.1: Number of genomes from each continent in total dataset (left) and animal dataset
(right)
The genomes in the total dataset were collected between 1948 to 2024, but the majority
were collected in the last 10 years. The animal genomes are from between 1955 and 2024,
with the majority also coming from recent years. The distributions of collection years for both
datasets are shown in Figure 4.3.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.2: Top 10 countries with most S. Enteritidis genomes in total dataset (left) and animal
dataset (right)
Figure 4.3: Distribution of collection years for total dataset (top) and animal dataset (bottom)
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
14
==PAGE:23==
The genomes were isolated from a range of different hosts. In the total dataset, almost
two thirds of the genomes were isolated from humans. There is also a significant number
of genomes from animals, some environmental samples and a small number of S. Enteritidis
genomes isolated from food. The host distribution for the total dataset can be seen in Figure 4.4.
Looking closer at the animal genomes, we see that the vast majority are isolated from poultry.
There are also a number of genomes from other types of animals, such as swine, rodents, cattle,
wild mammals and wild birds. The full distribution of animal hosts is provided in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.4: Distribution of hosts for total dataset. The ’Other’ category mainly includes environ-
mental samples.
Figure 4.5: Distribution of hosts for animal dataset.
The ’Other’ category mainly includes
genomes for which the type of animal was not specified.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
15
==PAGE:24==
MLST was conducted in order to determine the ST-type of the genomes. Table 4.1 shows
the 10 most abundant ST-types found in the total dataset and the animal dataset. Over 93% of
the genomes are ST11. This fits expectations, since ST111 is the most common ST-type for S.
Enteritidis [63].
Table 4.1: Ten most common ST-types in total dataset and animal dataset
Total Dataset
Animal Dataset
ST-type
Count
ST-type
Count
11
34961
11
7014
183
720
183
132
1925
517
1973
68
1974
133
814
38
Unknown
119
Unknown
22
3233
92
34
21
1973
78
40
19
814
68
469
12
19
51
13
11
34
45
19
10
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
16
==PAGE:25==
4.2
Phylogeny of S. Enteritidis genomes and global transmission
rates
Before the Bayesian phylogenetic analysis could be conducted, the datasets had to be di-
vided into smaller groups of closely related genomes. The program Mash [50] was used to de-
termine distances between all genomes in the two datasets. Mash is an alignment-free method
of rapidly estimating the similarity of a large number of genomes. Dendograms were created
for each dataset based on the Mash distances (Figures 4.6 and 4.7).
Figure 4.6: Dendogram of total dataset based on Mash distances. Red indicates genomes that
were discarded due to not being closely related to other genomes. Blue and dark-green show
the two major clades. Light-green indicates genomes outside the two major clades that were
not discarded.
Clusters of closely related genomes were identified by inspection of the dendograms. 70
clusters were identified for the total dataset. The initial size distribution can be seen in Fig-
ure 4.8a. On the dendogram, there were groups of up to several thousand genomes that were
identical according to Mash distance. The four clusters containing such groups were subsam-
pled, so that a single genome was chosen from among the identical genomes and the rest were
omitted from the cluster. Since the Bayesian phylogeny analysis can be very computationally
demanding for a large number of genomes, it was also decided to subsample all clusters with
>600 genomes based on a 10 SNP threshold. For any groups in these clusters with less than
10 SNPs between them, a single genome was left in the cluster and the rest were omitted. The
size distribution after the subsampling steps can be seen in Figures 4.8b and 4.8c.
23 clusters were identified from the animal dataset. Four clusters also contained a large number
of genomes that were identical based on Mash distance, so these were subsampled in the same
way as the clusters from the total dataset. Since there were no clusters left with >600 genomes,
it was not necessary to perform SNP subsampling. The size distributions of the animal clusters
before and after subsampling can be seen in Figures 4.9a and 4.9b.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.7: Dendogram of animal dataset based on Mash distances. Red indicates genomes
that were discarded due to not being closely related to other genomes. Blue shows the major
clade. Green indicates genomes outside the major clade that were not discarded.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.8: Distribution of cluster sizes for total dataset. a) Cluster sizes before subsampling.
b) Cluster sizes after subsampling based on Mash distance. c) Cluster sizes after subsampling
based on 10 SNP cut-off.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
18
==PAGE:27==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Distribution of cluster sizes for animal dataset. a) Cluster sizes before subsampling.
b) Cluster sizes after subsampling based on Mash distance.
Symmetric
Asymmetric
A
A
B
B
Figure 4.10: Visualisation of
symmetric (top) and asym-
metric (bottom) rates be-
tween two countries, A and
B.
Timed phylogenies were constructed for each cluster using
the Bayesian phylogeny program BEAST2 [27], employing a con-
stant coalescent tree prior. The resulting consensus trees were
used to estimate the transmission rates between each pair of
countries, using discrete trait analysis in BEAST2.
Both symmetric and asymmetric transmission rates were esti-
mated. Symmetric transmission rates assume that the transmis-
sion from country A to country B is the same as the the transmis-
sion from country B to country A. With asymmetric transmission
rates, the transmission from country A to country B differs from
the transmission from country B to country A (Figure 4.10). The
asymmetric scenario best represents the real situation of trans-
mission between countries. Unfortunately, the asymmetric anal-
ysis worked for just 46 out of 70 clusters in the total dataset (65%)
and 11 out of 22 clusters in the animal dataset (50%). Due to
the large amount of data left out if only these rates were used, it
was decided to also calculate symmetric transmission rates. The
symmetric analysis worked for 64 out of 70 clusters in the total
dataset (91%) and 18 out of 22 clusters in the animal dataset (81%). This resulted in four sets
of transmission rates, defined by whether they came from the total or the animal dataset, and
whether they were symmetric or asymmetric. The transmission rates range in size from close
to zero for some pairs of countries, up to around 1.5 or 2.5 transmission events per year for oth-
ers. The ten highest rates for each dataset are provided in Tables 4.2 and 4.3, and transmission
rates for all pairs of countries are provided in Supplementary tables 3-6.
We see that for the total dataset, the highest symmetric rates are between Norway and
Poland, Canada and USA as well as Hungary and USA. The highest asymmetric rates are from
France to the United Kingdom, from Canada to Turkey and from Japan to USA. Although these
results do not show the exact same country pairs in the top, there are some similarities. Canada
and USA show up in the top 10 highest rates for both symmetric and asymmetric rates, with the
asymmetric rate indicating that most of the transmission goes from Canada and into the USA.
The same is true for The United Kingdom and Israel, where the asymmetric rate goes from The
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
19
==PAGE:28==
Table 4.2: Highest ten transmission rates for total datasets
Symmetric total dataset
Asymmetric total dataset
Country combination
Transmission rate
Country combination
Transmission rate
Norway-Poland
1.402
France-United Kingdom
2.444
Canada-USA
1.055
Canada-Turkey
1.201
Hungary-USA
1.041
Japan-USA
1.128
Italy-Lebanon
0.945
United Kingdom-Israel
0.950
Angola-Democratic Republic
of the Congo
0.938
Canada-USA
0.904
Germany-Sweden
0.924
Germany-France
0.799
Kenya-Uganda
0.874
Argentina-Canada
0.692
Kenya-Malawi
0.851
Mauritius-United Kingdom
0.682
Israel-United Kingdom
0.711
Brazil-United Kingdom
0.620
Belgium-Poland
0.658
Lebanon-Brazil
0.571
Table 4.3: Highest ten transmission rates for animal datasets
Symmetric animal dataset
Asymmetric animal dataset
Country combination
Transmission rate
Country combination
Transmission rate
Germany-Poland
2.154
Poland-Germany
1.569
Nigeria-South Korea
1.442
Canada-South Korea
0.945
Germany-Mozambique
1.034
USA-China
0.909
Mozambique-Spain
0.919
Canada-USA
0.780
Argentina-Germany
0.811
Brazil-USA
0.707
Germany-United Kingdom
0.802
United Kingdom-Poland
0.635
Portugal-Spain
0.753
Belgium-Poland
0.632
Argentina-Spain
0.706
Spain-Portugal
0.584
Canada-South Korea
0.674
Germany-China
0.572
Argentina-Canada
0.669
Sweden-Germany
0.559
United Kingdom to Israel. Norway and Poland, who have the highest symmetric transmission
rate, are not found in the asymmetric rates because Norway was only represented in clusters
that did not succeed in the asymmetric analysis. The same is the case for several other countries
that feature in the top of the symmetric transmission rates, like Hungary, Angola and Uganda.
For the animal dataset, the highest symmetric rates are between Germany and Poland, Nigeria
and South Korea as well as Germany and Mozambique. The highest asymmetric rates are from
Poland to Germany, from Canada to South Korea and from USA to China. In this case, both sets
of transmission rates agree that there is a lot of transmission between Germany and Poland,
with the asymmetric rate indicating that the transmission goes from Poland to Germany. We also
see Spain and Portugal in the top in both sets of rates, and the asymmetric transmission rate
goes from Spain into Portugal. Canada and South Korea also show up in the top of both lists,
with transmission coming from Canada. Again, some countries are not part of the asymmetric
set of transmission rates, because the clusters including genomes from those countries did not
succeed. Both Nigeria and Mozambique, who are listed at the top of the symmetric rates, are
not represented in the asymmetric transmission rates.
In order to visualize the transmission rates, a network analysis was performed for each set
of rates (total symmetric, total asymmetric, animal symmetric and animal asymmetric). The
networks can be viewed in Figures 4.11 to 4.14.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
20
==PAGE:29==
Australia
Canada
China
Georgia
Germany
Ireland
Kenya
Kuwait
South_Korea
Spain
Tanzania
USA
United_Kingdom
Belgium
Italy
Senegal
Brazil
Chile
Lebanon
Peru
Ethiopia
Russia
Singapore
South_Africa
Tunisia
Gambia
Romania
Saudi_Arabia
Thailand
Sri_Lanka
Argentina
France
Turkey
Poland
Portugal
Angola
Democratic_Republic_of_the_Congo
Hungary
India
Malawi
Morocco
Netherlands
Paraguay
Taiwan
Mozambique
Cameroon
New_Zealand
Uganda
Viet_Nam
State_of_Palestine
Mauritania
Denmark
Iran
Japan
Mauritius
Norway
Cote_d'Ivoire
Comoros
Madagascar
Sweden
Israel
Africa
Asia
Europe
North Americ
South Americ
Oceania
Figure 4.11: Network of symmetric transmission rates for total dataset. The width of the edges
correspond to the amount of transmission between two countries. The ten highest rates are
highlighted in red. The colour of each node indicates the continent.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
21
==PAGE:30==
Australia
Canada
China
Georgia
Germany
Ireland
Kenya
Kuwait
South_Korea
Spain
Tanzania
USA
United_Kingdom
Belgium
Italy
Senegal
Brazil
Chile
Lebanon
Peru
Singapore
Turkey
Tunisia
Taiwan
Portugal
South_Africa
Viet_Nam
Mauritania
Malawi
Poland
Japan
Denmark
Mauritius
Cote_d'Ivoire
Russia
France
Democratic_Republic_of_the_Congo
Sri_Lanka
Sweden
Argentina
Israel
Africa
Asia
Europe
North America
South America
Oceania
Figure 4.12: Network of asymmetric transmission rates for total dataset. The width of the edges
correspond to the amount of transmission between two countries. The ten highest rates are
highlighted in red. The colour of each node indicates the continent.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
22
==PAGE:31==
Canada
Germany
Spain
USA
United_Kingdom
Australia
Belgium
Italy
Netherlands
Portugal
Brazil
Chile
China
Singapore
South_Korea
Turkey
Senegal
Poland
Mozambique
Madagascar
Nigeria
South_Africa
Sweden
Argentina
Africa
Asia
Europe
North Americ
South Americ
Oceania
Figure 4.13: Network of symmetric transmission rates for animal dataset. The width of the
edges correspond to the amount of transmission between two countries. The ten highest rates
are highlighted in red. The colour of each node indicates the continent.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
23
==PAGE:32==
Canada
Germany
Spain
USA
United_Kingdom
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
China
Portugal
Singapore
South_Korea
Turkey
Senegal
Poland
Italy
South_Africa
Sweden
Argentina
Africa
Asia
Europe
North America
South America
Oceania
Figure 4.14: Network of asymmetric transmission rates for animal dataset. The width of the
edges correspond to the amount of transmission between two countries. The ten highest rates
are highlighted in red. The colour of each node indicates the continent.
In order to identify countries with a particularly high amount of transmission, transmission
rates were summed for each country and normalized based on how many connections each
country has. For the symmetric transmission rates, all rates involving that country was summed.
For the asymmetric rates, only rates starting from each country was summed together for that
country. That means that for the symmetric transmission rates, a high summed transmission
indicates that the country has a lot of S. Enteritidis coming either into the country, out of the
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
24
==PAGE:33==
country, or both. Meanwhile, a high summed score of the asymmetric transmission rates indi-
cate that that country is spreading S. Enteritidis to other countries. The ten countries with the
highest normalized summed transmission are provided in Tables 4.4 and 4.5. The full list of
countries and their summed transmission rates is available in Supplementary Table 11.
In the total dataset, Mozambique, Turkey and Mauritius have a high symmetric transmission,
while Argentina, France and Israel have a high asymmetric transmission. Many of the top ten
countries are present on both lists. Many of the same countries also rank high in the animal
dataset. Argentina, Mozambique and Poland have the highest symmetric transmission, while
Argentina, Sweden and Poland are at the top of the asymmetric transmission. Again, many of
the same countries are found in the top of both lists.
Table 4.4: The ten countries with the highest normalized summed transmission rate for both
symmetric and asymmetric total datasets.
Symmetric total dataset
Asymmetric total dataset
Country
Normalized transmission
Country
Normalized transmission
Mozambique
0.368
Argentina
0.340
Turkey
0.362
France
0.312
Mauritius
0.322
Israel
0.305
Israel
0.291
DR Congo
0.288
Poland
0.252
Mauritius
0.238
Ireland
0.250
Japan
0.223
Germany
0.230
Portugal
0.198
France
0.225
Ireland
0.195
Cote d’Ivoire
0.221
Poland
0.193
Argentina
0.220
Sweden
0.188
Table 4.5: The ten countries with the highest normalized summed transmission rate for both
symmetric and asymmetric animal datasets.
Symmetric animal dataset
Asymmetric animal dataset
Country
Normalized transmission
Country
Normalized transmission
Argentina
0.563
Argentina
0.367
Mozambique
0.525
Sweden
0.326
Poland
0.519
Poland
0.279
Germany
0.398
Canada
0.251
Canada
0.365
Italy
0.184
Spain
0.329
Belgium
0.181
Nigeria
0.302
Senegal
0.171
Senegal
0.301
Spain
0.165
Italy
0.263
Germany
0.159
South Korea
0.261
Portugal
0.159
4.3
Factors influencing transmission of S. Enteritidis
Three different models, GLM, BRT and XGBoost were trained to predict the transmission
rates of S. Enteritidis from a dataset of 35 different predictor variables. The models were fitted
in 1000 iterations each, where each iteration used different bootstrap samples of the predictors.
The model from the best-performing iteration was saved. This was done for all four sets of
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
25
==PAGE:34==
transmission rates: symmetric total, asymmetric total, symmetric animal and asymmetric ani-
mal. The models were evaluated based on the three metrics RMSE, mean absolute error (MAE)
and the coefficient of determination (R2). The metrics for the best-performing models out of all
the bootstrap iterations are listed in Table 4.6. For the symmetric total data, the asymmetric total
data and the asymmetric animal data the BRT model performs best. The R2 values indicate that
these models explains 27.3%, 17.5% and 46.6% of the total variation in the data, respectively.
For the symmetric animal data, the XGBoost model performs best and explains 29.2% of the
total variation in the data.
Table 4.6: RMSE, MAE and R2 for each model and dataset.
Total Dataset
Animal Dataset
Symmetric rates
RMSE
MAE
R2
RMSE
MAE
R2
GLM
0.166
0.098
0.048
0.144
0.114
0.126
BRT
0.145
0.092
0.273
0.131
0.107
0.279
XGBoost
0.16
0.095
0.115
0.13
0.1
0.292
Asymmetrc rates
RMSE
MAE
R2
RMSE
MAE
R2
GLM
0.216
0.097
0.071
0.127
0.1
0.445
BRT
0.203
0.095
0.175
0.125
0.095
0.466
XGBoost
0.211
0.092
0.114
0.141
0.11
0.32
For the animal dataset, the BRT model on the asymmetric animal transmission rates per-
formed best, and this is also the best performing model overall. This model will be referred
to as the best animal model. We can look closer at the importances of each predictor in this
model, to gain an understanding of which factors are important for transmission of S. Enteri-
tidis. Since BRT models perform automatic feature selection, not all predictors are used by the
model. Figure 4.15 shows the predictors included in the best animal model. We see that the
most important predictors are poultry trade and pork trade. The temperature also plays a role in
the prediction of transmission rates, as well as changes in land use, specifically for cropland and
secondary land. Other predictors included in the model are trade with cooked meat, latitude,
change in precipitation and GDP growth.
For the total dataset, the best performing model was the BRT model fitted on the symmetric
transmission rates. We will refer to this model as the best total model, and also investigate
predictor importance for this model. Figure 4.16 shows the predictors most important for the
best total model. This model uses a lot of different predictors to predict the transmission rates,
but among the most important are fish trade, change in precipitation, beef trade, the percentage
of secondary land, the change in temperature, the percentage of managed pasture, change in
urban land, trade of sheep and goats, dairy trade and latitude. Predictor importances for the
best performing models on the other datasets can be found in Supplementary Tables 16 and 17.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
26
==PAGE:35==
Predictor importance
Animals
0.628
0.263
0.022
0.021
0.020
0.017
0.011
0.011
0.006
0.002
Predictors
poultry trade
pork trade
mean temp
maximum temp
cropland change
cooked meat trade
latitude
secondary land change
precipitation change
GDP growth
Figure 4.15: All predictors contributing to the best animal model (BRT fitted on the asymmetric
animal transmission rates). Areas corresponding to their importance score and labels in black
showing the score. Secondary land is defined as natural land that is recovering from previous
human disturbance.
Predictor importance
Total
0.160
0.082
0.073
0.069
0.069
0.052
0.050
0.045
0.040
0.039
0.034
0.031
0.031
0.030
0.030
0.020
0.019
0.019
0.016
Predictors
fish trade
precipitation change
beef trade
secondary land
temp change
managed pasture
urban land change
sheep goats trade
dairy trade
latitude
pasture to urban
cropland change
GDP growth
diurnal temp range
managed vegetation
universities
egg trade
crop to urban
forest cover
Figure 4.16: All predictors contributing to the best total model (BRT fitted on the symmetric total
transmission rates). Areas corresponding to their importance score and labels in black showing
the score. Due to the high number of predictors, only the predictors with importance scores >
0.015 are listed on the legend. The full list of predictor importances is available in Supplementary
Table 16. Secondary land is defined as natural land that is recovering from previous human
disturbance. Managed pasture is grazing land for animals, managed by humans. ’pasture to
urban’ and ’crop to urban’ describe the change in land use from pasture or cropland to urban
land. The diurnal temperature range is the difference between the daily maximum and minimum
temperatures.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
27
==PAGE:36==
Since the models were run for 1000 iterations on different bootstrap samples of the data,
we can also investigate which predictors had the highest importance scores in all the other it-
erations.
Figure 4.17 shows box plots of the importance scores for the ten predictors with the highest
mean importance based on all 1000 iterations of the best animal model. The distributions of the
importance scores are very skewed, so each predictor might score very high in one iteration but
score zero in the next. There are however some patterns, with some predictors having a high
importance score more often than others. Figure 4.18 shows a heat map of the importance
score in each iteration for each predictor. The most important predictors in the best animal
model based on the mean importance scores from all iterations include trade of animal prod-
ucts, namely trade of eggs, poultry, pork, beef, cooked meat, fish and dairy. We also see that
the latitude, the mean temperature and percentage of cropland are among the most important
predictors.
For the best total model, box plots of the predictors with the highest mean importance can be
seen in Figure 4.19 and a heatmap showing the importances per iteration for all predictors is
provided in Figure 4.20. Like for the animal model, trade of animal products score high in im-
portance. This includes trade of fish, cooked meat, beef, sheep and goat meat, pork, eggs and
dairy. Again, the temperature also seems to be important, as well as land use, in this case
mainly the percentage of urban land and the transition of secondary land to urban land.
Figure 4.17: Boxplots of the ten predictors with highest mean importance based on all bootstrap
iterations of the BRT model on the asymmetric animal transmission rates. Means are indicated
in red.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
28
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.18: Heatmap showing the importances of each predictor in each bootstrap iteration
for the BRT model on the asymmetric animal data. Lighter colours indicate higher importance.
Definitions of each predictor are found in Supplementary Table 12.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.19: Boxplots of the ten predictors with highest mean importance based on all bootstrap
iterations of the BRT model on the symmetric total transmission rates. Means are indicated in
red.
Figure 4.20: Heatmap showing the importances of each predictor in each bootstrap iteration
for the BRT model on the symmetric total transmission rates. Lighter colours indicate higher
importance. Definitions of each predictor are found in Supplementary Table 12.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
30
==PAGE:39==
We can also investigate which effect each of the predictors in the best animal and the best
total model has on the predicted transmission rates. One way to investigate the effect of pre-
dictors is through ALE plots. ALE plots show the effects of a single predictor on the response
variable, while accounting for all other predictors. ALE plots are particularly useful because they
are unbiased even when predictors are correlated with other predictors [64].
Figure 4.21 shows the effects of the predictors involved in the best animal model. For the most
important predictor, the trade of poultry, we see that below a threshold of around 2, the predictor
has very little effect on the prediction, but once above the threshold, there is a positive linear
relationship between the predictor and the prediction. For the pork trade, which has the second
highest importance in the model, we see that once above a certain threshold, it has a constant
high effect on the predictions. In general, poultry trade, pork trade, cooked meat trade, latitude,
secondary land change and precipitation cause a higher predicted transmission rate if they have
higher values. In other words, these predictors have a positve association with the predicted
transmission rates. On the other hand, maximum temperature, mean temperature, cropland
change and GDP growth all show a negative association with the predicted transmission rates.
So, the transmission rates will be lower if the temperature is higher, or if the percentage of crop-
land has increased, or the GDP is higher.
Figure 4.22 shows the effects of the ten most important predictors involved in the best total
model. Trade of fish, beef, sheep and goat meat and dairy as well as the percentage of man-
aged pasture all show positive associations with the predicted transmission rates. Temperature
change and latitude show negative associations. The precipitation change and the percentage
of secondary land, however, have slightly more complicated effects. The precipitation change
has a positive impact on the transmission rates until it reaches a certain threshold just below
zero, where the effect becomes negative instead. Then, when the precipitation change is be-
tween one and two, the effect becomes positive again. For the percentage of secondary land,
the effect also starts by being negative for low values, then it becomes positive for a range of
values, after which it become negative again, only to become positive again for values higher
than two.
Strangely, the effect of latitude seems to be almost the exact opposite in the two models. In both
models, it has a negative effect for most values but in the animal model, it becomes positive for
very high values, and in the total model, it is only positive for small values.
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
poultry trade
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Effect on prediction (centered)
0
2
4
6
8
pork trade
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
3
2
1
0
1
2
maximum temp
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
3
2
1
0
1
2
mean temp
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
4
2
0
2
cropland change
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0
2
4
6
8
10
cooked meat trade
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
Effect on prediction (centered)
2
1
0
1
latitude
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.002
2
0
2
4
6
8
secondary land change
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
6
4
2
0
2
4
precipitation change
0.0004
0.0002
0.0000
0.0002
0
2
4
6
GDP growth
0.0004
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
0.0002
0.0003
Figure 4.21: ALE plots of each predictor involved in the best animal model. Secondary land is
defined as natural land that is recovering from previous human disturbance.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
31
==PAGE:40==
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
fish trade
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Effect on prediction (centered)
0
2
4
precipitation change
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0
5
10
15
20
beef trade
0.010
0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
1
0
1
2
3
secondary land
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
2
0
2
4
temp change
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
1
0
1
2
3
4
managed pasture
0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
Effect on prediction (centered)
1
0
1
2
3
4
urban land change
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0
5
10
15
sheep goats trade
0.010
0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
0
5
10
15
dairy trade
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
1
0
1
2
3
latitude
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
Figure 4.22: ALE plots of the ten most important predictors involved in the best total model.
Secondary land is defined as natural land that is recovering from previous human disturbance.
Managed pasture is grazing land for animals, managed by humans.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
32
==PAGE:41==
5
Discussion
In this project, publicly available WGS data has been used to infer transmission rates of S.
Enteritidis between countries using Bayesian phylogeny methods. The transmission rates were
then combined with country-level climatic or socio-economic data in machine learning models
in order to identify driving factors for transmission.
A limitation of this study is the inherent sampling bias in the publicly available S. Enteritidis
genome data. The country distribution of the collected genomes was highly biased, with the
majority of the genomes coming from either the United Kingdom or the United States. This
means that the transmission dynamics for these countries was very well-represented, but there
may have been important connections between other countries that were missed in the analy-
sis. It also means that the transmission from highly sampled countries may have been slightly
overestimated compared to less sampled countries. Another source of bias is that the majority
of the genomes were collected in the last 10 years. This means that the calculated transmission
rates will reflect recent transmission patterns better than historical transmission. Additionally,
almost two thirds of the genomes were collected from humans. Since transmission of S. En-
teritidis between humans does not often occur [24], modelling transmission based on human
samples is not ideal. For this reason, the animal dataset was created. The animal dataset is
smaller, and thus does not include as many countries as the total dataset. Furthermore, the
majority of the animal genomes are sampled from poultry, and although S. Enteritidis is most
often found in poultry, transmission happening between other species may be overlooked.
The genomes were divided into closely-related clusters so the Bayesian phylogenic analysis
could be run on each cluster individually. Due to the limitations of how many genomes can be
included in a BEAST analysis and the computational expense of these analyses, large clusters
were subsampled to reduce their number of genomes. Only genomes that were very closely
related to a representative genome were discarded, so no significant genomic information was
lost in this subsampling approach. However, metadata information of the discarded genomes
was left out, which can have been important, especially if the discarded genomes represented
lowly-sampled countries, years or hosts. Indeed, the total dataset contained sequences from
80 different countries, but the total symmetric transmission rates only include 61 different coun-
tries, indicating that 19 countries were lost during subsampling.
Another limitation is that it was not possible to calculate asymmetric transmission rates for all
clusters. The clusters that failed were primarily those with a high number of different countries
within the cluster. This would have led to a high number of parameters to estimate, which is
likely why the analysis failed. Due to the large amount of data not included in the estimation
of the asymmetric transmission rates, it was decided to also estimate symmetric transmission
rates. This approach worked for almost all clusters. However, the symmetric rates do not reflect
real transmission dynamics well, because the transmission from country A into country B will
not necessarily be equal to the transmission from country B into country A.
In the estimation of the transmission rates, only country-level locations were specified. How-
ever, for large countries, there could be significant differences in the S. Enteritidis transmission
dynamics across different regions. If possible, partitioning the data based on regions in larger
countries would have likely led to a more accurate representation of transmission dynamics.
However, this would have required the WGS data to have detailed information regarding where
each genome was collected, and it would have led to an even higher number of parameters to
estimate.
For the total dataset, the highest transmission rates are between Norway and Poland, between
Hungary and USA, from France to the United Kingdom, from Canada to Turkey, from Japan
to USA and from Canada to USA. For the animal dataset, Poland to Germany is the highest
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
33
==PAGE:42==
rate in both the symmetric and asymmetric transmission rates. Other high rates are between
Nigeria and South Korea, between Germany and Mozambique, from Canada to South Korea
and from USA to China. Transmission from Canada to USA is also high according to the animal
dataset. When looking at which countries are responsible for the most transmission, the top
includes Argentina, Turkey, France, Mozambique, Sweden, Poland and Mauritius and Israel.
Based on the knowledge of how S. Enteritidis spreads between livestock, it might be expected
to find some of the worlds top livestock producers to be involved in a lot of transmission. This
is indeed the case for some of these countries - Argentina is among the top countries when it
comes to chicken meat and beef production. Turkey is among the top producers of both chicken
meat and eggs. France has a very large production of both chicken meat and eggs, and with
the United Kingdom being the top importer of eggs from the European Union, this might explain
the high transmission rate from France to the United Kingdom. Sweden also has significant pro-
duction of dairy and poultry. Poland is among the world’s top producers of both chicken meat,
eggs and pork, and an international outbreak of S. Enteritidis in 2016-2018 has been linked to
eggs from Poland [11]. For Mozambique, Mauritius and Israel, there might be other reasons
why they are among the countries with the highest summed transmission [65–68].
Three different models were tested for their ability to predict S. Enteritidis transmission rates
based on a dataset of possible predictors. The best-performing model was the boosted regres-
sion trees (BRT) model, when predicting the asymmetric rates based on the animal dataset.
Based on the knowledge that S. Enteritidis is mainly transmitted between animals [24], and that
transmission rates are not usually symmetric between countries, this set of transmission rates
is also the ones expected to best represent real transmission dynamics, so it is encouraging
that the model was able to partly explain these rates using the predictor dataset.
For the total dataset, the best model was the BRT model when predicting the symmetric trans-
mission rates. It did however perform significantly worse than the BRT model on the asymmetric
animal transmission rates. If we assume that the predictor dataset can indeed explain S. Enter-
itidis transmission, it might be that the total dataset simply contained too many human genomes
to represent the real transmission well, and that the asymmetric rates, which were missing sig-
nificant amounts of data, represented transmission even worse. The model used a high number
of different predictors in it’s predictions. This could be an indication that it is overfitting, meaning
that it tries to model noise in the training data, rather than underlying patterns in the data. A way
to test this is to compare metrics like RMSE and R2 calculated on both the training and test set.
If they are significantly better on the training set, this indicates overfitting. Indeed, the RMSE
and R2 calculated on the training set were 0.107 and 0.389, respectively, compared to 0.145
and 0.273 on the test set. This shows that the model was indeed overfitting. It still explains 27%
of the total variation in the test set, so it has captured some underlying trends, but all in all, it
is best not to rely too much on the results from this model. Fortunately, the best animal model
had an RMSE of 0.143 and an R2 of 0.428 when calculated on the training set, compared to
0.125 and 0.466 on the test set, so this model was not overfitting.
For both datasets, it was the BRT model that performed best. BRT models are known to have
a high predictive performance in a variety of tasks, and has several advantages. An important
advantage is the ability to fit complex non-linear relationships between predictors and the re-
sponse variable. They also model interaction effects automatically, they’re resistant to outliers
and they can handle predictors of different types and scales [39].
The predictors that proved most important for the best animal and best total models were the
predictors that described trade of animal products. Trade of poultry, pork, eggs, fish, beef,
cooked meat, and sheep and goat meat were all among the predictors most used by the mod-
els to predict S. Enteritidis transmission rates. It does however vary which specific predictors
were chosen by the model in each bootstrap iteration. When interpreting predictor importances
in machine learning models, it is important to consider whether some predictors are correlated
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
34
==PAGE:43==
with each other. When predictors are correlated, they will contribute the same information to
the model, and therefore the model might select arbitrarily between them. While correlated pre-
dictors do not usually affect the predictive performance of BRT models, it might not be possible
to distinguish between the importances of correlated predictors [69]. In this project, the models
were trained 1000 times using different bootstrap samples of predictor data for each iteration.
The correlations between predictors will have been different for each iteration, so it is hard to
know if there were significant correlations in some iterations. In the predictor data used for the
best animal model, there were some moderate correlations between some of the animal trade
data, specifically between beef and cooked meat trade (correlation coefficient, r of 0.51), beef
and pork trade (r of 0.56), dairy and pork trade (r of 0.63) and eggs and poultry trade (r of 0.61).
There were also strong correlations (r > 0.9) between the temperature variables: mean tem-
perature, maximum temperature and minimum temperature. Because of this, any importance
the model assigns to one temperature variable can, in effect, be attributed to the entire set of
correlated variables. In other words, when predictors are highly correlated, the importance of
one may be “transferred” to another, making it difficult to interpret each variable’s contribution in
isolation. The best total model had the same kind of pattern, with strong correlations between
the temperature variables, and moderate to high correlations between some of the trade vari-
ables.
It is well-known that S. Enteritidis is transmitted through animal products, such as eggs, poultry
and pork [24]. So for this analysis, it is a good sign that they indeed are identified as important
for transmission. They can be viewed as a kind of ’positive control’, indicating that the method
works in explaining transmission of S. Enteritidis. The best total model has fish trade as the
most important predictor of transmission. Fish do not naturally have any Salmonella strains
that can be pathogenic to humans as part of their microbiome. However, they can become con-
taminated with Salmonella through e.g. polluted water or cross-contamination during handling
[19, 70]. Since this is the model that showed overfitting, it is hard to conclude whether fish trade
is actually an important predictor of transmission or whether it is a false signal.
The ALE plots for the best animal model and the best total model (Figures 4.21 and 4.22) de-
scribe the effect of each predictor on the predicted transmission rates. It is no surprise that all
the variables describing trade of animal products show a positive association with the transmis-
sion of S. Enteritidis. The ALE plots suggest a negative association between temperature and
transmission of S. Enteritidis. While some studies have observed a positive relation between
temperature and presence of Salmonella [71], other studies have also observed a negative as-
sociation [72, 73]. Wilkes et al. [73] argues that in colder weather, the soil water content and
water table depth is higher, which may allow farm waste to move into nearby rivers and streams
more easily. Moving on to precipitation, the ALE plots show a positive association between pre-
cipitation and transmission of S. Enteritidis. This trend has also been observed in several other
studies [71–74]. As with colder temperatures, increased rainfall will wash waste from animals
into rivers and streams, and thus cause spread of Salmonella. It is well known in epidemiology
that land use is an important factor for the spread of infectious diseases [75], and indeed, sev-
eral land use predictors are included in the two best models. The change in cropland and the
change in urban land both show a negative association with S. Enteritidis transmission, while
the change in secondary land shows a positive association. Secondary land is defined as natu-
ral vegetation that is recovering from previous human disturbance [60]. However, several other
studies have found the opposite pattern in regard to these land use variables - that cropland and
urban land generally increase the likelihood of finding Salmonella. And since secondary land
is natural land, it would be expected to decrease the amount of Salmonella [74, 76–78]. The
model also shows a positive relation between the proportion of managed pasture and trans-
mission. This is more in line with what other studies have found. Liang et al. found that the
likelihood of detecting Salmonella was higher close to cattle ranch sites [71]. Additionally, lat-
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
35
==PAGE:44==
itude is also among the most important predictors in both the animal and total best model. In
the animal model, it shows a positive relation to the transmission rates, but in the total model,
it has a negative relation. In a study by Toro et al. [76], a relation between latitude and the
presence of Salmonella was also found. In the study, a parabolic trend was observed. The
relation between latitude and Salmonella transmission might be due to varying temperatures at
different latitudes. Finally, it is interesting to note that many of the predictors exhibit a threshold
beyond which the transmission rate changes dramatically Figures 4.21 and 4.22. Recognising
and targeting these critical thresholds could be especially useful in control strategies.
As previously mentioned, the link between S. Enteritidis and eggs, poultry meat and other an-
imal meat products is well established, and a number of interventions are in place focusing on
these areas [19, 20, 79]. The purpose of this project, however, is to investigate whether there
are other factors that might drive transmission of S. Enteritidis. The results point to several rele-
vant factors, to do with temperature, precipitation and land use. Further investigations into how
these factors influence transmission of Salmonella might guide future interventions to prevent
Salmonellosis cases in humans.
Nevertheless, the best model in this study explained only about 50% of the total variance in the
data. This indicates that some important determinants of S. Enteritidis transmission were not
captured in the current set of predictors. One such missing factor could be the movement of
vector animals, such as wild birds or insects. Another potential gap involves the trade of con-
taminated goods such as vegetables or animal feed, both of which can harbour Salmonella and
serve as sources of transmission [14, 15]. It is also likely that entirely unknown variables influ-
ence S. Enteritidis transmission, and future studies may help illuminate these factors. Another
possible explanation for why the best model was not able to explain more of the transmission
patterns lies in how the transmission rates were calculated. As noted earlier, the genomic data
had a substantial sampling bias, underwent subsampling to manage the computational inten-
sity of BEAST analyses, and it was not possible to estimate asymmetric transmission rates for
a large part of the data. Consequently, if the derived transmission rates had better captured
the true transmission dynamics of S. Enteritidis, the current predictor dataset might have shown
improved predictive performance.
This project is the first to use only publicly available datasets—including WGS data and a variety
of predictor variables—to investigate factors driving pathogen transmission. Projects like this
are now feasible thanks to the rapid expansion of WGS data [80], the development of advanced
phylogenetic software such as BEAST2, and innovations in machine learning, all of which en-
able the integration and analysis of increasingly complex datasets. The limitations discussed
here are due to limited data availability and the constraints of current technology. With increas-
ing amounts of WGS data becoming available every day, and continued development of more
advanced software, the approach used in this study can provide more accurate identification of
the factors driving transmission in the future - not only for Salmonella, but for a wide range of
pathogens.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
36
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusion
This project introduced a novel, data-driven method for identifying factors that drive pathogen
transmission. Using Bayesian phylogeny analyses, publicly available WGS data from S. Enter-
itidis was used to infer global transmission rates among countries. The transmission rates were
combined with a predictor dataset consisting of a wide range of variables relating to each coun-
try as well as trade and travel between countries. Machine learning models were trained to
predict S. Enteritidis transmission rates based on the predictor dataset, and the most important
predictors of transmission were identified.
The results pointed to the trade of animal products as the most important driver of S. Enteritidis
transmission, particularly the trade of eggs, poultry meat, and pork. Other factors important
for transmission of S. Enteritidis include climatic and land use variables, such as temperature,
precipitation, the change in cropland, secondary land and urban land and the percentage of
managed pasture, as well as latitude.
However, the best model in this project explained only around 50% of the total variance of the
transmission rates, indicating that there are still other unknown factors that shape transmission
dynamics. The project also faced a number of limitations related to data availability and techno-
logical limitations, which may have impacted the models’ performances. These limitations are
likely to become less pronounced with time, as the volume of publicly available WGS data con-
tinues to expand and computational methods advance. In the future, this data-driven approach
could help elucidate the transmission dynamics of a range of other important human and animal
pathogens.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
37
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
1.
Balasubramanian, R. et al. The global burden and epidemiology of invasive non-typhoidal
Salmonella infections June 2019.
2.
Camacho, D. M., Collins, K. M., Powers, R. K., Costello, J. C. & Collins, J. J. Next-
Generation Machine Learning for Biological Networks June 2018.
3.
Grimont, P. A. D. & Weill, F.-X. ANTIGENIC FORMULAE OF THE SALMONELLA SEROVARS
9th edition 2007.
4.
Gal-Mor, O., Boyle, E. C. & Grassl, G. A. Same species, different diseases: How and why
typhoidal and non-typhoidal Salmonella enterica serovars differ. Frontiers in Microbiology
5. ISSN: 1664302X (AUG Aug. 2014).
5.
Majowicz, S. E. et al. The global burden of nontyphoidal Salmonella gastroenteritis. Clinical
infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America
50, 882–889. ISSN: 1537-6591. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20158401/ (6 Mar. 2010).
6.
Scallan, E. et al. Foodborne illness acquired in the United States-Major pathogens. Emerg-
ing Infectious Diseases 17, 7–15. ISSN: 10806040 (1 Jan. 2011).
7.
The European Union One Health 2023 Zoonoses report. EFSA Journal 22. ISSN: 18314732.
http://doi.wiley.com/10.2903/j.efsa.2024.9106 (12 Dec. 2024).
8.
Hendriksen, R. S. et al. Global Monitoring of Salmonella Serovar Distribution from the
World Health Organization Global Foodborne Infections Network Country Data Bank: Re-
sults of Quality Assured Laboratories from 2001 to 2007. Foodborne Pathogens and Dis-
ease 8. PMID: 21492021, 887–900. eprint: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / fpd . 2010 . 0787.
https://doi.org/10.1089/fpd.2010.0787 (2011).
9.
Sher, A. A., Mustafa, B. E., Grady, S. C., Gardiner, J. C. & Saeed, A. M. Outbreaks of food-
borne Salmonella enteritidis in the United States between 1990 and 2015: An analysis of
epidemiological and spatial-temporal trends. International Journal of Infectious Diseases
105, 54–61. ISSN: 18783511 (Apr. 2021).
10.
Li, S., He, Y., Mann, D. A. & Deng, X. Global spread of Salmonella Enteritidis via centralized
sourcing and international trade of poultry breeding stocks. Nature Communications 12.
ISSN: 20411723 (1 Dec. 2021).
11.
Pijnacker, R. et al. An international outbreak of Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis
linked to eggs from Poland: a microbiological and epidemiological study. The Lancet In-
fectious Diseases 19, 778–786. ISSN: 14744457 (7 July 2019).
12.
Gantois, I. et al. Mechanisms of egg contamination by Salmonella Enteritidis: Review ar-
ticle July 2009.
13.
Guard-Petter, J. The chicken, the egg and Salmonella enteritidis. Environmental Microbi-
ology 3, 421–430. ISSN: 14622912 (7 2001).
14.
Chlebicz, A. & Śliżewska, K. Campylobacteriosis, Salmonellosis, Yersiniosis, and Listerio-
sis as Zoonotic Foodborne Diseases: A Review May 2018.
15.
Vidic, B., Savic, S., Prica, N. & Suvajdzic, L. Epizootiology and Control Measures for
Salmonella in Pigs. Procedia Food Science 5, 312–315. ISSN: 2211601X (2015).
16.
Buncic, S. & Sofos, J. Interventions to control Salmonella contamination during poultry,
cattle and pig slaughter. Food Research International 45, 641–655. ISSN: 09639969 (2
Mar. 2012).
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
38
==PAGE:47==
17.
Santana, A. M. et al. Comparative Analysis Using Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis High-
lights a Potential Transmission of Salmonella Between Asymptomatic Buffaloes and Pigs
in a Single Farm. Frontiers in Veterinary Science 7. ISSN: 22971769 (Nov. 2020).
18.
Lassnig, H. et al. Prevalence of Salmonella spp. in Austrian broiler flocks in the context of
the EU-wide baseline survey 2005-2006. Berliner und Munchener tierarztliche Wochen-
schrift 125, 129–137. ISSN: 0005-9366. http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/22515031
(2012).
19.
Mkangara, M. Prevention and Control of Human Salmonella enterica Infections: An Impli-
cation in Food Safety (ed Oliveira, M.) Sept. 2023.
20.
Patrick, M. E. et al. Salmonella Enteritidis Infections, United States, 1985–1999 - Volume
10, Number 1—January 2004 - Emerging Infectious Diseases journal - CDC. Emerging
Infectious Diseases 10, 1–7. ISSN: 10806040. https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/10/1/02-
0572_article (1 2004).
21.
Martínez, M. C. et al. Multidrug-Resistant Outbreak-Associated Salmonella Strains in Irri-
gation Water from the Metropolitan Region, Chile. Zoonoses and Public Health 64, 299–
304. eprint: https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1111 / zph . 12311. https : / /
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/zph.12311 (2017).
22.
Dionisio, L. P. C. et al. Occurrence of Salmonella spp in estuarine and coastal waters of
Portugal 2000.
23.
Liu, B., Zhang, X., Ding, X., Bin, P. & Zhu, G. The vertical transmission of Salmonella
Enteritidis in a One-Health context June 2023.
24.
Hoelzer, K., Switt, A. I. M. & Wiedmann, M. Animal contact as a source of human non-
typhoidal salmonellosis 2011.
25.
Nascimento, F. F., Reis, M. D. & Yang, Z. A biologist’s guide to Bayesian phylogenetic
analysis Oct. 2017.
26.
Fornacon-Wood, I. et al. Understanding the Differences Between Bayesian and Frequen-
tist Statistics Apr. 2022.
27.
Bouckaert, R. et al. BEAST 2.5: An advanced software platform for Bayesian evolutionary
analysis. PLoS Computational Biology 15. ISSN: 15537358 (4 2019).
28.
Arenas, M. Trends in substitution models of molecular evolution. Frontiers in Genetics 6.
ISSN: 16648021 (OCT 2015).
29.
Drummond, A. J. & Rambaut, A. BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary analysis by sampling
trees. BMC Evolutionary Biology 7. ISSN: 14712148 (1 Nov. 2007).
30.
Bouckaert, R. Phylogeography in BEAST 2 Mar. 2022. https://www.beast2.org/2022/03/
01/phylogeography.html (2025).
31.
Müller, N. F., Rasmussen, D. & Stadler, T. MASCOT: Parameter and state inference under
the marginal structured coalescent approximation. Bioinformatics 34, 3843–3848. ISSN:
14602059 (22 Nov. 2018).
32.
Haughton, D. & Haughton, J. in, 221–234 (Springer New York, 2011). http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/978-1-4614-0385-2_11.
33.
Fox, J. in (Jan. 2002).
34.
Ahmed, S. A Comprehensive Introduction to Generalized Linear Models Mar. 2024. https:
//medium.com/@sahin.samia/a-comprehensive-introduction-to-generalized-linear-models-
fd773d460c1d (2025).
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
39
==PAGE:48==
35.
Kida, Y. Generalized linear models. Introduction to advanced statistical modeling Sept.
2019. https://towardsdatascience.com/generalized-linear-models-9cbf848bb8ab (2025).
36.
Tibshiranit, R. Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso 1996. https://academic.
oup.com/jrsssb/article/58/1/267/7027929.
37.
Hoerl, A. E. & Kennard, R. W. Ridge Regression: Biased Estimation for Nonorthogonal
Problems. Technometrics 12, 55–67. eprint: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.
1080/00401706.1970.10488634. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00401706.
1970.10488634 (1970).
38.
Abhishek, J. All about decision trees Sept. 2024. https://medium.com/@abhishekjainindore24/
all-about-decision-trees-80ea55e37fef (2025).
39.
Elith, J., Leathwick, J. R. & Hastie, T. A working guide to boosted regression trees July
2008.
40.
Rokach, L. Decision forest: Twenty years of research. Information Fusion 27, 111–125.
ISSN: 15662535 (June 2016).
41.
Ruchi. Gradient Boosted Decision Tree — Clearly Explained Dec. 2023. https://medium.
com / @ruchi . awasthi63 / gradient - boosted - decision - tree - clearly - explained - bd1d8c7d9923
(2025).
42.
GradientBoostingRegressor — scikit-learn 1.6.1 documentation https://scikit-learn.org/
stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.GradientBoostingRegressor.html#sklearn.ensemble.
GradientBoostingRegressor.feature_importances_.
43.
Chen, T. & Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. http://arxiv.org/abs/
1603.02754%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785 (Mar. 2016).
44.
Bentéjac, C., Csörgő, A. & Martínez-Muñoz, G. A Comparative Analysis of XGBoost. http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1911.01914%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10462-020-09896-5 (Nov. 2019).
45.
Mikheenko, A., Prjibelski, A., Saveliev, V., Antipov, D. & Gurevich, A. Versatile genome
assembly evaluation with QUAST-LG in Bioinformatics 34 (Oxford University Press, July
2018), i142–i150.
46.
Clausen, P. T., Aarestrup, F. M. & Lund, O. Rapid and precise alignment of raw reads
against redundant databases with KMA. BMC Bioinformatics 19. ISSN: 14712105 (1 Aug.
2018).
47.
Larsen, M. V. et al. Benchmarking of methods for genomic taxonomy. Journal of Clinical
Microbiology 52, 1529–1539. ISSN: 1098660X (5 2014).
48.
Hasman, H. et al. Rapid whole-genome sequencing for detection and characterization of
microorganisms directly from clinical samples. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 52, 139–
146. ISSN: 00951137 (1 Jan. 2014).
49.
Seemann, T. mlst https://github.com/tseemann/mlst.
50.
Ondov, B. D. et al. Mash: Fast genome and metagenome distance estimation using Min-
Hash. Genome Biology 17, 1–14. ISSN: 1474760X. https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.
com/articles/10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x (1 June 2016).
51.
Letunic, I. & Bork, P. Interactive Tree of Life (iTOL) v6: Recent updates to the phylogenetic
tree display and annotation tool. Nucleic Acids Research 52, W78–W82. ISSN: 13624962
(W1 July 2024).
52.
Kaas, R. S., Leekitcharoenphon, P., Aarestrup, F. M. & Lund, O. Solving the problem of
comparing whole bacterial genomes across different sequencing platforms. PLoS ONE 9.
ISSN: 19326203 (8 Aug. 2014).
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
40
==PAGE:49==
53.
D’Alessandro, B. et al. Comparative genomics of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis
ST-11 isolated in Uruguay reveals lineages associated with particular epidemiological
traits. Scientific Reports 10. ISSN: 20452322 (1 Dec. 2020).
54.
Toro, M. et al. Whole-genome sequencing analysis of Salmonella enterica serovar enter-
itidis isolates in chile provides insights into possible transmission between gulls, poultry,
and humans. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 82, 6223–6232. ISSN: 10985336
(20 2016).
55.
Croucher, N. J. et al. Rapid phylogenetic analysis of large samples of recombinant bac-
terial whole genome sequences using Gubbins. Nucleic Acids Research 43, e15. ISSN:
13624962 (3 Feb. 2015).
56.
Deng, X. et al. Genomic epidemiology of Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis based
on population structure of prevalent lineages. Emerging Infectious Diseases 20, 1481–
1489. ISSN: 10806059 (9 2014).
57.
Feasey, N. A. et al. Distinct Salmonella Enteritidis lineages associated with enterocolitis
in high-income settings and invasive disease in low-income settings. Nature Genetics 48,
1211–1217. ISSN: 15461718 (10 Oct. 2016).
58.
Dallman, T. et al. Phylogenetic structure of European Salmonella Enteritidis outbreak cor-
relates with national and international egg distribution network. Microbial genomics 2,
e000070. ISSN: 20575858 (8 Aug. 2016).
59.
Kottek, M., Grieser, J., Beck, C., Rudolf, B. & Rubel, F. World map of the Köppen-Geiger
climate classification updated. Meteorologische Zeitschrift 15, 259–263. ISSN: 09412948
(3 June 2006).
60.
Zhang, F. et al. Global discovery of human-infective RNA viruses: A modelling analysis.
PLoS Pathogens 16. ISSN: 15537374 (11 Nov. 2020).
61.
Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 12, 2825–2830 (2011).
62.
GitHub - DanaJomar/PyALE: ALE Plots with python https : / / github . com / DanaJomar /
PyALE.
63.
Achtman, M. et al. Multilocus sequence typing as a replacement for serotyping in Salmonella
enterica. PLoS Pathogens 8. ISSN: 15537374 (6 2012).
64.
Apley, D. W. & Zhu, J. Visualizing the effects of predictor variables in black box supervised
learning models. J. R. Statist. Soc. B 82. ISSN: 1059-1086. https://academic.oup.com/
jrsssb/article/82/4/1059/7056085 (2020).
65.
Service, F. A. Livestock and Poultry: World Markets and Trade Brazil Continues to Domi-
nate Growth in Global Chicken Meat Exports in 2025 Market Shares of Global Trade Oct.
2024. https://public.govdelivery.com/accounts/USDAFAS/subscriber/new.
66.
commision, E. Agri-food data portal | Agricultural markets 2023. https://agridata.ec.europa.
eu/extensions/DataPortal/agricultural_markets.html (2025).
67.
Commission, E. EGGS-MARKET SITUATION-DASHBOARD Jan. 2025. https://agriculture.
ec.europa.eu/farming/animal-products/eggs_en.
68.
Food & of the United Nations, A. O. FAOSTAT - Crops and livestock products 2023. https:
//www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/QCL.
69.
Gregorutti, B., Michel, B. & Saint-Pierre, P. Correlation and variable importance in random
forests. http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.5726%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11222-016-9646-1
(Oct. 2013).
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
41
==PAGE:50==
70.
Carrasco, E., Morales-Rueda, A. & García-Gimeno, R. M. Cross-contamination and re-
contamination by Salmonella in foods: A review Mar. 2012.
71.
Liang, Z. et al. Impact of mixed land-use practices on the microbial water quality in a
subtropical coastal watershed. Science of the Total Environment 449, 426–433. ISSN:
00489697 (Apr. 2013).
72.
Weller, D., Belias, A., Green, H., Roof, S. & Wiedmann, M. Landscape, Water Quality, and
Weather Factors Associated With an Increased Likelihood of Foodborne Pathogen Con-
tamination of New York Streams Used to Source Water for Produce Production. Frontiers
in Sustainable Food Systems 3. ISSN: 2571581X (Feb. 2020).
73.
Wilkes, G. et al. Associations among pathogenic bacteria, parasites, and environmental
and land use factors in multiple mixed-use watersheds. Water Research 45, 5807–5825.
ISSN: 18792448 (18 2011).
74.
Murphy, C. M., Weller, D. L. & Strawn, L. K. Salmonella Prevalence Is Strongly Associated
with Spatial Factors while Listeria monocytogenes Prevalence Is Strongly Associated with
Temporal Factors on Virginia Produce Farms. Applied and Environmental Microbiology
89. ISSN: 10985336 (2 Feb. 2023).
75.
Gottdenker, N. L., Streicker, D. G., Faust, C. L. & Carroll, C. R. Anthropogenic Land Use
Change and Infectious Diseases: A Review of the Evidence Dec. 2014.
76.
Toro, M. et al. Environmental and anthropogenic factors associated with the likelihood
of detecting Salmonella in agricultural watersheds. Environmental Pollution 306. ISSN:
18736424 (Aug. 2022).
77.
Miller, S. et al. Influence of land use and climate on Salmonella carrier status in the small
Indian mongoose (herpestes auropunctatus) in Grenada, West Indies. Journal of Wildlife
Diseases 51, 60–68. ISSN: 00903558 (1 Jan. 2015).
78.
Sassoubre, L. M., Walters, S. P., Russell, T. L. & Boehm, A. B. Sources and fate of
Salmonella and fecal indicator bacteria in an urban creek. J. Environ. Monit. 13, 2206–
2212. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C1EM10213C (8 2011).
79.
Commission, E. Control of Salmonella https://food.ec.europa.eu/food-safety/biological-
safety/food-borne-diseases-zoonoses/control-salmonella_en (2025).
80.
Eyre, D. W. Infection prevention and control insights from a decade of pathogen whole-
genome sequencing Apr. 2022.
81.
Harris, I., Osborn, T. J., Jones, P. & Lister, D. Version 4 of the CRU TS monthly high-
resolution gridded multivariate climate dataset. Scientific Data 7. ISSN: 20524463 (1 Dec.
2020).
82.
University, C. F. I. E. S. I. N.-C.-C. Global Population Count Grid Time Series Estimates
(NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC), Palisades, NY, 2016).
https://doi.org/10.7927/H4CC0XNV.
83.
Murakami, D. & Yamagata, Y. Estimation of gridded population and GDP scenarios with
spatially explicit statistical downscaling 2016. https : / / github . com / Nowosad / global _
population_and_gdp.
84.
World Higher Education Database (WHED) Portal https://whed.net/home.php (2025).
85.
Chini, L., Hurtt, G. & Frolking, S. LUH1: Harmonized Global Land Use for Years 1500-2100,
V1 en. 2014. https://daac.ornl.gov/cgi-bin/dsviewer.pl?ds_id=1248.
86.
Chini, L. et al. LUH2-GCB2019: Land-Use Harmonization 2 Update for the Global Carbon
Budget, 850-2019 en. 2021. https://daac.ornl.gov/cgi-bin/dsviewer.pl?ds_id=1851.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
42
==PAGE:51==
87.
Tuanmu, M.-N. & Jetz, W. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and
ecosystem modelling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23, 1031–1045. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/geb.12182. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1111/geb.12182 (2014).
88.
Center For International Earth Science Information Network-CIESIN-Columbia Univer-
sity & NatureServe. Gridded Species Distribution: Global Mammal Richness Grids, 2015
Release (NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC), Palisades, NY,
2015). https://doi.org/10.7927/H4N014G5.
89.
Gilbert, M. et al. Global distribution data for cattle, buffaloes, horses, sheep, goats, pigs,
chickens and ducks in 2010. Scientific Data 5. ISSN: 20524463 (2018).
90.
Gaulier, G. & Zignago, S. BACI: International Trade Database at the Product-Level. The
1994-2007 Version Working Papers 2010-23 (CEPII, Oct. 2010). https://www.cepii.fr/
CEPII/fr/publications/wp/abstract.asp?NoDoc=2726.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
43
==PAGE:52==
Supplementary
Supplementary files
File name (click to access)
Description
Animal_8_beast.xml
Example of XML file for the initial BEAST analysis.
Animal_FT_symmetric_8.xml
Example of XML file using the FixedTreeAnalysis package and discrete
trait analysis to estimate symmetric transmission rates.
Animal_FT_asymmetric_8.xml
Example of XML file using the FixedTreeAnalysis package and discrete
trait analysis to estimate asymmetric transmission rates.
Network_analsis.py
Script to perform network analysis on all average_rates files. Saves the
resulting network graphs as PNG and PDF.
GLM_symmetric.py
Script to fit a GLM model on the symmetric rates for 1000 bootstrap
iterations. Uses predictors_symmetric_1948.tsv or
predictors_symmetric_1955.tsv as x data and
average_rates_symmetric_total.tsv or
average_rates_symmetric_animals.tsv as y data. Results are saved in
an output folder.
GLM_asymmetric.py
Script to fit a GLM model on the asymmetric rates for 1000 bootstrap
iterations. Uses predictors_asymmetric_1948.tsv or
predictors_asymmetric_1955.tsv as x data and
average_rates_asymmetric_total.tsv or
average_rates_asymmetric_animals.tsv as y data. Results are saved in
an output folder.
BRT_symmetric.py
Script to fit a BRT model on the symmetric rates for 1000 bootstrap
iterations. Uses predictors_symmetric_1948.tsv or
predictors_symmetric_1955.tsv as x data and
average_rates_symmetric_total.tsv or
average_rates_symmetric_animals.tsv as y data. Results are saved in
an output folder.
BRT_asymmetric.py
Script to fit a BRT model on the asymmetric rates for 1000 bootstrap
iterations. Uses predictors_asymmetric_1948.tsv or
predictors_asymmetric_1955.tsv as x data and
average_rates_asymmetric_total.tsv or
average_rates_asymmetric_animals.tsv as y data. Results are saved in
an output folder.
XGB_symmetric.py
Script to fit an XGBoost model on the symmetric rates for 1000
bootstrap iterations. Uses predictors_symmetric_1948.tsv or
predictors_symmetric_1955.tsv as x data and
average_rates_symmetric_total.tsv or
average_rates_symmetric_animals.tsv as y data. Results are saved in
an output folder.
XGB_asymmetric.py
Script to fit an XGBoost model on the asymmetric rates for 1000
bootstrap iterations. Uses predictors_asymmetric_1948.tsv or
predictors_asymmetric_1955.tsv as x data and
average_rates_asymmetric_total.tsv or
average_rates_asymmetric_animals.tsv as y data. Results are saved in
an output folder.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
I
==PAGE:53==
Supplementary tables
Large supplementary tables are provided as .tsv files and can be accessed from the table
below.
Supplementary tables
(Click to access)
Description
Supplementary table 1:
metadata_total.tsv
Metadata for all genomes in the total dataset.
Supplementary table 2:
metadata_animals.tsv
Metadata for all genomes in the animal dataset.
Supplementary table 3:
average_rates_symmetric_total.tsv
Average symmetric transmission rates from all clusters in the
total dataset.
Supplementary table 4:
average_rates_asymmetric_total.tsv
Average asymmetric transmission rates from all clusters in the
total dataset.
Supplementary table 5:
average_rates_symmetric_animals.tsv
Average symmetric transmission rates from all clusters in the
animal dataset.
Supplementary table 6:
average_rates_asymmetric_animals.tsv
Average asymmetric transmission rates from all clusters in the
animal dataset.
Supplementary table 7:
predictors_symmetric_1948.tsv
Predictor data used in the models together with symmetric
rates from the total dataset. The values of monadic predictors
are either dynamic time variance or absolute differences. The
values of dyadic predictors are summed from both directions.
Supplementary table 8:
predictors_asymmetric_1948.tsv
Predictor data used in the models together with asymmetric
rates from the total dataset. The values of monadic predictors
come from the origin country.
Supplementary table 9:
predictors_symmetric_1955.tsv
Predictor data used in the models together with symmetric
rates from the animal dataset. The values of monadic predic-
tors are either dynamic time variance or absolute differences.
The values of dyadic predictors are summed from both direc-
tions.
Supplementary table 10:
predictors_asymmetric_1955.tsv
Predictor data used in the models together with asymmetric
rates from the animal dataset. The values of monadic predic-
tors come from the origin country.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
II
==PAGE:54==
Supplementary Table 11: Normalized summed transmission rates for all countries and in all four
datasets. Missing values indicate that the country was not in that dataset.
Symmetric
total
Asymmetric
total
Symmetric
animals
Asymmetric
animals
Angola
0.128
-
-
-
Argentina
0.220
0.340
0.563
0.367
Australia
0.165
0.119
0.214
-
Belgium
0.206
0.164
0.225
0.181
Brazil
0.152
0.167
0.192
0.107
Cameroon
0.134
-
-
-
Canada
0.175
0.165
0.365
0.251
Chile
0.151
0.082
0.101
0.033
China
0.117
0.050
0.049
0.014
Comoros
0.115
-
-
-
Cote d’Ivoire
0.221
0.181
-
-
DR Congo
0.203
0.288
-
-
Denmark
0.173
0.115
-
-
Ethiopia
0.118
-
-
-
France
0.225
0.312
-
-
Gambia
0.138
-
-
-
Georgia
0.162
0.094
-
-
Germany
0.230
0.165
0.398
0.159
Hungary
0.139
-
-
-
India
0.124
-
-
-
Iran
0.168
-
-
-
Ireland
0.250
0.195
-
-
Israel
0.291
0.305
-
-
Italy
0.193
0.151
0.263
0.184
Japan
0.125
0.223
-
-
Kenya
0.186
0.043
-
-
Kuwait
0.185
0.140
-
-
Lebanon
0.181
0.132
-
-
Madagascar
0.086
-
0.221
-
Malawi
0.142
0.158
-
-
Mauritania
0.187
0.104
-
-
Mauritius
0.322
0.238
-
-
Morocco
0.131
-
-
-
Mozambique
0.368
-
0.525
-
Netherlands
0.158
-
0.210
-
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
III
==PAGE:55==
New Zealand
0.151
-
-
-
Nigeria
-
-
0.302
-
Norway
0.176
-
-
-
Paraguay
0.113
-
-
-
Peru
0.142
0.045
-
-
Poland
0.252
0.193
0.519
0.279
Portugal
0.151
0.198
0.207
0.159
Romania
0.148
-
-
-
Russia
0.142
0.101
-
-
Saudi Arabia
0.073
-
-
-
Senegal
0.162
0.059
0.301
0.171
Singapore
0.136
0.108
0.090
0.016
South Africa
0.184
0.155
0.194
0.099
South Korea
0.127
0.046
0.261
0.110
Spain
0.189
0.117
0.329
0.165
Sri Lanka
0.163
0.053
-
-
Palestine
0.080
-
-
-
Sweden
0.219
0.188
0.239
0.326
Taiwan
0.204
0.147
-
-
Tanzania
0.176
0.049
-
-
Thailand
0.122
-
-
-
Tunisia
0.161
0.125
-
-
Turkey
0.362
0.157
0.123
0.062
USA
0.168
0.070
0.170
0.102
Uganda
0.130
-
-
-
United Kingdom
0.111
0.073
0.255
0.118
Viet Nam
0.166
0.148
-
-
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
IV
==PAGE:56==
Supplementary Table 12: Description of explanatory variables with definition, year range, resolution and source. The choice of the monadic
variables was inspired by the approach used by Zhang et al. [60].
Variable of in-
terest
Definition
Year range
Resolution
Source
Monadic variables
Temperature
mean temp: Annual mean temperature (° C).
Calculated from monthly average temperature.
temp change: Annual mean temperature change (° C).
Calculated from monthly average temperature.
maximum temp: Maximum temperature of the warmest
month (° C).
Calculated from monthly maximum temperature.
minimum temp: Minimum temperature of the coldest
month (° C).
Calculated from monthly minimum temperature.
diurnal temp range: Annual mean diurnal temperature
range (° C).
Calculated from monthly diurnal temperature range.
1948-2023
for
total
data
1955-2023 for animal
data
0.5° grid cells
Climatic research unit, high res-
olution gridded datasets (CRU
TS v. 4.08) [81]
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
V
==PAGE:57==
Precipitation
precipitation: Annual total precipitation (mm).
Calculated by summing the monthly precipitation.
precipitation change: Annual total precipitation change
(mm).
Calculated by summing the monthly precipitation.
maximum precipitation: Maximum precipitation (mm).
Precipitation of wettest month, calculated from monthly
precipitation.
minimum precipitation: Minimum precipitation (mm).
Precipitation of driest month, calculated from monthly
precipitation.
rainy days: Annual rainy days (counts).
Calculated by summing the monthly rainy-day counts.
1948-2023
for
total
data
1955-2023 for animal
data
0.5° grid cells
Climatic research unit, high res-
olution gridded datasets (CRU
TS v. 4.08) [81]
Latitude
latitude: In angular (ranges from 0° to 90°).
Constant
Country level
Human popula-
tion
population: Human population count (counts, in per-
sons)
population growth: Population growth:
The decadal difference of human population (counts, in
persons)
1970, 1980, 1990 and
2000
30”
Global Rural-Urban Mapping
Project (GRUMP) [82]
Gross domestic
product (GDP)
GDP: Mean GDP (unit: PPP, billion US$2005/yr),
which is estimated by downscaling actual GDPs by
country
GDP growth: GDP growth:
The decadal difference of GDP (unit:
PPP, billion
US$2005/yr)
1980, 1990, 2000 and
2010
0.5° grid cells
Centre for Global Environmen-
tal
Research
(CGER):Global
dataset of gridded population
and GDP scenarios [83]
University
count
universities: Higher education institutions count offer-
ing at least a 4-year professional diploma or a post-
graduate degree in each country
2024
Country level
World
Higher
Education
Database (WHED) [84]
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
VI
==PAGE:58==
Land use
cropland: The percentage of cropland in each grid cell.
pasture: The percentage of pasture in each grid cell.
urban land: The percentage of urban land in each grid
cell.
primary land: The percentage of primary land in each
grid cell.
secondary land: The percentage of secondary land in
each grid cell.
forest cover: The percentage of forested land in each
grid cell.
managed pasture: The percentage of managed pas-
ture in each grid cell.
rangeland: The percentage of rangeland in each grid
cell.
Primary land is natural vegetation (either forest or non-
forest) that has never been impacted by human activ-
ities since 1700; Secondary land is natural vegetation
(either forest or non-forest) that is recovering from pre-
vious human disturbance.
The percentage of land area change for each category
in each grid cell:
cropland change: Growth of cropland area.
pasture change: Growth of pasture area.
urban land change: Growth of urbanized land area.
primary land change: Growth of primary land area.
secondary land change:
Growth of secondary land
area.
The percentage of land area change from cropland/-
pasture/primary land/secondary land to urban land in
each grid cell:
crop to urban: Urbanization of cropland.
pasture to urban: Urbanization of pasture.
primary to urban: Urbanization of primary land.
secondary to urban: Urbanization of secondary land.
managed vegetation: The percentage of cultivated and
managed vegetation in each grid cell.
Data about cropland,
pasture,
urban
land,
primary land and sec-
ondary
land
is
from
1948
(for
total
data)
or
1955
(for
animal
data) until 2024, where
the
data
from
2006-
2024
are
based
on
predictions.
Data about forested
land, managed pasture
and rangeland are from
between 1948 (for total
data) or 1955 (for ani-
mal data) and 2019
Vegetation data is
from 2024.
0.5°/30”
grid
cells
HarmonizedGlobal Land Use
(LUH) 1 and 2. For predictions,
the AIM model in LUH1 was
used [85, 86].
EarthEnv [87]
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
VII
==PAGE:59==
Mammal
species
rich-
ness
mammals: Mammal species richness represents the
number of species in a particular class, family or Inter-
national Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN)
threatened category
2015
30” grid cells
Gridded
Species
Distribution
[88]
Livestock
headcount
no. of cattle: Headcount for cattle.
no. of chickens: Headcount for chickens.
no. of duck: Headcount for ducks.
no. of pigs: Headcount for pigs.
2010, 2015, 2020
30” grid cells
GriddedLivestock of the World
(GLW) [89]
Dyadic variables
Flight traffic
flight passengers:
Number of flight passengers per
year.
1982-2016
Country level
ICAO
International
flight
database
[https://portal.icao.
int]
Trade of animal
products
beef trade: trade of beef, in US$. The following HS
codes are included: 0201, 0202, 020610, 0206210000,
0206220000, 020629.
cooked meat trade: trade of various cooked or pre-
pared meat products, in US$. The following HS codes
are included: 0210, 1601, 1602.
dairy trade: trade of dairy products, in US$. The follow-
ing HS codes are included: 0401, 0402, 0403, 0404,
0405, 0406.
eggs trade: trade of eggs, in US$. The following HS
codes are included: 0407, 0408.
fish trade: trade of fish, in US$. The following HS codes
are included: 0302, 0303, 0304, 0305.
poultry trade: trade of poultry meat, in US$. The follow-
ing HS codes are included: 0207.
sheep goats trade: trade of meat from sheep or goats,
in US$. The following HS codes are included: 0204,
0206909900, 0206809900
1995-2022
Country level
OEC
International
Datasets,
BACI Harmonized system [90]
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
VIII
==PAGE:60==
Supplementary Table 13: Hyperparameters chosen by the grid search in the best GLM bootstrap
models from each dataset. alpha is the L2 regularization strength.
Symmetric
total
Asymmetric
total
Symmetric
animals
Asymmetric
animals
alpha
0.464
0.167
0.464
0.464
Supplementary Table 14: Hyperparameters chosen by the grid search in the best BRT bootstrap
models from each dataset. The learning rate controls how much each tree contributes to the
predictions, and max_depth defines the maximum depth of each tree.
Symmetric
total
Asymmetric
total
Symmetric
animals
Asymmetric
animals
learning_rate
0.05
0.01
0.01
0.01
max_depth
2
2
4
2
Supplementary Table 15: Hyperparameters chosen by the Bayesian search in the best XGBoost
bootstrap models from each dataset. The learning rate controls how much each tree contributes
to the predictions, and max_depth defines the maximum depth of each tree. n_estimators de-
fines the number of gradient boosted trees. gamma defines the minimum loss reduction required
to perform further splits in a tree. subsample defines the subsampling ratio of the training data,
while colsample_bytree defines the ratio of X data columns used in each tree. reg_alpha and
reg_lambda control L1 and L2 regularization strengths, respectively.
Symmetric
total
Asymmetric
total
Symmetric
animals
Asymmetric
animals
learning_rate
0.024
0.024
0.046
0.069
max_depth
10
10
10
2
n_estimators
262
265
300
235
gamma
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.007
subsample
0.5
0.758
0.5
0.901
colsample_bytree
1.0
1.0
0.5
0.961
reg_alpha
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.003
reg_lambda
0.5
0.5
0.5
9.571
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
IX
==PAGE:61==
Supplementary Table 16: Predictor importance for the best-performing models on the symmetric
and asymmetric total dataset. All non-zero predictors are included, and the predictors are sorted
with most important predictors first.
BRT
Symmetric total
BRT
Asymmetric total
Predictors
Importances
Predictors
Importances
fish trade
0.160
forest cover
0.381
precipitation change
0.082
cooked meat trade
0.130
beef trade
0.073
rainy days
0.110
secondary land
0.069
egg trade
0.100
temp change
0.069
maximum precipitation
0.092
managed pasture
0.052
secondary land
0.038
urban land change
0.050
universities
0.033
sheep goats trade
0.045
fish trade
0.024
dairy trade
0.040
minimum precipitation
0.024
latitude
0.039
mammals
0.022
pasture to urban
0.034
pasture
0.020
cropland change
0.031
primary land change
0.014
GDP growth
0.031
primary land
0.008
diurnal temp range
0.030
precipitation change
0.003
managed vegetation
0.030
universities
0.020
egg trade
0.019
crop to urban
0.019
forest cover
0.016
mammals
0.013
minimum precipitation
0.010
pork trade
0.010
rainy days
0.009
rangeland
0.009
precipitation
0.008
pasture change
0.007
maximum precipitation
0.006
cropland
0.006
primary land
0.004
minimum temp
0.003
secondary land change
0.003
population growth
0.002
urban land
0.002
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
X
==PAGE:62==
Supplementary Table 17: Predictor importance for the best-performing models on the symmetric
and asymmetric animal datasets. All non-zero predictors are included, and the predictors are
sorted with most important predictors first.
XGBoost
Symmetric animals
BRT
Asymmetric animals
Predictors
Importances
Predictors
Importances
dairy trade
0.063
poultry trade
0.628
maximum temp
0.046
pork trade
0.263
pasture
0.039
mean temp
0.022
pasture change
0.032
maximum temp
0.021
primary land change
0.031
cropland change
0.020
pork trade
0.031
cooked meat trade
0.017
urban land change
0.029
latitude
0.011
precipitation change
0.028
secondary land change
0.011
forest cover
0.027
precipitation change
0.006
pasture to urban
0.026
GDP growth
0.002
fish trade
0.024
minimum precipitation
0.024
temp change
0.024
egg trade
0.024
diurnal temp range
0.023
precipitation
0.023
universities
0.021
beef trade
0.021
no. of cattle
0.020
maximum precipitation
0.020
mammals
0.019
population growth
0.019
mean temp
0.019
primary land
0.019
cooked meat trade
0.019
secondary land
0.019
GDP growth
0.019
rainy days
0.019
cropland change
0.018
secondary to urban
0.017
GDP
0.017
poultry trade
0.017
managed pasture
0.017
sheep goats trade
0.016
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
XI
==PAGE:63==
secondary land change
0.016
flight passengers
0.016
rangeland
0.015
crop to urban
0.015
latitude
0.015
cropland
0.014
minimum temp
0.014
no. of ducks
0.013
urban land
0.013
managed vegetation
0.012
no. of chickens
0.011
population
0.008
primary to urban
0.006
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
XII
==PAGE:64==
Supplementary figures
Supplementary Figure 1: Number of genomes from each country in the animal dataset, split
into continents.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
XIII
==PAGE:65==
Supplementary Figure 2: Number of genomes from each country in the animal dataset
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
XIV
==PAGE:66==
(a) GLM - symmetric, total
(b) BRT - symmetric, total
(c) XGBoost - symmetric, total
(d) GLM - symmetric, animals
(e) BRT - symmetric, animals
(f) XGBoost - symmetric, animals
(g) GLM - asymmetric, total
(h) BRT - asymmetric, total
(i) XGBoost - asymmetric, total
(j) GLM - asymmetric, animals
(k) BRT - asymmetric, animals
(l) XGBoost - asymmetric, animals
Supplementary Figure 3: Best RMSE per iteration for all three models (GLM, BRT, XGBoost) for
symmetric/asymmetric rates and total and animal data. Bootstrap iterations are on the x-axis
and RMSE is on the y-axis.
Identification of transmission factors for Salmonella Enteritidis
XV
