==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Adaptive Sonar Route Planning
Written By:
Andreas Kanneworff
s194595
Jacob Melchior Hansen
s194617
Supervisors:
Philip Bille
Inge Li Gørtz
Deadline
Januar 24th, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis presents the development, implementation and documentation of an
efficient coverage path planning algorithm for a sonar-equipped Autonomous Sur-
face Vehicle (ASV), aimed at improving the efficiency and quality of sonar surveys.
The algorithm generates optimal paths that minimize both travel distance and the
number of turns, while ensuring near-complete coverage of a given region. The
input consists of a polygonal region, static obstacles, and a fixed sonar configu-
ration. The solution incorporates multiple state-of-the-art convex decomposition
algorithms, such as the greedy recursive and sweep line algorithms, alongside vari-
ous path planning and sorting techniques, including depth-first search and heuristic
solutions based on the traveling salesman problem. These methods optimize the
visiting order of sub-regions, resulting in an efficient, continuous paths for the ASV
to follow. Techniques were implemented to overcome challenges posed by static
obstacles and hard region edges, ensuring that planned paths remained valid by
rerouting the ASV around these. The sum of width principle was applied to the
convex decomposition, in order to minimize the number of turns required for the
ASV to cover each sub-region. Extensive testing was conducted on real-world re-
gions, including the Antwerp harbor and the Great Belt Bridge region. The results
demonstrated that the proposed solution balances scanning efficiency, energy con-
sumption, and data quality. This work serves as a foundation for reducing survey
time, improving data quality, and enhancing the competitiveness of the sonar sur-
veys.
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
We would like to express our sincere gratitude towards Teledyne Marine for providing the
opportunity to work on this project. In particular, we would like to extend our thanks
to Harvey Stoelinga at Teledyne Marine for his continuous guidance through meetings
and online correspondence. His support was instrumental in ensuring that this thesis
remained focused on real-world applications.
Additionally, we would like to thank our DTU supervisors, Phillip Bille and Inge Li
Gørtz, for their valuable support during regular status meetings and for their insightful
contributions to discussions on the topic of our thesis.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Sonar Preliminaries
5
3
Previous Work
7
4
Theory
9
4.1
Part 1: Exact Cellular Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Part 2: Ordering Sub-Polygons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Part 3: Coverage Path Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Implementation
30
5.1
Algorithm Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Development Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Programming Style . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.5
Input File Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6
Exact Cellular Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.7
Implementation of Coverage Path Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.8
Connecting all Intersections Into a Full Path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.9
Region Hard Edge Avoidance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.10 Obstacle Avoidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6
Results and Discussion
80
7
Conclusion
87
A Additional Figures
92
A.1 Decomposition Splits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
A.2 CPP Visualizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A.3 Overlap Testing Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.4 CPP Version Comparison Paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
A.5 Obstacle Rerouting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
B Additional Data and Tables
103
B.1 CPP Versions Comparison Table
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
C Results
104
C.1 Realistic Antwerp Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
C.2 Relaxed Antwerp Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
C.3 Great Belt Bridge Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
D Algorithm Pseudocode
120
D.1 Pseudocode for Antipodal Pairs Computation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
D.2 Pseudocode for GetPath(b, bmate, a) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
D.3 Pseudocode for Rotating Calipers Path Planner . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
D.4 Pseudocode for Best Path Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
D.5 Pseudocode for the find cell function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
This thesis is conducted in collaboration with Teledyne Marine, a leading provider of
subsea imaging solutions for marine exploration, particularly advanced acoustic imaging,
such as multibeam sonar systems [32].
In marine exploration, ensuring complete and efficient coverage of a region of interest is
crucial for applications such as seafloor mapping, search operations, and environmental
monitoring. Sonar-equipped ASVs play a critical role in surveying these regions, but
their operational time is limited by battery capacity. Excessive travel distance not only
depletes the ASV’s battery faster but also reduces the time available for data collection.
Additionally, operating the sonar itself consumes energy, and excessive survey time and
turning of the ASV further increases the energy demand. The extended time and energy
increase would in turn amplify the cost for Teledyne Marine to conduct their sonar sur-
veys.
A sonar uses pings, which are sound waves generated by electrical pulses emitted at reg-
ular intervals to map the seafloor. These pings travel perpendicular to the ASV’s path,
covering both the left and right sides within the defined ping width. Due to the speed of
sound in water and the perpendicular nature of the pings, turning of the ASV during the
survey results in less accurate and more spaced-out points on the seafloor, which reduces
the overall accuracy of the sonar survey.
This thesis addresses the need for Coverage Path Planning (CPP) algorithms to improve
the efficiency and quality of sonar surveys performed by an ASV. The problem is a type of
CPP, which is a method for systematically covering a region. For a sonar-equipped ASV,
the goal is to generate a survey path that balances minimizing both travel distance and
the number of turns, thereby reducing energy consumption and enhancing data quality.
In this thesis, various strategies for generating efficient and valid coverage paths are
explored and implemented, focusing on comparing numerous state-of-the-art CPP algo-
rithms alongside custom approaches, which are specifically designed for a sonar-equipped
ASV. A path is valid if it does not cross any hard region edges or obstacles.
The input to the algorithm consists of a defined region, obstacles, and a fixed sonar
configuration. The region is represented as a polygon, and the obstacles are represented
as a list of polygons that lie within the region polygon. The sonar configuration primarily
defines the ping width. The main objective of the algorithm is to compute an efficient
coverage path, ensuring the ASV efficiently covers the region, while steering clear of hard
region edges and obstacles. The output of the algorithm is an ordered list of waypoints
for the ASV to follow, ensuring coverage of the region within the given constraints.
4
==PAGE:6==
2
Sonar Preliminaries
Sonar is an abbreviation for ”sound navigation and ranging”. Sonar technology utilizes
sound waves to map the seafloor or locate objects in the water. There are two types of
sonar: passive and active. A passive sonar listens to sound waves from external sources,
while an active sonar transmits sound pulses called pings, and records the reflected sound.
A transducer is a device in the sonar that converts electrical current into a sound pulse.
It is used for the transmission and reception of the sound waves. A sonar with a single
transducer is called a singlebeam sonar, where one that utilizes multiple transducers is
called a multibeam sonar [27].
An active multibeam sonar emits multiple sound pulses in a fan-shaped pattern, mea-
suring the time it takes for the reflected sound to return. Using this data, the sonar
calculates the distance to the seafloor or any objects that reflect the sound. The angle
of each transducer plays a crucial role in the measurement accuracy. When the distance
between the transducer and the seafloor increases, the distortion at the edges of the ping
increases, resulting in reduced accuracy at the boundaries.
When an object reflects a sound pulse before it reaches the seafloor, an acoustic shadow is
created, blocking the pulse which casts a shadow onto the seafloor. The closer the object
is to the sonar, the larger its shadow becomes, as more pulses from different transducers
are deflected by the object. This effect is further exacerbated at larger angles, where the
shadows on the seafloor are more pronounced due to decreased measurement accuracy,
as the angle between the transducer and the seafloor increases. A visualization of this
phenomenon, along with a comparison between multibeam and singlebeam sonars, is
shown in figure 2.
(a) Comparison of multibeam and single-beam
sonar.
(b) Illustration of the sonar shadow effect.
Figure 2: Visualizations of sonar beam characteristics.
2.0.1
Issues with Turning and Sonar Accuracy
When the ASV turns, the sonar’s scan of the seafloor decreases in accuracy, especially
along the boundary of the turning side. As the sonar moves along the turning arc, the
points on the seafloor become increasingly spaced, reducing resolution and scan precision.
Although adjusting the frequency of the pings can enhance the density of the points, the
issue of reduced accuracy on the turning side remains due to the wider spacing between
5
==PAGE:7==
ping edges. Additionally, the ASV uses more energy when turning compared to simply
traveling in a straight line. This must be taken into consideration when planning sonar
surveys, as excessive turning affects both the scan accuracy and the battery life of the
ASV.
A visualization of the issue is shown in figure 3, where a large spacing between the pings
has been used to better highlight the issue.
Figure 3: Sonar pings during a curved path traversal.
The sonars primarily used by Teledyne Marine are ”smart” active sonars, capable of au-
tomatically adjusting the angles of their transducers to maintain a consistent ping width.
This dynamic adjustment compensates for changes in water depth, preventing the varia-
tions in the ping width that would otherwise occur if the angles remained fixed.
High Performance Computing
High Performance Computing (HPC) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) is
facilitated through the DTU Computing Center, which provides computational resources
and services to support research and education [11]. The center provides access to the
HPC infrastructure for staff and students.
For this project, access to the HPC could prove valuable for handling the computational
demands of path planning algorithms, particularly when dealing with complex regions
and large numbers of obstacles. Utilizing the HPC clusters could significantly reduce
computation and testing time of the algorithms.
6
==PAGE:8==
3
Previous Work
In 2019 Teledyne Marine supported a project revolving around CPP for a group of stu-
dents from Aalborg University (AAU). The AAU project ”Seabed Coverage Path Plan-
ning and Re-routing”[13] primarily focused on re-routing a coverage path to adjust and
re-scan areas in the region that were inadequately scanned by the sonar-equipped ASV.
To address the re-routing challenge, CPP principles were applied to compute an efficient
coverage path for the region.
The decomposition algorithm applied for general CPP was found to be unsuitable for
re-routing. As a result, a convex decomposition algorithm using a vertical sweep line
was applied.
After obtaining the convex sub-polygons, the task of connecting differ-
ent sub-polygons was modeled as a TSP. Two heuristics were used for solving the TSP:
Repetitive Nearest Neighbor (RNN) and Cheapest Insertion (CI), which optimized the
sequence of visiting inadequately scanned areas. For the CPP implementation, a bous-
trophedon sweep pattern was employed, minimizing the number of turns and ensuring
efficient coverage of each sub-polygon.
The algorithm was tested on a dataset of the Antwerp harbor, containing jetties, towers,
and buoys. Figure 4 shows the Antwerp harbor illustrated with the raw data and hard
edges.
Figure 4: The Antwerp harbor illustrated with the raw data.
Additionally, the level of detail in the data was found to be greater than necessary. The
edges of the polygon and obstacles contained detailed notches, leading to an excessive
number of sub-polygons after decomposing the target region. To address this issue, a
smoothing scheme was applied to the notches. As the scan width increased, the likelihood
of the path intersecting a small obstacle decreased. Thus, isolated obstacles, sufficiently
small in relation to the scan width, were removed from the data. Figure 5a displays
the decomposition of the raw Antwerp harbor, consisting of 191 sub-polygons, alongside
7
==PAGE:9==
the decomposition of the smoothed Antwerp harbor in figure 5b, which contains 62 sub-
polygons.
(a) Raw decomposition.
(b) Smoothed decomposition.
Figure 5: A decomposition of the raw Antwerp harbor (a) and the smoothed and manip-
ulated Antwerp harbor (b).
The visualizations of the CPP of the raw and smoothed harbor can be seen in figure 6a
(raw) and figure 6b (smoothed). Since all edges in the harbor are hard, the path is invalid,
as it violates the constraints by crossing hard region edges. Comparing the number of
turns for the lightly smoothed and manipulated data with the raw data highlights the
issue of overly detailed data. A path width of 55 units was used, resulting in 125 turns
for the smoothed data and 248 turns for the raw data.
(a) Raw decomposition path.
(b) Smoothed decomposition path.
Figure 6: A CPP route of the raw Antwerp harbor region (a) and the smoothed Antwerp
harbor (b).
8
==PAGE:10==
4
Theory
In the context of CPP for a sonar-equipped ASV, the objective is to efficiently scan the
seafloor of a region of interest using the sonar. CPP refers to the process of creating
a coverage path that allows the sonar to cover the entire region. The objective is to
minimize both the distance and the number of turns in the path, to ensure the ASV can
efficiently traverse the region while ensuring full coverage.
There are various strategies for planning a general coverage path, but this thesis specif-
ically focuses on the context of a sonar-equipped ASV. In this context, the ping width
corresponds to the path width in the CPP problem, as the sonar must scan the entire
region by transmitting pings across the specified path.
Xin Yu [37] proposes a CPP method based on exact cellular decomposition, which utilizes
a dynamic programming approach to plan a coverage path. Exact cellular decomposition
is a technique that divides a region into simpler more manageable parts, which is espe-
cially useful for path planning in environments with obstacles.
The method proposed by Xin Yu achieves this by dividing the CPP process into three
primary procedures:
Part 1
Decomposition of the coverage region into sub-regions
Part 2
Selection of a traversal sequence for those sub-regions
Part 3
Generation of a boustrophedon path (straight, parallel tracks with alter-
nating directions) that covers each sub-region individually.
In part 1 the region is decomposed into simpler sub-regions, where a boustrophedon path
can be planned separately for each sub-region. A boustrophedon path is a method of
covering an area by moving back and forth in parallel lines, resembling the way an ox
would plow a field. In part 2 a visiting order is planned for the ASV to connect the
sub-regions. In part 3 the paths within each sub-region are created and the sequence for
visiting sub-regions are combined to create the final continuous path.
4.1
Part 1: Exact Cellular Decomposition
The first part involves decomposing a region into simpler, non-overlapping sub-regions.
One approach to achieve this is exact cellular decomposition, in which the region is
divided into convex sub-regions that collectively cover the entire area without overlap.
Approximate cellular decomposition is a different approach that sacrifices precision for
computational speed, resulting in cells that may slightly overlap obstacles or leave small
gaps.
Jiao et al. [24] describe a method for exact cellular decomposition that decomposes a con-
cave polygon into convex sub-polygons, where a boustrophedon path for each sub-polygon
is planned and combined using a dynamic programming strategy. They propose a greedy
recursive algorithm aimed at minimizing the sum of widths of the convex sub-polygons.
According to Xin Yu [37], the optimal solution for a concave polygon can be obtained by
minimizing the sum of widths of the convex decomposition. This ensures that the ASV
9
==PAGE:11==
will require fewer turns to cover the region. For this reason, simply applying a polygon
triangulation algorithm as discussed in the literature by Berg et al. [4] is not the best
strategy.
For a concave polygon P that has been decomposed into m convex sub-polygons, whose
widths are W1, W2, ..., Wm, the decomposition of P can formally be described by equation
(1). Since the convex decomposition of the concave polygon with the minimum sum of
widths is an NP-hard problem, it can only be solved by an approximate algorithm with
polynomial time complexity.
(
min Pm
i=1 Wi
s.t.
Pi ∈Convex Polygon
(1)
The basic idea is that minimizing the width of a polygon also minimizes the number of
turns required for an ASV to cover it. This is explained in equation (2), where W is
the width of a given convex polygon and d is the space between two adjacent path lines.
The space between path lines is known as the path width. Then the convex polygon
can in theory be covered by Nturn parallel path lines, when selecting a path direction
perpendicular to the width.
Nturn =
W
d

(2)
Once the convex sub-polygons has been computed, a sub-region connection algorithm is
applied to create an undirected graph connecting these sub-regions. Each sub-region is
then covered using the boustrophedon method. This method works for convex polygons
in which parallel lines can be drawn between any two edges without exiting the polygon
or intersecting more than two edges. However, this is not the case for concave polygons,
which is why it is important to decompose the region of interest into convex sub-polygons.
10
==PAGE:12==
4.1.1
Greedy Recursive Algorithm
Jiao et al. [24] propose a greedy recursive
algorithm to decompose a concave polygon
into convex sub-polygons while minimizing
the sum of widths. To obtain the minimum
number of turns in each sub-polygon, the
concave polygon area will be decomposed
into convex sub-polygons, according to the
principle of minimum sum of widths.
The algorithm is illustrated in the flowchart
from figure 7.
Let P be a concave poly-
gon with n vertices where ncc ∈[0, n −2)
are concave.
The general approach is to
iterate through the concave vertices vcc =
v1, v2, ..., vncc, and for each vertex place an
edge that splits the polygon into two sub-
polygons along that line. As shown in figure
8 there are four types of convex decomposi-
tion with minimum width, which are:
1. Extension from one edge of a concave
vertex
2. Connection between two concave ver-
tices
3. Make a line which passes a concave
vertex and in parallel to one edge
4. Connection between a concave vertex
and a convex vertex
Figure 7: Flowchart of the greedy recursive
convex decomposition algorithm.
For each split, the algorithm computes the sum of widths of the resulting sub-polygons.
After repeating this process for all concave vertices, the algorithm selects the best split
defined as the two sub-polygons P1 and P2 with the lowest sum of widths. This greedy
approach evaluates all combinations of concave vertices and edges, resulting in a single
split that produces two sub-polygons. The algorithm then recursively applies this process
to the resulting sub-polygons using a greedy approach. This process continues until the
base case is reached when a sub-polygon is convex, in which case it is simply returned.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 8: The four types of convex decomposition.
4.1.2
Judgment of the Concave Vertices
To identify the concave vertices the cross product of vectors can be used. For a vertex
vi(xi, yi) and its adjacent vertices vi−1(xi−1, yi−1) and vi+1(xi+1, yi+1) the cross product
of vectors is defined as:
F = vi−1vi × vivi+1
Accordingly the concave judgment matrix can be computed as:
S(vi) =

xi−1
yi−1
1
xi
yi
1
xi+1
yi+1
1

=





> 0
vi is a convex vertex
= 0
vi−1, vi and vi+1 are collinear
< 0
vi is a concave vertex
(3)
4.1.3
Computing Intersections
Fortunately, the convex decomposition algorithm from the flowchart only applies the
option to make a line which passes a concave vertex and in parallel to one edge. The
concave vertices are iterated through in the interval i ∈[0, ncc), where ncc is the number
of concave vertices. For each concave vertex the algorithm then iterates through each
edge in the interval j ∈[0, n) where n is the number of edges. Each edge ej is translated
to vertex vi and parameterized as an infinite line and the polygon is split along that line.
For all edges in the polygon ek where k ∈[0, n), it must be checked whether ej intersects
with this edge. As a result, the edge ek is parameterized as a line segment to represent
the actual edge. Equation (4) and (5) shows how the edges can be parameterized.
ej =
x0
y0

+ t
x2 −x1
y2 −y1

, t ∈(−inf, inf)
(4)
ek =
x3
y3

+ u
x4 −x3
y4 −y4

, u ∈[0, 1]
(5)
To compute the intersection points, the lines ej and ek are equated and solved for t
and u, similar to the approach outlined in the paper by Paul Bourke [5]. This yields
the following equations for t and u, which can be inserted into equations (4) and (5) to
compute the intersection point (if any) between the infinite line ej and the line segment
ek.
12
==PAGE:14==
t =
(−y4 + y0) · x3 + (−y0 + y3) · x4 + x0 · (y4 −y3)
(y1 −y2) · x3 + (y2 −y1) · x4 + (x1 −x2) · (y4 −y3)
(6)
u = (y0 −y3) · x1 + (−y0 + y3) · x2 −(y1 −y2) · (x0 −x3)
(y4 −y3) · x1 + (−y4 + y3) · x2 + (y1 −y2) · (x3 −x4)
(7)
4.1.4
Computing the Width of a Polygon
Each recursive step of the greedy recursive algorithm selects a split that minimizes the
sum of widths of the two sub-polygons. As a result, it has to determine the width of
the resulting sub-polygons created by splitting the polygon. The width of a polygon
can be computed using the rotating calipers algorithm, as described by Alzubaidi [3].
It essentially works by computing geometric properties of convex polygons, such as the
diameter or farthest points, by rotating a pair of calipers around the polygon. A de-
tailed description of this algorithm can be seen in figure 10. Since the rotating calipers
algorithm is only applicable to convex polygons, it is necessary to compute the convex
hull beforehand. The convex hull is the smallest convex shape that entirely encloses the
polygon. If the polygon is already convex, then the convex hull is simply the polygon
itself. To compute the convex hull, one can apply an algorithm such as Graham’s scan,
as described by Cormen et al. [9].
When the convex hull has been computed, the width and diameter of the polygon can be
determined using the rotating calipers algorithm. This algorithm works by systematically
processing all antipodal pairs on the convex hull to compute the minimum and maximum
distances between two parallel supporting lines. Antipodal pairs are categorized as either
vertex-edge (V-E) or vertex-vertex (V-V) pairs, as described by Alzubaidi [3]. The vertex-
vertex approach calculates the distance between two vertices on the convex hull that are
farthest apart, which is used to determine the diameter (the largest distance between
any two points) of the polygon. The vertex-edge approach measures the perpendicular
distance between a vertex and the opposite edge of the convex hull. This method is used
to compute the width of the convex hull, defined as the smallest distance between parallel
supporting lines that enclose the polygon. Since the greedy recursive algorithm focuses
on minimizing the sum of widths, the vertex-edge antipodal pair is used for this purpose,
as stated in Theorem 1.
Theorem 1 : The width of a convex polygon P only appears in the V-E style span (E–E
style can be considered as a special case of V–E style).
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 9: The diameter and width of a convex polygon.
Figure 10 illustrates a flowchart of the rotat-
ing calipers method, which can be applied
to compute the width of a convex polygon,
using the vertex-edge antipodal pairs.
This flowchart represents a step-by-step ap-
proach to the rotating calipers method. While
this description simplifies the mathemati-
cal concept, it focuses on iterating through
edges and computing relevant distances to
compute the minimum width. It works by
iterating through the edges of the convex
hull and for each edge it computes the per-
pendicular distance to all vertices that are
not included in forming the edge.
After
processing the vertices of the polygon for
a given edge, it selects the maximum per-
pendicular distance between the edge and
a vertex. In each iteration of the edges the
minimum width is updated, if the maximum
perpendicular distance for the current edge
is smaller than the previously recorded min-
imum width. Thus, the minimum width of
the polygon can be seen as the smallest of
the maximum distances that are computed
for each edge-vertex pair.
Figure
10:
Flowchart
of
the
rotating
calipers method.
4.1.5
Merging Adjacent Polygons
The greedy recursive algorithm for exact cellular decomposition can sometimes divide a
polygon into an excessive number of convex sub-polygons, which occurs when two convex
sub-polygons share an edge that can be removed. This results in redundant back-and-
forth motions for the ASV to cover the two sub-polygons, as it has to plan separate paths
14
==PAGE:16==
instead of a single larger path for the merged polygon. When merging two convex sub-
polygons, they have to share an edge and are distinguished as either adjacent or entirely
adjacent by the following definitions:
Definition 1 : Given two polygons P1 with n vertices and P2 with m vertices, if an edge
of P1, v1iv1(i+1) (i ∈[1, n]), coincides with an edge of P2, v2jv2(j+1) (j ∈[1, m]), we can
say that P1 is adjacent to P2.
Definition 2 :
P1 and P2 are adjacent to each other, whose coincidence edges are
v1iv1(i+1) and v2jv2(j+1) respectively.
If v1i = v2j (or v1i = v2(j+1)) and v1(i+1) =
v2(j+1) (or v1(i+1) = v2j), we can say that P1 is entirely adjacent to P2.
(a) Partially adjacent polygons, P1 and P2.
(b) Completely adjacent polygons, P1 and P2.
Figure 11: Illustrations of partially (a) and completely (b) adjacent polygons.
In order to avoid unnecessary back-and-forth motion, Jiao et al. [24] describe a method
to combine adjacent sub-polygons. Two sub-polygons are allowed to be merged if they
have the same direction of widths and are entirely adjacent. Figure 12 shows an example
of sub-polygons that can be merged into a single polygon, which allows for a better path
with fewer turns.
Figure 12: Two polygons that can be merged into a single polygon which requires fewer
turns to cover.
4.1.6
Creating Adjacency Graph
For a concave polygon that has been decomposed into convex sub-polygons and opti-
mized by merging fully adjacent sub-polygons, the problem reduces to finding a mini-
mum traversal of an undirected graph. In this graph, each sub-polygon is represented
15
==PAGE:17==
as a node, while edges describe the adjacency relationships between sub-polygons. Jiao
et al. [24] introduces this concept using set notation, which can be adapted to various
implementation approaches. Each sub-polygon Pk (k = 1, 2, . . . , m) is converted into a
node. If Pi ∩Pj ̸= ∅(i, j ∈[1, m]), then Pi is connected to Pj by an edge with a weight
of 1. If Pi ∩Pj = ∅, no connection is established. Then an adjacency matrix can be
constructed for the undirected graph A(aij) where:
aij =
(
1
Pi ∩Pj ̸= ∅
0
(Pi ∩Pj = ∅) ∪(i = j)
(8)
Both the matrix and the graph can be used to plan a visiting order for the path between
the decomposed sub-polygons using different search methods, which will be explored in
section 4.2.
4.1.7
Simulation
Figure 13a shows a concave polygon P(n = 13) whose vertices in counterclockwise order
are:
V = {v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6, v7, v8, v9, v10, v11, v12, v13}
=











(0.45 0.75)
(2.37 1.49)
(4.15 0.32),
(3.63 1.48)
(5.58 1.78)
(7.45 3.21),
(6.12 3.58)
(4.75 6.15)
(4.32 5.94),
(3.75 4.55)
(2.45 6.44)
(1.55 5.45)
(2.51 3.67)











(km)
Figure 13b illustrates the convex sub-polygons produced by the greedy recursive decompo-
sition algorithm. There are five concave vertices (ncc = 5) which are v = {v2, v4, v7, v10, v13}.
(a) Original concave polygon.
(b) Decomposition of concave polygon.
Figure 13: A concave polygon (a) and its optimal decomposition into convex sub-polygons
that minimizes the sum of widths (b).
Figure 14 shows the convex sub-polygons after merging and the undirected weighted
graph G(m = 7) that can be traversed for the coverage path planning algorithm.
16
==PAGE:18==
(a) Merged adjacent sub-polygons.
(b) Undirected weighted adjacency graph.
Figure 14: The convex sub-polygons after merging entirely adjacent sub-polygons (a) and
the undirected weighted adjacency graph (b).
4.1.8
Time Complexity Analysis of the Greedy Recursive Algorithm
Li et al. [26] goes through a time complexity analysis of the greedy recursive algorithm
where they define the function of time as:
T(n, ncc) ≤
(
C1n
ncc = 0
T(n1, ncc1) + T(n2, ncc2) + C2 · ncc · n2,
ncc > 0
(9)
If ncc = 0 the polygon is already convex and will not require the convex decomposition.
Computing the judgment matrix requires iterating through all vertices of the polygon,
which has a time complexity of O(n). If the polygon is already convex this process simply
has a time complexity of O(n). If ncc > 0 the polygon P has to be decomposed into
two sub-polygons P1 and P2. The decomposition algorithm for a single concave vertex
has a time complexity of O(n). In order to find the decomposition with minimum width
sum, there are n · ncc decomposition operations. Thus, the time complexity of an opti-
mal decomposition to decompose P into two sub-polygons with minimum width sum is
O(ncc · n2), hence the C2 · ncc · n2 of equation (9).
Let n1 and n2 denote the number of vertices in the sub-polygons P1 and P2 that are
produced when splitting a polygon P with n vertices at a concave vertex. During a split
the total number of vertices in the two sub-polygons (n1 + n2) is probably larger than
the number of vertices of the original polygon (n). There are four types of relationships
between (n1 + n2) and (n) which are illustrated in figure 15.
17
==PAGE:19==
(a) n1 + n2 = n + 3
(b) n1 + n2 = n + 2
(c) n1 + n2 = n + 2
(d) n1 + n2 = n + 1
(e) n1 + n2 = n
Figure 15: Relationships between (n1 + n2) and n.
Hence, n1 and n2 satisfy:
n ≤n1 + n2 ≤n + 3
Since the minimum number of vertices of a convex polygon is 3 it is true that:
0 ≤n1, n2 ≤n
Then equation (9) can be rewritten as:
T(n, ncc) ≤T(n, ncc1) + T(n, ncc2) + C2 · ncc · n2
Figure 16 illustrates the worst case of the greedy recursive algorithm where the polygon
is decomposed into a convex polygon and a concave polygon in every split.
18
==PAGE:20==
Figure 16: Worst case of the greedy recursive algorithm.
Consequently, the time complexity of the greedy recursive algorithm is polynomial as:
T(n, ncc) ≤T(n, ncc1) + T(n, ncc2) + C2 · ncc · n2,
ncc1 + ncc2 = ncc −1
≤T(n, 0) + T(n, ncc −1) + C2 · ncc · n2
≤T(n, 0) +

T(n, 0) + T(n, ncc −2) + C2 · (ncc −1) · n2
+ C2 · ncc · n2
= 2T(n, 0) + T(n, ncc −2) + C2 · n2 · [ncc + (ncc −1)]
...
≤(ncc −1) · T(n, 0) + T(n, 1) + C2 · n2 · [ncc + (ncc −1) + . . . + 3 + 2]
≤(ncc + 1) · T(n, 0) + C2 · n2 ·
ncc
X
i=1
i
= C1 · (ncc + 1) · n + C2 · n2 · ncc · (ncc + 1)
2
= C1 · (ncc + 1) · n + C2
2 · n2 · ncc2 + C2
2 · n2 · ncc
= O(n2 · ncc2)
4.1.9
Obstacles in the Region
Obstacles in CPP are objects that the ASV must navigate around in order to plan a
valid coverage path for the region. The type of obstacle depends on the environment
that is being scanned. In general it can be seen as a closed area that the ASV cannot
enter, and they can either be static or dynamic, as explained by Wu et al. [36]. Static
obstacles are fixed areas whereas dynamic obstacles are moving objects. In the context of
an ASV static obstacles could be bridge pillars, shallow waters, reefs etc., where dynamic
obstacles are objects such as buoys, floating debris, other vessels etc. Static obstacles are
19
==PAGE:21==
known beforehand and the plan to navigate around them can be preplanned. However,
dynamic obstacles might not be known beforehand. Floating debris is an example of
this, as it moves depending on the currents and winds. For dynamic obstacles, the path
should ideally be changed in real time, as these obstacles should be handled when they
are discovered.
4.1.10
Sweep Line Algorithm
The advantage of using the greedy recursive algorithm for exact cellular decomposition is
that it divides the region into convex sub-polygons while minimizing the sum of widths.
However, it is not able to handle obstacles, which requires a different decomposition al-
gorithm. Xin Yu [37] proposes a method for handling a single obstacle inside a single
convex polygon. The proposed convex decomposition method is an enhancement of a
trapezoidal decomposition, and is designed to reduce unnecessary cells. The trapezoidal
decomposition creates cells that are shaped like trapezoids. To improve time complexity
a sweep line method can be applied instead, where each vertex is defined as an event and
sorted by their x-coordinates in ascending order. The vertices of the polygon are listed
in counterclockwise order, and the vertices of the obstacle are listed in clockwise order.
A vertical sweep line is swept from left to right through the polygon field, visiting the
vertices in ascending order. The type of event defines which action is performed. Many
events will shoot a ray in either just an upward or downward direction, and split the
polygon when the edge that lies immediately above or below is hit. During the sweeping
process a balanced binary search tree L can be used to maintain the ”current” edges that
the sweep line intersects.
Convex trapezoidal cells are formed at the event depending on the type, and each cell
contains a ceiling and a floor list for the vertices. The sweep line then visits each vertex
ordered by the x-coordinate in ascending order and applies different operations depending
on the type of event.
In trapezoidal decomposition all vertices are classified into five types which are: OPEN,
CLOSE, SPLIT, MERGE and INFLECTION. Definition 3 gives a description of the
events for the trapezoidal decomposition, which are defined by considering the interior
angles for the polygon and exterior angles for the obstacles.
Definition 3 : A vertex v is an OPEN event if its two neighbor vertices lie on the right
side of the sweep line and the interior angle is less than π. If the interior angle is greater
than π, then v is a SPLIT event. A vertex is a CLOSE event if its two neighbor vertices lie
on the left side of the sweep line and the interior angle at v is less than π. If the interior
angle is greater than π, then v is a MERGE event. A vertex is an INFLECTION event
if its two neighbor vertices lie on the opposite sides of the sweep line.
The drawback of the trapezoidal decomposition is that it produces too many redundant
convex cells that can be merged into larger convex cells. This can be achieved by replacing
the INFLECTION event with four more events: FLOOR CONVEX, FLOOR CONCAVE,
CEIL CONVEX and CEIL CONCAVE as described in definition 4.
Definition 4 A vertex v is a FLOOR CONVEX event if its previous neighbor vertex
vprev lies on left side of the sweep line while its next neighbor vnext lies on right side
20
==PAGE:22==
of the sweep line, and the interior angle at v is less than π. If the interior angle is
greater than π, then v is a FLOOR CONCAVE event. On the contrary, a vertex v is a
CEIL CONVEX event if its previous neighbor vertex vprev lies on right side of the sweep
line while its next neighbor vnext lies on left side of the sweep line, and the interior angle
at v is less than π. If the interior angle is greater than π, then v is a CEIL CONCAVE
event.
Figure 17 shows a polygon that has been decomposed into convex sub-polygons around
an obstacle. The polygon is formed in counterclockwise order, and the obstacle is formed
in clockwise order as described by Xin Yu [37]. Figure 17a shows the result of decompos-
ing with the trapezoidal decomposition (definition 3), and figure 17b shows the convex
decomposition using the sweep line algorithm as in definition 4.
(a) Trapezoidal decomposition.
(b) Sweep line decomposition
Figure 17: Comparison of a trapezoidal decomposition (a) and a sweep line decomposition
(b).
Extending the trapezoidal algorithm to the sweep line algorithm requires defining the
events from both definition 3 and 4. These are defined below:
OPEN : Creates a new cell and the vertex for this event is appended to the floor list of
the cell.
SPLIT: Shoots rays both upwards and downwards from the vertex, finds the current
cell, and adds the intersection points to the ceiling and floor list respectively. Then the
current cell is considered closed and two new cells are opened. The vertex is added to
the floor list of the the new top cell and to the ceiling list of the new bottom cell. The
upwards intersection point is added to the ceiling list of the new top cell, and the down-
wards intersection point is added to the floor list of the new bottom cell.
FLOOR CONVEX : Finds the cell to which the vertex belongs and appends the vertex
into the floor list of the cell.
CEIL CONVEX : Finds the cell to which the vertex belongs and adds the vertex into
the ceiling list of the cell.
FLOOR CONCAVE: Shoots a ray upwards and computes the intersection point with
the edge above. The vertex is added into the floor list of the cell where the vertex belongs,
21
==PAGE:23==
and the intersection point is added into the ceiling list. Now this cell is considered closed
and a new cell is opened. The vertex is added to the floor list of the new cell and the
intersection point is added to the ceiling list.
CEIL CONCAVE: Similar to the FLOOR CONCAVE event except the ray is shot
downwards. The vertex is then added to the ceiling list of the correct cell, and the in-
tersection point is added to the floor list. This cell is now considered closed and a new
cell is opened, where the vertex is added to the ceiling list and the intersection point is
added to the floor list.
MERGE: Similar to the SPLIT event where the intersection with the sweep line in the
upwards and downwards direction are computed. The two cells to which the upwards
and downwards intersection points belong are found respectively. The vertex is added
to the floor list of the top cell and the ceiling list of the bottom cell. Then the upwards
intersection point is appended to the ceiling list of the top cell, and the downwards in-
tersection point is appended to the floor list of the bottom cell. Now the two cells are
considered closed, and a new cell is opened. The upwards intersection point is added to
the ceiling list and the downwards intersection point is added to the floor list of the new
cell.
CLOSE: Finds the correct cell where the vertex belongs and appends it to the floor list.
The current cell is then considered closed.
Figure 18 illustrates a convex polygon with an obstacle, where each vertex is defined as
the an event.
Figure 18: Eight event types which are OPEN(1), CLOSE(5), SPLIT(9), MERGE(12),
FLOOR CONVEX(2, 3, 4, 10), FLOOR CONCAVE(11), CEIL CONVEX(6, 7, 8, 14)
and CEIL CONCAVE(13, 15). The sweep line visits the events in ascending order sorted
by the x-coordinate.
One issue that can arise in the sweep line algorithm is that it assumes each vertex has
a different x-coordinate, as it has to visit the events in distinct order. According to Xin
Yu [37] this issue can be fixed by rotating the coordinate system by a sufficiently small
angle, if two or more vertices share an x-coordinate.
22
==PAGE:24==
4.1.11
Rotating a Coordinate System
Philip R. Evans [14] describes a method for rotating a set of coordinates without changing
its shape or size. A rotational transformation is uniquely defined by a rotation matrix
which transforms the set of coordinates. The natural expression of a rotation is as an
angle θ and in two dimensions it can be described as:
x′
y′

=
cos θ
−sin θ
sin θ
cos θ
 x
y

(10)
4.1.12
Time Complexity Analysis of the Sweep Line Algorithm
Let n be the number of vertices in a polygon. The first step is to sort the events based on
the x-coordinates, which has a time complexity of O(n log n). Determining the edge that
is immediately above or below the event in the sweep line process has a time complexity
of O(log n), if the edges are stored in a balanced binary search tree. Repeating the sweep
line process for n vertices then has a total time complexity of O(n log n).
4.1.13
Optimal Sweep Direction
The sweep line algorithm only computes a single convex decomposition with a vertical
sweep direction. Simply using a vertical sweep direction is not the most optimal approach,
as it does not necessarily compute the convex decomposition with the lowest sum of
widths. Wesley Huang [21] explains that the optimal sweep direction, which minimizes
the sum of widths, is perpendicular to one of the boundary or obstacle edges. As a result,
Xin Yu [37] proposes an extension of the sweep line algorithm, that considers all sweeping
directions and computes the convex decomposition for each direction. The best convex
sub-polygons can then be selected, as the decomposition with the lowest sum of widths.
For the modified algorithm, all sweeping directions that are perpendicular to the region
or obstacle edges are examined. This was showed to produce a nearly optimal solution
with great efficiency, when comparing with two state-of-the art algorithms. Furthermore,
it was showed that the algorithm can produce a feasible and effective solution for a large
region containing obstacles as well.
4.1.14
R-Tree
An R-tree is a height balanced tree data structure used for spatial access methods pro-
posed by Antonin Guttman [19]. In practice, it can be used to index bounding boxes of
polygons, which is practical for detecting overlapping polygons and obstacles efficiently.
Each node in the R-tree contains a group of minimum bounding boxes, which recursively
partition the data space. The key idea is to use the bounding boxes to decide whether or
not to search inside a sub-tree. This can be effective at pruning away nodes in the search
space that are not relevant during the search.
R-trees do not guarantee good worst-case performance, but generally perform well with
real-world data. Querying an R-tree has an average time complexity of O(logM N) and
worst case of O(n).
23
==PAGE:25==
4.2
Part 2: Ordering Sub-Polygons
As outlined in section 4.1.6, the convex decomposition returns an unordered list of sub-
polygons and an adjacency graph that describes the connectivity of the sub-polygons. To
minimize the travel distance between sub-polygons when creating a continuous coverage
path for the region, it is crucial that they are ordered optimally. There exists several
well-known graph traversal methods, including Depth-First Search (DFS), Breadth-First
Search (BFS), and A*, which have been compared by Chinemerem Iloh in [23].
4.2.1
Graph-Based Ordering
DFS is a suitable choice for creating the visiting order of the sub-polygons, due to its
ability to traverse deep into a graph efficiently. By exploring each path fully before back-
tracking, DFS can quickly identify potential paths through the adjacency graph, which
is particularly useful for creating a continuous connected path.
Other graph traversal algorithms, such as BFS and A*, also provide useful properties for
ordering sub-polygons. BFS explores all nodes at the current depth level before moving
to deeper nodes. While BFS guarantees the shortest path in terms of the number of
edges, it becomes less efficient for deep graphs or when edge weights (such as distances
between sub-polygons) are more important than the edge count.
On the other hand, A* search incorporates both the actual cost of reaching a node and a
heuristic estimate of the remaining cost to reach the goal. For this reason A* could be a
good choice for finding optimal paths in weighted graphs. However, the edge weights in
the adjacency graph can only be approximated using distances between polygon centroids,
which may not accurately reflect travel costs for irregularly shaped polygons. Addition-
ally, the time complexity of A* can be significantly higher than that of DFS and BFS,
especially for large graphs or when the heuristic function is not well-defined.
Given the characteristics of the adjacency graph, a DFS graph search approach is pre-
ferred for its simplicity and efficiency. While BFS and A* could theoretically optimize
the path in cases with well-defined weights, their added complexity may not yield signif-
icant benefits here. The lack of reliable edge weights, due to the challenges of assigning
meaningful costs in graphs for complex polygons, further reduces the practicality of the
more advanced techniques like A*.
Another sorting method for the sub-polygons visiting order could be to model the prob-
lem as a Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP). While graph-based traversal techniques,
such as DFS, provide a straightforward method to explore the adjacency graph, they are
not designed to minimize global travel distances. By treating each sub-polygon as a node
in a TSP, with the distances between nodes approximated by the Euclidean distances be-
tween the sub-polygons centroids, the objective is to find an ordering that minimizes the
total travel distance. This approach allows for leveraging the extensive existing literature
and algorithms developed for solving TSPs, as outlined by Farahani et al. in [15].
24
==PAGE:26==
4.2.2
Ordering with a Traveling Salesman Problem Solution
The TSP is a classical combinatorial optimization problem where a salesman must visit a
set of cities (nodes) exactly once and return to the starting point, hereby minimizing the
total travel distance. Formally, the problem is defined on a weighted graph G = (V, E),
where V represents the set of nodes and E the set edges between them, each associated
with a weight (distance or cost). The objective is to find a Hamiltonian cycle [35] with
the minimum possible weight.
The TSP is an NP-hard problem, meaning that the computational cost required to find
an exact solution grows exponentially with the number of nodes.
Despite this, TSP
has practical applications in logistics and path planning, where finding efficient paths
is important. Various exact algorithms exist, such as dynamic programming (e.g., Bell-
man–Held–Karp algorithm[28]) and branch-and-bound[15], but are only feasible for small
search spaces.
For larger search spaces, heuristic and approximation methods are commonly used. Ex-
amples include Nearest Neighbor algorithms, Christofides’ algorithm[25] (which guaran-
tees a solution within 1.5 times the optimal path for metric TSP), and metaheuristic
approaches such as Genetic Algorithms and Simulated Annealing[33]. These methods
balance computational efficiency and solution quality, which makes them practical for
real-world applications.
While the Traveling Salesman Problem provides a robust framework for minimizing the
travel distance between the sub-polygons, its integration with CPP requires careful adap-
tation. By combining the TSP-based ordering of sub-polygons with CPP strategies, it is
possible to generate a continuous path that reduces the sub-polygons’ connection distance.
The following section explores the theoretical foundations and practical implementation
of CPP in the context of a sonar-equipped ASV.
4.3
Part 3: Coverage Path Planning
CPP is a well-researched area, with various methods developed to efficiently cover regions
of interest. One of the most common approaches is the boustrophedon search pattern,
where the vehicle follows a back-and-forth sweeping motion to cover the region. This ap-
proach was initially introduced in 1998 by Choset and Pignon [8] and forms the backbone
of many CPP algorithms today. In the context of static ASV path planning, the input to
CPP algorithms consists of a polygon representing the region, and a list of obstacles. The
output is an ordered list of waypoints the ASV must follow to ensure the given region is
completely scanned.
A comprehensive survey from 2013 by Galceran and Carreras [17] reviews the most suc-
cessful CPP methods from the previous decade. This survey provides a solid foundation
in the CPP problem domain, detailing the origins of research in this area and highlighting
key early advancements. The insights from this survey serve as a baseline for understand-
ing existing CPP methods and informed the development of subsequent approaches.
During the research, it was found that many different methods for CPP have been ex-
plored and documented. For instance, Cai et al. [6] proposed a method for complete CPP
25
==PAGE:27==
based on the A* algorithm, primarily aimed at optimizing path planning for household
cleaning robots. A greedy approach to the CPP problem was explored by Ercan et al.
[1]. This approach was, however, very specific for agricultural field machines, and does
not have a good solution to regions containing obstacles, as the agricultural fields were
assumed free of obstacles.
Other CPP methods include clustering-based techniques as proposed by Chen et al. [7]
and sampling-based approaches by Englot and Hoover [12]. Clustering-based methods,
which group regions for simultaneous coverage by multiple robots, are effective in reducing
coverage time. However, these methods are not directly applicable to scenarios involving
a single ASV, as they are tailored to multi-robot systems. Sampling-based techniques,
which are designed to handle dynamic and obstacle-rich environments by generating ran-
dom sample points, are focused on ensuring probabilistic completeness. However, the
extensive sampling and iterative path refinement they require are less suited for the con-
tinuous and precise coverage needed in sonar-based applications.
Methods for integrating start and end points into the CPP process have also been ex-
plored in the literature, such as the approach by Vasquez-Gomez et al. [34]. This method
is particularly relevant as it facilitates the linking of sub-polygons into a continuous path,
ensuring smooth transitions between them. This is essential for achieving efficient and
coherent path planning.
By analyzing various approaches, a comprehensive understanding of CPP strategies was
developed. While methods based on A* offer structured and optimal path planning, they
tend to be computationally expensive. An alternative approach, as seen in the work
by Vasquez-Gomez et al. [34], facilitated more efficient traversal of sub-polygons. How-
ever, this method was originally tailored for UAVs, necessitating adaptations for an ASV.
Furthermore, most CPP implementations, including those explored in the literature, are
primarily designed for convex polygons. This highlights the importance of decomposition
algorithms to plan paths for non-convex regions.
4.3.1
Back-and-Forth Path Strategy
Research suggests that adopting a CPP strategy based on the Back-and-Forth Path
(BFP) approach, as outlined by Vasquez-Gomez et al. [34], provides an effective starting
point. This method computes coverage paths by selecting start and end points that may
lie outside the region itself, offering greater flexibility. It can be adapted to sub-polygon
scenarios by using the endpoint of one’s path as the start point for the next. This ensures
smooth transitions between paths, a key requirement for efficient sonar scanning. The
BFP strategy is particularly well-suited for convex regions, generating parallel path lines
to ensure full coverage with minimal turns.
The Rotating Calipers Path Planner (RCPP), also introduced by Vasquez-Gomez et al.
[34], computes antipodal points and determines the optimal Edge-Vertex Path (EVP)
for coverage in convex sub-polygons. While the BFP strategy focuses on establishing a
general sweep direction and does not inherently require the RCPP, it is vital for efficiently
calculating antipodal pairs for EVP’s.
26
==PAGE:28==
4.3.2
Antipodal Pairs Detection Algorithm
Antipodal pairs in convex polygons are useful for determining the optimal sweep direc-
tion in CPP algorithms. The approach presented by Vasquez-Gomez et al.[34] focuses on
vertex-vertex (V-V) antipodal pairs, as described in section 4.1.4. These pairs consist of
vertices such that two parallel lines can be drawn through each of them, and these lines
do not intersect the interior of the polygon. This is visualized in figure 19. To efficiently
identify these pairs, the original geometric algorithm inspired by Preparata and Shamos
[30] can be employed, which computes the farthest points between polygon segments
through area-based computations.
The algorithm processes each vertex of the convex polygon, identifying the farthest ver-
tex from each point along the boundary by computing the signed area of the triangle
formed by two adjacent vertices and a third candidate vertex. The farthest vertex forms
an antipodal pair with the current vertex. This method has a time complexity of O(n),
where n is the number of vertices. The algorithm can be seen in detail in Appendix D.1.
The RCPP algorithm works by advancing two pointers (p and q) along the convex bound-
ary of the polygon. The signed area of the triangle formed by p, NEXT[p], and NEXT[q]
is computed to determine the farthest point q. If q is the farthest point from p, then p and
q form an antipodal pair. Parallel edges are handled through an additional condition to
ensure unique antipodal pairs are identified without duplication. The algorithm creates
at most 3
2 × n antipodal pairs, where n is the number of vertices.
Figure 19 visualizes all non-adjacent antipodal pairs in a pentagon (grey dotted lines).
Additionally, an example of two of the parallel lines corresponding to the antipodal pairs
[0, 2] (green lines) and [0, 3] (red lines) are shown.
Figure 19: Example of Antipodal Pairs in a Convex Polygon.
4.3.3
Edge-Vertex Path Construction
The EVP is a specific variant of the BFP strategy, where the coverage lines are aligned
parallel to one of the polygon’s edges. The EVP ensures efficient coverage, and by turn-
ing on the edges of the polygon, it allows the sonar to accurately scan the interior of the
region. To determine the optimal edge for the EVP, the algorithm proposed by Vasquez-
27
==PAGE:29==
Gomez et al. [34] first computes antipodal pairs using the RCPP algorithm, as seen in
Appendix D.3. Then, it selects the pair that provides the optimal sweep direction, based
on the polygon’s geometry.
Wesley Huang [21] proposed another method to find the optimal sweep direction and
starting edge. They proposed that the optimal sweep direction for the path lines can be
determined by moving perpendicular to the minimum width of the polygon. This ap-
proach significantly reduces the number of coverage lines and simplifies the overall cover-
age path, making it particularly well-suited for a sonar-equipped ASV. Huang’s method
skips the steps of computing antipodal pairs, but for large polygons, finding the mini-
mal width is more computationally expensive, compared to the antipodal pairs approach.
The CPP approach by Vasquez-Gomez et al.[34] uses three primary algorithms to create
the optimal path. However, their approach is designed to work with a single polygon,
which can include external start and end points. With some rework, this can be adapted
to work with multiple polygons. Their three algorithms for creating an optimal coverage
path plan are described below.
The first algorithm is GetPath (Appendix D.2). This algorithm works by first computing
the vector from vertex b to bmate. This initial vector is then offset in the sweep direction,
towards the goal vertex a, by ∆init =
dx
2 , where dx is the chosen path width.
The
first offset distance ∆init is half the path width to ensure full coverage along the initial
edge. As long as intersections can be found between the current offset vector and the
polygon’s edges, the algorithm continues offsetting the previous vector by the full path
width distance dx. The found intersections ip1 and ip2 are connected to the path ρ using
the CheckAndConnect function, which is not described, but assumed to connect them
in an optimal order. A visualization of the GetPath algorithm can be seen in figure 20,
where the initial vector and the first two offset vectors and their intersection points are
shown.
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 20: First two offset vectors and the initial vector visualized.
Their next algorithm is the RotatingCalipersPathPlanner (Appendix D.3). It works by
first computing the antipodal pairs for the polygon’s vertices, which is achieved using
the algorithm created by Preparata and Shamos[30], as explained in section 4.3.2. For
each V-V antipodal pair (i, j), it computes the best EVP ρ using the BestPath algorithm,
which can be seen in detail in Appendix D.4. Then, it evaluates the total cost of the
path, considering both possible orientations (from ps to pe and vice versa), and selects the
path with the shortest total distance. Finally, this optimal path ρ is generated using the
GetPath function with the optimal vertices b and a selected, and the best path is returned.
The complexity analysis of their CPP approach results in a worst-case complexity of O(n).
4.3.4
Hard Region Edges and Obstacles in the Region
In coverage path planning algorithms, it is advantageous to be able to handle both hard
and soft region edges. Hard edges refer to boundaries the ASV is not able to cross, such
as harbor edges or similar structures. On the other hand, soft region edges are edges the
ASV is allowed to travel through.
In addition to hard region edges, obstacles may also exist within the region. Similar to
the region edges, obstacles can be categorized as hard or soft. Soft obstacles includes
areas that have already been scanned or that do not need to be scanned, in which case
no path should be planned for these areas. Hard obstacles represent physical structures,
shallow waters, or protected areas that the ASV cannot or is not allowed to enter.
29
==PAGE:31==
5
Implementation
5.1
Algorithm Overview
The CPP algorithm implemented in this the-
sis builds upon the research described in the
theory section. The algorithm is designed
to generate efficient paths for an ASV to
achieve complete and efficient coverage of a
specified region.
The process begins with exact cellular de-
composition of the input region into smaller
convex sub-polygons, which simplifies the
coverage path planning by ensuring that each
sub-polygon can be fully covered efficiently.
For each of these sub-polygons, a path is
generated using a boustrophedon coverage
strategy, which follows a systematic back-
and-forth search strategy to cover the re-
gion.
Once the paths for the individual sub-polygons
has been planned, an optimal visiting order
in which the ASV travels between them is
computed. This is achieved by sorting the
list of sub-polygons in a way that minimizes
the global travel distance when connecting
their paths, improving the overall efficiency
of the path.
Furthermore, the algorithm is equipped to
handle obstacles and hard edges within the
region.
It reroutes the planned paths to
avoid hard edges while maintaining cover-
age, leveraging adaptive techniques for rerout-
ing around the obstacles and hard region
edges efficiently. A simplified flowchart of
the implementation can be seen in figure 21.
Figure 21: Algorithm Design Flowchart
This combination of convex decomposition, localized path planning, global optimization,
and obstacle avoidance forms the core of our adaptive sonar route planning algorithm,
making it suitable for static complex marine environments. The current version cannot
handle dynamic obstacles as we had to limit the scope of the project.
5.2
Development Environment
Our algorithm is implemented in Python, with the Tkinter[16] library used for creating
the user interface.
We used GitHub for version control and code collaboration, and
30
==PAGE:32==
PyCharm as the the development environment. The algorithm has a naturally modular
structure, allowing the different parts to be easily combined in version control without
too many merging conflicts. In some cases, we also used Code With Me for live coding,
primarily for debugging and resolving merging issues.
5.3
Programming Style
The programming style used in this project is a combination of functional and object-
oriented programming. The algorithms are implemented as functions that take inputs
and produce outputs. Meanwhile, we created three classes: Polygon, Vertex, and Edge,
to represent the region and obstacles. The reason for using classes to represent the region
and obstacles is the need to handle these as mutable objects, which makes it easier to
apply operations such as rotations, edge splitting, and the removal of specific vertices.
Figure 21 illustrates a class diagram of the three classes.
Figure 21: Class diagram for the Polygon, Vertex and Edge classes.
5.4
User Interface
During the implementation phase, a user interface for the algorithm was developed. This
allowed for quick testing of different input files, algorithm choices, and parameters. Addi-
tionally, Teledyne Marine showed interest in testing the algorithm during the development
process. Providing a user interface significantly simplifies the testing process compared to
31
==PAGE:33==
setting up a code environment and learning to run the various algorithm options in code.
Furthermore, the interface visualizes relevant statistics regarding the generated path.
Figure 22 visualizes the user interface. The top-left corner contains a plot of the region
and the generated path, with the relevant data displayed below. The right pane contains
the available options for generating the path.
Figure 22: Screenshot of the user interface.
To visualize the region and the resulting decomposition and path generation, we decided
to utilize the Matplotlib[22] library’s pyplot functions. Matplotlib is a widely used
library for graphing and visualization in Python, and its pyplot module provides simple
and efficient tools for creating various types of plots. For our purposes, it allows for easy
plotting of polygons, paths, and other geometric elements. Additionally, Matplotlib’s
interactivity makes it ideal for examining the generated paths in detail.
5.5
Input File Format
The input to the algorithm consists of a region and a list of obstacles provided in a JSON
format. The region is defined as a list of 2D Cartesian coordinates representing vertices in
counterclockwise order, along with a list specifying which edges are hard. The obstacles
are represented by a list of 2D Cartesian coordinates in clockwise order. Since obstacles
can be either soft or hard, the JSON file also includes a list to define this property, where
0 defines a soft obstacle and 1 defines a hard obstacle. A region can contain both hard and
soft edges, and each edge is defined individually. However, for obstacles, it as assumed
that all edges are either soft or hard, meaning the entire obstacle is defined as either soft
32
==PAGE:34==
or hard. The structure of the JSON file is seen in figure 23. Figure 23a illustrates an
empty file and figure 23b illustrates the concave polygon with an obstacle and no hard
region edges from figure 29 in section 5.6.7.
{
"area ": {
"coordinates ": [
]
"hard_edges ": [
]
},
"obstacles ": {
" num_of_obstacles ": 0,
" hard_obstacles ": []
}
}
(a) Empty JSON file.
{
"area ": {
"coordinates ": [
[45, 75],
[237, 149],
[415, 32],
[363, 148],
[558, 178],
[745, 321],
[612, 358],
[475, 615],
[432, 594],
[375, 455],
[245, 644],
[155, 545],
[251, 367]
],
"hard_edges ": [
]
},
"obstacles ": {
" num_of_obstacles ": 1,
"obstacle_1 ": [
[548, 380],
[628, 280],
[524, 202],
[442, 209]
],
"hard_obstacles ": [1]
}
}
(b) Concave polygon with an obstacle.
Figure 23: JSON file for an empty file (a) and a concave polygon containing an obstacle
(b).
5.6
Exact Cellular Decomposition
For the algorithm of this thesis, an exact cellular decomposition method was chosen over
an approximate cellular decomposition method, as it was found to be more accurate and
suitable for precise path planning. A downside to the increased accuracy of exact cellular
decomposition, is that it is also more computationally expensive, especially for complex
regions. However, from the discussions with Teledyne Marine it was discovered, that the
main focus should be on precision and path efficiency and not execution time.
The algorithms that were implemented for exact cellular decomposition are based on the
theory described in section 4.1. First, the greedy recursive algorithm was implemented,
as it was found to optimize the convex sub-polygons by applying logic, which minimizes
33
==PAGE:35==
the sum of widths of the decomposed convex sub-polygons. This ensures the ASV has
to perform fewer turns to cover the area using a back-and-forth path planning strategy.
The disadvantages of the greedy recursive algorithm is it cannot handle obstacles, and
for complex regions it requires a lot of computational power to decompose the region.
As a result, a different decomposition algorithm called the sweep line algorithm was
implemented as well. The advantage of this algorithm is that it is capable of decomposing
around obstacles and has a better theoretical time complexity of O(n log n) vs O(n2·ncc2).
The disadvantage is that, it does not optimize the convex sub-polygons, which means
theoretically it produces sub-polygons that requires redundant turns to cover, compared
with the greedy recursive algorithm.
Finally, to fix this issue an optimization of the
sweep line algorithm was implemented as well, which can handle both obstacles while
minimizing the sum of widths.
5.6.1
Greedy Recursive Algorithm
The greedy recursive algorithm was implemented following the flowchart from figure 7. In
the first step the concave vertices are computed using the concave judgment matrix from
equation (3). Once, the concave vertices has been computed, the method is to iterate
through them, and for each concave vertex iterate through the edges of the polygon, and
create a line from the vertex that parallels the edge. This line is then used to split the
polygon into two sub-polygons, whose sum of widths is computed, and the process is
repeated for all of the concave vertices in the polygon. For a polygon with ncc concave
vertices and n edges, a single iteration computes ncc · n splits. After all the splits has
been computed, the best split (P1, P2) with the lowest sum of widths is selected for the
recursive call, until the base case is reached (e.g when ncc = 0), in which case the convex
sub-polygon is returned.
5.6.2
Splitting a Polygon
The main issue that was observed when implementing the greedy recursive algorithm,
is the step where the polygon P had to be divided into two sub-polygons (P1, P2) at a
concave vertex by a line that parallels an edge. The literature never explains how this is
handled in practice, and, as a result, we had to develop our own method for this step.
Three possible types of splits were identified as illustrated in figure 24. Figure 24a shows
the case when the line only intersects a single edge of the polygon. This is the simple
case where the polygon can simply be split along the line from the concave vertex to the
intersection point. The line can also have multiple intersection points and they can occur
in both directions from the concave vertex, as illustrated in figure 24b. The problem with
this scenario is that, the split divides the polygon into three sub-polygons, and the greedy
recursive algorithm assumes the polygon is always split into two sub-polygons before the
recursive call.
34
==PAGE:36==
(a) One valid intersection.
(b) Two valid intersections.
(c) One valid, two invalid.
Figure 24: The three types of intersections that can occur when splitting at a concave
vertex.
To fix the issue when the polygon is being split into three sub-polygons, two different
methods were considered. The first method handles the problem by modifying the greedy
recursive algorithm, such that it can recurse on more than two sub-polygons. The sec-
ond method handles the issue by always computing a single intersection point, thereby
ensuring the polygon is only divided into two sub-polygons. After implementing the sec-
ond method and comparing the results with the literature, it was chosen for the final
algorithm, as it better follows the structure from the flowchart of the greedy recursive al-
gorithm, which assumes the polygon is always split into two sub-polygons. Furthermore,
while testing, it was found that this approach also matches the results from the paper.
As the second method was chosen, the challenge was then to ensure it only selects a single
intersection point. When there are multiple intersection points, the basic idea is to select
the intersection point with the shortest distance to the concave vertex. In figure 24b, both
intersection points are theoretically valid, and in this case the upwards intersection point
should be used, as its distance to the concave vertex is smaller. However, this method
is not always applicable, as there can also exist illegal intersection points (illustrated in
figure 24c). In this case there are three intersection points, two illegal in the upwards
direction, and one legal in the downwards direction.
An intersection point is considered illegal if the line exists the region at any point be-
fore the intersection point. To determine if this is the case, the orientation property of
the cross product is utilized. Since the polygons are created in counterclockwise order,
the cross product between the direction vector of the parameterized infinite line and the
intersecting edge vector is computed, and the result used to test whether the intersec-
tion occurs inside or outside the polygon. This information is then used to judge if an
intersection point is legal or illegal. If an intersection point is deemed illegal, then all
consecutive intersection points following the same direction are also deemed illegal.
Two different methods were implemented to handle the issue with illegal intersection
points. In the first method, the intersection points are divided into two lists depending on
the direction (e.g. sign of t from equation (4)). The two lists are then sorted using Quick
Sort based on the absolute value of |t|, as this can be interpreted as the distance between
the intersection point and the concave vertex, when inserted into the parameterized line
35
==PAGE:37==
equation.
The first entry in the two lists is then compared, and the entry with the
minimum distance to the concave vertex selected. If this intersection point is deemed
illegal, the first intersection point from the opposite direction is selected. However, it was
found that sorting the lists could be skipped and the second method was based on this
approach. In this method, the unsorted list of intersection points are simply traversed,
which allows the algorithm to find the intersection points with the shortest distance to
the concave vertex in both directions in linear time instead of polynomial time. To keep
track of the intersection data three lists are used:
• Coordinates: The 2D Cartesian coordinates of the intersection points.
• Directions: The value of t from equation (4). The sign can be interpreted as the
direction, and the absolute value interpreted as the distance to the concave vertex.
• Cross Products: The cross product between the parameterized line and the in-
tersecting edge vector.
This is used to determine the relative orientation of an
intersection point, to ensure it is legal.
Since all three lists have the same length and are indexed equally, it is sufficient to traverse
only the list containing the directions. Consequently, using the same index for lookup
across the lists ensures a constant-time operation.
Once the correct intersection point has been computed, the polygon is split into two sub-
polygons by the line between the concave vertex and the intersection point. Since the
polygon P follows a counterclockwise orientation, the two sub-polygons P1 and P2 are
created as follows: Given the concave vertex cv, the intersection point ip, and the end
vertex of the intersection edge vto, the first sub-polygon is created starting from ip and
extending to vto. The path then follows the vertices of the polygon in counterclockwise
orientation from the pointer to the next vertex of vto, and continuing until reaching and
including cv. The second sub-polygon is then created starting from cv and following the
vertices of the polygon in counterclockwise orientation order until reaching and including
ip. See figure 25 for a detailed illustration.
(a) Splitting line.
(b) The two sub-polygons.
Figure 25: Splitting a polygon P into two sub-polygons P1 and P2.
5.6.3
The Recursive Call of the Greedy Recursive Algorithm
The greedy recursive algorithm computes ncc · n possible splits in each recursive call.
It then selects the best split of the polygon P, defined as the sub-polygons P1 and P2
36
==PAGE:38==
with the lowest sum of widths. In each iteration, a matrix D ∈Rncc·n is initialized, and
each entry (i, j) in D contains the sum of widths for a given split. A similar matrix is
initialized for the splits, where each entry (i, j) contains a tuple with the sub-polygons
(P1, P2). For the concave polygon from figure 13, the concave vertices are v2, v4, v7, v10,
and v13, and the polygon has a total of 13 edges. As a result, the matrix D is a 5 × 13
matrix for this example. Once all the splits has been computed, the best split with the
minimum sum of widths (mini,j Dij) is selected for the recursive call.
Figure 26 illustrates all the possible splits that occurs when splitting the concave polygon
in the concave vertex v12. This process is then repeated for the rest of the concave vertices
in order to fill out the entire matrix D (see appendix A.1). In this case, the best split
with the minimum width is D12,10 = 558.9, and the resulting sub-polygons P1 and P2 are
selected for the recursive call.
Figure 26: The splits and the sum of widths that were computed when dividing the
concave polygon at vertex v12.
The recursive call repeats the process for P1 and P2 until the base case is reached, when
ncc = 0, in which case the sub-polygon is simply returned. The sub-polygons are subse-
quently combined using a greedy approach, generating the convex decomposition. How-
ever, it was found that directly using the split P1 and P2 for the recursive call, occasionally
causes the algorithm to fail. While debugging, the issue was identified, as when a split
produced a sub-polygon, whose width was insufficient to count it is a valid polygon.
This issue was fixed, thereby increasing the robustness of the algorithm, by introducing
a preprocessing step for the sub-polygons, before applying them in the recursive call.
The fix includes a function to check if the polygon is well-formed, which ensures invalid
polygons are never selected for the recursive call. In practice, it was implemented by
verifying that the polygon has at least three vertices, no duplicate vertices and no self-
intersecting edges. Collinear vertices are also temporarily removed during this process
by forming vectors to the neighboring vertices and computing the determinant. If the
37
==PAGE:39==
determinant is zero, the area of the parallelogram formed between the vectors is also
zero, implying that the vertex is collinear with its neighbors and can be removed, while
keeping the polygon’s initial shape. For the final implementation of the greedy recursive
algorithm, it was found to be advantageous to keep the collinear vertices, as it made it
easier to merge adjacent sub-polygons for the subsequent optimization. If a sub-polygon
is not well-formed, ∞is simply inserted into the appropriate index of the D matrix,
ensuring these sub-polygons are never considered for the recursive call.
5.6.4
Computing the Width of a Polygon
As the greedy recursive algorithm requires a function to compute the width of a sub-
polygon, this function had to be implemented, following the theory from section 4.1.4.
However, the implementation of the Graham’s scan algorithm was omitted, as it was
found that the SciPy library [10] includes a built-in function to compute the convex hull
of a polygon. The function for computing the width of a polygon was implemented using
the rotating calipers algorithm, exactly as described in the flowchart in figure 10.
5.6.5
Creating the Adjacency Graph
The next part of the greedy recursive algorithm was to implement the optimization, as
well as the adjacency graph. While the set notation from equation (8) effectively de-
scribes the theory for detecting adjacent sub-polygons, in practice, it was found that
using vectors is a better approach. This was useful, both for optimizing (i.e., merging
sub-polygons) and creating the adjacency graph.
Figure 27c illustrates an example of the undirected graph for the decomposed concave
polygon from figure 27b. The adjacency graph that was computed in our implemen-
tation is different from the theoretical adjacency graph from figure 14. This is due to
our adjacency graph only considering edge adjacency, whereas they also consider vertex
adjacency. In practice, this means that they assume the ASV can travel freely between
the sub-polygons P1 and P3, and P5 and P7, whereas we do not. As a result, in our ad-
jacency graph, the shared vertex between these sub-polygons are interpreted as a closed
area, where the ASV cannot travel freely, and these connections are not included in the
adjacency graph.
(a) Original concave poly-
gon.
(b)
Decomposed
sub-
polygons.
(c) Adjacency graph for the
concave polygon.
Figure 27: A concave polygon (a) that has been decomposed with greedy recursive algo-
rithm (b) and its adjacency graph (c).
38
==PAGE:40==
Creating the adjacency graph required a function to detect adjacent sub-polygons by
examining their edges. For entirely adjacent sub-polygons, this proved to be straight-
forward to implement, as the vertices of the two edges can be compared directly, as in
definition 2. However, identifying shared edges between polygons that are only partially
adjacent proved to be more complicated.
To determine if two polygons P1 and P2 are partially adjacent, requires to iterate through
the edges of both polygons and compute the determinant of the edge vectors. If the
determinant is found to be zero, the edge vectors are determined to be collinear (i.e. lie
on the same infinite line). However, two edges can still be collinear while not overlapping,
and therefore not being partially adjacent. In such cases, the endpoints of the edges are
projected onto the common infinite line d to examine if they overlap. For an edge ei
defined between points p1 and p2, and an edge ej defined between points p3 and p4, the
endpoints are projected onto the common line d as follows:
proj p1
d
= p1 · d
d · d , proj p2
d
= p2 · d
d · d , proj p3
d
= p3 · d
d · d , proj p4
d
= p4 · d
d · d ,
To determine whether the edges overlap and, consequently, whether the two polygons
partially share an edge, the following criteria must be satisfied:
max(proj p1
d , proj p2
d ) > min(proj p3
d , proj p4
d ) ∧
max(proj p3
d , proj p4
d ) > min(proj p1
d , proj p2
d )
When applied to the decomposed sub-polygons from figure 27b, the method is used to
detect shared edges between the sub-polygons, and create the undirected adjacency graph
from figure 27c.
5.6.6
Merging Adjacent Sub-Polygons
As described in section 4.1.5, the greedy recursive algorithm often produces redundant
sub-polygons that can be merged. Deciding if it should merge the sub-polygons, depends
on the path planning strategy. Following their specific path planning strategy, they merge
sub-polygons that are entirely adjacent and have the same direction of widths. However,
as illustrated in figure 12, they merge convex sub-polygons into concave sub-polygons as
well, which is not applicable to all path planning strategies.
While exploring literature regarding various path planning strategies, some were encoun-
tered that could handle both convex and concave polygons, while others were exclusively
limited to convex polygons. To simplify the problem, it was decided early on to focus
solely on convex sub-polygons. As discussed in section 4.3, designing a path planner for
convex sub-polygons is simpler, and in most cases more optimal than one intended to
handle both convex and concave polygons.
For the optimization approach used for the greedy recursive algorithm in this thesis, the
sub-polygons that are entirely adjacent are merged, and only while the merged polygon
is still convex (see figure 28). This ensures the algorithm never plans an illegal path, that
travels beyond the region boundaries, when following parallel back-and-forth path lines.
The transit lines (connection between sub-regions’ paths) is a different case that has its
own logic, as explained in section 5.8.
39
==PAGE:41==
(a) Sub-polygons before merging.
(b) Merged sub-polygons.
Figure 28: Merging two entirely adjacent convex sub-polygons (a) into a larger convex
sub-polygon (b).
The purpose of merging sub-polygons is simply to optimize the ASV’s path, as it allows
the algorithm to plan a path for a larger polygon. This decreases both the number of
turns in the BFP path and the number of transit lines. For the concave polygon from
figure 27, this is not relevant, as none of the sub-polygons can be merged, while keeping
them convex. However, for more complex regions such as the Antwerp harbor, this proved
significantly more relevant (see section 5.6.12).
5.6.7
Sweep Line Algorithm
It was found that the greedy recursive algorithm is effective for producing the optimal
convex decomposition, as it minimizes the sum of widths. However, once obstacles are
introduced to the regions, the method is no longer applicable, as illustrated in figure 29.
This figure illustrates a concave polygon containing an obstacle, along with the convex
decompositions generated by the greedy recursive algorithm and a new decomposition
sweep line algorithm. In this case, the greedy recursive algorithm incorrectly decomposes
through the obstacle, whereas the correct approach involves decomposing around the
obstacle, such that it simply becomes an area that is avoided when scanning.
40
==PAGE:42==
(a) Concave polygon with a
single obstacle.
(b) Decomposition with the
greedy recursive algorithm.
(c) Decomposition with the
sweep line algorithm.
Figure 29: A concave polygon with a single obstacle (a) decomposed using the greedy
recursive algorithm (b) and sweep line algorithm (c).
The issue of decomposing regions with obstacles was fixed by exploring different decom-
position algorithms, where the sweep line algorithm was discovered. The advantage of
this algorithm is that it decomposes a region into convex sub-polygons, while accounting
for obstacles. However, its disadvantage is that it does not produce the optimal convex
sub-polygons. As mentioned earlier, the objective is not only to decompose the polygon
into convex sub-polygons while avoiding obstacles, but also to optimize the sub-polygons,
thereby minimizing the number of turns required to cover the region. The greedy recur-
sive algorithm addresses this issue by minimizing the sum of widths, whereas the sweep
line algorithm simply decomposes the polygon by splitting at concave vertices using a
vertical sweep line.
Initially, the sweep line algorithm was implemented directly using the theory from section
4.1.10 and an approximation of the convex polygon with an obstacle from the paper (see
figure 30).
First, the vertices of the region and obstacle are combined and sorted in
ascending order based on their x-coordinate using the Insertion Sort algorithm. Each
vertex is assigned an event as described in definition 3 and 4:
• OPEN (v0)
• CLOSE(v4)
• SPLIT(v8)
• MERGE(v11)
• FLOOR CONVEX (v1, v2, v3, v9)
• FLOOR CONCAVE(v10)
• CEIL CONVEX (v5, v6, v7, v13)
• CEIL CONCAVE(v12, v14)
The vertices are iterated through and cells are opened and closed appropriately following
the theory. If the vertex is a SPLIT or MERGE event, vertical rays are shot both up-
wards and downwards, and the intersections with the edges in both directions are used
for closing and opening cells. If the vertex is a FLOOR CONCAVE, a ray is shot only
41
==PAGE:43==
in the upwards direction. Similarly, if the vertex is a CEIL CONCAVE, a ray is shot
only in the downwards direction. Initially, the goal was to use a balanced binary tree to
keep track of the edges that were being intersected. However, a simpler approach, where
the edges are simply iterated through, was selected. This choice was made for ease of
implementation in the early stages of development, even though it resulted in a slightly
worse time complexity.
Each cell in the sweep line algorithm contains a ceiling and floor list for the vertices. The
cells can then be transformed into an instance of our polygon class using the vertices of
the floor list and reversed ceiling list respectively. This ensures the vertices of the final
sub-polygons follows a counterclockwise orientation.
(a) Convex polygon with a single obstacle.
(b) Decomposition sub-polygons.
Figure 30: Approximation of the convex polygon containing a single obstacle (a), and its
decomposition using the sweep line algorithm (b).
5.6.8
Extending the Sweep Line Algorithm
The sweep line algorithm is designed to handle a single obstacle inside a convex polygon.
The issue with this approach arose, when applying it to concave polygons and to poly-
gons that contains multiple obstacles. Modifying the sweep line algorithm to be able to
handle these cases, required several extensions. The main issue that was encountered is
identifying the correct cell to which the vertices should be appended, as the number of
open cells increases significantly for concave polygons. Furthermore, when shooting rays
upwards or downwards in a concave polygon, there are often multiple intersection points
in the same ray direction, which further complicates the process.
The first issue was fixed by improving the method to find the correct cell when appending
the vertices. This requires maintaining a list of which cells are active and closed. Only
the active cells are then considered in the search, and the ceiling and floor list for each
active cell is traversed to identify the correct cell. For the events that split the polygon,
the problem was resolved by examining the vertices on the intersecting edge. Since the
region is formed in counterclockwise order, and the obstacles are formed in clockwise or-
der, the vertex at the end of the edge that is being intersected by the sweep line is always
to the left of the current event. This issue again involves traversing the active cells and
encoding all possible scenarios considering the ray direction, the event type of the vertex,
and the event type of the vertex at the end of the intersecting edge (see Appendix D.5 for
pseudo-code). A new event type for the collinear vertices also had to be encoded, since
42
==PAGE:44==
collinear vertices are allowed in the polygon, which is not explained in the paper. In this
case no action is performed, but the vertices should still be appended to the correct cells.
The sweep line algorithm assumes all vertices have distinct x-coordinates. If two vertices
share the same x-coordinate, the coordinate system must be rotated until all x-coordinates
are distinct. To resolve this issue, it was necessary to implement a function to check
whether two vertices share the same x-coordinate. If this condition holds, the region
and obstacles are rotated by a sufficiently small angle until all vertices have unique x-
coordinates. This was achieved by iterating through the vertices and applying the rotation
matrix as described in section 4.1.11. After the rotation of the coordinate system by θ
degrees, the sweep line algorithm is applied to create the decomposed cells, and the region
and obstacles are then rotated back by −θ degrees, to restore the original coordinate
system.
5.6.9
Sweep Line Algorithm Time Complexity
The theoretical time complexity of the original sweep line algorithm from the paper
is O(n log n). However, as it was modified for this thesis, the time complexity of the
algorithm is a bit worse. Firstly, Insertion Sort was used for sorting the vertices instead
of an O(n log n) based sorting algorithm such as Merge Sort. Secondly, the balanced
binary tree used to keep track of the intersecting edges was not implemented. Finally,
the issue with the algorithm not being able to handle vertices that share an x-coordinate
was also fixed. To reanalyze the time complexity, there are four primary steps:
• Rotating the coordinate system.
• Sorting the combined vertices of the region and obstacles.
• Iterating through the sorted vertices and performing the action of the events.
• Rotating the coordinate system back to the original.
Let n be the number of vertices for the region and m be the number of vertices for
the obstacles. Determining if the coordinate system should be rotated requires iterating
through the vertices and comparing each x-coordinate. Worst case this operation has
a time complexity of O(n + m). Rotating the coordinate system requires applying a
rotation matrix to each vertex (constant time) with a sufficiently small angle, until all
vertices have distinct x-coordinates. Ignoring constant time operations, this has a time
complexity of O(n + m). Overall the rotation step has a time complexity of
O(n + m) + O(n + m) = O(n + m)
The next step is to sort the vertices in ascending order by their x-coordinate.
Since
Insertion Sort is applied, which has polynomial time complexity, this step has a time
complexity of:
O((n + m)2)
Computing the intersections between the edges and the sweep line requires iterating
through each edge, which has a time complexity of O(n+m). Additionally, for each event,
identifying the correct cell to append the vertex involves a test with a time complexity
43
==PAGE:45==
of O(k), where k is the number of cells, and k < (n + m). Hence, the time complexity
for this step is:
O((n + m)) · O(k) = O((n + m) · k)
Finally, rotating the coordinate system back to its original is another rotation operation
with a time complexity of:
O(n + m)
By applying the modifications mentioned above, the time complexity of the sweep line
algorithm implemented in this thesis is:
O(n + m) + O((n + m)2) + O((n + m) · k) + O(n + m) = O((n + m)2)
5.6.10
Combination of the Greedy Recursive and Sweep Line Algorithm
In theory, the greedy recursive algorithm produces a better convex decomposition than
the sweep line algorithm. However, as mentioned earlier its disadvantage is it cannot han-
dle obstacles. As a result, an experiment was conducted with a combination of the two
algorithms, in order to test if this solution performs better than the sweep line algorithm.
This was achieved by first decomposing the region into a list of convex sub-polygons using
the greedy recursive algorithm. Next, the sub-polygons that overlaps with an obstacle
are merged, and the sweep line algorithm is applied to only this part of the region.
Figure 31 shows an example of using the combination algorithm on a concave polygon
than contains an obstacle. After decomposing the polygon with the greedy recursive al-
gorithm, the sub-polygons that overlaps with the obstacle are identified. This requires to
perform a point-in-polygon and edge intersection test. The naive approach is to simply
iterate through the obstacles and sub-polygons in order to perform the aforementioned
tests. Let n denote the number of decomposed sub-polygons and m the number of obsta-
cles, the naive approach requires (n · m) iterations. However, a more efficient approach
was identified, where the bounding boxes of the obstacles and sub-polygons are com-
pared, as these can be computed in constant time, when creating the polygon objects.
By querying an R-tree, comparing each obstacle and sub-polygon is avoided, which has
the potential to prune away large portions of the search space by excluding branches,
whose bounding boxes do not intersect. However, the R-tree approach only has a bet-
ter execution time in cases, when the obstacles affects a small number of the sub-polygons.
44
==PAGE:46==
(a) Merged sub-polygons containing the
obstacle.
(b) Decomposed sub-polygons using the
combination algorithm.
Figure 31: Merging sub-polygons affected by an obstacle (a) and decomposing the merged
polygon using the sweep line algorithm (b).
As described in section 4.1.14, the average time complexity of querying an R-tree is
O(log n) and worst case is O(n).
When the obstacles affect a large number of sub-
polygons (i.e. there are multiple intersecting bounding boxes), the time complexity using
an R-tree goes towards the naive approach of O(n + m). For large search spaces, it was
found best to avoid the naive approach, as for each iteration the algorithm has to perform
the point-in-polygon and edge intersection tests. For the implementation of the R-tree,
it was chosen to utilize an existing library called RTree[31], that comes with a function
to compute intersections between minimum bounding rectangles.
The point-in-polygon test was straightforward to implement, since all of the sub-polygons
are convex, which ensures that any point inside a sub-polygon consistently lies on the
same side of the polygon’s edges. Specifically, for a convex polygon in counterclockwise
order, the cross product between the edge vector (formed by consecutive vertices of the
polygon), and the vector from the edge’s starting vertex to the test point are consistently
positive, if the point is inside the polygon.
However, simply performing the point-in-polygon test is not always sufficient to check for
intersections with the obstacles. For instance, a sub-polygon can overlap with an obstacle
without containing any of its vertices. As a result, an edge intersection test is performed
as well, to determine if the edges of the obstacle intersects the edges of a sub-polygon.
5.6.11
Optimized Sweep Line Algorithm
After implementing the combination algorithm, it was discovered that the sweep line
algorithm could be modified to also minimize the sum of widths, thereby ensuring the
optimal sub-polygons are created from the beginning. As the combination algorithm is
experimental and not a state-of-the-art algorithm, the optimized sweep line algorithm
was implemented as well. During the research, it was discovered that the optimal sweep
direction is perpendicular to one of the edges of the region or obstacles. As a result, to
obtain the optimal decomposition, the sweep line algorithm is applied with each edge
45
==PAGE:47==
serving as the sweep direction. In each iteration, the sum of widths are then computed
for each convex decomposition, allowing the algorithm to select the optimal convex sub-
polygons with the lowest sum of widths.
Modifying the sweep line algorithm to the optimized sweep line algorithm required less
modifications than initially presumed. Instead of changing the algorithm to be able to
handle non-vertical sweep lines, the existing sweep line algorithm could be utilized by
computing rotations of the region and obstacles. In practice, this is handled by iterating
through each edge of the region and obstacles and computing the angle θ to rotate the
edge to the vertical direction. For an edge vector v = [x, y], the angle of v relative to the
positive x-axis is computed as:
ϕ = arctan2(y, x)
As the vertical direction corresponds to an angle of π/2 then θ is computed as:
θ = π
2 −ϕ
Here θ defines the angle to rotate the region and obstacles, such that the edge vector v
has an upwards vertical direction, which allows the existing sweep line algorithm to be
applied. After the convex decomposition has been computed, the sub-polygons and ob-
stacles are rotated back to their original position by −θ. Figure 32 illustrates the convex
decompositions using the optimized sweep line algorithm applied to the concave polygon
that contains an obstacle from figure 29. The sum of widths for each decomposition
is displayed as well. In this case, the convex decomposition from sub-figure (g), which
has a sum of widths of D = 628.85 meters, is selected as the optimal convex sub-polygons.
46
==PAGE:48==
(a) D = 653.95m
(b) D = 719.43m
(c) D = 643.81m
(d) D = 691.05m
(e) D = 631.11m
(f) D = 749.57m
(g) D = 628.85m
(h) D = 646.848m
(i) D = 699.48m
(j) D = 642.35m
(k) D = 645.43m
(l) D = 628.9m
(m) D = 647.86m
Figure 32: The convex decompositions obtained from the optimized sweep line algorithm
for a concave polygon.
Since the optimized sweep line algorithm is an extension of the original sweep line algo-
rithm, it has a worse time complexity. Let n and m denote the number of edges for the
region and obstacles respectively. Then for each edge, it has to rotate both the region
and obstacles. For a single edge, this operation has a time complexity of:
O(n + m)
After each rotation, it has to apply the original sweep line algorithm which has a known
time complexity of:
O((n + m)2)
Thus for a single edge, the algorithm has a time complexity of:
O(n + m) + O((n + m)2) = O((n + m)2)
47
==PAGE:49==
Repeating this process for all (n+m) edges, results in the time complexity of the optimized
sweep line algorithm as:
(n + m) · O((n + m)2) = O((n + m)3)
5.6.12
Decomposition of the Antwerp Harbor
Similar to the AAU project, the different decomposition algorithms were also tested on a
real-world region. The AAU project had extracted the data from a part of the Antwerp
harbor, which was converted into our JSON format. It required some preprocessing of
the dataset. First, the vertices were provided in clockwise order and had to be reversed
to counterclockwise order. The original dataset also contained obstacles which were not
identifiable from a satellite image. As a result, these objects were removed from the
dataset, as they might have been dynamic obstacles, which is not the focus of this the-
sis. This simplifies the region significantly, as it reduces the number of concave vertices
drastically.
Figure 33a illustrates the region from a satellite image, while figures 33b and 33c show the
simplified and realistic extracted regions, respectively. As the original dataset contains
jetties and quays, two versions of the Antwerp harbor were extracted. First, a simpli-
fied version was extracted, where the jetties and quays are removed, and then a realistic
version was extracted, where they are included. To ensure the most accurate path, they
should theoretically be included, as they are a static part of the harbor where the ASV
should navigate around. However, since the Antwerp harbor is a very challenging region
it was decided to include both versions. When excluding the static obstacles, the Antwerp
harbor has a total of 50 vertices out of which 24 are concave. For the realistic Antwerp
harbor, it has a total of 133 vertices out of which 66 are concave.
(a) Satellite image of the
harbor.
(b) Simplified version of the har-
bor.
(c) Realistic version of the har-
bor.
Figure 33: The Antwerp harbor as a satellite image (a), simplified extracted region (b),
and realistic extracted region including the jetties and quays (c).
Since the Antwerp harbor is a complex polygon which is computationally heavy to de-
compose, it was decided to utilize the HPC service provided by DTU 2.0.1. The tests
were performed with identical configuration of the HPC, and within the same time span
to ensure the most fair comparison.
48
==PAGE:50==
The first test is of the sweep line algorithm applied to the Antwerp harbor (both simple
and realistic), and the results are illustrated in figure 34. For the simple Antwerp harbor
it produced a total of 35 convex sub-polygons and completed the process in 0.082 seconds.
For the realistic Antwerp harbor it produced 97 convex sub-polygons and completed the
process in 0.630 seconds.
(a) Decomposed simplified harbor.
(b) Decomposed realistic harbor.
Figure 34: Decomposition of both the simplified (a) and realistic (b) Antwerp harbor
using the sweep line algorithm.
The greedy recursive algorithm was also applied to the Antwerp harbor. However, it
was found to be only applicable to the simplified version, as the realistic version proved
too complex. Applying it to the simplified Antwerp polygon produced 223 convex sub-
polygons. This illustrated one of the issues with the greedy recursive algorithm, where it
often produces redundant sub-polygons. This is when optimization was relevant, as by
merging the adjacent sub-polygons following the criteria from section 5.6.6, the number
could be reduced drastically from 223 to 45 convex sub-polygons. Figure 35 visualizes
the convex decomposition before and after optimization.
(a) Initial decomposed sub-polygons.
(b) Optimized sub-polygons.
Figure 35: Convex decomposition of the simplified Antwerp harbor with the greedy recur-
sive algorithm, visualized as the initial decomposed sub-polygons (a) and the optimized
sub-polygons (b).
49
==PAGE:51==
For the realistic Antwerp region, the greedy recursive algorithm was computationally un-
realistic. The algorithm was tested through the HPC with a time limit of 48 hours, and
even after this time period it had not finished. We suspect that providing additional time
would not resolve the issue, as it seemed to be a specific case that caused infinite recur-
sion. Solving this issue would require a significant debugging effort due to its complexity,
leading us to prioritize other tasks.
It was found that the optimized sweep line algorithm was applicable to both versions
of the Antwerp harbor, and it completed the decomposition process within a realistic
time limit in both cases. The convex decompositions are visualized in figure 36. For
the simplified Antwerp harbor it produced 35 convex sub-polygons and completed the
process in 5.84 seconds. For the realistic Antwerp harbor it produced 93 sub-polygons
and completed the process in 51.394 seconds.
(a) Simplified region.
(b) Realistic region.
Figure 36: The convex decomposition of the simplified (a) and realistic (b) Antwerp
harbor using the optimized sweep line algorithm.
5.6.13
Decomposition Algorithm Performance Measurements
Table 1, 2 and 3 compare the greedy recursive, sweep line and optimized sweep line algo-
rithms. The algorithms were applied to the concave polygon from figure 27a, and both
the simplified and realistic Antwerp harbor regions. Since the greedy recursive algorithm
cannot handle obstacles, these tests were conducted on regions without obstacles. The
greedy recursive algorithm was tested both with and without optimization (e.g. merging
of sub-polygons) when relevant. To measure the performance of a convex decomposition,
the sum of widths was used as the metric, as it was found that the number of turns in the
path for the individual sub-polygons were theoretically correlated with the sum of widths.
Concave Polygon
GR
SL
OSL
Number of Sub-Polygons
8
8
7
Sum of Widths
647.86m
728.88m
628.85m
Execution Time
0.69s
0.01s
0.13s
Table 1: Performance data using a concave polygon for the greedy recursive, sweep line
and optimized sweep line algorithms.
50
==PAGE:52==
Antwerp (Simplified)
GR
GRO
SL
OSL
Number of Sub-Polygons
223
45
35
36
Sum of Widths
3746.45m
3190.7m
3129.09m
2606.36m
Execution Time (seconds)
3926.244s
4016.18s
0.082s
2.91s
Table 2: Performance data using the simplified Antwerp harbor for the greedy recursive,
greedy recursive optimized, sweep line and optimized sweep line algorithms.
Antwerp (Realistic)
GR
SL
OSL
Number of Sub-Polygons
N/A
97
93
Sum of Widths
N/A
4232.32m
3311.2m
Execution Time
N/A
0.28s
38.46
Table 3: Performance data using the realistic Antwerp harbor for the sweep line and
optimized sweep line algorithm.
In each table 1, 2, and 3, it was found that the optimized sweep line algorithm produced
the most optimal convex decomposition measured by the sum of widths. Furthermore, it
significantly outperformed the greedy recursive algorithm regarding the execution time.
The greedy recursive algorithm was found to perform reasonable well measured on the
sum of widths of the convex decomposition. However, its execution time for the more
complex polygons (e.g. the Antwerp harbor) was considerably poor. Oppositely, the
sweep line algorithm performed best in terms of execution time in all tests due to its
simplicity. The trade-off was that it performed worst on the concave polygon from table
1 measured by the sum of widths.
There is an interesting case with the sweep line algorithm, as it performed better than the
greedy recursive algorithm on the simplified Antwerp harbor from table 2 measured by the
sum of widths. This is due to the unique structure and complexity of the harbor, where a
greedy approach does not necessarily yield the best result. However, when optimizing the
convex sub-polygons, it was found that the performance between the sweep line and the
greedy recursive algorithms was approximately equal with a difference of 1.93%. How-
ever, when comparing the execution times, the sweep line algorithm outperformed the
greedy recursive algorithm by nearly a factor of 39, 000 on the simplified Antwerp harbor.
When obstacles were introduced, finding the optimal convex decomposition was more
challenging. As explained earlier, the only state-of-the-art algorithms that are capable of
handling obstacles are the sweep line and optimized sweep line algorithms, whereas the
greedy recursive algorithm fails to decompose around them, as visualized in figure 29. To
utilize the greedy recursive algorithm for handling obstacles, the combination algorithm
was introduced as an experiment. However, since the combination algorithm is exper-
imental and not a published algorithm, its performance was found to be fluctuant and
depending heavily on the construction of the obstacles. No cases were identified where it
managed to outperform the optimized sweep line algorithm.
To summarize the combination algorithm shortly, it uses the greedy recursive algorithm
to decompose the empty region. Then it identifies which sub-polygons are affected by
the obstacles and merges these appropriately. The merged polygon is then decomposed
51
==PAGE:53==
using the sweep line algorithm. It was observed that the biggest factor to predict if the
combination algorithm performed better than the sweep line algorithm, were the num-
ber of overlapping sub-polygons and obstacles. If the obstacles overlapped with many
sub-polygons, it often performed worse since it had to remove multiple of the optimized
convex sub-polygons produced by the greedy recursive algorithm. Oppositely, if the ob-
stacles only affected a few sub-polygons, the combination often performed better than
the sweep line algorithm, as it left the majority of the sub-polygons produced by the
greedy recursive algorithm unchanged.
In order to evaluate the convex decomposition of a concave polygon with an obstacle,
the concave polygon from figure 29 was used. The decomposition algorithms that are
evaluated are the sweep line, combination and optimized sweep line algorithms, and the
results are summarized in table 4.
Using the sum of widths as performance metric,
it is observed that the optimized sweep line produced the best convex decomposition.
The second-best algorithm is the combination algorithm, which, in this specific case,
outperformed the sweep line algorithm.
However, it was also possible to construct a
different region where this was not the case. In terms of execution time, the combination
algorithm took significantly longer than the sweep line algorithm, and approximately
one-third of the execution time of the optimized sweep line algorithm.
Concave Polygon (Obstacle)
SL
CO
OSL
Number of Sub-Polygons
13
13
12
Sum of Widths
801.63m
786.61m
711.55m
Execution Time
0.01s
0.85s
0.27s
Table 4: Performance data for the sweep line, combination, and optimized sweep line
algorithms using a concave polygon with an obstacle.
5.7
Implementation of Coverage Path Planning
In our implementation of CPP, we adopted the approach described in section 4.3.1 as a
baseline. This approach was primarily designed for a UAV, which benefit from distinct
movement properties and greater freedom to operate outside the region of interest, com-
pared to an ASV. A UAV can typically avoid obstacles by flying above them and in most
cases do not encounter hard edges within the region. In contrast, an ASV must navigate
around obstacles and are frequently constrained by hard region edges, such as when op-
erating inside harbors. Additionally, the theoretical approach from 4.3.1, focuses solely
on covering a single polygon and did not include methods for ordering and connecting
multiple sub-polygons’ paths into one continuous path.
As a result, the researched approaches did not fully address these limitations, necessitat-
ing modifications to adapt them for a sonar-equipped ASV. The CPP implementation in
this thesis evolved through three distinct versions, each building upon the previous one to
better address these challenges. A comparison of the three versions and their respective
improvements is provided below.
52
==PAGE:54==
Version 1: Naive Path Connection
Version 1 was the initial adaptation of the baseline CPP algorithm and focused on directly
implementing the three algorithms from the researched papers as described in section 4.3.
Key Features:
• Constructed paths in ”real time”, connecting intersections as they appeared without
optimization.
• Iterated through all antipodal pairs, computing multiple paths for each, then se-
lecting the path that minimized the total travel distance and number of turns.
• Lacked mechanisms for handling obstacles or hard edges.
• Used DFS to sort the visiting order of the sub-polygons based on the adjacency
graph.
• DFS often resulted in suboptimal connections between sub-polygons, leading to
longer travel distances.
Limitations:
• Inefficient due to repeated computation of multiple paths for all antipodal pairs.
• Did not consider global optimization of connections between sub-polygons.
• Naive approach to path construction led to unnecessary travel distance and turns.
Version 2: Enhanced Path Planning
Version 2 introduced major improvements by decoupling intersection computation from
path construction and adopting better optimization and sub-polygon ordering techniques.
This was done by adapting and improving on version 1’s algorithms to better suit the
needs of an ASV.
Improvements over version 1:
• Intersections separately, allowing more informed decision-making afterwards during
path connection.
• Introduced simple logic to navigate around hard region edges and single obstacles.
• Applied a TSP solution to sort the sub-polygons based on centroid distances, im-
proving visiting order to further minimize travel distance.
• Reduced the number of paths computed for each sub-polygon to one path for each
antipodal pair by leveraging the RCPP algorithm to identify the key vertices (a, b,
and bmate).
Remaining Limitations:
• Did not account for multiple obstacles, limiting its practical applicability.
• Complex regions occasionally resulted in suboptimal paths for some of the sub-
polygons due to vertex selection inaccuracies in the RCPP.
53
==PAGE:55==
Version 3: Final Implementation
Version 3 addressed the limitations of version 2 by introducing better obstacle and hard
edge handling and implemented a simpler, more reliable approach to selecting the three
key vertices. Additionally, a better sorting method was implemented to take start and
end points of each sub-polygon’s path into consideration to further minimize the total
transit distance.
Improvements over version 2:
• Enhanced obstacle avoidance to account for multiple obstacles, ensuring valid con-
nections between all sub-polygons.
• Introduced an improved TSP solution that evaluated four start-end pairs for each
sub-polygon to further minimize the total transit distance.
• Replaced the rotating calipers method with a new sweep direction approach:
– Selected the longest edge in each sub-polygon as the parallel line.
– Used the vertex furthest away perpendicularly to determine the sweep direc-
tion.
Advantages:
• Accounted for real-world constraints, including obstacles and hard region edges.
• Simplified logic while ensuring robust and efficient path planning.
• Provided a reliable and adaptable CPP solution for a sonar-equipped ASV in various
complex regions.
Next, the implementation of the third version is presented in detail, highlighting details
from the prior versions where relevant. Following this, an an overview of the performance
and generated paths is provided, on the same concave polygon, using each version to
illustrate the advancements in the final version. Additionally, it is discussed how devia-
tions from the original theory improved performance, when planning a coverage path for
a sonar-equipped ASV.
First, the computation of the optimal path for a single sub-polygon is described. This
method was used to compute the paths for all three versions of our CPP implementation.
The key difference between the versions path planning lies in the selection of the points
used to generate the paths.
5.7.1
Back-and-Forth Path
To plan the optimal path for each sub-polygon, the BFP strategy from 4.3.1 was used as
the baseline, and used an EVP search pattern, as described in section 4.3.3, to generate
the path lines. This strategy was chosen, as it minimized the number of turns required
for coverage of the region while maximizing the distance traveled between turns.
Other search patterns, such as zig-zag or spiral, also provide near-complete coverage
but typically require more turns or have other disadvantages compared to the EVP, as
visualized in figure 37 below.
54
==PAGE:56==
(a) 8 turns, 540m distance, 100%
coverage.
(b) 8 turns, 902m distance,
100% coverage.
(c) 8 turns, 500m distance,
99.14% coverage.
Figure 37: Comparison of an EVP (a), zig-zag (b) and spiral (c) search patterns on the
same polygon. The green area indicates path coverage, yellow overlap area, and red is
the outlying areas, using a 10m path width.
Figure 37 compares an optimal EVP search pattern with an optimal zigzag and spiral pat-
tern for the same region. While all patterns require 8 turns, the EVP and zigzag achieves
100% coverage, whereas the spiral leaves small unscanned areas inside the region. The
zig-zag pattern does not scan any of the area outside the region, but does have a large
overlap area compared to the others. The spiral pattern also has a larger overlap and a
smaller outlying area than the EVP, but requires the ASV to turn inside the polygon,
which results in inaccurate scans when using a sonar. Here, the EVP and zig-zag turn
on the edges, which ensures the entire area inside the region is scanned without turns
interrupting the parallel lines.
Before creating the EVP path for a sub-polygon, its collinear vertices must be removed.
A collinear vertex is one that lies on the edge between two other vertices. Removing
these vertices reduces the total number of vertices in the sub-polygon, which optimizes
the subsequent computation of the ideal vertices used in the EVP. Additionally, collinear
vertices potentially causes errors during the path planning, as the goal vertex a in the
EVP must not lie on the edge used to draw the parallel path lines between vertices b and
its counterclockwise neighbor vertex bmate.
5.7.2
Finding Vertices b, bmate, and a
In versions 1 and 2, antipodal pairs were used to identify the three key vertices: b, bmate,
and a. For each vertex vi of a sub-polygon P = {v0, v1, . . . , vn−1}, its antipodal vertex
vj is found as the furthest vertex relative to vi. Duplicate pairs, such as (i, j) and (j, i),
are removed to avoid redundant calculations when computing the path. Additionally,
neighboring pairs are removed, as they can result in faulty path planning. Specifically, if
the vertices a and b are neighbors, the computed path from b and bmate toward the goal
vertex a may cause bmate and a to coincide, leading to errors during path construction.
A specific edge case arises when handling triangular sub-polygons during the removal
of neighboring vertices. For these, the hypotenuse of the triangle is identified, and the
vertices along this edge are retained as b and bmate. The remaining vertex is then assigned
as a, ensuring that the sweep direction is correct. This adjustment helps avoid errors in
path construction and ensures the optimal path for triangle sub-polygons is planned. A
visualization of this can be seen in figure 38.
55
==PAGE:57==
Figure 38: Triangle region EVP vertices selection.
The initial vertex selection approach started by generating a list of antipodal pairs
[(i1, j1), . . . , (iq, jq)], where q represents the number of antipodal pairs for the current
sub-polygon. For each pair, four potential paths are generated. The first path used i1
as vertex b, where bmate is b’s counterclockwise neighbor, and j1 as goal vertex a. The
second path was computed by swapping b and bmate, while keeping a unchanged. This
helped evaluate the impact of changing the direction of traversal at that antipodal pair
to check for a better path.
For the next two paths, the vertices a and b were swapped. In these paths, the path
started at the previous goal vertex a and moved towards the original start vertex b, ap-
plying the same logic to determine the corresponding counterclockwise neighbor for each
path for vertex b. In the first reversed path, bmate was set to b’s counterclockwise neigh-
bor, while in the second path, bmate was swapped with b. These four paths allowed us to
compare different configurations and select the optimal of these paths.
This approach was essential for exploring all possible ways to connect the antipodal
points, ensuring that the most efficient path was chosen for each configuration.
To select the optimal of these paths, the following set of heuristics was applied: (1) the
total distance traveled (in meters), (2) the number of turns, and (3) the type of turns.
Turns were classified into three categories based on the angle between their consecutive
path lines:
• Difficult turns: Angles less than 45◦.
• Medium turns: Angles between 45◦and 90◦.
• Easy turns: Angles greater than 90◦.
To ensure accurate turn classification, the maximum angle was limited to 180◦. If the
angle exceeded this limit, it was recalculated using the complementary path line as the
56
==PAGE:58==
starting point. A weight was then applied to both the total number of turns and each
turn classification. Difficult turns were given a weight 10 times higher than easy turns,
and medium turns a weight 5 times higher than the easy turns. These weights were found
through experimentation, and worked by penalizing paths with sharper turns more, fa-
voring those with fewer and smoother turns. This approach ensured that all key path
metrics could be fairly compared, striking a balance where travel distance was not dis-
proportionately weighted compared to turns.
While this method produced near-optimal paths in most cases, it required excessive
computation, as four paths were generated for each sub-polygon. First, computing the
antipodal pairs was performed in O(n) time, where n is the number of vertices in the
polygon. To find the intersections between an offset vector and the polygon’s edges, the
time complexity was O(m), where m is the number of edges in the polygon. The GetPath
implementation closely followed the one described in section 4.3.3, which had a runtime
of O(n), due to the antipodal computation call.
To find the optimal path among the four computed paths, all i points in each path must
be added together and compared, with a time complexity of 4 · O(i). Additionally, in
the GetPath function, for each vertex n, m edges must be checked for intersections. This
leads to the total runtime for computing the near-optimal EVP path for a sub-polygon
as:
4 · O(n) · O(m) + 4 · O(i) = O(n · m + i)
To address the inefficiencies of generating multiple paths for each sub-polygon, in version
2, the RotatingCalipersPathPlanner function was implemented, as described in sec-
tion 4.3.2. This approach evaluates all antipodal pairs for a given sub-polygon, similar
to version 1, but selects the optimal pair using the BestPath function instead of trying
all four different combinations. The BestPath function starts by determining the relative
orientation of the vertices to assign b and a, which define the starting point and sweep
direction. It evaluates turning angles between consecutive path lines to minimize sharp
turns and identifies alternative candidates b2 and a2 for the sweep direction. By compar-
ing the distances between b and a, as well as b2 and a2, the algorithm selects the path
with fewer turns and shorter overall distance as the optimal path ρ. This path is then
generated using the GetPath function.
The BestPath function runs in constant time O(1), and since only one path is generated
for each sub-polygon without the need to compare four paths, the runtime of our CPP
version 2 is reduced to:
O(1) + O(n) · O(m) = O(n · m)
While this approach reduced computational cost by avoiding redundant path generation,
it relied heavily on antipodal pairs, which were observed to not always guarantee an op-
timal EVP. These non-optimal sub-polygon paths can be seen highlighted in figure 39a,
and the optimal in figure 39b. The full regions can be viewed in Appendix A.2.
57
==PAGE:59==
(a) Non-optimal paths generated
by version 2.
(b) Optimal paths generated by
version 3.
Figure 39: Zoomed in comparison of the non-optimal path lines from version 2 (a), and
the optimal from version 3 (b).
In version 3, the limitations of relying solely on antipodal pairs was addressed by devel-
oping a more robust yet simpler method for identifying the three key vertices. For each
sub-polygon, its longest edge was identified. Then, the vertices connected by this edge
were designated as b and bmate, while vertex a was determined by calculating the perpen-
dicular distances from the edge to the remaining vertices and selecting the vertex farthest
from the edge. This ensured that the sweep direction for the EVP was optimal and made
the method applicable even for triangular sub-polygons. It is a similar approach as the
one presented by Huang in section 4.3.3.
The two sub-figures 40a and 40b visualizes a comparison between a simple BFP using
the EVP search pattern. Sub-figure (a) shows an optimal path, determined by correctly
selecting the vertices b, bmate, and a, where b and bmate are identified based on the longest
edge of the polygon. In contrast, sub-figure (b) visualizes a non-optimal path. By using
the optimal vertices for the EVP, the same region can be covered using just half the
number turns. This comparison highlights the importance of selecting the optimal three
vertices for each sub-polygon when computing a coverage path.
58
==PAGE:60==
(a) Optimal EVP with 6 turns
(b) Non-optimal EVP with 12 turns.
Figure 40: Visual comparison of an optimal EVP (a) and a non-optimal (b).
5.7.3
Constructing the Edge-Vertex Path
To construct the final CPP version, the GetPath function was modified to create a new
function, get path intersections. This function takes as input a polygon, the path
width dx, the vertices b, bmate, a, and the boundary box for the polygon.
The first step of the new function was to determine the sweep direction for the EVP for the
given polygon. It begins by defining a vector vinit from vertex b to bmate, and another vec-
tor vba from b to a. Then, it calculates the perpendicular vector vperp to vinit by swapping
the x- and y-components of vinit and negating the x-component. The perpendicular vec-
tor vperp is then normalized to a unit vector to ensure that the direction is scale-invariant.
Next, the sign of the dot product between vperp and vba is calculated using the numpy
sign function. This function returns either −1 or +1, indicating whether vertex a lies
in the direction of vperp. A positive sign means a lies in the direction of vperp, while a
negative sign indicates that a lies in the opposite direction. This determines the sweep
direction, used to offset the path lines towards the goal vertex a.
In the original GetPath algorithm it sets the initial vector offset distance ∆init to half the
path width dx. This approach fails for narrow polygons or when dx is too large relative
to the polygon dimensions, as the offset vector may move outside the polygon and fail
to find the initial intersections with the polygon. To address this issue, we calculate the
perpendicular distance from vertex a to the vector vinit and adjust ∆init as follows:
∆init =
(
dist(a,vinit)
2
,
if dx > dist(a, vinit),
dx
2 ,
otherwise.
This ensures that a path can be planned even for polygons that are too narrow for the
chosen path width dx, as the offset distance ∆init is set to half the polygon’s diameter in
the sweep direction, ensuring initial intersections are always found. For wider polygons,
∆init defaults to the original GetPath calculation, being half the path width dx value, as
detailed in section 4.3.3.
59
==PAGE:61==
Next, using the computed data, the first offset vector was initialized as described in section
4.3.3, by offsetting vinit in the sweep direction by a distance of ∆init. Small inaccuracies
in data representation during intersection calculations could result in missing one or
both of the required intersections with the polygon’s edges. To address this issue, the
polygon’s boundary box was computed using its minx, maxx, miny, and maxy coordinates.
The offset vector was then extended to intersect with two sides of the boundary box.
This ensured that the offset vector always intersected the polygon at exactly two points.
During testing, intersections with the polygon’s vertices were correct, when utilizing this
method. These extended offset vectors are shown in the figure 41 and can be compared
to the theoretical algorithm’s visualization in figure 20.
Figure 41: First two extended offset vectors and the initial vector visualized.
An edge case occurs when the offset vector lies directly on the goal vertex a, resulting in
only one intersection being found. To handle this case, a duplicate intersection point is
temporarily added to ensure the remaining logic functions correctly. This duplicate point
is later removed when connecting the path points together.
After computing the two intersections between the polygon and the initial extended offset
vector, a loop is started to iteratively find the new path intersections between subsequent
extended offset vectors and the polygon’s edges. The intersections are stored as ordered
pairs in a list. Each new offset vector is created by shifting the previous one towards the
goal vertex a by the following distance:
dx = 2 · ∆init −overlap distance.
Compared to the initial offset vector’s distance from the starting vector between vertices
b and bmate, which is:
dx = ∆init −overlap distance.
The overlap distance can be set manually to add an overlap between path lines. The
detailed implementation of path overlap is described in section 5.7.4 below, but works by
subtracting an overlap distance from the offset distance.
The loop continues until an offset vector no longer intersects the polygon. Before termi-
nation, a final offset vector is created by shifting the last offset vector, which lies outside
60
==PAGE:62==
the polygon, in the opposite sweep direction by ∆init −0.01m. This ensures the remain-
ing ∆init distance is covered, as the last vector outside the polygon is offset by the full
path width of 2 · ∆init, while the previous path line covers only ∆init towards the poly-
gon’s edges. If this final offset vector intersects the polygon, its resulting intersection
points are added to the list of intersection points as pairs which is then returned by the
get path intersections function.
5.7.4
Path Overlap
A key enhancement in our EVP implementation is the ability to specify an overlap dis-
tance between path lines. To avoid issues, if the given overlap distance exceeds ∆init, it
is adjusted to ∆init −0.01m, such that there is at least 1cm between adjacent path lines.
This check prevents excessive overlap that could cause offset vectors to move backwards
which results in an incomplete coverage path creation.
The two figures below illustrate two paths for the same region. In figure 42a no overlap is
used and the parallel path lines are spaced by the full path width dx = 35m. In figure 42b,
an overlap distance of 8 meters reduces the spacing between paths to dx = 35m −8m =
27m.
(a) 35m path width and 0m overlap dis-
tance.
(b) 35m path width and 8m overlap dis-
tance.
Figure 42: Visualizations of the same polygon with the same path width of 35m, but (a)
has a 0m overlap distance and (b) has 8m (22%). Green color is covered area, yellow is
overlap and red is the outlying area.
This feature is crucial for a sonar specific application, as sonar accuracy decreases near
the edges of a ping, which correspond to the path width’s boundaries. While such con-
siderations are not emphasized in other CPP implementations we reviewed, discussions
with Teledyne Marine highlighted its importance. In our approach, the overlap distance
can be manually adjusted for each region, offering flexibility to accommodate different
application requirements.
In addition to manually setting the overlap distance, five different overlap distances,
expressed as percentages of the path width, were tested to identify a general overlap
61
==PAGE:63==
percentage. These tests, which were conducted on four different polygons, used overlap
distances of 0%, 5%, 10%, 20%, and 50%. The 20 figures showcasing these paths are
presented in Appendix A.3. To identify the optimal overlap percentage, three metrics
were considered: coverage percentage, path distance, and the number of turns.
The data from the 20 paths is aggregated by the overlap percentage, and the averaged
metrics are calculated and normalized for comparison. An overall efficiency score is then
computed using the formula:
Score = wc · Norm. Coverage −wt · Norm. Turns −wd · Norm. Distance,
where wc, wt, and wd are the weights for coverage percentage, turns, and path distance,
respectively. Additionally, the score was normalized to a scale of 0% to 100% for clarity.
The overlap percentage with the highest score is selected as the optimal choice. A high
weight to the coverage percentage was assigned, as it represents the primary objective
of the CPP algorithm. A medium weight was given to the number of turns, while the
lowest weight was applied to the path distance.
Table 5 presents the averaged aggregated data with its normalization, and the normalized
efficiency scores for the tested overlap distances.
Overlap (%)
Avg. Coverage (%)
Avg. Turns
Avg. Path Distance (m)
0
99.59
13.5
1840.50
5
99.75
14.5
1945.00
10
99.92
15.0
2027.00
20
99.99
17.5
2282.25
50
100.00
29.5
3564.75
Norm. Score (%)
Norm. Coverage
Norm. Turns
Norm. Distance
40.30
0.996
0.458
0.516
65.74
0.997
0.492
0.546
100.00
0.999
0.508
0.569
95.73
1.000
0.593
0.640
0.00
1.000
1.000
1.000
Table 5: Aggregated Metrics for Overlap Distances
As shown in table 5, an overlap distance of 10% of the path width achieves the highest
normalized efficiency score, making it the optimal general overlap percentage. This over-
lap percentage provides a good balance by maximizing coverage while minimizing the
path distance and the number of turns used in the path.
Without introducing any overlap between the path lines, complete coverage of non-square
regions is not possible using the BFP strategy. This is due to sharp angles between region
edges and path lines, which results in small areas not being scanned by the sonar. A
visualization of this issue can be seen in figure 43.
62
==PAGE:64==
Figure 43: Visualization of the small area not covered when using a BFP on polygons
with angled edges.
5.8
Connecting all Intersections Into a Full Path
Once the intersections for all sub-polygons have been computed, they must be connected
into a continuous path. Two types of connections are created for this purpose. The first
connects the intersected pairs inside each sub-polygon, minimizing the travel distance
between them. The second connects the paths between sub-polygons, ensuring the end-
point of one sub-polygon is linked to the start point of the next. The visiting order of
the sub-polygons plays a crucial role in this process, and the sorting methods researched
for ordering are described in section 4.2.
Discussions with Teledyne Marine highlighted the importance of distinguishing between
the path lines within each sub-polygon and the transit lines connecting them. As the
ASV moves between sub-polygons, it traverses previously scanned areas or regions outside
the designated area, leading to unnecessary sonar usage and redundant overlap in the
resulting scans. To address this, an additional list was created to store transit flags. For
each path point with index i, the transit flag at index i is set to transit if it is a transit
point, or path if it is a path point. The start and end points of each sub-polygon’s path
are marked as transit points. When two transit points are connected, the line between
them is marked as a transit line when the sub-polygon’s paths are connected to the final
path. In visualizations, transit lines are distinguished from path lines, as shown in figure
44.
63
==PAGE:65==
Figure 44: Highlight of transit lines on unordered sub-polygon connections.
5.8.1
Simple Path Connection
Once the intersections are computed, the individual sub-polygon paths must be connected
into a full route. As described in section 4.3.1, a function CheckAndConnect is used to
integrate two newly intersected points into the path before identifying subsequent inter-
sections. However, the original theory does not provide a detailed explanation of how
this function operates, beside that it connects the found intersections into the path before
the next intersected pair is computed. We found that connecting the intersections while
they are being found can lead to sub-optimal connections, when connecting multiple sub-
polygons’ paths together. Therefore, in CPP version 2, a different method was applied,
where the intersections were connected only after all intersections have been computed.
In the implementation of CPP version 1, the CheckAndConnect function was implemented
based on its expected input and output, as no description of it was presented in the paper.
In our implementation, the function selected the closest new intersection point relative
to the last point in the current path and appended it first, followed by the remaining
intersection point. While this approach minimized the travel distance within individual
sub-polygons, it did not account for the connections between the start and end points of
adjacent sub-polygons, often leading to suboptimal overall path connections.
To improve on this issue, it was found that optimizing the order of sub-polygons was
important for minimizing the total travel distance. Hence, for CPP version 1, a simple
sorting method was implemented using a DFS sorting method as described in section 4.2.
64
==PAGE:66==
5.8.2
Depth-First Search
The first sorting method was implemented using DFS on the adjacency graph for the
sub-polygons, which were created as described in section 4.1.6. To implement the cre-
ation of the adjacency graph, the function create adjacency graph was implemented,
which took an unordered list of sub-polygons and generated the adjacency graph based
on their edge adjacency.
For this function, the Python library NetworkX[20] was used, as it includes tools for
graph creation and a variety of graph search algorithms, including DFS. To construct
the adjacency graph, each sub-polygon was compared with every other sub-polygon us-
ing the polygons are adjacent function. If the two given sub-polygons shared an edge,
this would return True, and an edge was added between them in the adjacency graph.
Applying the DFS algorithm to this graph resulted in a visiting order, where DFS sys-
tematically visits connected sub-polygons by following adjacent edges. This ensured that
the visiting order respects the connectivity of the sub-polygons. The ordered traversal
replaces the previous random order, ensuring a more structured and efficient connection
between the sub-polygons’ paths.
(a) Adjacency graph.
(b) DFS connected path.
Figure 45: Version 1 adjacency graph visualization with greedy decomposition (a) and
Version 1 path using DFS sub-polygon order with a 15m path width (b).
Figure 45a above visualizes the adjacency graph and figure 45b the connected path for
a concave polygon. The lines connecting the sub-polygons’ paths are marked as transit
lines to provide a clearer visualization of the movement between the sub-polygons.
The DFS implementation in NetworkX follows a similar approach to the algorithm de-
scribed in 4.2.1. It creates an adjacency matrix representation of the graph and performs
a depth-first traversal using a stack-based iterative approach. This results in a runtime
of O(v +e), where v is the number of vertices and e the number of edges in the adjacency
graph.
While this initial implementation proved to be a valid solution, it did not always find
the optimal visiting order. As the DFS sorting algorithm does not minimize the global
65
==PAGE:67==
travel distance between sub-polygons, as described in section 4.2. To improve on this, the
second CCP version used a TSP solution to sort the visiting order of the sub-polygons.
5.8.3
Advanced Path Connection
In the second CPP version, the initial CheckAndConnect function was enhanced by in-
troducing a class of functions to optimize the connection of intersections. This approach
utilized the property that each sub-polygon’s path can have four distinct start-end pairs.
By selecting one of the four intersections as the start point: A, B, C, or D, illustrated
in figure 46 below, and applying an improved connection logic, the total path connection
distance could be minimized.
An example of this is if point A is chosen as the starting point, then point D becomes its
endpoint. However, depending on the number of turns in the path, the first point in the
first intersection does not always pair with the second point in the last intersection.
Figure 46: Highlight of start-end intersection pair locations.
To improve path connection, four different path combination scenarios were defined. Each
scenario follows the straightforward logic of the initial CheckAndConnect function to con-
nect the intersections points, but the choice of start and end points varies depending on
the specific scenario.
The first scenario applies to a single-polygon’s path. In this case, no additional logic is
required, and the path is connected as in version 1 using the CheckAndConnect function.
The second scenario handles the path connection for the first sub-polygon in the ordered
list. In this case, one of the four possible intersection points: A, B, C, or D is selected
based on its proximity to the closest intersection point in the next sub-polygon. The
point with the shortest distance to one of the next sub-polygon’s A, B, C, or D points
is chosen. Once the closest intersection point is determined, this is fixed as the endpoint
for the first sub-polygon’s path, and the remaining intersection points are connected with
this prerequisite using the CheckAndConnect function.
The third scenario applies to middle sub-polygons, which are polygons that are neither
the first nor the last in the list. In this case, two different paths are created. The first
66
==PAGE:68==
path selects one of the four intersection points A, B, C, or D as the starting point. It is
chosen based on the shortest distance to the current last point in the path, which cor-
responds to the endpoint of the previous polygon’s path. The second path is created by
using the same method as the first scenario, with the goal of minimizing the connection
distance to the next sub-polygon’s path rather than the previous sub-polygon’s path. The
optimal path is then determined by calculating the total travel distance from the current
last point in the connected path, through all path points, and ending at the respective
endpoints. The path with the shortest total distance is selected as the optimal connected
path for the current sub-polygon.
The final scenario applies to the last sub-polygon. In this case, the sub-polygon’s inter-
section point closest to the last point of the total path is selected as its starting point,
which is the previous sub-polygon’s end point. This simple approach ensures an optimal
connection for the final segment of the path.
This improved method of connecting the paths primarily relied on the order of the sub-
polygons to improve on the previous method, as it minimized the distances between
the adjacent sub-polygons in the list. For CPP version 2, a TSP solution based on the
distances between the centroids of the sub-polygons was utilized, to improve the visiting
order compared to the DFS solution.
5.8.4
Traveling Salesman Problem on Polygon Centroids
From the research in section 4.2.2, it was identified that modeling the sub-polygon order-
ing problem as a TSP could reduce the global travel distance between sub-polygons. In
the initial TSP centroid approach, the aim was to plan an optimal route by minimizing
the travel distance between each sub-polygon’s centroid. This was achieved by first im-
plementing a function to compute the centroid of each polygon, calculated as the mean
of its vertices’ 2D Cartesian coordinates. Next, a function to compute the Euclidean
distance between two polygon centroids was implemented, treating them as 2D points.
Then, to solve the TSP, the OR-Tools[18] library was used, which is an open-source
optimization package developed by Google. OR-Tools offers efficient algorithms for var-
ious routing problems, including the TSP.
For this implementation, the TSP solver required a distance matrix D of size n×n, where
n represents the number of sub-polygons. Each entry D[i, j] in this matrix represents the
Euclidean distance between the centroid of sub-polygon i to the centroid of sub-polygon
j. The resulting matrix is symmetric where (D[i, j] = D[j, i]), with zeroes along the
diagonal, indicating that the distance from a centroid to itself is zero.
The OR-Tools library uses this distance matrix as input, and the path cheapest arc
(PCA) heuristic was applied to determine the optimal traversal order of the polygon
centroids. This heuristic was chosen for its computational efficiency, allowing medium to
large-sized TSP instances to be solved without excessive computation time. The strategy
works by greedily selecting the next centroid based on the shortest available distance,
iteratively building the path.
67
==PAGE:69==
PCA has a runtime complexity of O(n2), where n is the number of centroids (sub-
polygons). It evaluates all possible connections to find the shortest arc for each node.
While it does not guarantee a globally optimal solution, it provides a near-optimal con-
nection path that minimizes the total travel distance efficiently. The output is an ordered
sequence of indices that indicates the traversal order based on the initial unordered list.
A visualization of the solved TSP route between sub-polygon centroids on the concave
polygon with its computed and connected path can be seen in figure 47.
(a) TSP centroid visiting order.
(b) TSP centroid connected path.
Figure 47: Version 2 TSP centroid visiting order with greedy decomposition (a) and
version 2 path using TSP centroid sub-polygon order with a 15m path width (b).
Through testing, it was found that minimizing the travel distance between the sub-
polygons’ centroids did not always lead to optimal results. Small changes to the path
width would alter where a sub-polygon’s path starts and ends, which in turn could sig-
nificantly change the travel distance to the next sub-polygon.
For the final implementation of the sorting method, the focus was on choosing the correct
start-end pair from each sub-polygon, to minimize the travel distance between them.
5.8.5
TSP Greedy Nearest Neighbor Solution
For this approach, we chose not to use any Python libraries, as, to the best of our
knowledge, the specific problem appeared to be unique. While it shared similarities with
Clustering-Based TSP (CBTSP) and Generalized TSPs (GTSP), it introduced additional
complexity. In the problem, each sub-polygon would act as a ”super-node” with four dis-
tinct start-end pairs, and for each super-node, only one pair must be selected. The goal
is to choose the optimal pair for each super-node by comparing it to all other super-node
pairs.
Simply minimizing the distance between start points is not ideal. The respective end
points must also be considered, as the travel distance between them will significantly
affect the overall path connection. If either point could be chosen without considering
68
==PAGE:70==
its paired point, the problem could be modeled as a GTSP, as seen in figure 48 below.
Alternatively, picking the centroid point between the start-end pair is not ideal, as the
centroid point would be approximately equal for each of the four pairs. As a result that
solution would closely mimic the previous centroid based TSP solution.
Figure 48: An arbitrary GTSP approach visualization from [29].
Figure 48 visualizes a GTSP with 17 vertices partitioned into six clusters C1, . . . , C6.
The chosen path between the six clusters forms the shortest Hamiltonian cycle, visiting
exactly one vertex from each cluster once.
69
==PAGE:71==
Figure 49: The new problem structure modeled as a graph.
Figure 49 visualizes our problem modeled as a graph. Each sub-polygon acts as a super-
node (depicted in red) and has four start-end point pairs, represented as the super-node’s
vertices (depicted ins blue). Each pair is only connected to itself and the super-node.
This specific figure is a graph representation of the same concave region used in the DFS
(figure 45) and TSP centroid (figure 47) visualizations. Figure 49 shows all super-nodes
being connected for easier readability, but in reality, each end point from a super-node
is connected to every other super-node’s start points. The super-nodes do not have a
position, they are only used to cluster the start-end pairs, allowing the selection of one
pair for each sub-polygon.
As the number of super-nodes increases, both the number of edges and vertices in the
problem scale accordingly. Initially, each super-node has 8 vertices, with 4 start vertices
and 4 end vertices connected in pairs. The total number of vertices grows linearly with
the addition of each super-node. If there are n super-nodes, the total number of vertices
is given by:
Total vertices = 8n
The number of edges grows as well, since each end vertex of a super-node is connected
to every start vertex in every other super-node. For each super-node n, the number of
edges added with the introduction of a new super-node is:
Edges per new super-node = 4 · 4 · (n −1)
This is because each of the 4 end vertices in a new super-node is connected to all 4 start
vertices of each of the n −1 other super-nodes. Therefore, the total number of edges
70
==PAGE:72==
grows quadratically with the number of super-nodes:
Total edges = 16n(n −1)
Thus, as the number of super-nodes increases, both the number of vertices and edges
increase, leading to quadratic growth in the problem size.
Given the quadratic growth in the number of edges and vertices, solving the problem
directly becomes computationally expensive.
As a result, it was crucial to develop a
TSP solution that could efficiently handle the problem size. To achieve this, the Greedy
Nearest Neighbor (GNN) solution was implemented, iteratively selecting the closest start
point of a super-node at each step to minimize the distance traveled. This approach was
particularly well-suited for regions decomposed into many sub-polygons, as it reduced
computational complexity while still providing a near-optimal solution.
To implement the solution, the algorithm would run four times, testing each of the four
possible start-end pairs from the first super-node. This approach reduced the likelihood
of getting trapped in a local minimum, as different initial selections may lead to non-
optimal results. The best connection path, in terms of total distance, was chosen from
the four iterations. The number of turns remains unchanged for each sorting method,
as only a single path line is used to connect the sub-polygons. Once hard region edges
and obstacles are introduced, optimally sorting the sub-polygons will help minimize the
number of turns needed to reroute the path around them.
The time complexity of the GNN implementation is O(n2), where n is the number of
super-nodes. This is because, in each iteration, the algorithm must evaluate the distance
to all unvisited super-nodes and their start-end pairs. Given that we repeat the process
four times (one for each possible starting pair in the first super-node), the overall time
complexity is O(4n2), which then simplifies to O(n2).
71
==PAGE:73==
Figure 50: Version 3 path with the Greedy Nearest Neighbor TSP sorted visiting order.
To enhance the sorting method for regions with hard edges, as described later in section
5.9, additional heuristics were introduced, to address cases where two sub-polygons are
in close proximity but separated by region edges. This improvement was achieved by
calculating the number of intersections between region edges and a line drawn from the
current point to the candidate point being tested as the next nearest neighbor. Since the
number of intersections is typically much smaller compared to the distance (in meters),
the intersection count was weighted, with the weight being adjustable by the user based
on the specific region. A weight of 100 was found to be effective for most regions.
However, this modification increased the time complexity of the GNN sorting method.
For each connection, involving n sub-polygons, all m region edges needed to be checked
for intersections. As a result, the updated time complexity became O(n2 + nm).
A snippet of an area where choosing the nearest neighbor would be suboptimal due to
crossing hard region edges, resulting in longer rerouted paths, is shown in Figure 51.
72
==PAGE:74==
Figure 51: Snippet of the area showing protruding region edges.
Additionally, a penalty heuristic was implemented for long connections, with weights
determined through different experiments.
Connections longer than 500 meters were
classified as long, and penalized by adding an extra 250 meters to the nearest neighbor
distance. While this adjustment did not significantly improve the TSP GNN performance,
as the shortest next connection was typically already selected, it was included in the final
implementation due to its minimal computational overhead, as the heuristic operates
with a O(1) time complexity.
5.8.6
Comparison of the three CPP Versions
In this subsection, the performance of the three CPP versions are compared. The com-
parisons focus on regions without obstacles or hard region edges, as the first two versions
cannot handle these. The sweep line algorithm was used to decompose all regions. All
tests were conducted on the same computer (Intel Core i5 processor, 8GB RAM, Win-
dows 11), to ensure fair comparison of execution times. All Path visualizations for all
four regions and additional data can be found in Appendix A.4 and B.1.
Table 6 presents the averaged path generation data from the three CPP versions across
four different regions: a general concave region, the simplified and realistic Antwerp har-
bor, and a triangle region. The triangle region was included as CPP version 1 failed to
generate an optimal path due to sub-optimal vertex selections for b, bmate, and a.
Analyzing the data, it was observed that CPP version 3 is slower than versions 1 and
2, primarily due to the increased sorting time, as the path generation time is similar
to that of CPP version 2. Despite this, version 3 excels in key metrics such as coverage
percentage and transit distance. It achieves the highest coverage by addressing edge cases
near the region’s edges, which also leads to a slightly longer total distance and a higher
number of turns, as additional path lines are generated.
73
==PAGE:75==
Metric
V1
V2
V3
Total Execution Time (s)
3.1849
0.4767
6.17
Sorting Time (s)
3.060
0.7025
6.5973
Coverage Percentage (%)
97.15
98.30
99.67
Total Distance (m)
43,457.62
49,113.36
51,157.88
Transit Distance (m)
4,936.65
5,961.81
3,479.72
Total Turns
136.25
126.5
158.5
Hard Turns (< 45◦or > 180◦)
42.67
51.33
51.67
Medium Turns (45◦−90◦)
47.25
48.25
58.67
Soft Turns (90◦−180◦)
57.5
59.25
57.67
Table 6: Averaged comparison of the paths generated by CPP versions 1,2 and 3 across
four regions.
Version 2 improved coverage over version 1 but missed a final check for the last path line,
as detailed in section 5.7.3. This was fixed in version 3. The transit distance, on the
other hand, decreased with each version as the sorting methods were optimized.
In conclusion, while version 3 is slower, it significantly improves coverage and path gen-
eration by addressing edge cases and refining sorting methods, leading to a more efficient
solution for coverage path planning.
5.9
Region Hard Edge Avoidance
So far, most figures of regions with a path have shown the region edges marked as soft
(shown in black), meaning the ASV could freely cross any edge while moving between the
sub-polygons. In this section, the approach for rerouting the ASV around hard region
edges (shown in red), while optimizing the path as much as possible, will be described.
The next section will explain how the ASV is rerouted around obstacles within the region.
In the Polygon class, a boolean variable was added to each region edge to indicate whether
it is a hard edge, meaning no valid path line could cross it. These values were defined
when the region was read from its JSON file. When creating the combined path for the
region, it checks if the connecting path line from the previous sub-polygon’s end point to
the next sub-polygon’s start point intersects any hard region edges. As the decomposition
algorithm decomposes around the obstacles, the sub-polygons’ paths cannot cross region
edges or obstacles. Hence, the check for a valid connection is performed only when the
paths are being connected.
5.9.1
Check for Region Hard Edge Intersections
This check uses a geometric method based on line segment intersection. For connecting
the start and end points from consecutive sub-polygon paths, a check is made to see if
the connecting line segment intersects any hard edges. If an intersection is found, the
connection between the points must be rerouted around the intersected edges.
The intersection check uses the cross product to determine if two line segments intersect.
74
==PAGE:76==
For segments defined by start and end points p1, p2 and q1, q2, the direction vectors are
r = p2 −p1 and s = q2 −q1. The cross product r × s indicates if the segments are parallel
(no intersection). If the segments are not parallel, the intersection is determined by the
parametric values t and u:
t = (q1 −p1) × s
r × s
,
u = (q1 −p1) × r
r × s
For the segments to intersect within their bounds, the conditions 0 ≤t ≤1 and 0 ≤u ≤1
must hold. If these conditions are satisfied, the segments intersect, and the ASV’s path
must be rerouted to avoid the intersected hard edge.
This method worked well in most scenarios, but some edge cases incorrectly flagged a
connection as invalid, even when it did not cross a hard edge. This occurred if either the
start point, end point, or both were located precisely on a hard edge, it was counted as
an intersection. However, only some of these cases are truly invalid, while others are valid
even when the points lie on a hard edge. To address this issue, additional filtering based
on whether the line segment enters the region was introduced. This issue is visualized in
figure 52 below.
Figure 52: Showcase of an invalid (top left) and a valid (bottom right) path connection
when both points are located on hard edges, marked as the transit lines.
Initially, it is checked if the start and end points lie on the same hard edge. If they
do, no intersection occurs, as two points on the same edge cannot cross it. Otherwise,
the winding number algorithm[2] is applied to determine if the line segment enters the
polygon’s region. The winding number is computed at the midpoint of the line segment,
as follows:
75
==PAGE:77==
The winding number quantifies how many times the polygon’s boundary wraps around
the point, to assess if the segment intersects the region. The winding number is the sum
of the angles between the vector from the midpoint to each of the polygon’s vertices and
the vector to the next vertex:
winding number =
n
X
i=1
angle(vi, vi+1)
If the absolute value of the winding number is non-zero, the line segment is considered
to have entered the region, and no further intersection check is necessary.
For cases between 2 and 4 intersected edges, it is checked whether any of the edges share
a vertex with the start or end point. If the line segment is determined to be inside the
region, the edges are filtered out, otherwise the edges are retained. This filtering prevents
false positives, where points on the hard edge do not actually result in a crossing of the
region. If more than 4 hard edges are intersected, it indicates that the line from the
previous path’s endpoint to the current path’s start point has crossed a hard region edge
and rerouting must be applied.
5.9.2
Rerouting Connection to Avoid Hard Edge Intersections
If an invalid connection between two sub-polygons is identified, the two vertices from the
nearest intersected edge are treated as new points for two paths: one going left and the
other right around the region. The initial endpoint from the previous sub-polygon’s path
is stored as the start point for both directions. Each new point is then checked for a valid
connection to the start point of the next sub-polygon’s path. This process continues iter-
atively in both directions until a clear connection is found between the new vertices and
the next sub-polygon. Each time a new intersected hard edge is encountered and its left or
right vertex is selected, a check is made from this vertex to all previously identified points
in the path, starting from the shared start point. If a valid path exists, the path is up-
dated to include only these points, as this represents the shortest reroute identified so far.
Once both directions have found a valid path, they are compared based on the number
of turns and the distance traveled. Through experimentation, a weight of 10 for turns
was found to yield the desired results. The lower turn weight, compared to the weight
used when computing the best CPP for each of the sub-polygons, is due to the fact that
the rerouted path is considered transit, during which the sonar is often turned off, thus
minimizing the impact of turns on the overall scanning results.
Figure 53 showcase two arbitrary coverage paths for a concave polygon. 53a visualizes
a path where all region edges are soft, so the ASV is allowed to travel across any of the
region edges. In figure 53b, all of the region edges are defined as hard, so as a result of
this the path for the ASV must be rerouted to avoid crossing any of the edges.
76
==PAGE:78==
(a) Concave polygon with soft edges.
(b) Concave polygon with hard edges.
Figure 53: Concave polygon where all region edges are soft edges (a), and concave polygon
where all region edges are hard edges (b). The paths visualizes the necessary rerouting
steps to avoid crossing the hard region edges.
5.10
Obstacle Avoidance
In addition to region edges being impassable, there may be obstacles inside the region
that the ASV cannot traverse, or areas that do not need to be scanned. Soft, passable
obstacles do not require additional handling, as these areas are excluded from our list of
sub-polygons returned from the convex decomposition.
Obstacles are represented using the Polygon class, where all edges of a hard obstacle
are marked as hard, while a region may have a mix of hard and soft edges. The same
intersection check as for region edges is used for obstacles, testing if the line segment
from the endpoint of the previous path to the start point of the next path intersects any
obstacle’s edges. If more than one edge is intersected, rerouting is required to plan a
valid connection. A special case occurs when the intersected point is on a vertex of the
obstacle; in this case, the connection is incorrectly flagged as invalid, but the line never
actually crosses the obstacle edge, hence it is a valid connection.
When an invalid connection occurs, the connection must be rerouted to avoid crossing
the obstacle’s edges. This rerouting process follows a similar strategy to the one used for
region edges, where paths are planned in both the left and right direction of the obstacle
using the closest intersected edge. Once both directions have found valid routes, the
best path is selected as the connection between the two sub-polygons, based on the same
evaluations as when choosing between the region rerouted paths.
Figure 54a shows a region with only hard edges and a hard obstacle with no rerouting, so
the transit lines invalidly crosses over the hard edges. Figure 54b shows the same region
and obstacle, but with rerouting. In this case no hard edges are being crossed by the
transit lines, hence it is a valid connection.
77
==PAGE:79==
(a) Concave polygon path with no rerouting
(b) Concave polygon path with rerouting
Figure 54: Concave polygon with an obstacle path reroute visualizations. No rerouting
done in (a) and rerouting done in (b).
Most of the calculations for the new path are the same as those used for region edges.
One key difference is that for region edges, the check determines if the line between two
points lies inside the region, whereas for obstacles, the check ensures the line does not
enter the obstacle, as this would indicate crossing its edges. For region edges, the path
can follow the region boundary in both directions by selecting adjacent edges. However,
with obstacles, multiple obstacles may be intersected, so it is necessary to find the closest
intersected obstacle edge to the new route’s last point.
To determine the closest intersected obstacle edge, the distance from the current point to
each edge of the obstacle is calculated. First, the Euclidean distance to both the vertices,
v1 and v2, which makes the current edge, is calculated, from the starting path point.
Then, the distance to the midpoint of the edge is calculated, from the start point again.
Finally, a weighted distance is computed by combining the distances to the closest vertex,
the midpoint, and the obstacle centroid. The final weighted distance is calculated as:
weighted distance = dist to closest vertex + dist to midpoint + dist to centroid
2
Testing with different weights and combinations of regions and obstacles, it was found
that using a weight of 1 for the distance to the closest vertex and the distance to the
midpoint performed effectively. Through testing, it was found that when the weight of
the distance to the centroid was halved to 0.5, the results improved significantly, as this
metric produced faulty results when given a higher weight.
The edge with the minimum weighted distance is selected as the closest intersected ob-
stacle edge. This ensures that the rerouted path avoids the obstacle while minimizing
the total travel distance. Once the closest intersected obstacle edge is identified, it is
used to determine the new left and right path points for the rerouting. After the closest
obstacle is found, its edges are followed in both directions to determine the path around it.
For regions with multiple obstacles, the rerouting process continues by checking for in-
tersections with the next obstacle along the path from the current last point to the start
78
==PAGE:80==
point of the next path. This process is repeated for each new obstacle, ensuring that a
valid path is found around all obstacles. Each time a new point is added to the rerouted
path, a check is performed comparing all previous points to ensure that a shorter path
can be found. If a shorter path exists, it is selected, ensuring the most efficient route.
(a) Multiple Hard Obstacles.
(b) Mix of Hard and Soft Obstacles.
Figure 55: Comparison of rerouting for a region with only hard obstacles (a) and a mix
of soft and hard obstacles (b).
In figure 55a the obstacles in the region are all defined as hard. In this case no transit
line must cross into them, whereas in figure 55b, half the obstacles are set to soft and the
ASV is allowed to travel across them, to help minimize the connection travel distance.
79
==PAGE:81==
6
Results and Discussion
The purpose of this section is to present the results of the final algorithm implementation
(CPP version 3) in combination with the different decomposition algorithms, applied to
larger and more complex regions. In this test, the different sorting methods for the sub-
polygon visiting order, namely unordered, DFS, TSP centroid, and TSP GNN, has been
included. This flexibility allows for testing the various methods and choosing the most
suitable one for a given region.
For the test files, the realistic Antwerp harbor from figure 33 and an approximation of
the Great Belt Bridge region were used. The realistic Antwerp region was selected as it
closely resembles the smoothed Antwerp region from the AAU project in figure 6. The
four sorting methods were tested and compared, as each method exhibited potential to
generate the most optimal path depending on the specific characteristics of the region.
6.0.1
Realistic Antwerp Region
The realistic Antwerp region was decomposed using both the sweep line and optimized
sweep line algorithms, as the greedy recursive algorithm was found to be inapplicable (see
section 5.6.12). The two decomposition algorithms were tested in combination with the
four sorting methods, resulting in a total of eight coverage paths, which are illustrated in
Appendix C.1. The path width was set to 55 meters, similar to the AAU project. The
regions’ edges were all defined as hard, and rerouting and transit lines were enabled to
measure the transit distance and ensure that no hard edges were crossed.
The most relevant path data for comparing different coverage paths include coverage
percentage, transit distance, total distance (combining transit and path distances), and
the number of turns. Since the sub-polygons’ paths are computed separately, the path
distance does not significantly vary between sorting methods. For example, in the sweep
line decomposition of the realistic Antwerp region, the difference between the worst path
distance of 54, 491 meters (Appendix C.1 figure 76) and the best at 54, 309 meters (Ap-
pendix C.1 figure 77) is only 182 meters, or 0.33%, caused by minor computational
inaccuracies. Therefore, the primary focus is on differences in the transit distances, as
these vary significantly depending on the chosen sorting method.
Tables 7 and 8 summarize the results of the four sorting methods applied to the con-
vex decompositions produced by the sweep line and optimized sweep line algorithms,
respectively.
Unordered
DFS
TSP Centroid
TSP GNN
Number of Turns
580
406
431
430
Total Distance (m)
91,691.93
71,859.42
72,620.4
69,335.22
Transit Distance (m)
37,262.55
17,539.73
18,129.13
15,026.29
Coverage Percentage (%)
99.81
99.65
99.83
99.65
Table 7: Summarized CPP results for the realistic Antwerp region decomposed with the
sweep line algorithm.
80
==PAGE:82==
Unordered
DFS
TSP Centroid
TSP GNN
Number of Turns
439
353
371
390
Total Distance (m)
81,175.54
73,171.81
72,210.44
75,494.63
Transit Lines (m)
22,624.51
14,844.84
18,874.89
17,045.31
Coverage Percentage (%)
99.85
99.85
99.85
99.84
Table 8: Summarized CPP results for the realistic Antwerp region decomposed with the
optimized sweep line algorithm.
First, by evaluating the paths using the number of turns as a performance metric, the
most optimal path was found to be achieved by combining the optimized sweep line algo-
rithm for convex decomposition with the DFS sorting method. This combination resulted
in a path that requires 353 turns for the ASV to cover the region, while rerouting around
the hard region edges.
When using the total distance as performance metric, the most optimal path was achieved
by applying the sweep line algorithm for convex decomposition along with the TSP GNN
sorting method. This combination generated a path with a total distance of 69, 335.22
meters.
Examining the coverage percentage, all combinations of convex decomposition and sorting
algorithms were found to generate paths covering the region with minimal error. Figure
56 illustrates the best paths, where figure 56a shows the path with the minimum number
of turns, and figure 56b shows the path with the minimal travel distance.
(a) Optimal path for turns.
(b) Optimal path for distance.
Figure 56: Most optimal paths measured on the number of turns (a) and total travel
distance (b).
From the initial research, a theoretical correlation between the sum of widths of the
convex decomposition and the number of turns in the paths was found, as explained
in equation 2. Minimizing the width W in this equation, reduced the number of turns
required to cover the individual sub-polygons when applying their specific path plan-
ning strategy. This do not necessarily translate into a practical scenario with edge cases,
rerouting around hard edges and transit lines, as these parameters are not considered
by the equation. This is an example where theoretical expectations potentially diverge
81
==PAGE:83==
from practical outcomes. Furthermore, it was uncertain how the number of turns would
correlate with the total distance of the path.
These findings support the theory that minimizing the sum of widths of the convex
sub-polygons also minimizes the number of turns in the coverage path. This is best il-
lustrated by comparing table 7 and 8. Both tables apply the same four sorting methods
(unordered, DFS, TSP centroid and TSP GNN). In the first table, they are applied to
the sub-polygons from the sweep line algorithm, which has a sum of widths of 4232.32
meters. In the second table, they are applied to the sub-polygons from the optimized
sweep line algorithm, which has a sum of widths of 3311.2 meters. A clear correlation
was identified, as the number of turns were reduced significantly for the optimized sweep
line decomposition algorithm, since the path has fewer turns for each of the four sorting
methods compared to the sweep line algorithm. An interesting observation from tables 7
and 8 is that minimizing the number of turns do not necessarily correspond to a shorter
total distance. This is due to the total distance being influenced more by factors such as
rerouting, and the overall structure of the region, compared to the number of turns.
The Antwerp harbor was selected as the ideal objective for the algorithm. During the
initial discussions with Teledyne Marine, this region was characterized as an especially
challenging region for coverage path planning algorithms. In particular, the Antwerp
harbor presents a unique challenge due to its narrow middle section, in which the ASV
must travel through to move between the upper and lower ends of the harbor, which
enabled an ideal stress test of the algorithm. Furthermore, it enabled the comparison
of coverage paths with those from the AAU project (see section 3), although they are
not directly comparable in terms of performance. The AAU project only provides data
regarding the number of turns for an invalid path that crosses the hard region edges. By
examining their path visualizations, it was found that they apply a different definition of
a turn. In the AAU project, it appears they count two waypoints as a single turn if the
ASV makes a 180◦change in direction. As a result, their path consists of 125 turns and
approximately 230 waypoints.
In contrast, the definition applied in this thesis considers a single waypoint in the path
as a change of direction, thereby counting it as a single turn. This difference in the
definition of a turn makes the comparison of turn data between the two approaches less
straightforward. Additionally, the AAU project does not mention how they smooth the
Antwerp harbor, meaning the two regions might not be exactly identical.
The focus of this thesis is primarily on valid paths within the context of an ASV that
must respect the hard region edges. However, to allow for a comparable coverage path
to the AAU project, this criterion was temporarily relaxed by permitting the path to
cross the hard region edges. With this approach, the algorithm was able to produce a
path with 258 waypoints, and by applying the turn definition from the AAU project,
approximately 129 turns.
82
==PAGE:84==
6.0.2
Region Around the Great Belt Bridge
A test region surrounding the Great Belt Bridge in Denmark was constructed to experi-
ment with a custom region. Due to the unavailability of data regarding the bridge pillars,
this region is a rough estimate based on satellite images (figure 57a). The bridge pillars
were modeled as hard obstacles to prevent the ASV from colliding with them.
The shipping lane was modeled as a soft obstacle to prevent scanning in this area, as
shown in figure 57b. In this implementation no coverage path was planned for this region,
since the ASV cannot avoid dynamic ship traffic and blocking the area for scanning is
not feasible. By treating the shipping lane as a soft obstacle, the ASV can pass through
the area with minimal disruption to the traffic. This demonstrates the effective use of
soft obstacles to designate regions where scanning should not occur, while still allowing
for passage of the ASV.
(a) Satellite image.
(b) Approximate region represented as a polygon with obstacles.
Figure 57: Satellite image of the area surrounding the Great Belt Bridge in Denmark (a)
and its approximated region (b).
The optimized sweep line algorithm was used to decompose the region to ensure the sum
of widths is minimized. The path width was set to 50 meters, and all four sorting methods
were tested. The data for these paths can be seen in table 9 below.
83
==PAGE:85==
Unordered
DFS
TSP centroid
TSP GNN
Number of Turns
444
372
385
363
Total Distance (m)
367,035.21
361,072.31
339,478.84
327,590.72
Transit Distance (m)
64,123.06
56,095.12
37,821.73
25,935.86
Coverage Percentage (%)
99.57
99.73
99.58
99.84
Table 9: Summarized CPP results for the Great Belt Bridge decomposed with the opti-
mized sweep line algorithm.
As seen in table 9, the best path was found using the TSP GNN sorting method, which
outperformed the other sorting methods on all parameters (number of turns, total dis-
tance, and coverage percentages).
The path included 363 turns, covers a distance of
327, 590.72 meters, and achieves a coverage percentage of 99.84%. The significant reduc-
tion in total distance using the TSP GNN sorting method compared to the other sorting
methods was primarily due to the low transit distance. Notably, for this region, both TSP
sorting methods outperformed the DFS method measured on the total distance metric.
For the Great Belt Bridge region, the TSP GNN sorting method’s transit distance was
53.83% shorter than that of the DFS sorting method. This path can be seen in figure 58.
Figure 58: The optimal coverage path for the area surrounding the Great Belt Bridge
with a 50m path width.
6.0.3
Verdict of the Tests
During testing on larger, more complex regions, it was observed that the TSP GNN
sorting method did not always outperform the DFS sorting method. The DFS sorting
method outperformed the TSP GNN in certain regions, occasionally by a significant
margin. As shown in table 8, DFS was superior across all metrics for the realistic Antwerp
region, compared to the TSP GNN, when using the optimized sweep line decomposition.
This was largely attributed to the adjacency of the sub-polygons within the region. The
adjacency graphs for the Great Belt Bridge and realistic Antwerp harbor regions can be
seen in figure 59a and 59b.
84
==PAGE:86==
(a) Great Belt region adjacency graph.
(b) Antwerp realistic region adjacency graph.
Figure 59: Comparison of the adjacency graph from the region around the Great Belt
Bridge (a) and the adjacency graph for the realistic Antwerp harbor (b).
A clear pattern emerges when comparing the two graphs. In the Antwerp region, multiple
85
==PAGE:87==
deep branches are present, which aligns well with the DFS search strategy. In contrast,
the TSP GNN sorting method was more prone to make locally optimal choices that did
not lead to the global optimum in these types of graphs. For the Great Belt Bridge re-
gion, where the sub-polygons are connected in a circular manner, the TSP GNN solution
performs better, while the DFS is less effective.
86
==PAGE:88==
7
Conclusion
In this thesis, an efficient coverage path planning algorithm was developed for a sonar-
equipped autonomous surface vehicle, achieving optimal scanning coverage while mini-
mizing travel distance and the number of turns in the path. The combination of convex
decomposition and efficient path planning strategies was found to yield optimal results,
effectively addressing real-world challenges such as rerouting around static obstacles and
hard region edges.
The algorithm was divided into three main components: exact convex decomposition,
coverage path planning for individual sub-polygons, and sorting the sub-polygons’ paths
in an optimal visiting order to generate an efficient, continuous path.
Numerous state-of-the-art algorithms were explored for exact cellular decomposition,
namely the greedy recursive, sweep line, and optimized sweep line algorithms.
Each
algorithm demonstrated unique strengths and weaknesses. A clear correlation was found
between minimizing the sum of widths of the convex sub-polygons, and reducing the
number of turns in the back-and-forth path. As a result, the optimized sweep line algo-
rithm emerged as the best decomposition method, due to its reasonable execution time,
ability to minimize the sum of widths, and ability to handle obstacles. Additionally, an
experiment was conducted, where the greedy recursive and sweep line algorithm were
combined. However, through testing it was found, that its results could not compare
with a state-of-the-art algorithm, such as as the optimized sweep line algorithm.
Planning a back-and-forth edge-vertex path separately for each sub-polygon by using its
longest edge to generate the parallel edge-vertex path lines resulted in an optimal path
for each sub-polygon. Various sorting methods were tested to connect these paths into
a continuous path. The first method employed a depth first search strategy on the sub-
polygons’ adjacency graph, providing a simple yet effective solution. Additionally, the
problem was modeled as a traveling salesman problem, where each sub-polygon’s centroid
was treated as a node, and the shortest Hamiltonian cycle was found to determine the
optimal visiting order.
As neither method provided a perfect solution, experiments were conducted using the four
possible start-end pairs for each path. A greedy nearest neighbor approach was applied
to select the optimal pair for each sub-polygon, efficiently determining a near-optimal
visiting order. When connecting the sub-polygons’ paths, it was essential to ensure that
no intersections occurred with hard region edges or obstacles. In the event of such an
intersection, the path was rerouted to generate a valid coverage path.
Extensive testing on large, complex regions revealed that the algorithm achieved near-
complete coverage while minimizing travel distance and the number of turns. The best
sorting method for each region was found to depend on the adjacency of the sub-polygons,
with the simpler depth first search outperforming the greedy nearest neighbor heuristic in
some scenarios. Additionally, it was observed that a lower number of turns in the paths
was not always correlated with a shorter travel distance. This discrepancy was due to
how the path was rerouted around obstacles and hard region edges.
87
==PAGE:89==
Depending on the sonar survey’s requirements, a user can select the optimal sorting
method based on criteria such as survey time constraints or scan precision. Some surveys
may prioritize shorter travel distances to save time, while others may require more precise
scans by focusing on reducing the number of turns.
Overall, the algorithm developed in this thesis provides an efficient adaptive coverage
path plan tailored to a sonar-equipped autonomous surface vehicle, potentially reducing
survey time and improving data quality. This, in turn, could enhance the competitiveness
of Teledyne Marine’s sonar solutions in the market. This thesis serves as a baseline for
future development by Teledyne Marine. Building on this work, future improvements
could include incorporating dynamic obstacles, real-time path adjustments, and further
optimization techniques to enhance the efficiency and robustness of the sonar surveying
process.
Future work
As the scope of the project had to be limited, some of the solutions that were considered
were not feasible to implement and document in this thesis.
A major improvement to the algorithm, would be the ability to dynamically reroute the
path as unforeseen dynamic obstacles are detected by the ASV. Numerous approaches to
implement this functionality were considered. The simplest being to stop the ASV tem-
porarily, then plan a new convex decomposition and path for the remaining unscanned
region, and incorporating the newly detected obstacle as a static obstacle. As the algo-
rithm is fairly time efficient, the ASV would only need to stop briefly, depending on the
scale of the remaining region, before resuming its task with the newly planned path.
To reduce the time required to scan a region, the next step would be to utilize multiple
ASVs. The algorithm developed in this thesis would not require any significant changes
to the path planning, but would need additional functionality to divide the generated
path into segments. Based on the number of available ASVs, the path could be split into
the corresponding number of segments, allowing multiple ASVs to simultaneously cover
different parts of the region.
The find cell function used in both the sweep line and optimized sweep line algorithm has
known issues. These issues should be addressed through further debugging and exten-
sive testing of the function on more complex regions, ensuring it accounts for currently
unconsidered scenarios.
During the research it was found that the current convex decomposition algorithms could
be optimized by using the principle of merging adjacent sub-polygons with the same di-
rection of width into concave polygons as well. Intuitively, this is logical, as the alignment
of the width directions suggests the boustrophedon path will follow the same direction for
two adjacent sub-polygons. As a result, the algorithm can prioritize planning a path for
the larger sub-polygon, even if it is concave, thereby further reducing the number of turns.
The optimized sweep line algorithm should be reworked to utilize non-vertical sweep
directions, rather than simply rotating the region to align an edge vertically, and then
88
==PAGE:90==
applying the original sweep line algorithm. The issue with the current approach, is that
rotating the region to align an edge vertically, results in two vertices sharing the same
x-coordinate. Since the sweep line algorithm cannot handle vertices with identical x-
coordinates, the region must currently be rotated further until all vertices have distinct
x-coordinates, which is inefficient. A more robust solution would involve modifying the
algorithm to directly accommodate non-vertical sweep directions. However, this would
require significant changes, including a complete redefinition of the events.
References
[1]
Ercan U. Acar et al. “Morse Decompositions for Coverage Tasks”.
In: The International Journal of Robotics Research 21.4 (2002), pp. 331–344.
doi: 10.1177/027836402320556359.
url: https://doi.org/10.1177/027836402320556359.
[2]
David Alciatore. A Winding Number and Point-in-Polygon Algorithm.
url: https:
//www.engr.colostate.edu/~dga/documents/papers/point_in_polygon.pdf.
[3]
Asia Mahdi Naser Alzubaidi. “Diameter and width via Rotating Calipers of a Set
of Two-dimensional Convex Hull Vertices using Graham scan algorithm”.
In: Journal of KerbalaUniversity 11.2 (2013).
[4]
Mark de Berg et al. “Polygon Triangulation”. In: Computational Geometry. 2nd.
Springer-Verlag, 2000, pp. 45–61. isbn: 3-540-65620-0.
[5]
Paul Bourke. “Intersection of a Plane and a Line”. In: (2014).
[6]
Z. Cai et al. “Research on complete coverage path planning algorithms based on
A* Algorithms”.
In: Open Cybernetics and Systemics Journal 8 (2014), pp. 418–426.
[7]
Jinchao Chen et al. “A Clustering-Based Coverage Path Planning Method for
Autonomous Heterogeneous UAVs”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 23.12 (2022), pp. 25546–25556.
doi: 10.1109/TITS.2021.3066240.
[8]
Howie Choset and Philippe Pignon.
“Coverage Path Planning: The Boustrophedon Cellular Decomposition”.
In: Field and Service Robotics. London: Springer London, 1998, pp. 203–209.
isbn: 978-1-4471-1273-0.
[9]
Thomas H. Cormen et al. “33.3: Finding the convex hull”.
In: Introduction to Algorithms (1990), pp. 955–956.
[10]
SciPy Developers. scipy.spatial.ConvexHull — SciPy v1.11.3 Manual. 2025.
url: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.
spatial.ConvexHull.html.
[11]
DTU High Performance Computing. url: https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/.
89
==PAGE:91==
[12]
Brendan Englot and Franz Hover.
“Sampling-Based Coverage Path Planning for Inspection of Complex Structures”.
In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and
Scheduling 22.1 (2012), pp. 29–37. doi: 10.1609/icaps.v22i1.13529.
url: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICAPS/article/view/13529.
[13]
Andreas Hald Espensen, Oskar Emil Aver, and Pernille Krog Poulsen.
“Seabed Coverage Path Planning and Re-routing”. In: (2024).
url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/238251904_Seabed_
Coverage_Path_Planning_and_Re-routing.
[14]
Philip R. Evans. “Rotations and rotation matrices”. In: (2001).
[15]
Reza Zanjirani Farahani et al.
Traveling Salesman Problem: Theory and Applications. Google Books, 2020.
url: https://books.google.com/books/about/Traveling_Salesman_Problem.
html?id=gKWdDwAAQBAJ.
[16]
Python Software Foundation. Tkinter — Python interface to Tcl/Tk. 2023.
url: https://docs.python.org/3/library/tk.html.
[17]
Enric Galceran and Marc Carreras.
“A survey on coverage path planning for robotics”.
In: Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61.12 (2013), pp. 1258–1276.
issn: 0921-8890. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2013.09.004. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092188901300167X.
[18]
Google. OR-Tools Documentation. 2023.
url: https://or-tools.github.io/docs/pdoc/ortools.html.
[19]
Antomn Guttman.
“R-TREES. A DYNAMIC INDEX STRUCTURE FOR SPATIAL SEARCHING”.
In: (1984).
[20]
A. A. Hagberg, D. A. Schult, and P. J. Swart. NetworkX Documentation. 2023.
url: https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/reference/index.html.
[21]
Wesley Huang.
“Optimal Line-sweep-based Decompositions for Coverage Algorithms”.
In: Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (2001).
[22]
J. D. Hunter. Matplotlib Documentation. 2023.
url: https://matplotlib.org/stable/index.html.
[23]
Princess Chinemerem Iloh. “A COMPREHENSIVE AND COMPARATIVE
STUDY OF DFS, BFS, AND A* SEARCH ALGORITHMS IN A SOLVING
THE MAZE TRANSVERSAL PROBLEM”. In: International Journal of Social
Sciences and Scientific Studies 2.2 (2022), pp. 482–490.
url: https://www.ijssass.com/index.php/ijssass/article/view/54.
[24]
Yu-Song Jiao et al.
“Research on the Coverage Path Planning of UAVs for Polygon Areas”.
In: Journal of Intelligent Robotic Systems 102.3 (2021), pp. 67–84.
90
==PAGE:92==
[25]
Alon Krymgand.
The Christofides Algorithm - Approximating the Metric TSP Problem. 2023.
url: https://alon.kr/posts/christofides.
[26]
Yan Li et al. “Coverage path planning for UAVs based on enhanced exact cellular
decomposition method”. In: ().
[27]
Teledyne Marine. Teledyne Marine Sonars. 2023.
url: https://www.teledynemarine.com/en-us/products/product-
line/Pages/Sonars.aspx.
[28]
Quang Nhat Nguyen.
“Traveling Salesman Problem and Bellman-Held-Karp Algorithm”. In: (2020).
url:
https://www.math.nagoya-u.ac.jp/~richard/teaching/s2020/Quang1.pdf.
[29]
Petric˘a C. Pop et al.
“A comprehensive survey on the generalized traveling salesman problem”.
In: European Journal of Operational Research 314.3 (2024), pp. 819–835.
issn: 0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2023.07.022. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221723005581.
[30]
Franco P. Preparata and Michael Ian Shamos.
Computational Geometry: An Introduction.
Texts and Monographs in Computer Science. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985.
isbn: 978-0387961311.
[31]
Rtree: Spatial indexing for Python.
url: https://rtree.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
[32]
Teledyne Marine. 2025. url: https://www.teledynemarine.com/.
[33]
Bladimir Toaza and Domokos Eszterg´ar-Kiss. “A review of metaheuristic
algorithms for solving TSP-based scheduling optimization problems Image 1”.
In: Applied Soft Computing 148 (2023), p. 110908. issn: 1568-4946.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110908. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1568494623009262.
[34]
Juan Irving Vasquez-Gomez et al.
“Coverage Path Planning for 2D Convex Regions”.
In: Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems 97 (2020), pp. 81–94.
[35]
Eric W. Weisstein. Hamiltonian Cycle. 2023.
url: https://mathworld.wolfram.com/HamiltonianCycle.html.
[36]
Tao Wang Yubing Wu and Shuo Liu.
“A Review of Path Planning Methods for Marine Autonomous Surface Vehicles”.
In: (2024).
[37]
Xin Yu. “Optimization Approaches for a Dubins Vehicle in Coverage Planning
Problem and Traveling Salesman Problems”. In: (2015).
91
==PAGE:93==
A
Additional Figures
A.1
Decomposition Splits
92
==PAGE:94==
93
==PAGE:95==
94
==PAGE:96==
A.2
CPP Visualizations
Figure 60: Antwerp realistic region CPP version 2 edge cases non-optimal path visual-
ization.
95
==PAGE:97==
Figure 61: Antwerp realistic region CPP version 3 optimal path visualization.
96
==PAGE:98==
A.3
Overlap Testing Figures
All paths were computed with a 20m path width. Figures in Column 1 have a 0m overlap
distance, Column 2 has a 1m overlap distance, Column 3 has 2m, Column 4 has 4m, and
Column 5 has 10m.
Below each sub-figure shows the coverage percentage, total path distance, and the number
of turns.
(a) 98.93%,
330m, 6
(b) 99.58%,
346m, 6
(c) 99.91%,
375m, 8
(d) 100.0%,
418m, 8
(e) 100.0%,
672m, 16
(f) 99.98%,
605m, 8
(g) 100.0%,
715m, 10
(h) 100.0%,
710m, 10
(i) 100.0%,
821m, 12
(j) 100.0%,
1242m, 20
(k) 99.61%,
750m, 12
(l) 99.80%,
783m, 12
(m) 99.86%,
804m, 12
(n) 100.0%,
909m, 14
(o) 100.0%,
1410m, 24
(p) 99.85%,
5677m, 28
(q) 99.60%,
5936m, 30
(r) 99.91%,
6219m, 30
(s) 99.97%,
6981m, 36
(t) 100.0%,
10935m, 58
97
==PAGE:99==
A.4
CPP Version Comparison Paths
(a) Version 1: Concave region 15m path width.
(b) Version 2: Concave Region 15m path width.
(c) Version 3: Concave region 15m path width.
98
==PAGE:100==
(a) Version 1: Antwerp simplified region 50m
path width.
(b) Version 2: Antwerp simplified region 50m
path width.
(c) Version 3: Antwerp simplified region 50m
path width.
99
==PAGE:101==
(a) Version 1: Antwerp realistic region 50m path
width.
(b) Version 2:
Antwerp realistic region 50m
path width.
(c) Version 3: Antwerp realistic region 50m path
width.
100
==PAGE:102==
(a) Version 1: Triangle region 15m path width.
(b) Version 2: Triangle region 15m path width.
(c) Version 3: Triangle region 15m path width.
101
==PAGE:103==
A.5
Obstacle Rerouting
Figure 67: Single easy obstacle.
Figure 68: Single difficult obstacle
Figure 69: Two easy obstacles.
Figure 70: Two difficult obstacles.
Figure 71: Multiple easy obstacles
Figure 72: Multiple difficult obstacles
Figure 73: Showcase of obstacle rerouting with varying obstacles in a convex region with
a 20m path width.
102
==PAGE:104==
B
Additional Data and Tables
B.1
CPP Versions Comparison Table
Region
Metric
V1
V2
V3
Concave
Execution Time (s)
0.9129
0.0970
0.030
Sorting Time (s)
0.06
0.49
0.01
Total Distance (m)
14126.88
13567.00
14007.25
Path Distance (m)
13142.27
13102.67
13564.02
Transit Distance (m)
984.61
464.33
539.60
Coverage Percentage (%)
98.16
98.37
99.72
Total Turns
102
102
102
Hard Turns (< 45◦or > 180◦)
28
27
32
Medium Turns (45◦−90◦)
24
24
22
Soft Turns (90◦−180◦)
50
51
48
Antwerp Simplified
Execution Time (s)
1.2558
0.2186
1.10
Sorting Time (s)
0.970
0.670
1.010
Total Distance (m)
52859.27
54677.48
57161.79
Path Distance (m)
45258.94
47630.60
52412.71
Transit Distance (m)
7600.33
7046.89
4749.08
Coverage Percentage (%)
97.06
98.31
99.85
Total Turns
182
148
166
Hard Turns (< 45◦or > 180◦)
40
54
47
Medium Turns (45◦−90◦)
71
40
48
Soft Turns (90◦−180◦)
71
54
71
Antwerp Realistic
Execution Time (s)
2.0036
0.3618
22.68
Sorting Time (s)
8.37
1.35
22.57
Total Distance (m)
60469.09
67687.58
68293.47
Path Distance (m)
50033.29
53459.26
59113.83
Transit Distance (m)
10435.80
14228.32
9179.64
Coverage Percentage (%)
97.03
98.24
99.85
Total Turns
348
284
306
Hard Turns (< 45◦or > 180◦)
127
123
136
Medium Turns (45◦−90◦)
130
72
100
Soft Turns (90◦−180◦)
91
89
70
Triangle
Execution Time (s)
0.0120
0.0020
0.0011
Sorting Time (s)
0
0
0
Total Distance (m)
435.75
416.96
416.96
Path Distance (m)
435.75
416.96
416.96
Transit Distance (m)
0.00
0.00
0.00
Coverage Percentage (%)
97.73
99.27
99.27
Total Turns
12
8
8
Hard Turns (< 45◦or > 180◦)
3
0
0
Medium Turns (45◦−90◦)
3
4
4
Soft Turns (90◦−180◦)
6
4
4
Table 10: Comparison of CPP V1, V2, and V3 across different regions with metrics on
sorting time, execution time, distance, coverage and turns.
103
==PAGE:105==
C
Results
C.1
Realistic Antwerp Results
Figure 74: Coverage path planning for the realistic Antwerp harbor using the sweep line
algorithm and unsorted sub-polygons.
104
==PAGE:106==
Figure 75: Coverage path planning for the realistic Antwerp harbor using the sweep line
algorithm and DFS sorting method.
105
==PAGE:107==
Figure 76: Coverage path planning for the realistic Antwerp harbor using the sweep line
algorithm and TSP Centroid sorting method.
106
==PAGE:108==
Figure 77: Coverage path planning for the realistic Antwerp harbor using the sweep line
algorithm and TSP GNN sorting method.
107
==PAGE:109==
Figure 78: Coverage path planning for the realistic Antwerp harbor using the optimized
sweep line algorithm and the unordered sub-polygons.
108
==PAGE:110==
Figure 79: Coverage path planning for the realistic Antwerp harbor using the optimized
sweep line algorithm and the DFS sorting method.
109
==PAGE:111==
Figure 80: Coverage path planning for the realistic Antwerp harbor using the optimized
sweep line algorithm and the TSP centroid sorting method.
110
==PAGE:112==
Figure 81: Coverage path planning for the realistic Antwerp harbor using the optimized
sweep line algorithm and the TSP GNN sorting method.
111
==PAGE:113==
C.2
Relaxed Antwerp Results
Figure 82: Coverage path planning for the relaxed realistic Antwerp harbor using the
unordered sub-polygons method.
112
==PAGE:114==
Figure 83: Coverage path planning for the relaxed realistic Antwerp harbor using the
DFS sorting method.
113
==PAGE:115==
Figure 84: Coverage path planning for the relaxed realistic Antwerp harbor using the
TSP Centroid sorting method.
114
==PAGE:116==
Figure 85: Coverage path planning for the relaxed realistic Antwerp harbor using the
TSP GNN sorting method.
115
==PAGE:117==
C.3
Great Belt Bridge Results
Figure 86: Coverage path planning for the Great Belt Bridge using the optimized sweep
line algorithm and the unordered sub-polygons.
116
==PAGE:118==
Figure 87: Coverage path planning for the Great Belt Bridge using the optimized sweep
line algorithm and the DFS sorting method.
117
==PAGE:119==
Figure 88: Coverage path planning for the Great Belt Bridge using the optimized sweep
line algorithm and the TSP centroid sorting method.
118
==PAGE:120==
Figure 89: Coverage path planning for the Great Belt Bridge using the optimized sweep
line algorithm and the TSP GNN sorting method.
119
==PAGE:121==
D
Algorithm Pseudocode
D.1
Pseudocode for Antipodal Pairs Computation
Algorithm 1 Antipodal Pairs Algorithm
1: p ←pN
2: q ←NEXT[p]
3: while Area(p, NEXT[p], NEXT[q]) > Area(p, NEXT[p], q) do
4:
q ←NEXT[q]
▷March on P until the first vertex farthest from pN
5: end while
6: qo ←q
7: while q ̸= pN do
8:
p ←NEXT[p]
9:
print(p, q)
10:
while Area(p, NEXT[p], NEXT[q]) > Area(p, NEXT[p], q) do
11:
q ←NEXT[q]
12:
if (p, q) ̸= (qo, pN) then
13:
print(p, q)
14:
end if
15:
end while
16:
if Area(p, NEXT[p], NEXT[q]) = Area(p, NEXT[p], q) then
17:
if (p, q) ̸= (qo, pN) then
18:
print(p, NEXT[q])
▷Handling of parallel edges
19:
end if
20:
end if
21: end while
120
==PAGE:122==
D.2
Pseudocode for GetPath(b, bmate, a)
Algorithm 2 GetPath Algorithm for an Edge-Vertex Path
Require: Polygon Q = {V, E}, sweep width dx, initial vertex b, adjacent vertex bmate,
and antipodal point a
∆init ←dx
2
Lflight ←CreateLine(b, bmate)
Lflight ←OffSet(Lflight, ∆init)
ρ ←∅
while Intersects(C(Lflight), Q) do
ip1, ip2 ←IntersectEdges(Lflight, E)
ρ ←CheckAndConnect(ρ, ip1, ip2)
Lflight ←OffSet(Lflight, dx)
end while
return ρ
121
==PAGE:123==
D.3
Pseudocode for Rotating Calipers Path Planner
Algorithm 3 Rotating Calipers Path Planner
Require: Set of vertices V , starting point ps, ending point pe
Ensure: Optimal coverage path τ
1: A ←computeAntipodalPairs(V )
2: c∗←∞
3: for each pair (i, j) in A do
4:
ρ ←BestPath(V, i, j)
5:
τaux ←minCost({ps, ρ, pe}, {pe, ρ, ps})
6:
if cost(τaux) < c∗then
7:
τ ←τaux
8:
c∗←cost(τ)
9:
end if
10: end for
11: return τ
122
==PAGE:124==
D.4
Pseudocode for Best Path Algorithm
Algorithm 4 Best Path Algorithm
Require: Set of vertices V = {1, . . . , n}, antipodal pair (i, j)
Ensure: Best path ρ
1: if angle(i, j) −π < 0 then
2:
b ←j, a ←i
3: else
4:
b ←i, a ←j
5: end if
6: ϕ ←angle(b, a) −π
7: γb ←angle(b −1, b)
8: γa ←angle(a −1, a) −ϕ
9: if γb < γa then
10:
b2 ←b −1, a2 ←a
11: else
12:
b2 ←a −1, a2 ←b
13: end if
14: if dist(b, a) ¡ dist(b2, a2) then
15:
ρ ←getPath(b, b + 1)
16: else
17:
ρ ←getPath(b2 + 1, b2)
18: end if
19: return ρ
123
==PAGE:125==
D.5
Pseudocode for the find cell function
Algorithm 5 Find Cell in Polygon Subdivision
Require: v (vertex), cells (list of cells), active cells (boolean list indicating active cells), direction up (boolean), v2
(optional, another vertex)
1: for i ←0 to |cells| −1 do
2:
if not active cells[i] then
3:
continue
4:
end if
5:
if v.type = SPLIT and (v2 ∈cell[0] or v2 ∈cell[1]) then
6:
return (i, cell)
7:
end if
8:
if v.type = CEIL CONVEX and (v.next ∈cell[0] or v.next ∈cell[1]) then
9:
return (i, cell)
10:
end if
11:
if v.type = FLOOR CONVEX and (v.prev ∈cell[0] or v.prev ∈cell[1]) then
12:
return (i, cell)
13:
end if
14:
if v.type = CEIL CONCAVE then
15:
if v2.type = SPLIT and v2 ∈cell[1] then
16:
return (i, cell)
17:
end if
18:
if v2 ∈cell[0] or v2 ∈cell[1] then
19:
return (i, cell)
20:
end if
21:
end if
22:
if v.type = FLOOR CONCAVE and (v.prev ∈cell[0] or v.prev ∈cell[1]) and (v2 ∈cell[1] or v2 ∈cell[0]) then
23:
return (i, cell)
24:
end if
25:
if v.type = MERGE then
26:
if direction up then
27:
if v2.type = OPEN and v2 ∈cell[1] then
28:
return (i, cell)
29:
else if v2 ∈cell[0] then
30:
return (i, cell)
31:
end if
32:
else
33:
if v2 ∈cell[1] then
34:
return (i, cell)
35:
end if
36:
end if
37:
end if
38:
if v.type = COLLINEAR CEILING and (v.next ∈cell[0] or v.next ∈cell[1]) then
39:
return (i, cell)
40:
end if
41:
if v.type = COLLINEAR FLOOR and (v.prev ∈cell[0] or v.prev ∈cell[1]) then
42:
return (i, cell)
43:
end if
44:
if v.type = CLOSE then
45:
if v.prev ∈cell[1] and v.next ∈cell[0] then
46:
return (i, cell)
47:
end if
48:
if v.next.type = OPEN then
49:
if v.prev ∈cell[1] and v.next ∈cell[1] then
50:
return (i, cell)
51:
end if
52:
end if
53:
if v.prev.type = SPLIT and v.prev ∈cell[1] then
54:
return (i, cell)
55:
end if
56:
if v.prev ∈cell[1] then
57:
return (i, cell)
58:
end if
59:
end if
60: end for
124
