==PAGE:1==
Techincal University of Denmark
Master of Science in Engineering
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Master Thesis
Integrated LCA Modeling in
EASETECH and Brightway
Applying advanced LCA features to Waste Managmement Systems
Author:
Emil Laurberg Pedersen
Study number:
s184115
February 2, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This topic was chosen due to my personal interest in exploring opportunities to model
Waste Management Systems (WMS), with a particular focus on adding flexibility to
existing waste LCA systems. I find this topic interesting as it combines my passions for
LCA, programming, and waste management. This thesis contributes to a larger project
focused on integrating waste LCA frameworks into a broader context.
This thesis investigates how advanced LCA features can be applied to WMS to in-
crease the level of detail and flexibility in modeling the environmental impacts associated
with waste management. In a broader context, the goal is to highlight how such features
can be made accessible in waste LCA modeling, with the expectation of contributing to
more informed and accurate decision-making in waste management and environmental
policy.
I would like to thank Anders Damgaard and Heath Logan for their supervision, profes-
sional guidance, and moral support throughout this project. I am also thankful to Tomás
Navarrete Gutierrez for serving as a secondary supervisor and for involving me in the
development process of the bridging software, ET2BW.
While this thesis started out having a significantly different scope, the final approach,
goal and scope of this thesis are very relevant for the broader context in waste LCA.
It will be interesting to follow further research under this topic.
Emil Laurberg Pedersen, February 2, 2025
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Purpose and aim. The purpose of this thesis was to explore opportunities for bridging
gaps in the field of waste LCA by integrating a waste-specific LCA model, EASETECH,
with a broader and more flexible LCA model, Brightway. The aim was to assess the
opportunities, limitations, and effectiveness of applying advanced LCA methods to Waste
Management Systems (WMS) through integrated waste modeling in EASETECH and
Brightway. The identified gaps are as follows: flexibility in modeling with transparent
and robust results for precise and unbiased decision-making and the lack of quality and
availability of waste data. In addition to this, the potential of bridging these gaps was
assessed through the development and application of the ET2BW bridging software.
Methods. To ensure compatibility between the two modeling frameworks, a screening
of technical assumptions was conducted, followed by an assessment of the strengths and
weaknesses of bridging EASETECH and Brightway in the context of waste LCA modeling.
While many weaknesses were resolved using ET2BW, some were retained, and two new
limitations related to data complexity in EASETECH were introduced. To test the bridge,
regionalization and prospective LCA techniques were expected to be applied to a fully
bridged EASETECH model to incorporate spatial and temporal aspects into waste LCA
models. To assess this, a case study was developed using a persona of an environmental
engineer to model the Danish national export of waste in 2022 in EASETECH, which
was then bridged into Brightway using ET2BW.
Results. Since the bridge was not fully developed within the timeframe of this thesis,
activity groups for heat, electricity, and substitution processes were used in Brightway
to demonstrate the potential and opportunities of a fully functional bridge. Baseline
emissions from the EASETECH model indicated a net avoided impact of -1,352 kg CO2
per ton of waste exported from Denmark in 2022, with aluminum substitution being
the primary contributor to avoided emissions. Complete regionalization of substitution
processes was not carried out due to compatibility issues within Brightway packages.
However, automatic foreground process allocation successfully identified best-fit, site-
specific technosphere processes for each country within the model scope.
Mean data
quality scores for the highlighted processes ranged from 2.2 to 2.6, depending on the
country. The regionalization of substitution processes resulted in a mean avoided impact
of -4.3 kg CO2 per kg substituted waste, with a standard deviation within of 0.16% for all
assessed countries, primarily due to low spatial data availability for aluminum. Applying
ii
==PAGE:4==
prospective LCA techniques to substitution processes projected a decrease in avoided
emissions by 70% for aluminum and fiber, 50% for batteries, and 10%-30% for steel and
plastics by 2050. When applying the case model context and waste composition changes
to this development, aluminum became a less dominant substituted material fraction,
while plastics increasingly dominated avoided impacts over time.
Discussion. The results highlight both the opportunities and limitations of bridging
EASETECH and Brightway. Though, challenges remain regarding data complexity in
modeling, compatibility in carrying out regionalization, along with assessing the uncer-
tainty of applying these features to waste LCA models. In addition, improvements are
needed in foreground modeling approaches to ensure sufficient accuracy and detail. The
findings emphasize the need for continued development and testing to achieve a fully
integrated and reliable waste LCA framework for integrated waste modeling, and an
assessment of effects to a WMS when bridging is fully applied to an EASETECH model.
Conclusion and future work. This thesis demonstrates the potential of bridging the
two models using ET2BW, particularly for improving accessiblity of incorporating spatial
and temporal aspects into waste LCA models. Future work should apply these approaches
to a fully developed EASETECH model, refine methods for regionalization and prospec-
tive LCA, and correctly implement and assess background transformations in regional-
ization. These improvements will ultimately enhance the robustness and applicability of
waste LCA in a decision-making context.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Sammenfatning
Formål. Formålet med dette speciale er at undersøge mulighederne for at reducere
metodiske begrænsninger i affalds-LCA, ved at integrere EASETECH med det mere
fleksible og generelle LCA-værktøj, Brightway. Målet er at vurdere potentialet, begræn-
sningerne og effektiviteten af at anvende avancerede LCA-metoder på affaldssystemer
gennem en integreret modeltilgang i EASETECH og Brightway, ved brug af bridgingsoft-
ware pakken ET2BW. To centrale metodiske udfordringer i affalds-LCA faget er blevet
identificeret: manglende fleksibilitet i modellering, samt behov for transparente og ro-
buste resultater til præcise og objektive beslutningsgrundlag samt en mangel på kvalitet og
tilgængelighed i affaldsdata. Specialet undersøger, hvordan disse mangler kan afhjælpes,
gennem brug af ET2BW.
Metoder. For at sikre kompatibilitet mellem de to LCA modelleringsværktøjer, har spe-
cialet gennemført en screening af tekniske antagelser, efterfulgt af en vurdering af styrker
og svagheder ved at koble EASETECH med Brightway.
Brugen af ET2BW løser en
række metodiske begrænsninger i modellering, men nogle forbliver uændret, og to nye
udfordringer relateret til datakompleksitet i EASETECH bliver introduceret. Funktion-
aliteten testes ved at anvende regionalisering og prospektive LCA-teknikker på en fuldt
integreret EASETECH-model med henblik på at inkludere rumlige og tidslige aspekter
i affalds-LCA. For at demonstrere mulighederne ved denne tilgang, er der udviklet et
casestudie, hvor en karakter af en miljøingeniør anvendes til at modellere Danmarks na-
tionale eksport af affald i 2022 i EASETECH, som derefter kobles til Brightway ved brug
af ET2BW.
Resultater. Da ET2BW stadig er under udvikling, blev der i stedet anvendt grupperede
aktiviteter for varme, elektricitet og substitutionsprocesser i Brightway, til at demonstrere
potentialet ved en fuldt funktionel integration mellem EASETECH og Brightway. Ba-
sisemissionerne fra EASETECH modellen viste emissioner på -1,352 kg CO2 pr. ton ek-
sporteret affald fra Danmark i 2022, hvor substitution af aluminium var den primære kilde
til emissionerne. Komplet regionalisering af substitutionsprocesser kunne ikke gennem-
føres grundet kompatibilitetsproblemer i Brightway-pakkerne. Dog blev automatisk allok-
ering af forgrundsprocesser implementeret for at identificere de bedst egnede geografiske
matches for de inkluderede processer. De gennemsnitlige datakvalitetsscorer for disse pro-
cesser lå mellem 2.2 og 2.6, afhængigt af land. Regionalisering af substitutionsprocesser
resulterede i en gennemsnitlig emission på -4.3 kg CO2 pr. kg substitueret affald, med en
iv
==PAGE:6==
standardafvigelse på 0.16 % mellem alle lande, hvilket primært skyldtes begrænset rumlig
datatilgængelighed for aluminium. Prospektive LCA-analyser af substitutionsprocesser
viste en forventet reduktion i undgåede emissioner på 70% for aluminium og fibre, 50%
for batterier og 10-30% for stål og plast i 2050.
Når disse udviklinger blev anvendt
på casestudiets affaldssammensætning over tid, blev aluminium en mindre dominerende
substitueret ressource, mens plast overtog en større del af miljøpåvirkningerne.
Diskussion. Resultaterne viser både potentialer og begrænsninger ved at koble
EASETECH og Brightway.
At koble disse to LCA modelleringsværktøjer løser en
række tekniske udfordringer, men datakompleksitet og kompatibilitetsproblemer ved
regionalisering er stadigvæk en barriere i dette studie. Desuden er der behov for en mere
systematisk vurdering af usikkerheden ved anvendelsen af disse metoder i affalds-LCA.
Modellering af forgrunds data kræver yderligere udvikling for at sikre tilstrækkelige
resultater i analyserne.
Samlet set understreges behovet for fortsat metodeudvikling
for at opnå en fuldt integreret og pålidelig ramme for at modellere affalds-LCA i
EASETECH og Brightway.
Konklusion og fremtidigt arbejde. Dette speciale viser, at integrationen mellem
EASETECH og Brightway har potentiale til at forbedre mulighederne for at inklud-
ere geografiske og tidsvariable aspekter i affalds-LCA. Der er dog behov for yderligere
udvikling, før en fuldt integreret affalds-LCA model kan implementeres i praksis. Frem-
tidigt arbejde bør fokusere på at anvende de udviklede metoder på en fuld EASETECH
model når ET2BW er færdigbygget. Derudover bør der fokuseres på at forbedre tilgangen
til regionalisering og prospektiv LCA samt sikre korrekte ændringer af baggrundsdata i
regionalisering. Disse forbedringer vil styrke LCA modellering af affaldssystemer til at
kunne give et mere fulendt billede af miljøåvirkningerne fra sådanne systemer, hvilket i
sidste ende kan understøtte beslutningstagning indenfor affaldssystemer.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Sammenfatning
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Scope of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Terms and Definitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Challenges and Methodological Considerations in Waste LCA
. . . . . .
5
2.1.1
LCA of Current Waste Management Systems . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Key Challenges and Gaps in Waste LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Background System Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Assessment Models and Technical Assumptions in Waste LCA Modeling
7
2.2.1
Screening of Technical Assumptions of EASETECH and Brightway
8
2.3
Key Factors and LCA Features in Waste LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Waste Composition and Waste Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Regionalization in LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
Prospective LCA and Waste Management Systems
. . . . . . . .
10
3
Methods
12
3.1
Bridging EASETECH and Brightway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Case Study - Impacts from Danish Exported National Waste . . . . . . .
13
3.2.1
Adopted Persona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
EASETECH Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.3
Minimizing Limitations Through Integration . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Applying LCA Operations in Brightway - Testing the Bridge . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Prospective LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Results
21
4.1
Baseline Impact Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
4.2
Regionalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Changes in the Foreground System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.2
Changes in the Background System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Prospective LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.1
Changes in the Foreground System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.2
Changes in the Background System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Discussion
35
5.1
Assumptions and Limitations of Methods and Framework . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.1
Evaluating Main Assumptions of Integrated Waste Modeling . . .
35
5.1.2
Method and Data Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.3
Framework-specific Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Lessons Learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.1
Revisiting Thesis Research Questions and Aim . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.2
Evaluating Expected Outcomes from Results . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2.3
In a Broader Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Recommendations and Practical Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3.1
Recommendations for Integrated Waste Modeling, using ET2BW
43
5.3.2
Practical Applications in Waste Management Systems . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Further Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4.1
Improving Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4.2
Refining ET2BW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4.3
Potential Extensions to the Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5
Key Points and Insights
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Conclusion
49
7
Appendix
55
7.1
A - Technical Assumptions of Brightway and EASETECH
. . . . . . . .
56
7.2
B - Recycling Pathway for Specific R codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.3
C - Description of Flowchart Processes in the EASETECH Model . . . .
58
7.4
D - Changes in Baseline Energy Impacts Over Time . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.5
E - Definition of R and D codes and Chosen Waste Treatment Technology
64
7.6
F - Relative Changes in Impacts for Substitution Processes with Constant
Waste Compositon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
vii
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Context and Motivation
The world of waste is an undesired, yet unavoidable part of society and is the cause of
some of the main challenges in sustainability. With approximately 2,223 million tonnes
of waste produced in EU each year [22], the treatment and recovery of resources from
this amount of waste is important for transitioning into a more sustainable future.
As a significant part of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 11. Sustainable cities
and communities, 12. Responsible consumption and production and 13. Climate action,
the sector of waste management play a significant role in contributing to a circular econ-
omy and de-fossilization of specific sectors [30].
Impacts from waste management account for approximately 3.2% of total GreenHouse
Gas (GHG) emissions in 2016, with majority of impacts from landfills and wastewater
[32]. Recycling systems are underrepresented in these frameworks [21], and highlights
a need of improving climate accounting to emphasize the relevance and motivation for
optimizing recycling systems.
Using secondary products from recycling systems in producing sectors will support
closing the material loops in these sectors. Therefore, Improving the accounting of recy-
cling systems will aid in de-fossilizing the waste sector and supporting a circular economy
[21].
International trade and increased decentralization of production have made supply
chains harder to study and thus, harder to assess for upstream environmental impacts of
products. This is significant in the context of extended producer responsibility, highlight-
ing the need for models to assess environmental impacts, associated with product supply
chains.
While the concept Industrial Ecology and subsequent LCA methods have been around
since the 1970’s [19], the focus on LCA has been increasing, with a rapid increase in
studies, research and methods in the last two decades [27].
Following the growth of LCA studies, the development of LCA in Waste Management
Systems (WMS) have seen a drastic increase in studies since 2009 [2]. LCA in Waste
Management (WM) is an evolving field, still facing significant gaps in terms of methods,
1
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1. Introduction
data, and frameworks. Studies and reviews of the current field of waste LCA reveal a
lack of focus on waste prevention systems, sectors beyond municipal waste treatment,
and consistency in modeling frameworks, especially in the context of future scenarios and
prospective modeling.[9, 17, 2, 34, 11]. Thus, a need for integrating and expanding the
current frameworks in the field of waste LCA is needed. Advanced LCA methods to apply
on waste system models are still being developed to create more specific and dynamic
assessments. Taking temporal, spatial, and sectoral variations into account will lead to
more accurate Impact Assessments (IA) and better support decision-making for complex
WM systems. While prospective modeling is used for studying emerging technologies and
its role in future society, there is a need to incorporate prospective methods in studies of
WMS. In particular, prospective modeling can help to ensure that the development and
implementation of waste treatment technologies remain relevant and viable throughout
their operational lifetimes [17]. In addition, prospective modeling is also needed to assess
how WMS handle the future waste treatment of emerging and more complex resources.
To reach before-mentioned sustainable development goals; 11, 12, 13, accurate and
transparent LCA modeling in WMS is needed, with access to advanced LCA methods
to reach responsible and unbiased decision-making, aiming towards more circular and
de-fossilized systems in society.
The motivation for this thesis is to address the gaps concerning limitations of advanced
LCA modeling of WMS, ultimately being able to create a better support for decision-
making within the field of WM.
1.2
Aim of the Thesis
The main aim of this thesis is to assess the opportunities, limitations and effective-
ness of applying advanced LCA methods to WMS through integrated waste modeling in
EASETECH and Brightway.
The research will fill gaps in waste LCA related to flexibility in LCA modeling, primar-
ily the lack of focus on spatial and temporal factors. The thesis is expected to showcase
the opportunities of extending waste modeling in EASETECH, ultimately extending the
waste LCA framework to include spatial and temporal dynamics in modeling WMS.
To evaluate this, following objectives and connected research questions have been
formulated to gain extensive knowledge about the main aim.
Objectives
• Objective 1: Identify gaps in the research field of waste LCA, together with the
strengths and weaknesses, present in EASETECH and Brightway.
2
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1. Introduction
• Objective 2: Evaluate the expected opportunities of integrating EASETECH and
Brightway, using current strengths and weaknesses of each modeling framework.
• Objective 3: Evaluate the integration between EASETECH and Brightway, done
by carrying out a case study of Danish national export of waste. The following
features will be applied on the case study and results from this will be evaluated:
– Regionalization.
– Prospective LCA.
Research Questions
1. Research Question 1: How well are the relevant gaps and weaknesses in the waste
LCA research field being bridged by integrating the two assessment models?
2. Research Question 2: How will the strengths and weaknesses of EASETECH and
Brightway act when these systems are integrated, compared to their strengths and
weaknesses as standalone models?
3. Research Question 3: How well does the integration of EASETECH models in
Brightway work for its intended use in the case with regards to regionalization and
prospective LCA?
The research questions will be used for basis of a discussion of how well the objec-
tives have been answered, along with it’s connected shortcomings, and how this can be
accounted for in future work.
1.3
Scope of the Thesis
As this is a proof-of-concept thesis, the scope is limited to assessing the relative change
of impacts when applying regionalization and prospective LCA on WMS. Neither socioe-
conomic nor economic factors, beyond what is modeled when including Socioeconomic
Shared Pathways (SSPs) in prospective LCA, are within the scope of this thesis and will
not be investigated further. Hence, results should be used for highlighting the opportu-
nities and potential of extending waste models.
The geographical scope and methods for creating regionalized models for Danish na-
tional export of waste is limited to Denmark and the subsequent importers of waste in
2018-2022; Germany, Netherlands, Sweden, Norway and Turkey [10]. The export to Other
countries and Rest of Europe (RER) is considered out of scope. Recovery and disposal
of these amounts will therefore not be considered. Recovery of waste, not finally treated
within the boundaries (R12, R13) will not be considered further.
3
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction
The intended audience for this thesis is researchers and engineers with experience in
the field of LCA and waste management, but with limited knowledge in programming
and Brightway modeling.
1.4
Terms and Definitions
This section describes the key terms and the definition of these, in the context of this
thesis.
Table 1.1: Key terms, and how the term is defined in the thesis.
Term
Definition
Foreground system
User-defined data and process flows of an LCA system.
Background system
The use of pre-defined processes with existing LCI,
available in an external database.
Site-generic
Average or general data, that can be applied multiple regions.
Site-specific
Specific data to a particular region
Apply transformations
Methodological adjustments to a predefined dataset.
Geocollection
GIS data containing data of areas, defined by an EcoInvent location or region.
Socioeconomic Shared Pathway
Trajectories in population, economic development and GHG emissions [18].
Integrated waste modeling
Modeling LCA of a waste system using two or more assessment models.
4
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Challenges and Methodological Considerations in
Waste LCA
2.1.1
LCA of Current Waste Management Systems
The primary focus of waste LCA is on quantifying environmental impacts, associated with
the End-Of-Life stage of products and goods [20]. Rather than defining the functional
unit as the impacts, associated with producing and using a good or a service as in
traditional LCA, the functional unit is defined as the impacts associated with treating a
heterogeneous flow of waste bin-to-cradle part of the life cycle. The differences in FU,
system boundary and cut-off are a significant difference in separating product LCA and
waste LCA.
The current research field is mainly focused on household and household-related waste,
but is lacking focus on other waste sectors, for example in the e-waste and construc-
tion/demolition waste sectors [2]. A significant part of LCAs has mainly been carried out
in developed countries, specifically in Europe and Central Asia, thus creating a spatial
bias in waste technologies [2, 9]. Treatment technologies in developing countries and
countries outside Europe have been less researched, and would cause possible biases to-
ward every imact category, especially when assessing site-sensitive impact categories [2,
9].
Trends in life cycles of waste treatment technologies has shown a light shift towards
energy-related waste technologies like anaerobic digestion in treatment of organic waste
[9]. Overall, there has been a move away from incinerating organic waste, as anaerobic
digestion and composting prove to be cheaper treatment technologies [9].
Most of thermal treatment in the global field of WM technologies are incineration, and
still emerging technologies like pyrolysis and gasification of waste material is underrepre-
sented, due to the simple fact that waste is a well established waste treatment technology
in many societies [9]. On the other hand, open land-filling as a treatment technology has
been increasing as a result of economic development in developing countries, along with a
slight decrease in sanitary landfills [9]. Although this data is not directly linked to the dy-
5
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Background
namics of waste treatment technologies, the development of these technologies highlights
the importance of considering temporal aspects to account for changes in WMS.
Although LCA studies on waste management systems have been increasing in the
recent decades, results and conclusions are found to differ when creating an LCA model
for similar waste systems [2]. An example for plastic waste treatment concluded that of
29 studies, 59% found recycling as the best performing waste treatment technology, 14%
found thermal treatment to be the best performing treatment technology, while the rest of
the studies (28%) found inconclusive results to the best performing waste technology [2].
This example shows the need of consistency and transparency in waste LCA modeling,
as the highlighed studies likely had differences in spatial and temporal setting, waste
composition/properties, data quality and system boundary, thus making the conclusions
different. This example emphasizes the need for bridging gaps in the field of waste LCA,
to reach consistent and transparent results.
2.1.2
Key Challenges and Gaps in Waste LCA
While the key challenges have been mentioned as part of the current research field, the
specific issues if each of the key challenge areas have been grouped and described in
Table 2.1.
The gaps in the research field of waste LCA will naturally include the bias of not taking
certain factors into account, nor weighting them accordingly, with respect to their true
impacts. Thus, there is a motivation for these gaps to be bridged to reach unbiased and
accurate conclusions. This thesis will focus on bridging gaps in Flexiblity in modeling
including transparent and robust results for precise/unbiased decision-making and The
lack of quality in waste data and availability. In addition, subsection 5.4.3 will evaluate
the opportunities of using the findings of this thesis as a basis for bridging other gaps in
the field of waste LCA.
2.1.3
Background System Complexity
Background system complexity in waste LCA refers to the complexity of the processes,
used to model the background system. Expanding the system increases the use of fore-
ground processes, thereby reducing and controlling complexity of the model.Examples
include using technosphere processes to expand the energy systems and mixes of the
model, thereby not relying on background mixes.
Substitution of secondary materials and energy has in multiple waste systems shown to
dominate background impacts of the system. Materials like aluminum, steel and plastics
are prone to carry a large environmental burden if extracted and refined as a primary
resource. Therefore, recycling and substitution processes are prioritized when expanding
processes, thus reducing the complexity in the background system of these processes.
6
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Background
Model results in waste LCA studies are frequently caused by the choice of background
processes, with the background processes contributing up to half of emissions [16]. This
complicates the system model, as background processes are chosen on best fits in relation
to the scope of the study.
Following the development of recent frameworks, developed by [28], background sys-
tems can be transformed to allow more complexity [14, 29]. While regionalization does
not expand the background system, it transforms background processes to account for
site-specific emissions, and is also considered a background system transformation [12].
Evaluation of results and methods from transforming background systems will be included
in the thesis, and described in detail in the following section 2.3.
2.2
Assessment Models and Technical Assumptions in
Waste LCA Modeling
Modeling WMS are focused on expanding foreground systems to achieve very specific
and flexible foreground systems. While most of the focus is on the foreground system,
the background system is not evaluated on the same level [17]. This shows the need for
more flexible models, which can parameterize elementary exchanges in the background
processes to reach higher levels of detail in finding high contribution substances and
measuring global sensitivity at elementary exchange level.
EASETECH is developed as a waste-oriented LCA model, allowing LCA modeling of
waste technologies on waste fraction level, exclusively used for modeling Bin-to-Cradle
or Bin-to-Grave stages of the product life cycle. EASETECH allows for defining waste
fractions when defining the waste composition and Functional Unit (FU), allowing for
tracking material flows throughout the system at waste fraction level. Waste fractions
are not aggregated, and mass/property transformations is performed for each respec-
tive waste fraction, creating transparency and flexibility, as these flows can be tracked
throughout the system. Furthermore, EASETECH is equipped with a pre-defined process
catalog, containing pre-defined processes with relevant input parameters. This feature
boosts transparency and consistency when modeling environmental processes and waste
technologies. This method of modeling supports modular LCA in WM, presented by
[26], where custom sub-systems can be created from scratch, reflecting each respective,
user-defined module [8].
Brightway, a python-based, open-source LCA modeling framework [28], is a modular,
flexible and versatile tool for background data transformations and scenario analysis.
The modular and pythonic structure of Brightway allows for efficient coupling between
models from the Brightway software ecosystem [7], making Brightway into a versatile tool
for combining existing models and frameworks, along with implementing new frameworks
7
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Background
into an already existing software ecosystem. As an example, Brightway allows background
transformation of processes to assess predicted impacts, using IAMs to predict technology
and energy changes in relation to Socioeconomic Shared Pathways (SSPs) [14].
2.2.1
Screening of Technical Assumptions of EASETECH and
Brightway
Technical assumptions are screened through documentation and experimentation in
EASETECH, and Brightway [28, 8], In order to get an overview of differences in
modeling frameworks.
Main results of this screening shows that the two models use linear matrix calcula-
tions to calculate LCI and LCIA. Yet, Brightway can differentiate temporal aspects at
greater detail and without the use of manual scenario analysis. Furthermore, Brightway
supports expansion of the waste system, as the tool is made for Cradle-to-Cradle model-
ing. Modeling-wise, EASETECH uses material properties for waste technology modeling,
along with the use of complex environmental processes with linear responses, which is
not supported in the current Brightway framework. A table of the technical assumption
screening can be found in section 7.1.
2.3
Key Factors and LCA Features in Waste LCA
2.3.1
Waste Composition and Waste Properties
The choice of including waste composition in waste LCA studies is crucial to the re-
sults of the overall environmental impacts, along with the following interpretation and
decision-making. In WMS, the waste composition is largely overlooked, yet contributes,
on average, to 48% of results and 83% of uncertainty [16] in the modeled waste manage-
ment systems. Therefore, a change in both composition and waste fraction properties
will be a significant contributor to the impacts and conclusions of the study.
A review of 250 WtE studies for technology parameters, including waste, chemical and
material composition, found that while 70% of these studies included detailed descriptions
of fractions, present in the waste, only 44% included a detailed description about both
the chemical and fractional/material composition and the rest (26%) included no to little
detailed information [15, 16]. This proves, that the studies contains either none or poor
descriptions and justifications, even though this technology parameter is significant to
impacts and results.
The chemical and physical waste properties of each waste fraction show another degree
of freedom in waste composition, which will ultimately account for as much significance
as the waste composition, as the waste composition can essentially be seen as a weighed
8
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Background
average of properties of each included waste fraction. Naturally, these properties represent
a more detailed level of data, which both enhances the granularity and complexity of the
data.
The properties of waste fractions vary considerably between different types of
wastes, leading to significant changes in environmental impacts.
As an example, the
amount of fossil carbon in plastics prove to dominate climate change impacts from waste
incineration technologies, with impacts being dominated by input-specific emissions [17].
Ideally, waste LCA studies should present how the quality and uncertainty of the
waste composition data affect the final results and uncertainty, in which few waste LCA
studies have done [16]. While it is impossible for models to automatically collect custom
composition data, it is recommended using scenario analysis, global sensitivity and un-
certainty analysis to assess the importance of waste composition. This would aid filling
the knowledge gap of not knowing the significance and complexity of waste composition,
which will ultimately aid in interpreting results and guide decision-making in a more
informed and effective direction.
2.3.2
Regionalization in LCA
The spatial scope of waste LCA studies within the 2 last decades is dominated by studies
from Central Asia and Europe and East Asia & Pacific and having Italy and China as
main contributor to these country groups, respectively. The varying data availability
for impacts, associated with biosphere emissions, is making spatial differentiation chal-
lenging to estimate consistently [9]. This naturally causes biased results, either over- or
underestimating results and risking wrongful decision-making.
Regionalization in LCA is used when measuring site-specific exchanges between tech-
nosphere and biosphere, along with including region-specific parameters. In the context
of waste LCA, this includes the choice of technosphere processes, recycling and substi-
tution efficiencies, along with transport distances and impacts from additional processes
in the systems like transfer stations and material sorting. Using site-specific CFs instead
of site-generic CFs will aid the study towards providing a precise impact assessment and
following interpretation.
While in theory, impacts of every exchange should be region specific, data availability
does not allow for this. Hence, existing regionalization frameworks in waste LCA prioritize
focus on substances, shown to have the highest contribution, and in some cases the lowest
data quality [1]. Regionalizing emissions have proven to be significant for the recycling
impacts a case study, focusing on climate change impacts from paper recycling [1]. Results
vary a factor of 6-8, depending on the substitution of secondary paper from wastepaper
treatment [1].
Although no single correct framework for doing regionalization is considered the most
correct [12], different ways of regionalizing an LCA has been presented [1, 29]. Each with
9
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Background
it’s own limitations and opportunities, inspiration can be drawn from each method to
create a regionalization method, based on [1] for foreground data and [29] for background
data. This approach will be described in section 3.3 and its effectiveness discussed in
subsection 5.2.2.
2.3.3
Prospective LCA and Waste Management Systems
Emerging waste technologies require long operational lifetimes and large financial invest-
ments in order to be implemented in a waste management system [17]. Therefore, waste
LCA studies should aim to adopt a prospective LCA framework to anticipate future
needs and changes in society when identifying environmentally optimal solutions. While
the field of waste LCA moves towards adopting more prospective LCA methods, waste
models should also be able to assess predicted changes in technologies and impacts to
back this change in modeling [17].
Prospective LCA, while developed for assessing impacts on emerging technologies, can
be applied in waste systems to reflect expected dynamics in a waste management system,
along with expected changes in waste properties and waste technologies.
In connection to future predictions, some articles have focused on predictions for future
waste management systems. These predicted changes are mostly focused on waste quan-
tities, waste properties and background processes, associated with recycling waste frac-
tions, mainly looking at influences by de-fossilization. Although the predictions mostly
seem optimistic, the generation of waste fractions is expected to double for some fractions
[17], stating that while the waste generation per capita might decrease, the total waste
generation will increase significantly. Change is expected, especially in the textile waste
fraction, as there has been a factor 4 increase from 2000 to 2020 [17]. As a major limita-
tion for these predictions, the social response, unforeseen policy regulations, and market
influence are not considered, mainly because it is almost impossible to estimate correctly.
Therefore, and to control complexity in predictions, only changes in waste generation,
energy and waste properties will be taken into account.
Currently, prospective LCA and future scenario analysis in waste LCA lack consis-
tency, quality and a clear framework [34]. PREMISE (PRospective EnvironMental Im-
pact AsSEssment) can be used as a streamlined prospective framework, which transforms
EcoInvent databases to reflect changes in the LCI of background processes, following pre-
dicted trends from SSPs [14]. This approach is focused on transforming energy systems,
but have expanded to take material production, transport systems, agriculture and land-
use, and waste management into account [14, 13].
10
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Background
Table 2.1: Key challenges and specific issues of the current research field of waste LCA.
Key challenges
Specific issues
Description of specific issues
Sources
The lack of quality in
waste data and availability
Modelling multiple waste sectors
Underrepresentation of waste studies from
other sectors than household waste, examples:
Construction and Demolition, Agriculture,
forestry and fishing and Manufacturing
[2]
Estimating resource efficiencies
and resource recovery
Not enough attention to quality and market
substitution of recovered materials, along
with possible multiple values, as end products
of recycling are likely to have different quality
grades, accounting for different substitution rates
[17]
Improving emission control from
waste technologies and systems
Higher and more specific data quality for waste
management systems are too time consuming,
hence assumptions are made, leading to a
reduction in data quality and model certainty.
[17]
Flexiblity in modelling including
transparent and robust results
for precise/unbiased decision-making
Scenario based modeling
Scenarioes to explore likely scenarios to assess
model uncertainty are underrepresented in studies.
[2]
Lack of focus on
temporal perspectives
Dynamic, temporal and Prospective LCA
is underrepresented in the research field of
waste LCA, due to the recency of the framework
and limitations of current waste LCA models.
[24, 34]
Lack of focus on
spatial perspectives
Inclusion of regionalized emissions are mostly
limited to energy systems and dominating
background processes, whereas factors like
foreground parameters, waste technologies,
socioeconomic responses and emissions to
biosphere lack attention.
[1, 2]
Including sensitivity/uncertainty
analysis
Inclusion of data uncertainty and global sensitivity
is underrepresented in recent studies.
Consistently defining system
boundaries and FU
No definition of system boundaries, temporal scope
and unclear definition of FU and reference flow.
[17]
Expanding the
modeling framework
Waste prevention modeling
Lack of focus on waste prevention systems
and a clear, normalized framework for LCA
modeling, with very few studies
published in this area.
[17], [5]
11
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3
Methods
3.1
Bridging EASETECH and Brightway
The Brightway package, ET2BW, acting as a bridge between EASETECH and Brightway,
is developed by Tomás Navarrete Gutierrez, made compatible for EASETECH version
3.6.7 to work with Brightway 2.5 [23]. The bridge will be applied to a case study to test
the functionality of modeling waste management systems in EASETECH and Brightway.
In order to capture the entire complexity of the EASETECH model, the relevant
catalogs and scenarios are transferred to Brightway as SQlite databases. For recreating
an EASETECH scenario, three catalog databases and one scenario database need to be
created; a material fraction database, a material property database, an external process
database and a scenario database, with the databases in specific order.
The catalog
databases contain generic, non-scenario specific data, hence being created in it’s respective
database.
For the scenario transfer, exchanges, processes and flows of the model is taken directly
from the database files, stored as XML files, in the EASETECH scenario files.
The
databases are created by the use of the Extract, Transform, Load (ETL) method, to
create the scenario databases.
This is done on an I/O approach of EASETECH processes, meaning that each
EASETECH process is represented as it’s consumption and emissions, based on reference
flow.
This approach already represents major limitations on testing environmental
parameters with non-linear responses for sensitivity or contribution, like first order decay
rates when modeling landfill gas generation [3]. This issue will be discussed later, in
subsection 5.4.2.
12
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.2
Case Study - Impacts from Danish Exported Na-
tional Waste
3.2.1
Adopted Persona
A persona was adopted in the case study to highlight how this approach can be applied
to LCA modeling of WMS. The adopted persona is as follows:
An
environmental
engineer,
wanting
to
explore
opportunities
of
integrating
EASETECH with Brightway.
Furthermore, he wants to test how integration into
Brightway will affect his existing EASETECH models.
He has good knowledge of
python, but very little experience with Brightway. He has a good understanding of the
dynamics in WMS and the relationship between process emissions and characterized
impacts.
An EASETECH model for modeling environmental impacts, associated with sending
and treating exported waste in Germany, sent from Denmark in 2022 has been developed
under this persona. The case study builds on export data from [10], along with assump-
tions of waste pathways, waste treatment and transport distances. The chosen EcoInvent
processes are site-generic.
Following the integration, he would like:
1. To extend his model to calculate regionalized impacts, associated with exported
waste for each country that imports waste from Denmark.
2. To apply prospective LCA tecniques the WMS, in order to predict changes in im-
pacts and waste technologies in the future.
In more general terms, he would like his model to do the following:
1. Make the EASETECH model as a generic parameterized model to ensure modeling
consistency and flexibility.
2. Create and model scenarios, while iterating through variables, to assess changes in
impacts, following changes in parameters.
3. Regionalize emissions from country-specific waste treatment.
4. Apply Prospective LCA techniques on each scenario, with additional changes of
waste treatment technologies are done at different points in time.
13
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.2.2
EASETECH Model
Flowchart and Description of The System
Dataflow of the EASETECH model is as follows; 1) Waste generation and composition,
2) Allocation of waste fractions for Recovery/Disposal (R/D) pathways, 3) Allocation
of waste fractions to respective import countries, 4) Allocation of final treatment op-
tions/waste technologies on each respective R and D code.
A definition of R and D
codes, along with allocated treatment techology is found in section 7.5.
The flow is
visualized below in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1:
Flowchart of the material flows throughout the waste management system for exported danish waste on
national level.
Expanding the recycling process shows the treatment and substitution of each specific
14
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3. Methods
R fraction of finally treated waste, see section 7.2.
Figure 3.1 shows the mass flow and associated processes. Transport distances are
separated between inter-country transportation in Denmark, inter-country transportation
in the import country and export transportation between countries, each with separate
assigned transport distances. Transfer stations are assumed to have no emissions from
use, commission or decommission. The entire system has also an input of materials and
energy, and and output of emissions, accounting for total consumption and emission of
processes within the system boundary. A full description of how processes are modeled
in EASETECH are present in section 7.3.
System boundaries has been chosen to begin at generation of waste with no associated
upstream impacts, and end with waste, either exiting the system, or substituting primary
production. System expansion is used in the model when Data Quality (DQ) is good
enough to do so. Otherwise, external processes by best estimates were used. The recycling
processes were adapted from existing recycling processes in EASETECH [31, 25].
Development and Design
The EASETECH model is built using allocation matrices to route masses throughout
the system.
Export fraction data from [10] are used as a basis for allocating waste
fractions to each country, along with assumptions of waste received to each country,
based on typical imported waste fractions to each country. EcoInvent v3.8 is chosen as
database for modeling the background system. This is chosen because the Brightway tool
for background regionalization does not support more recent versions of the EcoInvent
database.
The exported waste composition is created from detailed composition data and ex-
ported data masses are aggregated on EU standard codes, accounting for different R/D
options. As the transparency of data is limited, assumptions have been made to approxi-
mate the model flows are the most correct form. The exported national waste masses have
not been shown on waste fraction level, and to account for this, the following method for
estimating allocation vectors for each country (acountry), thus approximating mass flows
on fraction level has been used.
Westimate = acountry ∗wyear
(3.1)
With variables;
• acountry=[a1,a2,. . . ,an]: allocation vector, showing an estimation of how much of the
total mass of the waste fraction is exported to the respective country.
• wyear=[w1,w2,. . . ,wn]:
composition vector, showing waste composition fractions
from [10].
15
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3. Methods
• Westimate: allocated waste amounts on each waste fraction.
acountry is found by minimizing the difference between total national estimated ex-
ported waste amount, (Wactual) from [10], and sum of Westimate:
n
X
i=0
(Westimate −Wactual) ≈0
(3.2)
Using this method will likely yield multiple solutions of acountry for minimizing Equa-
tion 3.2.2, because of its many degrees of freedom. One of the solutions for acountry, with
the best expected fit to a real-life context have been chosen for use in modeling. This
method has also been used for allocating waste fractions between total R and D masses,
along with allocating on each specific R and D code.
Assumption correctness to overcome data limitations is not a priority for the described
EASETECH model, as this is an example of proof-of-concept case. Hence, the absolute
results of this model should not be used for other purposes than as a baseline result
before applying regionalization and Prospective LCA techniques on the model. Though,
DQ and assumption correctness will be evaluated when applying the mentioned methods
to the EASETECH model after export into Brightway, as the effectiveness and accuracy
of these methods are relevant to the thesis.
The EASETECH model is limited to five different scenarios, as the waste is exported to
five different countries [10], with each scenario representing the specific waste quantities
sent to each destination.
The engineer has chosen to export one model scenario for
export to Brightway and will create the generic parameterized model from this. He will
afterwords recreate the other models using the generic parameterized model in Brightway
for method consistency.
3.2.3
Minimizing Limitations Through Integration
As indicated in the differences in technical assumptions subsection 2.2.1, some strengths
and weaknesses of each modeling tool start to become apparent. These strengths and
weaknesses are described in Table 3.1, along with the strengths and weaknesses of bridging
the two modeling tools, in relation to the two modeling tools as standalone tools.
Using ET2BW will naturally also need some knowledge and setup of Jupyter Note-
books, but further use of ET2BW have not been considered in this strengths and weak-
nesses table, merely the integration part after transferring the EASETECH model.
As seen in Table 3.1, while resolving important issues in modeling, the bridge still
retains some weaknesses and introduces two new weaknesses. The severity and how to
overcome these weaknesses will be discussed in subsection 5.1.3.
16
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.3
Applying LCA Operations in Brightway - Testing
the Bridge
The bridge will be tested by creating a generic parameterized model for Danish national
export of waste, with input from multiple excel sheets. The modeling in Brightway will
be created and demonstrated using two jupyter notebooks, along with two connected
python scripts. The model, with incuded methods and results, is available in supporting
information: ’SI_1_MSC_integrated_modeling’.
The following subsections provide a detailed overview of the operations applied to the
case model in Brightway after its export via ET2BW, as well as the anticipated outcomes
of these operations.
Regionalization
The goal of this method is to add a spatial dimension to EASETECH modeled WMS,
creating site-specific impacts for processes in the model.
Regionalization, in this case, will be done by:
1. Changing foreground data to correspond with matching spatial and socioeconomic
data for the specific country.
2. Allocating regionalized CFs to each biosphere flow for the specific country, using an
integrated framework in Brightway [29].
Data availability at the country level is limited in databases and studies [2], and
to account for this in the foreground data, the method will use GDP as a measure of
similarity in the technological and social factors, associated with countries in question
[1].
For selecting country-specific technosphere processes from EcoInvent, the data is found
in the following ranked order;
1. Matching country
2. Matching larger region, including the country
3. Matching country with similar GDP ranking (nearest 10 countries from origin coun-
try on a ranked GDP list)
4. Large, site-generic regions - GLO and RoW.
5. Countries with no similarity to the origin country (over 10 countries from origin
country on a ranked GDP list)
17
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3. Methods
Each of these steps will be assigned a DQ score 1-5 for each process to evaluate how
well the operation performed. This method is implemented in Python, using a dedicated
function for finding the best site-specific fit nor the model process, using GDP data from
2023 [33].
Even though some processes are only a best fit for the country, the Brightway frame-
work ensures that CFs are matched to the origin country, so that process emissions are
accounted for as if they occur there.
In addition, foreground regionalization of the full EASETECH model will be done by
1) changing recycling efficiencies, 2) changing transport distances, 3) changing forms of
transport (ship or truck), 4) changing waste allocation to respective country and 5) chang-
ing technosphere processes to country-specific EcoInvent processes. These parameters are
expected to be read into the model using an excel sheet.
The expected outcomes include five regionalized impact assessments and a total im-
pact assessment for the full functional unit (FU) of 1 ton of exported Danish national
exported waste. Additionally, the results should provide a measure of DQ in allocating
processes to their respective regions.
3.3.1
Prospective LCA
The goal of this method is to add a temporal dimension to EASETECH modeled WMS,
creating a variable timeframe for the model.
Time horizon for this Prospective assessment will be from 2022 to 2050 and transform-
ing this model to account for predictions of future changes will be done by transforming
foreground and background data. The baseline model to be used for this will be a site-
generic model, based on 2022 data.
Foreground data transformations have been done using future predictions of the state
of waste generation and energy consumption in 2050 [17], assuming a linear change per
year from 2022 towards 2050.
Transformation of this will be done using two change
vectors, depicting factor differences for each fraction per year. Waste composition is then
normalized to 100% to find total impact of these changes on national waste composition.
These factors are used as input to the model, using an excel sheet, included in the model
in Supporting Information.
Waste treatment technologies will be modified at specific time points. This will be
defined in an Excel sheet before running the model. This sheet allows flexibility in ex-
changing any process but is currently limited to one exchange per year, meaning multiple
parameters cannot be changed within the same year.
Background data transformations is expected to be done using PREMISE, accounting
for changes in the background system towards 2050 using prediction data from REMIND
to transform the system according to Socioeconomic Pathways 1 (SSP1), with all sectors
18
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3. Methods
updated.
The expected outcomes from this application are results, showing the gradual de-
velopment in process CC impacts over time and showing the main contributing factors
and their share of the impacts over time. This will be visualized using a line plot and a
stacked barchart, respectively.
19
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3. Methods
Table 3.1: Strengths and Weaknesses of EASETECH v3.6.7, Brightway 2.5 and Bridging the two modeling tools, using
ET2BW [23]. Resolves, Retains and Introduces are used as measures of what the bridging of the two modeling tools
have resolved of weaknesses, retained as a weakness and have introduced as a new weakness. If no weaknesses are identified,
a dash (-) is used.
Category
EASETECH
Brightway
Bridging EASETECH and Brightway
Software
build
Strengths
Integrated UI with small learning
curve, manipulation of waste
processes are very flexible.
Fully customizable and transparent
with methods and used data.
Modeling the waste management system is
done using a UI, without the use of Brightway.
Resolves: Steep learning curve and
Brightway complexity in modeling.
Weaknesses
Code and methods are not readily
available, only in SI - limits level
of complexity in the model.
Modeling has a steep learning curve, no
integrated UI and the user needs python
skills or extensions to Brightway, for
example Activity Browser [AB].
Retains: Limited software transparency
when modeling.
Software
specialization
Strengths
Specialized software for LCA
modelling of WMS.
Adaptable to every type of LCA
software, and further analysis.
Uses the LCA framework for waste manage-
ment systems, and creates an opportunity of app-
lying this model in other contexts than
of waste management.
Resolves: Limited flexibility for applying other
modeling contexts than waste-oriented, and the
requirement of skill/effort in Brightway modelling.
Weaknesses
Limited flexibility to apply for other
cases than waste management systems.
Requires some customization effort and skill
to create specific waste-oriented LCA systems.
-
Data availability
Strengths
Existing catalogs of data and processes.
Has updated processes and exchanges,
drawing directly from Ecoinvent biosphere
and technosphere exchanges.
Uses existing catalogs of material fractions,
properties and flows, coupled with updated
biosphere and technosphere flows.
Resolves: Risk of using outdated biosphere flows,
technosphere flows and LCIA methods
Retains: No available data and processes
without EcoInvent access.
Weaknesses
Risk of using outdated LCIA methods,
biosphere- and technosphere flows.
No available data and processes
without EcoInvent access.
-
Modularity
in modeling
Strengths
Systems can be costumized to
be as modular as desired.
Modules can be created and modified
transparently with great detail.
Modules can be customized and used
flexibly when creating the model.
Resolves: Requiring effort and coding
skills to create modules.
Weaknesses
User will need some knowledge of
how EASETECH works to do this.
Requires coding skills and much
effort to create modules from scratch.
Retains: The need to have knowledge
of EASETECH when wanting to
create a modular LCA model.
Scenario analysis
Strengths
Very detailed scenarios can be created.
Scenarios can be created flexibly and
efficiently, using the same methods with
different parameters, and can be changed
after implementing scenario analysis.
Scenario analysis allows for efficient and
autonomous creation of scenarios and
allows for changes to be done easily afterwords.
Resolves: Inefficient and manual scenario
analysis, with risks of user-made inconsistencies.
Weaknesses
Is done inefficiently and manually, and
does not prove to be flexible if changes
are made to the system afterwords.
Requires some setup and knowledge
of Brightway and Python.
Retains: Requirement of some setup and
knowledge of Brightway and Python
Introduces: Limited flexibility in manipulating
and testing environmental parameters after
integration to Brightway, due to the level of
complexity in current EASETECH XML files.
Advanced LCA
features
Strengths
Local sensitivity analysis
using Monte Carlo.
Access to community extensions in the
Brightway software ecosystem, allowing
for advanced LCA features.
Allows for advanced LCA features to be
applied to EASETECH models.
Resolves: Lack of LCA features in waste modeling.
Weaknesses
Does not have any way of integrating
advanced LCA features on waste systems.
Additional packages and setup is required
to use advanced LCA features.
Retains: Additional setup and packages are still
needed for these features to be used.
Introduces: Global sensitivity is not fully available
in the integration, as environmental parameters are
unable to be tested for sensitivity in Brightway.
20
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Results
During the work and creation of the thesis, ET2BW bridging software has been developed
and tested iteratively to track progress and compatibility with results and details. This
bridging and overall development process showed to have multiple challenges. Thus, the
process of converting an EASETECH model to a Brightway database was extended by
the senior researchers beyond the thesis deadline.
As the bridge is still in development, these results highlight the potential and oppor-
tunities of a fully functional bridge. Therefore, the following will be presented:
1. An impact assessment of the parameterized, site-generic EASETECH model for
Danish national export of waste.
2. Demonstration of the potential of applying regionalization and prospective LCA
techniques on WMS.
In detail, the demonstration will consist of analyzing the impacts from the following
activity groups: Substitution of recycled material processes, consumption of heat and
consumption of electricity. These impacts are quantified by consumption of one unit of
resource for each grouped activity, defined as:
1. 1 kg of finally treated waste as secondary resource, to be used for substitution.
2. 1 MJ of heat generated.
3. 1 kWh of electricity generated.
The created process and process amount composition are theoretical and created for
demonstration purposes to apply to the case. Hence, the weighing and composition mixes
are not representative and should not be applied to any real-world cases.
Ecological Footprint (EF) v3.0 characterization factors (CFs) have been used as im-
pact method for calculating LCIA, with included toxicity and without long-term emissions
considered. While EASETECH presents results for six impact categories, the demonstra-
tion of process impacts and dynamics in Brightway is focused solely on climate change
(CC) impacts.
21
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4. Results
4.1
Baseline Impact Assessment
The EASETECH model have been created with a scenario-based approach. Each cre-
ated scenario is corresponding to each specific country to be assessed. The output from
EASETECH modeling is therefore five scenario impact assessments, stored as .csv files.
Transport distance and allocation of waste composition and mass to each country for final
treatment are scenario-specific, while waste composition, technosphere processes, energy
mixes and EcoInvent processes are not scenario-specific. The site-generic heat mix for
has been assumed as a mix of 22% natural gas markets and 78% other than natural gas
markets, based on global energy consumption data [32]. Site-generic electricity mix has
been assumed a 100% composition of a global market for high voltage electricity. Heat
and electricity markets have been integrated in each relevant process. Due to the aggre-
gation of data, done by EASETECH, it is not possible to estimate the direct contribution
of these markets without additional scenario analysis.
Table 4.1 show the absolute impacts of treating 1 ton of exported waste within the
chosen system boundaries and study scope.
Climate
change
Human toxicity,
cancer
Human toxicity,
non-carcinogenic
Particulate
matter - wo LT
Ecotoxicity,
freshwater
Water
use
Sum
-1352.5
-2.2E-06
1.14E-04
-1.01E-04
-376020
-191.65
Table 4.1: Absolute values for Danish national export of waste in 2022, calculated using EF v.3.0 including toxicity,
without long term emissions. D.I = Disease Incidents.
Only non-carcenogenic human health impacts are net positive when looking at the
entire system impacts. To break down the contribution to burdens or avoided emissions,
the country level contribution to impacts has been plotted in Figure 4.1.
The main contributor across all impacts categories is Turkey, because of the large
imported share of metal fractions for recycling.
The interesting thing to note is the lack of avoided emissions from steel substitution
in the non-carcinogenic impact category, stating that the recycling conditions are worse
than the extraction conditions in the chosen data for this specific impact category. As
avoided impacts should be expected by substituting processes, the bigger burden for
human health in waste treatment of steel, than for substitution of steel is conflicting with
expected results. This is likely caused by either workers in a steel recycling factory being
exposed to hazardous materials, or simply just overestimated and outdated data from
EASETECH. Either way, this result should be investigated further.
Disaggregated impacts, by contribution of each process within each respective country
from Figure 4.1, are presented in Figure 4.2. Only processes with an absolute contribution
over 1% to any impact category are included in the graphs.
It is apparent that aluminum and steel are the two main contributors to the overall
22
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 4.1: Contribution to impacts, shown in Table 4.1, plotted on country level. The negative contribution in water
uses for Norway a net burden in this case.
impacts in the system when looking at contribution to each impact category, thereby also
proving the overall system impacts to be sensitive to changes in metal markets, waste
metal fractions and properties.
This underlines the need for expanding the recycling
system to account for regional changes in substitution and recycling, as these parameters
are essential to the overall performance of the system.
23
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 4.2: Disaggregated contribution of EASETECH processes, contributing to over 1% of absolute emissions for any
impact category, plotted for 6 impact categories. Appendix with data for all impact categories are included in the model
outputs, included in in ’SI_1_MSC_integrated_modeling’.
24
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4. Results
4.2
Regionalization
This section aims to create site-specific processes at a constant timeframe, in order to
show the relative changes in emissions and impacts, when demonstrating regionalization
on highlighted processes. Limitations of this approach is discussed in subsection 5.2.2.
4.2.1
Changes in the Foreground System
Since no fully functioning EASETECH model can be imported to Brightway, exchanging
the foreground parameters for recycling efficiencies, transport distances, transport forms
and waste allocation to respective countries will not be accounted for in the following
section.
Site-specific process allocation
To evaluate the performance of the foreground process allocation, DQ scores were allo-
cated to each of the five steps of the algorithm, corresponding with definitions of DQ,
highlighted in Table 4.2. Note, that since the background transformations are yet to be
applied, the countries with matching GDP have been assigned a DQ score of 3.
Table 4.2: Modified spatial correlation from the ecoinvent pedigree matrix v3.0, adjusted to align with the scope of the
thesis.
DQ score
1
2
3
4
5
Geographical
correlation
Data from area under study,
and areas with similar prod-
uction conditions and back-
ground data transformed
to be emitted in area under study.
Area from
larger regions
Area with similar prod-
uction conditions (within
10 countries with similar
GDP from the assessed country)
Areas RER,
RoW and GLO
Data from distinctly different area
(beyond 10 countries with similar
GDP from the assessed country)
From these DQ score definitions, the foreground changes was carried out and plotted
in Figure 4.3.
25
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 4.3: Allocated Data Quality (DQ) rating for each process per country, allocated using definitions from modified definitions for spatial correlation from EcoInvent pedigree matrix
3.0, described in Table 4.2. Mean DQ scores are not weighted.
26
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4. Results
Non-weighed mean DQ scores are found to be similar each country (<0.5), indicating
that the counties are comparable on a non-weighed basis.
Aluminium production, lithium battery production, natural gas-powered electricity
and coal powered electricity are allocated a low and homogeneous DQ score, showing
that site-specific options for these processes are unavailable. Measures to overcome this
would be to assess alternative processes, with the same scope and impacts, to be used in
connection with the original process.
As seen in Figure 4.3, some site-generic DQ values are assigned 1. This does not make
sense when looking at the goal of allocating site-generic processes to the system. This
can be attributed to the strict area of search, done by the algorthm, combined with low
spatial data availability. Improvements to this approach is underlined in subsection 5.4.1.
The non-weighed mean DQ scores show an unbiased take on DQ, showing the overall
comparability of the different system scenarios, and this approach is especially useful
if significant changes in waste composition occur, shifting the process weights. While
weighed DQ scores are more important include for certain study scopes, the non-weighed
DQ scores are preferred in this context.
Using this approach is useful for identifying data gaps, along with processes of low
relevance to the spatial scope of the system.
This approach can be used as a quick
way to identify data bias in the used EcoInvent data. This is especially important in
consequential or comparative LCA modeling of waste systems, differences in DQ will
introduce a bias in decision-making.
Site-specific Impacts, coupled to the case results
After allocating to best-fit processes, LCIA was calculated using site-generic CFs, and
presented in Table 4.2.1. This is carried out on a non-weighed and a weighed basis to
assess the changes in impacts when applied to a case.
Table 4.3: Absolute climate change impacts for activities, with uniform composition for providing a total of 1 unit of the
activity. The weighted activities are weighted on case-specific compositions for each country.
DE
NL
NO
SE
TR
electricity activities, non-weighed (kgCO2 −EQ/kWh)
0.336
0.296
0.242
0.245
0.243
electricity activities, weighed (kgCO2 −EQ/kWh)
0.409
0.435
0.086
0.328
0.281
heat activities, non-weighed (kgCO2 −EQ/MJ)
0.027
0.030
0.033
0.031
0.034
heat activities weighed (kgCO2 −EQ/MJ)
0.031
0.026
0.018
0.029
0.040
substitution activities, non-weighed (kgCO2 −EQ/kg)
-6.689
-6.443
-6.511
-6.511
-6.443
substitution activities, weighed (kgCO2 −EQ/kg)
-4.304
-4.288
-4.301
-4.301
-4.288
The insignificant differences between the impacts of the regionalized substitution pro-
cesses between countries, with standard deviation being less than 1% of mean impacts
27
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4. Results
(0.16%). This is caused by the limited regional data availability, impact intensity, and
waste composition share of aluminium. For electricity and heat activities, the impacts of
fossil processes in the mix are dominating the change in climate change impacts.
Note, that processes, labeled as non-weighed, are weighed uniformly and therefore not
based on the composition of each respective country. The weighing is done to emphasize
the changes in 1 unit of activity, produced in each country, along with the differences in
impacts when finding best-fit, site-specific allocation of foreground processes. Changes in
development can be seen when weighing the processes to case-specific energy and waste
compositions, with a significant shift in climate change impacts. The same development
in substitution activities can be observed. This is due to the unchanged waste composition
across every country.
The relative changes, seen in Table 4.2.1 are indicators for changes in emissions over
a spatial scope, and if coupled with background allocation of regional CFs, could show
a more significant distinction in impacts between each country. Background transforma-
tions to account for this is described in subsection 4.2.2.
4.2.2
Changes in the Background System
The method of transforming background processes in Brightway are based on GIS data
to recreate geographical areas to couple with process locations in EcoInvent. The LCI
for these processes are then matched with region-specific CFs, when doing the impact as-
sessment. By combining foreground changes that account for societal and technological
factors with background transformations that incorporate region specific CFs for ecolog-
ical impacts, it is possible to imitate a region-specific EcoInvent process. When applying
regionalization in the context of this thesis, the allocated processes are stored in a new
database with changed location attributes, corresponding to the specific country, where
emissions occur. The activity groups are then created, using the modified processes in
the new database.
These processes will later be used as basis for demonstrating the
opportunities of applying regionalization.
Due to compatibility issues between the newest versions of Brightway and the Bright-
way regionalization package, the databases broke when creating spatial regions, rendering
it impossible to allocate regionalized CFs to the created database. As a result of this,
regionalized CFs could not be applied to the activities, leading to an unsuccessful regional
background transformation.
If the regionalized CFs were linked successfully, the results were expected to show
significant variations in impact categories with high local sensitivity, particularly for land
use, eutrophication, particulate matter formation, and water use, due to the spatial vari-
ability of each country and process. In contrast, impact categories with a broader regional
scope, such as climate change and ionizing radiation, are expected to show smaller vari-
28
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4. Results
ations. Methods and potential limitations of this approach will be further examined in
subsection 5.1.3.
4.3
Prospective LCA
This section aims to create site-generic at a variable timeframe, to demonstrate the
change in the system and impacts over time. In detail, the following section focus on the
prediction of impacts and dynamics of energy intensity, waste composition and technology
shifts, acting as foreground changes to the system. For background system changes, the
main contributing factors of a typical WMS are transformed using the PREMISE tool.
4.3.1
Changes in the Foreground System
The prospective foreground changes of waste composition and energy intensity parameters
have been done using a stepwise approach, calculating percentwise changes on a fractional
level. Then, the waste fractions are normalized to adjust the waste composition for each
respective year. The energy intensity parameters are calculated as absolute reductions in
intensity over time.
Changes in Energy Intensity
For energy intensity, it is assumed that waste treatment technologies are developed and
refined with a focus on reduction in energy consumption. Therefore, energy consumption
is assumed to reduce 2.8% each year for electricity and 2% for heat technologies in the
range of 2023 to 2050, as shown in Figure 4.4. Note, that energy intensities are calculated
as (energy_intensitytotal = (reductionenergy_intensity)year), showing that the reduction in
energy intensity is modeled as a mild potential regression, rather than linear.
Energy intensity is expected to be applied for foreground consumption of energy and
while the background data of these systems account for de-fossilization over time, the
energy intensity factors are applied as a foreground transformation for assumed future
optimization of waste recycling technologies. Energy intensity is only expected to be
applied on direct energy consuming activities in recycling.
Energy substitution from
incineration and biogas combustion, along with energy consumption in waste disposal
technologies; inert landfilling and backfilling, should not be scaled using this approach.
This approach requires system expansion of every recycling activity, as energy con-
sumption amounts need to be a part of the foreground system. In the case model, the
waste treatment technology for lithium batteries is modeled as an EcoInvent process,
thereby making it impossible for linking the reduction in energy up to this recycling
process. This is an example of bias in waste modeling of recycling technologies, due to
varying DQ in the waste treatment sector.
29
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 4.4: Changes in energy intensity, related to foreground energy consumption in waste recycling activities. The
development within electricity activities (2.8%) and heat activities(2%) have been assumed the same for all processes within
these activities.
Changes in technology
The method for changing waste technologies in the foreground data of the system model
builds on a process roadmap, created in excel.
This sheet acts as a switch between
EcoInvent processes. When creating prospective scenarios, the roadmap is checked for
processes to be exchanged and will change the process for the remainder of the prospective
scenarios. Examples of usage could be shifting the waste substitution processes for a waste
fraction to a similar process.
Although not demonstrated on a case, data is read into the model and stored in the
prospective arguments for application to an EASETECH model, exported to Brightway.
Changing the foreground in a prospective context in WMS is important when pre-
dicting changes, as trends in waste composition, energy consumption and treatment tech-
nologies are inevitable and essential for model results.
The only implemented example of shift in technology in the case-study is not con-
30
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4. Results
nected to the roadmap for exchanging processes but is connected to changes in waste
composition. This exemplifies the need for defining technology shits flexibly, which will
be discussed in subsection 5.2.2.
Changes in Waste Composition
For forecasting waste composition, this thesis assumes only an increase in specific waste
fractions: textiles, plastics and metals. Fractions are set to correspond to a yearly increase
in absolute waste amounts of 7.14% for textiles and plastic fractions, and 5.36% for metal
fractions.
Furthermore, to apply a hypothetical, case-specific foreground technology change to
waste composition, an in-land, state-of-the-art metal recycling system is implemented.
This reduces the metal fractions to 20% of the exported amounts and limits the absolute
increase of metal fractions to 2% by 2035. Changes are reflected in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Yearly change in waste composition, with hypothetical shift in technology, in 2035. The composition is plotted
for 1 ton of waste, exported from Denmark.
Even though metal fractions have a lower growth rate than plastic and textile fractions,
31
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4. Results
changes reflect a significant share of Other metals, over time due to the large initial waste
fraction amount. After in-land metal recycling is introduced, plastic fractions begin to
increase in composition, due to the higher share and growth rate of plastic waste.
This approach for scenario modeling is relevant for transparency and detailed predic-
tion modeling, when used with PREMISE for background transformations. Additionally,
the approach is preferred for modeling, as changing the waste composition dynamics rely
on parameters, which can be easily exchanged and tested for sensitivity on a detailed
level.
4.3.2
Changes in the Background System
PREMISE has been applied to the main contributing processes to predict impacts of both
energy consumption and material substitution. The following results show only changes
in baseline impacts from material substitution over time. Graphs and descriptions of the
changes in energy systems over time can be found in section 7.4.
Transformations have been carried out on a five-year grid between 2025 and 2050, with
a starting point in 2023. The thesis uses a standard, PREMISE-defined scenario, created
with remind to model SSP1 with ≈1.7 C increase in global temperature as defined in the
PREMISE documentation [13]. Note that while data from the EcoInvent 3.8 database is
from 2021 and earlier, it is assumed that the data is still representative in 2023.
Due to de-fossilizing the energy sector towards 2050, avoided impacts from aluminum
is reduced to 34% from baseline emissions, resulting in a significantly smaller avoided
impact of substitution. The same trend can be seen for fiber due to a large share (≈75%)
of CC impacts [17] being related to energy consumption in the process. Lithium battery
production is still facing a learning curve and is not optimized as technology. Along with
this, the energy demand and extraction of lithium is most likely also a contributing factor
in explaining changes in avoided emissions.
Avoided emissions from plastics, steel and glass will be reduced up to 20% from base-
line emissions. Steel and glass production are well developed technologies, and changes in
avoided impacts are expected to originate from changes in energy systems. While plastics
face minor changes in avoided impacts due to the low demand for energy in production,
the differences in avoided impacts between PET and HD-PE are most likely explained
by the influence of biobased materials in the future markets. Due to its properties, pro-
duction dynamics, and influence in current plastic markets, biobased PET has a greater
market impact than HD-PE, leading to a larger reduction in PET impacts.
Coupling foreground and background prospective transformations
Coupling the foreground and background dynamics and changes in impacts is exemplified
in Figure 4.7, combining changes in waste composition and background data to estimate
32
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 4.6: Development of substitution processes starting in 2023, afterwords following five-year grids between 2025-
2050. The reduction from baseline impacts show the reduction in avoided impacts.
the importance of substitution processes in the WMS. Relative change in substitution
process contribution with a constant waste composition is included in section 7.6, to
highlight the relative change in impacts, only caused by background transformations
While fiber, glass and batteries keep their average relative share in impacts, the main
change in dynamics, is the increasing share of impacts from plastics over time. This shows
a need for assessing plastic pathways throughout the system in the future, even though
the impact contribution of plastic is of minor significance in the current waste system.
33
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 4.7: PREMISE predictions, coupled with changes in waste composition results in the relative contribution of CC
impacts for resource substitution of 1 kg recycled material in the EASETECH product system. Foreground energy and
technology transformations have not been taken into account.
34
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The following sections include 1) a re-evaluation of the thesis research questions, aim and
results, 2) a discussion of results, methods and 3) a discussion of the assumptions and
limitations of these results and methods. The discussion also covers recommendations,
real-world application and further work, needed to be carried out to refine the approaches,
presented and applied in this thesis.
5.1
Assumptions and Limitations of Methods and
Framework
The following section aims to highlight the key assumptions and limitations within the
methods and framework, discuss how these factors influence the conclusions and results,
and explore ways to account for them in future work.
5.1.1
Evaluating Main Assumptions of Integrated Waste Model-
ing
The following section highlights the main assumptions and their potential impact on
results. Assumptions regarding EASETECH baseline modeling are excluded in this sec-
tion, as it is preferred to focus on the effects of integrated waste modeling, rather than
standalone EASETECH modeling.
The main assumption in the conclusions and interpretation of results is the assumption
that the trends of WMS in general are defined by its energy and resource substitution
effects. Applying conclusions from this thesis on other WMS models than recycling or
recovery systems are not valid.
Results are assumed to account for a general impact profile, even though they are
only based on CC impacts. This assumption can create a bias in decision-making, as not
every impact category is accounted for in the conclusions.
For assumptions in foreground changes of regionalization, the allocated processes are
assumed to be of best-fit, and therefore valid in following analysis. This assumption is a
significant source of uncertainty, as the best-fit for each country might not be the best-fit
35
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5. Discussion
for the scope of the thesis.
The coupled background and foreground regionalization is assumed to be sufficient to
characterize a process from a country with similar economic development, as a process
from the original country. This assumption is only relevant in connection to results, when
measuring model uncertainty, which have not been covered in this thesis.
When creating site-generic processes to use in prospective LCA, the processes are
found using the foreground regionalization algorithm, finding the "worst-fit" for Denmark.
The process will be allocated to Denmark as a site-generic region if no "worst-fit" is found.
The correctness of this assumption is of minor importance to the system, as this measure
happens in very few cases, but can be of major importance if this approach is applied in
other contexts.
For assumptions in prospective foreground changes, the main assumption in this ap-
proach is the constant basis, in which predictions are made. These numbers are either
assumed or extrapolated from other studies. The importance of this data in relation to
results is large and will significantly affect the results if changed.
Lastly, it is assumed that all processes are correctly transformed for assumptions in
background transformations in prospective LCA. If these transformations are not valid,
the results and conclusions presented in this thesis are not valid.
5.1.2
Method and Data Limitations
This subsection outlines the limitations of each part of the results section, with a focus
on method limitations within each subsection.
An overall major limitation in applying regionalization and prospective LCA on a
WM LCA model, is the lack of focus on evaluating uncertainty and sensitivity of the
choices and assumptions, decided throughout the application of these features.
This
needs to be included when applying these features to models, to assess and understand
the uncertainty and sensitivity of these transformations.
Case study modeling in EASETECH
While assumptions regarding the case study modeling was excluded, it is still important
to highlight the limitations of the baseline, on which the results have been created, as
this can affect the subsequent application of LCA features.
The main limitation in EASECTECH modeling are the data availability and assump-
tions, especially with regards to waste product quality, influencing recovery and market
substitution rates. Chosen and created processes also introduce limitations in modeling,
especially when combining different data sources with different biases. In this example,
EASETECH catalog data and EcoInvent data are prone to show different results and
should be streamlined to increase data consistency and assumptions. As an example,
36
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5. Discussion
open land burning is modeled as an incinerator with no technosphere processes and sub-
stitution processes, sufficiently simulating the process in relation to its contribution to
overall impacts. This approach does create a bias, as the impacts of this is likely under-
estimating the climate change and human health impacts, since heavy metals, dioxins,
nitrous oxides and other pollutants are not removed after incineration.While foreground
data is valid, the DQ needs to be refined, as some recycling processes are built on assumed
numbers and generic EASETECH recycling process data.
Foreground Process Allocation in Regionalization
The foreground regionalization tool for allocating to best-fit for site-specific processes is an
efficient and quick tool for methodically allocating processes in an LCA system. Though,
due to the complex structure and definition of regions in EcoInvent, it is not certain that
every region is considered when allocating processes to larger regions. Therefore, one
should double check sensitive or contributing processes after running the algorithm. This
tool is meant for changing the overall sites of every used process in the system, to account
for consistent site-specific allocation in the entire model.
This method of allocating processes on a best-fit basis is limited to non-comparative
modeling, as differences in DQ when comparing country performance leads to biased and
untrue results.
A main limitation to the current approach is the fact that some processes have a
connection in relation to the scope of the study, and the same spatial correlation between
these processes should be prioritized over having individual high spatial correlation with
scope.
For example, heat from biomass and electricity from biomass, both produced
in from a CHP plant, should have matching geographic correlation, as the impacts of
production of energy otherwise would have a bias.
Background Allocation in Regionalization
While not being investigated fully in this thesis, there are already identified issues with
this approach, along with points for future work. This approach is expected to transform
the direct emissions of the process to be emitted in the origin country, but the supply
chains, modeled as connected technosphere processes, are not changed to correspond
with the origin country. This will prove to be an issue when using market values in this
approach, which, in this approach, is expected to remain unchanged, due to the lack of
elementary exchanges.
Foreground Allocation in Prospective LCA
Waste composition and subsequent trends from this are limited to data from 2022, and
choosing an average of all available should be preferred to have a solid reference point to
37
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5. Discussion
create predictions from. Additionally, technology changes in the foreground are currently
only limited to changing one EcoInvent process for each predicted year. For realistic
changes in technology this approach is not sufficient, as technology changes influence
multiple parameters and dynamics in the waste system.
Background Allocation in Prospective LCA
The main limitation in the applied background transformations is flexibility in the results.
To account for this limitation, "best" and "worst" case scenarios could have been created
on the same basis, to assess upper and lower bounds of the predicted impacts of each
process. Furthermore, forecasts rely on IAMs to create predictions for each SSP. Results
from background transformations are therefore influenced by the chosen IAM. While
it was out of scope to test differences in results when modeling with one or the other
assessment model, this is certain to influence the resulting impacts and changes.
5.1.3
Framework-specific Limitations
Opportunities and limitations within this integrated waste modeling framework was pre-
sented as Resolves, Retains and Introduces in Table 3.1. The following sections discuss if
the outcomes from Resolves and Introduces are as expected. Retains is not discussed in
this section, as there is no expected change in these, when changing modeling approach.
Resolved Modeling Limitations
The following limitations was expected to be resolved when bridging the two LCA models:
1. Steep learning curve and complexity of Brightway.
• This is not resolved, as the operations within the thesis scope required exten-
sive knowledge of Brightway and it’s complexity.
• To resolve this, python functions and objects should be developed to apply
these features in a waste management context.
2. Risk of using outdated biosphere and technosphere flows.
• At current state of doing integrated waste modeling using ET2BW, this is not
resolved. While biosphere flows are rematched to updated flows, the techno-
sphere flows in EASETECH does not have a UUID to link to updated tech-
nosphere processes.
• To resolve this, technosphere processes need to have a UUID in order to be
matched to an EcoInvent database.
38
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5. Discussion
3. Inefficient and manual scenario analysis, with risks of user-made inconsistencies.
• Resolved. Brightway can be used as an efficient and automatic tool for doing
scenario analysis.
4. Lack of LCA features in waste modeling.
• Resolved. Results from this thesis demonstrate that advanced LCA features
can be applied in a waste LCA context.
Whether the issues of Limited flexibility for applying other contexts to the system
than a waste-oriented context and Requiring effort and coding skills to create modules are
resolved or not, can’t be determined by the results, presented in this thesis. Though, due
to the cradle-to-cradle scope of Brightway, WMS should be able to expand the system
boundaries to a larger context, if the FU of the WMS is considered. This will require
additional development, as the flows entering the WMS should contain detailed waste
properties to be compatible with the EASETECH modeled WMS. For the creation of
modules in Brightway, the development of the bridge should take the modularity of
EASETECH models into account, but it is not certain at current development stage.
Introduced Modeling Limitations
The following two limitations was expected to be introduced when bridging the two
LCA models using ET2BW: limited flexibility in manipulating and testing environmen-
tal parameters after integration to Brightway, due to the level of complexity in current
EASETECH XML files, and global sensitivity is not fully available in the integration, as
environmental parameters are unable to be tested for sensitivity in Brightway.
The two introduced limitations have the same issue, originating from the fact that the
available level of detail in the EASETECH databases are not satisfactory. To overcome
this, the toolbox of predefined EASETECH processes should be introduced as separate
activities in Brightway, and should be used in the same way, in which they are currently
used in EASETECH.
5.2
Lessons Learned
This section highlights and discusses the results and whether the presented results were as
expected when doing integrated waste modeling with ET2BW, along with a perspective
to the broader context in waste LCA and sustainability.
39
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.2.1
Revisiting Thesis Research Questions and Aim
Assessing how the applied methods, analysis and results have performed will help in
determining how well the aim have been achieved, along with it’s connected research
questions. The objectives are evaluated through answering the research questions.
Research Question 1: How well are the relevant gaps and weaknesses in the
waste LCA research field being bridged by integrating the two assessment
models?
The gaps in the field of waste LCA have been identified along with expected bridging
of gaps by integrating EASETECH and Brightway for waste LCA modeling, which have
shown a bridging of some specific issues in 1) Flexiblity in modeling including transparent
and robust results for precise/unbiased decisionmaking and 2) The lack of quality in waste
data and availability. For 1) the presented results are seen to resolve the lack of focus
on temporal and spatial perspectives, along with making scenario-based modeling more
accessible and consistent. For including sensitivity, the bridging to Brightway introduced
new limitations, not present in EASETECH, due to data granularity in the source file of
EASETECH. With the current methods and versions of ET2BW and EASETECH, the
global sensitivity cannot be done to the level of satisfaction of an environmental engineer,
wishing to test sensitivity of parameters in certain EASETECH processes. Examples of
this include the sensitivity of calorific values of plastic in an incineration process, or the
sensitivity of decay rates of C in a landfill process. In this case, bridging EASETECH
and Brightway is not recommended and proves to make the modeling more inflexible.
For 2), while not bridging any specific issues within the scope of the thesis, measures
for improving DQ on a spatial scale are also demonstrated when regionalizing emissions.
While the background transformations did not prove to be possible, the approach is
expected to improve DQ on a spatial scale in a consistent manner.
Overall, the expected gaps to be bridged have been satisfactory, but the bridging of
these gaps has also shown to open new gaps within the same modeling context, making
this approach perform worse than anticipated.
Research question 2: How will the strengths and weaknesses of EASETECH
and Brightway act when these systems are integrated, compared to their
strengths and weaknesses as standalone tools?
This question has been answered using a screening of strengths and weaknesses of the
framework of each model, along with the expected strengths and weaknesses of bridging
the two tools. Furthermore, these expected strengths and weaknesses have been tested
during modeling in Brightway and have been re-evaluated in subsection 5.1.3, on whether
the expectations were met.
40
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5. Discussion
Overall, the strengths and weaknesses have been identified and evaluated to satisfac-
tion.
Research Question 3: How well does the integration of EASETECH models
in Brightway work for its intended use in the case with regards to applying
regionalization and prospective LCA techniques?
The intended application of regionalization on highlighted WM processes presented some
challenges with regards to background transformations when regionalizing CFs, showing
that the current way of regionalizing does not work at a satisfactory level in Brightway,
both because the tool does not support newer data than that of EcoInvent v3.8 and the
fact that it does not work with newer versions of Brightway. For foreground changes, the
approach is effective but is dependent on search area and data availability and should
therefore be treated as a tool for finding recommendations for best-fit processes within
the defined spatial scope.
For prospective LCA, the foreground and background transformations prove to work
well in relation to it’s intended use for predicting impacts and dynamics in key WMS
processes. Though PREMISE is a well-suited tool for prospective LCA, the foreground
changes are very extensive in a WM context. Thus, supporting modeling of foreground
mixes, composition and consumption will need to be implemented by use of custom
data, adding flexibility, but also complexity to predictions. While time-demanding, the
flexibility in this approach allows for highly detailed and case-specific prospective LCA
modeling of WMS.
Overall, these analyses have answered how well the integration between EASETECH
and Brightway work for its intended ude.
Main aim: Assess the opportunities, limitations and effectiveness of apply-
ing advanced LCA methods to WMS through integrated waste modeling in
EASETECH and Brightway.
The main aim has been achieved through evaluating the research questions. 1) The oppor-
tunities from applying advanced LCA features through integrated waste modeling prove
to fill gaps regarding spatial, temporal and scenario-based modeling. 2) The limitations
have been found as expected weaknesses along with the expected strengths in a screening
of strengths and weaknesses. 3) The effectiveness has been found using a measure of how
well the integrated waste modeling approach works for its intended use.
5.2.2
Evaluating Expected Outcomes from Results
Expected outcomes of applying advanced LCA features through integrated waste mod-
eling have been defined in section 3.3, and results will be evaluated from these expected
41
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 5. Discussion
outcomes to assess whether the actual outcomes match the expected.
Regionalization
To assess the quality of process allocation to their respective countries, a graph of al-
located DQ scores has been included, serving as a check for consistent DQ and spatial
specificity. The foreground transformation carried out in this thesis is satisfactory but not
optimal due to the method’s limited flexibility for foreground allocation. The expected
outcomes were not fully achieved, as background transformations were not performed,
resulting in impacts being shown only for foreground transformations.
The intended
setup of five regionalized impact assessments was not fully realized. While the table is
structured accordingly, the impacts lack background transformations and prevents the
results from reaching a satisfactory level.
Prospective LCA
The relative impacts of processes are plotted after background transformations have been
carried out.
Instead of the main contributing factors of the model, the composition
of changes in impacts from substituted impacts was found and plotted as a stacked
barchart over time. This was reached using background transformations, connected with
foreground changes in waste composition. Therefore, the actual outcomes are reaching a
satisfactory level with regards to expected outcomes in prospective LCA.
5.2.3
In a Broader Context
Integrated waste modeling show that this approach allows the analysis of spatial and tem-
poral aspects in waste modeling, along with setting a consistent framework for including
these features in future studies. SDG’s will be used as a measure of how applying these
features relate to the broader societal context. Applying prospective LCA to account
for changes in time will aid SDG 11; Sustainable cities and communities, by supporting
robust and flexible design of waste systems and SDG 13; Climate action, by mitigating
emissions related to resource extraction or emissions for disposal, by the use of recycled
materials. Applying regionalization to account for site-specific emissions will aid SDG 12;
Responsible consumption and production by assessing regional emissions in supply chains,
along with measuring changes in impacts from regional waste treatment, and SDG 13;
Climate action by mitigating emissions through knowledge of treating and substituting
waste and resources optimally, with regards to the spatial scale.
Please note, that applying these aspects on WMS will influence multiple SDGs, but
the thesis is limited to only assessing changes in the three highlighted SDG’s.
42
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5. Discussion
Comparing existing studies
An existing study on regionalization in recycling systems has taken a more detailed and
qualitative approach to estimating region-specific emissions [1]. While this study has
already been mentioned in the thesis, its key takeaway is its qualitative approach to
regionalization — an aspect that the approach, presented in this thesis, needs.
For prospective LCA application, another study on construction and demolition waste
in a circular economy [11]. Though, this approach was custom tailored to the specific
case study and emphasized in this case a need for streamlined prospective application on
WMS in the field of Waste LCA.
5.3
Recommendations and Practical Applications
This section covers some recommendations for how and when to use the integrated waste
modeling framework. A short list is also included in the section to show examples of
practical application.
5.3.1
Recommendations for Integrated Waste Modeling, using
ET2BW
Though the use of modeling in Brightway introduces flexibility and new features, it is
also adding complexity to the modeling process. When to use integrated waste modeling,
bridged using ET2BW, is dependent on the scope of the waste system. This should be
decided before modeling the system, as it can impact the flow of modeling in EASETECH.
When to use this is exemplified in Table 5.1 with some examples of LCA operations to
be applied on a typical WMS.
43
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5. Discussion
Table 5.1: When to do integrated waste modeling, dependent on the tasks to be carried out. WMS=Waste Management
Systems.
Operations
Standalone waste modeling
in EASETECH
- IA of a static WMS
- Contribution analysis
- SA on enviromental waste processes
- Basic scenario analysis
Integrated waste modeling
in EASETECH and Brightway
- Advanced scenario analysis
- Assessing model uncertainty on
process level
- Prospective LCA in WMS
- Regionalizing impacts in WMS
- Expanding waste LCA systems to
a non-LCA context
Model Building in EASETECH for Integrated Waste Modeling
When building an EASETECH model for use in integrated waste modeling, one should
focus on what end-goal and results should be obtained by the assessment, and how the
analysis in Brightway should be carried out in detail, before beginning to build a model
in EASETECH. The workflow would therefore require a full overview of the system and
logic in modeling.
Factors, such as consistent naming, flexible waste allocation, and
parametrization of key variables will create a good and efficient basis for modeling and
visualizing results in Brightway.
Below are some recommendations for optimizing integrated waste modeling workflows
between EASETECH and Brightway:
• Avoid unnecessary repetitive processes with minor changes in parameters or pro-
cesses; This can be automated in Brightway to reduce user created modeling errors
and inconsistencies.
• Avoid unlinked processes in the EASETECH model; Changing the process linking
in Brightway will reduce transparency and increase unnecessary complexity.
• Instead of using absolute or primary data values for waste flow distribution, waste
amounts should be distributed using fractional values. This method increases the
transparency and flexibility of the model, making it easier to create and compare
alternative scenarios with different waste flows.
44
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5. Discussion
• Ungroup every EASETECH process to achieve a flat modeling structure, making
the EASETECH model and the integrated waste model easier to compare.
Note, that while it is not required for an EASETECH model to follow these recom-
mendations, this will make the modeling workflow simpler and more transparent.
5.3.2
Practical Applications in Waste Management Systems
Integrated waste modeling is preferred if the context of the LCA study is used as macro-
level decision-making support, needing a full and detailed picture of the WMS and its
context.
Additionally, integrated waste modeling can also be used in the context of
micro-level decision-making support.
1. Macro-level decision-making: Assessing the feasibility of implementing new WMS
in society.
• Material Recovery Facilities.
• Incineration of waste.
• Prospective recycling systems for non-recyclable fractions.
2. Micro-level decisionmaking: Re-evaluating existing methods and system flows for
optimizing the WMS.
• Plastic recycling systems and methods.
• Export of waste for recovery and disposal.
These examples showcase how integrated waste modeling can support results and
following decision-making. However, its effectiveness ultimately depends on the study’s
scope and is not guaranteed to work for each of these cases.
5.4
Further Research
This section describes the next steps to improve, refine and extend the approaches of
doing integrated waste modeling in EASETECH and Brightway, presented in the thesis.
5.4.1
Improving Methods
Methods, presented in this model will need additional improvement to increase effec-
tiveness and functionality. Firstly, the used methods for applying regionalization and
prospective LCA will need to be expanded to work on an entire EASETECH process,
rather than a list of selected processes. Implementing this will require additional work
45
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5. Discussion
and an expansion of the current methods, done in modeling. Secondly, the assessments
carried out in the thesis should be done for all the presented baseline impact categories
to draw accurate conclusion regarding the implementation of features.
EASETECH Modeling. The EASETECH model should be expanded to include emis-
sions from RER+ROW, along with including energy mixes containing the same process
composition as the modeled energy mixes in Brightway. This will create both a com-
pleteness and consistency in modeling. Furthermore, case-specific foreground data for
recycling efficiencies and transport distances should be found and used to correspond
with real-world scenarios.
Foreground changes in regionalization. The method of allocating best-fit countries
and regions should be expanded to ensure all sociopolitical regions from EcoInvent is
included. Additionally, the method should include features that ensure a consistent level
of DQ across countries, particularly when comparing country-specific impacts in region-
alization. Furthermore, when creating site-generic processes and only finding country-
specific data, it should resort to creating a new process, containing an uniform mix of
the country-specific processes. The DQ scores should be linked up to uncertainty factors
and considered when creating the regionalized processes. While this method is created
as a function in the supporting python scripts, it has not been applied to the case and
will therefore require more development.
Background transformations in regionalization. The most important improvement
is correctly allocating the site-specific CFs to the biosphere flows, making the background
regionalization tool work. In addition, further research is needed to improve the regional-
ization of supply chains, ensuring a more accurate representation of site-specific processes,
where original data is not available.
Foreground changes in prospective LCA. Waste composition predictions should be
recalculated to correspond with changes in waste composition between 2018 to 2022, and
should then be coupled with the prediction factors, used in the current methods. Fur-
thermore, the energy and heat consumption should have different reduction in intensity
for each recycling technology, essentially creating more case-specific predictions for en-
ergy consumption. The method for changing technologies should be extended to include
multiple connected changes every year, in order to correctly simulate technology changes,
and it’s associated impacts to the system.
Background transformations in prospective LCA. When transforming background
databases, PREMISE should be run for multiple SSPs and for other IAMs to assess
46
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5. Discussion
uncertainty of the choices, made when transforming the databases.
5.4.2
Refining ET2BW
In addition to what is expected to be included in the bridge when it is fully developed,
some next steps can be taken to refine the bridging between the two model frameworks:
• A new Brightway database can be created, containing all EASETECH defined ma-
terial processes. This can be done to allow for parameter manipulation in environ-
mental processes, along with allowing the option of building on the model without
needing to re-run the entire bridge if changes occur.
• Unique IDs for external processes, enabling linking to EASETECH databases.
• Parameters, defined in EASETECH.
While needing additional development in ET2BW, these changes require additional
development on EASETECH, in order make this data accessible for bridging into Bright-
way. This increased data accessibility will also account for the limitations, caused by the
I/O approach in the available EASETECH data.
5.4.3
Potential Extensions to the Framework
As a part of further research, the following section describe items to investigate further,
to evaluate opportunities of bridging other gaps in the field of waste LCA.
The current Brightway framework contains an open-source software ecosystem, which
is continuously worked on. This allows for future extensions to account for various mod-
eling needs. Coupling a waste-oriented LCA modeling tool with a model, able to focus
on all LC stages, rather than just EOL to resource, will prove to be a good basis for
extending the framework, or developing a new framework. Waste prevention modeling
could show such a need for more inclusion of LC stages. Hybrid LCA modeling could also
be used for estimating efficiencies and resource recovery on a sectoral level, when other
data is not available, thus increasing DQ in the field of waste LCA.
While not being a part of this software ecosystem, waste models could be integrated
with existing ways of doing hybrid LCA or solid waste optimization. Though this is solely
dependent on the compatibility between the software and its respective frameworks.
For developing on a waste-specific framework within the software ecosystem, methods
from [6] could be used to apply waste-specific operations to the system, for example to
include feedback loops and nonlinearity in waste modeling.
Extending the framework can prove to bridge additional gaps in the field of waste LCA
in the future. The inconsistency in modeling multiple waste sectors can be accounted
47
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. Discussion
for when waste models are bridged to a more flexible modeling tool. Sensitivity and
uncertainty analysis can be integrated into Brightway modeling, making these analyses
more accessible. While GSA is not currently possible at satisfactory level, it is available
within the Brightway software ecosystem and can be applied once EASETECH models
are fully bridged into Brightway using ET2BW.
5.5
Key Points and Insights
This thesis has provided a solid foundation for applying regionalization and prospective
LCA to WMS. However, both the methods and results have proven to contain major
limitations. While the approaches used serve as a valuable starting point, further re-
search and development are needed to ensure that the methods and results are valid and
applicable in both an LCA and a WM context.
The gaps of waste LCA, expected to be bridged, along with the opportunities and
limitations of integrating EASETECH and Brightway, have been assessed. Results have
been found to address the bridging of these gaps when doing integrated waste modeling.
The expected opportunities and limitations have also been evaluated and checked whether
the actual opportunities and limitations was as expected.
Practical applications and the broader societal context of this research have been
discussed and recommendations for doing integrated waste modeling using ET2BW have
been highlighted.
Lastly, integrating EASETECH waste models to Brightway prove to be able to extend
the framework and may bridge additional gaps in the field of waste LCA.
48
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to explore opportunities for bridging gaps in the field of
waste LCA by integrating a waste-specific LCA tool, EASETECH, with a broader and
more flexible LCA tool, Brightway. Existing gaps in waste LCA have been identified;
Flexiblity in modeling including transparent and robust results for precise/unbiased de-
cisionmaking and The lack of quality in waste data and availability, and the potential
of bridging the gaps through the development and application of the ET2BW bridging
package is assessed from this.
To ensure compatibility between the two modeling frameworks, a screening of technical
assumptions was conducted, followed by an assessment of the strengths and weaknesses
of bridging EASETECH and Brightway in modeling Waste Management Systems (WMS)
Findings conclude that while many of the weakenesses was resolved when bridging using
ET2BW, some weaknesses was still retained and two new weaknesses regarding data
complexity was introduced.
To test the bridge, the goal was to apply regionalization and prospective LCA tech-
niques to a fully bridged EASETECH model, incorporating spatial and temporal aspects
into waste LCA modeling. As part of this process, a persona of an environmental engineer
was adopted to create an EASETECH model representing the Danish national export of
waste in 2022.
Since the bridge is still under development, activity groups for heat, electricity, and
substitution processes were used in Brightway to demonstrate the potential of a fully
functional bridge. Baseline emissions from the EASETECH model indicated a net avoided
impact of -1.352 kg CO2 per ton of waste exported from Denmark in 2022, with aluminum
substitution being the primary contributor to the avoided impacts.
Applying regionalization to these substitution processes in their entirety was unsuc-
cessful due to compatibility issues with the latest versions of Brightway and the Brightway
tool for regionalization. However, automatic foreground process allocation was success-
fully performed to identify the best-fit, site-specific technosphere processes within these
activities. Mean Data Quality (DQ) scores from this foreground process allocation was
observed to range from 2.2-2.6, depending on the country. The impact of regionalization
on substitution processes yielded a mean avoided impact of -4.3 kg CO2 per kg of substi-
tuted waste, with variability between the assessed countries causing a standard deviation
49
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
of less than 1% of the mean value (0.16%), largely due to the low spatial data availability
for aluminum.
Applying prospective LCA techniques to substitution processes have shown a decrease
in avoided emissions by 70% for aluminum and fiber, 50% for batteries, and 10%-30%
for steel and plastic in 2050.
When applied to the case model, with variable waste
composition, aluminum became a less dominant substituted resource over time, while
plastics increasingly dominated the avoided impacts.
However, these results and methods present significant limitations, particularly the
lack of focus on the introduced uncertainty in applying these features, and the need
for further development of foreground modeling approaches to achieve sufficient level of
accuracy and detail.
While a fully integrated EASETECH model is not yet available for testing in Bright-
way, this thesis demonstrates the potential of bridging EASETECH and Brightway using
ET2BW, highlighting its opportunities for integrating spatial and temporal dimensions
into waste LCA modeling and addressing existing gaps in the field.
For future work, these approaches should be applied on a full EASETECH model once
the bridge is fully developed. Additionally, the methods for applying regionalization and
prospective LCA techniques should be further refined to improve their robustness and con-
sistency, along with correctly implementing and assessing the effectiveness of background
transformations in regionalization. These improvements will ultimately strengthen the
applicability of the framework in the broader context of waste management and decision-
making.
50
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
R. Legros A. Provost-Savard and G. Majeau-Bettez. “Parametrized regionalization
of paper recycling life-cycle assessment”. In: Waste Management 156 (Feb. 2023),
pp. 84–96. issn: 1879-2456. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2022.11.018.
[2]
A. Laurent et al. “Review of LCA studies of solid waste management systems - Part
I: Lessons learned and perspectives”. In: Waste Management 34.3 (Mar. 2014). doi:
10.1016/j.wasman.2013.10.045.
[3]
A. Ole et al. Landfilling in EASETECH: Data collection and modelling of the landfill
modules in EASETECH. Tech. rep. DTU Environment, 2014. url: www.env.dtu.
dk.
[4]
C. Gentil et al. “Models for waste life cycle assessment: Review of technical assump-
tions”. In: Waste Management 30.12 (2010), pp. 2636–2648. issn: 0956053X. doi:
10.1016/j.wasman.2010.06.004.
[5]
C. Llatas et al. “An LCA-based model for assessing prevention versus non-
prevention of construction waste in buildings”. In: Waste Management 126 (May
2021), pp. 608–622. issn: 1879-2456. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2021.03.047.
[6]
C. Lodato et al. “Process-oriented life cycle assessment modelling in EASETECH”.
In: Waste Management 127 (May 2021), pp. 168–178. issn: 1879-2456. doi: 10.
1016/j.wasman.2021.04.026.
[7]
C. Mutel et al. Brightway Documentation: Ecosystem Overview. Accessed: 2025-01-
05. 2025. url: https://docs.brightway.dev/en/latest/content/overview/
ecosystem.html.
[8]
J. Clavreul et al. “An environmental assessment system for environmental tech-
nologies”. In: Environmental Modelling and Software 60 (2014), pp. 18–30. issn:
1364-8152. doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.06.007.
[9]
K. Mulya et al. “A systematic review of life cycle assessment of solid waste manage-
ment: Methodological trends and prospects”. In: Science of The Total Environment
(July 2022). doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.154903.
[10]
M. Hornung Thorndahl et al. Affaldsstatistik 2022 - Revideret udgave. Danish.
Miljøstyrelsen, 2022. isbn: 9788770386654. url: https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/
publikationer/2024/08/978-87-7038-639-5.pdf.
51
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[11]
M. Uzzal Hossain et al. “Circular economy and the construction industry: Exist-
ing trends, challenges and prospective framework for sustainable construction”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews (Sept. 2020). doi: 10.1016/j.rser.
2020.109948.
[12]
R. Frischknecht et al. “Regionalization in LCA: current status in concepts, software
and databases—69th LCA forum, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, 13
September, 2018”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 24.2 (Feb.
2019), pp. 364–369. doi: 10.1007/s11367-018-1559-0.
[13]
R. Sacchi et al. Premise Documentation. Accessed: 2025-01-31. 2024. url: https:
//premise.readthedocs.io/en/latest/introduction.html.
[14]
R. Sacchi et al. “PRospective EnvironMental Impact asSEment (premise): A
streamlined approach to producing databases for prospective life cycle assessment
using integrated assessment models”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 160 (May 2022). issn: 1879-0690. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2022.112311.
[15]
T. Astrup et al. “Life cycle assessment of thermal Waste-to-Energy technologies:
Review and recommendations”. In: Waste Management 37 (Mar. 2015), pp. 104–
115. issn: 1879-2456. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2014.06.011.
[16]
V. Bisinella et al. “Importance of waste composition for Life Cycle Assessment of
waste management solutions”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 164 (Oct. 2017),
pp. 1180–1191. issn: 0959-6526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.07.013.
[17]
V. Bisinella et al. “Waste LCA and the future”. In: Waste Management 174 (Feb.
2024), pp. 53–75. issn: 1879-2456. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2023.11.021.
[18]
Carbon Brief. Explainer: How ’Shared Socioeconomic Pathways’ explore future cli-
mate change. Accessed: 2025-02-01. 2017. url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/
explainer-how-shared-socioeconomic-pathways-explore-future-climate-
change/.
[19]
R. Carson. Silent Spring. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1962. isbn: 978-
0-395-92466-9.
[20]
T. H. Christensen. Solid Waste Technology & Management. Wiley, 2011. isbn:
9781405175173.
[21]
European Environment Agency. Capturing the climate change mitigation benefits
of circular economy and waste sector policies and measures. Accessed: 2025-02-01.
2024. url: https : / / www . eea . europa . eu / publications / capturing - the -
climate-change-mitigation.
52
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[22]
Eurostat. Waste Statistics. Accessed: 2025-01-29. 2024. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Waste_statistics#
Total_waste_generation.
[23]
T. Gutierrez. ET2BW. At current time, this link is private because the ET2BW
bridge is still being developed. 2025. url: https://github.com/tngTUDOR/et2bw%
20%5Bin%20development%5D.
[24]
S. Hellweg and L. Milà i Canals. “Emerging approaches, challenges and opportuni-
ties in life cycle assessment”. In: Science 344 (2014), pp. 1109–1113. doi: 10.1126/
science.1248361.
[25]
M. Grosso L. Rigamonti and M. Giugliano. “Life cycle assessment for optimising the
level of separated collection in integrated MSW management systems”. In: Waste
Management 29.2 (2009), pp. 934–944. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2008.06.005.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2008.06.005.
[26]
T. Kägi M. Haupt and S. Hellweg. “Modular life cycle assessment of municipal
solid waste management”. In: Waste Management 79 (Sept. 2018), pp. 815–827.
issn: 1879-2456. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2018.03.035.
[27]
B. et al. Moutik. “Life Cycle Assessment Research Trends and Implications: A
Bibliometric Analysis”. In: Sustainability (2023). url: https://www.mdpi.com/
2071-1050/15/18/13408.
[28]
C. Mutel. “Brightway: An open source framework for Life Cycle Assessment”. In:
The Journal of Open Source Software 2.12 (Apr. 2017), p. 236. doi: 10.21105/
joss.00236.
[29]
C. Mutel. brightway2-regional. Accessed: 2025-01-05. 2024. url: https://github.
com/brightway-lca/brightway2-regional.
[30]
M. Hrad R. Kopecká and M. Huber-Humer. “The role of the waste sector in the
sustainable development goals and the IPCC assessment reports”. In: Österreichis-
che Wasser- und Abfallwirtschaft 76 (2024), pp. 300–307. doi: 10.1007/s00506-
024-01034-7. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00506-024-01034-7.
[31]
L. Rigamonti. “Valutazione dei percorsi di recupero di materiali e di energia in
sistemi integrati di gestione dei rifiuti urbani”. Italian. PhD thesis. Polytechnic of
Milan, 2007.
[32]
H. Ritchie. Sector by sector: where do global greenhouse gas emissions come from?
2020. url: https://ourworldindata.org/ghg-emissions-by-sector.
[33]
The World Bank. Data catalog: GDP ranking. Accessed: 2025-01-29. 2024. url:
https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/search/dataset/0038130.
53
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[34]
T. H. Christensen V. Bisinella and T. F. Astrup. “Future scenarios and life cycle
assessment: systematic review and recommendations”. In: International Journal of
Life Cycle Assessment (Nov. 2021). doi: 10.1007/s11367-021-01954-6.
54
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
Appendix
55
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 7. Appendix
7.1
A - Technical Assumptions of Brightway and EASETECH
Evaluation criteria
Subcriterias
EASETECH
Brightway
Functional unit
Is limited to waste oriented FU, defined
by a waste generation of a specific composition
Functional unit can be defined flexibly, but not
explicitly accounting for waste fractions.
System boundaries
Technical system and the environment
Focused on Bin-to-Cradle part of the lifecycle.
System boundaries can be set from Cradle-to-Cradle.
Time horizon boundaries
Constant time horizon
Allows temporal differentiation. [14]
Upstream and downstream boundaries
Flexible definition of zero-burden approach, upstream
impacts can be included but at very low complexity.
Zero burden approach can be defined flexibly.
Boundary conditions for cut-off criteria
no embedded cut-off
no embedded cut-off
Waste composition and properties
Contains material fractions with many properties
Does not focus on waste fractions and properties
Energy aspects
Included - grouping and creation of subprocesses allow
for flexible energy mixes and markets to be created
Included - processes can be created to act as external processes
Waste management processes
Collection and transport
Included
Not included, but can be created manually
Intermediate facilities
Included
Not included, but can be created manually
Material recycling
Included
Not included, but can be created manually
Thermal treatment
Included
Not included, and hard to estimate correctly
without the use of material properties
Biological treatment
Included
Not included, but can be created manually
Landfill gas
Landfill gas generation included as catalog process with
connected non-linear responses to parameter changes
No existing processes and support for non-linear calculations
Landfill leachate
Included
Not included
Landfill C sequestration
Included
Not included
Data availability/quality
DQ is briefly included, not calculated
Not included
Calculation methods
Linear matrix calculations
Linear matrix calculations
Handling sensitivity
GSA on foreground processes
Modular design
Included
Included
Table 7.1: Screening of technical assumptions from EASETECH version 3.7.1 and Brightway, version 2.5. Evaluation criteria inspired by [4].
56
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7. Appendix
7.2
B - Recycling Pathway for Specific R codes
Figure 7.1: Flowchart of the expanded recycling system process, shown in Figure 3.1. Description of these processes are
included in Table 7.2.
57
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 7. Appendix
7.3
C - Description of Flowchart Processes in the
EASETECH Model
Descriptions for the waste export system
Table 7.2: Description of each flowchart process, drawn in Figure 3.1
Process
Description
Exported waste generation, National, DK, 2022
Waste generation point, with FU of 1 ton waste for export.
Transfer station #1 - Export of waste
Transfer station, modeled as an allocation
matrix for waste fractions with no consumption or emission.
Transfer station #2 - Separation of D waste
Transfer station, modeled as an allocation
matrix for waste fractions with no consumption or emission.
Transfer station #3 - Separation of R waste
Transfer station, modeled as an allocation
matrix for waste fractions with no consumption or emission.
Landfilling of D waste and R residuals (D1, D15)
Modeled as a bottom ash landfill with modified process parameters.
Open land burning of D waste (D10)
Modeled as an incinerator with no substitution of energy,
along with bottom and fly ash being used for mineral fertilizer substitution.
Backfilling of D waste (D3, D12)
Modeled as direct deposition into german salt mines.
Storage of D waste (D9, D15)
Modeled as a process with no output, assuming this waste has negligible
impact on nearby environment and has associated emissions with storing the waste.
Incineration of R waste and recycling residuals (R1)
Modeled as a modern danish incinerator from 2012 with modified parameters.
Recycling of R waste (R2, R4, R5, R9)
Process is explained in subsection below.
Anaerobic digestion of R waste (R3)
Modeled as a thermophilic anaerobic digester from 2007
with energy substitution. Residues are sent to UOL.
Land application of R waste (R10, R3 residuals)
Modeled as UOL of anaerobically digested OFMSW on clayey
soil, substituting fertilizer production.
Transport flows
Transport with variable distances (Truck, ship or a combination,
depending on the country), determined by waste amount and distance of transport.
58
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 7. Appendix
Descriptions for the waste recycling process in the system
Table 7.3: Description of recycling processes in the EASETECH system, named after the processes, shown in Figure 7.1
Processes
Description
Recycling of R waste
Transfer station, programmed as an allocation ma-
trix, containing allocation of each waste fraction to
respective treatment. No direct emissions or loss
is assumed in this process.
Recycling
of
Ferrous/non-ferrous
metal
Material flow of metal waste fractions from pro-
cess "Recycling of R waste" and "R1 - energy
recovery", to two separate facilities, treating the
ferrous and the non-ferrous material, respectively.
Treatment includes energy consumption and di-
rect emissions, along with substituted material af-
ter processing.
Substitution ratios are included.
No transportation is assumed in this process. No
transport differences between these two facilities
are assumed. Residues from this process are land-
filled.
Secondary materials are assumed to sub-
stitute primary unalloyed steel and cast alloy alu-
minium, respectively.
Recycling of Paper
Material flow of paper waste fractions from process
"Recycling of R waste" is input to a treatment fa-
cility, with energy consumption, direct emissions,
and recovery efficiency. Treatment includes energy
consumption and direct emissions, along with sub-
stituted material after processing. Substitution ra-
tios are included. No transportation is assumed in
this process. Residues from this process are sent
to incineration (R1). Secondary materials are as-
sumed to substitute wood-containing paper.
59
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 7. Appendix
Table 7.3: Description of recycling processes in the EASETECH system, named after the processes, shown in Figure 7.1
(continued)
Processes
Description
Recycling of Glass
Material flow of glass waste fractions from pro-
cess "Recycling of R waste" is input to a sorting
facility, with electricity consumption and recov-
ery efficiencies.
Afterwards, it is transported to
a treatment facility, with energy consumption, di-
rect emissions, and recovery efficiency. Treatment
includes energy consumption and direct emissions,
along with substituted material after processing.
Substitution ratios are included. No transporta-
tion is assumed in this process. Residues from both
processes are sent to landfill (D1). Secondary ma-
terials are assumed to substitute white packaging
glass.
Recycling of Plastic
Material flow of plastic waste fractions from pro-
cess "Recycling of R waste" is assumed to be a
50/50 mix of HDPE and PET, which is input to
two treatment facilities for handling HDPE and
PET, respectively. Both facilities account for en-
ergy consumption, direct emissions, and recovery
efficiency. Treatment includes energy consumption
and direct emissions, along with substituted ma-
terial after processing. Substitution ratios are in-
cluded. No transportation is assumed in this pro-
cess. No transport differences between these two
facilities are assumed. Residues from this process
are sent to landfill (D1). Secondary materials are
assumed to substitute HDPE and PET, respec-
tively.
60
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 7. Appendix
Table 7.3: Description of recycling processes in the EASETECH system, named after the processes, shown in Figure 7.1
(continued)
Processes
Description
Recycling of Batteries
Material flow of battery fractions from process
"Recycling of R waste" is input to a treatment fa-
cility, with energy consumption, direct emissions,
and recovery efficiency. Treatment includes energy
consumption and direct emissions, along with sub-
stituted material after processing. Substitution ra-
tios are included. No transportation is assumed in
this process. Residues from this process are sent
to hazardous incineration. Secondary material is
assumed to substitute rechargeable NMC111 pris-
matic batteries.
61
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 7. Appendix
7.4
D - Changes in Baseline Energy Impacts Over Time
Transforming energy mixes for use in foreground processes have been carried out, trans-
forming the impacts of the energy composition mixes over time, as seen in Figure 7.2.
Process composition is found from assumption.
Figure 7.2: Energy systems, and the relative change in relation to baseline impacts. Energy components are plotted on
a non-weighted basis.
From Figure 7.2, is is obvious to see that the electricity and heat emissions can be
grouped into three categories; 1) no or minor change in impact, <10% change from
baseline in 2050, 2) moderate changes in impact, around 10-50% from baseline and 3)
significant change in impacts, over 50% from baseline. The reduction in impacts from
photovoltaic and hydropower can be explained by the learning curve of these technologies,
along with overcoming current challenges within each technology, consequently reducing
impacts. Development in fossil energy sources has shown to be insignificant for impact
changes heat production. Else, hard coal reduced in 2025 by 20% and remained constant
for electricity production. These changes are due to the unchanged extraction methods
and fossil C content. Eventual reductions in fossil systems can be explained by imple-
mentation of Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technologies.
CC impacts from biomass generated electricity is increasing drastically in the period
between 2023 and 2025 and has a larger impact than baseline, up to 2040. This trend is
seen due to the small share in purpose-grown crops for biomass CHP, which is increasing
in biomass shares after 2040.
The significant difference in trend development, seen when looking at heat generation
from biomass is initially conflicting with the same trend, seen in electricity generation.
This change in trends can be explained by the following: 1) Geographical inconsistency
due to low data availability. Electricity generation is modeled from a RoW dataset, while
heat generation is modeled using a Belgian dataset. Changes in the socioeconomic state
62
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 7. Appendix
of included countries in RoW are expected to carry a larger environmental impact than
processes from Belgium.
While PREMISE creates its own energy markets with respective mixes, the energy
mixes, used in waste systems are significant to the results and data quality in these should
be high. Hence, custom energy mixes will be created and analyzed to demonstrate the
required flexibility for expanding processes and using these features in a waste-specific
LCA modeling context.
63
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 7. Appendix
7.5
E - Definition of R and D codes and Chosen Waste
Treatment Technology
Table 7.4: Definitions of R and D codes [10], and modeled treatment method when modeling in EASETECH. N/A means
no treatment allocated. This is only done for R and D codes with no masses.
R/D code
Description
Modeled treatment method
D1
Disposal of waste in a landfill
Landfill
D3
Injection into deep geological formations for waste disposal
Backfilling
D5
Disposal in a specially designed landfill facility
Landfill
D9
Physical-chemical treatment not applicable in this context
N/A
D10
Waste-to-Energy without substitution of material
WtE without substitution
D12
Permanent storage or burial of waste in the ground
Backfilling
D15
Storage of waste for later treatment or disposal
Backfilling
R1
Waste-to-Energy, utilizing waste for energy recovery
WtE
R2
Recovery of solvents from waste for reuse
Recycling
R3
Recovery of organic materials through anaerobic digestion
AD (Anaerobic Digestion)
R4
Recovery of metals from waste for reuse
Recycling
R5
Recovery of other inorganic materials from waste
Recycling
R9
Regeneration of oil for reuse in production processes
Recycling
R10
Spreading of waste on land to improve soil quality or other benefits
Land application
R11
Application of waste not covered by a specific treatment process
N/A
R12
Exchange of waste for reuse in other processes
Recycling
R13
Storage of waste for future recycling or recovery
Recycling
64
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 7. Appendix
7.6
F - Relative Changes in Impacts for Substitution
Processes with Constant Waste Compositon
Figure 7.3: Relative changes in impacts over time for substitution materials, with a constant waste composition. A
larger contribution means a larger share of avoided emissions.
65
