==PAGE:1==
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of
Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture
Applications.
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell
Culture Applications.
Master Thesis
February, 2025
Author
Valentina Mendoza Martinez
Supervisors
Ada-Ioana Bunea
Marcin Piotr Piekarczyk
Daniel Maher
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Scanning electron micrograph by Valentina Mendoza Martinez, 2024.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé,
Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark.
www.construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
The current thesis project is submitted as a requirement to complete the Master of Science
in Engineering program in Materials and Manufacturing at the Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU). This thesis has been prepared over five months with a 30 ECTS workload
in the POLYMIC group at the National Center for Nano Fabrication and Characterization
(DTU Nanolab).
Valentina Mendoza Martinez - s222509
Signature
Date
ii
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
Valentina Mendoza Martinez
02/02/2025
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The successful completion of this project is largely thanks to the guidance and trust-based
supervision of Ada. Her extensive knowledge and experience provided me with invaluable
tools to refine my thinking and deepen the quality of this work. I am also deeply grateful
to my co-supervisor, Marcin, for his generous dedication of time, thoughtful advice, and
meticulous attention to detail throughout the supervision process.
I am immensely grateful for all the experiences and the people I have encounter over the
past 10 years on this journey in search for better opportunities. In one way or another,
they have inspired, supported, or helped me to get where and who I am today.
Thanks to my family for supporting me in every decision and let me fly away at the age
of seventeen, for instilling in me the importance and passion for knowledge, and always
encouraging me to give my best wherever I go. All that has led me to become a Chemical
Engineer from the University of Granada and soon a specialist in Materials and Manufac-
turing from the Technical University of Denmark.
A heartfelt thanks to the people of D1, who became my family in Denmark, for being all
what I needed, and for allowing me to experience so many joyful moments. To Melika and
Caterina—this Master’s journey wouldn’t have been the same without you. To Martin for
always being there supporting me, listening to my ideas about this project and reading it
multiple times.
So many places, so many people, so many cultures, and so many goals achieved.
Dear Valentina, look how far you have come.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Probiotics are live microorganisms that provide health benefits when consumed in ad-
equate amounts. However, current probiotic formulations—such as capsules, suspen-
sions, powders, and probiotic foods—face challenges related to bacterial viability loss
during processing and storage. A promising approach to improving probiotic delivery is
the use of biofilm-forming bacteria, as biofilms enhance bacterial resilience in harsh en-
vironments.
This study explores the potential of microstructures fabricated by two-photon polymer-
ization as carriers for probiotic delivery through biofilm formation. To optimize bacterial
attachment, different microstructure features were tested, including rigid and soft materi-
als, smooth and rough surfaces, and cavities of varying sizes relative to bacterial dimen-
sions. Surface properties were analyzed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),
contact angle measurements, and atomic force microscopy (AFM) to correlate bacterial
attachment with surface chemistry and topography.
Results indicated that bacteria adhered most effectively to silanized borosilicate surfaces,
followed by a rigid polymer (IPL), and least to hydrogel substrates. Among the printed mi-
crostructures, bacteria preferred stiff materials and rough surfaces with increased contact
points, while smooth surfaces exhibited lower bacterial attachment. Sharp edges acted
as anti-fouling features, preventing bacterial colonization. Additionally, studies confirmed
the presence of a silane coating on substrates, ensuring structural stability and adhesion
in various liquid environments.
These findings demonstrate the potential of two-photon polymerized microstructures as
effective carriers for probiotic bacteria, laying the groundwork for further studies to develop
optimized probiotic delivery systems for the food industry.
iv
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
3D printing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Two Photon-Polymerization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
Two Photon Absorption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Characterization of Surface Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.2
Wetting properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.3
Atomic Force Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Biofilm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Materials and Methods
9
3.1
Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Iteration one
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Iteration two
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.3
Iteration three . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Photoresist materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Silanization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
2PP fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.1
File preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4.2
Sample preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4.3
Printing and development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.5
Surface chemistry of substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5.2
Wetting properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.6
Atomic Force Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.7
Bacteria culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.7.1
Well-plate configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.8
Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Results and Discussion
19
4.1
Fabricated microstructures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Silanization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2.2
Wetting properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Atomic Force Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.4
Bacteria culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.5
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
37
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
v
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix
41
A.1 Silanization Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 Bacteria Culture & Fixation Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.3 Technical Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
A.4 Print job 3D preview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.4.1
Triangular layout of iteration 1 and 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.5 Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
vi
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Two-photon polymerization (2PP) is a technology that enables the fabrication of highly
precise structures at the nanometer scale [1]. This technique has opened new areas
for research, offering promising applications across various fields, including biomedical
engineering, materials science, and microbiology [2]. Its capacity to produce complex,
three-dimensional microstructures with exceptional resolution makes it a valuable tool for
exploring new solutions to scientific and industrial challenges.
Probiotics are defined as live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amount,
confer a health benefit on the host [3]. Probiotic preparations come in various forms: cap-
sules, suspensions, powders, and combined into probiotic food. All of these forms could
be further improved as they share the issue of a loss of viability during both processing
and storage [4].
Bacteria in biofilm format can be a way of delivering probiotics, since the benefits of bacte-
ria are maximized when they form biofilm rather than existing in their planktonic state [5].
This is due to the fact that biofilm, which are communities of microorganism embedded
in a self- produced extracellular matrix, provide benefits such as protection against shear
stress and harsh environments [6]. Delivering bacteria in biofilm format could potentially
reduce resource consumption and streamline supply chains [5]. However, despite ex-
tensive research on biofilm formation, a comprehensive understanding of how to reliably
promote this process remains elusive. While key aspects and the general mechanisms
of biofilm formation are known, the process is highly dependent on numerous factors,
including type of bacteria and environmental conditions.
The present project focuses on investigating the use of 3D printed microstructures fab-
ricated via 2PP, using different materials and design features for potential bacterial at-
tachment and subsequent biofilm formation as delivery systems for probiotics in the food
industry. The aim of this study more specifically is to examine the influence of mate-
rial properties and surface design features on bacterial adhesion– the critical first step in
biofilm formation. Comparing between a rigid material and a soft material, to determine
their potential to enhance bacterial adhesion, whilst surface features, such as roughness
and design geometries, for their effectiveness for bacterial attachment and growth.
These findings are intended to serve as a foundation for future research aimed at devel-
oping novel and more efficient methods for transporting bacteria in biofilm format.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
3D printing
According to the ISO standard 52900:2021, additive manufacturing is described as the
process of joining materials to make parts from 3D model data, usually layer upon layer,
as opposed to subtractive manufacturing and formative manufacturing methodologies.
3D printing or additive manufacturing covers a wide range of processes for creating three
dimensional structures from a digital file, having the advantage of producing complex
shapes and surfaces that are very difficult to achieve by using conventional methods such
as casting, subtractive manufacturing and forming.
This technology have been experience an increase expansion in the recent years. It first
emerged in the 1980’s by the development of stereolithography by Charles Hull, a process
making liquid polymers harden under ultra-violet light [7]. And now a days there are more
than 50 kinds of 3D printing technologies based on different principles and developed
for different materials, speed and precision requirements, such as photo polymerization
to fusion deposition up to bio-printing recently. Making it a technology with practically
borderless variety of applications in different fields like healthcare, aviation, food industry,
aerospace, electronics, robotics, tissue engineering.
The 3D printing overall process can be describe in some steps, where the first part consist
of the solid part modeling by Computer-Aided Design (CAD) software. Once the model
have been created, it must be sliced into layers, then a code must be generated to feed
into the 3D printer [8], the 3D printer reads the file and creates the product by adding
material layer by layer and finally if necessary, a post processing is done.
Less material wastage, lightweight objects, less post processing and very less cost for
manufacturing complex parts makes 3D printing an advantageous technology [9] [10] .
2.2
Two Photon-Polymerization
Two-photon polymerization (2PP) is a technology in 3D printing based on a non-linear op-
tical process known as two-photon absorption (2PA)—described in 2.2.1 . This technology
enables the fabrication of microstructures with complex shapes and critical dimensions of
a few hundred of nanometers [1].
A typical 2PP setup includes a femtosecond laser emitting photons in the near-infrared
(NIR) spectrum, which is tightly focused into a photosensitive resin by high numerical
aperture (NA) objective. The energy absorbed from the simultaneous absorption of two
photons initiates a photochemical reaction, causing the photoactive molecules within the
resin to cross-link and solidify into a predetermined structure directly from a Computer-
Aided Design (CAD) file [2]. The process involves layer-by-layer construction, where each
layer consists of voxels (the smallest printable volume element in 3D, where local poly-
merization occurs), organized and solidified through precise movements controlled by
piezoelectric stages and galvanometric mirror systems.
A two photon-polymerization process consists of three stages: initiation, where photoini-
tiators (PIs) reach the excited state (PI*) by absorption of two photons and decompose
into radicals (R·) Propagation, where the radicals combine with monomers (M) to produce
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
3
==PAGE:12==
monomer radicals (RMn·) Termination, where two monomer radicals are combined and
the photon polymerization concludes.[2]
PI →PI∗→R · +R·
(2.1)
R · +M →RM· →RMM · ... →RMn·
(2.2)
RMn · +RMm· →RM(n+m)R
(2.3)
2.2.1
Two Photon Absorption
Two-photon absorption (2PA) is the fundamental process underlying 2PP. The principle
of 2PA involves the simultaneous absorption of two photons which may have identical
or differing frequencies, causing a molecule to transition from a lower state (usually the
ground state) to a higher energy state.
This phenomenon was first theoretically described by Maria Göppert-Mayer in 1931 and
experimentally demonstrated by Kaiser and Garrett in 1961, shortly after the invention of
the laser [11].
The main distinction between one photon absorption and two photon absorption lies in
their interaction mechanism, 1PA is a linear process, with absorption directly proportional
to the light intensity, and in contrast, 2PA is a non-linear process, depending quadratically
on the light intensity, making it observable only under high intensity conditions such as
focused pulsed laser beams, which generate extremely high photon densities [12]
Figure 2.1: Adapted from S. Ruzin and H.Aaron UC Berkley.
In 2PA, the combined energy of the two photons is equal to the energy difference be-
tween the molecule’s ground and excited states. Each photon contributes half the energy
required for the transition, allowing excitation with photons of longer wavelengths than
those used in 1PA. This property enables 2PA to access specific excited states that would
otherwise require higher-energy photons. This process involves the creation of a virtual
state, which is not a permanent state of the molecule, and exists only for a brief period of
time [13]
The nonlinear nature of 2PA offers significant advantages, particularly in applications re-
quiring high spatial resolution. For example, in focused Gaussian beams, 2PA intensity
decreases with distance from the beam center at twice the exponential rate of 1PA, lead-
ing to enhanced resolution in processes like photoactive polymer excitation. This mech-
anism can induce polymer bond scission in positive-tone resists or bond crosslinking in
negative-tone resists [14].
Negative-tone resist are materials whose solubility decreases upon exposure to radia-
tion.This solubility change can occur in any number of different ways, but the two most
4
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:13==
common are a change in polarity or a substantial increase in molecular weight through
cross-linking [15].
Hydrogels are defined as crosslinked polymer network structures capable of retaining
large amounts of water. porous architecture, and their softness.
2.3
Characterization of Surface Properties
2.3.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
XPS is a non-destructive and surface sensitive technique used to examine the elemental
and chemical composition of a sample. Irradiating the sample with X-rays of a specific
energy will free electrons bound in the sample atoms and cause some of them to leave
as photoelectrons with a kinetic energy that can be correlated to the electronic state in
which they were bonded. From this the elemental and composition in the sample may be
determined [16].
The method probes the most loosely bonded electrons in the sample atoms. As these
electrons are the ones participating in chemical bonding with other atoms, their binding
energy varies slightly as a result of the chemical environment. This chemical shift is mea-
sured by the XPS, and it thus serves as a powerful characterization tool.
Each element has its own ”Fingerprint” in the XPS spectrum. The electronic states in the
atoms are occupied by electrons with specific binding energy.
All elements have peaks within the wide energy range (0-1350 eV binding energy) of the
survey spectrum. Hence any element that is present in the sample whithin its detection
limit (aprox 1%) will show up in the survey spectrum as peaks of intensity that are deter-
mined by the respective concentration [17].
2.3.2
Wetting properties
The surface free energy of a solid material is characterized by its wetting properties, which
involve the interaction between the solid and a liquid. Studying this property requires the
quantitative measurement of the contact angle (θ), formed at the three phase boundary
where a liquid, a gas, and the solid intersect.
As first described by Thomas Young in 1805, the contact angle of a liquid droplet on an
ideal solid surface –chemically homogeneous and topographically smooth– is defined by
the mechanical equilibrium between the solid, liquid and gas at the three phase contact.
This relationship is expressed in the following equation:
γsv = γsl + γlv cos θY
The interfacial tensions, γsv, γsl, and γlv, form the equilibrium contact angle of wetting,
often referred to as Young contact angle θY [18].
When the contact angle is lower than 90 degress, the liquid spread across the surface,
with a contact angle of zero indicating complete wetting (hydrophilic surface). Contrary, a
contact angle grater than 90 degrees indicates that the liquid beads on the surface forming
a compact droplet (hydrophobic surface) [19].
The shape of a liquid droplet is determined by the surface tension of the liquid a phe-
nomenon based on the cohesive forces between the liquid’s molecules, where each
molecule in the bulk is pulled equally in all direction by their neighbors, resulting in a
net force of zero. However, the molecules at the surface lack neighboring molecules in all
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of contact angles formed by sessile liquid drops on a smooth ho-
mogeneous solid surface
directions, causing an imbalance in forces. The surface molecules are pulled inward by
the neighboring molecules, creating an internal pressure and causing the liquid minimize
its surface area [18].
The most commonly used technique for measuring contact angle involves directly mea-
suring the tangent angle at the three-phase contact point of a sessile dropplet. Goniometry
is the method that analyzes the shape of a drop of test liquid placed on a solid.
2.3.3
Atomic Force Microscopy
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), invented by Binning in 1986, is a high-resolution imaging
technique capable of analysing both conductive and non-conductive surfaces. Its principle
involves detecting the interaction forces between a sharp probe tip and the sample surface
[20].
AFM has become a versatile tool across scientific and engineering fields, especially for
topographic characterization at the nanometer scale.
With a lateral resolution of ap-
proximately 1nm and a vertical resolution below than 1Å, AFM can produce atomic-level
images. It also offers unique advantages, including the ability to operate under a vari-
ety of environmental conditions, perform in situ measurements, and function as a non-
destructive technique [21].
It operates by measuring the interaction forces between a sharp probe tip—mounted on
a flexible cantilever—and the sample surface. A laser beam, reflected from the back
of the cantilever onto a four-segment photodiode, detects vertical deflections and lateral
distortions. A high-precision piezoelectric scanner, controlled by applied voltages, moves
either the tip or the sample in the x, y, and z directions.The resulting z-piezo movements
across the x-y plane are used to generate detailed topographic images [22].
Two primary imaging modes are commonly employed in AFM. In contact mode, the tip
maintains continuous contact with the sample, and a feedback loop adjusts z-position of
the scanner to maintain a constant cantilever deflection. In dynamic (tapping) mode, the
cantilever oscillates near its resonance frequency, and the z-position is adjusted to keep
the oscillation amplitude stable. This mode is particularly advantageous for imaging soft
or delicate surfaces, as it minimizes damage to both the sample and the probe [21].
2.4
Biofilm
Biofilms are structured microbial communities attached or not to surfaces, being the pre-
dominant way of life in bacteria. Bacteria in biofilms are mostly embedded in a complex
matrix comprised of extracellular polymeric substances that provide mechanical stability
and protection against environmental adversities [23].
6
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:15==
The process of bacterial adhesion is influenced by many factors, including material sur-
face properties, influences of surface charge, surface wettability, roughness, topography,
stiffness, and combination of properties on bacterial adhesion, bacterial motility and the
effect of hydrodynamic flow [23].
Biofilm lifestyle offers bacteria enhanced protection against environmental stresses (an-
tibiotics, disinfectants, desiccation, host immune system). Therefore, understanding how
bacteria form and persist in biofilms is necessary for the safe application of biofilms in in-
dustry (wastewater treatment and bioremediation) as well as in human health (probiotics
and food safety) [24],[25].
Furthermore, there is a pressing interest in using biofilms in industrial settings for produc-
tion of relevant valuable bioproducts (i.e. recombinant proteins, enzymes), due to their
increased productivity as continuous production processes [26].
Surface charge density is an important surface property related to van der Waals force and
electrostatic interactions, that can determine bacterial adhesion onto material surfaces
[23].
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:17==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Designs
An iterative process was undertaken to design microstructures with simple geometries.
These designs were created as 3D models using SolidWorks ® (Student Edition 2023
SP2, Dassault Systèmes), a computer-aided design (CAD) software for solid modeling.
The dimensions used in this software to design the models were in millimeters (mm),
but later in the process, the software DeScribe (see section 3.4.1) converted them to
micrometers (µm). For consistency throughout the report, this latter unit of measurement
will be used as the reference.
The iterations involved refining the designs based on feedback from image analysis. This
process resulted in three design iterations. For detailed dimensions of each feature and
design, refer to the technical drawings in Appendix A.3.
3.1.1
Iteration one
Three designs with different features were created, represented in Figure 4.7:
• Design A1: A circular part with a diameter of 200 µm and a height of 10 µm. The part
contains symmetrical cavities evenly distributed around its center. Four rounded,
teardrop-shaped cavities are evenly spaced radially around the center, and four
circular holes are positioned between them. Each circular hole includes two smaller
concentric circular depressions within it, cut to different depths from the surface.
• Design B1: A honeycomb-like structure inscribed in a 140 µm circumference featur-
ing a repeating pattern of seven hexagonal shapes, each of them inscribed within
a circle of 30 µm of diameter. Four hexagons are open all the way to the bottom,
with a total height of 10 µm, and three hexagons have a depth of 6 µm from the top
surface.
• Design C1: A flat square part of 100 µm length, subdivided into nine equal square
sections. Five of them have microtexture with different scales (0.6-1.2 µm) of equally
spaced features (pyramidal spikes, square pillars, grid and rectangular walls), giving
texture to the surface, while the other four sections consisted of smooth surfaces.
(a) Design A1.
(b) Design B1.
(c) Design C1.
Figure 3.1: Isometric view of 3D model designs from iteration 1.
3.1.2
Iteration two
The designs from Section 3.1.1 served as the foundational framework for this second
iteration, with minor modifications implemented. The outer and inner straight walls of
Designs A1 and B1 were adjusted to incorporate a draft angle of 30◦, and sharp edges
from Design A1 were rounded using a fillet tool. Additionally, the dimensions of Designs
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
9
==PAGE:18==
B1 and C1 were increased: the honeycomb structure was inscribed within a 200 µm
circumference, and the sides of the square structure were set to a length of 140 µm.
These modified structures, named A2, B2, and C2 are represented in Figure 3.2.
(a) Design A2.
(b) Design B2.
(c) Design C2.
Figure 3.2: Isometric view of 3D model designs from iteration 2.
3.1.3
Iteration three
Unlike the previous iterations with three separate designs, this third iteration consisted of
a single unified structure derived from Design C2: a square with a side length of 140 µm
and a height of 10 µm, divided into nine equal square sections. Within these sections,
the features described in the previous iterations for the other designs (concentric circles,
hexagon, draft walls, square pillars, grid and rectangular protrusions) were combined to
generate an All in one design, as represented in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Isometric view of 3D model design All in one, from iteration 3.
3.2
Photoresist materials
Two different suitable photoresists were used separately to fabricate the microstructures,
a rigid polymer and a swelling hydrogel. The characteristics of each material are summa-
rized below:
• IP-L: A stiff material, it is a liquid negative-tone 2PP resin (Nanoscribe, Karlsruhe,
Germany). Its reactive group is acrylate and it is designed for printing in an oil-
immersion configuration. This material combines high resolution, low shrinkage (<
10%), and excellent stability. It has a Young’s modulus of 4.73 GPa and a Vickers
hardness 22.61 HV0.0025, according to the producer’s specifications.
• Hydrogel: A soft material, it is an acrylic acid hydrogel prepared in our laboratory
by the supervisor, Daniel Maher. It has a Young’s modulus range of 5-10 MPa (data
provided by Florea Lab, not published yet).
The composition of the hydrogel is presented in Table 3.1.
10
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:19==
Substance
Role
Mass fraction [%]
Acrylic Acid (CAS 79-10-7, Sigma Aldrich)
Monomer
15
SR9035 (CAS 28961-43-5, Arkema)
Crosslinking Agent
84
BAPO (CAS 162881-26-7, Sigma Aldrich)
Photoinitiator
1
Table 3.1: Hydrogel composition.
3.3
Silanization
Rounded borosilicate glass coverslips (30 mm diameter, 170 µm thickness, #1.5, Thermo
Scientific, Germany) were used as substrates and functionalized with a silane solution in
the laboratory at DTU, following the protocol detailed in Appendix A.1.
Batches of substrates were silanized on a constant basis, whenever necessary, through-
out the project. This process involved several steps:
Initially, the borosilicate substrates were washed using solvents (acetone and isopropanol)
to increase the polarity of the surface and remove contaminants. Following this, the sur-
face was activated through oxygen plasma treatment for 15 minutes, enhancing the re-
activity of the borosilicate surface by generating hydroxyl (OH-) groups. This step was
performed using the Zepto low pressure plasma system (Electronic Diener, Ebhausen,
Germany).
After surface activation, the substrates were treated with a mixture of 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl
methacrylate (98%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), ethanol, and acetic acid (30%, Merck KGaA,
Germany) for one hour. During this reaction, the silanol groups in the silane bond cova-
lently with the hydroxyl groups on the substrate surface.
Finally, the modified substrates underwent a curing process by being placed on a hot
plate at 60◦C for one hour. This step strengthens the bonds and stabilizes the silane
layer, ensuring the durability and effectiveness of the functionalization process. Specific
parameters for each step are provided in the aforementioned protocol to ensure repro-
ducibility.
3.4
2PP fabrication
The fabrication process of the microstructures consisted of several steps, described be-
low. The following steps –sample preparation, printing, and development– were con-
ducted by the author in the PolyFabLab polymer ISO 7 cleanroom under yellow light to
prevent unintended polymerization.
the equipment used the Photonic Professional GT+ (Nanoscribe, Karlsruhe, Germany) as
3D printer based on 2PP (shown in Figure 3.4). It is designed for ultra-precise and rapid
microfabrication. The system uses a femtosecond fibre Ti-Sapphire laser source with a
wavelength of 780 nm to polymerize the resin, with laser power of 50 mW corresponding
to 100% (maximum achievable of 70 mW), pulse duration ranging from 100 fs to 200 fs,
and a repetition rate of 80 MHz [27].
The printer was used to fabricate all samples in oil-immersion mode. To focus the laser
light into the sample, the microscope objective Plan-APOCHROMAT 63x/1.4 (Carl Zeiss,
Oberkochen, Germany) was used, which is suitable for printing small features. Immer-
sol™518 F oil (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) was used as the immersion medium.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.4: Photonic Profesional GT+ 3D printer form Nanoscribe.
3.4.1
File preparation
Once the desired microstructures were designed with Solidworks, the models were ex-
ported as .STL files, which stands for “Standard Tessellation Language”, a widely used
file format in additive manufacturing. However, to make the files compatible with the Pho-
tonic Professional GT+ 3D printer, they were converted to GWL files (General Writing
Language). This step was carried out using the software DeScribe 2.7 (Nanoscribe, Karl-
sruhe, Germany). This software is the job preparation program developed by Nanoscribe
for 3D printing applications. It contains an import wizard that reads the CAD models from
the STL file and convert them to GWL files, defining the laser’s focal point trajectory within
the 2PP resin by setting all necessary printing parameters. Additionally, the software au-
tomatically adjusts the dimensions to micrometers (µm).
Default printing settings for each material were applied based on the following:
• Manufacturer recommendations for IP-L.
• knowledge from previous experiments conducted by the author’s research group for
the hydrogel.
These parameters are summarized in Table 3.2. Optimization of printing parameters for
these specific microstructures was outside the scope of this project due to time con-
straints.
Printing parameter
IP-L
Hydrogel
Slicing distance (SD) [µm]
0.3
0.3
Hatching distance (HD) [µm]
0.2
0.3
Laser power (LP) [%]
40
90
Scanning speed (SS) [µm/s]
10000
6500
Table 3.2: Default printing parameters for IP-L and Hydrogel.
The text editor of the mentioned software was used to program the print of an array of
multiple microstructures in a single print job, an therefore in a single substrate. One layout
consisted of a triangular distribution, where each vertex of the triangle contains the three
microstructures (Design A, B and C). This setup was repeated twice , once for design
iteration 1 and again for design iteration 2. The other layout consisted of a 3x3 square
12
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:21==
array with the microstructure from design iteration 3. See the 3D preview of the print job
file in Figure A.7 in the Appendix.
3.4.2
Sample preparation
After processing the files, the next step was sample preparation for printing in oil-immersion
mode.
The silanized coverslips were used as substrates for the printed microstructures. Each
coverslip with the printed microstructures corresponded to one sample. The coverslips
were placed on a substrate holder and secured with tape. A drop of Immersol™518 oil was
applied to the bottom center of the coverslip. Depending on the material used, different
approaches were implemented.
• For the IP-L, a drop of the liquid resin was placed on the top side, ensuring alignment
with the oil drop on the bottom.
• For the Hydrogel, due to the high volatility of acrylic acid, a custom printing cell was
prepared to limit evaporation. Two parallel strips of tape were placed on the top side
of the coverslip, and an 18x18 mm square cover glass (VWR, thickness No.1) (not
silanized) was placed on top, creating a small gap between the two surfaces. Fol-
lowing this, 20 µL of hydrogel was placed at the edge of the cell using an Eppendorf
pipette, allowing the liquid to infiltrate by capillarity effect and forming an uniform
layer. A graphic representation of this setup is shown in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Schematic side view of the printing cell for hydrogel, in oil-immersion mode.
Finally, the sample was mounted onto the printing stage of the 3D printer.
3.4.3
Printing and development
In order to start the printing job, a software that controls the printer was use. NanoWrite
1.10.5 provides an easy-to-use graphical user interface and a live-view camera (AxioVi-
sion) to monitor the printing process in real time. The generated GWL file (print job) was
uploaded, and printing was initialized.
Once the printing job was completed, the substrate holder was removed from the printer,
and the sample was detached. The final step involved developing the fabricated mi-
crostructures by removing the oil and residual uncrosslinked photoresist. The unmounted
sample was submerged in two separate isopropanol (IPA) baths for 15 minutes each.
This ensured the the resin was fully removed while preventing saturation of the clean-
ing solution. After microstructure development, all samples were allowed to dry at room
temperature before characterization.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
13
==PAGE:22==
3.5
Surface chemistry of substrates
To verify that the silanization process effectively altered the surface chemistry of the sub-
strates, two studies were conducted: one to analyze the surface’s chemical composition
and another to examine wetting properties. For these experiments, samples were taken
at each stage of the silanization process described in Section 3.3, resulting in five test
conditions:
• Dirty: Coverslip taken directly from the box provided by the manufacturer, without
any prior cleaning or preparation.
• Solvent: A coverslip taken after the first step of the silanization process, which in-
volved increasing the polarity of the surface by washing with acetone followed by
isopropanol.
• Plasma: A coverslip taken after the third step, consisting of a 15 minutes oxygen
plasma treatment.
• Coated: coverslip taken at the end of the silanization process.
• Aged: Coverslip examined four weeks after the silanization process to evaluate its
properties, as the protocol specifies that the coating’s effective lifespan is one month.
Both survey spectra and contact angle measurements were performed at the center and
at the edge of the sample.
3.5.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
Surface chemical composition of the borosilicate glass from the five test conditions men-
tioned before, was analyzed using the Nexa X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer system
(ThermoFisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). This state-of-the-art instrument pro-
vides detailed chemical and elemental surface analysis. The XPS analysis was performed
using a monochromated Al K-α radiation at 1486.6 eV, The equipment operates with the
software Avantage v5.9931 (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), which
is designed for Thermo Fisher Scientific’s surface analysis products. The software pro-
vides comprehensive tools for data acquisition, processing, and reporting, enabling pre-
cise chemical characterization.
The substrates were mounted on a sample holder, place into the load-lock of the equip-
ment and then transferred into the analysis chamber. An experiment was set up using the
X-ray gun as the source, with a spot size of 400 µm, and the flood gun enabled for charge
compensation, as the measurements were conducted on non-conductive surfaces.
A surface survey spectrum of elements was performed at two points positioned at the
center and edge of each sample. For each point, auto-height adjustment was enabled
and ten scans were performed with a dwell time of 50 ms per scan.
The data obtained was analyzed using the Avantage software to extract atomic percent-
age compositions.
3.5.2
Wetting properties
The wetting properties of the substrates were evaluated using the Attension® Theta Flow
Optical Tensiometer (Biolin Scientific), an advanced instrument that enables precise mea-
surement of surface and interfacial tension, static and dynamic contact angles, and sur-
face free energy. This device automates key settings to ensure high quality, repeatable
data. This optical tensiometer is controlled by the software OneAttension Version 4.1.2
(Biolin Scientific), which enables real-time data collection, analysis, and visualization.
14
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:23==
A sessile drop contact angle experiment was conducted. Initially, the equipment was
calibrated using a standard calibration ball with a 4 mm diameter, after that the zoom of
the camera was kept constant.
A single liquid dispenser was used with a disposable pipette tip placed on it. The tubbing
was filled with deionized (DI) water and the volume of the drop was set to 4 µL. A default
recipe from the software was selected for measuring the contact angle of deionized (DI)
water on the surface of the coverslip.
The coverslip was positioned on the stage and moved until it was visible in the camera.
The baseline was aligned with the coverslip surface and the dispenser was adjusted to
ensure the droplet was visible from the top view of the camera. All measurements were
conducted at room temperature and normal atmospheric conditions. For each test condi-
tion, three measurements were recorded and the process was repeated twice to ensure
statistical significance.
Once the images were recorded, the analysis tab in the software was used to process
the measurements. The contact angle data was generated by the software by fitting the
Young-Laplace equation (See section 2.3.2) to each of the drop profile measurements.
3.6
Atomic Force Microscopy
To examine the surface roughness of the printed microstructures made from different
materials an Atomic Force Microscopy system (AFM) was used. The microstructures
were characterized using the Dimension Icon-PT AFM (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA). This
high-performance AFM is ideal for nanoscale material and device characterization.
The imaging was performed with the scanning software NanoScope 9.4, with the experi-
ment set to Tapping mode in air for roughness measurement. A TAP150-Al probe (Bud-
getSensors ®, Innovative Solutions Bulgaria Ltd. Sofia, Bulgaria) was used to extract the
topology of the specific area on the surface, featuring a spring constant of 5 N/m and a
resonance frequency of 150 kHz. The laser was aligned on the probe and tip was brought
into focus.
The sample was placed on the stage, secured in position by turning on the vacuum chuck,
then loaded and focused with the software. The scan parameters were configured to a
scan rate 0.467 Hz, and A scan area of 15x15 µm2 was selected from a section of each
designed microstructures. Scans were performed to evaluate the topology of the selected
areas of each sample by determining the root mean square roughness (Rq), calculated
using the following equation:
Rq =
√∑n
i=1(Zi −Z)2
n
where Zi is the current Z value, Z is the mean Z value of all points within the area, and
n is the number of points.
The analysis of the obtained scans was performed using NanoScope Analysis 1.70 soft-
ware (Bruker), which was used to compute the root mean square roughness (Rq).
The samples evaluated were a different batch from the samples taken for bacteria culture
and SEM imaging, in order to ensure that the structure roughness achieved by the printer
was not affected by the thin gold layer or the bacteria attached.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: Schematic representation of the areas where roughness was evaluated rep-
resented with a red square in each microstructure.
3.7
Bacteria culture
Once the microstructures were 3D printed and developed, they were transported to the
laboratories of the Food Microbiology section at the University of Copenhagen (KU),
where the process of bacterial growth on the microstructures was conducted by Bjørg
Freiesleben Frier Smestad and Postdoc Rocio Espinosa Portero. The bacteria selected
from the strain collection of the mentioned university section and their corresponding me-
dia are presented below:
• Leuconostoc citreum: Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) ISO 33, heterofermentative coccus-
shaped. cultured in MRS medium (De Man, Rogosa, and Sharpe). This strain was
selected due to its application in probiotics, commonly used in the food industry.
This strain reaches a pH of 4.5 after 20-24 hours incubation in MRS (initial pH of
MRS is 5.5).
• Pseudomonas putida MRB1: A mutant strain cultured in TSB medium (Tryptic Soy
Broth). This strain served as a positive control due to its robust biofilm-forming ability
on various surfaces.
Both bacteria were inoculated in their respective media by suspending a single colony
from an agar plate in 5mL of broth and incubating overnight at the appropriate tempera-
ture. The next day, the overnight cultures were adjusted to an optical density (OD)600 of
0.1 before starting the experiments.
Prior to bacteria seeding, microstructures were sterilized by being submerged in ethanol
overnight and subsequently rinsed with deionized (DI) water three times to remove resid-
ual ethanol, ensuring that bacterial growth was not inhibited. After that, the sterilized mi-
crostructures were placed in well plates with the desired configuration (see section 3.7.1).
The bacteria and their respective media were then added to the well plates. The plates
were placed inside the incubator at 30◦C to allow the bacteria to grow statically on the
microstructures overnight.
Finally, a fixation process for visualization was carried out to preserve the samples for
further analysis.
Details and steps for sterilization, incubation, and fixation, are provided in the protocol in
section A.2 from the Appendix for reproducibility.
3.7.1
Well-plate configuration
6-well plates were routinely used for each bacterial culture iteration. Each well, with a
diameter of 35 mm, was large enough to accommodate a single sample, consisting of
a silanized coverslip with the printed microstructures on top, acting as a chip with the
various designs.
16
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:25==
Two different configurations were tested, a schematic representation of the well plate
configurations is presented in Figure 3.7 and described below:
• First configuration: Conducted in a 6-well plate with three columns. Column one
served as a control with no bacteria and no microstructures on the coverslips. Columns
two consisted of LAB with microstructures made from each material (IP-L repre-
sented in orange and hydrogel represented in blue). Column three consisted of
Putida with microstructures made from each material again.
All substrates were placed flat at the bottom of the wells.
• Second configuration: Maintained the control column, but focused exclusively on
LAB, incorporating two specific setups: Sandwich and Smørrebrød configurations.
The first consisted of two substrates with the microstructures facing each other. And
the second consisted of two substrates with the microstructures on oposite sides.
For these, a 3D printed separator (represented in green) made with PLA, designed
and fabricated by the supervisor Ada-Ioana Bunea, was used to facilitate the setups.
Figure 3.7: Scheme of sample configurations in a 6-well plate for bacteria culture.
3.8
Imaging
Footage of the dry microstructures was captured after fabrication and sample develop-
ment, using the VHX-X1F digital microscope (Keyence International, Belgium) with full
coaxial lighting. Additionally, the VK-X300 series 3D laser scanning microscope (Keyence
International, Belgium) with a resolution of 0.01 nm, was employed. This high-precision
surface analysis tool is designed for non-contact 3D measurement and observation. It was
used to measure dimensions of the printed microstructures. The images were obtained
under laser confocal scan mode, and analyzed with the software VK-X 3000 MultifileAn-
alyzer, setting a reference plane and measuring the profile and line roughness of the 3D
images.
Once the bacteria were fixated at KU, they were transported back to DTU for further in-
spection. Initially, the Nikon Eclipse LV100NDA optical microscope was used to iden-
tify the position of the microstructures and the material. This preliminary check ensured
proper orientation of the microstructures for subsequent analyses.
Following this, the samples were examined by scanning electron microscopy, to investi-
gate bacterial attachment to the structures. Since bacteria and polymer are non-conductive
specimens, a thin gold layer (approximately 10 nm) was applied to all the samples, us-
ing the 208HR sputter coater (Cressington Scientific Instruments, Watford, UK) with gold
target.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
17
==PAGE:26==
Finally, for a detailed examination of the microstructures topography and bacterial adhe-
sion, images were acquired using the Zeiss Supra VP 40 (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Ger-
many) scanning electron microscope with SmartSEMv6.0 software. This high—performance
SEM is designed for versatile imaging and analytical applications with high resolution. Im-
ages were captured using the secondary electron (SE) detector under high vacuum (HV)
mode and an acceleration voltage (ETH) of 3 KeV. Each microstructure was imaged from
each of the samples.
18
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:27==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Fabricated microstructures
The conceptualization process for designing microstructures was based on two key per-
spectives: the constraints of the printing process and the bacteria culture. The goal was to
design microstructures that were feasible to fabricate by 2PP while also exploring features
that could potentially influence and promote bacterial attachment and biofilm formation on
the microstructures.
From the printing perspective, the selected designs and dimensions had to fit within the
effective printing field of the chosen 63x objective (see section 3.4) , ensuring they did not
exceeded 200 µm for circular shapes and 141 µm for the largest inscribed square [28].
It was observed that for the hydrogel, walls designed with a height of 10 µm and a thick-
ness of less than 5 µm were not fully printed and exhibited overexposure and increased
bubbling effect (see Figure A.4.1 in the appendix). To maintain consistency between mi-
crostructures fabricated with the two materials, and avoid the need for further adjustments
of the default printing parameters, feature dimensions were constrained to be above the
aforementioned threshold.
From the bacterial perspective, the focus was on identifying correlations between surface
properties and bacterial adhesion. In designing the microstructures, characteristics known
to repel or kill bacteria, such as sharp edges or dimensions smaller than their own size
(0.5-2 µm)[23], were minimized.
Based on literature review and discussions with the research group, three key character-
istics were studied with the microstructure designs:
• Feature Size: Evaluating whether bacteria attach more to wide or narrow spaces
(targeted by Design A).
• Material Preference: Investigating whether bacteria prefer the resin materials or
avoid it, by comparing their attachment in two different conditions, closed holes with
a resin bottom versus open holes where bacteria interact directly with the underlying
silanized substrate (targeted by Design B).
• Surface Topography: Analyzing the impact of surface roughness and texture (tar-
geted by Design C).
The printed microstructures were examined under a digital microscope and a laser scan-
ning microscope, to assess the printing quality. From the analysis of the obtained images,
it was concluded that the microstructures were successfully printed, demonstrating that
the default printing parameters listed in Table 3.2 were suitable for ensuring structural
integrity during the fabrication of the current designs. Their dimensions accurately repli-
cated the original CAD designs, the height of the printed microstructures deviate from
the CAD models by being 1,3 ± 0,6 µm less, while for horizontal measurements, related
to the width of the features, was measured that the printed structures deviated from the
CAD models by 0,3 ± 0,7 µm more. Additionally, 90% of the printed microstructures re-
mained attached to the borosilicate substrate after development. Microstructures printed
with IP-L were observed to be free from defects such as bubling or buning. However,
in the microstructures printed with hydrogel, some defects were observed, particularly in
regions with thin walls, were there was a lack of stability and deformations such as not
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
19
==PAGE:28==
parallel walls and offset circunferences. This observation suggests that to fully leverage
the high-quality fabrication capabilities of the 2PP printer, the printing parameters should
be optimized to meet the requirements of the current designs.
For the three design iterations, representative images of the IP-L and hydrogel printed
microstructures captured with the digital microscope are presented in Figures 4.1 and
4.2.
Figure 4.1: Digital microscope images from microstructures fabricated with IP-L and Hy-
drogel, from design Iterations 1 and 2. Same scale for all images 25 µm.
Comparing Iterations 1 and 2, the internal and external walls of Designs A2 and B2 ap-
pear visibly thicker, clearly reflecting the introduction of 30◦draft angles. Additionally, the
dimensions of the design form Iteration 2, align well with the maximum effective writing
field of the 63x objective used. These modifications result in the microstructures from
Iteration 2 being more consistent in size compared to those from Iteration 1.
The third iteration consisted of the all-in-one design that combined features from the pre-
vious iterations, representative images from the microstructure fabricated with IP-L and
hydrogel are displayed in Figure 4.2 .
20
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:29==
(a) all in one IPL.
(b) all in one Hydrogel.
Figure 4.2: Digital microscope images from microstructures fabricated with IP-L and Hy-
drogel, from design Iterations 3.
The images presented in Figures 4.1 and 4.2 also reveal that microstructures printed with
IP-L closely replicated the CAD model with high fidelity. In contrast, it can be visually seen
that the microstructures printed with hydrogel exhibited few deformations and reduced
accuracy to the CAD design (sides of the square being not perpendicular nor parallel,
and offset in the designed concentric circles). Furthermore, all microstructures remained
attached to the substrate, demonstrating the effectiveness of the silanization process in
ensuring adhesion.
The dimensions of the printed microstructures were measured using the 3D images ob-
tained from the laser scanning microscope by performing a profile measurement analysis
with MultifileAnalyzer software. The microstructures were found to accurately replicate
the original dimensions of the CAD designs and comply with the expected 10% shrink-
age inherent to the materials. A representation of the profile measurements done to the
printed microstructure Design A2 can be seen in Figure 4.3.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.3: Laser scanning microscope image from the profile measurement of the IP-L
printed microstructure of design A2.
It is noteworthy that the height of all microstructures was measured to be 8,4 ± 0,1 µm
being less than the designed 10 µm.(See Figure A.9). This discrepancy aligns with the
default settings of the printer, where the print job starts 0.5 µm below the interface. Addi-
tionally, the interface-finding process can introduce some issues, and the polymerization
occurs most effectively where two vowels overlap. As a result, the final layer may be less
thick than another layer. All these, contributing to the reduced height observed in the
measurements.
Figure 4.4: Height profile measurement represented through color-code legend, of 3D
images from design all in one with different materials.
22
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:31==
4.2
Silanization
To prevent detachment of the microstructures from the borosilicate coverslip throughout
the whole process, which involved submerging the microstructures and washing them re-
peatedly, the functionalization process (silanization) was performed as a first step, before
the fabrication process. The aim was to achieve a monolayer of silane on the substrate
surface to act as the coupling agent.
To confirm the presence of this silane coating, two different techniques were employed:
surface chemical composition analysis with XPS and contact angle measurements with
an optical tensiometer. These analyses involved examining the five test conditions men-
tioned in section 3.5:
This silanization process also changes the surface properties of the borosilicate cover-
slips, which can have a positive or negative influence on the bacterial attachment.
4.2.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
A Survey spectra analysis of the elements present on the surface of the coverslips was
performed with XPS. It was conducted twice per sample –once at the edge and once at
the center– on the five substrate samples mentioned above.
The data of the surface chemical composition of the studied coverslips is reported in Table
4.1.
Element
Dirty
Solvent
Plasma
Coated
Aged
O
47.85
56.04
60.29
60.80
60.17
C
24.95
12.49
5.91
6.77
7.90
Si
20.35
23.13
24.58
24.87
24.49
K
2.03
2.54
2.80
2.81
2.20
Na
2.09
2.11
2.30
1.46
1.76
B
1.55
2.13
1.64
1.67
1.71
Al
1.40
1.58
1.60
1.63
1.78
Table 4.1: Surface Chemical Composition (%) of Studied Coverslips.
This experiment did not provide detailed insights into the presence of a silane monolayer
on the substrate surface. However, observations in relation to the data obtained from
the atomic percentages were done. Notably, the silicon (Si) content increased from the
dirty sample to the coated sample, although in very small percentages. This result is
expected, as the aim was to study a thin coating. While XPS offers excellent accuracy
for surface analysis, its resolution ranges between 2-10 atomic layers. Consequently, the
obtained data includes signals not only from the silane coating but also from the underlying
borosilicate glass substrate, which inherently contains a significant amount of silicon. As
a result, the signal from the thin coating is relatively low.
The data also indicate that the atomic percentage of carbon (C), decreases progressively
by half from the dirty sample to the sample treated with solvents and further reduces by
half after plasma treatment. This progressive reduction can be attributed to the removal
of contaminants during solvent cleaning, followed by more effective cleaning achieved
through oxygen plasma treatment. However, a small amount of carbon is still detected,
likely due to the adsorption of hydrocarbon contaminants from the atmosphere onto the
glass surface.
Oxygen (O) percentage increased across the samples, while the atomic percentage of
other elements present in the borosilicate glass (Potasium K, Sodium NA, Boron B and
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
23
==PAGE:32==
aluminium Al) remained constant. This increase is expected because the silanization
process introduces a silane molecule containing two oxygen atoms and one silicon atom,
thereby contributing a higher proportion of oxygen relative to silicon. See Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Formula of the molecule 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl.
4.2.2
Wetting properties
Additionally, a study of wetting properties was conducted on another batch of coverslips
taken at the same stages of the process as mentioned in section 4.2. Once the contact
angle data was collected using the OneAttension software, a statistical analysis was per-
formed to calculate the average contact angle and its corresponding standard deviation.
The results of the contact angle measurements are presented in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Plot of the contact angle measured data with its corresponding standard de-
viation per each test sample
The dirty coverslips exhibited the highest value, with a contact angle of 70.6 ± 1.7 . After
washing with solvents, the contact angle decreased a 12%, as expected since the surface
energy is being modified by the use of solvents with different polarities, plus dust removal.
The subsequent oxygen plasma treatment significantly decreases the contact angle to
a value of 6.3 ± 1.4 being the lowest value observed. Oxygen plasma is well known
for enhancing the hydrophilicity of various materials, by removing organic contaminants
and residual particles, creating a highly hydrophilic surface. These findings support the
reduction in atomic percentage of carbon from removing organic contaminants. observed
from the XPS experiment (Section 4.2.1).
24
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:33==
Following silanization, a significant increase of the contact angle to a value of 51.3 ±
2.8 was observed, confirming that the surface was functionalized with the silane solution.
This serves as evidence of the present of a silane coating. Finally, the sample identified
as Aged, stored in the dark for four weeks, did not show a significant difference in contact
angle compared to the freshly coated sample. This suggests that the substrate coating
remained effective and capable of improving adhesion between the substrate and the
printed microstructures. This finding was additionally supported by the fact that there
was not an observed difference on the amount of printed microstructures that remained
attached, when using either the freshly silanized substrates or aged ones.
4.3
Atomic Force Microscopy
An area of 12x12 nm2 was examined to determine the surface roughness of the different
materials. In this analysis, a combination of material characteristics and surface features
was evaluated, as these are critical factors that influence bacterial attachment. This ap-
proach replicates the conditions the bacteria encounter at the time of contact.
For both materials, specific parts of the structure were selected to explore roughness.
The Figures 4.7a, 4.7b, and 4.7c, illustrate the locations where AFM measurements were
taken. It is important to note that roughness is a statistical measure, reflecting variation
in the surface profile.
(a) Concentric circles Design A2
(b) Edge honeycomb cavity Design B2
(c) Grid texture from Design C2
Figure 4.7: Representative images of the areas where surface roughness was measured
using AFM. This case in the microstructures printed with IP-L from design iteration 2.
The values of surface roughness obtained from the analysis of AFM the data are pre-
sented in the Table 4.2.
For the smooth regions of the microstructures printed with IP-L, the surface roughness
obtained was 10 nm, which is consistent with what was reported in the paper [29], being
11.3 ± 0.1 when using a high NA objective (63x) and the Photonic Professional Gt+.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
25
==PAGE:34==
Material
Concentric Circles
Honeycomb
Grid
Smooth
Hydrogel
304
550
115
-
IP-L
151
653
160
10
Table 4.2: Surface Roughness (Rq in nm) obtained by AFM for Different Features and
Materials from the printed structures.
A difference in roughness of the different designed features is clearly observed. Is impor-
tant to mention that this roughness evaluates and overview of the topography that can be
compared to what bacterial will encounter in the attachment point.
4.4
Bacteria culture
Bacteria culture experiments conducted at KU consisted of three iterations, during which
the author observed certain parts of the process to understand how they were performed.
The samples of the first iteration of bacteria culture experiments were gold-sputtered and
examined under the SEM. The images shown below indicate promising initial results: the
bacteria attached to the microstructures, to the materials (both IP-L and hydrogel), and
to the substrate. This resolved the initial question of whether the silanized borosilicate
would impede bacterial attachment or whether the bacteria would completely avoid one
or both materials.
Figure 4.8: SEM images from bacteria culture experiment with microstructures from de-
sign iteration 1, a) IP-L microstructure of design A1, b) Hydrogel microstructure of Design
B1, and c) Hydrogel microstructure of design C1.
An important observation from this iteration 1 was that the bacteria appeared to accumu-
late along the walls of the microstructures. However, the images did not clearly indicate
whether the bacteria were located at the bottom, middle or top of the wall, as represented
in Figure 4.9a.
This issue was addressed with the design improvements introduced in iteration 2, which
included draft angled walls. These modifications prevented stage tilting of the SEM and
facilitated easier visualization, as shown in Figure 4.9b.
For the Iteration 2 of experiments, the microstructures from Design Iteration 2 were used.
The same well plate configuration 1 was used (Figure 3.7), but this time two replicas were
added to account for potential contamination or other uncontrolled errors, such as broken
substrates.
Observation of each sample was conducted using the SEM, but it was discovered that
11 out of 12 samples, the microstructures were inadvertently flipped during the bacteria
26
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:35==
(a) Design A1 IP-L, poor visibility of
bacteria in the straight wall.
(b) Design A2 IP-L, improved visibility
of bacteria in the angled wall.
Figure 4.9: SEM micrograph of bacteria attached to the wall of microstructures from a)
design A1 and b) design A2.
culture process. As a result, the microstructures were in direct contact with the bottom of
the well plate instead of being exposed to the bacterial culture media.
Despite this issue, liquid infiltrated beneath the sample, and bacteria overcame gravita-
tional forces to attach to the inner features of the microstructure. Proving that the ob-
served attachments were due to affinity to the surface rather than only passive settling
due to gravity driven sedimentation. Figure 4.10 compares flipped (a) and correctly po-
sitioned (b) samples. The amount of bacteria in figure (b) is significantly higher than in
(a) since the microstructure faced upwards in the well plate. Nevertheless, bacteria still
adhered to the microstructure in (a) preferentially going upwards on the microstructure
features against gravity.
(a) Design B2 facing downwards.
(b) Design B2 facing upwards.
Figure 4.10: SEM micrograph of bacteria attached to microstructures from IP-L design
B2, a)positioned facing downward in direct contact with the bottom of the well plate and
b) positioned facing upwards in direct contact with the bacteria culture medium.
When comparing Figure 4.10a to the image obtained of the back of the same substrate
(figure 4.11), which was in direct contact with the bacteria, a drastic difference in the
amount of bacterial attachment was evident.
Finally, the SEM images of the only substrates where cultivation was conducted correctly
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.11: SEM micrograph of bacteria attached all over the surface of the flipped sam-
ple where no microstructures were present.
are presented in Figure 4.12 with a close view of the surface features showing how bac-
teria attached to the surface.
It is clearly seen how the bacteria attached to the inner features and between the channels
where more contact points are available.
(a) close view A2
(b) close view B2
(c) close view c2
Figure 4.12: SEM micrograph of Results 2 iteration bacteria attachment
At this stage, the protocol was carefully revised to ensure that the substrates were handled
on the correct side.
For the third iteration of experiments, the microstructures from Design Iteration 3 were
used. A single well plate was cultivated exclusively with LAB, the bacteria of interest for
food industry applications. This time, the well plate was configured as shown in configu-
28
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:37==
ration 2 Figure 3.7, to explore bacterial attachment in both positions, with the microstruc-
tures facing upward and downward, potentially testing the effects of gravity in bacterial
attachment.
Each sample was identified and observed under the SEM, resulting in the following find-
ings:
Sandwich configuration:
For the top sample, where the microstructures faced downward, only a few bacteria at-
tached to the material. As shown in Figure 4.13a. However they consistently migrated
into the grooves, indicating a preference for these features rather than an effect of gravity,
as also observed in figure 4.10a from the previous iteration.
Figure 4.13: SEM representative images from bacterial attachment in microstructures po-
sitioned facing downwards a) Hydrogel top sample sandwich configuration, b) IP-L bottom
sample in smørrebrød configuration, c) back of the sample
On the other hand, the bottom side of the coverslips, which was in direct contact with the
bacteria, is visibly covered with a large amount of bacterial growth as shown in Figure
4.13c.
From the bottom sample, where the microstructures faced upwards only images from the
microstructures printed with hydrogel were obtained, since the IP-L substrate broke and
no data could be extracted. It is visible how bacteria are present in greater amount than
in the top sample, as illustrated in Figure 4.14
Smørrebrød configuration:
The top sample, where the microstructures faced upwards, the amount of bacterial attach-
ment was significantly higher. It was observed form Figure 4.15 that bacteria exhibited
a preference for the silanized coverslip, followed by IP-L, and lastly, hydrogel. Notably,
when comparing the different microstructures the bacteria appeared to prefer IP-L (4.15b)
as there was no clear distinction between the printed microstructure and the substrate in
terms of bacterial attachment. This made it impossible to determine whether bacteria
selectively adhered to specific features. As seen in the image, the entire surface of the
sample was covered with bacteria, except for the sharp edges of all the microstructures,
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.14: SEM representative images from bacterial attachment on hydrogel mi-
crostructures positioned facing upward, bottom sample sandwich configuration.
where less bacteria were present. This phenomenon was also observed in the hydrogel
(4.15a), where bacteria again avoided the sharp edges. In this case, however, a distinc-
tion in features preference could be made. Bacteria first attached to rough areas rather
than smooth ones.
Figure 4.15: SEM representative images from bacterial attachment microstructures facing
upwards in the smørrebrød configuration to different materials a)hydrogel and b) IP-L
From the bottom sample, were the microstructures faced downwards, overall bacterial
attachment was lower compared to the top sample of the sandwich configuration. This
reduction was likely due to limited access to the liquid medium. Nonetheless, bacteria still
exhibited a preference for the grooves as shown in Figure (4.13b). This finding suggests
that in the sandwich configuration, the downward-facing structure had greater exposure
to and interaction with the culture medium than in the smørrebrød configuration, where
the structure faced the bottom of the well and was subjected to additional weight.
30
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.16: SEM representative images from bacterial attachment to different features in
hydrogel microstructures facing upwards in the smøorrebrøod configuration a) grooves,
b) pillars, c) concentric circles
This third iteration of bacteria culture showed that the best results in relation to bacteria
attachment were found with microstructures printed with IP-L in the top sample of the
smørrebrød configuration (4.15b).
An observation made from the configuration 2 (section 3.7) of the well plate was that
positioning the 3D printed separator at the bottom of the well facilitated easier handling of
the sample and significantly reduced the risk of breakage.
4.5
Challenges
The fabrication process presented several failure points, particularly within the printing
of microstructures with hydrogel. As can be seen in Figure 4.17, some of the printed
structures exhibited bubbling and localized burning. The aforementioned issues, that can
cause instability to the fabrication outcome, were likely encountered due to overexposure
and lack of optimized printing parameters for the designs used in this study.
Figure 4.17: Digital microscope image of the microstructures of design iteration 1 printed
with hydrogel, that presented bubbling and burning defects due to overexposure and lack
of tailored printed parameters.
Another significant challenge arose from the automatic interface finding of the 3D printer.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
31
==PAGE:40==
The underlying reason for this problem can be attributed to the possible misalignment
between resin and oil, and to the used coverslip being thinner that the default parameters.
As a result of these issues the software failed to correctly identify the interface. Therefore,
in case of software failure, the objective had to be manually adjusted before some jobs.
As the issue sometimes occurred in the middle of a print execution, the time it took to
fabricate the microstructures was prolonged even further. Additionally, this introduced a
risk of detachment of microstructures during the process, as shown in Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.18: Digital microscope image of the IP-L printed structures of iteration 2 of de-
signs, in triangle configuration, where can be seen how the upper left vertex is missing
the microstructures that detached due to automatic interface-finding problems.
During the bacteria culture experiments, different challenges were encountered. Particu-
larly problematic was the positioning of the substrates within the well plates. On several
occasions, the microstructures were inadvertently flipped, affecting the bacterial adhesion
results. Furthermore, an uncontrolled disturbance of the well plate occurred during the first
iteration of bacteria seeding, causing a cross-contamination of the bacteria and medium,
as seen in Figure 4.19 where the liquid is observed to be outside the corresponding wells
and the control column presented bacteria.
To ensure proper visualization of the bacteria attached to the printed microstructures,
an additional step was required before SEM analysis. The introduction of this step into
the process was necessary because during the first runs it became apparent that the
samples could potentially flip. This introduced process involved preliminary imaging under
a digital microscope to confirm the correct side of the substrate before proceeding with
gold sputtering. As seen in Figure A.12 from the appendix, the green fluorescence helped
to identify the side of the sample where microstructures were present.
Finally, due to the delicate nature of the process, some substrates broke, which signif-
32
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.19: Image of well plate of bacteria culture experiment (Iteration 1) were can be
observed how the liquid media with bacteria seeding is over the place causing the cross-
contamination pointed with red arrow.
icantly complicated data collection. This issue prevented the observation of some test
conditions, highlighting the need for improved handling protocols to ensure repeatability
for a controlled and usable outcome.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:43==
5
Conclusion
Two photon polymerization proved to be a technique where a variety of designs features
can be printed in microscale. The designs proposed in this project were successfully
printed indicating that the default printing parameters used for each material were ade-
quate. Microstructures printed with the hydrogel displayed some defects, indicating that
further optimization of the printing parameters are needed for each specific design to get
the best quality of the mentioned manufacturing technique.
The silanization of the borosilicate coverslips was evaluated and findings on the pres-
ence of this coating was determined. The experiments with the XPS were inconclusive,
meaning that fine-tuning of the parameters could prove to be an important area to study
to obtain the necessary data for making conclusions about the coating layer. Although,
the contact angle experiments confirmed the presence of this coating, information about
the thickness of the silane was not obtained. It can be assumed that the coating thick-
ness is between one to less than ten atomic layers. Since for more than 10 layers the
substrate will appear to be visibly covered with a milky way color. This coating helped
to prevent detachment since the microstructures were submerged and washed on a con-
stant basis during the whole process. Results showed that 90% of the microstructures
remained attached to the substrates after bacteria culture. An additional takeaway that
can be taken for future research is that the use of 3D printed separators improves the
process of bacteria culture and ease of handling.
As for the bacterial attachment, all printed microstructures with different materials showed
microorganisms on them. even with the flipped microstructures bacteria still attached to
the material ”climbing” to inner parts of the microstructures. A categorization in relation
to materials preference can be done, where bacteria attached in a greater amount to the
borosilicate surfaces, then IP-L and least to hydrogel. This could be related to the surface
energy of the material, that will need to be further studied by zeta potential experiments for
example. A categorization in relation to the features present in the printed microstructures,
it was concluded that there was a preference for IP-L rather than hydrogel and as well to
rough and cavities were bacteria attached first than smooth surfaces. this is related to
different factors where cavities protects against shear forces and microscale features in
the same order as bacteria present more contact points. It was clear how bacteria avoided
sharp edges.
The observations from the three iterations of bacterial culture experiments were analyzed
in greater detail by correlating them with existing research on how surface properties
influence bacterial adhesion and attachment. The bacteria of interest in this study, Leu-
conostoc citreum (LAB), is a gram-positive, non-motile bacterium. Gram-positive bacteria
have a negative net charge on their cell walls due to the presence of carboxyl, amino and
phospate groups [30]. Previous research has shown that Gram-positive bacteria attaches
rapidly to positively charged surfaces. Whilst that is a statement of existing common
knowledge and understanding, the research has also shown that adhesion on negatively
charged surfaces increases exponentially over time [31]. This observation aligns with the
results in this study, as bacterial attachment was evident on all substrates tested, partic-
ularly in the third iteration, where adhesion all over the surface was clearly observed.
The findings in this study show that LAB bacteria attached to three different substrates
that, according to theory, should exhibit negative surface charges. According to previous
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
35
==PAGE:44==
studies into the topic, silanized borosilicate glass presents a negative surface charge and
the photoresist IP-L has a slightly negative surface charge [32]. The anionic hydrogel
used in this project deprotonates above pH of 4.3 thus presenting a negative charge on
its surface. The experiments were conducted in MRS medium with an initial pH of 5.5. To
confirm the correctness of the aforementioned statements, a Zeta potential analysis will
be needed to accurately characterize the surface charge of the materials used.
Another possible explanation for the attachment of negatively charge bacteria to nega-
tively charged surfaces lies in the binding mechanism of non-motile bacteria. In the case
of LAB, gravitational sedimentation may play a significant role [23] Additionally, bacte-
ria may bind to positively charged ions in the culture medium, which could subsequently
facilitate attachment to the substrate.
Bacteria showed preference to attach to microstructures fabricated with IP-L rather than
hydrogel. These findings indicate that stiffness plays an important role for an increase of
bacterial attachment. This is further backed by the significant difference in Young Mod-
ulus between the studied materials, which tells us that IP-L is 1000 times more stiff than
hydrogel. The idea that material stiffness enhances bacterial attachment has been ob-
served by [33], reporting that gram-positive bacteria covered 31% more surface area on
stiffer crosslinked films compared to a softer non-crosslinked. Similarly, [34] demonstrated
that bacterial adhesion increases with increasing material stiffness regardless of hydrogel
chemistry or adhesion mechanism.
Regarding surface topography, bacteria preferentially adhered to surface features with
more contact points. Surfaces with a characteristic feature of a dimension larger than
a single bacterium provide greater available contact area and sheltering for the microor-
ganism. This results in enhanced bacterial attachment [35]. This outcome is particularly
pronounced on engineered surfaces with well-defined features and spacing. where bacte-
ria tend to align with valley and pillar structures to maximize attachment areas. However,
less than 3% of bacteria cells attached to the edge of the distinct features, likely due to
the accumulation of electric charge at abrupt edges [36]. Additionally, bacteria appear to
actively choose their position to settle, differentiating between upper and lower areas on
surface patterns [37].
Bacteria attachment is a complex phenomenon influenced by a variety of factors where
surface characteristics play a significant role, making it challenging to make definitive
conclusions. Contradictory results in the existing literature further highlight this complexity
[23]. Therefore, further research is necessary to fully understand how surface charge den-
sity, material stiffness, and surface topography influence bacterial adhesion and biofilm
formation across different bacterial species. An introduction into the necessary research
could be based on the findings from this study. The findings from this study show that
the bacteria preference for material is not uniform across different factors. The surface
topography results show that sharp edges are generally avoided, while patterned texture
is preferred over a smooth surface. Secondly, in relation to the materials used for the
printed microstructures, stiff materials seem to enhance bacterial adhesion by a signifi-
cant degree. Finally, a categorization of materials can possibly be made based on the
surface energy. This categorization, where the highest amount of bacteria attached to
the silanized borosilicate glass followed by IP-L and lastly hydrogel, is backed by the ob-
servations but lacks supporting theory to make a definitive judgement. Thus, whether the
categorization can be made based on surface energy remains a hypothesis at this point
and needs to be studied further.
36
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Ada-Ioana Bunea et al. “Micro 3D printing by two-photon polymerization: configura-
tions and parameters for the nanoscribe system”. In: Micro. Vol. 1. 2. MDPI. 2021,
pp. 164–180.
[2]
Xiaoqin Zhou, Yihong Hou, and Jieqiong Lin. “A review on the processing accuracy
of two-photon polymerization”. In: AIP Advances 5.3 (Mar. 2015), p. 030701. ISSN:
2158-3226. DOI: 10.1063/1.4916886.
[3]
Prasad J Gill H. “Probiotics, immunomodulation, and health benefits.” In: Adv Exp
Med Biol 606.12 (2008), pp. 423–54. DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-74087-4_17..
[4]
Dembczyński R. Kiepś J. “Current Trends in the Production of Probiotic Formula-
tions.” In: Foods. 15.12 (2022), p. 2330. DOI: doi:10.3390/foods11152330..
[5]
Lopez Vizcaino Carmen. “Development of microstructures as carrier system for bac-
teria.” In: University of Copenhagen (2023).
[6]
Karin Sauer et al. “The biofilm life cycle: expanding the conceptual model of biofilm
formation”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 20.10 (2022), pp. 608–620.
[7]
Ibrahim M Alarifi. “Revolutionising fabrication advances and applications of 3D print-
ing with composite materials: a review”. In: Virtual and Physical Prototyping 19.1
(2024), e2390504.
[8]
Amit Bandyopadhyay et al. “Three-dimensional printing of biomaterials and soft ma-
terials”. In: MRS bulletin 40.12 (2015), pp. 1162–1169.
[9]
Ibrahim M Alarifi. “Revolutionising fabrication advances and applications of 3D print-
ing with composite materials: a review”. In: Virtual and Physical Prototyping 19.1
(2024), e2390504.
[10]
Mustafijur Rahman et al. “A review on nanomaterial-based additive manufacturing:
Dynamics in properties, prospects, and challenges”. In: Progress in Additive Man-
ufacturing 9.4 (2024), pp. 1197–1224.
[11]
Miłosz Pawlicki et al. “Two-photon absorption and the design of two-photon dyes”.
In: Angewandte Chemie International Edition 48.18 (2009), pp. 3244–3266.
[12]
P. J. Maguire et al. “All-optical sampling based on two-photon absorption in a semi-
conductor microcavity for high-speed OTDM”. In: Opto-Ireland 2005: Optoelectron-
ics, Photonic Devices, and Optical Networks. Ed. by Gerald Farrell et al. Vol. 5825.
International Society for Optics and Photonics. SPIE, 2005, pp. 316–325. DOI: 10.
1117/12.604835. URL: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.604835.
[13]
Mariacristina Rumi and Joseph W. Perry. “Two-photon absorption: an overview of
measurements and principles”. In: Adv. Opt. Photon. 2.4 (Dec. 2010), pp. 451–518.
DOI: 10.1364/AOP.2.000451. URL: https://opg.optica.org/aop/abstract.cfm?URI=
aop-2-4-451.
[14]
Davies GJ Faraji Rad Z Prewett PD. “High-resolution two-photon polymerization:
the most versatile technique for the fabrication of microneedle arrays.” In: Microsyst
Nanoeng. 2021 Sep 3;7:71. (2021). DOI: 10.1038/s41378-021-00298-3..
[15]
Richard A. Lawson et al. “Chapter 8 - Negative-tone organic molecular resists”. In:
Materials and Processes for Next Generation Lithography. Ed. by Alex Robinson
and Richard Lawson. Vol. 11. Frontiers of Nanoscience. Elsevier, 2016, pp. 223–
317. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100354-1.00008-9.
[16]
J.F. Watts and J. Wolstenholme. “Electron Spectroscopy”. In: An Introduction to
Surface Analysis by XPS and AES. John Wiley Sons, Ltd, 2019. Chap. 1, pp. 1–
18. ISBN: 9781119417651. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 9781119417651 . ch1.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
37
==PAGE:46==
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781119417651.ch1. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781119417651.ch1.
[17]
Giovanna Pintori and Elti Cattaruzza. “XPS/ESCA on glass surfaces: A useful tool
for ancient and modern materials”. In: Optical Materials: X 13 (2022), p. 100108.
[18]
T. Randall Yuan Yuehua; Lee. “Contact angle and wetting properties”. In: Surface
Science Techniques. Ed. by Bodil Holst Gianangelo Bracco. Springer, 2013, pp. 3–
34. ISBN: 1299197779.
[19]
JC Berg. “Wettability Marcel Dekker”. In: New York (1993).
[20]
Yasuhiro Sugawara. “Atomic Force Microscopy”. In: Roadmap of scanning probe
microscopy. Ed. by Seizo Morita. Springer, 2007, pp. 15–21. ISBN: 1280727225.
[21]
Naoyuki Ishida. “Chapter 4 - Atomic force microscopy”. In: Non-Destructive Material
Characterization Methods. Ed. by Akira Otsuki et al. Elsevier, 2024, pp. 89–125.
ISBN: 978-0-323-91150-4. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 323 - 91150 -
4.00011-2.
[22]
Davide Ricci Pier Carlo Braga. “The Basics of Atomic Force Microscopy”. In: Atomic
Force Microscopy, Biomedical Methods and Applications. Ed. by Davide Ricci Pier
Carlo Braga. Humana Press, 2004, pp. 3–39. ISBN: 1-59259-647-9.
[23]
Sherry Zheng et al. “Implication of surface properties, bacterial motility, and hy-
drodynamic conditions on bacterial surface sensing and their initial adhesion”. In:
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 9 (2021), p. 643722.
[24]
Abdul Malik, Zerrin Erginkaya, and Hüseyin Erten. Health and safety aspects of food
processing technologies. Springer, 2019.
[25]
Andreia R Tomé et al. “Use of probiotics to control biofilm formation in food indus-
tries”. In: Antibiotics 12.4 (2023), p. 754.
[26]
Zaixiang Lou et al. “New perspectives for mechanisms, ingredients, and their prepa-
ration for promoting the formation of beneficial bacterial biofilm”. In: Journal of Food
Measurement and Characterization 17.3 (2023), pp. 2386–2403.
[27]
Federico Cantoni et al. “Round-robin testing of commercial two-photon polymeriza-
tion 3D printers”. In: Additive Manufacturing 76 (2023). DOI: 10.1016/j.addma.2023.
103761.
[28]
Ada-Ioana Bunea et al. “Micro 3D Printing by Two-Photon Polymerization: Configu-
rations and Parameters for the Nanoscribe System”. In: Micro 1.2 (2021), pp. 164–
180. DOI: 10.3390/micro1020013.
[29]
Federico Cantoni et al. “Round-robin testing of commercial two-photon polymeriza-
tion 3D printers”. In: Additive Manufacturing 76 (2023), p. 103761. ISSN: 2214-8604.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2023.103761.
[30]
Huub H.M. Rijnaarts et al. “DLVO and steric contributions to bacterial deposition in
media of different ionic strengths”. In: Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 14.1
(1999), pp. 179–195. ISSN: 0927-7765. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927-
7765(99)00035-1.
[31]
B. Gottenbos et al. “Initial adhesion and surface growth of Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa on negatively and positively charged poly(methacrylates)”. In: Journal of Ma-
terials Science: Materials in Medicine 10.12 (1999). Cited by: 65, pp. 853–855. DOI:
10.1023/A:1008989416939.
[32]
David Sabaté Rovira et al. “Additive manufacturing of polymeric scaffolds for biomimetic
cell membrane engineering”. In: Materials Design 201 (2021), p. 109486. ISSN:
0264-1275. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2021.109486.
[33]
Naresh Saha et al. “Influence of polyelectrolyte film stiffness on bacterial growth”.
In: Biomacromolecules 14.2 (2013), pp. 520–528.
38
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:47==
[34]
Kristopher W Kolewe, Shelly R Peyton, and Jessica D Schiffman. “Fewer bacteria
adhere to softer hydrogels”. In: ACS applied materials & interfaces 7.35 (2015),
pp. 19562–19569.
[35]
A.J. Scardino, J. Guenther, and R. de Nys. “Attachment point theory revisited: the
fouling response to a microtextured matrix.” In: Biofouling 24.1 (2008). Cited by:
227, pp. 45–53. DOI: 10.1080/08927010701784391.
[36]
Ralf Helbig et al. “The impact of structure dimensions on initial bacterial adhesion”.
In: Biomater. Sci. 4 (7 2016), pp. 1074–1078. DOI: 10.1039/C6BM00078A.
[37]
David Perera-Costa et al. “Studying the Influence of Surface Topography on Bac-
terial Adhesion using Spatially Organized Microtopographic Surface Patterns”. In:
Langmuir 30.16 (2014), pp. 4633–4641. DOI: 10.1021/la5001057.
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:49==
A
Appendix
A.1
Silanization Protocol
Protocol for silanizing glass slides
1. In the solvents fume hood, wash the coverslips with the following solvents: (Collect
the solvents used for rinsing and dispose of them as C-waste)
(a) Acetone
(b) Isopropanol (IPA)
2. Dry the substrates with N2 / air gun.
3. Oxygen plasma treatment: 15 minutes. Use program P2 and make sure oxygen
line (from Krober oxygen machine set to 0.4 lpm)is connected. Make sure from
here on you know which side was plasma treated. Program P2 consist of Pumping
down pressure: 0.30 mbar, Gas supply period (oxygen) with a duration of 1 minute
30 seconds, with O2 and 100% gas flow, controlled pressure via gasses and pro-
cess pressure of 0.60 mbar. Plasma process period: 15 minutes and 100% power.
Venting period of 20 seconds.
4. While the plasma is running, prepare fresh silanizing solution in silanization beaker
(teflon): (For a batch of 13 coverslips)
(a) 400 mL ethanol
(b) 41 mL silanizing agent (mix well with the ethanol) (use 19G needle + 5 mL
syringe)
(c) 2 mL of our 30% acetic acid (add just before adding the substrates)
5. Incubate substrates in silanizing solution for 1 h at room temperature, use lid (second
Teflon beaker) to prevent evaporation.
6. Rinse with IPA
7. Dry the substrates with N2 / air gun.
8. Bake for 1 h at 60° on a hotplate.
9. Place the dry substrates in a petri dish or substrate holder.
10. Store in the dark and use within a month (note silanization date on storage lid).
A.2
Bacteria Culture & Fixation Protocol
Materials:
– 96% ethanol and sterile water for sterilization of microstructures.
– 6-well plates for supporting the microstructures.
– MRS media and TSB media (100 ml of each).
– Agar plates with bacteria (less than 1 week old).
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
41
==PAGE:50==
– Sterile 1x PBS (recipe is available in PatLab).
– SEM buffers (see Appedix pdf; Sodium cacodylate buffer 0.1M and Karnovsky’s
fixative)
– Ethanol dilutions 20%, 30%, 50%, 70%, 90% and pure ethanol
– 100% Hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS)
Protocol
A Sterilization
– Dip in 96% ethanol overnight
– Wash three in sterile water by covering them completely each time. Manipulate
with sterilized forceps
– After the sterilization, all steps are carried out in sterile clean environment until
the structures are fixated
B Inoculation of bacteria
– Inoculate 10 ml of TSB with P. putida MRB1, and grow overnight at 30°C with
mild shaking. Similarly, inoculate 10 ml of MRS with L. citreum iso33, and grow
overnight at 30°C statically.
– The next day, measure OD600 of the overnight cultures. Dilute both cultures
to OD 0.1 and inoculate the wells with microstructures with a final volume of
4.5 ml. Use the same dilution tube to inoculate the same microstructure but
with different material (i.e. prepare 10 ml of final volume at OD 0.1 to inoculate
one well containing a hydrogel microstructure, and another well containing an
IP-L microstructure).
Remember to use TSB for inoculation of P. putida and MRS for inoculation of
L. citreum.
Inoculate the references with MRS in plate 1 and with TSB in plate 2 and 3.
Follow the scheme for inoculation (use the same biological replicate per plate):
– Close the lid, seal the sides with parafilm and place inside a bag to prevent wa-
ter evaporation. Label the bag as “CAREFUL, PLEASE DO NOT MOVE/DIS-
TURB”, so that other users can notice it inside the incubator.
– Place them so that to minimize disturbance from other people moving things
around in the incubator. Grow microstructures statically at 30°C overnight.
– Ensure there is no contamination in the controls.
Remove media using a
pipette. Wash twice using 1x PBS pipetting carefully and avoiding the center
of the microstructures.
C Fixation for SEM visualization Ensure all solutions are prepared before starting the
protocol. All steps are carried out in the fume hood in A413 – right opposite class 2
lab, and at room temperature (RT).
Important: after washing with PBS, structures are placed in new a 6-well plate. This
new 6-well plate is where the fixation will take place.
42
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:51==
Steps
Duration
Volume
Remarks
Karnovsky’s Fixative
Min. 2 h
500 µl
Remove after
incubation time.
Sodium cacodylate buffer 0.1M
20 min
500 µl
Wash for 20 minutes
and remove.
Sodium cacodylate buffer 0.1M
20 min
500 µl
Wash for 20 minutes
and remove.
Demineralized water
15 min
750 µl
Wash for 15 minutes
and remove.
Demineralized water
15 min
750 µl
Wash for 15 minutes
and remove.
20% ethanol
15 min
750 µl
Wash for 15 minutes
and remove.
30% ethanol
15 min
750 µl
Wash for 15 minutes
and remove.
50% ethanol
15 min
750 µl
Wash for 15 minutes
and remove.
70% ethanol
15 min
750 µl
Wash for 15 minutes
and remove.
Can be left O/N
or longer in fridge.
90% ethanol
15 min
750 µl
Wash for 15 minutes
and remove.
90% ethanol
15 min
750 µl
Wash for 15 minutes
and remove.
100% ethanol
30 min
750 µl
Wash for 30 minutes
and remove.
100% ethanol
30 min
750 µl
Wash for 30 minutes
and remove.
100% HMDS
30 min
750 µl
Wash for 30 minutes
and remove.
Table A.1: Hydrogel composition
Leave plate with open lid O/N In the fume hood
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
43
==PAGE:52==
A.3
Technical Drawings
Figure A.1: Technical drawing, design A1
44
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.2: Technical drawing, design B1
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure A.3: Technical drawing, design A2
46
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.4: Technical drawing, design B2
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.5: Technical drawing, design C2
48
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.6: Technical drawing, design ALL IN ONE
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
49
==PAGE:58==
A.4
Print job 3D preview
(a) Triangular layout
(b) 3x3 square layout
Figure A.7: 3D preview of the different layouts used for the print jobs programmed in
DeScribe software
A.4.1
Triangular layout of iteration 1 and 2
50
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:59==
(a) Iteration 1
(b) Iteration 2
Figure A.8: comparison triangular layout from design iteration 1 and 2 were a consistency
in the dimensions of the three designs can be observed in iteration 2
Test material
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) DA IPL height
(b) DB IPL height
(c) DC IPL height
Figure A.9: profile measurements heigth IPL
52
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.10: back side of sample positioned as top in sandwich configuration of printed
hydrogel
Figure A.11: Optical microscope image of a test structure of hydrogel with inclomplete
walls when dimensions were less than 5 micons thicness and 10 microns height
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.12: Digital microscope image showing th green fluorescence of the IPL and
bacterias to identify the position of the microstructures after bacteria culture.
54
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:63==
A.5
Project plan
Design, 3D Printing, and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture
Applications.
Master’s Thesis Project Plan.
Valentina Mendoza Martinez-s222509.
Planned activities:
– Literature Study Conduct a comprehensive review of recent research and publica-
tions relevant to this project. The focus will be on understanding the capabilities and
limitations of two photon polymerization as an additive manufacturing technique, as
well as the materials used. Specifically, this study will examine how this process is
applied to create both soft and stiff microstructures by exploring the various param-
eters that influence the mechanical properties of the fabricated structures, and the
potential application of these microstructures in the field of cell culture.
A comprehensive review of the literature was conducted and presented in Chapter
2.
– Training Gain the necessary skills to safely and effectively work in a cleanroom
environment at PolyFabLab, as well as being able to work independently with the
characterization instruments at the department.
All the required trainings for using the equiptments and accessing the PolyFabLab
cleanroom were completed as planned.
– Experimental part Experiments will be carried out in two phases; phase one will be
specifically for test microstructures and phase two will be dedicated to the application
related to cell culture. Both consist of an iterative process of design, fabrication, and
characterization.
– Phase one
– Microstructure design Use CAD software to design test microstructures tailored to
the specific requirements of various characterization techniques. Develop separate
designs optimized for mechanical and chemical property evaluation.
A variety of 3D models were prepared and presented in Chapter 3.1, showing the
iterations conducted throughout the project
– Microstructure Fabrication Execute the fabrication process of the test structures by
two-photon polymerization technique, with the NanoScribe Photonic Professional
GT+ printer. For this, five different materials will be used, including two stiff commer-
cial resins (IP-L and IP-Dip), as well as three soft materials: a pH-responsive hydro-
gel, a sugar-responsive hydrogel, and a silicone material, whose printability for 2PP
will be explored. Prepared 3D models were succesfully fabricated using Nanoscribe
Photonic Professional GT+. Results were discussed in Chapter 4.1 Nevertheless,
only two materials were used, one stiff (IP-L) and one Soft (pH-responsive hydrogel),
since the other materials presented challenges to be used inside the cleanroom
– Microstructure Characterization Perform a topological analysis of the printed mi-
crostructures using optical microscopy and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM).
Record and analyze the results to assess the success of the fabrication process.
Use Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) to evaluate the roughness of the printed mi-
crostructures and ensure accurate data measurement and interpretation. Perform
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
55
==PAGE:64==
chemical analysis of the printed microstructures using X-ray Photoelectron Spec-
troscopy (XPS) to assess surface chemistry and material composition. Fabricate
microstructures were succesfully characterized using optical microscopy and laser
confocal microscopy in order to evalaute the dimensions of the obtained structures.
Results were presented in chapter 4.xx Atomic force microscopy was used to anal-
yse the roughness of the microstructures or topography, results presented in chapter
4.xx Nevertheless, XPS was not carried out only to asses the surface chemestry of
the substrates and to study the presence of silane coating. And not performed in
the materials used for printing.
– Data Analysis Compile and compare the mechanical and chemical characterization
data from the different materials used in microstructure fabrication. Apply statistical
analysis to identify significant differences and trends and select two suitable mate-
rials, one stiff and one soft, for further exploration for cell culture applications. data
obtained from the different characterization techniques used was evaluates and or-
ganized into tables, images and plot presented in Chapter 4 As mention before, the
material selection occured way before since there were only two available options
– Phase two Design and Fabricate microstructures for cell culture applications.
Design and fabricate microstructures with tailored surface patterns based on prior
characterization results and application-specific needs, with a focus on promoting
cell attachment. These designs will be optimized for cell culture applications by intro-
ducing distinct surface features aimed at enhancing bacterial adhesion and growth.
The samples will be provided to the corresponding research group at Copenhagen
University for bacterial culture experiments. Design on phase one took into consid-
ereation the bacteria attachment and the results from imaging of bacteria culture
were the key decision point to make iterations on the designs, samples were pro-
vided to KU to conduct the bacteria culture experiments Documentation: Thesis
writing Prepare a detailed final report that includes the methodology, results, and
data analysis of the entire project. Ensure that the report is clear, comprehensive,
and meets academic standards for submission. Thesis writting occured the last
month of the project
Gantt diagram:
56
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.13: Gantt diagram
Design, 3D Printing and Characterization of Soft and Stiff Microstructures for Cell Culture Applications.
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.construct.dtu.dk
