==PAGE:1==
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time
Windows
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
Master Thesis
2 February, 2024
By
Ifigeneia Tziola
Julie Hustoft
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Management (Technical University of Denmark; De-
partment of Technology, Management and Economics; Management Science Division) in
fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in
Business Analytics and in Industrial Engineering and Management. It was written in the
period from September 2, 2024 to February 2, 2025 with a scope of 30.0 ECTS, and was
supervised by Jesper Larsen.
The thesis addresses the Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows (TSPTW),
which involves constructing a route that starts and ends at a depot while respecting time
constraints. First, a review of existing literature on related problems and solution ap-
proaches is presented. The problem, sequence building with narrow time windows, is then
formally defined and is then formally defined and integrated into this research landscape.
The main contribution of the thesis is the development of an Adaptive Large Neighbor-
hood Search (ALNS) framework, enhanced with a post-optimization linear programming
(LP) model to determine optimal route start times. Various computational experiments on
instances provided by AMCS demonstrate that the proposed method achieves competitive
results, improving upon AMCS’s existing algorithm in key performance metrics.
Ifigeneia Tziola - s222569
Signature
Date
Julie Hustoft - s194359
Signature
Date
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis addresses the Sequence Building with Narrow Time Windows problem, a vari-
ant of the Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows (TSPTW). The objective is
to construct a route that starts and ends at a depot, visiting all orders exactly once while
respecting time windows. In our approach we decided to adopt soft time windows. Since
violations are allowed but penalized, the goal is to minimize a weighted sum of total dis-
tance, travel duration, and time window violations.
The proposed solution builds a sequence using a Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) al-
gorithm which is then further refined through an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
(ALNS) algorithm. Additionally, a post-optimization linear program (LP) determines the
optimal route start time, reducing waiting times and violations even further.
The ALNS framework was tested on all 73 instances provided by AMCS and found feasi-
ble solutions for all cases. Compared to AMCS’s Thorough (T) mode, the ALNS improves
total distance in 23 out of 25 instances within 3-minutes and in 24 out of 25 instances within
5 minutes. Similarly, it improves total travel time in 22 out of 25 instances for 3-minutes
runtime and in 21 out of 25 instances for 5-minutes of runtime. On average, the ALNS
reduces total distance by 3.33% , 3.61% , and 3.64% , while also reducing travel time by
5.80% for 3-minutes and 5-minute and and 5.85% for 20-minutes runtimes respectively.
These results demonstrate that the the ALNS on average outperforms the AMCS algorithm
in key optimization metrics, given a runtime of 3 minutes. Therefore, we believe that the
proposed framework is well-suited for real-world applications where fast and reliable route
optimization is required.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We are incredibly grateful to our supervisor, Jesper Larsen, for his guidance and support
throughout this thesis. His patience, insightful feedback, and willingness to engage with
our questions made all the difference. Our almost weekly meetings gave us both structure
and the space to explore different ideas, and his advice always helped us see things from
new perspectives. We also appreciate the trust he placed in us, giving us the freedom to
navigate challenges in our own way while always being there when we needed a nudge in
the right direction.
We are also deeply grateful to Kristian Hauge at AMCS for his invaluable industry in-
sights and practical advice, which helped bridge the gap between theory and real-world
application. His willingness to answer all our questions gave us a clearer understanding
of the challenges and priorities in practice. Beyond that, his support in providing us with
real-world data was essential to shaping this thesis, and we truly appreciate the time and
effort he dedicated to helping us along the way.
Finally, we want to thank our family and friends for their support during this process. Their
encouragement, patience, and well-timed distractions kept us sane (relatively speaking)
and helped us stay motivated—even when parameter tuning stretched the limits of both
our deadline and sanity.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
The Traveling Salesman Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
TSP with Time Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Large Neighborhood Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
AMCS
9
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Exact Model
13
4.1
Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Decision Variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Objective Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.5
Hard Time Windows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Large Neighborhood Search
17
5.1
Large Neighborhood Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Objective Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
33
6.1
Acceptance Criteria and Stopping Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Destroy mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Repair mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Adaptive Weight Adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.5
Starting Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
ALNS Tuning
47
7.1
Tuning Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Tuning Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.3
Chosen Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8
Results
58
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
v
==PAGE:7==
8.1
Computational Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8.2
LNS Configuration for Comparison with ALNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
9
Discussion
73
9.1
Discussion on Deterministic Removal Heuristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
9.2
Start Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
9.3
External Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
10 Conclusion
79
Bibliography
81
A Overview of Data
85
B
Route Development
86
B.1
Set 05-09
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B.2
Set 05-15
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.3
Set 07-08
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C Results
93
D
Starting Times Overview for ALNS 5 minutes
106
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
vi
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Millions of packages are delivered worldwide daily, supporting the seamless flow of goods
that underpins global trade, e-commerce, and modern consumer lifestyles (Bowes, 2023).
Logistics providers face increasing pressure to meet the growing demand for fast and reli-
able deliveries while balancing operational efficiency and sustainability. Optimization of
delivery routes plays a crucial role in addressing these challenges, which requires innova-
tive solutions to ensure efficient and timely operations. Realistic delivery operations are
typically bounded by delivery time commitments, customer availability, and traffic flow
conditions-all of which create significant complications for route planning.
A fundamental challenge in optimizing delivery routes is ensuring that each package is
delivered within predefined time intervals, known as time windows. This requirement
transforms the general package delivery problem into a Traveling Salesman Problem with
Time Windows (TSPTW), where the objective is to determine the shortest possible route
for a single vehicle to visit a set of locations within its specified time windows and return
to its origin. These time constraints significantly increase the complexity of the problem,
often making it computationally challenging or infeasible to find solutions that satisfy
all the constraints. Although the TSPTW serves as the foundation, its principles extend to
broader logistical challenges, such as the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP), which involves
optimizing routes for multiple vehicles.
Figure 1.1: The map illustrates a set of delivery locations (blue dots) with their respective time
windows (TW), along with a central depot (red square) that serves as the starting and ending point
of the delivery route.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
1
==PAGE:9==
This thesis is conducted in collaboration with AMCS, a leading provider of integrated
software and technology solutions for the environmental and logistics industries (AMCS
Group, n.d.-b). The partnership with AMCS ensures that the research is grounded in prac-
tical, real-world challenges the logistics sector faces. The primary objective is to develop
an optimization algorithm capable of addressing the TSP with narrow time windows, fo-
cusing on the specific needs of AMCS clients, which is to minimize travel costs, travel
time, and violations of time window constraints. By tackling this focused problem, this
research aims to contribute to academic advancements and practical applications that im-
prove operational efficiency.
The methodological approach focuses on metaheuristic techniques, particularly the Large
Neighborhood Search (LNS) and its adaptive variant, the Adaptive Large Neighborhood
Search (ALNS). These methods are well-suited to the TSPTW due to their flexibility in
handling complex constraints and their ability to find high-quality solutions within rea-
sonable computational time. This thesis includes developing the metaheuristic, tuning
parameters for optimal performance, and evaluating the algorithm’s effectiveness on real-
world problem instances.
Through this collaboration with AMCS, the research seeks to bridge the gap between the-
oretical advances in optimization and their application in the logistics industry. This work
aims to enhance decision-making for single-vehicle routing problems by addressing the
challenges associated with narrow time windows, ultimately contributing to more effi-
cient, reliable, and sustainable logistics operations.
1.1
Problem Description
The overall objective of the TSPTW is to find a route that serves all locations. The com-
plexity is added when some of the locations have strict restrictions on the service time
window, also known as narrow time windows. The narrow time window constraint cre-
ates significant computational challenges by drastically reducing the number of feasible
routes an optimization algorithm can generate.
These tight restrictions reduce flexibility in the sequencing and scheduling of deliveries.
The algorithm thus has to search in a more restricted solution space, which raises the
difficulty of finding valid routes. Furthermore, if time windows are geographically in-
compatible or too restrictive, infeasible solutions may arise where no route satisfies all
constraints. This can be seen in Figure 3.1, where all the pink markers have the same
narrow time window but are located at different areas of the route.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
2
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: The map shows a delivery route with stops color-coded by time windows. Markers
of the same color indicate deliveries within the same time window. The red dots is the stops that
don’t have narrow time windows. (AMCS Group, n.d.-b)
There is no clear definition of how narrow a narrow time window is. It is, in reality, more
dependent on the geographical location of the nodes and the actual distances between
these. The two locations that are furthest from each other could have almost the exact
same time window, so the route needs to service the first location immediately when the
time windows open and then go directly to the other location in order to serve that one
before the time window closes. These locations would then have narrow time windows.
In the real world, this is further complicated by uncertainties, such as traffic delays or un-
foreseen disruptions, which might significantly impact the planned schedules. These un-
certainties can make the solutions highly sensitive to deviations, necessitating robust and
adaptable optimization techniques. The need to account for resource allocation, schedul-
ing, and route dependency can further add to the complexity. Small changes can have
ripple effects across the entire route plan, requiring more sophisticated optimization tech-
niques. However, this thesis does not consider these real-world uncertainties but focuses
on finding the best possible route in an acceptable time frame.
Another critical aspect to consider is the objective function. Optimizing solely for time can
result in unrealistic solutions, as it effectively treats detours as cost-free. In such cases, the
model might prioritize saving even a single second by significantly increasing the route
distance. In the real world, detours bear real-world costs such as fuel, tolls, and vehicle
wear-and-tear. These costs are directly linked to the distance traveled and often outweigh
the benefits of minor time savings. Adding distance to the objective function together
with time will therefore make the model more practically oriented, avoid large detours,
and provide cost-efficient and operationally reliable solutions.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) is among the most famous combinatorial opti-
mization problems. It has been extensively studied and is usually used as a benchmark for
evaluating the performance of algorithms dealing with operational research. Much has
been written on the TSP and its extensions in literature, including various formulations
and solution approaches. In addition, wide-ranging reviews, like the recent systematic
review by Saller et al. (2023), underscore the width of research in this domain and how
complex the problem at hand is, along with the vast array of real-life applications. Nev-
ertheless, this literature review covers only the most relevant and influential studies that
align closely with the objectives of this thesis. It addresses, in particular, extensions that
include narrow and soft time windows, which are becoming increasingly crucial in real-
world applications like logistics and urban delivery, where precision and flexibility are
both important (Budak and Chen, 2020). The following sections will detail some find-
ings from existing research, discuss the main methods of dealing with such constrained
versions, and discuss the implications of different solution approaches.
2.1
The Traveling Salesman Problem
The TSP problem involves finding the shortest possible route for a single traveler to visit
a set of n locations, or nodes, exactly once and return to the starting point. Despite its
apparent simplicity, the TSP belongs to the class of NP-hard problems, meaning that no
polynomial-time algorithm is known to solve it for all instances (Karp, 1972). This com-
plexity has made the TSP a benchmark problem for evaluating optimization algorithms
and heuristic techniques.
The TSP has significant practical applications, ranging from logistics and transportation
to circuit board design and DNA sequencing (Applegate et al., 2007). Its utility lies in
its ability to model a wide variety of routing problems. However, real-world applications
often require addressing additional constraints such as time windows, capacity limits, or
dynamic conditions, which complicate the problem and necessitate tailored solution ap-
proaches.
Over the decades, various methods have been developed to solve the TSP. Exact algo-
rithms, such as branch-and-bound and cutting-plane methods, guarantee optimal solu-
tions but are computationally expensive and infeasible for large instances (Dantzig et al.,
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
4
==PAGE:12==
1954). For example, the Concorde TSP Solver, which implements these methods, has
solved instances with up to tens of thousands of nodes, but only with significant compu-
tational resources (Applegate et al., 2006). While exact algorithms are valuable for small
to medium-sized problems, their computational requirements grow exponentially with the
number of nodes.
Heuristic and metaheuristic algorithms have been widely employed to address the lim-
itations of exact methods. Heuristics like the nearest neighbor and Christofides (1976)
algorithm provide solutions quickly but may deviate from optimality. Christofides’ algo-
rithm, in particular, assures a solution that is within 1.5 times the optimum tour length,
known as the worst-case approximation ratio. In reality, it primarily provides solutions
much closer to the optimum, making it a reliable choice for practical applications where
near-optimal solutions are acceptable (Vempala and Goyal, 2015). Metaheuristics such
as Genetic Algorithms, Simulated Annealing, Tabu Search, and Ant Colony Optimization
(Dorigo and Gambardella, 1997) have shown great promise in tackling larger instances
efficiently. These methods focus on exploring the solution space intelligently to find high-
quality solutions within reasonable time frames, often balancing solution accuracy with
computational efficiency.
The major strength of TSP is its ability to model most of the optimization problems.
Among others, applications have been developed in logistics, manufacturing, and telecom-
munications for route optimization, production sequencing, and network design. It is pos-
sible to formulate TSP with a wide range of constraints, such as time windows, capacity
limits, precedence requirements, and objective variations like prize-collecting, extending
the model’s applicability to a wide range of industries. However, its inherent complexity
also presents challenges. Among the major challenges, one finds the combinatorial ex-
plosion: exponential growth in solution space, which is a result of increasing the number
of nodes. While exact algorithms guarantee optimality, their computational requirements
make them impractical for big instances; heuristic and metaheuristic approaches, however,
provide a flexible framework that can efficiently solve large-scale problems within rea-
sonable time limits. Their ability to adapt to problem-specific requirements and provide
for easy addition or modification of constraints and objectives makes them very useful
in practical applications. Nevertheless, their reliance on parameter tuning and the lack of
guaranteed optimality can limit their applicability in scenarios where precision is critical.
2.2
TSP with Time Windows
The TSP with time windows (TSPTW) adds an additional layer of complexity by imposing
time constraints on visits to each node. In this variant, each node must be visited within
a predefined time frame, making the problem more restrictive and often rendering tradi-
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
5
==PAGE:13==
tional optimization methods less effective (Kohl and Madsen, 1997). When these time
windows are narrow, feasible solutions may be difficult to find, increasing computational
complexity and the risk of infeasibility (Solomon, 1987).
Research has shown that handling TSPTW requires specialized strategies that go beyond
classical heuristics and exact methods. Exact methods, such as branch-and-bound or dy-
namic programming, struggle with the increased dimensionality introduced by time con-
straints, as the feasible region of the solution space shrinks considerably with narrower
time windows (Kallehauge et al., 2005). These methods are effective for small-scale
problems but face exponential growth in computational requirements for larger instances,
necessitating alternative approaches.
Heuristic and metaheuristic methods have been widely explored for the TSPTW due to
their ability to produce high-quality solutions within reasonable timeframes. Heuristics
such as the insertion-based algorithm proposed by Solomon (1987) leverage problem-
specific knowledge to construct feasible solutions quickly, though these solutions may de-
viate significantly from optimality. Furthermore, Gendreau et al. (1998) emphasized that
narrow time windows significantly limit route flexibility, necessitating advanced heuris-
tics or metaheuristics such as tabu search to achieve practical solutions. Metaheuristics, in-
cluding Tabu Search (Gendreau et al., 1998), Simulated Annealing (Lü and Cheng, 2010),
and Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (Pisinger and Ropke, 2007b), provide a balance
between solution quality and computational efficiency. These methods focus on intelli-
gently exploring the solution space, often employing strategies to escape local optima and
improve solution robustness.
An important extension of TSPTW is the inclusion of soft time windows, where time
constraints can be violated at a penalty. This approach introduces flexibility to the opti-
mization process. This can facilitate an easier generation of feasible solutions in practical
applications where strict scheduling is challenging (van den Berg et al., 2013). Further-
more, hybrid methods combining exact and heuristic techniques have shown promise in
efficiently navigating the trade-offs between feasibility, optimality, and computation time.
The choice of solution approach for the TSPTW depends heavily on the problem’s scale
and the strictness of its constraints. While exact methods provide theoretical benchmarks
for smaller instances, heuristics and metaheuristics remain indispensable for large-scale,
practical problems.
2.3
Large Neighborhood Search
Large Neighborhood Search (LNS), introduced by Shaw (1998), systematically explores
large portions of the solution space by iteratively destroying and repairing parts of a so-
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
6
==PAGE:14==
lution. This method removes a subset of solution elements and reinserts them using an
insertion heuristic or optimization procedure. Unlike traditional local search methods
that make incremental changes, LNS explores larger, more diverse regions of the solution
space by allowing significant modifications to the current solution. By strategically se-
lecting which elements to remove and reintroducing them in a more optimal manner, LNS
can escape local optima by introducing greater variation and avoiding small, short-sighted
adjustments. This process increases the likelihood of finding higher-quality solutions by
enabling broader exploration while maintaining feasibility through guided reconstruction.
Building on Shaw’s foundational work, subsequent researchers have significantly expanded
the scope and application of LNS. Pisinger and Røpke (2010) provided a comprehensive
framework for LNS, highlighting its versatility in solving routing problems, including the
Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW). The VRPTW is an extension of
the TSPTW by considering multiple vehicles instead of a single one. Pisinger and Røpke
(2010) emphasized that the success of LNS lies in its ability to explore large and diverse
neighborhoods, making it particularly effective for highly constrained problems.
Recent advancements in LNS have further extended its applicability to other optimization
domains. Song et al. (2020) proposed a generalized LNS framework for solving integer
linear programs, showcasing its flexibility beyond traditional routing problems. Similarly,
Chen et al. (2020) introduced a neural network heuristic to enhance the destroy and repair
mechanism, improving solution quality and computational efficiency.
One of the key strengths of LNS is its adaptability, as the destroy and repair mechanisms
can be tailored to specific problem requirements. However, this adaptability also intro-
duces challenges. Poorly designed mechanisms can limit the algorithm’s effectiveness,
while evaluating large neighborhoods can increase computational costs, especially for
large-scale problems (Shaw, 1998).
In summary, LNS has evolved from its initial conception into a powerful and flexible
framework for solving constrained optimization problems, such as the TSPTW. Its ability
to explore large neighborhoods and adapt to diverse constraints makes it an indispensable
tool in modern optimization.
2.4
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) was introduced by Røpke and Pisinger
(2006) as an extension of LNS to overcome its limitations by incorporating an adaptive
mechanism that dynamically selects destroy and repair mechanisms based on their his-
torical performance. This makes the method adaptive by changing strategies along the
search for the best solutions, making the approach very powerful across a wide range of
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
7
==PAGE:15==
instances (Røpke and Pisinger, 2006). ALNS has been successfully applied in various do-
mains, particularly in transportation, logistics, and scheduling. Applied extensively to ve-
hicle routing problems (VRP), including capacitated and time-constrained variants, ALNS
optimizes delivery routes while addressing fleet and scheduling constraints (Pisinger and
Røpke, 2010). It has also been applied to workforce scheduling and production planning,
where it helps optimize staff assignments and improve production efficiency by consider-
ing various operational constraints (Golinska-Dawson and Kolinski, 2019; Gutjahr et al.,
2023). These are some of the diverse applications ALNS can be used for and highlight
ALNS’s robustness and versatility in solving large-scale optimization challenges.
The key innovation of ALNS lies in its adaptive framework, which uses a scoring mecha-
nism to evaluate the effectiveness of each destroy and repair mechanism. Mechanisms that
contribute to improving the solution are rewarded, whereas those that perform poorly are
deprioritized. This adaptive selection process allows ALNS to prioritize high-performing
mechanisms, improving both efficiency and solution quality over time. Røpke and Pisinger
(2006) demonstrated that ALNS significantly outperforms standard LNS for solving the
Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows (PDPTW), a variant of the VRP where
goods or passengers must be transported between specific pickup and delivery locations
within predefined time windows, particularly for larger and more constrained instances.
Their study successfully applied ALNS to instances with up to 1,000 locations, showcas-
ing its scalability and robustness in handling complex real-world problems.
Later studies further highlighted the robustness and versatility of ALNS. Gendreau and
Potvin (2008) and Pisinger and Røpke (2010) emphasized its ability to balance intensifi-
cation, focusing on promising regions of the solution space, and diversification, exploring
new areas. This balance makes ALNS particularly well-suited for handling complex prob-
lems with diverse configurations. Moreover, He et al. (2022) noted that ALNS reduces
the need for extensive parameter tuning compared to LNS, making it more user-friendly
for practitioners. However, its success still depends on the diversity and quality of its de-
stroy and repair mechanisms, which must be carefully designed to align with the specific
problem characteristics.
In contrast to LNS, which relies on a fixed set of neighborhoods and heuristics, ALNS’s
adaptive mechanism provides a significant advantage in terms of flexibility and perfor-
mance. Using its ability to dynamically adjust its search strategy, ALNS addresses one
of the primary weaknesses of LNS, its sensitivity to the choice of the destroy and repair
mechanism and the parameter settings. This adaptability, coupled with its capacity for
robust performance on highly constrained problems, makes ALNS a powerful tool in the
optimization domain.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
8
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3
AMCS
As mentioned earlier, this thesis is conducted in collaboration with AMCS, a global leader
in intelligent solutions for waste, recycling, transportation, manufacturing, and resource
management logistics (AMCS Group, n.d.-b). They provide a list of different transporta-
tion software’s that are specialized towards different types of goods. These goods include
agriculture, building materials, fuel, people and packages. One of these transportation
software’s is the route planner (AMCS Group, n.d.-c). The problem discussed in this the-
sis focuses on transportation and, more specifically, route planning. The goal of this thesis
will, therefore, be to develop an optimization algorithm for the Traveling Salesman Prob-
lem with narrow time windows (TSPTW). The data used have been made available by
AMCS along with some results. These results are made by AMCS transportation soft-
ware and will be used as a benchmark to measure the performance of the optimization
algorithm developed in this thesis.
Figure 3.1: AMCS logo. (AMCS Group, n.d.-b)
AMCS is a prominent provider of logistics solutions, helping its customers optimize op-
erations and improve efficiency. For many of their clients, timely service is critical for
maintaining customer satisfaction and ensuring operational reliability. The logistics chal-
lenges faced by AMCS clients often involve planning routes for vehicles servicing 75 to
200 locations per trip. For such large-scale problems, exact optimization methods typi-
cally fail to produce solutions within acceptable time limits. This highlights the need for
metaheuristic approaches capable of generating near-optimal solutions efficiently while
considering key objectives like minimizing total travel distance and time, as well as ad-
hering to strict delivery schedules.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.2: Time windows for locations with narrow constraints, shown as horizontal bars. Each
bar represents the allowed service period for a location, with the x-axis indicating time in hours.
The concept of soft time windows is employed to address these computational challenges.
In contrast to hard, where one violation of any kind makes the solution infeasible, soft
time windows propose a penalty system for early and late arrivals. Vehicles can arrive
outside the specified time window, but deviations incur a cost proportional to the severity
of the violation. As illustrated in Figure 3.2, the locations with narrow time windows
for set 02 are concentrated in the early morning hours, between 5:00 and 8:00. In a hard
time window setting, this clustering could lead to infeasibility if multiple locations must
be serviced simultaneously, forcing the algorithm to discard otherwise promising routes.
The use of soft time windows provides greater flexibility, allowing slight deviations when
necessary while still prioritizing adherence to preferred schedules.
The soft time windows allows more flexibility in route planning while penalizing sched-
ules that are far from the preferred time slots. The soft time windows relax the strict
feasibility constraints to a cost-based trade-off. Therefore, they increase the size of the
solution space and the applicability of the generated routes. This approach better reflects
real-world operations, where minor deviations are often manageable as long as overall
efficiency and service quality are maintained.
3.1
Data
The data provided by AMCS forms the foundation for the optimization and evaluation of
the developed algorithm. A total of 73 problem instances were received, some of which
are modified variations of others to test different scenarios and constraints. Each problem
instance is structured into three CSV files, containing the following information:
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
10
==PAGE:18==
1. Distance Data: The first file includes the distance matrix, specifying the travel
distances (in meters) and travel times (in seconds) between all pairs of locations.
This matrix is crucial for calculating the optimal routes and estimating travel costs.
2. Location Data: The second file provides detailed information about each location,
including the location ID, geographical coordinates, time window, and handling
time. This data defines the constraints and objectives for the optimization algorithm.
3. Depot Data: The third file contains information about the depot, including its loca-
tion ID, coordinates, and the time window for vehicle departures and returns. This
data ensures that the algorithm accounts for vehicle availability and scheduling con-
straints.
These datasets are real-world scenarios encountered by AMCS clients, making them in-
valuable for testing and validating the algorithm. The structured nature of the data allows
for systematic experimentation and analysis, ensuring that the algorithm can handle di-
verse problem instances and varying levels of complexity. A detailed overview of the
instances can be seen in table A.1 in the appendix. By leveraging this data, the research
aims to produce an optimization algorithm that is not only computationally efficient but
also practical and applicable in real-world logistics operations.
3.1.1
Result Data
AMCS provided result data for 25 of the instances, each solved using their existing opti-
mization approach. Three different solutions were generated for every instance: a fast, a
normal, and a thorough run. The key difference between these runs is the computational
time allocated for solving the problem. A fast run favors speed, possibly at the expense of
solution quality; whereas a thorough run takes much more computational time to search
for the best solution. The normal run reflects a balance between speed and accuracy. The
computational time consumed by each instance varies depending on the size and complex-
ity of the problem. Each AMCS result file includes the following information:
1. Sequence of Visits: The order in which locations are visited, including the starting
and ending depot.
2. Time window: The start and end of the time window for each location.
3. Arrival and Departure Times: The timestamp for when a vehicle arrives at and
departs from each location.
4. Handling Time: The duration required to complete operations at each location
before departure.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
11
==PAGE:19==
5. Wait Time: The time spent waiting due to early arrival.
6. Driving Time and Distance: The travel time and distance between consecutive
locations.
7. Odometer Readings: The cumulative travel distance at each step in the route.
These result files serve as a benchmark for evaluating the performance of the developed
optimization algorithm. Since AMCS’s solutions represent realistic, high-quality routes
used in real-world logistics operations, they provide a valuable reference for assessing the
algorithm’s efficiency and effectiveness.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
12
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 4
Exact Model
An exact mathematical model was developed early to better understand the Traveling
Salesman Problem with Time Windows (TSPTW) and its inherent constraints. This initial
formulation served as a foundational step in exploring the problem’s complexity and iden-
tifying key constraints. The exact model provides a precise mathematical representation
of the problem, detailing the parameters, decision variables, objective function, and con-
straints that collectively define feasible and optimal routing solutions. The insights gained
from formulating the exact model have informed the development of heuristic approaches
in later chapters of this thesis.
4.1
Parameters
Firstly, some parameters are considered which precisely represent the problem. These
parameters outlined the essential components of the delivery network, like the set of cus-
tomer locations, travel information, and scheduling constraints. This outlined parameter
framework provides appropriate ground for the model to effectively reflect the complex-
ities associated with routing and time management, thus providing the necessary ground
for both the decision variables and constraints that follow.
• n: Number of customers.
• i, j ∈{0, 1, . . . , n}: Index of nodes where 0 represents the depot.
• dij: Distance between node i and node j.
• tij: Travel time between node i and node j.
• ei: Earliest time that service can begin at node i (start of the time window).
• li: Latest time that service must begin at node i (end of the time window).
• pe: Penalty per unit of early arrival at a customer (i.e., arriving before the time
window opens).
• pl: Penalty per unit of late arrival at a customer (i.e., arriving after the time window
closes).
• M: A large constant
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
13
==PAGE:21==
• hi: Handling time at customer i.
• cd: Cost per unit of distance traveled.
• ct: Cost per unit of time spent traveling.
4.2
Decision Variables
The decision variables define the choices and actions within the model, determining the
vehicle’s routing and scheduling behavior. These variables capture essential aspects such
as route selection, service start times, and potential deviations from time windows, form-
ing the basis for the model’s objective and constraints.
• xij ∈{0, 1}: Binary variable, 1 if the vehicle travels from node i to node j, 0
otherwise.
• Si ≥0: Continuous variable representing the service start time at every node.
• δi
e ∈{0, 1}: Binary variable, 1 if the vehicle arrives early at node i, 0 if it arrives
on time or late.
• δi
l ∈{0, 1}: Binary variable, 1 if the vehicle arrives late at node i, 0 if it arrives on
time or early.
4.3
Objective Function
The objective function defines the primary goal of the optimization model by minimiz-
ing the costs associated with the delivery routes. By optimizing the objective function,
the model aims to achieve an efficient and cost-effective routing solution that meets all
problem constraints.
Minimize Z = cd
n
∑
i=0
n
∑
j=0
dijxij + ct
n
∑
i=0
n
∑
j=0
tijxij +
n
∑
i=1
(
peδi
e(ei −Si) + plδi
l(Si −li)
)
The objective function minimizes the total cost, which includes travel costs, both distance
and time, and penalties for early or late arrivals at each customer node.
4.4
Constraints
The constraints provide the rules needed for the solution to be feasible and satisfy the op-
erational requirements. These requirements are, for example, flow conservation and that
each customer is served exactly once. This ensures that each customer will be served
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
14
==PAGE:22==
within specified constraints in the most optimized way to develop an overall delivery
schedule.
1. Vehicle starts and ends at the depot:
n
∑
j=1
x0j = 1,
n
∑
i=1
xi0 = 1
These constraints ensure that each vehicle starts at the depot (node 0) and returns to the
depot after serving customers.
2. Each customer is served exactly once:
n
∑
j=0
xij = 1
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n}
This constraint ensures that each customer is visited exactly once by a vehicle.
3. Flow conservation:
n
∑
i=0,i̸=j
xij =
n
∑
i=0,i̸=j
xji
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n}
This ensures that for every customer i, if a vehicle arrives at i, it must also leave to serve
another customer or return to the depot.
4. Service start time:
Sj ≥Si + tij + hi −M(1 −xij)
∀i, j ∈{0, 1, . . . , n}
This constraint ensures that if the vehicle travels from customer i to customer j, the service
at customer j can only start after the travel time from i and the handling time at i.
5. Deactivate early arrival variable when on time or late:
Si ≥ei −Mδi
e
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n}
This constraint deactivates the early arrival binary variable δi
e when the service starts on
time or later than the expected time.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
15
==PAGE:23==
6. Activate early arrival variable when early:
Si ≤ei + M(1 −δi
e)
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n}
This ensures that δi
e = 1 if the service starts early (before ei).
7. Deactivate late arrival variable when on time or early:
Si ≤li + Mδi
l
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n}
This constraint deactivates the late arrival binary variable δi
l when the vehicle arrives on
time or early.
8. Activate late arrival variable when late:
Si ≥li −M(1 −δi
l)
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n}
This ensures that δi
l = 1 if the service starts late (after li).
4.5
Hard Time Windows
Hard time windows impose a strict limit on the time range within which services can be
performed at each location. A solution will be considered infeasible if the vehicle arrives
before the earliest allowed time or after the latest permitted time. This method strictly
follows customer requirements but will cause infeasibility if some route constraints con-
flict with the time restrictions. In contrast, soft time windows allow for more flexibility,
including early or late arrivals, at some penalty cost. Deviations from the time windows
incur penalties reflected into the objective function, instead of rendering a solution infea-
sible. This way, practical solutions can be obtained with violations of time windows. The
acceptable size of these violations should be balancing cost and service quality.
The changes that would be seen in the exact model when you move from soft time windows
to hard time windows are in both the objective functions and the constraints. Firstly, in
the objective function, the last section regarding the penalties for early and late arrivals
will be removed. The first 4 constraints will stay the same. However, constraints 5 to 8
will be removed. Instead, two new constraints will be introduced. These are:
Si ≥ei
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n}
Si ≤li
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n}
These two constraints ensures that the service start time at every node is within the time
window.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
16
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 5
Large Neighborhood Search
5.1
Large Neighborhood Search
The Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) metaheuristic, first introduced by (Shaw (1998)),
operates on the fundamental principle of iteratively improving a solution by alternately
destroying and repairing it. This approach belongs to the broader class of Very Large-
Scale Neighborhood (VLSN) algorithms, the essential idea behind which is that exploring
large neighborhoods significantly increases the likelihood of finding high-quality solu-
tions. However, exhaustive search of these large neighborhoods is computationally pro-
hibitive. This is why LNS uses heuristics to limit the search process by guiding it more
efficiently.
Unlike traditional LS methods that focus on small, incremental changes to a solution,
LNS enables exploration of the solution space in a more extensive manner by employing
a ”destroy-and-repair” mechanism. Specifically, the neighborhood in LNS is not explicitly
defined; instead, it is implicitly constructed through the destruction and subsequent repair
of a current solution. The process introduces stochasticity to ensure diverse exploration,
making it especially effective for solving tightly constrained problems where local search
methods often become trapped in suboptimal solutions.
In the context of a Traveling Salesman Problem with Soft Time Windows (TSPSTW), the
destroy operation generally removes a certain percentage of customers from their assigned
positions in the route randomly or following some pre-defined logic or criteria. The repair
operation then reinserts these customers, using a heuristic approach. The flexibility of this
method lies in the variety of destroy and repair strategies offering a range of options to se-
lect. Furthermore, the acceptance criteria for new solutions, such as a simulated annealing
approach, allow LNS to balance exploration and exploitation. The following pseudocode
outlines the general structure of the Large Neighborhood Search algorithm as applied in
this study. It highlights the initialization, iterative destruction and repair process, accep-
tance criteria, and the selection of the best solution. The following pseudocode outlines
the general structure of the Large Neighborhood Search algorithm as applied in this study.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
17
==PAGE:25==
Algorithm 1 Large Neighborhood Search (LNS)
1: xb ←x ←Init(π)
2: while not Terminate(π, x) do
3:
xt ←r(d(x))
4:
if accept(xt, x) then
5:
x ←xt
6:
end if
7:
if c(xt) < c(xb) then
8:
xb ←xt
9:
end if
10: end while
The pseudocode begins with the initialization step in line 1, where the initial solution x
is generated most commonly using a construction heuristic. This solution then serves as
the starting point for the search and is also stored as the best-known solution xb. The
algorithm then iterates until a termination criterion, such as a time limit or a maximum
number of iterations, is met. In line 3, the core mechanism of the LNS is applied through
the destroy (d(x)) and repair (r(d(x))) operators. The function d(x) represents the destroy
operator, which removes a subset of elements from the solution, effectively breaking part
of the sequence. The function r(d(x)) represents the repair operator, which reconstructs
the solution by reinserting the removed elements. The new solution is then evaluated
with an acceptance criterion such as Simulated Annealing, Greedy Acceptance, or Late
Acceptance, allowing controlled diversification and escape from local optima (line 4). If
accepted, xt replaces x as the current solution (line 5). If xt improves upon xb, it is stored
as the best solution found so far (lines 7-8). This process continues until the algorithm
terminates.
Within the framework of our study, we implemented LNS with the following components:
5.1.1
Initial Solution
The initial solution can be constructed using various methods, depending on the context
and requirements of the problem. One common approach is the Nearest-Neighbor (NN)
heuristic, which builds a route by starting from a depot and repeatedly visiting the closest
unvisited node until all nodes are included. Another approach is the savings algorithm
(Clarke and Wright, 1964), which starts with each node assigned to its own route and
iteratively merges routes based on the greatest cost savings while maintaining feasibility.
A random initialization can also be used, where nodes are assigned to a route arbitrarily. It
follows that there is often a trade-off between how sophisticated the construction heuristic
is and how quickly the metaheuristic can produce a high-quality solution. A better initial
solution, such as one generated by NN or savings, can sometimes accelerate convergence
by starting closer to an optimal solution. However, this is not always the case as a strong
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
18
==PAGE:26==
metaheuristic should be able to effectively explore the search space and locate high-quality
solutions regardless of the starting point. The choice of initialization method depends on
the problem characteristics and the desired balance between initial solution quality and
exploration potential.
An example of an initial route constructed using random initialization with a total distance
of 1227 is shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: A random initial solution.
5.1.2
Destroy Mechanism
The destroy operation in the Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) algorithm introduces di-
versity by removing a subset of nodes from the current solution, allowing the search to
escape local optima and explore broader neighborhoods. The degree of destruction is a
key factor, since removing too few nodes can hinder the exploration of the solution space,
since the benefits of a large neighborhood are diminished. On the other hand, removing
too many nodes reduces LNS to repeated re-optimization, which can be computationally
very expensive. Various approaches can be found in the literature. Shaw (Shaw, 1998)
proposed gradually increasing the destruction degree, while Ropke and Pisinger (Røpke
and Pisinger, 2006) suggested selecting it randomly within a predefined range based on
instance size. Different destroy mechanisms cater to various problem characteristics. For
example, Random removal ensures broad exploration by deleting nodes arbitrarily, while
cluster-based removal eliminates nodes belonging to specific geographic or logical clus-
ters. Worst removal targets nodes with the highest cost contribution, whereas time-based
removal focuses on nodes with tight time windows. For the LNS to effectively explore
the solution space, the destroy method must allow access to different regions of the search
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
19
==PAGE:27==
space rather than focusing on specific parts of the solution. Therefore, a well-designed
destruction strategy often incorporates some level of stochasticity, ensuring that the algo-
rithm can both explore new solutions and refine promising ones. Figure 5.2 illustrates a
solution after applying the destroy operation, where the remaining partial solution has a
total distance of 597.
Figure 5.2: Solution after the destroy operation, with nodes removed randomly.
5.1.3
Repair Operation
After the destruction phase, the repair operation reconstructs the route by reinserting the
removed nodes back into the solution. The way nodes are reinserted plays a crucial role
in determining the quality of the final solution. A key decision when implementing the
repair method is whether to use a heuristic-based or an optimal approach.
A heuristic repair method, such as the cheapest insertion heuristic, evaluates all possi-
ble positions for a node and selects the one that increases the total cost the least. A re-
gret heuristic (Shaw, 1993), on the other hand, considers multiple insertion positions for
each node and minimizes the regret, defined as the cost difference between the best and
second-best positions, or more generally, the difference between the best and k-best posi-
tions. These methods provide good-quality solutions while maintaining computational ef-
ficiency. Alternatively, an optimal repair method seeks to construct the best possible full
solution from the partial solution, often by using exact optimization techniques. While
optimal repair may lead to high-quality solutions in fewer iterations, it is computation-
ally more expensive and may reduce diversity in the search process, as it tends to accept
only improving or identical-cost solutions. This can make it harder for the algorithm to
escape local optima unless a significant portion of the solution is destroyed in each itera-
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
20
==PAGE:28==
tion (Pisinger and Ropke, 2007a). Another choice in the repair process is whether to use a
custom-coded heuristic or a general-purpose solver, such as a mixed-integer programming
(MIP) solver to reconstruct the solution. While solvers can provide high-quality solutions,
they may significantly increase runtime, making them less suitable for large-scale prob-
lems. Ultimately, the selection of a repair method depends on the balance between solution
quality, computational efficiency, and the level of diversification required. An example
of an improved reconstructed solution is illustrated in Figure 5.3, where the final route
has a total distance of 856, a 30% reduction from the initial solution.
Figure 5.3: Final optimized route after the reconstruction phase.
5.2
Objective Function
Real-world problems often involve multiple conflicting objectives, where improving one
may lead to compromising another. For instance, a shorter travel distance might result
in more time window violations, while fewer violations could increase the travel time.
Such problems, where a theoretically optimal solution balancing all objectives could exist
but is rarely attainable in practice, are known as Multi-Objective Optimization Problems
(MOPs).
In contrast to single-objective optimization, where a single optimal solution exists, MOPs
yield a set of trade-off solutions, known as the Pareto optimal set or Pareto Front (POF).
A solution is considered Pareto optimal if no other feasible solution can improve one ob-
jective without worsening at least one other objective. Figure 5.4 illustrates the concept
of a Pareto Front, showing the trade-offs between two conflicting objectives and the con-
vergence towards non-dominated solutions.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.4: Pareto Front: Trade-offs between two conflicting objectives in a Multi-Objective Op-
timization Problem. Non-dominated solutions approximate the Pareto Front (Pereira et al., 2023).
The employed metaheuristic approaches seeks to approximate the Pareto Front by identi-
fying high-quality, non-dominated solutions. While it’s not guaranteed that all solutions
found are Pareto optimal, the solution space is iteratively explored to reduce dominance
violations and improve the quality of the solutions.
When solving Multi-Objective Optimization Problems (MOPs), decision-making is re-
quired to select the most suitable solution from the set of trade-offs. Several approaches
exist to handle this process (Molenbruch et al., 2014):
1. No-preference methods, which provide solutions directly without user preference.
2. Posteriori methods, which identify the entire set of non-dominated solutions, and
the user selects the most appropriate solution afterward.
3. Priori methods, which incorporate user preferences into the optimization process
to directly produce one solution.
4. Interactive methods, which combine user decision-making during the optimization
process to iteratively refine the solutions.
Distance Traveled
In this thesis, after discussions with AMCS, it was emphasized that minimizing the dis-
tance traveled should be the most critical part of the cost function based on customer
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
22
==PAGE:30==
preferences. While time is also important, optimizing solely for time can lead to solutions
where unnecessary detours are ”free” in terms of cost, resulting in excessive driving.
Time Windows
To address time constraints, we approached the problem using soft time windows, which
allow for both early and late violations. These violations are of course penalized in the
cost function, enabling us to search for a solution that achieves a good trade-off between
distance, time, and time window violations.
Waiting Times
As for waiting times, we chose not to include them directly in the cost function. This
decision ensures that our primary focus remains on optimizing the critical aspects of the
problem: minimizing distance while balancing time efficiency and adherence to time win-
dows. Expanding on AMCS’s feedback, it was clarified that waiting times are typically
handled differently in practice. In real-world scenarios, the plan is first generated based
on the optimization criteria, and then, if excessive waiting times are identified, the planner
is informed. At that point, it becomes the responsibility of the planner to decide how to
manage the waiting time. This could involve either waiting at the location or adjusting the
sequence to reduce idle time.
In response to these considerations, our objective function balances three factors: total
distance traveled, total time spent, and penalties for time window violations. To model
these often competing objectives, weights are assigned to each factor: wd, wt, wv for dis-
tance, time and violations accordingly, in the cost function. By assigning these weights
before the optimization process begins, we adopt an a priori method, where user prefer-
ences are incorporated into the objective function to directly guide the optimization toward
a solution that reflects these priorities.
Since some of the above components have different units, it was necessary to normalize
and balance these terms appropriately to make their contributions comparable. To address
this, we introduced a normalization factor q for the distance term based on the ratio of
total time to total distance:
cost = q · wd · D + wt · T + wv · V,
with q =
∑n
i=1
∑n
j=1 Tij
∑n
i=1
∑n
j=1 Dij
Having defined the structure of the objective function, the next step is to determine an
appropriate combination of the weights wd, wt, and wv to optimize the solution in a way
that meets the customer’s expectations.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
23
==PAGE:31==
Alternative Objective Functions
The chosen objective function is based on a priori method with normalization. There does
however exist a magnitude of different alternatives that could have been chosen instead.
Some of these are:
• Weighted Sum Approach (Priori): A standard method where weights are assigned
to each term directly, without normalization (Marler and Arora, 2010).
• Lexicographic Optimization (Priori): Instead of combining objectives into a sin-
gle function, a hierarchical approach optimizes the most important objective first
and considers others only if the primary goal is met (Stewart et al., 2021). This is
suitable for cases where one criteria, for example time window violation, is signif-
icantly more critical than others.
• Pareto Frontier Exploration (Posteriori): Instead of pre-defining weights, this
method finds a set of Pareto-optimal solutions that reflect different trade-offs be-
tween objectives (Deb, 2001). Decision-makers can then select the most suitable
trade-off afterward.
• Dynamic Weights (Interactive): A dynamic alternative where weights or con-
straints are adjusted iteratively based on decision-maker feedback (Miettinen et al.,
2016).
This decision we made was based on discussions with AMCS, where the relative impor-
tance of different objectives had already been established, making a priori approach the
most appropriate choice. The weighted sum method with normalization allows for an a
priori approach while maintaining the comparability between objectives.
5.2.1
Neighborhoods and Local Search Enhancements
During our initial experiments with the LNS algorithm, we observed that the solutions
the algorithm generated were often far from the benchmark values provided by AMCS.
Therefore, we suspected that it was limited in its ability to achieve higher-quality solu-
tions. In an effort to address this limitation, we decided to enhance the LNS framework
by incorporating a local search step.
The purpose of this step is to better the quality of the solution achieved by the LNS alone,
by making targeted adjustments within its immediate neighborhood, after the repair op-
erator has been applied and before proceeding to the next LNS iteration. Neighborhoods
are defined as the set of solutions that can be reached by applying specific transforma-
tions to the current solution. It is widely observed that in many optimization problems,
local optima are situated relatively close within specific neighborhoods. This suggests that
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
24
==PAGE:32==
searching the entire solution space might not always be required to identify near-optimal
solutions. This approach limits the search to smaller areas of the solution space, allowing
for optimization but without overwhelming computational resources.
5.2.2
Neighborhood Operators
We decided to test two neighborhood operators: 2-opt and 2-swap. The reason behind
our selection stems from the fact that they are widely used in Traveling Salesman Prob-
lem (TSP) optimization due to their simplicity and effectiveness. They are frequently
mentioned in the literature as standard methods for exploring localized solution spaces
and improving solution quality.
2-Opt Neighborhood
The 2-opt heuristic generates a neighborhood by removing two edges in the current route
and reconnecting the segments in reverse order. Hence, the 2-opt neighborhood is de-
fined as the set of solutions obtained by reversing any segment between two nodes ni and
nj, where j > i. In the case of the Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows
(TSPTW), the depot is fixed at the beginning (and the end) of the route. As a result, the
node indices i and j must satisfy i ̸= 1 and j ̸= 1, as the depot cannot be altered or
relocated within the route.
Below we provide two examples of a 2-opt operation in Figures 5.5, 5.6.
Figure 5.5: The segment between nodes 4 and 5 is reversed.
Figure 5.6: The segment between nodes 3 and 6 is reversed.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
25
==PAGE:33==
2-Swap Neighborhood
The 2-swap heuristic generates a neighborhood by exchanging the positions of two nodes
in the route. Hence, the 2-swap neighborhood is defined as the set of solutions obtained by
exchanging the positions of any two nodes n1 and n2, where n1 ̸= n2 and both nodes are
not the depot. Unlike 2-opt, which modifies the whole segment between nodes, 2-swap
directly rearranges the sequence of nodes. This method is rooted in the idea that small
changes in the sequence can significantly improve the final route. Below, two examples
of a 2-swap operation are illustrated in Figures 5.7, 5.8.
Figure 5.7: Nodes 4 and 5 are exchanged.
Figure 5.8: Nodes 3 and 6 are exchanged.
Neighborhood Size
The size of a neighborhood defines how many possible solutions can be reached from a
given solution by applying a single move. In a 2-opt neighborhood, the number of possible
moves is given by:
(n −1)(n −2)
2
= O(n2)
where n is the number of nodes in the tour. This results from selecting two edges and
reversing the subsequence between them, making it an O(n2) neighborhood.
The 2-swap neighborhood, on the other hand, has a size of:
n(n −1)
2
= O(n2)
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
26
==PAGE:34==
as it allows swapping any two nodes, regardless of their adjacency, also resulting in an
O(n2) complexity.
These neighborhoods differ from others, such as the neighborhoods formed by a com-
bination of a destroy and repair mechanisms, since they are defining a structured set of
solutions reachable through small perturbations.
Integration with LNS
After constructing a solution with one iteration of the LNS, the local search enhancement
evaluates the current solution’s neighborhood. If an improvement is found, the refined
solution replaces the original in the LNS process. Otherwise, the original solution is re-
tained, and the algorithm proceeds to the next iteration. By testing this additional step, we
observed significant improvements in the results. Both methods was tested on a subset of
instances, where preliminary results showed that the 2-swap produced solutions that were,
on average, 3.87% better than those obtained using 2-opt. Based on this performance, we
decided to implement the local search enhancement using 2-swap in the final approach.
5.2.3
Weight Tuning and Experimental Setup
All experiments were conducted on the DTU HPC cluster, utilizing nodes equipped with
Intel Xeon Gold 6226R processors. The computations were run with a single core, with
4GB of memory allocated per core. The job scheduling was managed using the LSF batch
system, and all experiments were executed using Julia 1.10.2. The cluster environment
ensured consistent performance.
Out of the 73 instances provided by AMCS, with significant variation in terms of size (the
number of nodes), presence of time windows, and the size of time windows (ranging from
none to wide, narrow, and very narrow time windows), eight were chosen to represent
the tuning set. These data sets were selected in an effort to represent a diverse range of
attributes, ensuring that the tuning results would be robust across various scenarios.
Time windows were categorized based on their duration:
• Very Narrow: ≤25 minutes
• Narrow: 26 ≤minutes ≤40
• Wide: > 40 minutes
The chosen instances and their main characteristics are summarized below:
This selection covers a wide range of instances, differing in size and complexity. This en-
sures the algorithm is evaluated under diverse conditions, reflecting real-world scenarios.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
27
==PAGE:35==
Dataset
Nodes
Total
TWs
Very
Narrow
TWs
Narrow
TWs
Wide
TWs
Set 01B
63
None
0
0
0
Set 02
102
14
3
8
3
Set 03
82
6
2
3
1
Set 05-16
189
2
0
0
2
Set 06-16
87
1
0
0
1
Set 08-02 Modified
97
21
2
0
19
Set 09
62
4
2
2
0
Set 10
43
6
0
1
5
Table 5.1: Overview of tuning instances.
5.2.4
LNS Tuning
In this section, we describe the process of tuning the key parameters of the LNS. The Large
Neighborhood Search framework relies on both the destroy and the repair mechanisms to
iteratively improve solutions. For this study, we chose to use a random destructor to re-
move a percentage of nodes from the solution, ensuring broad exploration, and a cheapest
insertion heuristic for reconstruction, which efficiently reinserts nodes while minimizing
additional cost.
We will start by making a note that tuning every parameter extensively by testing all pos-
sible combinations would take an enormous amount of time and computational resources.
To keep it manageable, we take a step-by-step approach, tuning one parameter at a time
while keeping the rest fixed. The result of one step is carried forward to the next.
Initially, a weight configuration of (wd, wt, wv) = (0.5, 0.3, 0.2) is chosen, where the
weights represent the importance of distance, time, and violations, respectively. This first
configuration was selected because the customer prioritizes minimizing distance over the
other components. Intuitively, this weight setup seemed to align well with the customer’s
priorities. With this configuration, we begin tuning the cooling rate, followed by the per-
centage to destroy (initially set to 40%), and finally revisit the objective function for weight
configuration tuning.
Cooling Rate
The cooling rate determines how quickly the algorithm reduces its search space over time.
A slower cooling rate allows more exploration, while a faster rate focuses the search
sooner. To tune this parameter, we fix the weight configuration at (0.5, 0.3, 0.2) and the
percentage to destroy at 40%. The tested cooling rates are:
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
28
==PAGE:36==
Cooling rate = [0.99, 0.985, 0.98, 0.975, 0.97]
The summary statistics table below shows the average improvement (Avg. Imp.) and
standard deviation (Avg. Std.) across all instances. This is followed by Part 1 and Part 2
tables, which detail the performance for individual instances.
Cooling Rate
Avg. Imp.
Avg. Std.
0.99
6.72%
0.29%
0.985
6.37%
0.31%
0.98
6.43%
0.29%
0.975
6.39%
0.27%
0.97
6.05%
0.36%
Table 5.2: Summary statistics for different cooling rates.
01B
02
03
05_16
Cooling Rate
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
0.99
6.18% 0.45% 13.30% 0.40% 11.84% 0.10% 2.01% 0.20%
0.985
6.08% 0.68% 13.31% 0.55% 10.72% 0.09% 1.73% 0.18%
0.98
6.02% 0.39% 11.86% 0.27% 11.48% 0.12% 2.28% 0.22%
0.975
5.61% 0.47% 12.53% 0.28% 11.30% 0.12% 2.56% 0.09%
0.97
5.36% 0.49% 11.24% 0.64% 11.31% 0.13% 2.37% 0.20%
Table 5.3: Cooling Rate tuning (Part 1).
06_16
08_02_MODIFIED
09
10
Cooling Rate
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
0.99
3.53% 0.11% 4.50%
0.31%
1.56% 0.25% 10.97% 0.51%
0.985
2.89% 0.19% 4.01%
0.16%
1.37% 0.22% 10.87% 0.38%
0.98
3.20% 0.16% 4.01%
0.29%
1.55% 0.15% 11.09% 0.75%
0.975
2.85% 0.35% 4.32%
0.18%
1.30% 0.29% 10.63% 0.42%
0.97
2.74% 0.21% 3.93%
0.21%
1.01% 0.24% 10.45% 0.77%
Table 5.4: Cooling Rate tuning (Part 2).
The results indicate that Cooling rate = 0.99 achieves the highest average improvement.
This value seemingly allows the algorithm to explore the solution space more effectively,
leading to better results. Based on these findings, we select Cooling rate = 0.99 for
subsequent steps.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
29
==PAGE:37==
Percentage to Destroy
The percentage to destroy refers to how many nodes are removed during the destruction
phase of the LNS. This parameter controls the balance between exploration and exploita-
tion during reconstruction. This balance is important because it controls how the algorithm
explores new possibilities (exploration) and improves the current solution (exploitation).
When we remove bigger parts of the solution (higher destruction percentage), the algo-
rithm has more freedom to explore different options and can avoid getting stuck in a local
optima. This is called exploration. On the other hand, when we destroy small parts of
the solution (lower destruction percentage), the algorithm works on improving the current
solution by making slight changes. This is called exploitation.
The goal is to find the right balance between exploring new solutions and refining what
we already have, so the algorithm can find a good solution efficiently. With the cooling
rate now fixed at 0.99, we test the following destruction percentages:
pdestroy = [0.25, 0.3, 0.35, 0.4, 0.45]
The summary statistics for the percentage to destroy are presented below, followed by
detailed results in Part 1 and Part 2 tables.
% to Destroy
Avg. Imp.
Avg. Std.
0.25
6.27%
0.40%
0.30
6.31%
0.37%
0.35
6.34%
0.35%
0.40
6.64%
0.40%
0.45
6.50%
0.44%
Table 5.5: Summary statistics for % to Destroy tuning.
01B
02
03
05_16
% to Destroy
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
0.25
5.80% 0.54% 11.20% 0.85% 11.43% 0.15% 2.19% 0.35%
0.30
6.09% 0.50% 11.42% 0.65% 11.44% 0.14% 2.11% 0.27%
0.35
5.79% 0.53% 12.27% 0.47% 11.22% 0.15% 2.26% 0.18%
0.40
6.49% 0.51% 13.12% 0.75% 11.38% 0.18% 2.48% 0.30%
0.45
6.37% 0.74% 12.11% 0.49% 11.51% 0.14% 2.12% 0.35%
Table 5.6: % to Destroy tuning (Part 1).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
30
==PAGE:38==
06_16
08_02_MODIFIED
09
10
% to Destroy
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
0.25
3.12% 0.18% 4.33%
0.18%
1.23% 0.29% 10.58% 0.66%
0.30
3.03% 0.25% 4.32%
0.16%
1.37% 0.27% 10.72% 0.60%
0.35
2.94% 0.34% 4.09%
0.23%
1.33% 0.26% 10.83% 0.66%
0.40
2.97% 0.22% 4.34%
0.22%
1.41% 0.19% 10.93% 0.87%
0.45
3.00% 0.20% 4.17%
0.32%
1.66% 0.36% 11.02% 0.90%
Table 5.7: % to Destroy tuning (Part 2).
From the results, pdestroy = 0.4 emerges as the best option. We proceed with this value in
the final tuning step.
Objective Function Weights Configuration
After tuning the cooling rate and percentage to destroy, we revisit the weights of the objec-
tive function. While the initial configuration (wd, wt, wv) = (0.5, 0.3, 0.2) was intuitively
chosen based on customer priorities, this step validates whether it is indeed the best choice.
The tested weight configurations are:
(wd, wt, wv) =


(0.3, 0.4, 0.3)
(0.4, 0.4, 0.2)
(0.5, 0.3, 0.2)
(0.35, 0.35, 0.3)
(0.45, 0.35, 0.2)
(0.2, 0.4, 0.4)
(0.15, 0.4, 0.45)
(0.3, 0.3, 0.4)
(0.25, 0.35, 0.4)


The summary statistics table below provides an overview of the results, while Part 1 and
Part 2 tables break down the performance for each of the tested instances.
(wd, wt, wv)
Avg. Imp.
Avg. Std.
(0.3, 0.4, 0.3)
6.58%
0.28%
(0.4, 0.4, 0.2)
6.69%
0.29%
(0.5, 0.3, 0.2)
6.22%
0.39%
(0.35, 0.35, 0.3)
6.53%
0.28%
(0.45, 0.35, 0.2)
6.28%
0.33%
(0.2, 0.4, 0.4)
6.31%
0.30%
(0.15, 0.4, 0.45)
6.48%
0.47%
(0.3, 0.3, 0.4)
6.45%
0.37%
(0.25, 0.35, 0.4)
6.32%
0.33%
Table 5.8: Summary statistics for all obj. function weight configurations (wd, wt, wv).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
31
==PAGE:39==
01B
02
03
05_16
(wd, wt, wv)
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
(0.3, 0.4, 0.3)
6.88% 0.31% 12.92% 0.65% 11.13% 0.05% 3.41% 0.22%
(0.4, 0.4, 0.2)
5.84% 0.25% 13.49% 0.79% 11.61% 0.08% 2.01% 0.26%
(0.5, 0.3, 0.2)
5.24% 0.44% 11.91% 0.96% 11.57% 0.09% 1.83% 0.28%
(0.35, 0.35, 0.3) 5.67% 0.41% 13.25% 0.52% 11.26% 0.13% 2.61% 0.14%
(0.45, 0.35, 0.2) 5.90% 0.46% 11.38% 0.56% 11.36% 0.09% 2.35% 0.18%
(0.2, 0.4, 0.4)
6.76% 0.32% 10.36% 0.52% 11.37% 0.14% 2.28% 0.26%
(0.15, 0.4, 0.45) 6.58% 0.92% 12.74% 0.69% 11.42% 0.13% 1.83% 0.30%
(0.3, 0.3, 0.4)
6.82% 0.53% 11.65% 0.44% 11.57% 0.11% 2.20% 0.38%
(0.25, 0.35, 0.4) 6.34% 0.49% 11.90% 0.65% 11.37% 0.18% 1.89% 0.24%
Table 5.9: Objective function weights(wd, wt, wv) tuning (Part 1).
06_16
08_02_MODIFIED
09
10
(wd, wt, wv)
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
Imp.
Std.
(0.3, 0.4, 0.3)
2.72% 0.25% 4.28%
0.16%
0.74% 0.11% 10.61% 0.48%
(0.4, 0.4, 0.2)
3.56% 0.20% 4.52%
0.12%
1.58% 0.10% 10.95% 0.52%
(0.5, 0.3, 0.2)
3.10% 0.15% 3.95%
0.29%
1.49% 0.23% 10.64% 0.67%
(0.35, 0.35, 0.3) 2.91% 0.19% 4.36%
0.14%
1.27% 0.24% 10.90% 0.46%
(0.45, 0.35, 0.2) 2.86% 0.25% 4.28%
0.27%
1.57% 0.29% 10.50% 0.51%
(0.2, 0.4, 0.4)
3.46% 0.28% 4.76%
0.13%
0.92% 0.28% 10.58% 0.46%
(0.15, 0.4, 0.45) 2.62% 0.18% 4.10%
0.33%
1.57% 0.22% 11.01% 0.98%
(0.3, 0.3, 0.4)
3.13% 0.22% 3.99%
0.28%
1.44% 0.34% 10.77% 0.69%
(0.25, 0.35, 0.4) 2.65% 0.24% 4.20%
0.25%
1.40% 0.16% 10.83% 0.44%
Table 5.10: Objective function weights(wd, wt, wv) tuning (Part 2).
The results show that while the initial configuration (wd, wt, wv) = (0.5, 0.3, 0.2) was
chosen based on the intuition that distance minimization is the highest priority for the
customer, the configuration (wd, wt, wv) = (0.4, 0.4, 0.2) ultimately provides the best
performance across all tested instances.
Summary of Selected Parameters
After tuning the parameters, the following configurations are selected:
[Cooling Rate, pdestroy, wd, wt, wv] = [0.99, 0.4, 0.4, 0.4, 0.2]
These parameters were chosen because they provide a good balance between exploration
and exploitation, aligning with both computational feasibility and the customer’s priori-
ties. While more extensive tuning could further improve the results, this approach achieves
decent performance within a reasonable time frame.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
32
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 6
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
The Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) metaheuristic is an extension of LNS
introduced by Røpke and Pisinger (2006). It builds on the same foundational principle
of iteratively improving a solution through destruction and repair. However, ALNS en-
hances the basic LNS framework by incorporating adaptivity, allowing the algorithm to
dynamically select the most effective destroy and repair strategies based on their historical
performance. This adaptivity ensures that ALNS adjusts its search behavior to better suit
the specific characteristics of the problem instance being solved.
As with LNS, ALNS belongs to the family of Very Large-Scale Neighborhood (VLSN)
algorithms, which leverage large neighborhood exploration to improve the chances of
finding high-quality solutions. The key distinction lies in ALNS’s ability to prioritize
strategies that have proven effective in previous iterations, thus balancing exploration and
exploitation in a more targeted manner. This adaptability makes ALNS particularly ef-
fective for complex and constrained optimization problems, such as the Traveling Sales-
man Problem with Time Windows (TSPTW), where traditional local search methods often
struggle.
In ALNS, the destruction phase removes a subset of elements from the current solution,
such as customers from a route, using a variety of predefined destroy mechanisms. These
mechanisms can include random removal, time-window-based removal, and distance-
based removal, among others. The repair phase reinserts the removed elements into the
solution, using strategies such as greedy heuristics and regret-based insertion. ALNS dy-
namically selects which destruction and repair heuristics to use in each iteration based on
a weight adjustment mechanism, where the weights are updated depending on the success
of the heuristics in improving the solution.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
33
==PAGE:41==
Algorithm 2 Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS)
1: xb ←x ←Init(π)
2: ρ−←{1, . . . , 1}; ρ+ ←{1, . . . , 1};
3: while NOT Terminate(π, x) do
4:
Select d ∈Ω−and r ∈Ω+;
5:
xt ←r(d(x));
6:
if accept(xt, x) then
7:
x ←xt;
8:
end if
9:
if c(xt) < c(xb) then
10:
xb ←xt;
11:
end if
12:
Update ρ−and ρ+;
13: end while
Algorithm 2 extends the standard LNS (1), by dynamically adjusting the selection of de-
stroy and repair methods based on their past performance. The key modifications are
introduced in lines 2, 4, and 12. In line 2 the algorithm maintains weight vectors ρ−and
ρ+ for destroy and repair operators, respectively. These weights determine the probability
of selecting a specific operator. Initially, all methods have equal weight. Then in line 4 the
destroy and repair operators are selected initially using a roulette wheel selection and then
probabilistically ensuring that operators with higher success rates are chosen more fre-
quently. Finally, in line 12, there is the dynamic weight adjustment, where the algorithm
updates the operator weights based on their performance using a scoring function.
6.1
Acceptance Criteria and Stopping Conditions
When designing a heuristic algorithm, two important decisions that needs to be made are
the acceptance criteria and stopping conditions. These choices determine how and for how
long the algorithm explores the solution space.
6.1.1
Acceptance Criteria
The simplest acceptance criterion is to only accept improving solutions. This is known
as a hill-climber approach. While it can be effective at finding better solutions quickly,
it often causes the algorithm to become trapped in local optima. That is because of its
inability to explore seemingly unfavorable solutions that could potentially lead to optimal
results later on.
To avoid this, the chosen acceptance method is inspired by simulated annealing (SA). Sim-
ulated annealing introduces randomness by sometimes accepting worse solutions. If the
new solution improves the current one, it is always accepted. If it is worse, it is accepted
with a probability. This enables the algorithm to search broader in the solution space,
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
34
==PAGE:42==
especially in the early stages of the search. The probability is defined as:
P = e−c(zt)−c(z)
T
Here:
• c(zt) is the cost of the new solution.
• c(z) is the cost of the current solution.
• T is the temperature.
Initially, the temperature is high, allowing the algorithm to explore ”freely” by accepting
worse solutions oftener. Over time, the temperature decreases using a cooling factor 0 <
c < 1:
Tnew = Told · c
As the temperature drops, the algorithm slowly becomes more selective, focusing on im-
proving the best solutions. The initial temperature T0 is calculated to suit the problem
instance. Specifically, T0 is set so that a solution w% worse than the initial one is ac-
cepted with a 50% probability at the start:
T0 = −w · c(z)
ln(0.5)
This ensures the search starts with enough exploration to avoid premature convergence.
For the reasons described above we chose simulated annealing over the hill-climber ap-
proach.
In our case, after testing different setups, we found that multiplying the calculated T0 by
50 provided a sufficiently high initial temperature to ensure the algorithm explores the
solution space effectively in the early stages. The adjusted formula is:
T0 = −w · c(z) · 50
ln(0.5)
6.1.2
Stopping Conditions
An algorithm also needs a clear rule for when to stop, and there are several options to
consider. One common approach is to use fixed iterations, where the algorithm stops after
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
35
==PAGE:43==
a set number of iterations. While this method is simple and easy to implement, it does not
account for the possibility of variable iteration times between different instances of the
same problem. Another option is solution stability, where the algorithm terminates if the
solution has not improved after a specified number of iterations. This approach adapts to
the progress of the search. However, it is a bit challenging to define what the appropriate
number of iterations should be. Therefore, it runs the risk of stopping too early if the
algorithm experiences temporary ”stagnation”.
A third option is to stop when the temperature in simulated annealing drops below a certain
threshold. When that happens, it’s an indication that the algorithm has shifted its focus
from exploration to refinement, and further iterations are therefore less effective. Another
option is to use a performance threshold, where the search ends once a solution meets a
predefined quality level. This is useful when there is a known acceptable solution, though
it can be challenging to define such a threshold without prior knowledge of the problem.
Lastly, the option used in this algorithm is having time as the stopping criteria. This en-
sures that there is a consistent runtime across all problem instances and leads to better
control over the computational resources.
6.2
Destroy mechanisms
In the ALNS, destroy mechanisms play a crucial role in generating new solutions by par-
tially deconstructing the current solution. This can be done in various ways, each influ-
encing the search process differently. For this thesis, five different methods were imple-
mented, targeting aspects such as randomness, travel distance, cost contribution, and time
window constraints. By dynamically selecting among these mechanisms, the algorithm
should be able to enhance solution quality.
6.2.1
Random Removal
The simplest destruction method is random removal, where a fixed number of nodes are
randomly removed from the solution each time. The number is determined by a param-
eter, d_perc, representing the percentage of the solution to be destroyed. This method is
easy to implement but surprisingly effective. Because of its simplicity and effectiveness,
it is frequently included as a destroy mechanism in ALNS implementations. By introduc-
ing randomness, it allows for some diversification in the search, ensuring that the solution
space is explored more thoroughly and reducing the risk of being confined to local op-
tima. However, excessive randomness can also be a drawback, as removing too many
nodes without considering solution structure may disrupt promising solutions and lead to
inefficient exploration.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
36
==PAGE:44==
Algorithm 3 Random Removal
Input: route, percentage
Output: remaining route, removed nodes
1: N ←∅;
2: k ←⌈length(route) × percentage⌉;
3: while|N| < k
4:
idx ←Random index from middle nodes of route;
5:
node ←Node at position idx in route;
6:
N ←N ∪{node};
7:
route ←route \ {node};
8: end while
9: remaining route ←route;
10: removed nodes ←N;
6.2.2
Longest Distance Removal
Since distance is factored in the objective, and it is customer’s top priority to minimize it,
a simple way to decide which orders to remove is based on that. This heuristic follows
a straightforward logic: at each iteration, it examines all nodes in the route (except the
depot) and calculates the total additional distance incurred by visiting each node. This is
done by summing the distance from the node to its predecessor and its successor in the
sequence. The node whose removal results in the greatest reduction in total travel distance
is then selected for elimination. This process repeats until a predefined percentage of the
nodes are removed. One advantage of this approach is that it reduces route inefficiencies
by eliminating nodes that contribute excessive detours. However, One notable drawback
is its complete determinism. Since the removal process is based purely on evaluating the
distance contribution of each node, the same input will always yield the same removals.
This lack of randomness can limit the diversity of the search process, as the algorithm
may consistently explore similar regions of the solution space. The following pseudocode
describes the method in detail:
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
37
==PAGE:45==
Algorithm 4 Longest Distance Removal
Input: route, percentage
Output: remaining route, removed nodes
1: while |removed nodes| < k do
2:
worstD ←0;
3:
iWorst ←0;
4:
for i = 2 to length(remaining route) −1 do
5:
prior node ←remaining route[i −1];
6:
current node ←remaining route[i];
7:
next node ←remaining route[i + 1];
8:
priorD ←d[prior node, current node];
9:
nextD ←d[current node, next node];
10:
sumD ←priorD + nextD;
11:
if sumD > worstD then
12:
worstD ←sumD;
13:
iWorst ←i;
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
removed nodes ←removed nodes ∪{remaining route[iWorst]};
17:
remaining route ←remaining route \{remaining route[iWorst]};
18: end while
6.2.3
Worst Removal
This removal heuristic focuses on improving the solution by targeting the most ”expen-
sive” parts of it. Each order in the route contributes to the total cost, so removing the orders
that add the most to the cost has the highest potential for improvement. To determine this,
the algorithm calculates how much the solution’s cost would decrease if a specific order
were removed. This cost reduction is computed for every order in the route.
Once these values are calculated, the orders are sorted in descending order based on their
removal cost. The top of the list contains the orders whose removal would result in the
largest cost reduction. However, to prevent the algorithm from always removing the same
orders and getting stuck in repetitive patterns, a randomness factor is introduced. Instead
of always removing the most expensive order, the algorithm selects an order based on
a random index. The random index is determined using a parameter p, which controls
how likely it is to select an order from the top of the list versus the bottom. When p is
higher, the top orders are more likely to be chosen, but lower-cost orders still have a small
chance of being selected. This method combines targeting costly orders with the element
of randomness and that way helps diversify the search while also focusing on improving
the solution’s overall cost.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
38
==PAGE:46==
Algorithm 5 Worst Removal
Input: route, percentage
Output: remaining route, removed nodes
1: while q > 0 do
2:
Array: L = All planned requests i, sorted by descending cost(i, s);
3:
Choose a random number y in the interval [0, 1);
4:
Request: r = L[⌊yp · |L|⌋];
5:
Remove r from solution s;
6:
q = q −1;
7: end while
6.2.4
Worst TW Removal (Narrow)
This heuristic removes nodes with the narrowest time windows, prioritizing those with
tight scheduling constraints. Nodes are sorted in ascending order of their time window
widths, with the narrowest ones removed first. By targeting the most constrained nodes,
this approach aims to increase flexibility in the remaining route, making it easier to opti-
mize during the reinsertion phase.
6.2.5
Worst TW Removal (Wide)
This method removes nodes with the widest time windows, prioritizing those with the
most scheduling flexibility. Nodes this time are sorted in descending order of their time
window widths, with the widest ones removed first. By removing the nodes with wide
time windows, the heuristic focuses on disrupting the more flexible parts of the solution.
These nodes have large time frames for scheduling, meaning they are relatively easy to
fit anywhere in the route. Removing them temporarily enables the algorithm to reposition
them during reconstruction in a way that minimizes violations.
6.3
Repair mechanisms
Repair mechanisms play a crucial role in reconstructing a solution after the destruction
phase by reinserting removed nodes in a structured manner. This can be done in vari-
ous ways, each influencing the search process differently. For this thesis, three different
methods were implemented, focusing on minimizing insertion costs and improving overall
solution feasibility.
6.3.1
Cheapest Insertion Heuristic
The heuristic iteratively reinserts the nodes removed at the destruction phase into the route
at positions that minimize a weighted cost function. This cost function, same as the ob-
jective function discussed earlier, accounts for total distance, total time, and penalties for
time window violations. For each removed node, the algorithm evaluates every possible
insertion position in the current route, by calculating the resulting cost for each. The inser-
tion that yields the lowest total cost is selected. In cases where multiple insertions result
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
39
==PAGE:47==
in the same cost, the algorithm ”resolves the tie” by selecting the node with the smallest
index. Once the best insertion is identified, the node is reinserted into the route, and the
process continues until all removed nodes are reinserted.
6.3.2
Regret k=2 Insertion
The Regret k=2 Heuristic reinserts the nodes by considering both the cost of the best
insertion position and the cost of the second-best position. The regret cost is defined as
the difference between these two costs, and nodes with higher regret costs are prioritized
for reinsertion. This ensures that delaying their placement does not lead to significantly
worse solutions. The process is repeated until all removed nodes are reinserted into the
route.
The regret-k heuristic selects a customer i from the set U of unassigned customers based
on the following rule:
i := arg max
i∈U
( k
∑
h=2
∆f h
i −∆f 1
i
)
,
where ∆f h
i represents the cost of inserting customer i at the hth cheapest position. By
using this look-ahead mechanism, the heuristic reduces the likelihood of being forced to
insert a customer into a suboptimal position due to the unavailability of better options.
The intention behind this is to avoid myopic decisions that only consider the immediate
best option.
6.3.3
Regret k=3 Insertion
The Regret k=3 Heuristic builds on the logic of Regret k=2 by considering the costs of
the best, second-best, and third-best insertion positions for each node. The regret cost is
calculated as the sum of the differences between the best cost and the second-best cost,
and the best cost and the third-best cost. Mathematically, the regret cost is defined as:
Regret Cost = (∆f 2
i −∆f 1
i ) + (∆f 3
i −∆f 1
i ),
where ∆f 1
i , ∆f 2
i , and ∆f 3
i represent the costs of inserting node i at its best, second-best,
and third-best positions, respectively.
The heuristic selects the node with the highest regret cost for reinsertion at each step,
prioritizing nodes that would incur significant additional costs if not placed in their best
position. This process repeats until all removed nodes are added back to the route.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
40
==PAGE:48==
Below is the general structure of the Regret-k insertion heuristic:
Algorithm 6 Regret-k Insertion
Input: U (Set of unassigned customers), x (Current solution)
Output: Updated solution x
1: while U ̸= ∅do
2:
for all i ∈U do
3:
∆f 1
i ←Cost of best insertion for customer i;
4:
∆f 2
i ←Cost of second-best insertion for customer i;
5:
∆f 3
i , . . . , ∆f k
i ←Costs of remaining best insertions for customer i;
6:
end for
7:
i ←arg maxi∈U
(∑k
h=2 ∆f h
i −∆f 1
i
)
;
8:
x ←Insert customer i into solution at its best position;
9:
U ←U \ {i};
10: end while
11: return x;
In the context of insertion heuristics, the parameter k in Regret-k determines the number
of alternative insertion positions considered for each node. While increasing k allows
the heuristic to account for more future consequences of current insertion decisions, it
also leads to higher computational complexity. In this thesis, we implement Regret-k
heuristics for k = 2 and k = 3. We do not proceed with k > 3 due to the diminishing
returns in solution quality improvement relative to the increased computational burden.
As noted in the literature, higher values of k can lead to excessive computational times
without significant gains in solution optimality. For instance, (Diana and Dessouky, 2004)
observed that while regret insertion heuristics improve solution quality, the computational
complexity becomes a limiting factor for large-scale problems when k is increased beyond
3.
6.4
Adaptive Weight Adjustment
In Section 6.2, five different removal heuristics were introduced, and in Section 6.3, a set
of three insertion heuristics. Instead of relying on a single removal and insertion heuristic
throughout the search, like we did with LNS, the ALNS are making use of all of them.
This approach is more robust because different heuristics are better suited for different
types of instances.
6.4.1
Choosing a Removal and Insertion Heuristic
To decide which heuristic to use, we assign weights to each of them and use a roulette
wheel selection mechanism. For k heuristics with weights wi, where i ∈{1, 2, . . . , k}, a
heuristic j is selected with probability:
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
41
==PAGE:49==
wj
∑k
i=1 wi
.
It should be noted that the removal and insertion heuristics are chosen independently of
each other and an adaptive weight adjustment method is used.
6.4.2
Adaptive Weight Adjustment
Before diving into the details of weight adjustment, it is important to first explain the
concept of heuristic scores in the ALNS framework. Each heuristic is assigned a score
σ that reflects how well it performs during the search process. The score measures the
contribution of a heuristic to improving the solution or exploring new areas of the solution
space. A higher score indicates that the heuristic has been effective in recent iterations,
either by finding better solutions or by promoting diversity in the search.
With this context in mind, the weights wi are updated automatically using statistics from
earlier iterations to reflect the recent performance of each heuristic. The search is divided
into segments, where each segment consists of a fixed number of iterations. At the begin-
ning of each segment, all heuristic scores are reset to zero and a heuristic’s score increases
under the following conditions:
• σ1: The heuristic generates a new global best solution.
• σ2: The heuristic produces a solution that is better than the current one, has not been
visited before, and is accepted.
• σ3: The heuristic generates a previously unvisited solution that is accepted, even if
its cost is worse than the current solution.
The parameter σ1 rewards heuristics that improve the solution, while σ3 promotes explo-
ration by encouraging heuristics to search in new areas of the solution space. To maintain
diversity, only previously unvisited solutions are rewarded.
During each iteration, two heuristics are applied: one for removal and one for insertion.
When updating scores, both heuristics are rewarded equally since it is unclear which con-
tributed more to the success of the solution. Then, at the end of each segment, the weights
for all heuristics are updated based on their scores. Let wij represent the weight of heuristic
i in segment j. The updated weight for segment j + 1 is calculated as:
wi,j+1 = wij(1 −r) + rπi
θi
,
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
42
==PAGE:50==
where:
• πi: The score of heuristic i in the last segment.
• θi: The number of times heuristic i was used in the last segment.
• r: The reaction factor, which controls how quickly the algorithm adjusts weights.
If r is set to zero, the weights remain unchanged from their initial values. If r is set to
one, the weights rely entirely on the scores from the last segment. This adaptive mecha-
nism ensures that the algorithm prioritizes heuristics that perform well while adapting to
changing conditions in the search.
Weight Adjustment Alternatives
The weight adjustment method described above is the one introduced by Røpke and Pisinger
(2006). Other methods have later also been implemented and explored. Among these are
the the reinforcement learning-based adjustments described by Reijnen et al. (2024). This
approach dynamically updates weights by predicting which heuristics will perform best in
different scenarios, allowing the algorithm to adapt without relying on predefined update
rules.
While different weight adjustment strategies exist, the method by Røpke and Pisinger
(2006) was chosen for this thesis as it was introduced alongside ALNS and has been
widely adopted in the literature. Its straightforward update mechanism has proven ef-
fective in guiding the search process, making it a reliable choice for heuristic selection in
combinatorial optimization.
6.5
Starting Time
The initial solution utilizes the start of the depot’s time window as the starting time of
the whole route. This means the vehicle will leave the depot as soon as the depot opens.
Having this fixed starting point simplifies the initialization by reducing the complexity
of the initial setup. A fixed starting point’s negative side is related to the possibility of
an increase in waiting time, leading to higher operational costs. For some instances, an
increase in waiting time is guaranteed since the depot’s time window is 24 hours while
the earliest time windows of the nodes open at 6 in the morning, meaning that the waiting
time is already close to 6 hours before the first node has been visited.
6.5.1
Optimal Starting Time
In order to address the complications regarding a fixed starting time for the route, a Lin-
ear Program (LP) was implemented to find the optimal starting time for a given route.
This step was inserted into the algorithm after the ALNS was completed. It takes the
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
43
==PAGE:51==
final solution produced by ALNS and optimizes the waiting time and violations. The im-
plementation of the LP has no direct effect on the route or total distance but focuses on
determining the best starting time to reduce unnecessary waiting time and violations of
time windows. The main objective of the LP is to minimize the violation time, with some
focus on minimizing the waiting time. Including the waiting time in the objective func-
tion is important for mitigating the excessive waiting time experienced when the depot is
constantly open.
The LP model is implemented after the ALNS to minimize computational time spent de-
termining the starting time. This allows the metaheuristic to explore a broader range of
solutions within a given time frame. By postponing the exact determination of starting
times until a high-quality route has been identified, the number of LP optimizations re-
quired is limited to one.
Objective Function
Minimize Z = 0.45
n+1
∑
i=1
early vi + 0.45
n+1
∑
i=1
late vi + 0.1
n+1
∑
i=1
waiting ti
The n in the objective represents the number of nodes including the depot. The plus one
makes sure that we count the depot twice since the route starts and ends with the depot.
Further, early vi and late vi is the violation at each node i in the route. Lastly, waiting ti
represents the waiting time at each node i. The weights have been decided in a way so
that the main goal is to minimize the violations, but also reducing the waiting time where
it is possible.
Constraints
1. The starting time is the time the route starts:
arrival t1 = starting time
This constraint ensures that the time the vehicle starts its route is the same as the starting
time. Here starting time is the decision variable gives the optimal starting time for the
route.
2. No waiting time is allowed at the depot:
waiting t1 = 0
This constraint ensures that there is no waiting time at the depot.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
44
==PAGE:52==
3. Arrival time at the next node:
arrival ti = arrival ti−1 +hroutei−1 +troutei−1,routei +waiting ti−1
∀i ∈{2, . . . , n+1}
This ensures that the arrival time at the next node in the route happens after the handling
(h) at the previous node is done and the vehicle transports (t) it self to the next node. This
also includes any waiting time that the vehicle had at the previous node.
4. Early violation and waiting time:
eroutei ≤arrival ti + waiting ti + early vi
∀i ∈{1 . . . , n + 1}
This constraint ensures that if the arrival time is before the time window opens (e) then
there is either waiting time or early violations that covers the difference.
5. Late violations:
lroutei ≥arrival timei −late vi
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n + 1}
This ensures that if the arrival time is after the time window closes (l) then there is a late
violation.
6.5.2
Effects of the LP
Figure 6.1 shows how the implementation of the LP model has affected waiting times
and violations for set 05-02. From this result, the reduction in the waiting time after the
incorporation of the LP into the process becomes very important. What was initially a high
amount of waiting time now gets significantly reduced. This implies that LP refines the
timing of routes so useless delays are avoided. The total violation time is the same before
and after the LP is applied. This makes sense since there were no violations in the original
solution. In this case, the work of the LP is not to resolve some kind of feasibility problem
but rather to update starting times to minimize waiting while maintaining the feasibility
with respect to time window constraints.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.1: The bar graph shows how the LP have impacted the waiting time (WT) and violation
time(VT) for set 05-02.
In summary, these findings highlight the contribution of LP to operational efficiency. The
fact that LP reduces waiting times without altering the satisfaction of constraints shows
that it is helpful in fine-tuning solutions to make them more practical and efficient in real
life.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
46
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 7
ALNS Tuning
7.1
Tuning Set
For the ALNS tuning, we utilize the same subset of eight instances described in the LNS
section. These instances were carefully selected to represent a diverse range of attributes,
including varying numbers of nodes and time window characteristics. By reusing this
tuning set, we hope to ensure consistency across the tuning phases.
7.2
Tuning Process
Ideally, the most extensive tuning strategy would involve testing all possible combinations
of parameter values across all instances. However, after assessing the computational effort
required and discussing it with our supervisor, it was determined that such an approach was
beyond the scope of this thesis. Instead, a more realistic approach was employed, similar
to the LNS Tuning above. We selected the initial parameter values based on results from
early tests and a reasonable initial guess. Parameters were then tuned iteratively, with
only one parameter varied at a time while the others remained fixed. For each parameter,
multiple values were tested across all selected instances of the tuning set, and the results
were evaluated using average performance metrics based on 5 runs per dataset. Once
the best-performing value for a parameter was identified, it was fixed, and subsequent
parameters were tuned while keeping the previously optimized parameters unchanged.
7.3
Chosen Parameters
To fine-tune the ALNS heuristic, five parameters are systematically tested following the
above-defined tuning framework. Each parameter is evaluated through five trials on each
of the eight instances, with every trial running for 20 minutes.
7.3.1
Start Temperature Control Parameter w
The choice of starting temperature, Tstart, is an important one in the ALNS framework,
used to balance exploration and convergence. According to the literature, it is calculated
such that a solution w% worse than the current solution is accepted with a 50% probability
during the first iteration. This is determined using the formula:
Tstart = −w · obj.value
ln(0.5)
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
47
==PAGE:55==
The parameter w controls how much worse a solution can be and still get accepted. Nat-
urally, higher w values allow for more exploration, while lower w values encourage ex-
ploitation.
In our case, the objective function value is scaled by a factor of 50 for the first iteration.
This ensures the algorithm runs long enough for all tuning instances and prevents early
convergence. Different w values were tested:
w = [0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1]
w
avg. improvement avg. std
0.01
11.68%
0.34%
0.025
11.40%
0.53%
0.05
11.40%
0.68%
0.075
11.36%
0.62%
0.1
11.27%
0.44%
Table 7.1: Summary Statistics for Different w Values.
01B
02
03
05_16
w
Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
0.01
8.21%
0.21%
27.54%
0.65%
18.06%
0.35%
8.65%
0.41%
0.025
8.05%
0.20%
27.26%
1.19%
18.21%
0.34%
8.16%
0.53%
0.05
7.58%
1.20%
27.29%
1.16%
18.01%
0.52%
7.97%
0.59%
0.075
7.26%
1.53%
26.84%
1.16%
18.21%
0.45%
7.81%
0.56%
0.1
7.05%
1.53%
26.69%
0.75%
18.05%
0.39%
7.64%
0.22%
Table 7.2: Parameter w tuning (Part 1).
06_16
08_02 MODIFIED
09
10
w
Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
0.01
5.84%
0.00%
6.45%
0.12%
3.59%
0.32%
15.09%
0.62%
0.025
5.84%
0.00%
6.48%
0.09%
3.45%
0.37%
13.75%
1.51%
0.05
5.84%
0.00%
6.49%
0.09%
3.51%
0.37%
14.54%
1.53%
0.075
5.85%
0.00%
6.40%
0.11%
3.40%
0.26%
15.07%
0.87%
0.1
5.72%
0.29%
6.50%
0.08%
3.56%
0.18%
14.95%
0.11%
Table 7.3: Parameter w tuning (Part 2).
The results in the tables clearly show that w = 0.01 achieves the best average improvement
across most datasets, including 01B, 02, 05.16, 09, and 10. Moreover, w = 0.01, provides
the lowest average standard deviation across all sets. Given this combination of high
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
48
==PAGE:56==
improvement and low variability, w = 0.01 was selected as the most robust parameter to
proceed with further analysis and experiments.
7.3.2
Cooling Factor ζ
The cooling factor, ζ, works together with the starting temperature to determine the rate
at which the temperature decreases during the algorithm and is also a parameter that in-
fluences the balance between exploration and exploitation throughout the search process.
In this study, a range of cooling factors was tested to explore various rates of temperature
decay. Inspired by previous work, the following values were considered:
ζ = [0.995, 0.99925, 0.9995, 0.99975, 0.9999]
ζ
Avg. Improvement Avg. Std
0.9999
11.35%
0.45%
0.99975
11.46%
0.47%
0.9995
11.51%
0.49%
0.99925
11.36%
0.53%
0.995
11.50%
0.46%
0.99
11.33%
0.48%
Table 7.4: Summary Statistics for Different ζ Values.
01B
02
03
05_16
ζ
Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
0.9999
7.09%
1.52%
26.42%
0.69%
18.47%
0.13%
7.71%
0.18%
0.99975
7.74%
1.04%
25.92%
0.96%
18.48%
0.11%
8.28%
0.52%
0.9995
5.85%
1.31%
27.34%
0.78%
18.49%
0.09%
8.18%
0.54%
0.99925
7.08%
1.71%
26.01%
0.82%
18.40%
0.17%
8.14%
0.53%
0.995
7.04%
1.52%
26.67%
0.76%
18.40%
0.19%
8.04%
0.59%
0.99
6.80%
1.49%
27.22%
0.95%
18.16%
0.29%
8.09%
0.01%
Table 7.5: Parameter ζ Tuning (Part 1).
The analysis of the results demonstrates that ζ = 0.9995 achieves the best performance for
instances 02, 03, and 09. This configuration also shows the highest average improvement
across all tested instances.
7.3.3
% to destroy
The destroy percentage, denoted as d_perc, determines the subset of nodes that are being
removed during the destruction phase of each iteration of the ALNS. This parameter plays
a crucial role in balancing the exploration of the solution space with the ability of the
insertion heuristics to add the removed nodes back to the route.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
49
==PAGE:57==
06_16
08_02 MODIFIED
09
10
ζ
Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
0.9999
5.50%
0.35%
6.49%
0.07%
3.65%
0.14%
15.50%
0.55%
0.99975
5.62%
0.21%
6.47%
0.10%
3.80%
0.23%
15.37%
0.62%
0.9995
5.53%
0.31%
6.48%
0.07%
4.18%
0.66%
16.05%
0.16%
0.99925
5.39%
0.29%
6.48%
0.09%
3.91%
0.18%
15.43%
0.46%
0.995
5.47%
0.34%
6.32%
0.05 %
4.01%
0.02 %
16.09%
0.24%
0.99
4.72%
0.21%
6.50%
0.09%
3.69%
0.16%
15.48%
0.60%
Table 7.6: Parameter ζ Tuning (Part 2).
To identify an appropriate value for d_perc, we tested the algorithm across a range of
values:
d_perc = [20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%, 45%]
These percentages were chosen to explore the trade-offs between smaller and larger de-
struction levels.
As briefly discussed in the LNS Tuning above, when the destroy percentage’s value is
low, the algorithm only slightly adjusts the current solution in each iteration. While this
can lead to quick convergence, it poses a risk that the algorithm gets stuck in local optima,
as the search remains limited to a more narrow region of the solution space. On the other
hand, higher values of the parameter allow the algorithm to explore the solution space
more broadly by removing and reinserting a larger number of orders. This increases the
likelihood of escaping local optima but comes at a cost. A higher destroy percentage
stretches the insertion heuristics capabilities, since they are more efficient when reinserting
a smaller number of orders. Beyond a certain point, the quality of the solutions generated
by the insertion phase can decline, as it becomes difficult to reconstruct good solutions
when too many nodes have been removed.
Another consideration is the computational time. As d_perc increases, naturally the al-
gorithm becomes slower because both the removal and reinsertion phases involve more
nodes, leading to longer times per iteration.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
50
==PAGE:58==
d_perc avg. improvement avg. std
0.2
10.43%
1.17%
0.25
11.01%
0.71%
0.3
10.80%
0.76%
0.35
11.34%
0.66%
0.4
11.06%
0.88%
0.45
11.43%
0.66%
Table 7.7: Performance of the algorithm for different values of d_perc.
01B
02
03
05.16
d_perc Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
0.2
7.16%
1.28%
25.82%
0.87%
18.27%
0.34%
3.85%
3.70%
0.25
6.21%
0.88%
27.53%
1.39%
18.49%
0.05%
6.70%
0.79%
0.3
5.26%
0.60%
27.59%
0.38%
18.48%
0.11%
8.16%
0.58%
0.35
6.94%
1.78%
26.91%
1.13%
18.38%
0.23%
7.25%
0.81%
0.4
7.05%
1.69%
26.61%
0.57%
18.19%
0.36%
8.61%
0.72%
0.45
7.27%
1.07%
26.81%
0.64%
18.77%
.30%
8.33%
0.66%
Table 7.8: Parameter d_perc tuning (Part 1).
06.16
08.02.MODIFIED
09
10
d_perc Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
0.2
5.75%
0.19%
6.10%
0.76%
2.32%
0.99%
14.15%
1.24%
0.25
5.68%
0.36%
6.41%
0.14%
3.22%
0.58%
13.84%
1.49%
0.3
4.32%
1.69%
6.39%
0.13%
3.26%
0.44%
12.97%
2.18%
0.35
5.81%
0.39%
6.35%
0.21%
3.60%
0.01%
15.49%
0.69%
0.4
5.61%
0.36%
6.55%
0.00%
3.70%
0.28%
12.18%
3.04%
0.45
5.88%
0.07%
6.47%
0.05%
3.76%
0.21%
14.19%
2.30%
Table 7.9: Parameter d_perc tuning (Part 2).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
51
==PAGE:59==
For the sets 01B, 03, 06.16, and 09, a dperc value of 45% yields the best results. This config-
uration also demonstrates the highest average improvement across all tested instances, as
well as the smallest average standard deviation. Therefore, we selected this configuration
for our analysis.
7.3.4
Segment Size (nseg)
The segment size defines the number of iterations after which the ALNS performance
metrics are updated during the algorithm’s execution. Smaller segment sizes allow for
more frequent updates, potentially improving convergence, while larger segment sizes
reduce computational time but may slow down the responsiveness of the algorithm to
performance changes. Earlier studies have used values such as nseg = 100 as seen in
(Røpke and Pisinger, 2006) or nseg = 50 (Larsen et al., 2019), but no specific justification
for these choices has been provided in the literature. Inspired by these references, we
explored a range of segment sizes to evaluate their impact on the algorithm’s performance.
The tested values are:
nseg = [50, 75, 100, 125, 150]
nseg avg. improvement avg. std
50
14.95%
0.58%
75
15.18%
0.49%
100
15.13%
0.29%
125
15.01%
0.51%
150
15.20%
0.37%
Table 7.10: Summary Statistics for Different seg Values.
01B
02
03
05.16
nseg Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
50
7.57%
1.50%
26.60%
0.79%
18.12%
0.40%
7.77%
0.76%
75
7.82%
1.34%
27.15%
0.50%
18.44%
0.19%
7.98%
0.46%
100
8.20%
0.39%
27.10%
0.31%
18.14%
0.41%
7.93%
0.41%
125
7.65%
1.49%
26.65%
0.17%
18.14%
0.29%
8.09%
0.62%
150
8.26%
0.24%
26.94%
0.75%
18.45%
0.19%
8.26%
0.77%
Table 7.11: Parameter Tuning (Part 1).
For the sets 01B, 03, 05.16, and 08.02.MODIFIED, a nseg of 150 iterations yields the best
results. This configuration also demonstrates the highest average improvement across all
tested instances, Therefore, we selected this configuration for our analysis.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
52
==PAGE:60==
06.16
08.02.MODIFIED
09
10
nseg Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
50
5.43%
0.25%
6.44%
0.10%
3.59%
0.48%
44.09%
0.34%
75
5.63%
0.29%
6.39%
0.13%
3.59%
0.69%
44.46%
0.30%
100
5.52%
0.29%
6.53%
0.02%
3.64%
0.14%
43.97%
0.35%
125
5.53%
0.29%
6.43%
0.10%
3.49%
0.77%
44.13%
0.37%
150
5.57%
0.21%
6.53%
0.03%
3.62%
0.37%
43.97%
0.37%
Table 7.12: Parameter Tuning (Part 2).
7.3.5
Scores (σ)
The initial score values, denoted as σ, are critical for guiding the adaptive mechanisms
of the ALNS algorithm. A commonly used initial setting is σ = [15, 10, 1], as suggested
in the course material on optimization using metaheuristics, that this configuration often
yields good performance. Additionally, (Larsen et al., 2019) used score values of σ =
[25, 15, 5] in their work.
Inspired by these references, the following score configurations were tested in this study:
σ = [[25, 15, 5], [20, 10, 5], [15, 10, 1]]
σ1, σ2, σ3 Avg. Improvement Avg. Std
[15, 10, 1] 11.35%
0.33%
[20, 10, 5] 11.51%
0.37%
[25, 15, 5] 11.57%
0.42%
Table 7.13: Summary Statistics for Different σ1, σ2, σ3 Values.
01B
02
03
05_16
σ1, σ2, σ3 Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
[15, 10, 1]
6.80%
0.36%
26.70%
0.70%
18.21%
0.18%
8.38%
0.50%
[20, 10, 5]
7.74%
0.35%
27.16%
0.72%
18.14%
0.39%
7.90%
0.45%
[25, 15, 5]
7.60%
0.38%
27.19%
1.12%
18.23%
0.33%
8.34%
0.32%
Table 7.14: Parameters σ1, σ2, σ3 Tuning (Part 1).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
53
==PAGE:61==
06_16
08_02 MODIFIED
09
10
σ1, σ2, σ3 Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
[15, 10, 1]
5.42%
0.29%
6.51%
0.02%
3.67%
0.24%
15.10%
0.37%
[20, 10, 5]
5.51%
0.19%
6.44%
0.08%
3.65%
0.29%
15.57%
0.49%
[25, 15, 5]
5.63%
0.28%
6.47%
0.08%
3.67%
0.20%
15.46%
0.61%
Table 7.15: Parameters σ1, σ2, σ3 Tuning (Part 2).
For the sets 02, 03, 06.16, and 09, the configuration of σ = [25, 15, 5] yields the best
results. This combination shows the highest average improvement across all tested in-
stances, hence, it was selected to proceed with our experiments.
7.3.6
Reaction Factor (r)
The reaction factor, denoted as r, plays an essential role in determining how swiftly the
weight adjustment mechanism of the ALNS adapts based on heuristic performance. For
this study, an initial value of r = 0.10 was chosen, inspired by earlier work of Ropke and
(Røpke and Pisinger, 2006) and (Larsen et al., 2019), without justification. The parameter
r controls the sensitivity of the algorithm. If r is set to 0, the scores from heuristics are
ignored, and the weights remain fixed at their initial values. Conversely, if r is set to 1,
the most recent scores entirely dictate the new weights. This allows for a spectrum of
adaptability, depending on the chosen r value. The values tested for r include:
r = [0.10, 0.15, 0.20, 0.25, 0.30, 0.40, 0.50]
r
Avg. Improvement Avg. Std
0.1
11.45%
0.54%
0.15
11.29%
0.53%
0.2
11.40%
0.38%
0.25
11.42%
0.46%
0.3
11.43%
0.55%
0.4
11.75%
0.71%
0.5
11.41%
0.53%
Table 7.16: Summary Statistics for Different r Values
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
54
==PAGE:62==
01B
02
03
05.16
r
Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
0.1
6.70%
1.71%
26.53%
0.67%
18.29%
0.36%
8.69%
0.45%
0.15
6.51%
1.57%
26.68%
0.49%
18.21%
0.44%
8.46%
0.58%
0.2
7.65%
1.06%
26.71%
0.70%
17.88%
0.23%
8.23%
0.48%
0.25
7.32%
1.28%
26.81%
0.61%
18.36%
0.20%
8.33%
0.48%
0.3
6.92%
1.35%
26.83%
1.09%
18.09%
0.33%
8.14%
0.67%
0.4
8.44%
2.29%
27.12%
0.97%
18.31%
0.21%
8.34%
0.68%
0.5
6.70%
1.49%
26.65%
0.46%
17.98%
0.56%
8.74%
0.60%
Table 7.17: Parameter r Tuning (Part 1).
06.16
08.02.MODIFIED
09
10
r
Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
0.1
5.62%
0.29%
6.46%
0.08%
3.62%
0.12%
15.65%
0.64%
0.15
5.64%
0.12%
6.46%
0.09%
3.57%
0.19%
14.75%
0.74%
0.2
5.75%
0.21%
6.51%
0.03%
3.65%
0.11%
14.86%
0.22%
0.25
5.33%
0.14%
6.47%
0.13%
3.73%
0.30%
15.05%
0.52%
0.3
5.62%
0.23%
6.53%
0.02%
3.70%
0.18%
15.60%
0.54%
0.4
5.75%
0.3%
6.43%
0.14%
3.76%
0.33%
15.85%
0.75%
0.5
5.48%
0.21%
6.52%
0.01%
3.78%
0.24%
15.39%
0.66%
Table 7.18: Parameter r Tuning (Part 2).
For the sets 01B, 02, 06.16, and 10 choosing a reaction factor r = 0.4 yields the best
results. On average, it also shows the highest improvement across all tested instances,
and therefore we chose it to proceed with our experiments.
7.3.7
Reheating Mechanism (ν)
Initially, the reheating strategy was not implemented, meaning the search continued with-
out periodic reheating. Effectively, this corresponds to a reheating threshold of ν = ∞,
where the algorithm relied solely on its default exploration and diversification strategies.
All parameter tuning up to this point was conducted under this assumption. Now, we
introduce reheating with finite values of ν to examine whether it improves performance
by preventing stagnation and promoting better solution diversity.
The tested values for ν are:
ν = [750, 1000, 1250, 1500, 2000, ∞]
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
55
==PAGE:63==
Table 7.19 summarizes the performance of the ALNS for different reheating values.
Reheating Gap (ν) Avg. Improvement Avg. Std
750
11.34%
0.64%
1000
11.53%
0.59%
1250
11.41%
0.58%
1500
11.27%
0.56%
2000
11.36%
0.53%
∞
11.39%
0.59%
Table 7.19: Summary Statistics for Different Reheating Values (ν).
01B
02
03
05.16
Reheating Gap (ν) Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
750
6.48%
1.68%
26.49%
1.01%
18.12%
0.30%
8.68%
0.81%
1000
6.92%
1.14%
27.31%
0.90%
18.02%
0.37%
8.66%
0.63%
1250
7.14%
1.48%
26.49%
1.23%
18.19%
0.14%
8.18%
0.54%
1500
6.90%
1.53%
26.63%
0.85%
17.99%
0.25%
8.12%
0.86%
2000
7.83%
1.17%
25.98%
0.88%
18.02%
0.22%
8.68%
0.68%
∞
7.09%
1.01%
26.98%
1.31%
18.02%
0.13%
8.59%
0.71%
Table 7.20: Parameter Reheating Tuning (ν) – Part 1.
06.16
08.02.MODIFIED
09
10
Reheating Gap (ν) Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev Imp. Obj. Std Dev
750
5.69%
0.32%
6.12%
0.14%
3.59%
0.11%
15.53%
0.74%
1000
5.51%
0.35%
6.61%
0.16%
3.86%
0.25%
15.30%
0.93%
1250
5.46%
0.27%
6.44%
0.05%
3.74%
0.21%
15.66%
0.71%
1500
5.22%
0.20%
6.33%
0.10%
3.57%
0.15%
15.44%
0.58%
2000
5.46%
0.29%
6.59%
0.06%
3.67%
0.11%
14.64%
0.85%
∞
5.31%
0.32%
6.68%
0.16%
3.52%
0.22%
14.93%
0.88%
Table 7.21: Parameter Reheating Tuning (ν) – Part 2.
Based on the results, ν = 1000 is selected as it provides, on average, the best improvement
with a relatively low standard deviation.
7.3.8
Summary of Tuning Results
The complete parameter tuning process resulted in the following parameter vector, which
represents the final settings for the ALNS framework used in this study:
(w, ζ, dperc, nseg, σ1, σ2, σ3, r, ν) = (0.01, 0.9995, 0.45, 150, 25, 15, 5, 0.4, 1000)
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
56
==PAGE:64==
In addition, the weights for the objective function components were chosen to be:
(wd, wt, wv) = (0.4, 0.4, 0.2)
Therefore, the results presented in the subsequent chapters of this thesis are based on the
algorithm configured with these parameter settings.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
57
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Results
8.1
Computational Environment
All experiments were conducted on the DTU HPC cluster, utilizing nodes equipped with
Intel Xeon Gold 6226R processors. The computations were run with a single core, with
4GB of memory allocated per core. The job scheduling was managed using the LSF batch
system, and all experiments were executed using Julia 1.10.2. The cluster environment
ensured consistent performance.
8.2
LNS Configuration for Comparison with ALNS
In this section, we aim to compare the performance of the LNS and ALNS implementa-
tions across various scenarios and run times. Additionally, the results will be contrasted
with the AMCS benchmarks (Fast, Normal, Thorough). However, before delving into the
comparison, it is essential to determine the most suitable LNS configuration to maintain
a certain degree of ”fairness” in our evaluation.
8.2.1
Selecting the Best LNS Configuration
To establish a fair ground for comparison for the LNS and ALNS, we first need to de-
termine the best configuration of the LNS. This is crucial because the ALNS approach
incorporates multiple destructors and constructors, dynamically adjusted during execu-
tion. Hence, in order to uphold a baseline for fairness we need to carefully select the LNS
configuration te we will be using for comparison.
We began by selecting the best destructor by evaluating different destruction strategies in
combination with the Cheapest Insertion Constructor (CIC) as a baseline. The destructors
tested include the Random Destructor (RD), which removes nodes randomly, the Best Cost
Destructor (BC), which selects nodes based on their contribution to the overall cost with
some degree of randomness in the process, the Worst Distance Destructor (WD), which
removes nodes contributing the most to total travel distance, the Worst Time Window Wide
Destructor (TWW), which prioritizes nodes with the largest time window violations, and
the Worst Time Window Narrow Destructor (TWN), which targets nodes with smaller
but still significant time window violations. The evaluation was conducted on the usual
tuning set of eight instances, where each combination was tested five times, with each run
lasting ten minutes. The average improvement and standard deviation for each destructor
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
58
==PAGE:66==
are summarized in Table 8.1.
RD
BC
WD
TWW
TWN
Set
Imp.
Std
Imp.
Std
Imp.
Std
Imp.
Std
Imp.
Std
Avg.
6.85% 0.26% 6.64% 0.20% 6.37% 0.22% 6.34% 0.18% 6.43% 0.23%
01B
7.12% 0.28% 6.93% 0.32% 6.05% 0.32% 6.56% 0.22% 6.59% 0.39%
02
13.32% 0.78% 12.71% 0.42% 11.97% 0.54% 12.26% 0.22% 12.43% 0.56%
03
11.39% 0.01% 11.47% 0.03% 11.46% 0.00% 11.47% 0.01% 11.51% 0.00%
05.16
3.22% 0.19% 3.04% 0.10% 3.04% 0.08% 3.07% 0.14% 3.15% 0.14%
06.16
2.46% 0.15% 2.52% 0.09% 2.33% 0.11% 2.17% 0.12% 2.41% 0.11%
08.02.MODIFIED 4.98% 0.17% 4.79% 0.16% 4.90% 0.15% 3.54% 0.24% 3.54% 0.29%
09
1.28% 0.09% 0.68% 0.09% 0.94% 0.03% 0.83% 0.13% 0.89% 0.04%
10
11.04% 0.40% 10.99% 0.39% 10.24% 0.53% 10.82% 0.42% 10.94% 0.28%
Table 8.1: Cheapest Insertion Constructor Performance Across Five LNS Destructor Vari-
ants.
From the results, the Random Destructor (RD) paired with CIC demonstrated the best
average improvement across all instances, making it the optimal destructor choice.
With RD as the selected destructor, we tested three different constructors to determine the
best-performing combination: the Cheapest Insertion Constructor (CIC), the K2-Regret
Constructor, and the K3-Regret Constructor. Table 8.2 shows the results for the combina-
tions of RD with each constructor.
CIC
K2-Regret
K3-Regret
Set
Im.p
Std
Imp.
Std
Imp.
Std
Avg.
6.85%
0.26%
7.04%
0.27%
6.75%
0.24%
01B
7.12%
0.28%
7.21%
0.39%
6.40%
0.29%
02
13.32%
0.78%
13.71%
0.44%
14.04%
0.58%
03
11.39%
0.01%
11.50%
0.03%
11.50%
0.01%
05.16
3.22%
0.19%
3.16%
0.22%
3.39%
0.11%
06.16
2.46%
0.15%
2.47%
0.08%
2.36%
0.12%
08.02.MODIFIED
4.98%
0.17%
5.42%
0.31%
3.62%
0.19%
09
1.28%
0.09%
0.81%
0.11%
0.85%
0.10%
10
11.04%
0.40%
12.07%
0.56%
11.82%
0.51%
Table 8.2: Random Destructor Summary Statistics.
The K2-Regret Constructor achieved the highest average improvement, making it the best
choice for the LNS configuration.
Based on the analysis above, the LNS configuration selected for comparison with the
ALNS consists of the Random Destructor (RD) and the K2-Regret Constructor. With
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
59
==PAGE:67==
the optimal LNS configuration identified, we can now proceed with comparisons against
ALNS under various runtime constraints, evaluating their performance across different
time limits.
8.2.2
Comparison of LNS and ALNS Performance
To compare the LNS with the ALNS, we first settled on the best LNS setup (as described
above) and then we executed the algorithm for 1, 3, and 5-minutes across all instances.
Next, the same approach was applied to the ALNS. This way, we could directly com-
pare their solutions and determine if and by how much ALNS improved over LNS across
different metrics.
The table below presents the average improvement of ALNS over LNS across all in-
stances. A positive percentage means that the ALNS performs better, while a negative
percentage indicates that the LNS performed better.
ALNS vs. LNS (1 min) ALNS vs. LNS (3 min) ALNS vs. LNS (5 min)
Cost
0.94%
0.92%
1.32%
Time
0.61%
0.54%
0.68%
Distance
2.05%
2.18%
1.84%
Table 8.3: Average improvement of ALNS over LNS for different runtimes (5, 3, and 1
minute comparisons).
From this, we see that for a 1-minute runtime, the ALNS tends to produce, on average, a
1.32% better solution than LNS. When both algorithms are given 3 minutes, ALNS is still
better, but the improvement is slightly under 1% (0.92%). Finally, for 5 minutes, ALNS
is still better but with a 0.94% improvement.
Looking at the specific KPIs, we see that the time metric improves by 0.68% for ALNS
over LNS in a 1-minute run, 0.54% for 3 minutes, and 0.61% for 5 minutes. More in-
terestingly, the distance, which is our main priority, is reduced by 1.84% with ALNS in
comparison to LNS for 1 minute, 2.18% for 3 minutes, and 2.05% for 5 minutes.
Overall, this confirms our initial assumption that the ALNS would generally outperform
the LNS. The improvements may not be massive, but they are consistent across different
runtimes.
For full results on all instances, refer to the appendix Appendix C
8.2.3
Comparison of ALNS with AMCS algorithm Performance
Having evaluated the ALNS performance against the LNS, we now proceed to compare the
ALNS with the AMCS algorithm. At AMCS, they carry out the optimization under three
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
60
==PAGE:68==
different modes: Fast, Normal, and Thorough. These modes use significantly different
computation times across instances. For example, in the case of instance 01 Large, the
largest instance in our dataset, the Thorough mode runs for 2336 seconds, while for other
instances, it may run for as little as 1 second. This indicates a highly versatile approach.
For 19 out of the 25 instances, where AMCS results are available, the Thorough mode
produces the shortest distance. For the remaining 6 instances, the Normal mode yields
the shortest distance. However, the difference between the Thorough and Normal mode
solutions in those cases is minimal. One exception is set 6_06, where normal outperforms
thorough by 1.5 kilometers. Despite that fact, and given that the Thorough mode produces
the best results in most cases, we decided to use it as the benchmark for comparison.
We compare our ALNS results for 3, 5, and 20 minutes of runtime against the AMCS
Thorough results. The summarized improvements in KPIs can be seen in the Table 8.4,
while the full detailed results for all instances can be found in the appendix.
AMCS (T) vs. ALNS (3 min) AMCS (T) vs. ALNS (5 min) AMCS (T) vs. ALNS (20 min)
Time
5.80%
5.80%
5.85%
Distance
3.33%
3.61%
3.64%
Table 8.4: Comparison of AMCS (T) with ALNS across different runtimes.
From the table, we observe that the ALNS improves the distance by 3.64% when run for
20 minutes, 3.61% for 5 minutes, and 3.33% for 3 minutes. Similarly, ALNS improves
the total traveled time by 5.85% at 20 minutes, 5.80% at 5 minutes, and 5.80% at 3 min-
utes. These results indicate that our ALNS framework outperforms AMCS in terms of key
optimization metrics, even when run for just 3 minutes.
When it comes to time window constraints, we observe that they are present in 23 out of 25
instances. Our ALNS approach avoids violations completely for 21 out of these 23 cases
for all runtime configurations (3, 5, and 20 minutes). The exceptions are Set 01 Large and
Set 02. Breaking it down further, for Set 01 Large, the 3-minute ALNS run results in an
early violation of 2108 seconds (≈35 minutes) and a late violation of 3392 seconds (≈56
minutes). Yet, both the 5-minute and 20-minute runs eliminate all violations.
For Set 02, the 3-minute run produces an early violation of 825 seconds (≈14 minutes)
and a late violation of 846 seconds (≈14 minutes). With a 5-minute run, these values
decrease to 135 seconds (≈2 minutes) for early violations and 442 seconds (≈7 minutes)
for late violations. When running ALNS for 20 minutes, the early violations are recorded
at 456 seconds (≈8 minutes), while the late violations drop to 235 seconds (≈4 minutes).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
61
==PAGE:69==
Regarding waiting times, the 3-minute ALNS run results in 855 seconds (≈14 minutes)
of waiting, increasing to 1151 seconds (≈19 minutes) for a 5-minute run, and dropping
significantly to just 120 seconds (≈2 minutes) for a 20-minute run.
In all configurations, ALNS outperforms the AMCS output, which results in 2919 seconds
(≈48.65 minutes) of early violations and 3534 seconds (≈58.90 minutes) of late violations
for this instance.
After evaluating the overall performance of ALNS against the AMCS method, we now
highlight some particularly interesting instances where our framework showed significant
improvements over the AMCS approach. Specifically, we focus on Set 3, 8.04, 9, and 10,
as they exhibited notable differences in the chosen KPIs.
Table 8.5 below presents the detailed comparisons for these instances. Each row corre-
sponds to a specific KPI and an Instance, while the columns show the percentage dif-
ferences between AMCS (T) and ALNS for 3, 5, and 20 minutes of runtime. Distance
is illustrated in meters, while time is given in hours, minutes, and seconds (hh:mm:ss).
However, waiting time (wt), early violations (ev), and late violations (lv) are all expressed
in seconds. Lastly, it is important to note how to interpret the last three columns of the
table. If a value is positive for waiting time (wt), early violations (ev), or late violations
(lv), it means that the ALNS method has gained that much time compared to AMCS (T),
i.e., it has reduced the time by that amount. Conversely, a negative value indicates that
ALNS performed worse in that specific metric, increasing the respective KPI compared to
AMCS (T). For a detailed comparison of all instances refer to the appendix Appendix C.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
62
==PAGE:70==
AMCS Results
ALNS Results
AMCS (T) vs ALNS
SET
KPI
F
N
T
5 min
3 min
20 min
3 min
5 min
20 min
01 large
cost
19766
20468
19612
t
11:28:36 10:52:32 10:53:51 11:02:47 11:04:58 11:04:26 -1.70% -1.37% -1.62%
d
74310
69677
67369
72634
72097
71163
-7.02% -7.82% -5.63%
wt
1620
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
127
54
54
0
2108
0
-2054
54
54
lv
0
0
0
0
3392
0
-3392
0
0
2
cost
12144
12102
12053
t
05:36:48 05:27:51 05:34:01 05:31:38 05:31:30 05:33:37 0.75%
0.71%
0.12%
d
78154
74486
74278
73383
73397
73818
1.19%
1.20%
0.62%
wt
120
0
60
855
1151
120
-1091
-795
-60
ev
3382
2955
2919
135
825
456
2094
2784
2463
lv
2259
6931
3534
442
846
235
2688
3092
3299
3
cost
6747
6747
6747
t
05:40:33 05:40:42 05:41:17 03:23:46 03:23:46 03:23:46 40.29% 40.29% 40.29%
d
45036
43265
41921
37680
37680
37680
10.12% 10.12% 10.12%
wt
7560
7860
7980
9541
8877
9541
-897
-1561
-1561
ev
953
944
909
0
0
0
909
909
909
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8.04
cost
5235
5235
5249
t
02:43:44 02:43:10 02:43:09 02:38:31 02:38:31 02:38:11
2.84%
2.84%
3.04%
d
20595
20873
20875
18675
18675
18955
10.54% 10.54% 9.20%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
23
21
36
0
0
0
36
36
36
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
cost
6690
6675
6670
t
06:34:49 06:35:40 06:34:58 04:05:46 04:05:28 04:05:22 37.85% 37.78% 37.88%
d
38058
36841
37212
36877
36508
36380
1.89%
0.90%
2.24%
wt
8880
9000
8940
8739
8573
8739
367
201
201
ev
1933
1882
1924
0
0
0
1924
1924
1924
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
cost
6927
6945
6926
t
06:33:43 06:33:55 06:33:55 04:28:43 04:29:04 04:28:41 31.69% 31.78% 31.79%
d
27334
25326
25326
22788
23228
22757
8.28% 10.02% 10.14%
wt
7260
7380
7380
9364
9498
11108
-2118
-1984
-3728
ev
2995
2893
2893
0
0
0
2893
2893
2893
lv
1195
892
892
0
0
0
892
892
892
Table 8.5: Evaluating ALNS Performance Against AMCS solutions for Selected In-
stances.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
63
==PAGE:71==
For Set 3, we observe that ALNS achieves a distance reduction of 10.12% for a 3-minute
run, 10.78% for a 5-minute run, and 10.29% for a 20-minute run compared to AMCS (T).
Similarly, travel time is reduced by 40.29% across all runtime configurations. Regarding
waiting times, we observe that the ALNS actually results in higher waiting times com-
pared to AMCS (T). More specifically the waiting time for ALNS is 7980 seconds (≈133
minutes), while AMCS (T) had 7860 seconds (≈131 minutes), leading to an increase of
120 seconds (≈2 minutes) for the ALNS. Similarly, for the 5-minute run, waiting time
increases to 9541 seconds (≈159 minutes) and for the 20-minute run, it decreases slightly
to 8877 seconds (≈148 minutes). However, early and late violations are completely re-
moved.
For Set 8.04, ALNS improves distance by 10.54% for both the 3-minute and 5-minute runs,
and by 9.20% for the 20-minute run. The travel time reduction is 2.84% for the 3- and
5-minute runs, and 3.04% for 20 minutes. Again, early and late violations are completely
removed.
For Set 9, ALNS significantly reduces travel time by 37.85% for a 3-minute run, 37.78%
for a 5-minute run, and 37.88% for a 20-minute run. The distance reduction is 1.89%
for 3 minutes and 5 minutes, and 0.90% for 20 minutes. In terms of waiting times, our
approach reduces waiting time by 367 seconds (≈6 minutes) for 3 minutes, 201 seconds
(≈3 minutes) for 5 minutes, and 201 seconds (≈3 minutes) for 20 minutes. Early and
late violations are consistently reduced by 1924 seconds (≈32 minutes) across all runs,
effectively eliminating them in comparison to AMCS (T).
Finally, for Set 10, ALNS improves distance by 8.28% for a 3-minute run, 10.02% for a
5-minute run, and 10.14% for a 20-minute run. Regarding waiting times, ALNS actually
increases waiting time compared to AMCS (T) by 2118 seconds (≈35 minutes) at 3 min-
utes, 1984 seconds (≈33 minutes) at 5 minutes, and 3728 seconds (≈62 minutes) at 20
minutes. For early and late violations, ALNS eliminates all of them, reducing violations
by 2893 seconds (≈48 minutes) for early violations and 892 seconds (≈15 minutes) for
late violations across all runtime configurations.
Overall, we observe that our framework yields improved results in terms of both distance
and traveled time minimization, and adherence to time windows.
8.2.4
Evaluating ALNS Performance Over Extended Runtime
In order to investigate whether providing the ALNS with significantly more time would
yield better solutions, we decided to run the algorithm for an extended period of 3 hours
on selected instances. Theoretically, if the neighborhoods in our search space allow for
full exploration of all feasible solutions, then given enough time, the algorithm should
eventually reach the best possible solutions. However, in practical implementations, the
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
64
==PAGE:72==
rate of improvement often diminishes over time, and the extent of improvement depends
on the structure of the solution space and the efficiency of the search.
Table 8.6 presents the results of running ALNS for 3 hours compared to shorter runs of 3,
5, and 20 minutes. The last three columns show the percentage improvement (or deterio-
ration) of the 3-hour ALNS solution relative to each of the shorter runs.
SET
KPI
ALNS Results
ALNS 3 hrs compared to ALNS in
3 min
5 min
20 min
3 hr
3 min
5 min
20 min
01 large
cost
20468
19766
19612
19424
5.37%
1.76%
0.97%
t
11:04:58 11:02:47 11:04:26 11:17:57 -1.92% -2.24%
-1.99%
d
72097
72634
71163
70934
3.40%
4.17%
2.06%
2
cost
12102
12144
12053
12053
0.40%
0.75%
0.00%
t
05:31:30 05:31:38 05:33:37 05:33:37 -0.63% -0.59%
0.00%
d
73397
73383
73818
73818
-0.57% -0.59%
0.00%
5.13
cost
9116
9167
9186
9109
0.07%
0.64%
0.84%
t
04:47:25 04:48:31 04:48:47 04:47:14 0.06%
0.45%
0.54%
d
46261
46791
47038
46215
0.10%
1.25%
1.78%
7.09
cost
4984
4984
4981
5011
-1.77% -1.77%
-1.38%
t
02:43:21 02:43:21 02:44:00 02:46:18 -0.55% -0.55%
-0.61%
d
27617
27617
27135
26491
4.25%
4.25%
2.43%
Table 8.6: ALNS performance across different runtimes.
Instance 01 Large, the largest in our dataset, already requires a significant amount of com-
putational time. The best solution before extending the runtime was obtained with a 20-
minute run. Running ALNS for 3 hours improved the objective function by 0.97% but
increased traveled time by 1.99%. However, the total traveled distance was reduced by
2.06%. For instance 02, the 3-hour ALNS run produced exactly the same solution as the
20-minute run. Looking at Instance 5.13, we see that previously, the best ALNS result in
terms of the objective function was obtained with the 3-minute run. Extending the run-
time to 3 hours yielded a marginally better solution, decreasing the cost function output
by 7 units (9116 −9109), which corresponds to a 0.07% improvement. Similarly, minor
improvements were observed in the travel time (0.06%) and distance (0.10%). Unlike the
previous cases, instance 7.09 produced an interesting outcome. The 3-hour run resulted
in a higher objective function value compared to all other ALNS runs, which suggests a
worse overall solution. However, the total traveled distance was reduced by 4.25% and
2.43% when compared to the 3-minute and 20-minute runs, respectively.
What becomes apparent is that while extending runtime can sometimes yield better so-
lutions, this is not a consistent trend across all instances. In some cases, improvements
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
65
==PAGE:73==
plateau quickly, while in others, the search actually shifts toward different solutions, given
enough time. However, even when longer runs provide gains, the improvements are of-
ten marginal. Given this, if we were to implement our algorithm in a real-world setting,
we would prioritize efficiency and opt for the ALNS with a 3- or 5-minute runtime, as it
strikes a good balance between solution quality and computational cost.
8.2.5
Analysis of Destroy & Repair Methods in ALNS
A fundamental feature of ALNS is its adaptive mechanism, which dynamically adjusts the
selection probabilities of both destroy and repair methods based on their contributions to
improving the solution or exploring new areas of the search space. Initially, each destroy
method has an equal probability of 20%, and each repair method has an equal probability of
33.3%. These weights evolve over time as the algorithm learns which methods contribute
most effectively to better solutions. The updates occur every 150 iterations (a segment)
based on the performance of each method as described extensively in section 6.
Over time, a clear pattern emerges in the selection of destroy methods. Random Removal
and Worst Cost Removal tend to gain the highest selection weights as the algorithm pro-
gresses, while Time Window-Based Removals typically receive the lowest. Worst Dis-
tance Removal generally falls in between. This trend suggests that the methods most fre-
quently rewarded are also the ones that contribute the most to improved solutions. How-
ever, there are a few cases where this pattern does not hold, and the other removal methods
achieve higher weights. A likely explanation for this behavior is that Random Removal
and Worst Cost Removal introduce a degree of randomness, which helps the algorithm
avoid premature convergence to local optima. This randomness is crucial for ALNS, as
it enables broader exploration of the solution space, increasing the likelihood of discover-
ing high-quality solutions. Without this mechanism, the search could become too greedy,
leading to suboptimal results.
The same adaptive logic applies to the repair methods. With three available repair strate-
gies, each starts with an equal selection probability of 33.3%, and their weights are up-
dated similarly to the destroy methods. The trends observed indicate that repair oper-
ators Regret-K2 and Regret-K3 typically gain higher weights over time, while all three
operators, including Cheapest Insertion, tend to reach similar weight distributions as the
algorithm progresses. In some cases, Cheapest Insertion improves in the later segments.
Through the visuals below, we attempted to illustrate the behavior of both the destroy
and repair methods throughout the algorithm’s execution over a 5-minute runtime. The
first set of graphs shows the evolution of selection probabilities over time, with the x-
axis representing the segments and the y-axis indicating the probability of a method being
selected. The second graph provides a breakdown of the performance of each method.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
66
==PAGE:74==
For destroy methods, the bars represent the number of times a method led to a global best
solution, a worse but unexplored solution, or a just worse solution. For repair methods,
the same three categories are considered. To give a broader view, we picked instances
with different behaviors, including both typical trends and outliers.
Instance 05_17: 83 nodes, 1 TW
Figure 8.1: Comparison of ALNS destructor and constructor method behavior for Instance
05_17.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
67
==PAGE:75==
Instance 06_01: 107 nodes, 3 TW
Figure 8.2: Comparison of ALNS destructor and constructor method behavior for Instance
06_01.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
68
==PAGE:76==
Instance 09: 62 nodes, 4 TW
Figure 8.3: Comparison of ALNS destructor and constructor method behavior for Instance
09.
8.2.6
Convergence Analysis
Convergence in ALNS is evaluated based on when the algorithm first identifies a solution
that is close to the optimal solution obtained. While there may be occasional improvements
beyond this point, they tend to be minor. Therefore, we consider the algorithm to have
converged when the first near-optimal solution is found.
Some instances exhibit rapid convergence. For example, an extreme case is Instance 01A.
Being the smallest instance with no time windows, the algorithm does not improve upon
the initial nearest-neighbor (NN) solution. This is no surprise, as NN based solutions
perform well in small-scale problems without time constraints. By analyzing the results,
we observe that in most cases, convergence might occur within a few iterations, while
in some others it takes a bit longer. However, we consistently observe that a 3-minute
runtime is sufficient for the algorithm to reach convergence.
Another natural observation is that for larger instances (larger number of nodes), iterations
become computationally expensive and hence causing slower convergence. A clear ex-
ample is Instance 01 Large, where the algorithm completes only 16 iterations in 5 minutes,
demonstrating a significantly slower progression. For this case, we provide cost evolution
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
69
==PAGE:77==
plots for both the 5-minute and 4-hour runs to illustrate the slow convergence behavior.
Despite these variations, the general trend indicates that setting a 3-minute runtime is a
reasonable balance for real-world applications, with 5 minutes offering a slight improve-
ment in solution quality.
Below, we present selected instances that exhibit different convergence patterns. Each
instance is represented by a pair of plots. The left plot shows the progression of the ob-
jective function over iterations, with the red line marking the best solution found and the
green line representing accepted solutions. The right plot illustrates the overall cost evo-
lution, displaying only the global best solution at each iteration, providing a clearer view
of convergence over time.
Instance 01 Large: 331 Nodes, 4 TW (5-Minute Run)
Figure 8.4: Cost evolution for Instance 01 Large (5 min).
Instance 01 Large: 331 Nodes, 4 TW (4-Hour Run)
Figure 8.5: Cost evolution for Instance 01 Large (4 hours).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
70
==PAGE:78==
Instance 08_03: 87 Nodes, 1 TW
Figure 8.6: Cost evolution for Instance 08_03.
Instance 01D: 171 Nodes, 0 TW
Figure 8.7: Cost evolution for Instance 01D.
Instance 01A: 24 Nodes, 0 TW
Figure 8.8: Cost evolution for Instance 01A.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
71
==PAGE:79==
The graphs for all instances were originally intended to be included in the appendix. How-
ever, due to the extensive space required, they are instead provided in a separate folder
along with the thesis submission files.1
1The full set of visualizations can be found in the supplementary materials included in the submission
folder.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
72
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 9
Discussion
9.1
Discussion on Deterministic Removal Heuristics
In Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS), the removal operator plays a crucial
role in diversifying the search by introducing perturbations to the current solution. How-
ever, three of the destroy operators we used in this study (Worst Distance Removal, Worst
TW Removal (Narrow) and Worst TW Removal (Wide)) are fully deterministic, as they
always remove nodes based on strict sorting criteria. While this ensures that the method
consistently prioritizes nodes with the intended characteristics, it also means that the same
nodes are repeatedly removed in similar solutions. This lack of randomness hinders the
intended diversification effect of the removal operator, limiting the search’s ability to ex-
plore alternative configurations effectively.
Introducing an element of stochasticity, similar to the one used in Worst Removal heuris-
tic, could enhance these methods by allowing occasional deviations from strict sorting.
For example, instead of always removing the nodes with the narrowest or widest time
windows, a probabilistic selection mechanism could be applied, where the probability of
removal decreases as one moves down the sorted list. This would prevent the heuristic
from following the same deterministic patterns while still prioritizing problematic nodes.
This limitation is reflected in the analysis of the performance of destruction and repair
mechanisms, where all 3 heuristics tend to yield inferior results compared to more stochas-
tic removal methods. As a result, these heuristics typically receive smaller weights in the
ALNS adaptive weight adjustment mechanism, reinforcing the need for a more stochastic
approach in future implementations.
9.2
Start Time
Determining the starting time of a route is an important step in ensuring feasibility and
minimizing unnecessary waiting. Several approaches can be used, including earliest fea-
sible arrival, latest feasible departure, and Linear Programming (LP). Besides choosing a
method, another important choice is when to determine the starting time within the ALNS
process. It can be handled after ALNS as a post-processing step, determined after each
repair mechanism, or integrated within the repair mechanism.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
73
==PAGE:81==
9.2.1
Based on the Earliest Feasible Arrival
A simple way to determine the starting time can be based on the first node in the route.
This method takes a starting time that is the latest possible departure from the depot and
still arrive exactly at the opening of the first node’s time window. Mathematically, this
corresponds to subtracting the travel time from the depot to the first node from the start
of the first node’s time window. However, if this calculated starting time violates the time
window constraints of the depot, the departure is instead set to the earliest feasible time,
which is when the depot opens. This approach mitigates excessive waiting times at the
first node, which can occur when the depot operates continuously and the default departure
time is set to its opening time.
This method is simple but suffers from a very notable drawback. It does not take into
consideration the time windows of the succeeding nodes in the route, perhaps leading to
higher violations in a later part of the schedule. Hence, although it may remove some
unnecessary idle time early in the route, it could actually increase total violation time.
9.2.2
Based on the Latest Feasible Departure
Another approach could be a just-in-time strategy that works its way backwards from the
last node in the route to compute a start time. The process starts by taking the latest possible
arrival at the final node within its time window and then iteratively adjusts the time for each
preceding node. In this approach, the entire route is taken into consideration to determine
the starting time. Unlike the earliest feasible arrival method, which only considers the
first node in the route, this approach minimizes the risk of ripple effects that could lead
to violations further along the route. However, results indicate that violations are not the
primary issue but that waiting time contributes more significantly to the objective. By
accounting for all time windows along the route, this method ensures a well-balanced
schedule with fewer unnecessary delays.
A disadvantage of the latest feasible departure is that it increases computational complex-
ity. As all nodes have to execute some calculation, this approach determines the best
time to start at the expense of longer processing, making it potentially less suitable for
large-scale problems.
9.2.3
LP
The LP model minimizes violation and waiting times by considering every node in the
route. Unlike the earliest feasible arrival method and the latest feasible departure method,
the LP takes a more structured approach. It optimizes the starting time while ensuring that
adjustments do not negatively impact other time windows along the route. However, the
results show that the LP has little to no effect on violation time in most instances, as the
total violation time is already zero after the ALNS phase. Instead, its primary function is
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
74
==PAGE:82==
to refine the departure time from the depot to reduce unnecessary waiting before the first
node’s time window opens. While this is similar to the earliest feasible arrival method,
there are key differences that justify using the LP.
One advantage of the LP is that it considers the entire route when adjusting the starting
time, preventing potential ripple effects that could lead to new violations later in the route.
Moreover, the LP allows more flexibility in fine-tuning the schedule to minimize waiting
time optimally rather than depending on a fixed heuristic. When ALNS is not guaranteed
to provide a perfectly feasible solution, the LP can make slight refinements to decrease
the remaining violations further.
That being said, if the LP’s only effect is adjusting the waiting time before the first node,
its added complexity may not always be justified. While it provides a more robust opti-
mization, it may not significantly improve the earliest feasible arrival method in practice.
9.2.4
Integration with ALNS
After the ALNS
Each of the three methods for determining the starting time could have been integrated into
the solution process in different ways. The key consideration is when this decision should
be made in relation to the ALNS. In the current model, the starting time is determined
after the ALNS has been completed, meaning that the route is first fully constructed before
the starting time is optimized. This approach significantly reduces computational effort,
allowing the ALNS to focus entirely on finding the best possible route without additional
complexity from time-based adjustments.
This post-processing approach has some drawbacks. One potential issue is its impact on
the ALNS repair mechanisms. All repair mechanisms rely on the objective function to
evaluate insertion costs and determine the best positions for new nodes. Since violations
are present during the ALNS process, the starting time directly influences their location
and magnitude. If the starting time is only optimized afterward, the ALNS may reject
solutions that appear costly due to violations but would have been significantly improved
once the starting time was properly adjusted. This means a potentially better solution
might not be accepted simply because the ALNS does not account for how much the cost
could improve once the starting time is determined. Depending on the method used to find
the starting time, this could result in missed opportunities where a solution that initially
appears suboptimal is actually superior once fully optimized. Therefore, balancing com-
putational efficiency with solution quality is a key consideration when deciding whether
to integrate the starting time decision within ALNS or handle it separately afterward.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
75
==PAGE:83==
After the Repair Mechanism
Another option is to determine the starting time immediately after the repair mechanism
before the cost of the solution is calculated. This way, the optimal starting time for the
route is considered when the ALNS evaluates whether the new solution should be ac-
cepted. By integrating the starting time adjustment at this stage, the risk of rejecting so-
lutions that are actually better is eliminated, as their true cost is properly assessed before
comparison.
However, the relevance of this approach depends on several factors. Since the ALNS
stopping criterion is time-based, adding a computation step at each iteration reduces the
number of solutions explored within the given time. This could lead to a less diverse
search, potentially resulting in a worse final solution. On the other hand, it might also
steer the search toward a different part of the solution space, leading to a better solution
closer to the optimum.
The effectiveness of this approach also depends on the problem characteristics and the re-
sults observed. Many of the instances analyzed in this thesis resulted in zero violations by
the end of the ALNS. In these cases, adjusting the starting time only affects waiting time,
which could be handled as a post-processing step rather than at each iteration. However,
earlier iterations may include solutions with violations that could benefit from having the
starting time determined during ALNS rather than afterward. The impact of this decision
is also dependent on the method used to determine the starting time. For example, the
earliest feasible arrival method does not actively reduce violations, making its integration
at each iteration less valuable. The other approaches could have a more significant impact
when applied earlier.
During the Repair Mechanism
The final option is to determine the starting time directly within the repair mechanism
before calculating the cost of the solution. Since all repair mechanisms rely on the cost
function to determine the best insertion positions, incorporating the starting time adjust-
ment at this stage would ensure that every new insertion is evaluated with the most accurate
possible cost.
This approach would, however, significantly increase the computational complexity since
the starting time would have to be recomputed for every insertion. As the ALNS already
performs a wide range of evaluations at every step, adding more computation to this will
slow down the search process and thus reduce the number of solutions that can be explored
within available time.
Once again, the earliest feasible arrival method would have minimal impact in this con-
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
76
==PAGE:84==
text, as it only considers the first node and does not actively minimize violations. More
advanced methods that account for the entire route could provide a greater benefit, but
the trade-off between improved cost accuracy and increased computational effort must be
carefully considered.
In the model implemented in this thesis, the LP-based approach determines the starting
time after ALNS has been completed. This decision was made to keep computational ef-
fort as low as possible, allowing ALNS to focus entirely on finding the best possible route
without any additional complications. While integrating the starting time earlier could lead
to more accurate cost evaluations, it would also reduce the number of solutions explored
within the given time. The LP-based method was chosen because it minimizes violation
and waiting time while ensuring feasibility. The LP approach, in combination with the
placement in ALNS, provides a good balance between solution quality and computational
efficiency.
9.3
External Factors
One of the biggest things that this current model does not consider is how external factors
might influence it, such as congestion, weather conditions, and other unforeseen delays.
In real-world applications, these factors can significantly impact travel times and, conse-
quently, the feasibility and efficiency of the generated routes. However, for the purposes
of this thesis, deterministic travel times based on predefined distances have been assumed
without accounting for variability caused by such external conditions.
9.3.1
Weather Conditions
AMCS has its headquarters in Ireland with offices in Europe, the USA, and Australasia
(AMCS Group, n.d.-a). This means that their clients are experiencing completely dif-
ferent weather conditions based on the time of year and geographical location. Weather
conditions can significantly affect travel times and the feasibility of routes in real-world
applications. Heavy rain, snow, ice, fog, and strong winds reduce vehicle speed, lower
road capacity, and increase the likelihood of unpredictable delays. These conditions are
especially true for areas with severe seasonable weather conditions that can lead to a sig-
nificant deviation from a scheduled plan.
Neglecting to consider the weather’s impact could lead to suboptimal routing decisions,
especially for those vehicles scheduled to make deliveries within narrow time windows.
For example, icy roads may slow travel speed below what was expected and hence make
them late, spreading through the day as the subsequent deliveries also become late. Sim-
ilarly, reduced visibility during foggy conditions can impact driver performance, further
affecting on-time arrival rates.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
77
==PAGE:85==
9.3.2
Traffic
Another critical factor is traffic congestion, which affects the travel time and reliability
of a planned route. Unlike weather conditions, which vary seasonally, traffic patterns
fluctuate daily and are affected by factors such as rush hours, road incidents, construction
work, and special events. Cities are prone to congestion, especially during peak hours
when the capacity on the road network is strained. This can lead to significant delays. On
the other hand, in rural regions, alternative routes may be scarce, and detours can become
more disruptive.
Failing to consider traffic-related disruptions can result in unrealistic route planning, es-
pecially for time-sensitive deliveries. A route that appears optimal under static conditions
may become impractical if vehicles encounter heavy congestion.
9.3.3
Unexpected Delays
In addition to weather and traffic conditions, unexpected delays can further disrupt planned
routes and impact delivery schedules. These are caused by fairly unpredictable events, in-
cluding accidents along traffic paths, sudden road closures, mechanical malfunction, and
even regulatory checks. Unlike recurring patterns in weather and traffic, these disrup-
tions are unpredictable and can occur at any time, making them particularly challenging
to account for in route planning.
While weather conditions, traffic congestion, and unexpected delays all influence real-
world routing, their actual impact on the solution quality depends on the specific problem
context. The extent to which these factors affect route feasibility is primarily determined
by the distances traveled and the nature of the road network. If vehicles only cover short
distances between nodes, where travel time is measured in seconds or a few minutes,
the effects of traffic, weather, or unexpected disruptions may be negligible. In such cases,
adding external factors would unnecessarily complicate the model without much improve-
ment. Thus, whether these elements are worth modeling depends on the problem’s nature
and potential trade-offs between solution quality and complexity.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
78
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to develop a solution method for the problem of Sequence
Building with Narrow Time Windows. This problem can be formulated as a Traveling
Salesman Problem with Time Windows (TSPTW), a well-known combinatorial optimiza-
tion problem that seeks the shortest route between a set of locations while adhering to
given time constraints. Unlike traditional formulations that focus primarily on minimiz-
ing travel time, the objective here was to minimize a weighted cost function that accounts
for total travel distance, duration, and time window violations.
Given the NP-complete nature of TSPTW, we opted for a metaheuristic approach from the
start, as exact methods were infeasible due to complexity and runtime constraints.
We initially implemented a Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) algorithm, using a random
destructor and a cheapest insertion repair heuristic, with the initial solution generated by
a nearest-neighbor heuristic. To start the optimization process, we had to first decide on
the objective and constraints. Since the problem was not strictly formulated, we decided
to allow soft time windows, meaning both early and late violations were permitted but
penalized in a multi-objective function.
The next key decision was determining the weight configuration for the objective function.
Since the client prioritizes minimizing total travel distance over reducing waiting times or
total travel duration, we experimented with different weight settings in the LNS. Initially,
we started with an intuitive weight configuration and tuned the LNS parameters. Once
the LNS parameters were tuned, we revisited the weight tuning process, leading to the
adoption of an alternative configuration that produced superior results.
Initial comparisons of LNS results with AMCS benchmarks showed that the LNS alone
did not perform well enough. To improve the framework, we introduced a 2-swap move
and a 2-opt move. Both significantly enhanced solution quality, but the 2-swap move
consistently outperformed the 2-opt, so we incorporated it into the framework. Then, to
further improve solution quality, we developed an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
(ALNS) framework that integrated the 2-swap move. The parameter tuning for both the
LNS and the ALNS was conducted systematically, tuning one parameter at a time and
fixing it before moving on to the next. This process was carried out on a set of eight
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
79
==PAGE:87==
selected instances.
Once the framework was optimized, we first compared LNS and ALNS across different
runtimes using the best LNS configuration. As expected, the ALNS consistently outper-
formed the LNS across nearly all instances and runtimes. We then compared the ALNS
results to the benchmarks provided by the AMCS’s Thorough mode, which typically yields
the best solutions. The results showed that for a 3-minute runtime, the ALNS achieved an
average improvement of 3.33% in total travel distance and 5.8% in total travel time com-
pared to AMCS’s algorithm. When extending the runtime to 5 or 20 minutes, the distance
gain improved even further to an average of 3.61%. Additionally, time window violations
and waiting times were either lower or remained the same on average across all instances.
Another interesting aspect of the problem was that the start time of the route was not
predefined. This flexibility meant that adjusting the start time could have a significant
impact on the solution, particularly in reducing waiting times. To incorporate this, we
developed an LP model that optimizes the start time after the ALNS completes its route
construction. This additional step further reduced waiting times and improved overall
feasibility.
To better understand the behavior of the ALNS, we analyzed which destroy and repair
methods contributed the most to improving solution quality. This analysis helped identify
the most effective operators, providing insights that could be used to refine the framework
in future work.
Several avenues exist for further improvements. One potential enhancement is expanding
the set of destroy and repair operators to explore a larger portion of the solution space.
Another possibility is integrating the route start time decision directly into the ALNS,
rather than applying it post-optimization, which could yield more efficient solutions. Ad-
ditionally, more extensive parameter tuning, where all parameters are optimized jointly
rather than sequentially, could improve overall performance. Finally, exploring alterna-
tive objective functions may allow for better trade-offs between total travel distance, travel
duration, and time window adherence.
Overall, this thesis successfully developed a solution method that produces feasible so-
lutions for all given instances within a reasonable runtime. Furthermore, the ALNS not
only finds feasible solutions but in most cases improves them beyond the provided bench-
marks. The methodology strikes a balance between computational efficiency and solution
quality, making it a viable approach for real-world applications.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
80
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
AMCS Group. (n.d.-a). About amcs [Accessed: 26 January 2025]. https://www.amcsgroup.
com/about-amcs/
AMCS Group. (n.d.-b). Amcs official website [Accessed: 26 January 2025]. https : / /
www.amcsgroup.com/
AMCS Group. (n.d.-c). Route planner software [Accessed: 26 January 2025]. https://
www.amcsgroup.com/solutions/route-planner/
Applegate, D. L., Bixby, R. E., Chvátal, V., & Cook, W. J. (2006). The traveling sales-
man problem: Implementation, application, and computation. Proceedings of the
International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM), 369–387.
Applegate, D. L., Bixby, R. E., Chvátal, V., & Cook, W. J. (2007). The traveling salesman
problem: A computational study. Princeton University Press.
Bowes, P. (2023). 2023 global parcel shipping index [Accessed: 2025-01-24]. https://
www.pitneybowes.com/content/dam/pitneybowes/us/en/shipping-index/
23-mktc-03596-2023_global_parcel_shipping_index_ebook-web.pdf
Budak, G., & Chen, X. (2020). Evaluation of the size of time windows for the travelling
salesman problem in delivery operations [Accessed: January 2025]. ResearchGate.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342337333_Evaluation_of_
the_size_of_time_windows_for_the_travelling_salesman_problem_in_
delivery_operations
Chen, M., Gao, L., Chen, Q., & Liu, Z. (2020). Dynamic partial removal: A neural network
heuristic for large neighborhood search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09330.
Christofides, N. (1976). Worst-case analysis of a new heuristic for the traveling salesman
problem. Management Science, 20(4), 497–504.
Clarke, G., & Wright, J. W. (1964). Scheduling of vehicles from a central depot to a number
of delivery points. Operations Research, 12(4), 568–581. https://doi.org/10.
1287/opre.12.4.568
Dantzig, G. B., Fulkerson, D. R., & Johnson, S. M. (1954). Solution of a large-scale
traveling-salesman problem. Operations Research, 2(4), 393–410.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
81
==PAGE:89==
Deb, K. (2001). Multi-objective optimization using evolutionary algorithms. John Wiley
Sons.
Diana, M., & Dessouky, M. M. (2004). A new regret insertion heuristic for solving large-
scale dial-a-ride problems with time windows. Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological, 38(6), 539–557.
Dorigo, M., & Gambardella, L. M. (1997). Ant colonies for the traveling salesman prob-
lem. BioSystems, 43(2), 73–81.
Gendreau, M., Hertz, A., & Laporte, G. (1998). A tabu search heuristic for the vehicle
routing problem with time windows. Transportation Science, 31(2), 127–140.
Gendreau, M., & Potvin, J.-Y. (2008). Metaheuristics in vehicle routing. Handbook of
Metaheuristics, 143–169.
Golinska-Dawson, P., & Kolinski, A. (2019). Adaptive large neighborhood search for
a production planning problem arising in pig farming. Journal of Open Innova-
tion: Technology, Market, and Complexity, 5(2), 26. https://doi.org/10.3390/
joitmc5020026
Gutjahr, M., Parragh, S. N., & Tricoire, F. (2023). Adaptive large neighborhood search for
a personnel task scheduling problem with task selection and parallel task assign-
ments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04494. https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04494
He, Y., Zheng, S., & Wang, W. (2022). Adaptive large neighborhood search for solving the
vehicle routing problem: A comprehensive review and classification. Computers
& Operations Research, 140, 105707.
Kallehauge, B., Larsen, J., & Madsen, O. B. G. (2005). Time window constrained routing
and scheduling problems—a classification and review. Computers & Operations
Research, 32(6), 1566–1582.
Karp, R. M. (1972). Reducibility among combinatorial problems, 85–103.
Kohl, N., & Madsen, O. B. (1997). An optimization algorithm for the vehicle routing
problem with time windows based on lagrangean relaxation. Operations Research,
45(2), 395–406.
Larsen, J., Perumal, S. S., Lusby, R. M., Riis, M., & Sørensen, K. S. (2019). A matheuristic
for the driver scheduling problem with staff cars. European Journal of Operational
Research, 275(1), 280–294.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
82
==PAGE:90==
Lü, Z., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2010). A simulated annealing heuristic for the vehicle routing
problem with time windows. Computers & Operations Research, 37(2), 213–226.
Marler, R. T., & Arora, J. S. (2010). The weighted sum method for multi-objective op-
timization: New insights. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 41(6),
853–862. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00158-009-0460-7
Miettinen, K., Hakanen, J., & Podkopaev, D. (2016). Interactive nonlinear multiobjective
optimization methods. In Handbook of metaheuristics (pp. 927–976). Springer.
Molenbruch, Y., Berghe, P. V., & Caris, A. (2014). The real-time multi-objective vehi-
cle routing problem – case study: Information availability and the quality of the
result [Accessed: January 2025]. ResearchGate. https : / / www . researchgate .
net/publication/262283685_The_Real-Time_Multi-Objective_Vehicle_
Routing_Problem_-_Case_Study_Information_Availability_and_the_
Quality_of_the_Result
Pereira, F., Fernandes, L., & Coelho, L. d. S. (2023). Features that a meta-heuristic must
possess in order to succeed in a mop [Accessed: January 2025]. ResearchGate.
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Features-that-a-meta-heuristic-must-
possess-in-order-to-succeed-in-a-MOP-Pereira-et_fig1_370609338
Pisinger, D., & Ropke, S. (2007a). An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic (tech.
rep.) (Accessed: 2025-01-30). Technical University of Denmark (DTU). https:
//backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/files/5293785/Pisinger.pdf
Pisinger, D., & Ropke, S. (2007b). An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the
pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Science, 41(4),
455–472.
Pisinger, D., & Røpke, S. (2010). Large neighborhood search. In Handbook of metaheuris-
tics (pp. 399–419). Springer.
Reijnen, R., Zhang, Y., Lau, H. C., & Bukhsh, Z. (2024). Online control of adaptive large
neighborhood search using deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2211.00759
Røpke, S., & Pisinger, D. (2006). An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the
pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Science, 40(4),
455–472.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
83
==PAGE:91==
Saller, J., Koehler, K., & Karrenbauer, A. (2023). A systematic review of approximability
results for traveling salesman problems leveraging the tsp-t3co definition scheme.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00604. https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.00604
Shaw, P. (1993). A new local search algorithm providing high quality solutions to vehicle
routing problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 66(3), 331–340.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(93)90331-K
Shaw, P. (1998). Using constraint programming and local search methods to solve ve-
hicle routing problems. International Conference on Principles and Practice of
Constraint Programming, 417–431.
Solomon, M. M. (1987). Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems with
time window constraints. Operations Research, 35(2), 254–265.
Song, J., Lanka, R., Yue, Y., & Dilkina, B. (2020). A general large neighborhood search
framework for solving integer linear programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00422.
Stewart, R. H., Palmer, T. S., & DuPont, B. (2021). A survey of multi-objective optimiza-
tion methods and their applications for nuclear scientists and engineers. Progress in
Nuclear Energy, 135, 103705. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2021.103705
van den Berg, J., van Woensel, T., & Morales, N. R. (2013). The time-dependent vehicle
routing problem with soft time windows and stochastic travel times. Eindhoven
University of Technology - Technical Report. https://pure.tue.nl/ws/files/
3549424/56494172410696.pdf
Vempala, S., & Goyal, V. (2015). How well does the christofides heuristic perform? arXiv
preprint arXiv:1506.07776.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
84
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER A
Overview of Data
Table A.1 shows an overview of the different instances received from AMCS. The infor-
mation includes the name, the number of nodes, and the number of narrow time windows
in the set.
Set
Nodes
TW
Set
Nodes
TW
Set
Nodes
TW
1A
24
No TW 5_17
83
1
7_07
11
2
1B
63
No TW 5_18
100
No TW 7_08
124
6
1C
140
No TW 6_01
107
3
7_09
70
No TW
1D
171
No TW 6_02
110
1
7_09_modified
70
6
01_Large
331
4
6_03
114
3
7_10
120
5
2
102
14
6_04
110
1
7_11
107
No TW
3
82
6
6_05
110
6
7_11_modified
107
5
4A
95
No TW 6_06
100
2
7_12
116
11
4B
95
No TW 6_07
88
3
7_12_modified
116
4
5_01
122
1
6_08
91
1
7_13
104
3
5_02
98
2
6_09
97
3
7_14
113
7
5_03
107
2
6_10
77
7
7_15
78
2
5_04
103
1
6_11
86
2
7_16
70
No TW
5_05
122
1
6_12
104
6
7_16_modified
70
7
5_06
106
No TW 6_13
106
2
7_17
110
6
5_07
131
No TW 6_14
100
3
8_01
112
No TW
5_08
127
1
6_15
80
1
8_01_modified
112
20
5_09
156
1
6_16
87
1
8_02
102
No TW
5_10
128
2
7_01
89
2
8_02_modified
102
21
5_11
125
1
7_02
142
1
8_03
87
1
5_12
96
3
7_03
132
13
8_04
89
1
5_13
136
1
7_03_modified
132
3
9
62
4
5_14
105
3
7_04
108
1
10
43
6
5_15
125
1
7_05
118
2
5_16
189
2
7_06
144
2
Table A.1: Overview of AMCS instances with their number of nodes and time window
constraints.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
85
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER B
Route Development
The following figures show how the route develops during the ALNS. The first figures in
each section (Figure B.1, B.5 and B.9) show the initial solution inserted into the ALNS.
While the following figures in each section gives a view of what the solution looks like
after 1 minute (Figure B.2, B.6 and B.10), 8 minutes (Figure B.3, B.7 and B.11) and then
finally after 20 minutes (Figure B.4, B.8 and B.12).
B.1
Set 05-09
Figure B.1: Initial route solution.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
86
==PAGE:94==
Figure B.2: Route solution after running the ALNS for 1 minute. Best cost is 9959.047, with a
distance of 32706 meters and a total time of 19992 seconds. This route have 0 waiting time and 0
violations on the time windows.
Figure B.3: Route solution after running the ALNS for 8 minute. Best cost is 9856.029, with a
distance of 31480 meters and a total time of 19918 seconds. This route have 0 waiting time and 0
violations on the time windows.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
87
==PAGE:95==
Figure B.4: Route solution after running the ALNS for 20 minute. Best cost is 9905.06, with a
distance of 32355 meters and a total time of 19910 seconds. This route have 0 waiting time and 0
violations on the time windows.
B.2
Set 05-15
The depot is the only node not seen in the visuals of the set. This is since the depot is
located so far from the other nodes, so getting a good look at the route changes would be
close to impossible.
Figure B.5: Initial route solution.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
88
==PAGE:96==
Figure B.6: Route solution after running the ALNS for 1 minute. Best cost is 7347.014, with a
distance of 33916 meters and a total time of 14058 seconds. This route have 0 waiting time and 0
violations on the time windows.
Figure B.7: Route solution after running the ALNS for 8 minute. Best cost is 7323.075, with a
distance of 33747 meters and a total time of 14021 seconds. This route have 0 waiting time and 0
violations on the time windows.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
89
==PAGE:97==
Figure B.8: Route solution after running the ALNS for 20 minute. Best cost is 7317.073, with a
distance of 33715 meters and a total time of 14010 seconds. This route have 0 waiting time and 0
violations on the time windows.
B.3
Set 07-08
The depot is the only node not seen in the visuals of the set. This is since the depot is
located so far from the other nodes, so getting a good look at the route changes would be
close to impossible.
Figure B.9: Initial route solution.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
90
==PAGE:98==
Figure B.10: Route solution after running the ALNS for 1 minute. Best cost is 11756.071, with a
distance of 85125 meters and a total time of 16901 seconds. This route have 0 waiting time and 0
violations on the time windows.
Figure B.11: Route solution after running the ALNS for 8 minute. Best cost is 11723.07, with a
distance of 84838 meters and a total time of 16859 seconds. This route have 0 waiting time and 0
violations on the time windows.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
91
==PAGE:99==
Figure B.12: Route solution after running the ALNS for 20 minute. Best cost is 11714.011, with
a distance of 84590 meters and a total time of 16873 seconds. This route have 0 waiting time and
0 violations on the time windows.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
92
==PAGE:100==
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
93
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER C
Results
AMCS Results
ALNS Results
AMCS (T) vs ALNS
SET KPI
F
N
T
5 min
3 min
20 min
3 min
5 min 20 min
6.01
cost
6239
6218
6191
t
03:36:56 03:34:29 03:34:28 03:37:04 03:35:23 03:34:44 -0.43% -1.21% -0.12%
d
23598
23022
23022
22711
23130
22868
-0.47% 1.35%
0.67%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
33
58
50
0
0
0
50
50
50
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.02
cost
6305
6299
6317
t
03:37:29 03:36:43 03:35:57 03:34:07 03:34:01 03:34:13 0.90%
0.85%
0.80%
d
28793
28219
28300
26454
26368
26662
6.83%
6.52%
5.79%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
49
48
34
0
0
0
34
34
34
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.03
cost
6500
6593
6506
t
03:48:25 03:46:00 03:48:04 03:45:17 03:47:10 03:45:18 0.39%
1.22%
1.21%
d
25322
24079
24353
23455
24492
23573
-0.57% 3.69%
3.20%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
47
58
19
0
0
0
19
19
19
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.04
cost
8495
8495
8498
t
04:08:39 04:07:45 04:07:45 04:06:57 04:06:57 04:07:25 0.32%
0.32%
0.13%
d
32797
32574
32574
31798
31798
31694
2.38%
2.38%
2.70%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
7
2
2
0
0
0
2
2
2
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.05
cost
6031
6032
6374
t
03:31:14 03:31:38 03:30:56 03:27:23 03:27:31 03:27:19 1.62%
1.68%
1.71%
d
22928
21777
21525
20242
20187
20131
6.22%
5.96%
6.48%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
14
18
10
0
0
0
10
10
10
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.06
cost
6762
6768
10980
t
03:31:00 03:27:43 03:30:01 03:27:32 03:27:36 03:27:32 1.15%
1.18%
1.18%
d
27516
25684
27106
25637
25697
25637
5.20%
5.42%
5.42%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
49
24
55
0
0
0
55
55
55
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.07
cost
8610
8545
8545
t
03:56:09 03:54:29 03:54:29 03:54:27 03:52:50 03:52:50 0.70%
0.01%
0.70%
d
53773
53445
53445
51198
50754
50754
5.04%
4.20%
5.04%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
56
19
19
0
0
0
19
19
19
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.08
cost
8476
8479
8472
t
04:28:43 04:22:23 04:22:23 04:22:07 04:22:28 04:21:48 -0.03% 0.10%
0.22%
d
54004
50344
50344
49659
49543
49730
1.59%
1.36%
1.22%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
6
51
51
0
0
0
51
51
51
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.1: Evaluating ALNS Performance Against AMCS solutions for Instances 6.01 to
6.08.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
94
==PAGE:102==
AMCS Results
ALNS Results
AMCS (T) vs ALNS
SET KPI
F
N
T
5 min
3 min
20 min
3 min
5 min 20 min
6.09
cost
9429
9429
9466
t
04:21:58 04:24:33 04:20:39 04:20:08 04:20:08 04:19:20 0.20% 0.20%
0.51%
d
56892
59107
57017
53845
53845
54798
5.56% 5.56%
3.89%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
42
60
24
0
0
0
24
24
24
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.10
cost
8684
8684
8738
t
03:42:14 03:42:43 03:42.43 03:41:44 03:41:44 03:42:22 0.44% 0.44%
0.16%
d
59799
59756
59756
57538
57538
58199
3.71% 3.71%
2.61%
w
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
23
45
45
0
0
0
45
45
45
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.11
cost
7160
7158
7158
t
03:27:32 03:25:39 03:25:24 03:25:34 03:25:05 03:25:05 0.15% -0.08% 0.15%
d
30158
28997
28599
28108
28222
28222
1.32% 1.72%
1.32%
w
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
21
55
14
0
0
0
14
14
14
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.12
cost
6041
6083
5990
t
03:32:42 03:28:47 03:28:11 03:27:00 03:27:49 03:25:37 0.18% 0.57%
1.23%
d
23472
22115
21873
20351
20770
20001
5.04% 6.96%
8.56%
w
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
23
5
38
0
0
0
38
38
38
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.13
cost
11864
11864
11864
t
04:46:36 04:40:36 04:41:55 04:40:35 04:40:35 04:40:35 0.47% 0.47%
0.47%
d
69799
69194
69523
69192
69192
69192
0.48% 0.48%
0.48%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
19
3
44
0
0
0
44
44
44
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.14
cost
6699
6699
6699
t
03:30:02 03:27:54 03:27:54 03:27:32 03:27:32 03:27:32 0.18% 0.18%
0.18%
d
28469
26726
26726
26636
26636
26636
0.34% 0.34%
0.34%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
33
55
55
0
0
0
55
55
55
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.15
cost
5118
5118
5119
t
02:45:33 02:43:48 02:44:30 02:42:23 02:42:23 02:42:56 1.29% 1.29%
0.95%
d
24552
23999
24279
23079
23079
22845
4.94% 4.94%
5.91%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
58
4
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.16
cost
7598
7577
7598
t
04:03:52 04:04:29 04:03:50 04:04:19 04:03:38 04:04:19 0.08% -0.20% -0.20%
d
52210
52918
52212
52173
52008
52173
0.39% 0.07%
0.07%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
24
52
52
0
0
0
52
52
52
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.2: Evaluating ALNS Performance Against AMCS solutions for Instances 6.09 to
6.16.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
95
==PAGE:103==
AMCS Results
ALNS Results
AMCS (T) vs ALNS
SET KPI
F
N
T
5 min
3 min
20 min
3 min
5 min
20 min
8.01
cost
9901
9904
9902
t
05:29:03 05:31:27 05:31:12 04:35:12 04:35:09 04:35:20 16.92% 16.91% 16.87%
d
85840
85690
85695
84538
84634
84478
1.24%
1.35%
1.42%
w
3000
3180
3180
2330
2252
2252
928
850
928
ev
22
58
73
0
0
0
73
73
73
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8.02
cost
9218
9236
9239
t
05:31:09 04:26:33 04:26:33 04:06:49 04:07:31 04:07:53 7.14%
7.40%
7.00%
d
84200
82108
82108
80866
80896
80750
1.48%
1.51%
1.65%
w
4800
1080
1080
571
229
3402
851
509
-2322
ev
46
106
106
0
0
0
106
106
106
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8.03
cost
5397
5400
5397
t
02:46:30 02:45:03 02:40:41 02:38:06 02:38:10 02:38:07 1.57%
1.61%
1.60%
d
22835
22461
22220
20523
20541
20523
7.56%
7.64%
7.64%
w
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
42
30
57
0
0
0
57
57
57
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.3: Evaluating ALNS Performance Against AMCS solutions for Instances 8.01 to
8.03.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
96
==PAGE:104==
SET
KPI
Init.
LNS
ALNS
LNS vs ALNS
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
01 large
cost
28613
20704
20739
28876
19766
20468
20249
t
11:26:35 11:30:07 11:34:15 12:13:35 11:02:47 11:04:58 11:19:25 3.96% 4.22% 7.38%
d
71291
77955
76734
86487
72634
72097
73422
6.83% 6.04% 15.11%
w
0
0
0
0
0
0
243
0
0
-243
ev
34727
2000
0
1585
0
2108
7621
2000
-2108
-6036
lv
41739
0
0
33376
0
3392
211
0
-3392
33165
01A
cost
3706
3706
3706
3706
3706
3706
3706
t
01:52:54 01:52:54 01:52:54 01:52:54 01:52:54 01:52:54 01:52:54 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%
d
25485
25485
25485
25485
25485
25485
25485
0.00% 0.00% 0.00%
w
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
01B
cost
7201
6133
6125
6096
6096
6090
6109
t
03:14:06 02:52:43 02:55:48 02:55:19 02:55:19 02:54:42 02:55:50 -1.51% 0.63% -0.29%
d
27671
21632
20741
20547
20547
20645
20555
5.02% 0.46% -0.04%
w
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
01C
cost
15878
14780
15010
14962
14548
14659
14719
t
07:32:43 06:59:58 07:06:20 07:07:10 06:54:41 06:54:37 06:57:17 1.26% 2.75% 2.31%
d
101472
95156
96735
95352
93030
95307
95241
2.23% 1.48% 0.12%
w
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
01D
cost
16893
15165
15153
15183
14899
14916
15087
t
08:57:03 08:05:07 08:03:36 08:06:31 07:57:51 08:00:15 08:01:46 1.50% 0.69% 0.98%
d
83823
73736
74255
73406
71825
70980
73790
2.59% 4.41% -0.52%
w
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
cost
13841
12167
12124
12533
12144
12102
12199
t
05:26:20 05:36:19 05:34:14 05:44:04 05:31:38 05:31:30 05:34:24 1.39% 0.82% 2.81%
d
74869
74535
74223
77546
73383
73397
73910
1.55% 1.11% 4.69%
wt
0
829
672
351
855
1151
1147
-26
-479
-796
ev
30844
210
210
237
135
825
825
75
-615
-588
lv
9764
285
403
372
442
846
846
-157
-443
-474
3
cost
7100
6747
6747
6747
6747
6747
6747
t
03:29:45 03:23:46 03:23:46 03:23:46 03:23:46 03:23:46 03:23:46 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%
d
41931
37680
37680
37680
37680
37680
37680
0.00% 0.00% 0.00%
wt
9890
9541
8635
9637
9541
8877
9541
0
-242
96
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
04A
cost
8587
8405
8405
8457
8351
8363
8380
t
04:27:58 04:26:38 04:26:21 04:27:28 04:24:48 04:25:20 04:25:28 0.69% 0.38% 0.75%
d
24449
22757
22826
23109
22637
22624
22785
0.53% 0.88% 1.40%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
04B
cost
8587
8379
8379
8457
8351
8363
8363
t
04:27:58 04:25:27 04:25:27 04:27:44 04:24:48 04:25:20 04:25:17 0.24% 0.04% 0.92%
d
24449
22780
22780
23038
22637
22624
22639
0.63% 0.68% 1.73%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.4: Comparison of LNS and ALNS at 5, 3, and 1 minutes. The last three columns
show ALNS improvement over LNS, with positive values favoring ALNS and negative
favoring LNS (Part 1).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
97
==PAGE:105==
SET KPI
Init.
LNS
ALNS
LNS vs ALNS
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5.01
cost
10410
8916
8843
8903
8771
8771
8788
t
04:53:08 04:49:50 04:48:51 04:50:19 04:47:30 04:47:30 04:47:06 0.81% 0.47%
1.11%
d
48304
42221
41171
41706
40310
40310
40890
4.53% 2.09%
1.96%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
6957
0
0
12
0
0
0
0
0
12
lv
5661
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.02
cost
11108
7338
7353
7380
7265
7279
7280
t
03:46:07 03:33:27 03:34:37 03:34:26 03:33:21 03:32:08 03:32:09 0.05% 1.16%
1.06%
d
30821
28223
28058
28468
27334
27885
27882
3.15% 0.62%
2.06%
wt
0
9920
7922
6212
7300
6093
6362
2620
1829
-150
ev
40
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
16313
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.03
cost
7710
7614
7542
7614
7535
7614
7591
t
03:58:45 03:56:26 03:53:19 03:56:26 03:53:14 03:56:26 03:55:54 1.35% -1.34% 0.23%
d
26958
26403
26438
26403
26369
26403
26266
0.13% 0.13%
0.52%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.04
cost
6929
6725
6790
6793
6665
6660
6675
t
03:51:38 03:47:29 03:48:09 03:48:36 03:45:00 03:45:33 03:45:30 1.09% 1.14%
1.36%
d
28195
26047
27052
26892
26032
25662
25989
0.06% 5.14%
3.36%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
7232
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.05
cost
8561
7853
7853
7853
7849
7849
7844
t
04:23:00 04:07:08 04:07:08 04:07:08 04:07:01 04:07:01 04:06:53 0.05% 0.05%
0.10%
d
49482
43217
43217
43217
43191
43191
43154
0.06% 0.06%
0.15%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
40
0
0
0
7
7
0
-7
-7
0
lv
248
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.06
cost
7806
7403
7430
7425
7372
7379
7464
t
03:59:48 03:52:35 03:53:45 03:53:38 03:51:48 03:51:59 03:53:23 0.34% 0.76%
0.11%
d
31200
27704
27683
27654
27516
27558
28335
0.68% 0.45% -2.46%
wt
0
2796
2796
2796
2796
2796
2796
0
0
0
ev
8506
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.07
cost
9573
9173
9143
9124
9121
9129
9123
t
04:14:36 04:06:32 04:05:04 04:05:47 04:05:10 04:05:54 04:04:35 0.55% -0.34% 0.49%
d
45389
42682
42751
42275
42421
42307
42633
0.61% 1.04% -0.85%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.08
cost
7759
7332
7469
7552
7323
7413
7383
t
03:57:12 03:50:36 03:49:17 03:54:47 03:50:24 03:52:45 03:52:03 0.09% -1.51% 1.16%
d
28381
24697
27006
26329
24635
25095
24914
0.25% 7.08%
5.37%
wt
0
4530
0
561
5704
1656
1610
-1174
-1656
-1049
ev
11897
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.5: Comparison of LNS and ALNS at 5, 3, and 1 minutes. The last three columns
show ALNS improvement over LNS, with positive values favoring ALNS and negative
favoring LNS (Part 2).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
98
==PAGE:106==
SET KPI
Init.
LNS
ALNS
LNS vs ALNS
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5.09
cost
10560
10208
10183
10238
9947
9932
10037
t
05:48:07 05:36:47 05:36:51 05:37:33 05:32:53 05:32:30 05:33:13 1.16% 1.29% 1.28%
d
36743
35411
34974
35611
32625
32533
33985
7.87% 6.98% 4.57%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
8701
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.10
cost
9379
9045
9051
9055
8989
9014
8989
t
05:04:15 04:58:57 04:59:34 04:59:39 04:58:15 04:58:30 04:58:15 0.23% 0.36% 0.47%
d
37931
34144
33997
34017
33436
33773
33436
2.07% 0.66% 1.71%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.11
cost
13660
12591
12611
12633
12587
12591
12591
t
06:36:02 06:10:17 06:10:57 06:10:38 06:10:27 06:10:17 06:10:17 -0.05% 0.18% 0.09%
d
84359
75197
75289
75880
75031
75197
75197
0.22% 0.12% 0.90%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.12
cost
8014
7546
7563
7570
7519
7551
7570
t
04:15:43 04:07:48 04:08:00 04:08:09 04:07:01 04:07:56 04:08:11 0.32% 0.03% -0.01%
d
23434
19956
20108
20151
19860
19984
20146
0.48% 0.62% 0.02%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
325
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.13
cost
9338
9193
9338
9240
9167
9116
9116
t
04:51:15 04:48:51 04:51:15 04:49:47 04:48:31 04:47:25 04:47:25 0.12% 1.32% 0.82%
d
48983
47165
48983
47666
46791
46261
46261
0.79% 5.56% 2.95%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.14
cost
7460
7245
7301
7121
7103
7161
7137
t
03:52:14 03:45:39 03:48:19 03:43:20 03:42:54 03:44:19 03:43:45 1.22% 1.75% -0.19%
d
28496
27648
27516
26610
26493
26857
26700
4.18% 2.39% -0.34%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
12731
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.15
cost
7897
7361
7423
7477
7327
7363
7348
t
04:06:51 03:54:18 03:55:35 03:56:44 03:53:46 03:54:57 03:53:56 0.23% 0.27% 1.18%
d
38802
34193
34803
35325
33778
33918
34101
1.21% 2.54% 3.46%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.16
cost
11643
11257
11219
11260
11038
11079
11153
t
06:30:24 06:23:26 06:22:11 06:23:14 06:18:26 06:18:50 06:20:56 1.30% 0.88% 0.60%
d
51271
46325
46142
46510
44102
44805
45327
4.80% 2.90% 2.54%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.6: Comparison of LNS and ALNS at 5, 3, and 1 minutes. The last three columns
show ALNS improvement over LNS, with positive values favoring ALNS and negative
favoring LNS (Part 3).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
99
==PAGE:107==
SET KPI
Init.
LNS
ALNS
LNS vs ALNS
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5.17
cost
6556
6488
6488
6488
6488
6488
6488
t
03:25:49 03:24:40 03:24:40 03:24:40 03:24:40 03:24:40 03:24:40 0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
d
28317
27604
27604
27604
27604
27604
27604
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.18
cost
8531
8287
8287
8303
8289
8289
8289
t
04:10:10 04:04:07 04:04:07 04:04:32 04:04:10 04:04:10 04:04:10 -0.02% -0.02% 0.15%
d
43185
41501
41498
41606
41509
41509
41509
-0.02% -0.03% 0.23%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.01
cost
6550
6205
6257
6258
6239
6218
6205
t
03:44:39 03:35:00 03:35:45 03:36:41 03:37:04 03:35:23 03:35:00 -0.96% 0.17%
0.78%
d
25543
23037
23801
23320
22711
23130
23037
1.42%
2.82%
1.21%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.02
cost
6832
6379
6356
6356
6305
6299
6326
t
03:46:03 03:36:00 03:35:29 03:35:29 03:34:07 03:34:01 03:35:18 0.87%
0.68%
0.09%
d
31915
27108
26876
26876
26454
26368
26292
2.41%
1.89%
2.17%
wt
0
0
1105
1105
0
0
0
0
1105
1105
ev
10415
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.03
cost
6786
6538
6577
6569
6500
6593
6599
t
03:52:03 03:45:36 03:45:59 03:46:08 03:45:17 03:47:10 03:48:12 0.14% -0.52% -0.91%
d
26112
24111
24752
24488
23455
24492
24069
2.72%
1.05%
1.71%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.04 cost
9130
8495
8585
8533
8495
8495
8495
t
04:20:45 04:06:57 04:09:51 04:07:48 04:06:57 04:06:57 04:06:57 0.00%
1.16%
0.34%
d
35551
31798
32041
32014
31798
31798
31798
0.00%
0.76%
0.67%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.05 cost
6200
6032
6031
6032
6031
6032
6032
t
03:31:48 03:27:31 03:27:23 03:27:31 03:27:23 03:27:31 03:27:31 0.06% -0.06% 0.00%
d
21450
20197
20242
20197
20242
20187
20187
-0.22% 0.27%
0.05%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.06 cost
7282
6944
6866
6990
6762
6768
6768
t
03:37:22 03:32:11 03:31:04 03:33:17 03:27:32 03:27:36 03:27:36 2.19%
1.64%
2.66%
d
29725
26660
25912
26935
25637
25697
25697
3.84%
0.83%
4.60%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.7: Comparison of LNS and ALNS at 5, 3, and 1 minutes. The last three columns
show ALNS improvement over LNS, with positive values favoring ALNS and negative
favoring LNS (Part 4).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
100
==PAGE:108==
SET KPI
Init.
LNS
ALNS
LNS vs ALNS
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
6.07
cost
9240
8576
8587
8566
8610
8545
8576
t
04:09:25 03:53:38 03:52:29 03:52:41 03:54:27 03:52:50 03:53:38 -0.35% -0.15% -0.41%
d
55846
50952
51616
51177
51198
50754
50952
-0.48% 1.67%
0.44%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.08
cost
8933
8472
8493
8493
8476
8479
8476
t
04:29:57 04:21:49 04:22:21 04:22:21 04:22:07 04:22:28 04:22:07 -0.11% -0.04% 0.09%
d
55336
49732
49912
49912
49659
49543
49659
0.15%
0.74%
0.51%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
348
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
97
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.09
cost
10230
9740
9813
9847
9429
9429
9429
t
04:37:05 04:25:31 04:28:07 04:29:50 04:20:08 04:20:08 04:20:08 2.03%
2.98%
3.59%
d
60509
56924
57106
56970
53845
53845
53845
5.41%
5.71%
5.49%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
351
0
0
-351
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.10
cost
8960
8689
8689
8738
8684
8684
8689
t
03:48:56 03:41:51 03:41:51 03:42:22 03:41:44 03:41:44 03:41:51 0.05%
0.05%
0.23%
d
59314
57572
57572
58199
57538
57538
57572
0.06%
0.06%
1.08%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.11
cost
7925
7158
7230
7247
7160
7158
7166
t
03:40:00 03:25:05 03:26:12 03:26:22 03:25:34 03:25:05 03:25:19 -0.24% 0.54%
0.51%
d
33387
28222
28800
28961
28108
28222
28257
0.40%
2.01%
2.43%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.12
cost
6291
6083
6061
6100
6041
6083
6050
t
03:32:59 03:27:49 03:26:20 03:28:46 03:27:00 03:27:49 03:27:10 0.39% -0.72% 0.77%
d
22359
20770
21021
20659
20351
20770
20434
2.02%
1.19%
1.09%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.13
cost
12256
11864
11864
11864
11864
11864
11864
t
04:49:22 04:40:35 04:40:35 04:40:35 04:40:35 04:40:35 04:40:35 0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
d
71647
69192
69192
69192
69192
69192
69192
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.14
cost
7119
6782
6846
6846
6699
6699
6699
t
03:35:26 03:30:22 03:31:12 03:31:12 03:27:32 03:27:32 03:27:32 1.35%
1.74%
1.74%
d
30198
26867
27550
27550
26636
26636
26636
0.86%
3.32%
3.32%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.8: Comparison of LNS and ALNS at 5, 3, and 1 minutes. The last three columns
show ALNS improvement over LNS, with positive values favoring ALNS and negative
favoring LNS (Part 5).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
101
==PAGE:109==
SET
KPI
Init.
LNS
ALNS
LNS vs ALNS
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
6.15
cost
5514
5132
5184
5134
5118
5118
5118
t
02:51:01 02:42:51 02:43:34 02:42:55 02:42:23 02:42:23 02:42:23 0.29%
0.72%
0.33%
d
26643
23123
23775
23131
23079
23079
23079
0.19%
2.93%
0.22%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
9255
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.16
cost
8010
7702
7702
7702
7598
7577
7598
t
04:15:31 04:07:57 04:07:57 04:07:57 04:04:19 04:03:38 04:04:19 1.47%
1.74%
1.47%
d
56464
52663
52663
52663
52173
52008
52173
0.93%
1.24%
0.93%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.01
cost
6462
5697
5650
5831
5584
5577
5645
t
03:11:20 02:54:48 02:53:37 02:55:00 02:52:03 02:52:33 02:54:11
1.57%
0.61%
0.47%
d
23578
19743
19497
19774
19119
18868
19251
3.16%
3.23%
2.64%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
1838
426
214
191
0
0
0
426
214
191
lv
382
0
0
634
0
0
0
0
0
634
7.02
cost
10057
9208
9171
9288
9024
9085
9186
t
04:56:50 04:37:47 04:36:41 04:38:14 04:36:31 04:37:40 04:37:02 0.46%
-0.36% 0.43%
d
41743
36729
36572
37345
34513
34984
36668
6.03%
4.34%
1.81%
wt
0
1448
1520
1541
4489
226
279
-3041
1294
1262
ev
8945
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
226
0
0
134
0
0
0
0
0
134
7.03
cost
11237
9451
9457
9457
9103
9128
9440
t
04:58:16 04:53:43 04:53:49 04:53:49 04:49:15 04:50:11 04:53:36 1.52%
1.24%
0.07%
d
53083
52500
52592
52592
47240
47304
52325
10.02% 10.05% 0.51%
wt
2052
1626
616
560
2167
1941
548
-541
-1325
12
ev
116
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
8252
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.03.m
cost
10649
9315
9411
9485
9283
9289
9437
t
04:58:16 04:53:26 04:54:27 04:59:37 04:52:34 04:52:44 04:57:19 0.30%
0.58%
0.77%
d
53083
49685
51251
50148
49446
49355
50310
0.48%
3.70% -0.32%
wt
0
4421
5046
3000
1661
0
0
2760
5046
3000
ev
5215
0
0
0
0
259
121
0
-259
-121
lv
5311
0
0
0
0
32
0
0
-32
0
7.04
cost
13405
12982
12906
13037
12812
12812
12816
t
05:32:55 05:23:43 05:21:29 05:24:40 05:20:40 05:20:40 05:20:59 0.94%
0.25%
1.13%
d
105929
101973
101541
102602
100085
100085
100010
1.85%
1.43%
2.53%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.05
cost
8544
8294
8345
8362
8181
8158
8170
t
04:17:14 04:13:10 04:13:29 04:13:41 04:10:04 04:10:53 04:09:43 1.22%
1.03%
1.56%
d
38268
35804
36501
36701
35171
34497
35131
1.77%
5.49%
4.28%
wt
1794
3129
872
1412
4608
430
1635
-1479
442
-223
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.9: Comparison of LNS and ALNS at 5, 3, and 1 minutes. The last three columns
show ALNS improvement over LNS, with positive values favoring ALNS and negative
favoring LNS (Part 6).
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
102
==PAGE:110==
SET
KPI
Init.
LNS
ALNS
LNS vs ALNS
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
7.06
cost
11559
11086
10984
11094
10550
10550
10550
t
05:36:56 05:25:05 05:21:19 05:25:13 05:13:39 05:13:39 05:13:39 3.52%
2.39%
3.56%
d
53019
50131
49958
50214
46148
46148
46148
7.95%
7.63%
8.10%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.07
cost
7609
6799
6793
6879
6636
6637
6800
t
03:42:21 03:35:03 03:34:07 03:37:04 03:30:13 03:30:55 03:34:46 2.25%
1.49%
1.06%
d
27483
22323
22551
22749
21684
21470
22430
2.86%
4.79%
1.40%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
236
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
1283
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.08
cost
16199
11961
11847
11899
11762
11745
11808
t
05:04:07 04:47:32 04:44:55 04:46:06 04:41:52 04:41:32 04:43:33 1.97%
1.19%
0.89%
d
96358
86217
85340
85744
85146
84979
85234
1.24%
0.42%
0.59%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
6094
94
0
0
0
0
0
94
0
0
lv
16223
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.09
cost
5135
4984
4984
4984
4984
4984
4981
t
02:46:34 02:43:21 02:43:21 02:43:21 02:43:21 02:43:21 02:44:00 0.00%
0.00% -0.40%
d
29547
27617
27617
27617
27617
27617
27135
0.00%
0.00%
1.75%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.09.m
cost
6649
4992
4995
4992
4992
4992
4992
t
02:46:34 02:44:49 02:43:30 02:44:49 02:44:49 02:44:49 02:44:49 0.00% -0.81% 0.00%
d
29547
26911
27808
26911
26911
26911
26911
0.00%
3.23%
0.00%
wt
0
3825
3266
2264
3900
3852
3684
-75
-586
-1420
ev
2721
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
7568
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.10
cost
9358
9187
9187
9187
9142
9157
9170
t
04:42:44 04:39:47 04:39:47 04:39:47 04:37:58 04:38:31 04:39:28 0.65%
0.45%
0.11%
d
52660
50597
50597
50597
50566
50609
50418
0.06% -0.02% 0.35%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.11
cost
6654
6483
6496
6496
6220
6220
6224
t
03:36:43 03:33:20 03:29:38 03:29:38 03:30:21 03:30:21 03:30:14 1.40% -0.34% -0.29%
d
30092
28223
26159
26159
24278
24278
24406
13.98% 7.19%
6.70%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
73
73
0
0
0
0
73
73
lv
0
0
1009
1009
0
0
0
0
1009
1009
7.11.m
cost
6918
6305
6305
6305
6227
6227
6230
t
03:36:43 03:29:47 03:29:47 03:29:47 03:30:26 03:30:26 03:30:19 -0.31% -0.31% -0.25%
d
30092
26311
26311
26311
24366
24366
24494
7.39%
7.39%
6.91%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
313
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
1322
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.10: Comparison of Selected Instances with ALNS Optimization.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
103
==PAGE:111==
SET
KPI
Init.
LNS
ALNS
LNS vs ALNS
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
7.12
cost
10620
9875
9960
9960
9875
9902
9915
t
04:52:34 04:38:11 04:39:43 04:39:43 04:38:11 04:38:11 04:38:26 0.00%
0.55%
0.46%
d
57210
50843
51611
51611
50843
51279
51393
0.00%
0.64%
0.42%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.12.m
cost
10765
9994
9960
9960
9960
9991
10045
t
04:52:34 04:39:13 04:39:43 04:39:43 04:39:43 04:39:50 04:42:03 -0.18% -0.04% -0.83%
d
57210
52345
51611
51611
51611
52067
52076
1.40% -0.88% -0.90%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
367
0
0
0
0
0
369
0
0
-369
lv
721
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.13
cost
12750
12501
12501
12501
12427
12426
12432
t
05:17:11 05:12:10 05:12:10 05:12:10 05:11:45 05:11:45 05:11:53 0.13%
0.13%
0.09%
d
102928
100333
100333
100333
99055
99047
99106
1.27%
1.28%
1.22%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.14
cost
10292
7506
7521
7506
7510
7505
7511
t
04:03:57 03:57:25 03:58:27 03:57:25 03:59:46 03:59:02 03:59:12 -0.99% -0.24% -0.75%
d
35199
35127
34946
35127
34113
34366
34406
2.89%
1.66%
2.05%
wt
1971
1721
1944
1877
902
2100
1877
819
-156
0
ev
339
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
13128
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.15
cost
10941
9956
9893
9956
9861
9861
9997
t
05:11:00 04:46:40 04:45:26 04:46:40 04:44:02 04:44:02 04:46:23 0.92%
0.49%
0.10%
d
105516
93350
92328
93350
92379
92379
94814
1.04% -0.06% -1.57%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.16
cost
5882
5552
5552
5578
5551
5551
5551
t
02:59:43 02:52:13 02:52:13 02:52:47 02:52:11 02:52:11 02:52:11 0.02%
0.02%
0.35%
d
35806
32389
32389
32684
32376
32376
32376
0.04%
0.04%
0.94%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.16.m
cost
6762
5678
5678
5729
5560
5560
5560
t
02:59:43 02:55:17 02:55:17 02:56:09 02:52:27 02:52:27 02:52:27 1.62%
1.62%
2.10%
d
35806
33594
33594
34281
32445
32445
32445
3.42%
3.42%
5.36%
wt
0
3867
4049
4559
3711
3711
3711
156
338
848
ev
2599
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
4403
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.17
cost
13248
11523
11526
11557
11510
11502
11500
t
04:42:37 04:31:03 04:31:29 04:31:42 04:30:51 04:30:52 04:30:27 0.07%
0.23%
0.46%
d
89177
86401
86277
86721
86266
86129
86259
0.16%
0.17%
0.53%
wt
0
633
607
1468
647
646
669
-14
-39
799
ev
665
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
6431
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table C.11: Performance comparison of LNS and ALNS with different time limits.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
104
==PAGE:112==
SET
KPI
Init.
LNS
ALNS
LNS vs ALNS
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
5 min
3 min
1 min
8.01
cost
10217
9965
9965
10082
9901
9904
9904
t
04:40:18 04:35:18 04:35:18 04:38:38 04:35:12 04:35:09 04:35:09 0.04% 0.05% 1.25%
d
89499
86121
86121
87055
84538
84634
84634
1.84% 1.73% 2.78%
wt
0
2927
2927
3341
2330
2252
2122
597
675
1219
ev
12534
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8.01.m
cost
10288
9902
9974
9995
9904
9894
9898
t
04:40:18 04:35:20 04:35:18 04:36:58 04:35:09 04:34:56 04:34:56 0.07% 0.13% 0.73%
d
89499
84478
86121
85565
84634
84525
84526
-0.18% 1.85% 1.21%
wt
0
2122
2626
2942
2122
2007
2234
0
619
708
ev
14506
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
357
0
46
58
0
0
18
0
46
40
8.02
cost
9748
9461
9416
9419
9218
9236
9251
t
04:17:57 04:11:53 04:11:18 04:11:36 04:06:49 04:07:31 04:08:04 2.01% 1.51% 1.40%
d
87036
83842
83085
82988
80866
80896
80937
3.55% 2.63% 2.47%
wt
0
5178
3511
1469
571
229
4723
4607
3282
-3254
ev
32108
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
56
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8.02.m
cost
10439
9374
9218
9235
9218
9218
9259
t
04:17:57 04:10:09 04:07:12 04:06:39 04:07:12 04:07:12 04:08:16 1.18% 0.00% -0.66%
d
87036
82740
80641
80824
80641
80641
81017
2.54% 0.00% -0.24%
wt
0
2899
341
466
503
258
123
2396
83
343
ev
21847
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
3512
0
0
115
0
0
0
0
0
115
8.03
cost
5992
5420
5441
5437
5397
5400
5408
t
02:49:33 02:38:38 02:38:44 02:38:16 02:38:06 02:38:10 02:38:21 0.34% 0.36% -0.05%
d
24629
20658
20890
20982
20523
20541
20586
0.65% 1.67% 1.89%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8.04
cost
5524
5235
5273
5308
5235
5235
5244
t
02:44:06 02:38:31 02:39:46 02:39:05 02:38:31 02:38:31 02:39:27 0.00% 0.78% -0.23%
d
20697
18675
18781
19454
18675
18675
18494
0.00% 0.56% 4.93%
wt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ev
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
cost
7571
6699
6760
6683
6690
6675
6697
t
04:09:50 04:05:57 04:07:12 04:05:38 04:05:46 04:05:28 04:05:54 0.07% 0.70% -0.11%
d
41310
37095
38550
36723
36877
36508
37072
0.59% 5.30% -0.95%
wt
0
8739
8739
8573
8739
8573
8739
0
166
-166
ev
21185
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
3441
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
cost
12978
6959
6950
6948
6927
6945
6922
t
04:29:38 04:29:21 04:29:10 04:29:05 04:28:43 04:29:04 04:28:36 0.24% 0.04% 0.18%
d
23795
23578
23329
23235
22788
23228
22669
3.35% 0.43% 2.44%
wt
0
9618
8834
11625
9364
9498
10064
254
-664
1561
ev
14234
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
lv
30036
0
0
11
0
0
0
0
0
11
Table C.12: Comparison of Selected Instances with ALNS Optimization.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
105
==PAGE:113==
CHAPTER D
Starting Times Overview for ALNS 5 minutes
The table below provides an example of the starting times as generated by the ALNS
framework for different instances when running for 5 minutes. As part of the optimization
process, the start time of each route was not predetermined but instead adjusted post-
optimization to improve feasibility and minimize waiting times.
Since the problem formulation includes time windows, shifting the starting time of the
route can significantly impact the quality of the solution. A later or earlier start can help
reduce waiting times or avoid time window violations.
This table serves as an illustrative example of the output from our approach, showing the
optimal start times determined for each instance after ALNS execution for 5 minutes.
Set
Start Time
Set
Start Time
Set
Start Time
Set
Start Time
01 Large
07:06:28
5.11
08:32:52
6.12
08:40:54
7.12
08:47:42
01A
03:42:12
5.12
09:49:33
6.13
10:03:39
7.12 Mod.
08:47:42
01B
03:50:35
5.13
06:08:35
6.14
06:20:12
7.13
07:55:13
01C
05:25:10
5.14
09:17:52
6.15
08:09:17
7.14
06:45:02
01D
03:58:44
5.15
07:50:37
6.16
05:42:52
7.15
05:30:50
2
05:13:41
5.16
09:36:09
7.01
06:36:37
7.16
05:58:52
3
00:52:10
5.17
08:03:37
7.02
07:40:07
7.16 Mod.
08:34:17
4A
00:00:00
5.18
05:41:27
7.03
05:55:58
7.17
08:53:21
4B
00:00:00
6.01
06:58:12
7.03 Mod.
07:30:19
8.01
09:03:34
5.01
08:29:52
6.02
07:08:36
7.04
07:47:02
8.01 Mod.
09:03:34
5.02
08:12:55
6.03
06:53:32
7.05
06:10:08
8.02
08:03:17
5.03
09:47:42
6.04
07:53:59
7.06
05:52:02
8.02 Mod.
09:00:41
5.04
10:18:26
6.05
08:48:25
7.07
07:46:30
8.03
09:00:04
5.05
11:49:20
6.06
07:50:17
7.08
07:06:55
8.04
08:56:29
5.06
09:22:03
6.07
07:03:54
7.09
05:59:57
9
09:33:23
5.07
08:37:12
6.08
06:21:09
7.09 Mod.
08:21:37
10
08:28:14
5.08
09:59:54
6.09
08:28:27
7.10
08:05:50
5.09
08:21:22
6.10
09:02:36
7.11
05:58:30
5.10
08:13:02
6.11
07:52:48
7.11 Mod.
07:57:17
Table D.1: Example of starting times produced by the ALNS framework for a 5-minute
run.
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
106
==PAGE:114==
Sequence Building for Routing with Narrow Time Windows
107
==PAGE:115==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
