==PAGE:1==
Characterization of Early-Expressed
Phapecoctavirus AV126 Proteins and Their
Growth-Inhibitory Effects on Extended
Spectrum β-Lactamase Producing Escherichia
coli
Author
Magnus Bridal Ryom - s193787
Supervisors:
Professor Lone Brønsted, University of Copenhagen
Postdoctoral scholar Anders Nørgaard Sørensen, University of Copenhagen
Professor Mogens Kilstrup, Technical University of Denmark
February 2, 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Acknowledgements
I would like to sincerely thank my supervisor, Lone Brønsted, for the opportunity to conduct
my master’s thesis with her group, PHAGEBio, and for her guidance and insight throughout
the project.
A special thanks to Anders Nørgaard Sørensen for his for his availability,
patience, guidance, and support during all of my experimental work.
I also extend my
gratitude to my DTU supervisor, Mogens Kilstrup, for his supervision and for helping me
make my project at KU possible.
Finally, I sincerely appreciate all all members of the
PHAGEBio group for their incredible support and assistance throughout my time at KU.
Preface
This DTU MSc thesis was carried out by Magnus Bridal Ryom as part of the DISCOVER
project, led by the PHAGEBio group at the Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences,
University of Copenhagen. The thesis serves as the final prerequisite for receiving the degree
of Master of Science in Biotechnological Engineering (MSc Eng). The work corresponds to
30 ECTS credits and was conducted from September 2024 to February 2025.
1
==PAGE:3==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Nomenclature
Amp100 - 100 g/mL ampicillin
AmpC - AmpC Beta-Lactamase
AmpR - Ampicillin resistance gene
AMR - Antimicrobial Resistance
BPPL - Bacterial Priority Pathogens List
BSA
- Bovine serum albumin
dsDNA - Double-stranded DNA
DTT - Dithiothreitol
E. coli - Escherichia coli
EDTA - Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EMSA - Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay
ESBL - Extended-Spectrum Beta-Lactamase
GST
- Glutathione-S-transferase
HGT - Horizontal Gene Transfer
HRP - Horseradish Peroxidase
ICTV - International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses
IMAC - Immobilized Metal Ion Affinity Chromatography
IPTG - Isopropyl--D-thiogalactopyranoside
Kan50 - Kanamycin 50 µg/mL
KanR - Kanamycin resistance gene
kDa
- Kilodalton
LA
- Luria Agar
LB
- Luria Broth
LPS
- Lipopolysaccharides
MCS - Multiple Cloning Site
2
==PAGE:4==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
MW
- Molecular weight
Neo
- Kanamycin resistance gene
O-antigen - Oligosaccharide Antigen
O/N
- Overnight
OD
- Optical density
ori
- Origin of replication
oriT
- Origin of transfer
PBPs - Penicillin-Binding Proteins
PCR - Polymerase Chain Reaction
PFU
- Plaque Forming Units
RBPs - Receptor-Binding Proteins
RPM - Revolutions Per Minute
SD
- Shine-Dalgarno (sequence)
SDS-PAGE - Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
ssDNA - Single-stranded DNA
TAE
- Tris-acetate-EDTA (buffer)
TBS
- Tris-buffered saline
TFs
- Tail Fibers
TSPs - Tail Spike Proteins
VGT - Vertical Gene Transfer
WHO - World Health Organization
3
==PAGE:5==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Abstract
The rise of antimicrobial resistance is an increasing global health concern, particularly with
the emergence of extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) and AmpC β-lactamase (AMpC)
producing Escherichia coli (E. coli). Classified by the WHO as a critical-priority pathogen,
these bacteria resists penicillins, cephalosporins, and other antimicrobials, making infections
increasingly difficult to treat. As a result, there is an urgent need for alternative treatment
options to combat these pathogens. A promising strategy involves investigating bacterio-
phages that target and lyse ESBL/AmpC producing E. coli, focusing on the early-expressed
protein they use to take over the hosts metabolism. Studying these proteins could reveal
previously unidentified bacterial targets for developing novel antibiotics to combat these
bacteria.
This study aimed to identify antibacterial targets for antibiotic drug develop-
ment by examining the growth inhibitory mechanism of early-expressed proteins from the
ESBL/AmpC E. coli killing Phapecoctavirus AV126 bacteriophage. Focusing on seven early-
expressed genes (gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291) this project combined
bioinformatic and experimental methods in an attempt to characterize the function of these
proteins.
Growth inhibition assays showed all proteins suppressed growth, with gp103 and gp134
having the strongest growth inhibitory effects. All protein growth assays showed re-growth
on inhibiting plates, indicative of resistance development. Sequence and structural analysis
identified gp239 as a PhoH-like or PhoH2 protein, potentially involved in ATPase activity
and phosphate starvation responses. ATPase assays showed activity ATPase in gp239, but
contamination issues prevented definitive conclusions. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrated ssDNA and dsDNA DNA-binding capabilities, with gp134, gp239, and gp256
binding both ssDNA and dsDNA. SDS-PAGE analysis indicated multimerization of gp103
and possible post-translational modifications or host interactions for gp134. Re-growth of
gp134 resistant colonies on inhibitory plates prompted a lacZα-complementation assay to
probe mutation-driven resistance, though the results were inconclusive.
While no specific bacterial targets were identified for these proteins, the data collected from
these experiments contribute to the ongoing research on their inhibitory functions. The data
gathered from this project could also help in designing future studies focused on other phages
and their early-expressed proteins.
4
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Mechanisms and Spread of Antimicrobial Resistance . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Exploring the Potential of Bacteriophages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Harnessing Bacteriophages for Modern Antibiotic Strategies
. . . . .
4
1.3
The Life Cycle of Bacteriophages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Bacterial Targets in The Early Stage of Infection
. . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Bacteriophage Taxonomy & Morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Bacterial Host Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6
Phapecoctavirus AV126
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Project Aim
12
3
Background
13
3.1
Identification of AV126 Early Inhibitory Genes in ESBL032 E.coli . . . . . .
13
3.2
pPS26 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
pET28a(+)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
pUC19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
ESBL032 E.coli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Materials & Methods
16
4.1
Materials & Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.1
Sequence Analysis of The Early-Expressed AV126 Genes . . . . . . .
17
4.1.2
Phapecoctavirus AV126 phage propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.3
Phapecoctavirus AV126 DNA isolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.4
Phapecoctavirus AV126 plaque titration experiment . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.5
Growth Inhibition Spot-Test Assay of AV126 Early-Expressed Genes
19
4.1.6
Expression of AV126 Phage Early Genes in BL21(DE3) Cells Trans-
formed with pET28 Constructs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.7
IMAC Protein Purification of AV126 Gene Products with His GraviTrapTM 20
4.1.8
SDS-PAGE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.9
Quantification of Purified AV126 Phage Proteins Using Bradford Assay 21
4.1.10 DNA-Binding Analysis of AV126 Phage Gene Products Using EMSA
22
4.1.11 ATPase Activity Assay for AV126 Phage Gene Product gp239 . . . .
23
4.1.12 PolyHis Protein:Protein Lysate Pull-Down assay
. . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.13 Screening for Optimal Host, for the lacZα-complementation blue/white
screening assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.14 PCR Amplification: Primer Design & Fragment Amplification and
Vector Linearization protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.15 PCR DNA Purification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.16 In-Fusion Cloning of pUC19 Constructs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.17 Transformation of E. coli StellarTM (HST08) Competent cells
. . . .
27
5
==PAGE:7==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
4.1.18 Growth Inhibition Spot-test Assay of pUC19-gp134 Transformed E.
coli StellarTM (HST08) Competent cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.19 Purification of pUC19-gp134 Plasmid Construct Using Centrifugation
28
5
Results
29
5.1
Growth Inhibition Spot-Test Assay Analysis of E. coli ESBL032 using AV126
Early-Expressed Genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Sequence Analysis of Selected AV126 Inhibitory Genes
. . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Expression and Purification of AV126 Early Stage Recombinant Proteins . .
32
5.4
Investigation of DNA-Binding Potential of Protein Products using EMSA . .
35
5.5
gp239 ATPase Activity Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.6
Protein-protein Binding Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.7
Investigating Re-growth of Bacteria during Expression of gp134
. . . . . . .
43
6
Discussion
47
6.1
Gp239 Share Similarity with ATPase Protein and Exhibits ATPase Activity
47
6.2
Early Stage AV126 Proteins can Inhibit Growth of ESBL032 . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Source of Re-growth could note be Determined . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
SDS-PAGE Analysis showed gp103 and gp134 Deviated Their Expected Molec-
ular Weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.5
EMSA Analysis Indicated DNA-binding Capabilities
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.6
Final Remark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Conclusion
53
8
Appendix
54
References
60
6
==PAGE:8==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
1
Introduction
In 2023, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared antimicrobial resistance (AMR) to
be one of the most serious threats to global health, food security, and development today, with
the main drivers of AMR development being the overuse of antibiotics in humans, animals
and plants [1, 2]. It is estimated that 39 million people could die from AMR infections by
2050, underscoring the urgent need for improved access to effective antibiotics and enhanced
infection treatment options [3].
In the following year, the WHO released an updated Bacterial Priority Pathogens List
(BPPL), highlighting the most concerning AMR pathogens and categorizing them into three
priority groups: medium, high, and critical. Among the listed AMR pathogens, β-lactam
resistant bacteria are classified as a critical priority group. These bacteria include third-
generation cephalosporin-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, such as Escherichia coli (E. coli) pro-
ducing extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) and AmpC β-lactamase (AmpC) [4].
This priority designation reflects the fundamental role β-lactam antibiotics have in modern
medicine [2]. In general β-lactam antibiotics can be divided into two principal categories:
commonly used agents (such as penicillins, monobactams, and cephalosporins) which are
used in many treatment regimens, and carbapenems, which are considered last-resort antibi-
otics for severe or resistant infections [5]. The significance of β-lactams is further underscored
by their increasing usage in clinical settings, with these antibiotics currently representing ap-
proximately 65% of all injectable antibiotic prescriptions in the United States alone [6]. The
growing risk of carbapenem-resistance is evident, as deaths from carbapenem-resistant gram-
negative bacteria have increased by nearly 150%, from 50.900 cases in 1990 to 127.000 cases
in 2021[3]. This highlights the critical role of β-lactams in managing a wide array of bacterial
infections and emphasizes the potential consequences of increasing resistance[4][6].
β-lactam antibiotics are known to exert their bactericidal effect by binding to penicillin-
binding proteins (PBPs) located on the bacterial cell membrane. These PBPs are essential
enzymes involved in the final stages of peptidoglycan synthesis. β-lactam binding inhibits
the function of PBPs, leading to weakened cell walls and ultimately bacterial lysis [7, 8].
However, E. coli strains producing ESBL or AmpC β-lactamases (ESBL/AmpC E. coli)
have the ability to hydrolyze the β-lactam ring within the molecular structure of β-lactam
antibiotics, rendering them inactive [8]. Thus, these bacteria have been granted resistance
to a broad spectrum of antibacterial agents, which restricts the available treatment options
[6].
ESBL/AmpC encoding E. coli exhibit remarkable genomic diversity, with representation
across all phylogroups and sequence types of E. coli[9]. This genetic diversity is also re-
flected in the oligosaccharides (O-antigen) of the lipopolysaccharides (LPS) displayed by
ESBL, which are highly diverse, representing a large proportion of the 185 different O-
antigens found in E. coli. These bacteria have been isolated from various environments,
including food products, wild animals, wastewater, and livestock.
The presence of ES-
BL/AmpC producing E. coli in livestock and food products poses a significant risk to hu-
man health due to the transmissible nature of these AMR genes [9]. ESBL resistance genes
Page 1 of 65
==PAGE:9==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
are associated with conjugative plasmids and other mobile genetic elements, enabling their
transfer both in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, AmpC resistance genes are chromosomally
encoded, with high expression but lower mobility [9]. The primary concern is the transfer of
ESBL/AmpC resistance genes to pathogenic E. coli and other related pathogens within the
human reservoir[10].
Due to the multiple routes of exposure, adopting a "One Health approach" is crucial to
reducing the prevalence of ESBL/AmpC E. coli in both livestock and food products [9].
This approach aims to minimize human exposure, thereby prevent the further spread of
ESBL/AmpC resistance in humans, animals, and the environment. Efforts to control ES-
BL/AmpC E. coli in livestock have included various decolonization strategies such as clean-
ing protocols, the use of probiotics, and feed additives. While some of these methods have
shown positive effects, complete elimination of these resistant bacteria has proven difficult
[9].
As the existing range of antibiotics becomes progressively less effective against emerging
strains of AMR pathogens, and existing methods are found to be inadequate in dealing
with the evolving resistance, there is an urgent need for innovative approaches to effectively
manage ESBL/AmpC E. coli populations [2]. One promising alternative involves harnessing
the potential of bacteriophages (phages) by investigating how they shut down their host’s
biosynthetic pathways while exploiting its machinery during infection [9]. This could re-
veal novel antibacterial targets for inhibition of bacterial growth, paving the way for the
development of new antibiotics [11, 9].
The overall aim of this project is to investigate the inhibitory potential of early-
expressed proteins derived from the Phapecoctavirus phage AV126 (GenBank: OR35295-6.1)
against ESBL-producing E. coli. This study seeks to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
by which these early-expressed phage genes inhibit bacterial growth of ESBL E. coli and to
identify bacterial targets implicated in growth inhibition and host takeover. The knowledge
gained from this work could potentially contribute to the development of new, more effective
antibiotics and improved treatment options for combating ESBL/AmpC producing E. coli.
Page 2 of 65
==PAGE:10==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
1.1
The Mechanisms and Spread of Antimicrobial Resistance
Understanding how bacteria resist antibiotics and spread AMR genes is essential for iden-
tifying antibacterial targets and developing effective antimicrobial therapies. AMR can be
developed through various mechanisms, some of which are presented here.
Bacteria can develop resistance by producing enzymes that either break down or modify
antibiotics, rendering them ineffective - as is the case for β-lactamase mediated resistance.
Other bacterial enzymes, such as aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes, can phosphorylate,
adenylate, or acetylate specific hydroxyl or amino groups on aminoglycoside antibiotics,
preventing them from binding to their ribosomal targets [12]. Another resistance strategy
involves altering the structure or function of the antibiotic targets. For example, muta-
tions in PBP can lower the ability of β-lactam antibiotics to bind to their target, as seen
in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [13]. Resistance can also be obtained by de-
creasing the accumulation of the drug within the bacterial cell. For example, gram-negative
bacteria have been shown to produce efflux pumps, like the AcrAB-TolC system in E. coli, to
actively pump out a variety of antibiotics, such as fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines. This
reduces the concentration of the drugs inside the bacteria, making them less effective and
promoting resistance [14]. Additionally, bacteria can reduce drug uptake through imperme-
able outer membranes or down-regulation of porins, as observed in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
resistance to carbapenems [15]. Each of these strategies has evolved in bacteria from selec-
tive exposure to antibiotics. While some AMR mechanisms are well-understood, ongoing
research continues to reveal additional resistance pathways.
The spread of AMR genes is mainly driven by horizontal gene transfer (HGT) and vertical
gene transfer (VGT). HGT allows bacteria to exchange genes across species, mainly through
conjugation, where plasmids are transferred via pili [16, 17]. In ESBL producing E. coli,
resistance genes like blaTEM spread through these conjugative plasmids, often carrying
other resistance factors as well [17]. The mobility of these plasmids is further enhanced by
transposons and integrons, with transposons enabling gene transfer between plasmids and
chromosomes, and integrons capturing and expressing gene cassettes that include resistance
genes [18]. In contrast, AmpC β-lactamases are typically encoded on the chromosome and
spread through vertical gene transfer, where resistance is passed from parent to daughter
cells during replication [19].
By understanding the mechanisms behind AMR and gene transfer, researchers can identify
vulnerabilities in the AMR processes. These vulnerabilities could serve as potential targets
for developing new treatments and antibiotics to combat these bacteria.
1.2
Exploring the Potential of Bacteriophages
Phages are viruses that specifically target and infect bacteria, representing the most abun-
dant biological entities on earth with an estimated population of 1031 phage individuals [20].
Their bacterial specificity stems from their ability to recognize and bind to unique features
on the surface of bacterial cell envelopes, allowing for targeted interactions with particular
bacterial species or genera [9]. These ubiquitous viruses can be found in virtually every envi-
Page 3 of 65
==PAGE:11==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
ronment where bacteria exist, including soil, water, and even within the human body [20, 21].
Phages exhibit remarkable diversity in their morphology and genetic composition, harboring
within their genomes a significant proportion of the genetic diversity of the planet. Despite
their abundance and ecological importance, the molecular mechanisms governing phage-host
interactions remain poorly understood [20]. The vast genomic diversity of bacteriophages
represents a largely untapped resource, with current research focusing on a small set of tra-
ditional model organisms [20, 22]. However, the majority of gene products in both model
and non-model phages remain without assigned specific functions, with their corresponding
proteins often being uncharacterized or entirely unknown [23]. An analysis of 24.106 phage
genomes from NCBI GenBank revealed that 65% of the proteins encoded by these genomes
cannot be attributed to a known biological function [24]. This knowledge gap not only poses
a significant challenge to the effective application of phages but also presents an opportunity
for further research and innovation.
1.2.1
Harnessing Bacteriophages for Modern Antibiotic Strategies
Before the widespread usage of antibiotics, phages were used to treat a variety of bacterial
diseases such as cholera and typhoid fever. This practice, called phage therapy, was nearly
abandoned with the discovery of penicillin in the 1940s, but was re-established with the
discovery of its potential in combating AMR bacteria [25]. Since then, phage technology
has been developed for many applications in modern medicine, a few of which are presented
here.
Genetic engineering has been used to modify the genome of natural phages, for the construc-
tion of new artificial phages with enhanced therapeutic effects. These artificial phages can
be engineered to overcome the limitations of wild-type phages, such as narrow host range,
bacterial resistance, and poor biofilm penetration, thereby enhancing their therapeutic per-
formance and broadening their potential applications in clinical and environmental settings
[26].
In addition to engineered phages, scientists have also explored the use of phage-derived
enzymes like endolysins and murein lytic enzymes to combat AMR bacteria. These enzymes
can break down bacterial cell walls and, unlike traditional antibiotics, work outside the cell,
making them less prone to resistance development [25]. However, the effectiveness of these
enzymes is restricted to gram-positive bacteria, as the outer membrane of gram-negative
bacteria acts as a protective shield. This barrier prevents the enzymes from reaching and
breaking down the peptidoglycan layer [25, 26].
Phage cocktails, which are mixtures of bacteriophages that target different bacterial recep-
tors, are also used to fight AMR bacteria. By using phages that target different types of
bacteria, these cocktails can cover a wider range of infections and make it less likely that
bacteria will develop resistance [27, 25]. When combined with antibiotics, the two applica-
tions can work together to break down bacterial defenses, such as biofilms and efflux pumps,
while also slowing the development of resistance [27, 28]. However, creating, testing, and
getting approval for phage cocktails is a complex and time-consuming process, which makes
it harder for them to be used more widely in treating AMR infections [27, 25, 28].
Page 4 of 65
==PAGE:12==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
The phage application explored in this study is phage-inspired antibacterial design. This
method involves analyzing the intricate life cycles and specialized proteins of phages to
pinpoint specific bacterial vulnerabilities. Bacteriophages, as natural predators of bacteria,
continuously refine their strategies to exploit host physiology to facilitate their own replica-
tion. Through their proteins, they interact with key bacterial pathways, disrupting essential
processes for bacterial survival and growth. Insight into these bacterial targets forms the
basis of phage-inspired antibacterial design, which seeks to develop antibiotic drugs that
mimic these phage-host interactions. By extracting and analyzing the genomes of phages
with unknown bacterial targets, growth inhibiting genes and their possibly novel bacterial
targets can be identified through further analysis. This enables the development of antibi-
otics that mimic these antibacterial mechanisms, leading to the creation of novel antibiotic
drugs (see Figure 1) [29].
Figure 1: The workflow of phage-inspired antibacterial design. This figure
outlines the workflow used to discover new bacterial targets for drug development.
First, strong antibacterial phages with unknown bacterial targets are propagated.
Next, the phage genome is extracted and sequenced. The resulting sequence is
analyzed to identify potential growth-inhibiting genes, which are then expressed in a
bacterial host to screen for antibacterial activity through growth inhibition. The
selected inhibitory genes are further analyzed to identify their bacterial targets and
understand the mechanisms behind their inhibition. The identified host target then
serves as a foundation for drug development. This image was created using
https://BioRender.com and inspired by [29].
Page 5 of 65
==PAGE:13==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
1.3
The Life Cycle of Bacteriophages
Upon successfully infecting a bacterial host, phages enter one of two life cycles based on
their classification as either virulent (lytic) phages or temperate (lysogenic) phages. The
two cycles are illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2: The Two Infection Cycles of Bacteriophages. The figure illustrates
the two life cycles of phages: lytic and lysogenic. (1) The phage attaches to a suitable
host and injects its viral DNA. (2) The phage DNA circularizes, with the choice
between the lytic or lysogenic life cycle determined by the phage type (virulent or
temperate), environmental factors, and host conditions. (3a-4a) The phage enters the
lytic cycle, where new phage particles are produced by synthesizing and assembling
viral DNA and proteins. This culminates in the lysis of the host cell, releasing new
virions that can infect additional bacteria. (3b) The phage enters the lysogenic cycle
by integrating its DNA into the bacterial chromosome, forming a prophage. (4b) The
prophage remains dormant, replicating alongside the host cell’s DNA during cell
division. (5) The prophage is excised from the bacterial chromosome in response to
external stimuli and enters the lytic cycle. This image was modified from a BioRender
template (https://BioRender.com) and inspired by [30].
In the lytic replication cycle, the virulent phage viral genome hijacks the host’s cellular
machinery and directs metabolism towards the synthesis of new viral components (such as
nucleic acids and proteins) which are subsequently assembled into progeny virions. Upon
maturation, these virions induce lysis of the bacterial cell wall, often through the action of
phage-encoded enzymes such as endolysins, resulting in the release of new phages ready to
infect neighboring bacterial cells [31, 32].
Page 6 of 65
==PAGE:14==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
The lysogenic replication cycle involves the integration of the bacteriophage genome
into the chromosome of the bacterial host, forming a prophage. In this dormant state, the
prophage is passively replicated along with the host DNA during cell division, allowing the
viral genome to persist through bacterial generations without causing immediate damage.
Environmental stressors, such as exposure to ultraviolet light or certain chemicals, can trig-
ger the excision of the prophage from the bacterial genome and its entry into the lytic cycle.
This duality in bacteriophage life cycles allows phages to persist in an ever-changing envi-
ronment, balancing between dormant and active states depending on host availability and
environmental conditions [31, 32].
The regulation of gene expression plays a critical role in both cycles. Upon injection of the
phage genome into the host cell, a cascade of gene expression occurs, typically divided into
early, middle, and late stages. This temporal regulation of gene expression is crucial for
the efficient production of new phage particles. Early genes are expressed within the first
few minutes after infection, often using the host’s RNA polymerase. These genes typically
encode proteins involved in host takeover, DNA replication, and the expression of middle
and late genes. For example, in the infection cycle of the well-studied T4 phage, early genes
include those responsible for shutting down host gene expression and initiating phage DNA
replication. It is important to note that not all genes and gene products expressed during this
stage of infection necessarily contribute to hijacking the host metabolism. Some may play
a role in the subsequent phases of infection [23]. Middle genes are typically expressed after
the early genes but before DNA replication begins. They often encode proteins necessary for
DNA replication and the transition to late gene expression. However, not all phages have a
distinct middle gene expression phase. For T4, middle genes are involved in the production
of enzymes required for phage DNA synthesis and the regulation of late gene expression [23].
Late genes are expressed after DNA replication has begun and usually encode structural
proteins and those involved in cell lysis. Late gene products are responsible for assembling
new phage particles and facilitating their release from the host cell. In T4, late genes encode
capsid proteins and lysis enzymes [23]. Lysis of the cells using lysis enzymes releases the
newly formed phage particles, completing the infection cycle and allows new infections to
begin.
It should be noted that this study’s definitions of early-, middle-, and late gene
expression are not universally agreed upon and may vary between studies.
1.3.1
Bacterial Targets in The Early Stage of Infection
This study focuses on the early stage of phage infection to identify novel bacterial targets
that phages exploit to reprogram host metabolic machinery and subvert defense mecha-
nisms. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of the early stage of infection have identified
well-established bacterial targets that are exploited by model phages. These phages employ
various strategies to take over their bacterial hosts, targeting essential components such as
DNA, RNA, and proteins [33]. Phage-host interactions can be broadly categorized into two
types: those that interfere with bacterial housekeeping processes and those that disrupt bac-
terial defense systems. Phage products that disrupt housekeeping metabolism are typically
toxic to the host, while those targeting bacterial defenses are not usually directly toxic but
Page 7 of 65
==PAGE:15==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
still significantly impact host survival and phage replication [33]. Common targets for bac-
terial housekeeping genes in phages include ribosomal components (for example, ΘKZ014
binding to 5S rRNA), post-translational modifications of host proteins (for example, T4
modifying S1 and EF-Tu), and direct degradation of host DNA (for example, T7 utilizing
endonucleases). Additionally, targets for subverting host defense mechanisms encompass re-
striction enzymes inhibited by phages like T4 and T7, along with ribonucleases inhibited
by T4 proteins [34, 33, 23]. While studying early-expressed proteins from model phages
provides insight into host targeting, a knowledge gap remains in phage-host interactions.
Less characterized phages may employ novel early stage protein strategies to hijack bacterial
machinery, highlighting the need for further research to uncover unknown early stage protein
inhibitory mechanisms for phage-inspired drug design.
1.4
Bacteriophage Taxonomy & Morphology
Bacteriophage taxonomy and morphology are a dynamic scientific domain, continuously
evolving since the establishment of initial classification systems in the early 1970s, with on-
going refinements driven by advancements in genomic and structural research methodologies
[20, 35].
The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) has established a hierarchical
classification system for phages based primarily on their nucleic acid composition and mor-
phological characteristics. This system categorizes phages into orders, families, subfamilies,
genera, and species, with recent updates incorporating genomic data to refine taxonomic
assignments.
For tailed phages, the order Caudoviricetes has been established to include all such phages.
The new key criterion for classifying phages into the same species is that their genomes
must be over 95% identical at the nucleotide level across their entire length. For genera, the
threshold is set at 70% nucleotide identity over the full genome. The creation of subfamilies is
optional and occurs when two or more related genera share low nucleotide sequence similarity
and form a clade in a marker tree phylogeny. Families are defined by a significant degree
of nucleotide similarity among their members, typically requiring a shared set of ancestor
genes [35].
Caudoviricete phages exhibit similar structural characteristics, including linear dsDNA en-
closed in a head capsid, with a tail-like structure extending from the capsid [36]. At the
distal end of their tail, many phages possess a base-plate structure adorned with receptor-
binding proteins (RBPs), which initiate host infection by recognizing specific receptors on
the bacterial cell surface, such as LPS, outer membrane proteins or pili. This specificity
determines the host range of the phage and is a key factor in phage-host interactions. These
RBPs include tail fibers (TFs) and tail spike proteins (TSPs) [37, 9, 22].
TFs are characterized by their long, thin protein structures extending from the base-plate.
These complex structures often require chaperones for proper folding and function. TFs play
a crucial role in both reversible and irreversible adsorption, with highly diverse receptor-
binding domains that enable precise targeting of bacterial surface receptors, such as LPS,
Page 8 of 65
==PAGE:16==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
porin trans-membrane proteins, teichoic acids, and bacterial appendages such as pili and
flagella.
While TFs typically lack enzymatic activity, some have been found to contain
depolymerase-encoding regions, suggesting a potential role in degrading host surface polysac-
charides [38, 39].
TSPs, on the other hand, tend to be shorter and more rigid structures compared to TFs.
TSPs are involved in the more specific, irreversible binding to host receptors, leading to the
injection of the phage genome. Many TSPs possess enzymatic activity, often in the form of
depolymerase activity, which allows them to degrade specific components of the bacterial cell
surface, such as capsular polysaccharides or O-antigen side chains of LPS. This enzymatic
activity helps the phage penetrate the host’s protective cell layers [22, 38, 39].
For morphological identification of Caudoviricetes, the terms podovirus, myovirus, and
siphovirus remain valid identifiers [36].
The primary morphological distinctions among
podoviruses, myoviruses, and siphoviruses lie in the length, flexibility, and contractility of
their tails (see Figure 3).
Figure 3: Morphology of Caudoviricete Bacteriophages. The figure illustrates
the structure for morphological classification of Caudoviricetes, where three families
exist: (a) Myovirus, with contractile tails, (b) Podovirus, with short non-contractile
tails and no baseplate, and (c) Siphovirus, with long non-contractile tails and optional
tail fibers. This image was created in https://BioRender.com, and modified from [40].
Podoviruses are characterized by short, baseplate-less non-contractile tails. Their compact
tail structures facilitate attachment to host cells but limit the distance over which they can
inject their genetic material. Due to this structural simplicity, podoviruses often rely on
additional "pilot" proteins or DNA-injection proteins to facilitate the translocation of their
viral DNA across the host cell envelope. This process is likely accomplished through the
formation of a pore that penetrates the host envelope [41, 42].
Myoviruses possess long, contractile tails encased in a sheath capable of contraction. At
the distal end of their tails, they have complex base-plates equipped with both short and
Page 9 of 65
==PAGE:17==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
long TFs, as well as a TSP. Upon attachment to a host bacterium, the tail sheath contracts,
driving the TSP through the bacterial envelope to deliver the phage genome directly into
the cytoplasm[42] .
Siphoviruses feature long, flexible, non-contractile tails. Their tails are typically composed
of a tube surrounded by a flexible sheath. Unlike myoviruses, siphoviruses lack a contractile
mechanism, relying instead on enzymatic degradation of the bacterial cell wall and the
formation of a pore in the host membrane for DNA translocation. In siphoviruses, tail fibers
may be present, but not always [42, 43].
1.5
Bacterial Host Recognition
As previously noted, the initial stages of host recognition and infection are characterized by
high specificity, with bacteriophage-encoded RBPs accurately identifying and attaching to
distinct bacterial surface receptors. This precise targeting confines phages to their intended
bacterial hosts and generally unfolds in two phases: reversible binding followed by irreversible
attachment. However, it is important to note that there may be exceptions to this pattern
among different phages. For example, in the infection pattern of the T4 phage, which has
a myoviruses-like structure, the initial stage of host recognition involves reversible binding,
where the phage’s RBPs interact with specific receptors on the bacterial cell surface [44].
This reversible attachment allows the phage to "sample" the host before committing to
infection. For T4 this process involves the long TFs, which contain the RBP gp37 and a
chaperone gp38 protein [45]. Gp37 is a component of the long TF structure and primarily
functions as an RBP, facilitating the phage’s initial attachment to bacterial hosts. In con-
trast, gp38 serves as a chaperone, ensuring the proper folding of gp37 [44, 45]. T4’s long
TFs are known to recognize and bind two different types of receptors on the E. coli bacte-
rial envelope, namely LPS and the outer membrane protein OmpC. This dual recognition
system enhances the phage’s ability to locate suitable hosts, and also to "walk" across the
bacterial surface to find a suitable infection site [44, 45]. Once a suitable binding site is
located, the phage undergoes a conformational change that leads to irreversible binding and
commitment to the infection process. In T4, this binding step involves the short TFs, which
are normally kept in a retracted position. Upon finding an optimal site for infection, the
short TFs extend, rotate downwards, and bind irreversibly to the lipid A-inner core region
of the LPS [45]. This irreversible binding triggers conformational changes in the base-plate
structure, initiating the process of DNA injection via the TSP into the host cell.
While the T4 phage provides a well-known example of host recognition and infection, the
exact molecular mechanisms by which T4 perforates the bacterial envelope to inject its DNA
into the host are not fully understood. Additionally, its important to stress that this is just
one of many strategies used by bacteriophages. Different phages utilize various mechanisms
for host attachment and DNA injection, showcasing the diversity and adaptability of phage
infection processes.
Page 10 of 65
==PAGE:18==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
1.6
Phapecoctavirus AV126
Phapecoctavirus AV126 was isolated from a wastewater treatment plant and obtained
through direct plating on its host strain, ESBL080 E. coli, characterized by its AMR profile
including the presence of the CTX-M-14 β-lactamase gene. The genome of AV126 encodes
304 open reading frames, of which 153 have been predicted to function as early genes. How-
ever, most of these early genes are hypothetical or have unknown functions, emphasizing the
need for further functional characterization [9]. The genus Phapecoctavirus is classified un-
der the subfamily Stephanstirmvirinae within the class Caudoviricetes. Both the genus and
subfamily are relatively recent additions to viral taxonomy, introduced through the updated
ICTV classification system, resulting in limited biological and structural data [46].
The Stephanstirmvirinae subfamily of bacteriophages is characterized by its broad host
range, provided by an assembly of four different TFs and two TSPs. Together, these re-
ceptors create a versatile "Swiss army knife"-like structure, with TFs pointing in three
directions. Additionally, Stephanstirmvirinae TFs have glycosidase and colanidase activ-
ity, with some phages also encoding an additional TSP with N-acetylneuraminidase activity
[47, 48, 9]. These enzymatic activities likely break down surface polysaccharides on bacterial
cells, which often serve as barriers to phage infection. By degrading these protective layers,
Stephanstirmvirinae phages can access host cell receptors that would otherwise be inacces-
sible, thus expanding their potential host range. It is hypothesized that these phages may
initially bind to polysaccharides of enterobacterial common antigen and then to the outer
core of LPS for DNA injection. However, the role of the specific TFs in host binding has not
been elucidated yet [47, 48, 9].
Phapecoctaviruses comprises double-stranded DNA coliphages characterized by high lytic
activity and a broad host range. Although the specific host receptors and precise mech-
anisms of adsorption and infection remain unidentified, phages in the Stephanstirmvirinae
subfamily are known to encode three conserved tail fibers, each carrying glycosidase and
colanidase, degrade bacterial surface polysaccharides activity[9]. These enzymatic functions
correlate with observations that Phapecoctavirus phages reduce biofilm formation and dis-
mantle preformed biofilms, potentially explaining their broad host adaptability [49, 9]. Phage
AV126 exemplifies some of the traits found in the Phapecoctaviruses genus. Tested against
198 ESBL/AmpC-producing E. coli strains representing all known sequence types, AV126
successfully infected 65 strains (32.8%), spanning multiple phylogroups and 28 distinct se-
quence types, demonstrating a broad host range [9]. The AV126 genome lacks integrases
and repressors associated with lysogeny, confirming its obligately lytic lifestyle [9]. While
Phapecoctavirus is hypothesized to target enterobacterial common antigen and LPS during
infection - consistent with mechanisms observed in the Stephanstirmvirinae subfamily. This
was not observed in AV126 [9].
The broad host range of AV126, coupled with its uncharacterized early genes and unknown
bacterial targets, makes it a compelling candidate for phage-inspired antibacterial design.
By unraveling its inhibitory mechanisms, new insights could be gained into phage-host in-
teractions, helping to address the existing knowledge gap surrounding bacteriophages and
their potential applications.
Page 11 of 65
==PAGE:19==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
2
Project Aim
This project aims to investigate the mechanisms by which seven early-expressed Phapecoc-
tavirus AV126 proteins (gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291) inhibit the
growth of ESBL producing E. coli, and to identify their novel bacterial targets. This will
be accomplished by evaluating the growth inhibition potential of each protein, followed by a
combination of bioinformatic and experimental analysis to characterize their functions and
possible protein or DNA interactions to identify their bacterial targets. By elucidating the
role of these inhibitory proteins in bacterial reprogramming, this research seeks to aid the
development of phage-inspired antimicrobial treatments.
Page 12 of 65
==PAGE:20==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
3
Background
This section provides an overview of the methods used to obtain the seven early-expressed
Phapecoctavirus AV126 genes and the plasmid constructs utilized in this project. Addition-
ally, a comprehensive description of each plasmid and the ESBL strain used in this study is
also provided.
3.1
Identification of AV126 Early Inhibitory Genes in ESBL032
E.coli
Phapecoctavirus AV126 early-expressed genes were identified in a previous study (not pub-
lished), using a modified version of the nanopore-based cDNA Cappable-seq (ONT-cappable-
seq) method [50]. This technique enables end-to-end cDNA sequencing of primary prokary-
otic transcripts, to provide insight into the transcriptomes of AV126 and ESBL032 E. coli
at different stages of infection. To study the early transcriptome, samples were collected
5 minutes post-infection. Total RNA was isolated, and primary transcripts underwent an
enzymatic capping of the 5’ ends, followed by polyadenylation of the 3’ ends for compat-
ibility with nanopore PCR cDNA sequencing.
Sequenced primary transcripts were then
mapped to both the ESBL032 and Av126 genomes to identify early AV126 primary tran-
scripts. Early-expressed AV126 inhibitory genes were then identified from ESBL032 E. coli
growth inhibition spot test assays. This process narrowed the findings down to the seven
gene products used in this study: gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291. These
genes were subsequently cloned into the vectors pPS26 and pET28.
3.2
pPS26
The pPS26 vector is a 5899 bp low-copy plasmid designed for precise and tightly controlled
gene expression during a growth inhibition spot-test assay, minimizing unintended basal
activity, or "leakage," in the absence of an inducer. Its key replication features include an
origin of replication (oriV ) and a plasmid replication initiator protein (trfA). For selection,
it contains a kanamycin resistance gene (Neo) and includes an origin of transfer (oriT) for
horizontal gene transfer if needed. ESBL032 E. coli (ST-23) was used as an expression host
for pPS26 the expression of isolated from pig ceaca.
Gene expression is controlled by an L-rhamnose inducible promoter (rhaB), activated by
transcriptional regulators rhaR and rhaS in the presence of L-rhamnose. The use of this
stringent expression system enables the characterization of inhibition levels from each of
the gene products of interest. To suppress background transcription, the plasmid includes
dual terminators, ensuring strict regulation.
Additionally, a RBS and SD sequence are
incorporated into the forward primer, optimizing translation initiation and proper orientation
of the cloned gene. The vector map for the pPS26 backbone is provided in Figure A1 in
Appendix [51].
Page 13 of 65
==PAGE:21==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
3.3
pET28a(+)
The pET28a(+) (pEt28) vector is a 5369 bp plasmid designed for recombinant protein ex-
pression using T7 RNA polymerase. In this project, it serves as the backbone for target gene
expression and is utilized in E. coli BL21(DE3) cells (referred to as BL21). These host cells
encode the lacI gene and harbor a λ DE3 prophage, which contains the T7 RNA polymerase
gene under the control of the lacUV5 promoter. Additionally, BL21 cells contain mutated
Ion protease and OmpT protease genes, minimizing degradation of heterologously expressed
proteins [52].
The pET28 vector features a multiple cloning site (MCS) for gene insertion, along with an
associated RBS and a T7 initiation element to enable efficient transcription and translation.
Expression of the target gene is driven by the T7 promoter, which achieves high transcrip-
tional activity when T7 RNA polymerase is present. To suppress leaky expression, a lac
operator (lacO) is positioned upstream of the T7 promoter, allowing the LacI repressor to
inhibit transcription until induction. The vector-encoded lacI gene represses transcription
at both the T7 promoter and the lacUV5 promoter in BL21 cells, thus preventing basal
expression of T7 RNA polymerase.
This dual repression mechanism reduces unintended
transcription of the target gene before induction. Protein expression is triggered by the ad-
dition of isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), which inactivates LacI. This allows
transcription of the T7 RNA polymerase gene in BL21 cells and relieves repression of the
target gene on the plasmid. Such tight regulation is essential for toxic proteins, as T7 RNA
polymerase transcribes about five times faster than native E. coli RNA polymerase, risking
host resource overload. It also prevents the accumulation of harmful products that could
disrupt cellular functions or cause cell death before induction.
The pET28 plasmid is a low- to medium copy-number vector, further reducing leaky expres-
sion before induction. It includes a T7 terminator to ensure efficient transcription termina-
tion, a kanamycin resistance gene (KanR) for selection, and a pBR322 origin of replication
(ori) regulated by the small Rop gene product to maintain a controlled plasmid copy number.
For downstream purification, pET28 incorporates 6x His-tags at both the N- and C-termini,
as well as a thrombin cleavage site for flexible tag removal. A vector map of pET28 can be
seen in Figure A1 in Appendix [53].
3.4
pUC19
The pUC19 plasmid is a high-copy-number vector, 2686 base pairs in length, containing
the bla gene for ampicillin resistance (AmpR), a gene encoding the lacZα fragment of β-
galactosidase, and a pMB1 origin of replication for high plasmid yields. In this study, pUC19
was specifically chosen for its ability to facilitate a lacZα-complementation blue/white screen-
ing assay to investigate re-growth on growth inhibition plates. In this assay, an inhibitory
gene was inserted as a transcriptional fusion upstream of the lacZα gene, ensuring that both
genes are expressed under the same promoter and are translated as two seperate proteins.
When pUC19 is introduced into E. coli StellarTM competent cells, which lack the lacZα frag-
ment but express the lacZω fragment of β-galactosidase, the plasmid provides the missing
Page 14 of 65
==PAGE:22==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
α fragment. This allows the two fragments to complement each other, forming a functional
β-galactosidase enzyme capable of hydrolyzing X-gal to produce a characteristic blue color.
This complementation system serves a dual purpose: it enables visual monitoring of transfor-
mations through the blue/white screening and it facilitates the identification of colonies that
both carry the desired construct and express the inserted inhibitory gene from the shared
promoter.
The regulatory expression system in pUC19 enables stringent control of inserted genes and
the lacZα reporter gene. Similar to the expression system in pET28, expression of inserted
gene and lacZα is driven by the lac promoter and regulated by the lac operator, ensuring
tight transcriptional control with minimal basal expression. Induction of transcription is
achieved by the addition of IPTG, which inactivates the lac repressor and allows controlled
expression of the target genes. As previously mentioned, this system ensures reliable gene
induction while minimizing leaky expression. A vector map of pUC19 can be seen in Figure
A1 in Appendix [54].
3.5
ESBL032 E.coli
ESBL032 E. coli (MLST: ST-23, Serotype: O114:H9) , originally isolated from pig cecum,
was used as the host for the expression of AV126 early gene products during the growth
inhibition assay. This host has been shown to be highly sensitive to AV126 infection, making
it an ideal model for studying the molecular mechanisms employed by the phage during the
early stages of infection [9, 55]. Additionally, past projects observed that ESBL080 (MLST:
ST-88, serotype H12) was challenging to transform (data not shown), making ESBL032 a
more suitable transformation host.
Page 15 of 65
==PAGE:23==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
4
Materials & Methods
4.1
Materials & Methods
A description of the plasmids and primers used in this study can be found in Table 1 and
Table 2, respectively. An overview of the vector backbones used for the different constructs
is provided in Figure A1 in the appendix.
Plasmid name
Description (Relevant features)
Source or reference
pPS26
trfA-rhaS-rhaR-PrhaB-USER cassette, KanR
[51]
pET28a(+)
lacI- lacO-T7 promoter-MCS-His6, KanR
Merck Cat# 69864-3
pUC19
lacI-lac promoter-lacO-lacZα-MCS, AmpR
Takara Bio, Cat# 636766
pPS26-gp57
pPS26 with gp57 insert
DICOVER group
pPS26-gp68
pPS26 with gp68 insert
DICOVER group
pPS26-gp103
pPS26 with gp103 insert
DICOVER group
pPS26-gp134
pPS26 with gp134 insert
DICOVER group
pPS26-gp239
pPS26 with gp239 insert
DICOVER group
pPS26-gp256
pPS26 with gp256 insert
DICOVER group
pPS26-gp291
pPS26 with gp291 insert
DICOVER group
pET28-gp57
pET28a(+) with gp57 insert
DICOVER group
pET28-gp68
pET28a(+) with gp68 insert
DICOVER group
pET28-gp103
pET28a(+) with gp103 insert
DICOVER group
pET28-gp134
pET28a(+) with gp134 insert
DICOVER group
pET28-gp239
pET28a(+) with gp239 insert
DICOVER group
pET28-gp256
pET28a(+) with gp256 insert
DICOVER group
pET28-gp291
pET28a(+) with gp291 insert
DICOVER group
pUC19-gp134
pUC19 with gp134 insert
This work
Table 1: The plasmids used throughout this project. Notable features of the plasmid
are described as well as how the plasmid was obtained.
Page 16 of 65
==PAGE:24==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Name
Sequence
Purpose
Source
pUC19_Gp134_LacZ_F
5’-ACACAGGAAA
CAGCTATGAATAC
ATTCTAATCCGCA
GAAA-3’
Amplify gp134
gene fragment
TAG Copenhagen A/S
pUC19_Gp134_LacZ_R
5’-GGTATATTCC
TCCTGTTAATCCT
CTAAATCCATCCA
ATTATTTGTCACT
-3’
Amplify gp134
gene fragment
TAG Copenhagen A/S
pUC19_F
5’-CAGGAGGATA
TACCATGACCATG
ATTACCGCAGGC-
3’
Linearize vector
backbone
TAG Copenhagen A/S
pUC19_R
5’-AGCTGTTTCC
TGTGTGAAATTGT
-3’
Amplify vector
backbone
TAG Copenhagen A/S
Table 2: Primers used for PCR amplification of the gp134 fragment and linearization
of the pUC19 vector backbone. All primers were sourced from TAG Copenhagen A/S.
4.1.1
Sequence Analysis of The Early-Expressed AV126 Genes
Sequence analysis of early-expressed genes gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, and
gp291 was performed using integrated bioinformatics approaches. Multiple computational
tools including BLASTp [56], AlphaFold3 [57], HHpred [58], and FoldSeek [59] were employed
to predict protein functions and structural characteristics. The methodology combined se-
quence similarity searches, protein structure prediction, remote homology detection, and
structural comparison against reference databases.
4.1.2
Phapecoctavirus AV126 phage propagation
Phage propagation of Phapecoctavirus AV126 (GenBank: OR352956.1) using the original
isolation host E. coli ESBL080 [9], isolated from pig cecal, as the host strain was conducted
for the purpose of AV126 DNA isolation and plaque titration.ESBL080 was streaked out on
Luria Agar (LA) agar plates (made on-site) and set up to grow overnight (O/N) at 37◦C.
The following day, a single colony of ESBL080 was inoculated in 5 mL Luria Broth (LB)
media (made on-site), and incubated with 180 RPM shaking O/N at 37◦C. Post incubation,
LB+0.6% agar media was melted and kept at 55◦C, and a serial dilution of AV126 phage
stock (100 −10−6) was prepared.
For each dilution, 330 µL of phage dilution, 330 µL
of ESBL080 culture, and 12 mL of LB+0.6% agar media were combined, vortexed under
sterile conditions, and poured onto LA agar plates. This was performed in triplicates. After
Page 17 of 65
==PAGE:25==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
solidifying, plates were incubated O/N at 37◦C. Plates containing phage stock dilutions
10−4 −10−6 were chosen for phage harvesting. 10 mL SM buffer (100 mM NaCl, 8 mM
MgSO4.7H2O, 50 mM pH 7.5 Tris-HCl) was added to each selected plate, which were
then bagged and incubated with low shaking O/N at 4◦C . The next day, the SM buffer
containing harvested phage lysate was carefully poured from each plate into a syringe,
filtered twice through a 0.22 µm filter, and stored at 4◦C.
4.1.3
Phapecoctavirus AV126 DNA isolation
Stock Phapecoctavirus AV126 lysate was triple-filtered through a 0.22 µm filter. RNAse (10
mg/mL)(ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat#EN0531) cat and DNAse (1 U/µL) (ThermoFisher
Scientific, Cat#EN0521) were then added to final concentrations of 10 µg/mL and 20 µg/mL,
respectively, followed by incubation at 37◦C for 1 h. Post incubation, 0.5M EDTA (pH
8)(ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat#R1021) and proteinase K (20 mg/mL)(ThermoFisher Sci-
entific, Cat#EO0491) were added, to a final concentration of 20 mM and 50 µg/mL, respec-
tively, and the sample was incubated for an additional 2 h. Following incubation, the sample
was cooled to room temperature. The remaining phage DNA extraction was performed using
the Genomic DNA Clean & ConcentratorTM-10 kit (ZymoResearch, Cat#D4011) according
to manufacturers instructions. ChIP DNA-Binding Buffer was added to the phage DNA sam-
ple at a ratio of 2:1, and all centrifugations were performed at 16.000 g. The mixture was
transferred to a Zymo-Spin IC-XL Column(ZymoResearch,Cat#C1002-25) and centrifuged
for 30 seconds. After discarding the flow-through, two wash steps were performed using 200
µL DNA Wash Buffer. The DNA was then eluted using 10µL DNA Elution Buffer (10 mM
Tris, pH 8.5, 0.1 mM EDTA)(ZymoResearch,Cat#D3004-4-10), with a one-min incubation
at room temperature before the final centrifugation. DNA concentration was then measured
in the eluted sample, using a DeNovix DS-11 FX+ Spectrophotometer/Fluorometer, and
stored at -20◦C.
4.1.4
Phapecoctavirus AV126 plaque titration experiment
Phage titration was performed to determine the number of plaque-forming units (PFU) per
mL in the phage stock. The experiment was conducted in biological and technical triplicates.
The host strain was streaked on a LA agar plate and incubated O/N at 37◦C. A single colony
was inoculated into 5 mL LB media and incubated O/N at 37◦C with 180 RPM shaking.
A serial dilution of the phage stock 10−1 −10−8 was prepared in Eppendorf tubes, each
containing 900 µL LB medium. 100 µL of phage stock was added to the 10−1 dilution and
serially diluted. For the bacterial lawn, LB+0.6% agar medium was melted and kept at
55◦C. 4 mL of the melted 0.6% agar LB medium was mixed with 100 µL of the ESBL080
O/N culture in a 15 mL falcon tube. This mixture was then poured onto LA agar plate and
allowed to solidify in sterile conditions. 10 µL of each phage dilution was spotted onto the
lawn using a filter pipette tip. After drying, plates were incubated O/N at 37◦C. Plaques
Page 18 of 65
==PAGE:26==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
were counted from the least concentrated dilution showing separate plaques. The phage titer
was calculated using the formula: .
(Counted plaques) × 100 × (Positive dilution factor) = PFU/mL
The average titer was calculated from triplicate measurements.
4.1.5
Growth Inhibition Spot-Test Assay of AV126 Early-Expressed Genes
To assess the toxicity of each selected early stage inhibitory gene, a spot-test assay was
performed by diluting each strain and spotting 10µL onto inducing (5 mM L-rhamnose)
or non-inducing (0 mM L-rhamnose) agar plates. Each bacterial strain of cloned pPS26
ESBL032 E. coli with one of the early-expressed genes, as well as a postive and negative
control, were plated on 50µg/ml Kanamycin (Kan50) (Sigma, Cat#BP906) LA plates, and
inoculated O/N at 37◦C, while shaking at 180 RPM. The positive control contained the
pPS26 vector with the T4 bacteriophage alc gene, while the negative control contained
an empty pPS26 vector. After incubation, a single colony from each culture was inoculated
with 200µL LB+Kan50 into a 96-well microtiter plate (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat#15041),
and then incubated O/N at 37◦C. Two square (LA+Kan50L agar) plates were prepared in
parallel for spot-testing, with one plate containing 0 mM and the other 5 mM L-rhamnose
(0.5M)(Sigma, Cat#83650). The following day, each strain was ten-fold diluted (100 −10−5)
in LB+Kan50, and 10µL of the undiluted culture and each dilution were spotted onto the
two square (LA+Kan50L agar) plates, with and without L-rhamnose, and the spots were
left to dry. Once dry, each plate was inoculated upside down O/N at 37◦C. Each assay was
made in duplicates for all genes.
4.1.6
Expression of AV126 Phage Early Genes in BL21(DE3) Cells Transformed
with pET28 Constructs
Recombinant production of gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291 were per-
formed in the following manner. -80◦C BL21(DE3) E. coli stocks (Agilent, Cat#230245), each
transformed with pET28 encoding a different early phage gene, were streaked on LA+Kan50
agar plates, and incubated O/N at 37◦C. Post incubation, 1 isolated colony was inoculated
in 10 mL LB+Kan50 media, and incubated O/N at 37◦C with 180 RPM shaking. The fol-
lowing day, 1 L of LB+Kan50 mixture was transferred to an autoclaved 2L Erlenmeyer flask,
and inoculated with 10 mL of O/N culture. The inoculated mixture was incubated at 37◦C
with shaking at 180 RPM until OD600 ≈0.8, which took approximately 3-4 h. Recombinant
protein expression was induced by adding 500 µL of 1M IPTG (ThermoFisher Scientific,
Cat#R0392) to achieve a final concentration of 0.5 mM. The culture was then incubated at
16◦C with shaking at 180 RPM for 18-24 hs. The day after, the culture was transferred
to a 500 mL sterile centrifuge bottle under sterile conditions. The cells were harvested by
centrifugation at 4000 RPM for 30 min at 4◦C. The resulting cell pellet was re-suspended in
9 mL of lysis buffer (20 mM Na2HPO4, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM Imidazole) and transferred
Page 19 of 65
==PAGE:27==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
to a 50 mL Falcon tube. Samples of the cell pellet and supernatant were collected for SDS-
PAGE. Cell disruption was performed using a Bandelin SONOPULS UW2070 sonificator,
while keeping the sample on ice. The cells were sonicated 8 times for 30 seconds each at 80%
power for 9 cycles, with intervals between each cycle to prevent sample heating. The lysate
was then centrifuged at 10000 RPM for 10 min at 4◦C to remove insoluble cell debris. The
supernatant was collected and filtered twice through a 0.22 µm filter using a syringe.
4.1.7
IMAC
Protein
Purification
of
AV126
Gene
Products
with
His
GraviTrapTM
Purification of the target AV126 6x His-tagged recombinant proteins (gp57, gp68, gp103,
gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291) was performed using the His GraviTrapTM purification kit
(Cytiva, Cat#11003399), following the manufacturer’s protocol. The aim of this method was
to purify and concentrate the histidine-tagged protein samples utilizing Immobilized Metal
ion Affinity Chromatography (IMAC) and buffer exchange. This purification procedure was
consistent for all gene products.
The Cytiva His GraviTrapTM column was prepared by
cutting off the tip and removing the storage liquid. The column was then equilibrated with
10 mL of lysis buffer (20 mM Na2HPO4, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM imidazole).
Up to 35
mL of 2X filtered, unpurified His-tagged protein sample from the protein expression was
loaded onto the column, ensuring not to exceed the binding capacity of approximately 40
mg of protein. The column was washed with 10 mL of lysis buffer, and the protein was
eluted with 5 mL of elution buffer (20 mM Na2HPO4, 500 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole).
The column was re-equilibrated with 10 mL of lysis buffer and stored with 20 mL of 20%
ethanol. For buffer exchange and concentration, Amicon® Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units
with a molecular weight cut-off 2 times smaller than the molecular weight of the protein of
interest were used. The eluted protein sample was loaded into the Amicon filter unit and
centrifuged at approximately 4000 RPM for 15-60 min, until at volume of 1 mL was reached.
The concentrated volume was noted, and at least 3x the volume of the Tris Buffered Saline
(TBS) (25mM Tris.HCl, 1.15M NaCl, pH7.2) exchange buffer was added. The sample was
then centrifuged at 7700 RPM for 20 min until the original volume was reached. During
purification, fractions of the 2X filtered sample flowthrough, 1st wash step, and final IMAC
purified and Amicon concentrated elution sample were collected in separate falcon tubes for
subsequent SDS-PAGE analysis. Stocks of each purified product were prepared by diluting
with 99.5% glycerol to 10% final concentration and stored at -20◦C.
4.1.8
SDS-PAGE
Samples were prepared by mixing 26 µL of sample with 4 µL 0.5 M DTT and 10 µL Ther-
moFisher NuPageTM LDS sample buffer (Cat#NP0008). The mixtures were heated at 95◦C
for 5 min and then immediately placed on ice. A ThermoFisher NuPageTM 4-12% Bis-Tris
gel (Cat#NP0322BOX or #NP0321BOX) was washed with Milli-Q water and locked into an
XCell SureLockTM mini-cell chamber. The upper chamber was filled with 1x MES SDS buffer
Page 20 of 65
==PAGE:28==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
(ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat#B0002), and 0.5 mL ThermoFisher Scientific NuPageTM an-
tioxidant (Cat#NP0005) was added. The lower chamber was also filled with 1x MES SDS
buffer to the chamber marker. 20 µL of each sample was loaded into the gel wells, along
with 5 µL PageRulerTM Prestained protein ladder (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat#26619) as
a molecular weight marker. The gel was run at 180 V for approximately 30 min. After elec-
trophoresis, the gel was washed three times with Milli-Q water. It was then stained using 40
mL Liquid Substrate System blue stain (Sigma-AldrichTM, Cat#B1911) for 15-30 min with
gentle shaking. Following staining, the gel was washed with Milli-Q water and left shaking
in Milli-Q water O/N. SDS gel analysis was performed the following day using a Bio-Rad
Gel Doc XR+ system.
4.1.9
Quantification of Purified AV126 Phage Proteins Using Bradford Assay
The PierceTM Bradford Plus Protein Assay Kit with Dilution-FreeTM BSA Protein Standards
was employed to quantify the total protein concentration of purified protein products ex-
pressed from BL21(DE3) pET28 constructs containing genes of interest (gp57, gp68, gp103,
gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291). All reagents and samples were stored at 4◦C when not
in use. The kit provided pre-diluted bovine serum albumin (BSA) protein standards in an
8-channel tubestrip format compatible with multichannel pipettes. The tubestrip contained
1 mL of each BSA concentration: 2, 1.5, 1, 0.75, 0.5, 0.25, and 0.125 mg/mL, with one empty
tube for blank solution. To prepare the standards, the foil was carefully removed from the
tubestrip, and the provided strip cap was used to reseal the tubes.
The Bradford Plus
Reagent was prepared by gently inverting the bottle several times immediately before use,
avoiding shaking. The required amount of reagent was removed and equilibrated to room
temperature before use. For the standard microplate procedure, 5 µL of each standard or
unknown sample was pipetted into appropriate wells of a 96-well microplate (ThermoFisher
Scientific, Cat#15041). 250 µL of Bradford Plus Reagent was added to each well, and the
plate was mixed on a plate shaker at 180 RPM for 30 seconds at room temperature. After
removing the plate from the shaker, it was incubated at room temperature for 10 min. The
absorbance was then measured using a plate reader at 595 nm. For data analysis, the average
595 nm measurement for the blank replicates was subtracted from all other individual stan-
dard and unknown sample replicates. A standard curve was prepared by plotting the average
blank-corrected 595 nm measurements for each BSA standard against its concentration in
µg/mL. This curve was used to determine the protein concentration of each unknown sample.
The working range for this standard microplate procedure was 125-1,500 µg/mL. To enhance
accuracy, a four-parameter (quadratic) curve was applied for data fitting. The micro-molar
(µM) values for each sample were calculated from BradFord estimated concentrations and
protein molecular weight, using the following formula:
Micro-molar (µM) = Concentration (µg/mL)
Molecular Weight (kDa) × 1000
Page 21 of 65
==PAGE:29==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
4.1.10
DNA-Binding Analysis of AV126 Phage Gene Products Using EMSA
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA) was performed to determine the capacity of
purified proteins gp57, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291 to bind single-stranded DNA
(ssDNA) and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). The DNA from phage phiX174 was used to
test for ssDNA (PhiX virion)(New England Biolabs, Cat#N3023S) and dsDNA (PhiX RF
I)(New England Biolabs, Cat#N3021S) binding.
For each EMSA, a 1% agarose gel was
prepared by mixing 1.5 g of agarose with 150 mL of 1X TAE buffer.
The mixture was
boiled in a microwave until clear, then cooled before adding 10 µL of ethidium bromide.
Electroporation was carried out in 1X TAE buffer, and run at 160 V for 30-40 min. A
GeneRuler 1 kb Plus DNA Ladder ( ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat#SM1333) was used a
DNA size reference.
For each protein, a dilution series was prepared based on previous protein concentration mea-
surements using the Bradford Assay (see Section 4.1.9). The dilution series was calculated
using the following formula:
V2 = C1 × V1
C2
Where:
C1 = Initial concentration (stock concentration)
V1 = Volume of stock solution to use
C2 = Final desired concentration
V2 = Final total volume
The same dilution series was applied to both the dsDNA- and ssDNA-binding experiments
for each protein product. A 5x EMSA buffer (20 mM Tris 1 mM MgCl2, 50 mM NaCl,
0.4 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM dTT, 12.5% glycerol) was made by combining specific volumes of
stock solutions to achieve the desired final concentrations. For each reaction, 5 µL of diluted
protein was mixed with 2 µL 5x EMSA buffer, 2 µL milliQ water, and 1 µL of either 1:10
diluted phiX174 RFI DNA (dsDNA; 100 ng/µL = 57 nM) or 1:5 diluted phiX174 virion DNA
(ssDNA; 200 ng/µL = 57 nM). Two negative controls were prepared for each experiment. In
the First negative control, 1 µL of MilliQ water replaced the phiX174 DNA and mixed with
the dilution containing the highest protein concentration. In the second negative control,
5 µL of MiliQ water replaced the protein solution. A positive control was also included,
using the T4 protein gp32 (which is known to bind DNA[60]) in place of the gene product
being tested. The mixtures were incubated for 20 min at room temperature. Following
incubation, 2 µL of 6x TriTrack DNA loading dye (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat#R1161) was
added to each sample. 10 µL of each sample and 5 µL of GeneRuler 1 kb plus DNA ladder
(ThermoFisher Scientific SM1333) were loaded onto the 1% agarose gel. Gel electrophoresis
was run at 100 V for 30-40 min and visualized using a Bio-Rad Gel Doc XR+ system.
Page 22 of 65
==PAGE:30==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
4.1.11
ATPase Activity Assay for AV126 Phage Gene Product gp239
The ATPase activity assay is a modified version of the PiPerTM Pyrophosphate Assay kit
(TherimoFischer Scientific, Cat#P22062), which aimed to evaluate the ATPase function
of the purified gp239 protein, previously identified as a PhoH-like protein associated with
phosphate starvation responses. The ATPase activity of gp239 was assessed by replacing
the inorganic pyrophosphatase component of the assay with the purified gp239 protein
and using ATP as the substrate. The gp239 purified protein was obtained as previously
described (see Sections 4.1.6 & 4.1.7). All the ATPase assay stock solutions were prepared:
Amplex® Red reagent ( MW = 257 kDa) was dissolved in 100 µL of anhydrous DMSO
to prepare a 10 mM stock solution, immediately prior to use. A 1X reaction buffer was
prepared by diluting 5 mL of the provided 5X reaction buffer (500 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM
MgCl2, pH 7.5) with 20 mL of deionized water. The Amplex® working solution for the
assay was freshly prepared within 15 min of use by combining 4.68 mL of 1X reaction buffer,
50 µL of the Amplex® Red stock solution, 100 µL of 200 U/mL maltose phosphorylase
stock, 50 µL of 200 U/mL glucose oxidase stock, 20 µL of 100 U/mL horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) stock, 50 µL of 40 mM maltose stock, and 1 µL of 100 mM ATP stock solution.
Gp239 dilutions were prepared in 1X reaction buffer to final concentrations of 12.5 µM, 25
µM, 50 µM, 100 µM, and 150 µM. A 1X reaction buffer without gp239 was included to
account for background fluorescence. A negative control was prepared using a non-diluted
concentration of 62.7 µM and a 50% diluted concentration of 31.35 µM of gp103, a protein
with no known ATPase activity. For each reaction, 50 µL of the respective gp239 dilution
or control solution was pipetted into wells of a microplate. The reactions were initiated by
adding 50 µL of the freshly prepared Amplex® Red working solution, which included ATP
as the substrate. The final reaction volume per well was 100 µL. The plate was incubated at
37◦C for ≈1 h, protected from light, to allow the reaction to proceed. Simultaneously, the
fluorescence emissions of the resulting product, resorufin, were measured over time using a
fluorescence microplate reader set at an excitation wavelength of 530-560 nm and emission
detection at 590 nm. Fluorescence detection was measured using a fluorescence micro-plate
reader. To account for background signals, the fluorescence values from the 0 µM negative
controls were subtracted from the experimental samples. To compare the activities across
different gp239 concentrations and controls, a one-way analysis of variance was performed
(data not shown).
The specificity of the assay was validated through negative control
experiments using gp103.
4.1.12
PolyHis Protein:Protein Lysate Pull-Down assay
Purified stock gp134 was used as "bait protein" for the in-vitro protein interaction assay,
conducted with the PierceTM PolyHis Protein:Protein Pull-Down kit (ThermoFisher Scien-
tific, Cat#21277) using a modified version of the manufacturer’s instructions. Lysate from E.
coli ESBL032 was used as prey protein, to investigate potential bait binding. In this assay,
a non-treated gel control, which included the prey protein but omitted the bait, (P.), was
used to identify and eliminate false positives resulting from nonspecific protein binding to
Page 23 of 65
==PAGE:31==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
the HisPur Cobalt Resin. Additionally, an immobilized bait control was included, containing
the bait protein but excluding prey protien addition, (B.), to address potential false positives
arising from nonspecific protein interactions with the polyhistidine tag on the bait protein.
This immobilized bait control served a dual purpose, also functioning as a positive control
to confirm the cobalt affinity resin’s ability to effectively capture the polyhistidine-tagged
bait protein. For each experiment, the HisPur Cobalt Resin was first equilibrated through
a series of steps to prepare it for bait protein immobilization. First, 50 µL of thoroughly
re-suspended resin slurry was pipetted into labeled spin columns. A wash solution containing
10 mM imidazole was then added to each column. The columns were capped, inverted for
mixing, and centrifuged to remove the wash solution. This washing process was repeated
five times to ensure proper equilibration of the resin. Once equilibrated, bait protein immo-
bilization was performed. The bottom caps of the spin columns were applied, and ≈150
µg gp134 was added to each bait containing columns. The columns were capped and incu-
bated at 4◦C for 1 h, with gentle rocking to allow for binding. Following incubation, the top
and bottom caps were removed, and the bait containing columns were placed into collection
tubes before being centrifuged at 1250 g for 30 seconds to 1 min to collect the unbound
bait protein, labeled as bait flow-through. The columns were then recapped, and 400 µL
of wash solution was added. The capped columns were inverted several times for thorough
mixing, followed by centrifugation to collect and discard the wash. This washing process was
repeated five times to eliminate nonspecific interactions, ensuring effective immobilization
of the polyhistidine-tagged bait protein. Following bait protein immobilization, prey lysate
preparation was carried out using E. coli ESBL032 lysate. E. coli ESBL032 culture was
transferred to a sterile centrifuge tube. The culture was then centrifuged at 5000 g for 5
min, and the supernatant was discarded. The cell pellet was re-suspended in TBS (25 mM
Tris- HCl, 0.15 M NaCl; pH 7.2). After transferring the cell suspension to a new sterile cen-
trifuge tube, it was centrifuged again at 5000 g for 5 min, and the supernatant was discarded.
The pellet was then re-suspended in 200 µL of ice-cold TBS per 5 mL of starting culture.
Pierce Lysis Buffer was added to the mixture, and the lysate was then incubated on ice for
30 mins, periodic inversion of the tubes to ensure complete lysis. Following incubation, the
lysate was centrifuged at 12.000 g for 5 min to remove cell debris and insoluble material.
The clarified supernatant was carefully decanted into a new tube and stored on ice. To
prevent nonspecific binding during the subsequent pull-down assay, Imidazole stock solution
was added to the lysate to a final concentration of 10 mM imidazole. Following prey lysate
preparation, the prey protein capture step was performed. The bottom cap was applied to
the non-control Pierce Spin Column containing the immobilized polyhistidine-tagged bait
protein and the non-treated gel control, and up to 800 µL of prepared prey protein sample
was added. The column was capped and incubated at 4◦C for 2 h with gentle rocking to
allow binding. After incubation, the caps were removed, and the column was centrifuged
to collect the prey flow-through. The column was then subjected to a series of wash steps
to remove nonspecific interactions. Each wash involved adding 400 µL of wash solution,
inverting the capped column several times, and centrifuging to collect the wash fraction.
This process was repeated for a total of five washes to ensure thorough removal of unbound
proteins. After capturing the prey protein, the bait-prey complex and the control samples
were eluted from the resin using an elution buffer (290 mM imidazole in wash solution).
Page 24 of 65
==PAGE:32==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
To elute, 250 µL of buffer was added to each spin column, incubated for 5 min with gentle
rocking, and centrifuged to collect the eluate, labeled as "Elution". Fractions of bait and
prey elutions, as well as flowthroughs, for all experiments were collected and analyzed by
SDS-PAGE (see Section 4.1.8) for visualization.
4.1.13
Screening for Optimal Host, for the lacZα-complementation blue/white
screening assay
Stock E. coli ESBL032 and E. coli StellarTM (HST08) competent cells (Takara, Cat#636766)
transformed with gp291 were plated onto LA 100 µg/mL ampicillin (amp100) agar plates,
with and without 40 µg/mL X-gal (X-gal40) (gp291, non-inducing). The plates were incu-
bated overnight (O/N) at 37◦C and examined the following day for blue or white colony
formation.
4.1.14
PCR Amplification: Primer Design & Fragment Amplification and Vec-
tor Linearization protocol
All PCR-amplifications were performed, using the CloneAmpTM HiFi PCR Premix (Takara
Bio, Cat# 639298). Two sets of primers were designed for the PCR amplification and to facil-
itate the following In-Fusion Cloning of gp134 gene fragment, amplified from a gp134 cloned
pPS26 plasmid construct, into a linearized and amplified pUC19 backbone vector (Takara
Bio, Cat#636766).
The primers pUC19_Gp134_LacZ_F and pUC19_Gp134_LacZ_R
were used to amplify the gp134 fragment from a plasmid template containing the AV126
inhibitory gene cloned into the pPS26 vector backbone. Designed for In-Fusion HD Cloning,
each primer has a 5’ region with 15 bases homologous to the linearized pUC19 vector ends
for seamless integration and a 3’ region specific to the gp134 cloned pPS26 DNA template,
measuring 25 bases in pUC19_Gp134_LacZ_F and 36 bases in pUC19_Gp134_LacZ_R,
ensuring high specificity and amplification efficiency. The primers pUC19-F and pUC19-R
were designed to PCR amplify and linearize the pUC19 backbone vector.
Both primers
included 15 bp homologous regions at their 5’ ends, corresponding to 15 bp overlaps in the
gp134 fragment. The 3’ regions of the primers were specifically designed as follows: pUC19-
R: The 8 bp 3’ region was specific to the Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence of the lacZα gene.
pUC19-F: The 21 bp 3’ region was specific to the first 21 bases of the lacZα gene. Impor-
tantly, the 15 bp overlap between pUC19-F and pUC19_Gp134_LacZ_R contains the SD
sequence for the lacZα gene. This design ensures that the vector is precisely linearized, the
original SD sequence is preserved in front of the gp134 gene, and an additional SD sequence
is created from the primer overlap for the lacZα gene. This transcriptional fusion ensures
that both the gp134 and lacZα genes are independently translated from a single mRNA
transcript, as each gene retains its own SD sequence. This design preserves the regulatory
elements of both the insert and the vector, maintaining proper expression of the fusion con-
struct. Furthermore, because lacZα is transcribed separately but translated independently,
its function remains unaffected by mutations in the upstream gp134 gene. As a result, lacZα
can still be used for blue-white screening, even if gp134 undergoes mutations. An overview
of both primer pairs, as well as their source, can be found in Table 2.
Page 25 of 65
==PAGE:33==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
The PCR-amplification master mix was prepared in PCR tubes, by combining 12.5 µL of
CloneAmp HiFi PCR Premix (Cat#639298), 1 µL each of forward and reverse primers (final
concentration of 0.2 µM), template DNA (adjusted to a final concentration of 1 ng/µL), and
sterilized distilled water to adjust the total reaction volume to 25 µL. The settings for the
thermal cycler was as follows:
For PCR linearization of the vector backbone, the protocol was as follows: an initial
denaturation at 98◦C for 2 min, followed by denaturation at 98◦C for 10 seconds, annealing at
57◦C for 10 seconds, and extension at 72◦C for 20 seconds. These three steps (denaturation,
annealing, and extension) were cycled 35 times, with a final extension at 72◦C for 1 min
following the 35th cycle.
For fragment PCR amplification, the protocol was as follows: an initial denaturation at
98◦C for 2 min, followed by denaturation at 98◦C for 10 seconds, annealing at 57◦C for 10
seconds, and extension at 72◦C for 5 seconds. These three steps (denaturation, annealing,
and extension) were cycled 35 times, with a final extension at 72◦C for 1 min following the
35th cycle.
Post amplification, the DNA was subsequently PCR purified (see Section 4.1.15).
4.1.15
PCR DNA Purification
Purification of DNA from PCR mixtures were performed using the illustraTM GFXTM PCR
DNA and Band Purification Kit. Purification of DNA from PCR mixtures was performed
using the illustra™GFX™PCR DNA and Band Purification Kit. For each sample, 500 µl
of Capture buffer type 3 (blue) was added to up to 100 µl of the PCR reaction mixture in
a clean 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube and mixed thoroughly by pipetting. The mixture was
briefly centrifuged to collect the liquid at the bottom of the tube. The entire sample was
then transferred to a GFX MicroSpin column placed in a clean 2 ml collection tube. The
column was centrifuged in a microcentrifuge at 16.000 g for 30 seconds. The flow-through was
discarded, and the collection tube was reused for the subsequent washing step. To wash the
sample, 500 µl of Wash buffer type 1 was added to the column. The column was centrifuged
at 16.000 g for 30 seconds. The collection tube containing the flow-through was discarded,
and the GFX MicroSpin column was transferred to a fresh DNase-free 1.5 ml microcentrifuge
tube. To elute the purified DNA, 10-50 µl of Elution buffer type 6 (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH
8.0) was applied directly to the center of the membrane in the GFX MicroSpin column. The
column was incubated at room temperature for 1 min, then centrifuged at 16.000 g for 1
min to recover the purified DNA. DNA concentration was measured using a DeNovix DS-11
FX+ Spectrophotometer/Fluorometer. The eluted DNA was stored at -20°C until further
use.
4.1.16
In-Fusion Cloning of pUC19 Constructs
In-Fusion Cloning was performed using the gp134 fragment, PCR-amplified with insertion-
specific overhangs, and the linearized pUC19 backbone vector, previously amplified with
complementary overhangs (see Section 4.1.14. The In-Fusion Cloning was made using the
Page 26 of 65
==PAGE:34==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
In-Fusion® Snap Assembly Master Mix (Takara Bio, Cat#638948). The cloning was per-
formed using an insert-to-vector ratio of 2:1, calculated using Takara Bio’s online In-Fusion
Molecular Ratio Calculator [61]. The total amplified DNA amount (insert + vector) used
for the calculation is 200 ng, which is optimal for a 10-µl In-Fusion Cloning reaction. The
In-Fusion cloning reaction was prepared by mixing 2µL of 5X In-Fusion HD Enzyme Pre-
mix with calculated amounts of linearized pUC19 vector and purified PCR fragment. The
specific amounts of the vector and fragment were determined based on their DNA con-
centrations, measured using a DeNovix DS-11 FX+ Spectrophotometer/Fluorometer. The
required amounts of vector and fragment solutions for the In-Fusion Cloning procedure were
calculated using this formula:
Volume needed (µL) = Amount required (ng)
Concentration (ng/µL)
MilliQ water was added as needed to adjust the total reaction volume to 10 µL. The reaction
mixture was gently mixed, incubated at 50◦C for 15 min, and subsequently transformed into
E. coli StellarTM (HST08) Competent Cells.
4.1.17
Transformation of E. coli StellarTM (HST08) Competent cells
The transformation of E. coli StellarTM (HST08) Competent cells with the pUC19-gp134
plasmid construct was performed using a modified Clontech transformation protocol PT5055-
2. Competent cells were thawed from -80◦C stock, and 50 µL of thawed cells were transferred
into an eppendorf tube and gently mixed. For transformation, 2.5µL to 5 µL of In-Fusion
cloning reaction was added to the cells, followed by incubation on ice for 30 min. The cells
were then heat-shocked at 42◦C for exactly 45 seconds and immediately placed back on ice
for 1-2 min. Instead of SOC medium, pre-warmed (37◦C) LB medium was added to the
mixture to a final volume of 500 µL. The cells were then incubated at 37◦C with shaking
at 180 RPM for 1 h. Following incubation, the cells were centrifuged for 3 min at 5000
RPM, and 200 µL of the supernatant was removed. The remaining cells were re-suspended,
and 100 µL was plated onto one LA (amp100, X-gal40, 0.5 mM IPTG) agar plate. An
additional 200 µL was plated onto a second identical plate. Both platings performed using
glass bead.
Both plates were then incubated O/N at 37◦C. The transformed cells were
subsequently inoculated in 10 mL LB+amp100 media O/N at 37◦C with 180 RPM. 500 µL
was used for a growth inhibition assay, 500 µ/L was used as stock and stored at -80◦C, and
the pUC19-gp134 plasmid construct was purified from the remaining transformants, using
the ThermoFisher Scientific GeneJET Plasmid Miniprep kit (see Section 4.1.19).
4.1.18
Growth Inhibition Spot-test Assay of pUC19-gp134 Transformed E. coli
StellarTM (HST08) Competent cells
To determine whether the pUC19-gp134 transformed E. coli StellarTM (HST08) Competent
cells were growth-inhibited by gp134, a modified version of the growth inhibition spot-test
assay was conducted (see Section 4.1.5). A successfully transformed blue E. coli StellarTM
colony was inoculated in 10 mL of LB+amp100 media and incubated O/N at 37◦C with
Page 27 of 65
==PAGE:35==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
shaking at 180 RPM. A 500 µL aliquot of the O/N culture was serially diluted to create
a dilution series ranging from 100 to 10−5. Then, 10 µL of each dilution was spotted onto
LA agar plates containing either inducing (0.5 mM IPTG) or non-inducing (0 mM IPTG)
conditions, along with amp100 and X-gal40. The non-inducing plate served as the negative
control for the experiment. After the spots dried, the plates were incubated upside down
O/N at 37◦C.
4.1.19
Purification of pUC19-gp134 Plasmid Construct Using Centrifugation
A blue E. coli StellarTM (HST08) Competent cell colony transformed with the gp134-cloned
pUC19 plasmid vector was inoculated in 10 mL of LB supplemented with 100 µg/mL ampi-
cillin and incubated O/N at 37◦C with shaking at 180 RPM. Following inoculation, plasmid
DNA extraction was performed, following the ThermoFisher Scientific GeneJET Plasmid
Miniprep kit Protocol A. "Plasmid DNA purification using centrifuges". The inoculated
transformed bacterial culture was pelleted by centrifugation at 8000 rpm (6800 × g) for 2
min at room temperature. As pUC19 is a high-copy plasmid (300-700 copies per cell), only
5 mL of the bacterial culture was processed to avoid exceeding the GeneJET spin column
capacity of 20 µg of dsDNA. The supernatant was carefully decanted, ensuring all remaining
medium was removed. The pelleted cells were thoroughly re-suspended in 250 µL of Resus-
pension Solution (containing RNase A) by vortexing until no cell clumps remained. The cell
suspension was transferred to a microcentrifuge tube, where 250 µL of Lysis Solution was
added. The tube was gently inverted 4–6 times to mix, until the solution became viscous
and slightly clear. This step was limited to 5 min to prevent denaturation of the supercoiled
plasmid DNA. Next, 350 µL of Neutralization Solution was added and immediately mixed
by inverting the tube 4-6 times. The neutralized bacterial lysate became cloudy, and the
mixture was centrifuged for 5 min to pellet cell debris and chromosomal DNA. The super-
natant was carefully transferred to a GeneJET spin column, avoiding the white precipitate.
The column was centrifuged at 14.000 RPM for 1 min, and the flow-through was discarded.
Two wash steps were performed by adding 500 µL of Wash Solution (diluted with ethanol) to
the column, centrifuging at 14.000 RPM for 30-60 seconds, and discarding the flow-through
each time. An additional 1-min centrifugation at 14.000 RPM was performed to remove
residual Wash Solution. Finally, the GeneJET spin column was transferred to a fresh 1.5
mL microcentrifuge tube. To elute the plasmid DNA, 100 µL of Elution Buffer (10 mM Tris-
HCl, pH 8.5) was added to the center of the column membrane. After a 2-min incubation
at room temperature, the column was centrifuged at 14.000 RPM for 2 min to collect the
purified plasmid DNA. Plasmid DNA concentration was measured using a DeNovix DS-11
FX+ Spectrophotometer/Fluorometer, and stored at -20◦C.
Page 28 of 65
==PAGE:36==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
5
Results
5.1
Growth Inhibition Spot-Test Assay Analysis of E. coli ESBL032
using AV126 Early-Expressed Genes
To assess the toxicity of the selected AV126 early-expressed inhibitory genes of interest (gp57,
gp68, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291), E. coli ESBL032 strains transformed with
a low-copy pPS26 plasmid constructs, containing one of the inhibitory genes of interest,
were compared by spotting liquid cultures onto LA+Kan50 agar plates. The plates were
supplemented either with or without L-rhamnose to evaluate gene-induced effects on growth,
allowing comparison of toxicity levels. The low-copy nature of the pPS26 plasmid is crucial
for the toxicity assay, as it ensures controlled expression of the inhibitory genes and prevents
over-expression, which could lead to unregulated toxicity and misleading results. Positive
and negative controls were also included. The positive control involved E. coli ESBL032
transformed with a pPS26 plasmid construct containing the T4 bacteriophage Alc gene,
which inhibits bacterial growth by halting transcription [62].
The negative control used
an E. coli ESBL032 strain transformed with an empty pPS26 plasmid, and was therefore
expected to display no growth inhibition.
Each experiment was performed in biological
duplicates, and each strain sample was spotted horizontally following a dilution series from
100 −10−5. Results from the growth inhibition assay of gp57, gp68, gp134, gp239, gp256,
and gp291 can be seen in Figure 4A. Due to a mix-up, gp103 was not inculded in the initial
assay, and was therefore examined in a separate assay under identical conditions (Figure
4B).
Page 29 of 65
==PAGE:37==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure 4: Growth Inhibition Spot-Test Assay of E. coli ESBL032
transformed with pPS26 plasmids expressing selected inhibitory genes.
Figures A and B show different experiments conducted under the same conditions. A:
Growth inhibition assay of gp57, gp68, gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291. B: Growth
inhibition assay of gp103. Cultures were spotted as a dilution series (100 −10−5) on
LB+Kan50 agar plates supplemented with either 0 mM or 5 mM L-rhamnose. The
empty pPS26 and T4 Alc-containing pPS26 transformants were used as negative and
positive controls, respectively, in both experiments.
The positive and negative controls yielded the expected results in both assays (Figure 4A & B).
The empty pPS26 vector showed no effect on growth under either induced or un-induced conditions,
while the induced T4 Alc positive control exhibited observable inhibition even at a 10−1-dilution.
In the absence of induction, the T4 Alc control displayed no detectable gene expression leakage,
matching the behavior observed with the empty pPS26 control.
The toxicity levels varied across the gene products, with distinct patterns of growth inhibition
observed. Transformants containing gp103 in experiment Figure 4B exhibited the highest level of
growth inhibition, observable at the 10−1 dilution, though some inconsistent inhibition was noted
at the 10−3 dilution. Previous work in our group (data not shown) suggested that gp134 exhibited
the highest level of inhibition. However, this is not consistent with the results shown in Figure
4B, which indicate that gp103 has the highest inhibitory capacity. As previously stated gp103 was
tested in a separate experiment and thus, a direct comparison between Figures4A & 4B may
not be accurate. Therefore, it remains likely that gp134 is actually the most inhibitory protein.
Both gp68 and gp134 displayed growth inhibition at the 10−2 dilution, with gp134 showing a more
pronounced inhibitory effect. Similarly, gp256, gp291, and gp239 all demonstrated growth inhibition
at the 10−3 dilution, with gp239 inhibiting growth to a lesser extent compared to gp256 and gp291.
In contrast, gp57 exhibited the lowest growth inhibition among the gene products, with only slight
observable effects between 10−3 and 10−5 dilution.
In all cases, the emergence of new, visibly
distinct colonies was observed on inhibiting plates, suggesting that some bacterial cells resumed
growth.
Overall, the results indicate that each gene product can inhibit the growth of E. coli ESBL032 when
induced with L-Rhamnose, corroborating previous growth inhibition assays of these genes (data not
shown).
5.2
Sequence Analysis of Selected AV126 Inhibitory Genes
Sequence analysis of the Phapecoctavirus AV126 inhibitory genes(gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134, gp239,
gp256, and gp291) was performed to investigate their potential functions and bacterial targets. The
initial sequence analysis was conducted using BLASTp and HHpred, and yielded mostly inconclusive
results, except for gp239. The findings suggest that gp239 is either a PhoH-like or PhoH2 protein,
both linked to phosphate starvation and ATPase activity. Additionally, PhoH2 also possesses RNA
helicase and ribonuclease functions [63, 64]. A summary of all BLASTp and HHpred findings is
provided in Table 8 in Appendix. To complement these results, AlphaFold3 was used to predict
the structures of each protein. The AlphaFold3 predicted structures are shown in Figure 5.
Page 30 of 65
==PAGE:38==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure 5: AlphaFold3 Predicted Structures of AV126 Inhibition Proteins -
with Confidence Scores (pLDDT). The figure displays the AlphaFold3 predicted
structures of the proteins gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134, gp256, and gp291. The degree of
confidence for each prediction is represented by color gradients, with a scale for
pLDDT values provided at the bottom. (>90 pLDDT, blue) Indicates high confidence.
(90 to 70 pLDDT, cyan) Indicates moderate confidence. (70 to 50 pLDDT, yellow)
Indicates low confidence. (<50 suggests, orange) Indicates very low confidence.
Created in https://BioRender.com.
Overall, the predicted structures for the seven proteins show varying confidence levels based on
pLDDT (predicted Local Distance Difference Test) values, where >90 pLDDT indicates high con-
fidence, 90 to 70 pLDDT indicates moderate confidence, 70 to 50 pLDDT indicates low confidence,
and <50 suggests very low confidence.
The predicted structures for gp57 and gp103 exhibit predominantly high levels of confidence, sug-
gesting well-defined and stable conformations. Similarly, gp239 and gp256 show high confidence
in their core cluster regions, though certain extended peptide regions display low to very low con-
fidence scores. In contrast, gp134 and gp291 reveal a more mixed profile, with a combination of
stable and less certain regions. On the other hand, gp68 stands out with consistently low to very
low confidence scores across its structure, highlighting an overall unreliable prediction.
To better understand the proteins’ potential functions and bacterial targets, their predicted struc-
tures were compared to the AlphaFold Database (AFDB) and Protein Data Bank (PDB100) using
FoldSeek. The 3Di/AA and TM-align algorithms were employed to assess structural similarity based
on 3D conformation and amino acid sequence. The results of these comparisons are presented in
Table 9 in appendix, showing E-values for the 3Di/AA search and TM-scores for the TM-align
Page 31 of 65
==PAGE:39==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
search against both databases for several protein structures. Both algorithms consistently show that
gp239 is similar to PhoH-like proteins or PhoH2, with E-values as low as 2.36E-17 and TM-scores
up to 0.761, indicating a strong structural match.
Since all analysis indicated that gp239 shares structural and functional similarities with the PhoH-
like protein and PhoH2, its ATPase activity was further investigated.
In contrast, all analyses
showed that the remaining proteins ( gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134, gp256, and gp291 ) did not exhibit
significant structural or sequential similarities to any other known proteins. This suggests that
these proteins might be novel, potentially possessing unique functions that could target previously
unexplored bacterial mechanisms. Consequently, the study proceeded to further investigate these
proteins to understand their functions and mechanisms in inhibiting the growth of ESBL-producing
bacteria.
5.3
Expression and Purification of AV126 Early Stage Recombinant
Proteins
Investigating the functional capabilities of the AV126 inhibitory proteins - gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134,
gp256, and gp291 - required they be purificed. They were therefore expressed in BL21(DE3) strains
carrying pET28 constructs, each containing one of the inhibitory genes. Following expression, the 6x
His-tagged proteins were IMAC purified and Amicon up-concentrated. Fractions of the supernatant,
cell pellet, flowthrough, 1st wash step, and final IMAC purified and Amicon concentrated elution
sample were collected, and run on SDS-PAGE for most proteins (see Figure 6). The SDS-PAGE
for gp134 does not include these fractions. Additionally, gp68 exhibited no affinity for the IMAC
resin under tested conditions and was excluded from downstream functional assays due to failed
purification.
Each purified protein was compared to its expected molecular weight, calculated from the amino
acid sequence, including the 6x His tag (see Table 8 in Appendix).
Page 32 of 65
==PAGE:40==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Page 33 of 65
==PAGE:41==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure 6: SDS-PAGE gel analysis of gp57, gp103, gp134, gp256, and
gp291. The figure shows the SDS-PAGE analysis of each protein purification. The
lanes were loaded with fractions collected during protein expression and IMAC
purification, in the following order: supernatant, cell pellet, flowthrough, first wash
step (Wash 1), and the final IMAC purified and Amicon concentrated elution sample
(Amicon Pur.). (*) Indicates the column loaded in a different order. Gp68 could not
be purified. Created in https://BioRender.com
SDS-PAGE analysis demonstrated that most proteins aligned with their expected molecular weights,
with the exceptions of gp103 and gp134. Gp103 exhibits signs of forming trimers and dimers, as
evidenced by the position of its bands on the SDS-PAGE gel (see Figure 6B). The bands corre-
sponding to the dimer and trimer forms are observed at molecular weights approximately two (35.4
kDa) and three (53.1 kDa) times larger than the expected weight of the monomeric protein (17.7
kDa), respectively. Repeated purification of gp134 consistently resulted in a band around 13.5 kDa,
which is higher than the expected size of 9.7 kDa (see Figure 6C). This band does not correspond
to the weight of any homo-dimer formation of this protein. To explore this unexpected result, a
Protein Lysate Pull-Down assay was conducted to investigate potential protein-protein interactions.
In general, smearing was observed in some lanes, likely due to overloading of the wells. 1st wash frac-
tions showed either faint or no visible bands corresponding to the 6x His-tagged protein, suggesting
minimal protein loss during this step. In contrast, the eluted fractions displayed clear and distinct
bands. Other bands were also observed in the elute, suggesting that other proteins were co-purified
with the the AV126 proteins. The identity of the co-purified proteins is unknown. However, it was
determined that the level of purity was sufficient for further functional characterization.
The protein concentration of each sample was estimated using the Bradford Assay. Absorbance
at 595 nm was measured for each sample, alongside a series of BSA protein standards. A fourth-
order trendline was applied to the curve to estimate the protein concentrations of the samples. The
estimated concentrations (µg/mL) and the corrosponding molarity are summarized in Table 3.
The standard curve used for each concentration estimation is shown in Figure A2 in Appendix.
Sample
Concentration (µg/mL)
Protein Molecular Weight (kDa)
µM
gp57
9.26
14
661
gp103
1.11
17.7
62.7
gp134
0.58
9.7
59.8
gp239
4.93
32.2
153
gp256
1.37
19.3
71
gp291
7.83
13.5
580
Table 3: The table presents and overview of the protein concentrations estimated
using the bradford assay, as well as the molecular weights and calculated µM values
for each sample. The molecular weight was obtained from table 8 and the (µM)
values were calculated from the estimated concentration and molecular weight.
Page 34 of 65
==PAGE:42==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
The Bradford results reveal varying protein yields for the purifications. The molarity range from
59.8 µM to 661 µM, with gp57 showing the highest concentration at 9.26 µg/mL and gp134 the
lowest at 0.58 µg/mL. It was therefore possible to purify a sufficient amount of recombinant early
stage AV126 protein for further analysis.
5.4
Investigation of DNA-Binding Potential of Protein Products
using EMSA
EMSA was employed to evaluate the potential DNA-binding properties of the proteins gp57, gp103,
gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291. This assay can determine the protein-DNA interactions by ob-
serving shifts in DNA migration patterns in response to protein binding. In this experiment, both
ssDNA and dsDNA derived from the phiX174 phage were used to evaluate binding specificity. A
dilution series of each protein was prepared and tested against both ssDNA and dsDNA to observe
concentration dependent mobility shifts. Two negative controls were included consisting of sam-
ples without protein or DNA. Additionally, a positive control was also added, using the T4 protein
gp32 (known to bind DNA). Figures 7 and 8 shows the EMSA binding assays obtained for each
experiment for both ssDNA- and dsDNA-binding.
In the ssDNA EMSA experiments, no mobility shifts were observed for gp291 and gp57 at any of
the tested protein concentrations, indicative of no ssDNA-binding function (Figure7.A & 7.F).
In contrast, gp103, gp134, gp239, and gp256 all display a concentration dependent mobility shifts,
indicative of ssDNA-binding (Figure 7.B to E). The first observable mobility shifts for these
proteins occur at 62.7 µM, 50 µM, 25 µM, and 6.25 µM, respectively. Furthermore, distinct bands
are visible at lower bands sizes in the gp239 EMSA assay, with sizes ranging from 75 to 200 bp.
These bands are absent in the no ssDNA control and in the gp32 positive control (Figure 7.D).
Page 35 of 65
==PAGE:43==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure 7: EMSA ssDNA-binding Assay: Binding curves for PhiX174 virion
ssDNA with various proteins are shown. Protein concentration ranges: (A) gp57:
400-3.125 µM, (B) gp103: 62.7-3.125 µM, (C) gp134: 59.8-3.125 µM, (D) gp239:
153-3.125 µM, (E) gp256: 71-3.125 µM, (F) gp291: 400-3.125 µM. Controls: P =
negative control (protein only, no DNA), D = negative control (DNA only, no
protein), gp37 = positive control (a known DNA-binding protein). In each
experiment, DNA fragment sizes were estimated using the GeneRuler 1 kb Plus DNA
Ladder. Created in https://BioRender.com.
Page 36 of 65
==PAGE:44==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure 8: EMSA dsDNA-binding Assay: Binding curves for PhiX174 RFI
dsDNA with various proteins are shown. Protein concentration ranges: (A) gp57:
400-3.125 µM, (B) gp103: 62.7-3.125 µM, (C) gp134: 59.8-3.125 µM, (D) gp239:
153-3.125 µM, (E) gp256: 71-3.125 µM, (F) gp291: 400-3.125 µM. Controls: P =
negative control (protein only, no DNA), D = negative control (DNA only, no
protein), gp37 = positive control (a known DNA-binding protein).In each experiment,
DNA fragment sizes were estimated using the GeneRuler 1 kb Plus DNA Ladder.
Created in https://BioRender.com
Page 37 of 65
==PAGE:45==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Interestingly, the dsDNA EMSA results show two distinct bands for the dsDNA-binding, even in
the absence of protein ( see Figure 8). This observation can possibly be attributed to different
conformations of the circular dsDNA. DNA exists in various structural states, including supercoiled
and relaxed forms. Supercoiled DNA is more compact and thus migrates further than relaxed DNA
during gel electrophoresis. Consequently, supercoiled DNA would appear as a second band on the
gel. The absence of such multiple bands in the ssDNA samples further supports this interpretation,
as ssDNA do not exhibit supercoiling [65].
In the dsDNA EMSA results, gp291 and gp239 shows concentration dependent mobility shifts, both
with the first observable mobility shift at 50 µM (Figure 8D & 8F). Similar to the ssDNA-binding
assay, distinct bands are seen at smaller bands sizes in the gp239 EMSA assay, ranging from 75
to 200 bp. These bands are also absent in the no dsDNA control and in the gp32 positive control
(See Figure 8D). Gp57 also seemingly binds the dsDNA, with the first observable shift at 100
µM, but with an unique mobility shift pattern: the upper dsDNA band remains stationary while
the lower band shifts toward it at higher concentrations (Figure 8A). Gp134 and gp256 also show
concentration dependent mobility shifts, indicative of dsDNA-binding, with the first observable
mobility shifts for gp256 at a concentration of 71 µM, and gp134 at 50 µM (see Figure 8.C &
8.E). Gp103 shows no observable mobility shift at the experimental conditions, indicative of no
dsDNA-binding function (see Figure 8.B).
Table 4 summarizes the ssDNA and dsDNA-binding properties of gp57, gp103, gp134, gp239,
gp256, and gp291, obtained from the EMSA analysis.
Protein
ssDNA-binding
dsDNA-binding
Gp57
No binding
DNA-binding
Gp103
DNA-binding
No binding
Gp134
DNA-binding
DNA-binding
Gp239
DNA-binding
DNA-binding
Gp256
DNA-binding
DNA-binding
Gp291
No binding
DNA-binding
Table 4: Summary of ssDNA and dsDNA-binding Properties of Proteins -
gp57, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291. The table categorizes proteins
based on their DNA-binding activity: "DNA-binding" for proteins with observable
mobility shifts and "No binding" for proteins with no detectable mobility shift.
Page 38 of 65
==PAGE:46==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
5.5
gp239 ATPase Activity Assay
As previously mentioned, the sequence and structural analysis indicated that gp239 shares similari-
ties with either a ProH-like or PhoH2 protein, which both belongs to phosphate starvation inducible
protein with ATPase activity (see Table 8 & 9 in Appendix). To validate these findings, the AT-
Pase activity of purified gp239 was evaluated. An overview of the assay is presented in Figure 9.
Figure 9: The gp239 ATPase Activity Assay Reaction Cascade. The figure
illustrates the reaction cascade, used to detect ATPase activity. When gp239
hydrolyzes ATP to ADP, it releases inorganic phosphate. This phosphate is then used
by maltose phosphorylase to convert maltose into glucose-1-phosphate and glucose.
The glucose is subsequently oxidized by glucose oxidase, producing hydrogen peroxide.
Finally, horseradish peroxidase uses the hydrogen peroxide to convert amplex red into
resorufin, a highly fluorescent compound. The intensity of the fluorescence signal is
directly proportional to the amount of phosphate released, which in turn reflects the
ATPase activity of gp239. This image was created in https://BioRender.com, and
modified from an image in the PiPerTM Pyrophosphate Assay kit (TherimoFischer
Scientific, Cat#P22062).
From this reaction, the intensity of the fluorescence signal should therefore be directly proportional
to the amount of phosphate released, which in turn reflects the ATPase activity of gp239.
By
measuring the fluorescence over time at different concentrations of gp239, the assay can provide a
quantitative measure of the protein’s ATPase activity. Gp103 was used as a negative control in this
assay, as both the sequential and structural analyses indicated that it lacked ATPase functions.
The results, shown in Figure 10.A, display the graph of gp239 ATPase activity with background
noise removed. The ATPase activity of gp239 was assessed across a range of protein concentrations
(153 µM, 100 µM, 50 µM, 25 µM, 12.5 µM, and 0 µM), and the results are presented as fluorescence
emissions over time. Figure 10.B illustrates the graph of the ATPase negative control using gp103,
with noise removed.
Page 39 of 65
==PAGE:47==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure 10: ATPase activity assay of gp239 & negative control gp103 -
NOISE CORRECTED. (A) The graph presents the fluorescence emission
measurements at 590 nm over time (HH:MM:SS) for the gp239 sample at various
protein concentrations: 153 µM, 100 µM, 50 µM, 12.5 µM, and 0 µM. (B) The graph
displays the fluorescence emission measurements at 590 nm over time (HH:MM:SS) for
the negative control gp103 at different protein concentrations: 62.7 µM, 31.35 µM
(50% dilution), and 0 µM. For the time data, HH represents hours, MM represents
minutes, and SS represents seconds. Created in https://BioRender.com.
Page 40 of 65
==PAGE:48==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Initial results showed a concentration dependent ATPase activity for gp239, with higher protein
concentrations leading to a faster run-over rate of ATP (see Figure 10.A). In general, florescent
peaked at approximately 700.000-800.000 fluorescent emission, after which the levels of emission
decreased. At lower concentrations, fluorescence signals rose steadily without reaching clear peaks
within the experiment time-frame. The 0 µM gp239 sample showed no fluorescence increase, due to
background noise correction. The non-background noise corrected graphs can be found in Figure
A3 in Appendix.
Analysis of the negative control revealed an unexpected increase in fluorescence over time (see Fig-
ure 10.B). By the end of the experiment, fluorescence signals for gp103 reached approximately
30.000-40.000 fluorescent emission. This suggest that either gp103 posses unexpected ATPase ac-
tivity, or that contamination is present in the sample.
If indeed the source of the ATPase activity seen in the negative control stems from contaminants
likely co-purified during the IMAC purification, then it is possible that gp239 is similarity effected.
As such, the activity seen for gp239 may not entirely originate from this protein. While gp239
displays fluorescence emission increases consistent with ATPase activity, these findings cannot be
confidently attributed to specific ATP hydrolysis by gp239.
5.6
Protein-protein Binding Assay
To analyze the band observed for purified gp134 on the SDS-PAGE gel, a lysate pull-down assay
was conducted to explore potential gp134 protein interactions. This method uses the 6x His-tagged
"bait" protein gp134 to capture interacting proteins from a E. coli ESBL032 lysate.
The bait
protein were bound to cobalt resin, and mixed with the prey E. coli lysate to allow interactions
with potential binding partners. A non-treated control, which included the prey protein but omitted
the bait, was used to identify false positive results from nonspecific protein binding to the resin.
Additionally, we implemented an immobilized bait control, containing the bait protein but excluding
the prey, to address potential false positives arising from nonspecific protein interactions with the
poly-histidine tag on the bait protein. This immobilized bait control also served as a positive control,
confirming the resin’s ability to effectively capture the poly-histidine-tagged bait protein.
Fractions of bait and prey elutions, as well as flowthroughs from all experiments, were collected and
analyzed analyzed using SDS-PAGE (see Figure 11).
Page 41 of 65
==PAGE:49==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure 11: The gp134 lysate pull-down assay. The figure presents the
SDS-PAGE analysis of fractions collected from three pull-down experiments. In the
pull-down assay (B+P.), the gp134 bait protein was immobilized on the resin column
and subsequently treated with prey protein lysate. The prey control experiment (P.)
involved no bait immobilization on the column prior to prey protein capture. The bait
control experiment (B.) included immobilization of the gp134 bait protein on the resin
column but without treatment with prey protein lysate. The final elution step (E.)
represents the fractions where bait and, potentially, bound prey proteins were eluted.
Flowthrough fractions (FT) include those collected during the bait immobilization
step (B. and B+P.#1 FT) and the prey treatment step (P. and B+P.#2 FT).
In the prey control experiment, no protein bands were observed in the elution fraction, confirming
that the cobalt resin does not bind prey proteins non-specifically. In the bait control experiment,
partial loss of the gp134 protein (approximately 13.5 kDa) was observed in the flowthrough fraction,
while a strong gp134 band was detected in the elution fraction. This indicates that the resin retains
most of the bait protein.
When lysate was added to the immobilized bait, the flowthrough fractions from both the bait immo-
bilization step and the prey binding step produced results similar to the controls. When compared
with the prey control flowthrough, no difference in band pattern can be observed, indicating no bait
protein interaction. Analysis of the elution fraction showed no observable prey protein binding, as
only the expected 13.5 kDa bait protein band was detected, further confirming that no specific in-
teraction occurred between gp134 and proteins present in the E. coli lysate under the experimental
conditions.
Page 42 of 65
==PAGE:50==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
5.7
Investigating Re-growth of Bacteria during Expression of gp134
To examine the re-growth observed on the gp134 growth inhibiting plate (see Figure 4), a pilot
lacZα-complementation blue/white screening assay.
This was performed using an E. coli strain transformed with a gene fragment encoding gp134,
inserted into pUC19 immediately upstream of the lacZ promoter. The gp134 gene was selected
for this assay due to its high level of growth inhibition and observable re-growth in this study (see
Figure 4), along with its prior identification by our group as exhibiting the strongest inhibitory
effect. Figure 13 provides a schematic of the modified pUC19 plasmid, highlighting key features.
An overview of the full In-Fusion Cloning history can be found in Figure A4 in Appendix.
Figure 12: Schematic representation of the modified pUC19 plasmid,
constructed for the lacZα-complementation assay. The schematic highlights
the arrangement of the gp134 insert and the lacZα gene segment. The plasmid
features the insertion site of the gp134 gene fragment upstream of the lacZα gene, as
a transcriptional fusion. Key elements of the plasmid include the CAP-binding site,
lac promoter, -35 and -10 regions, lac operator, and multiple Shine-Dalgarno (SD)
sequences. The primers used for the cloning process and their overlap regions (shown
in green) are also indicated, demonstrating the design of the In-Fusion cloning
strategy. Created in https://BioRender.com
It was assumed that the re-growth occurred because the strain developed resistance to the early-
expressed AV126 gene products, likely due to a mutation in either plasmid construct or the host
chromosome. To determine whether this mutation was in the inhibitory gene, its promoter, or else-
where on the bacterial chromosome, the lacZα-complementation assay was performed following this
workflow: First, gp134 was inserted into the pUC19 backbone and the construct was transformed
to the lacZα-deficient HST08 E. coli. The transformed strain was plated onto inhibitory LA agar
plates containing X-gal and IPTG. Blue transformants observed post incubation were isolated, the
plasmid was extracted, and re-transformed into a new host strain. New transformants could then be
plated onto LA agar plates containing X-gal and IPTG, to investigate if the resistance is conferred
from mutations in the plasmid or bacterial genome.
It was originally intended to use ESBL032 E. coli as host. However as seen in Figure 13.B, when
Page 43 of 65
==PAGE:51==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
plated on LA agar plates containing X-gal showed blue colonies, suggesting that ESBL032 naturally
encodes β-galactosidase. In contrast, stellarTM competent cells produced white colonies under the
same conditions, suggesting no β-galactosidase activity.
Figure 13: Host Screening Assay. The figure present the two sets of LA agar
plates, used to screen for β-galactosidase activity. In both figures, the plates on the
left and right contain 0 µg/mL and 40 µg/mL X-gal X-gal, respectively. Both plates
contained 100 µg/mL ampicillin (amp100).
E. coli StellarTM competent cells have been shown to be inhibited by gp134 in a previous project
(data not shown). Based on these observations, E. coli StellarTM competent cells were selected as
the host strain.
Page 44 of 65
==PAGE:52==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
To prepare for In-Fusion Cloning, two primers designed and used to PCR amplify and linearize the
pUC19 backbone. All PCR amplifications were purified, and their individual DNA concentrations
were measured (see Table 5).
Sample
Measured DNA concentration (ng/µL)
Linearized pUC19 Amplification
20.4
gp134 gene fragment Amplificaiton
44.53
pUC19_Gp134_LacZ_F and _R (- control)
13.9
pUC19-F and -R (- control)
39.7
Table 5: DNA concentrations were measured for the PCR amplification of four
samples.
Following the In-Fusion Cloning of the gp134 fragment into pUC19, a single blue colony was observed
on two different plates (see Figure A5 in the Appendix). These two colonies (colony #1 and colony
#2) were each inoculated seperately, and used to perform a growth inhibition spot-test assay to
assess the ability of the regrown cells to inhibit growth (Figure 14).
Figure 14: Growth Inhibition Spot-test assay, of E. coli Stellar cells
transformed with pUC19+gp134 In-Fusion Cloning reaction mixture. The
image displays a (100 −10−5) dilution series growth inhibition spot-test of
transformed colonies: 1 and 2, with (0.5 mM IPTG) and without (0 mM IPTG) gp134
induction. All plates contain 100 µg/mL ampicillin and 40 µg/mL X-gal. No
inhibition is observed.
Page 45 of 65
==PAGE:53==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Blue colonies appeared on all plates, indicating successful lacZα-complementation. However, it was
not expected to observe blue colonies on the non-inducing plates. No difference in growth inhibition
was observed between the treated and control groups in either assay. Results from the plasmid
purification of the remaining colony #1 and #2 cell sample are presented in Table 7 in appendix.
Due to time constraints, the plasmids from these two colonies were not used for further transfor-
mation. As a result, the planned follow-up experiments to confirm the cloning and subsequent
screening for successful expression, as well as the sequencing of the bacterial DNA, were not carried
out in this study.
Page 46 of 65
==PAGE:54==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
6
Discussion
This study focused on the early-expressed proteins of Phapecoctavirus AV126 (gp57, gp68, gp103,
gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291) to uncover their roles in bacterial growth inhibition. By combining
computational predictions with experimental validation, we aimed to elucidate the mechanisms by
which these proteins reprogram host metabolism and inhibit bacterial growth, providing insights
that could aid in the development of phage-inspired antimicrobials.
6.1
Gp239 Share Similarity with ATPase Protein and Exhibits AT-
Pase Activity
The sequence and structural analysis of each AV126 phage protein yielded mostly inconclusive
results, except for gp239, which consistently showed similarity to a PhoH-like protein or PhoH2 (See
Table 8 & 9 in appendix). PhoH genes belongs to the Pho regulon, which regulates phosphate
uptake and metabolism under low-phosphate conditions and phosphate limitations [66]. These genes
are highly diverse, and have been found in various types of marine phages that have a wide host
range. This aligns with the Phapecoctavirus AV126, which has a wide host range and originally
isolated from wastewater[9, 66].
Among the fully sequenced phage genomes in GenBank, 40%
of marine phages have been found to contain phoH gene, compared to only 4% of non-marine
phages. PhoH has been shown to bind ATP, and is suspected to have ATPase activity, although
this has not been experimentally verified [64]. Cleavage of ATP would release energy for other
reactions, possibly one that leads to uptake of phosphate under conditions of phosphate starvation
[64]. Some phages have been linked to expressing PhoH during infection, as seen in Prochlorococcus
MED4, where P-SSP7 infection increased phoH transcript levels, possibly as a bacterial response
to metabolic stress [64]. The presence of PhoH-like genes in phage genomes may provide a selective
advantage, supporting phosphate acquisition and enabling phage replication under nutrient-limited
conditions[64]. However, despite the well-studied nature of the Pho regulon and the presence of
phoH genes in a wide array of phage genomes, the precise function of PhoH remains unknown. It
could be speculated that unregulated ATPase expression under normal conditions could be lethal, as
stress responses are typically tightly controlled[67]. Gp239 may be expressed at levels high enough
to disrupt cellular function.
In mycobacteria, PhoH2 is a dual-functional protein with RNA helicase and ribonuclease activities,
belonging to a toxin-antitoxin system that likely regulates cellular responses to environmental stress
[63]. The ATPase activity of PhoH2 is coupled with its RNA helicase function, allowing it to unwind
double-stranded RNA in an ATP-dependent manner[63]. PhoH2 has been implicated in controlling
bacteriophage infections, as the deletion of PhoH2 results in significantly increased viral DNA
replication and progeny [63]. Furthermore, PhoH2 has been linked to the phosphate starvation
response in some Gram-negative bacteria, highlighting its broader role in managing stress responses
[63]. Thus, unregulated expression of PhoH2 might also disrupt cellular function.
The investigation of the ATPase activity of gp239 produced inconclusive results.
While a con-
centration dependent increase in activity was observed for gp239, two key anomalies complicated
interpretation.
Firstly, fluorescence in the assay unexpectedly decreased over time, though the cause of this decay
remains unclear. Secondly, gp103, included as a negative control, also exhibited a signal, albeit to a
Page 47 of 65
==PAGE:55==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
much lesser extent than gp239. This observation presents two interpretations: (1) gp103 possesses
uncharacterized ATPase activity despite lacking sequence or structural homology to known ATPases,
rendering it unsuitable as a negative control, or (2) the signal arises from co-purified contamination,
such as residual host ATPases or free phosphate in the gp103 sample. Since both the sequence and
structural analyses of gp103 found no clear evidence of ATPase-related functions, contamination may
be a more plausible explanation for the observed signal. To address this issue, the experiment could
be repeated using a negative control protein that is confirmed to lack ATPase or phosphate-related
activity. This control must then also be produced from BL21(DE3) cells and purified using the
same method as gp239 and gp103. By ensuring identical production and purification conditions,
any ATPase activity observed in the control would strongly indicate contamination rather than
gp103 ATPase activity.
If, after these adjustments, the assay confidently demonstrates that gp239 can cleave ATP to ADP,
it could be of interest to explore whether gp239 can hydrolyze other nucleotides in addition to
ATP. This could be done by performing ATPase assays using different nucleotide triphosphates as
substrates. Research into phoH2 proteins has mainly shown that it has a preference for ATP, so
substrate specificity could help classify gp239 as a phoH2 protein[63]. It might also be interesting to
determine the kinetic parameters of gp239’s ATPase activity, such as the Michaelis-Menten constant
(Km), maximum reaction rate (Vmax), and catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km). This could be done by
performing ATPase assays at varying ATP concentrations and analyze the data using Michaelis-
Menten kinetics. It would then be possible to compare these parameters to those of PhoH2 to assess
functional similarities [68].
On the other hand, if ATPase activity were still observed in the negative control, it would be
indicative of co-purified contamination within the gp103 protein sample. Moreover, it would be
important to consider that similar contamination could also be present in the gp239 sample, which
could lead to false-positive results. To account for these possibilities, additional controls would
need to be included to ensure accurate assessment of gp239’s ATPase activity. These controls could
include: (1) a No-substrate control, in which no ATP substrate is added to the Amplex® working
solution, (2) a No-enzyme control, in which ATP substrate is added to the Amplex® working
solution and then combined with a 0 µM gp239 sample, and (3) a No-substrate/No-enzyme control,
in which no ATP substrate is added to the Amplex® working solution, which is then combined
with a 0 µM gp239 sample. These controls would be run simultaneously with the full reaction,
where both the enzyme and substrate are included, to provide a more comprehensive understanding
of the assay’s results and potential sources of interference. The fluorescence emission from the full
reaction readout can be corrected by subtracting the measurements from control (1) and control
(2). These controls account for the background signals associated with the enzyme and substrate,
respectively. However, since both subtractions also include the reagent background, we need to
add back the measurement from control (3), which represents the reagent background alone. This
correction ensures that the final fluorescence reading accurately reflects the specific activity of the
ATPase reaction, free from interference caused by enzyme-, substrate-, or reagent backgrounds.
6.2
Early Stage AV126 Proteins can Inhibit Growth of ESBL032
The growth inhibition spot test assay provided insight into the inhibitory potential of the selected
early-expressed gene products against ESBL032 E. coli. Notably, all proteins demonstrated clear
growth inhibition, with varying degrees of toxicity.
The strong growth inhibition observed for
Page 48 of 65
==PAGE:56==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
proteins such as gp103 and gp134 might indicate that these proteins target more essential pathways
or cellular processes in ESBL032 E. coli. This highlights gp103 and gp134 as promising subjects
for future research, as uncovering their bacterial targets could pave the way for the development of
potent antimicrobial drugs.
In contrast, gp57 exhibited minimal inhibitory activity, raising questions about its functional role
in growth inhibition. In a previous project from our group (data not published), it was found that
gp57 induced filamentation in the infected cells, suggesting that it may target processes related
to cell morphology or division. This observation provides a plausible explanation for the minimal
growth inhibition observed in the current assay. While gp57 did not reduce colony formation, its
ability to cause cell elongation without fully arresting growth could indicate a disruption of key
morphogenetic pathways, such as those involving cytoskeletal proteins (for example, FtsZ, MreB,
or RodZ) [69]. In such cases, the spot-test growth inhibition assay, which relies on colony formation
to estimate growth inhibition, may underestimate the inhibitory effects, as elongated cells can still
replicate their DNA and grow in size, even if division is impaired [69]. However, in that same project,
it was also found that gp256, like gp57, caused cell elongation. Despite this shared morphological
effect, gp256 exhibited stronger growth inhibition and higher toxicity in the assay. This difference
likely stems from their distinct mechanisms of action. While both proteins may disrupt cell division,
gp256 likely targets additional or different pathways.
A limitation of this growth inhibition assay is that testing inhibitory phage genes in isolation -
without an active AV126 phage infection - fails to account for their dependence on phage-specific
biochemical conditions or cooperative interactions with other phage proteins.
During infection,
early phage genes are expressed together, generating a dynamic environment where proteins may
rely on partners to stabilize their activity, enhance their effects, or counteract host defenses[70].
The regrown colonies observed in the growth inhibition assay were presumed to have developed
tolerance or resistance to the AV126 phage proteins (Figure 4). One possible explanation is that
mutations may have occurred in specific regions, leading to resistance through different mechanisms.
For instance, mutations could arise in the plasmid pPS26, particularly within the inhibitory gene
or promoter. These mutations, such as nonsense or frameshift mutations, might disrupt the coding
sequence of the inhibitory gene, rendering the protein nonfunctional. Alternatively, mutations could
occur in the L-rhamnose-inducible promoter of the plasmid, potentially reducing transcription and
lowering gene expression. Mutations in the bacterial chromosome could also confer resistance, but
this would likely require multiple changes affecting regulatory pathways or essential genes [71].
6.3
Source of Re-growth could note be Determined
Although the lacZα-complementation blue/white screening assay used to investigate the re-growth
yielded inconclusive results due to time constraints, several noteworthy observations were still made.
Firstly, only two blue colonies were observed following the transformation of E. coli StellarTM Com-
petent cells with the pUC19-gp134 plasmid construct A5. The unusually low number of blue colonies
observed in this experiment is likely due to the design of the pUC19-gp134 plasmid construct. In
this system, IPTG induction is required to activate the lac promoter, which drives transcription of
the lacZα gene. The expression of lacZα enables β-galactosidase activity, allowing for blue/white
screening of transformants. To facilitate this screening, transformed cells were therefore plated on
LA agar containing X-gal, and IPTG. However, the plasmid is designed with a transcriptional fusion
between the gp134 gene and the lacZα reporter, producing a single mRNA transcript controlled by
Page 49 of 65
==PAGE:57==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
the lac promoter. Consequently, IPTG induction triggers the simultaneous expression of both lacZα
and gp134. Previous unpublished data from our group demonstrated that gp134 expression inhibits
the growth of E. coli Stellar™Competent Cells. Thus, while lacZα expression enables blue/white
screening by producing functional β-galactosidase (blue colonies), the simultaneous expression of
gp134 appears to have severely reduced the viability of most transformed cells, which could account
for the reduced number of surviving colonies.
The two blue colonies that grew could therefore represent resistant colonies that have developed a
tolerance or resistance to the toxic effects of gp134 expression. Alternatively, the colonies might
have been transformed with the original circular pUC19 template (used for plasmid linearization)
rather than the intended pUC19-gp134 construct. This would bypass gp134 expression entirely, as
the parental plasmid lacks the toxic insert.
Secondly, we conducted a growth inhibition spot-assay using an inoculated sample of our isolated
blue transformed cells 14.
The results showed no inhibition on IPTG-containing plates.
This
outcome supports both previous hypothesis, as growth inhibition would not be observed if the
re-grown colonies had developed tolerance or resistance to the toxic effects of gp134 expression.
Similarly, inhibition would not be expected if the colonies had been transformed with the background
circular pUC19 template originally used for linearization. However, we observed blue colonies on
both the non-inducing and inducing plates. This was unexpected because the blue color indicates
β-galactosidase activity, suggesting that lacZα is being actively transcribed even on plates without
IPTG. One possible explanation could be that the lacI gene may have acquired mutations in the
host strain. These mutations could impair the repressors ability to bind to the lac operator, leading
to unregulated expression of lacZα even in the absence of IPTG. Alternatively, mutations in the lac
operator sequence within the plasmid could prevent the repressor from binding, resulting in leaky
expression.
To determine which plausible explanation regarding the pUC19 plasmid construct is correct, the
plasmids extracted from the two blue colonies could be further analyzed. One approach would be to
sequence the purified plasmid, which would provide definitive evidence for whether the gp134 gene is
present and whether mutations in the plasmid could explain the observed phenotypes. Alternatively,
the purified plasmids could be re-transformed into fresh E. coli StellarTM competent cells and
perform a growth inhibition spot-test assay. This would help determine whether the transformed
cells reproduce the same results (i.e., no growth inhibition) or exhibit growth inhibition upon IPTG
induction. If growth inhibition is observed, it would suggest that the original blue colonies carried
the gp134 plasmid, and the lack of inhibition in the initial experiment was due to host-specific
adaptations (for example, resistance or tolerance to gp134 toxicity). Conversely, if no inhibition
occurs, it would indicate that the original colonies likely retained the parental pUC19 plasmid
(lacking gp134), which would explain the absence of toxicity.
6.4
SDS-PAGE Analysis showed gp103 and gp134 Deviated Their
Expected Molecular Weight
The SDS-PAGE of the recombinant produced early stage proteins, generally showed protein bands
of the predicted molecular weight, except for gp103 and gp134. Gp68 could not be purified using
IMAC like the other proteins (data not shown) and was excluded from further analysis, despite
showing promising results in the growth inhibition spot test assay. This suggests that the 6x His
Page 50 of 65
==PAGE:58==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
tag on gp68 may not have been accessible for binding to the nickel resin, possibly because the
protein mis-folded, aggregated into clumps that hid the tag, or was broken down by the host’s
enzymes before purification. Attaching a different purification tag, such as GST (glutathione-S-
transferase) or MBP (maltose-binding protein), might resolve this issue. These tags are larger and
often enhance solubility and folding of the target protein[72, 73]. The faint additional bands observed
in the elution fractions across all proteins likely originate from residual host contaminants. Despite
IMAC’s specificity for His-tagged proteins, E. coli proteins can persist via non-specific binding to
the column. Partial degradation of the target protein by host proteases may also generate fragments
that retain the His tag, leading to co-elution.
The SDS-PAGE analysis of gp103 showed distinct bands at approximately 35.4 kDa and 53.1 kDa,
corresponding to dimeric and trimeric forms of the protein (monomer: 17.7 kDa). This pattern
suggests that gp103 may form stable multimers, even under the denaturing conditions of SDS-
PAGE, which is something that should be examined in future experiments. In contrast, repeated
purification of gp134 yielded a band at
13.5 kDa, larger than its predicted monomeric size (9.7
kDa). Since dimerization would produce a band near 19.4 kDa, this discrepancy cannot be explained
by self-association. Instead, the observed shift may arise from post-translational modifications or
alternatively gp134 might interact with a small host protein that co-purifies with the His-tagged
protein. To investigate this possibility, a Protein Lysate Pull-Down assay was performed to identify
potential binding partners retained during purification. However, no detectable bands corresponding
to interacting proteins were observed, implying either (1) potential binding partners are present at
concentrations below the detection threshold or (2) gp134 does not stably interact with host proteins
under the tested conditions.
To determine if gp134 interacts with other proteins found in the bacterial lysate, an alternative
pull-down strategy could be employed. Rather than eluting proteins from the washed cobalt resin
after immobilizing His-tagged gp134 and incubating with prey lysate, the entire resin-protein com-
plex could be preserved, skipping the elution step, and directly submitted for mass spectrometry.
Alternatively, the band could be directly excised from the SDS-PAGE and analyzed by mass spec-
trometry.
6.5
EMSA Analysis Indicated DNA-binding Capabilities
The EMSA data, summarized in Table 4, reveal distinct DNA migration patterns profiles among
the tested proteins, providing insights into their DNA binding capabilities and potential functional
roles.
Although we obtained EMSA results that demonstrated DNA binding capabilities, some
protein samples were too low in concentration to produce a binding curve with a plateau in the
mitigation pattern. To further explore their binding abilities, future studies could repeat EMSA
assays using a wider range of protein concentrations. Additionally, it may be of interest to perform
EMSA assays on RNA in future studies to determine whether these proteins can also bind RNA.
However, it is important to note that all EMSA reactions occurred in vitro. Therefore, this assay
can only confirm that a protein has the ability to bind DNA or RNA, but not that it necessarily
does so in vivo.
The gp239 EMSA showed concentration-dependent mobility shifts for both ssDNA and dsDNA,
with the first observable shift occurring at 25 µM for ssDNA and 50 µM for dsDNA. This dual
binding capacity is particularly intriguing given its bioinformatic classification as a PhoH-like or
PhoH2 protein, giving that these protein should not bind DNA [74]. Its DNA-binding activity may
Page 51 of 65
==PAGE:59==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
reflect a functional role unique to this AV126 phage inhibitory protein. Additionally, low-molecular-
weight DNA fragments ( 75-200 bp) were observed for gp239 (Figure 7.D &8.D). These fragments
were absent in the DNA-only and gp32 (positive control) samples but appeared in the protein-only
control, strongly suggesting contamination in the gp239 protein preparation. This contamination
may result from residual nucleic acids co-purified with the protein, such as degraded DNA or RNA
from the expression host, or from interactions between gp239 and nucleic acids present in the sample.
Identifying the nature of these fragments could be interesting, as it could provide functional insights
into gp239. If the fragments are RNA, this would support a functional link to PhoH2 proteins,
which exhibit RNase and RNA helicase activity. In contrast, canonical PhoH-like proteins are not
associated with RNA processing. Extracting and characterizing these bands could therefore help
clarify gp239’s functional role. However, it is important to note, that the RNA fragments may not
necessarily originate from enzymatic cleavage by gp239. Instead, they could stem from nonspecific
interactions with residual host RNA in the protein sample. Further investigation is therefore needed
to clarify the nature of these fragments and their possible relationship to gp239’s function.
The EMSA migration pattern observed in gp57 (Figure 8.A) seemingly indicated that it could
bind dsDNA. However, only the bottom supercoiled dsDNA bands shifted, while the upper bands
remained stationary. This could indicate that gp57 preferentially binds to supercoiled DNA instead
of relaxed DNA, binding specific sequences or structural motifs more prevalent in supercoiled DNA,
such as cruciforms or hairpins [75]. Alternatively, gp57 binding may induce conformational changes
in the supercoiled dsDNA, progressively converting it into a relaxed form, thereby altering its
mobility through the agarose gel.
6.6
Final Remark
As a final remark, protein purification resulted in varying protein concentrations. When comparing
the level of inhibition observed in the growth inhibition assay (Figure 4) with the obtained protein
concentrations (see Table 3), it was noted that the protein with the least growth inhibition (gp57)
had the highest yield, while the proteins with the strongest inhibition (gp103 and gp134) had the
lowest. This suggests that the lower protein yield may be due to the growth-inhibitory effects of
these proteins on the expression host, BL21(DE3). Future studies may benefit from testing an
alternative expression host that is not affected by these proteins’ inhibitory effect.
This could
potentially increase overall protein yield.
Page 52 of 65
==PAGE:60==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
7
Conclusion
This study examined the inhibitory effects of seven early-expressed proteins (gp57, gp68, gp103,
gp134, gp239, gp256, and gp291) from Phapecoctavirus Av126 on ESBL-producing E. coli. The
research aimed to uncover the functions of these proteins and identify their bacterial targets involved
in the phage’s takeover of the host cell.
Growth inhibition spot-tests revealed all proteins suppressed bacterial growth to varying extents.
Gp103 and gp134 exhibiting the strongest inhibition, suggesting their potential role in disrupting
essential bacterial pathways. However, re-growth on growth inhibiting plates indicated possible
resistance development, warranting further investigation into underlying genetic adaptations. The
results were inconclusive, but suggested that a mutation within transformed plasmid or bacterial
genome was the cause for the observed re-growth. Further purification and sequencing of the plasmid
from the transformants will be necessary to clarify the observed re-growth.
Sequence and structural analyses of the seven early-expressed AV126 genes provided insights into
their possible functional roles. Gp239 showed homology to PhoH-like and PhoH2 proteins, which
are linked to phosphate starvation responses and ATPase activity. However, the remaining proteins
exhibited no similarity to known protein sequences or structures, suggesting they may represent
novel, unexplored phage proteins with unique bacterial targets. The ATPase activity of gp239 was
assessed using a fluorescence-based ATP hydrolysis assay, and while the protein displayed activity
consistent with ATPase function, unexpected signals in the gp103 negative control raised concerns
regarding contamination, highlighting the need for a more optimized purification and additional
controls in future experiments.
Recombinant protein expression and purification was successful of all selected early stage AV126
proteins, with the exception of gp68. Gp103 exhibited possible dimer and trimer formation, which
could be further examined in future experiments. For gp134, the deviation in molecular weight did
not match any multimer formations. A protein-protein interaction assay did not detect any protein
interactions.
To probe for possible of DNA binding functions, EMSA assays were performed. Results revealed
diverse binding profiles: Gp134, gp239, and gp256 bound both ssDNA and dsDNA, gp103 and
gp291 showed ssDNA and dsDNA binding only. Gp57 was shown to only bind supercoiled dsDNA.
Although this study did not fully determine the bacterial targets of the seven AV126’s early proteins,
it provided insight into their functional properties, including their growth inhibiting effect, DNA-
binding capabilities, and possible ATPase activity. Overall, this work offers a possible framework
for exploring the interactions between bacteriophages and their bacterial targets, and could serve
as a foundation for future studies investigating the functional properties of other bacteriophages,
their mechanisms of action, and the bacterial systems they affect.
Page 53 of 65
==PAGE:61==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
8
Appendix
Figure A1: Overview of vector backbones pPS26, pUC19, & pET28a(+).
The figure provides an overview of the vector backbones employed in this study to
express the gene products of interest (gp57, gp68, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, and
gp291). Plasmid constructs containing these genes were generated to investigate their
potential growth-inhibitory effects, facilitate protein expression for subsequent
purification, and investigate re-growth.
Figure A2: Standard curve for protein concentration estimation using the
PierceTM Bradford Plus Protein Assay Kit. The absorbance values of the BSA
protein standards, measured at 595 nm, were plotted against their known
concentrations to generate the standard curve. A fourth-order trendline was fitted to
the data, and this curve was used to estimate the protein concentrations of the
samples in Table 3.
Page 54 of 65
==PAGE:62==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure A3: ATPase activity assay of gp239 & negative control gp103 - NO
NOISE CORRECTION. (A) The graph presents the fluorescence emission
measurements at 590 nm over time (HH:MM:SS) for the gp239 sample at various
protein concentrations: 153 µM, 100 µM, 50 µM, 12.5 µM, and 0 µM. (B) The graph
displays the fluorescence emission measurements at 590 nm over time (HH:MM:SS) for
the negative control gp103 at different protein concentrations: 62.7 µM, 31.35 µM
(50% dilution), and 0 µM. For the time data, HH represents hours, MM represents
minutes, and SS represents seconds. Created in https://BioRender.com.
Page 55 of 65
==PAGE:63==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure A4: In-Fusion Cloning history, of the insertion of the gp134
inhibitory gene into the pUC19 vector backbone. The figure illustrates an
overview of the insertion of the gp134 amplified gene fragment, into the linearized
pUC19 vector backbone. The gp134 was inserted as a transcriptional fusion just
upstream of the lacZα reporter gene, to avoid interference with the function of either
gp134 or lacZα.
Sample
Amount req. (ng)
Conc. (ng/µL)
Volume (µL)
Linearized pUC19
170
25.4
6.69
gp134 gene fragment
30
44.53
0.674
Table 6: The table shows the volumes used to create the pUC19-gp134 plasmid
construct using In-Fusion Cloning.
Page 56 of 65
==PAGE:64==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Figure A5: Transformation of E. coli Stellar cells with pUC19+gp134
In-Fusion cloning reaction mixture. The image displays two LB (100 µg/mL
ampicillin, 40 µg/mL X-gal, 0.5 mM IPTG) agar plates showing blue colonies after
transformation of E. coli Stellar cells with the pUC19+gp134 In-Fusion cloning
reaction mixture. Each plate contains a single blue colony: Colony #1 was from a
plate inoculated with 200 µL of the transformation mixture, while Colony #2 was
from a plate inoculated with 100 µL.
Sample
Measured DNA concentration (ng/µL)
Colony #1
98.0
Colony #2
107.78
Table 7: DNA concentration measurements (ng/µL) of E. coli Stellar cells
transformed with pUC19+gp134 In-Fusion Cloning reaction mixture.
Page 57 of 65
==PAGE:65==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
Gene:
Infection
Amino Acid Sequence
BLASTp
HHPRED
Predicted
Weight
(kDa)
AV126_0057 Early
VLNFEIDEQVKNKRCLTIKDLVDGTFVYENAFD
ENGDLSEVIYVLKVDDGENDYSAVELNHHAVQ
LVAQNTSKLLEVTLVTGITLK*
Hypothetical
No hits
14.0
AV126_0068 Early
MESNFIASLEINSTDVILAKTRKANMKKLAILIG
CIFLTACEDTNPQAYQQPQPQQYAQGQSDGD
TTIINNGGSSSGVGEFATGMLIGHMMSSGGNR
SSGDYNDRNTTIKNHYTPKPKTFNYG
KPKEQIKTYEKPKRRTKNSSYTRTKSYNPSLKS
SSSKSRKR*
Hypothetical
No hits
19.6
AV126_0103 Early
MKIVDHEQIEESDLMDLDAALGKVTIYAGIKAF
REKANSTFVMIPTKLKMRYLVPNRSAAPTDEE
EEETGRREWLNLLEKMEANFADISGNPEVYAE
DQRKARLEGRLLAFSYFDNLWS*
Hypothetical
No Hits
17.7
AV126_0134 Early
MNTSNRAEKIQSSKIRAWNEEVRKIGDKNRTRK
RGKSDKNYMWDLED*
Hypothetical
No Hits
9.7
AV126_0239 Early
MGNKTAATQRGKLSANKIESRYAAKAVGNDYR
LDDFMPEGDNQKVMQSMMVNDLTVVNAAAY
NTPAGTGKTSAALVQKLRGSMDFRIALKNFTEV
GQDGIQFLSGDKTDKLAAYHESTKRIFQQFMTA
NKLEENDGSGIGGNITVLPLGATLDTIVIDEAQLM
SETTLLKIERAGINTHIVLVDGRQTYAIKKRS
NGKLHQLLELYPEENGVREPVPTIDGFY
VELTTDMKRGKSLIKTEVF*
PhoH-like protein -
PhoH
is
a
cyto-
plasmic protein and
predicted
ATPase
that is induced by
phosphate
starva-
tion.
Phosphate
starvation-
inducible
protein;
PhoH2, ATPase
32.2
AV126_0256 Early
MSLVINMTFISSTIPTWKLESKNHGNGNIPHEKQ
ANIVRASLWLGMGAEDSHSYVERSVPPS
NKDGFIGEETDWFHGDETFGWGASHIKMDDF
GNSYDPAAKDNQ*
Hypothetical
No Hits
10.3
AV126_0291 Early
MPTIPHLGEGYMQNSYFFRCRACNRHLTHSRR
DNGKVIKESDLSCSICTGLAFDDSPERVYQHQC
TDVLNSVLDEQQLTD*
Hypothetical
No Hits
13.5
Table 8: This table presents an overview of the AV126 early-expressed genes (gp57,
gp68, gp103, gp134, gp239, gp256, gp291), including their amino acid sequences,
BLASTp and HHpred homology search results, and predicted protein molecular
weights in kilodaltons (kDa). Hypothetical proteins are those that are predicted to be
expressed in an organism, but no evidence of their existence is known.
Page 58 of 65
==PAGE:66==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
gp #
Database
Results
57
AFDB-proteome (3Di/AA)
Hypothetical protein Leishmania infantum (E: 5.70e-1)
PDB100 (3Di/AA)
6YSI ribosome-tigecycline complex - 50S subunit (E: 8.19e-1)
AFDB-proteome (TM-Align)
Sec translocon accessory complex subunit (TM: 0.424)
PDB100 (TM-Align)
Complex structure of PHF19 (TM: 0.504)
68
AFDB-proteome (3Di/AA)
DUF4057 domain-containing protein (E: 8.43e+0)
PDB100 (3Di/AA)
N/A
AFDB-proteome (TM-Align)
P22 Tail Needle Gp26 crystallized (TM: 0.309)
PDB100 (TM-Align)
Complex structure of PHF19 (TM: 0.504)
103
AFDB-proteome (3Di/AA)
Serine/threonine-protein phosphatase (E: 4.76e+0)
PDB100 (3Di/AA)
Crystal structure of Phormidium Phycoerythrin (E: 1.01e+0)
AFDB-proteome (TM-Align)
IP15629p (TM: 0.519)
PDB100 (TM-Align)
Crystal Structure of RcdA (TM: 0.467)
134
All databases
No data available
239
AFDB-proteome (3Di/AA)
PhoH-like protein (E: 2.36e-17)
PDB100 (3Di/AA)
Crystal structure of PhoH2 ATPase (E: 2.44e-14)
AFDB-proteome (TM-Align)
PhoH domain-containing protein (TM: 0.745)
PDB100 (TM-Align)
Crystal structure of PhoH2 ATPase (TM: 0.761)
256
AFDB-proteome (3Di/AA)
V-type proton ATPase subunit a (E: 8.80e-1)
PDB100 (3Di/AA)
Phage SAM lyase complex (E: 7.52e-1)
AFDB-proteome (TM-Align)
Ribosomal L23 domain containing protein (TM: 0.407)
PDB100 (TM-Align)
Double Mutant of Ribosomal Protein S6 (TM: 0.417)
291
AFDB-proteome (3Di/AA)
Protein ARV1 (E: 7.07e-2)
PDB100 (3Di/AA)
Crystal structure of NmrA-AreA complex (E: 1.87e+0)
AFDB-proteome (TM-Align)
Uncharacterized protein (TM: 0.393)
PDB100 (TM-Align)
RING finger domain of TNF receptor (TM: 0.395)
Table 9: Foldseek compares protein structures across methods and databases.
3Di/AA is a sequence-independent, 3D-based structural comparison method.
AFDB-proteome refers to the AlphaFold Database of predicted structures, while
PDB100 is a unique subset of the Protein Data Bank. TM-align performs structural
alignments, with TM-scores above 0.5 indicating similar folds and above 0.7 indicating
high similarity. For 3Di/AA, E-values below 1E-4 are considered significant.
Page 59 of 65
==PAGE:67==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
References
[1] M. Irfan, A. Almotiri, and Z. A. AlZeyadi, “Antimicrobial resistance and its drivers—a review,”
Antibiotics, vol. 11, no. 10, p. 1362, 2022.
[2] W. H. Organization et al., “Antimicrobial resistance,” World Health Organization, 2023.
[3] M. Naddaf, “40 million deaths by 2050: toll of drug-resistant infections to rise by 70%,” Nature,
vol. 633, no. 8031, pp. 747–748, 2024.
[4] W. H. Organization et al., “Who updates list of drug-resistant bacteria most threatening to
human health,” World Health Organization, 2024.
[5] L. M. Lima, B. N. M. da Silva, G. Barbosa, and E. J. Barreiro, “β-lactam antibiotics: An
overview from a medicinal chemistry perspective,” European journal of medicinal chemistry,
vol. 208, p. 112829, 2020.
[6] K. Bush and P. A. Bradford, “β-lactams and β-lactamase inhibitors: an overview,” Cold Spring
Harbor perspectives in medicine, vol. 6, no. 8, p. a025247, 2016.
[7] J. Turner, A. Muraoka, M. Bedenbaugh, B. Childress, L. Pernot, M. Wiencek, and Y. K.
Peterson, “The chemical relationship among beta-lactam antibiotics and potential impacts on
reactivity and decomposition,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 13, p. 807955, 2022.
[8] L. B. Rice, “Mechanisms of resistance and clinical relevance of resistance to β-lactams, gly-
copeptides, and fluoroquinolones,” in Mayo Clinic Proceedings, vol. 87, pp. 198–208, Elsevier,
2012.
[9] A. R. Vitt, A. N. Sørensen, M. S. Bojer, V. Bortolaia, M. C. H. Sørensen, and L. Brønd-
sted, “Diverse bacteriophages for biocontrol of esbl-and ampc-β-lactamase-producing e. coli,”
Iscience, vol. 27, no. 2, 2024.
[10] E. Becker, M. Projahn, E. Burow, and A. Käsbohrer, “Are there effective intervention measures
in broiler production against the esbl/ampc producer escherichia coli. pathogens. 2021; 10,”
tech. rep., Epub 2021/05/15. https://doi. org/10.3390/pathogens10050608 PMID: 34063430,
2021.
[11] S. Molshanski-Mor, I. Yosef, R. Kiro, R. Edgar, M. Manor, M. Gershovits, M. Laserson,
T. Pupko, and U. Qimron, “Revealing bacterial targets of growth inhibitors encoded by bac-
teriophage t7,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 111, no. 52, pp. 18715–
18720, 2014.
[12] J. M. A. Blair, M. A. Webber, A. J. Baylay, D. O. Ogbolu, and L. J. V. Piddock, “Molecular
mechanisms of antibiotic resistance,” Nature Reviews Microbiology, vol. 13, pp. 42–51, 2015.
[13] S. J. Peacock and G. K. Paterson, “Mechanisms of methicillin resistance in staphylococcus
aureus,” Annual Review of Biochemistry, vol. 90, pp. 637–666, 2021.
[14] X.-Z. Li and H. Nikaido, “Efflux-mediated drug resistance in bacteria: an update,” Drugs,
vol. 69, pp. 1555–1623, 2009.
Page 60 of 65
==PAGE:68==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
[15] D. M. Livermore, “Of pseudomonas, porins, pumps and carbapenems,” Journal of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 247–250, 2001.
[16] D. E. Bradley, “Characteristics and function of thick and thin conjugative pili determined by
transfer-derepressed plasmids of incompatibility groups i1, i2, i5, b, k and z,” Microbiology,
vol. 130, no. 6, pp. 1489–1502, 1984.
[17] S. R. Partridge, S. M. Kwong, N. Firth, and S. O. Jensen, “Mobile genetic elements associated
with antimicrobial resistance,” Clinical microbiology reviews, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 10–1128, 2018.
[18] A. Carattoli, “Plasmids and the spread of resistance,” International journal of medical micro-
biology, vol. 303, no. 6-7, pp. 298–304, 2013.
[19] J. H. Bethke, H. R. Ma, R. Tsoi, L. Cheng, M. Xiao, and L. You, “Vertical and horizontal gene
transfer tradeoffs direct plasmid fitness,” Molecular Systems Biology, vol. 19, no. 2, p. e11300,
2023.
[20] A. Jurczak-Kurek, T. Gąsior, B. Nejman-Faleńczyk, S. Bloch, A. Dydecka, G. Topka, A. Necel,
M. Jakubowska-Deredas, M. Narajczyk, M. Richert, et al., “Biodiversity of bacteriophages:
morphological and biological properties of a large group of phages isolated from urban sewage,”
Scientific reports, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 34338, 2016.
[21] M. R. Clokie, A. D. Millard, A. V. Letarov, and S. Heaphy, “Phages in nature,” Bacteriophage,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 31–45, 2011.
[22] L. M. Dicks and W. Vermeulen, “Bacteriophage–host interactions and the therapeutic potential
of bacteriophages,” Viruses, vol. 16, no. 3, p. 478, 2024.
[23] M. Wolfram-Schauerte, N. Pozhydaieva, M. Viering, T. Glatter, and K. Höfer, “Integrated
omics reveal time-resolved insights into t4 phage infection of e. coli on proteome and transcrip-
tome levels,” Viruses, vol. 14, no. 11, p. 2502, 2022.
[24] S. Grigson and R. Edwards, “What the protein!? computational methods for predicting micro-
bial protein functions,” 2023.
[25] A. H. Azam, X.-E. Tan, S. Veeranarayanan, K. Kiga, and L. Cui, “Bacteriophage technology
and modern medicine,” Antibiotics, vol. 10, no. 8, p. 999, 2021.
[26] Z. Hibstu, H. Belew, Y. Akelew, and H. M. Mengist, “Phage therapy: a different approach to
fight bacterial infections,” Biologics: Targets and Therapy, pp. 173–186, 2022.
[27] S. T. Abedon, K. M. Danis-Wlodarczyk, and D. J. Wozniak, “Phage cocktail development for
bacteriophage therapy: toward improving spectrum of activity breadth and depth,” Pharma-
ceuticals, vol. 14, no. 10, p. 1019, 2021.
[28] X. Li, Y. He, Z. Wang, J. Wei, T. Hu, J. Si, G. Tao, L. Zhang, L. Xie, A. E. Abdalla, et al., “A
combination therapy of phages and antibiotics: Two is better than one,” International Journal
of Biological Sciences, vol. 17, no. 13, p. 3573, 2021.
[29] B.-o. Kim, E. S. Kim, Y.-J. Yoo, H.-W. Bae, I.-Y. Chung, and Y.-H. Cho, “Phage-derived
antibacterials: harnessing the simplicity, plasticity, and diversity of phages,” Viruses, vol. 11,
no. 3, p. 268, 2019.
Page 61 of 65
==PAGE:69==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
[30] B. Aman and G. Ciobanu, “Mutual mobile membranes systems with surface objects,” Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Brainstorming Week on Membrane Computing, vol. I, 29-39. Sevilla, ETS
de Ingeniería Informática, 2-6 de Febrero, 2009, 2009.
[31] L. M. Kasman and L. D. Porter, “Bacteriophages,” in StatPearls [Internet], StatPearls Pub-
lishing, 2022.
[32] S. C. Parija, “Bacteriophages,” in Textbook of Microbiology and Immunology, pp. 733–738,
Springer, 2023.
[33] L. M. R. Chamorro, Functional exploration of bacteriophage T5 pre-early genes in the host
takeover: a route towards new antibacterial strategies?
PhD thesis, Université Paris-Saclay,
2020.
[34] M. Gerovac, K. Chihara, L. Wicke, B. Böttcher, R. Lavigne, and J. Vogel, “Phage proteins
target and co-opt host ribosomes immediately upon infection,” Nature Microbiology, vol. 9,
no. 3, pp. 787–800, 2024.
[35] D. Turner, A. M. Kropinski, and E. M. Adriaenssens, “A roadmap for genome-based phage
taxonomy,” Viruses, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 506, 2021.
[36] D. Turner, A. N. Shkoporov, C. Lood, A. D. Millard, B. E. Dutilh, P. Alfenas-Zerbini, L. J.
Van Zyl, R. K. Aziz, H. M. Oksanen, M. M. Poranen, et al., “Abolishment of morphology-based
taxa and change to binomial species names: 2022 taxonomy update of the ictv bacterial viruses
subcommittee,” Archives of Virology, vol. 168, no. 2, p. 74, 2023.
[37] D. Boeckaerts, M. Stock, B. De Baets, and Y. Briers, “Identification of phage receptor-binding
protein sequences with hidden markov models and an extreme gradient boosting classifier,”
Viruses, vol. 14, no. 6, p. 1329, 2022.
[38] F. L. Nobrega, M. Vlot, P. A. De Jonge, L. L. Dreesens, H. J. Beaumont, R. Lavigne, B. E.
Dutilh, and S. J. Brouns, “Targeting mechanisms of tailed bacteriophages,” Nature Reviews
Microbiology, vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 760–773, 2018.
[39] D. Dams, L. Brøndsted, Z. Drulis-Kawa, and Y. Briers, “Engineering of receptor-binding pro-
teins in bacteriophages and phage tail-like bacteriocins,” Biochemical Society Transactions,
vol. 47, pp. 449–460, 02 2019.
[40] V. Ongenae, A. Briegel, and D. Claessen, “Correction to:‘cell wall deficiency as an escape mech-
anism from phage infection’(2022) by ongenae et al.,” Open Biology, vol. 12, no. 7, p. 220199,
2022.
[41] H. Zhao, J. A. Speir, T. Matsui, Z. Lin, L. Liang, A. Y. Lynn, B. Varnado, T. M. Weiss,
and L. Tang, “Structure of a bacterial virus dna-injection protein complex reveals a decameric
assembly with a constricted molecular channel,” PloS one, vol. 11, no. 2, p. e0149337, 2016.
[42] M. Zinke, G. F. Schröder, and A. Lange, “Major tail proteins of bacteriophages of the order
caudovirales,” Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 298, no. 1, 2022.
[43] R. Linares, C.-A. Arnaud, S. Degroux, G. Schoehn, and C. Breyton, “Structure, function and
assembly of the long, flexible tail of siphophages,” Current Opinion in Virology, vol. 45, pp. 34–
42, 2020.
Page 62 of 65
==PAGE:70==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
[44] M. Z. Islam, A. Fokine, M. Mahalingam, Z. Zhang, C. Garcia-Doval, M. J. van Raaij, M. G.
Rossmann, and V. B. Rao, “Molecular anatomy of the receptor binding module of a bacterio-
phage long tail fiber,” Plos Pathogens, vol. 15, no. 12, p. e1008193, 2019.
[45] J. Taslem Mourosi, A. Awe, W. Guo, H. Batra, H. Ganesh, X. Wu, and J. Zhu, “Understanding
bacteriophage tail fiber interaction with host surface receptor: the key “blueprint” for repro-
gramming phage host range,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 23, no. 20,
p. 12146, 2022.
[46] P. K. Montso, A. M. Kropinski, F. Mokoena, R. E. Pierneef, V. Mlambo, and C. N. Ateba,
“Comparative genomics and proteomics analysis of phages infecting multi-drug resistant es-
cherichia coli o177 isolated from cattle faeces,” Scientific Reports, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 21426,
2023.
[47] D. Schwarzer, F. F. Buettner, C. Browning, S. Nazarov, W. Rabsch, A. Bethe, A. Oberbeck,
V. D. Bowman, K. Stummeyer, M. Mühlenhoff, et al., “A multivalent adsorption apparatus ex-
plains the broad host range of phage phi92: a comprehensive genomic and structural analysis,”
Journal of virology, vol. 86, no. 19, pp. 10384–10398, 2012.
[48] E. Maffei, A. Shaidullina, M. Burkolter, Y. Heyer, F. Estermann, V. Druelle, P. Sauer, L. Willi,
S. Michaelis, H. Hilbi, et al., “Systematic exploration of escherichia coli phage–host interactions
with the basel phage collection,” PLoS Biology, vol. 19, no. 11, p. e3001424, 2021.
[49] P. Wintachai, K. Surachat, G. Chaimaha, A. W. Septama, and D. R. Smith, “Isolation and
characterization of a phapecoctavirus infecting multidrug-resistant acinetobacter baumannii in
a549 alveolar epithelial cells,” Viruses, vol. 14, no. 11, p. 2561, 2022.
[50] L. Putzeys, M. Boon, E.-M. Lammens, K. Kuznedelov, K. Severinov, and R. Lavigne, “Devel-
opment of ont-cappable-seq to unravel the transcriptional landscape of pseudomonas phages,”
Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal, vol. 20, pp. 2624–2638, 2022.
[51] P. Calero, S. I. Jensen, and A. T. Nielsen, “Broad-host-range prouser vectors enable fast char-
acterization of inducible promoters and optimization of p-coumaric acid production in pseu-
domonas putida kt2440,” ACS synthetic biology, vol. 5, no. 7, pp. 741–753, 2016.
[52] thermofisher, “Choosing a bacterial strain for your cloning application.” https://www.
thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/life-science/cloning/cloning-learning-center/
invitrogen-school-of-molecular-biology/molecular-cloning/transformation/
competent-cell-selection-applications.html#expression. [Accessed 09-01-2025].
[53] P. J. Shilling, K. Mirzadeh, A. J. Cumming, M. Widesheim, Z. Köck, and D. O. Daley, “Im-
proved designs for pet expression plasmids increase protein production yield in escherichia coli,”
Communications biology, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 214, 2020.
[54] G. B. LLC, “pUC19 Sequence and Map — snapgene.com.” https://www.snapgene.com/
plasmids/basic_cloning_vectors/pUC19. [Accessed 02-02-2025].
[55] A. R. Vitt, M. C. H. Sørensen, V. Bortolaia, and L. Brøndsted, “A representative collection
of commensal extended-spectrum-and ampc-β-lactamase-producing escherichia coli of animal
origin for phage sensitivity studies,” Phage, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 35–45, 2023.
Page 63 of 65
==PAGE:71==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
[56] C. Camacho, G. Coulouris, V. Avagyan, N. Ma, J. Papadopoulos, K. Bealer, and T. L. Madden,
“Blast+: architecture and applications,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 10, no. 421., 2009.
[57] J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, C. Jumper, D. Hassabis, et al., “Highly
accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold,” Nature, vol. 596, no. 7873, pp. 583–589,
2021.
[58] M. Remmert, A. Biegert, A. Hauser, J. Soering, P. Wrede, and J. Soding, “Hhpred: protein
homology detection via large-scale integrated sequence profile comparison,” Bioinformatics,
vol. 28, no. 23, pp. 2476–2478, 2012.
[59] P. Sfakianakis, M. Steinegger, and J. Soding, “Foldseek: fast and sensitive protein structure
search,” Bioinformatics, vol. 38, no. 14, pp. 3702–3709, 2022.
[60] C. S. Jordan and S. W. Morrical, “Regulation of the bacteriophage t4 dda helicase by gp32
single-stranded dna–binding protein,” DNA repair, vol. 25, pp. 41–53, 2015.
[61] Takara
Biosciences,
“In-fusion
molar
ratio
calculator.”
https://www.
takarabio.com/learning-centers/cloning/primer-design-and-other-tools/
in-fusion-molar-ratio-calculator?srsltid=AfmBOooqgyiC0iyYrSwBJMvoUz7HzmOdYtwA23CPxcFskUM0L
2024. [Online; accessed 17-January-2025].
[62] M. Kashlev, E. Nudler, A. Goldfarb, T. White, and E. Kutter, “Bacteriophage t4 alc protein: a
transcription termination factor sensing local modification of dna,” Cell, vol. 75, no. 1, pp. 147–
154, 1993.
[63] E. S. Andrews and V. L. Arcus, “Phoh2 proteins couple rna helicase and rnase activities,”
Protein Science, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 883–892, 2020.
[64] D. B. Goldsmith, G. Crosti, B. Dwivedi, L. D. McDaniel, A. Varsani, C. A. Suttle, M. G.
Weinbauer, R.-A. Sandaa, and M. Breitbart, “Development of phoh as a novel signature gene
for assessing marine phage diversity,” Applied and environmental microbiology, vol. 77, no. 21,
pp. 7730–7739, 2011.
[65] T. Ha, A. G. Kozlov, and T. M. Lohman, “Single-molecule views of protein movement on
single-stranded dna,” Annual review of biophysics, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 295–319, 2012.
[66] X. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Yu, J. Jin, X. Liu, and G. Wang, “Novel groups and unique distribution
of phage phoh genes in paddy waters in northeast china,” Scientific Reports, vol. 6, no. 1,
p. 38428, 2016.
[67] E. De Nadal, G. Ammerer, and F. Posas, “Controlling gene expression in response to stress,”
Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 833–845, 2011.
[68] Shivangi, Y. Khan, M. K. Ekka, and L. S. Meena, “Structural and functional characteriza-
tion of mycobacterial phoh2 and identification of potential inhibitor of its enzymatic activity,”
Brazilian Journal of Microbiology, pp. 1–19, 2024.
[69] A. Typas, M. Banzhaf, C. A. Gross, and W. Vollmer, “From the regulation of peptidoglycan
synthesis to bacterial growth and morphology,” Nature Reviews Microbiology, vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 123–136, 2012.
Page 64 of 65
==PAGE:72==
DTU Master Thesis, Biotechnology
[70] E. Huiting and J. Bondy-Denomy, “Defining the expanding mechanisms of phage-mediated
activation of bacterial immunity,” Current opinion in microbiology, vol. 74, p. 102325, 2023.
[71] A. Porse, L. J. Jahn, M. M. Ellabaan, and M. O. Sommer, “Dominant resistance and negative
epistasis can limit the co-selection of de novo resistance mutations and antibiotic resistance
genes,” Nature communications, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 1199, 2020.
[72] D. Walls and S. T. Loughran, “Tagging recombinant proteins to enhance solubility and aid
purification,” Protein chromatography: Methods and protocols, pp. 151–175, 2011.
[73] P. Sun, J. E. Tropea, and D. S. Waugh, “Enhancing the solubility of recombinant proteins
in escherichia coli by using hexahistidine-tagged maltose-binding protein as a fusion partner,”
Heterologous gene expression in E. coli: methods and protocols, pp. 259–274, 2011.
[74] E. S. Andrews and V. L. Arcus, “The mycobacterial phoh2 proteins are type ii toxin antitoxins
coupled to rna helicase domains,” Tuberculosis, vol. 95, no. 4, pp. 385–394, 2015.
[75] D. Bikard, C. Loot, Z. Baharoglu, and D. Mazel, “Folded dna in action: hairpin formation
and biological functions in prokaryotes,” Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, vol. 74,
no. 4, pp. 570–588, 2010.
Page 65 of 65
