==PAGE:1==
Backtesting
and
Deploying
Systematic
Trading Strategies with Machine Learning
and MLOps
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learn-
ing and MLOps
Master Thesis
Jan, 2025
By
Nael Rashdeen
s144841
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree
Master of Science in Computer Science & Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science, cloud
computing and machine learning.
Nael Rashdeen - s144841
Signature
Date
ii
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
22-01-2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis presents an MLOps framework for deploying and maintaining systematic trad-
ing strategies. While machine learning applications in financial markets have been studied
extensively, the operational aspects of deploying these models at scale remain challenging.
The primary objective was to develop a comprehensive MLOps framework that stream-
lines the deployment of trading strategies while ensuring reproducibility and reliability.
The research emphasises implementing automated workflows for model training, testing,
and deployment, which significantly reduces operational overhead. We evaluate three dif-
ferent model architectures - Multinomial Logistic Regression, Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM) networks, and XGBoost—on daily price predictions for the top 20 S&P500 stocks
by market capitalisation.
Through the application of modern MLOps principles, the system was designed as a series
of containerised services managed through automated pipelines. Development eﬀiciency
was enhanced by implementing a standardised project structure with clear separation
between data processing, model training, and deployment. The implementation included
back testing, automated data validation, and centralised model artifact management to
ensure consistency across different trading strategies.
The infrastructure was built on AWS services, utilising S3 for data storage, Elastic Con-
tainer Registry for image management, and SageMaker for model deployment. The sys-
tem leverages Github Actions for continuous integration and deployment and code quality
checks before deploying to the cloud. This framework successfully demonstrated its capa-
bility in managing multiple model architectures while maintaining consistent performance
and reliability across development and cloud environments.
The findings suggest that
while technical implementation of MLOps practices is achievable, the unique character-
istics and eﬀiciency of capital markets require careful consideration in system design and
platform architecture.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my lovely wife, Alizey for her support during
these long nights over the last few months and for always having my back. I would equally
like to thank my parents and my siblings for their endless support in life. This is for all
of you!
Furthermore I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Nicki Skafte
Detlefsen for sparking my interest in MLOps, through the best course I have had during
my MSc programme at DTU, complemented by his guidance provided to me during this
research. Thank you Nicki.
iv
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Financial and Capital Markets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Machine Learning for Trading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
MLOps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
System Design & Implementation
11
3.1
System Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Platform Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Data Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
AWS Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
Deployment Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Results and Discussion
33
4.1
Model Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Trading Strategy Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
System Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
45
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The financial industry has progressively adopted machine learning disciplines for its sys-
tematic/algorithmic based trading strategies, creating a need for vigorous deployment
and management systems. Although the development of machine learning models within
trading is well researched and documented, its challenges remain with regard to the de-
ployment and maintenance of numerous models across different environments. This thesis
paper aims at addressing the domain of Machine Learning Operations (MLOps), confined
to systematic trading systems in capital markets.
It should be noted that traditional deployment approaches often fail to address the unique
requirements of trading systems. These include consistent model performance, rapid de-
ployment cycles, and monitoring at scale. Furthermore, the landscape of financial markets,
more specifically, capital markets, adds additional complexities, due to their inherent mar-
ket dynamics [1]. These complexities appear in many forms, given that capital markets
are aimed at being as eﬀicient as possible, and for an investor to outperform the market,
essentially requires observing, identifying, and exploiting market ineﬀiciencies in a timely
manner [2]. Naturally, during the conquest of arbitrage opportunities, industry practi-
tioners in capital markets adhere to regulatory frameworks and are bound by law to meet
the restrictions imposed by the independent country’s financial regulatory body, to ensure
fair market practice for all and mitigation of financial fraud practices [3].
However, despite machine learning’s appeal, it still produces key challenges being:
• Managing the life cycle of multiple machine learning models.
• Automating the deployment pipeline from development to production.
• Ensuring reproducibility of model training and backtesting results.
• Maintaining the reliability of a system in a financial context.
• Handling data processing and feature engineering on a scale.
Thus, this thesis paper proposes an MLOps framework built on AWS infrastructure that
addresses the aforementioned challenges through automated CI/CD practices, container-
ised deployments and systematic monitoring. Alongside this with a focus on the opera-
tional aspects of machine learning model deployment rather than the model performance
alone, this model aims to contribute to the broader understanding of how to design, build,
and maintain production-grade machine learning systems for systematic trading, while ac-
counting for the intricacies of capital markets. The MLOps will be tested on the S&P500
index; the rationale behind the S&P500 is due to the index tracking 500 of the largest
publicly listed company in the US, representing approximately 80% of the US stock market
cap, serving as an effective reflection of a nation’s stock market. [4].
1.1
Research Questions
The research question is aimed to explore the integration of MLOps practices in systematic
trading systems, focusing on the infrastructure and deployment aspects rather than trading
performance of the developed machine learning models. The primary research question is:
• How can machine learning models be effectively integrated into an end-to-end sys-
tematic trading pipeline using MLOps practices to ensure reliable deployment and
operations?
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
1
==PAGE:9==
To address the primary question, several sub-questions are developed to individually ex-
plore and solidify the evidence, ultimately giving insightful findings to answer the primary
question at hand.
• What are the essential infrastructure components required for deploying machine
learning based trading models in a production environment?
• How can containerisation and continuous integration/continuous deployment (CI/CD)
pipelines improve the reliability and reproducibility of model deployments in trading
systems?
• What monitoring and logging strategies are most effective for ensuring the stable
operation of machine learning trading systems?
1.2
Scope and Limitations
This thesis paper aims to implement an MLOps pipeline for systematic trading strate-
gies, that emphasises on daily stock price prediction for the 20 largest assets on market
cap within the S&P500 index, using machine learning models. The explanation behind
selecting the 20 largest companies were due to the S&P500 being weight-based, thus the
higher ranking stocks, represents a greater portion of the US stock economy [4]. More-
over, limiting the asset count from 503 to the top 20, provides greater overview, in turn
easing the development and implementation of the machine learning model. Moreover, it
is important to highlight that whenever Logistic Regression is mentioned, it refers to a
Multinomial Logistic Regression model, due to the prediction of three categories within
our target variables.
The thesis is confined around the development of end-to-end MLOps infrastructure on
AWS, including its data pipelines, model training, and automated deployment workflows.
The thesis will discuss and compare the relevancy of three model architectures while mea-
suring which one would be the most fitting given the case. These three architecture models
being: Multinomial Logistic Regression, LSTM, and XGBoost for multinomial classifica-
tion of next day price movements, evaluating their performance through backtesting on
historical data.
However, the thesis paper is constrained around the exclusive use of technical indicators.
The research in question have opted to disregard fundamental analysis, with a sole reliance
on technical analysis. The reason being that the investment horizon is on a day to day
basis, therefore it is more fitting to utilise historical data as well as trading volumes in
order to identify and exploit patterns among the top 20 S&P500 stocks.
2
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
2.1
Financial and Capital Markets
Financial markets are an integral part of modern economies, functioning as platforms
where securities such as equities, bonds, commodities and derivatives are traded. These
type of markets allow for eﬀicient allocation of resources, in terms of connecting entities
with surplus of capital, such as the individual investor and a given institution in need
of funding, for instance corporations or governments.
Through the facilitation of this
exchange it promotes economic growth, innovation, and wealth creation. The interaction
between the buyer (investor) and sellers (government or corporations) establishes the value
of the security based on the current information and future expectations [5].
Within the broader confines of the financial system, there are different markets, including
the stock market. The stock market occupies a unique and significant role as a subset of
capital markets. The stock market is essentially a marketplace were investors can purchase
and sell ownership of publicly listed companies. It serves as a means for organisations to
raise long-term funding and creates opportunities for investors to earn higher returns
through dividends and capital appreciation [5]. The stock market’s significance extends
beyond the scope of individual participants, given that it can give a loose indication
into economic health, reflecting the collective investor sentiment and offering insights into
broader economic trends (Levine, 1996). Additionally, the operations of the stock market is
consistent of two marketplaces; one being the primary market and the other the secondary
market.
The primary market is where securities are created, this includes companies
issuing publicly listed shares through Initial Public Offerings (IPOs). Once issued, the
secondary market comes into play, where these securities are traded among investors [2].
Additionally, it is important to note that the stock market is inherently complex, given
that it is easily influenced by a number of different information based factors such as
macroeconomic indicators and corporate performance to geopolitical events and investor
psychology (Alonso, 2024). These different dynamics introduce volatilitity, which is de-
fined as how much and rapidly prices move over a given time span. Volatility makes the
valuation of stocks and the prediction of their future price challenging [6]. Additionally,
market participants are a contributing force in affecting share prices of stocks, such as
retail investors, institutional investors, systematic traders etc. each which have varying
objectives and strategies [7].
Therefore, to predict stock price movements, it becomes vital to understand the stock
market’s behaviour, and its influencing factors. This thesis delves into the complexities of
the stock market, focusing on addressing the challenge of forecasting future stock prices
through Machine Learning modelling.
Examining factors that drive stock price move-
ments, and develop a model which accurately predicts next day returns expectations to
be either positive, neutral or negative, ultimately producing a final output in multinomial
classification that is downward, neutral, and upward movements.
2.1.1
Market Eﬀiciency
The stock market can be described as an eﬀicient system, given capacity to process a
wide array of information, and thereby reflect the information as the pricing of the securi-
ties. Additionally, through the participation of other players in the market, prices adjust
instantaneously in response to new data ranging from corporate announcements, macroe-
conomic indicators, or geopolitical events. This ensures that the value of the assets are
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
3
==PAGE:11==
typically priced fairly on the best available information [2]. Essentially, the stock market
is designed to uphold fair and accurate valuation of companies, foster transparancy and
promote investor confidence.
Nevertheless, it is important to note the difference between stock price and stock value.
The stock price, also known as the market value is the cost of share of a company’s stock
and frequently changes throughout the trading day based on the supply and demand
principles.
Price is influenced by various factors extending beyond the corporation as
a whole as earlier mentioned by economic conditions, market sentiment and rumours or
speculation. The stock value also known as the intrinsic value on the other hand refers to
the company’s true value which is not directly observable through its pricing. Deriving the
true worth of a company requires different methods such as the company’s assets, earnings
potential, growth prospects, competitive position and overall market conditions [8].
Additionally, the eﬀiciency of the stock market ensures to alleviate mispricing of assets,
such as arbitrage. Market participants may exploit gaps in an asset’s price and its under-
lying value, through simultaneously purchasing undervalued assets and selling overvalued
ones in different markets, creating an immediate profit [9]. However, given such a scenario,
due to the exploitation of market participants, prices would re-adjust at the correct level,
given that the demand i.e., purchase for the undervalued asset would increase, whereas the
supply i.e., selling of the overvalued asset would increase, ultimately increasing the price
of the undervalued asset and lowering the price of the overvalued asset, configuring itself
at an appropriate equilibrium [2]. Even though, the stock market is not defined without
its imperfections, nevertheless its structure and functioning, along with its capacity for
information integration and price adjustments, emphasises its importance as a reliable
platform. Additionally, it further signifies the challenge, that is predicting stock price
movements in a vast and dynamic environment.
To further substantiate the concept of market eﬀiciency, we rely on key theories providing a
framework to further understand how stock markets function. Eﬀicient Market Hypothesis
(EMH), the no-arbitrage condition, and the Law of One Price, all offer insights into the
associating factors which drive price discovery and resource allocation in the stock market.
Collectively, these theories convey how information is reflected in an asset’s price, how
mispricing opportunities are eradicated, and why securities with identical cash flows are
priced consistently across different markets. The following sections delve deeper into these
concepts and provide a more comprehensive understanding of market eﬀiciency and its
implications for stock price prediction.
Eﬀicient Market Hypothesis
The Eﬀicient Market Hypothesis was developed by Eugene F. Fama in his 1969 publica-
tion “Eﬀicient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work” [10]. Fama
specifies that markets are “informationally eﬀicient”. This means that the price of an asset
incorporates all available information at any given time. Hence, it becomes theoretically
impossible for investors to consistently achieve returns that are above the market average
on a risk-adjusted basis.
The Eﬀicient Market Hypothesis (EMH) assumes that investors will behave rationally, us-
ing all the relevant information to make decisions that will maximise their utility. Despite
some participants acting irrationally, the actions of the irrational investor will be offset by
the rational investor who will exploit price discrepancies, ensuring that markets remain
eﬀicient. In the stock market, prices respond almost instantaneously to new information,
ultimately reflecting the intrinsic value of the asset. Thus, arbitrage opportunities, where
investors can profit from price discrepancies without taking on risk, are rare and short-
4
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:12==
lived, as competitive market forces quickly correct any ineﬀiciencies, upholding a new
equilibrium [8].
Fama further categorised market eﬀiciency into three forms: weak, semi-strong, and strong.
The weak form eﬀiciency suggests that all available financial information is already incor-
porated into the asset price. Under this form, market participants are unable to achieve
abnormal profits from investing in these assets. The semi-strong form assumes that an
asset’s price at any moment incorporates all the existent information on the market, in-
cluding historical prices and other historical information, while additionally stating that
prices adjust instantenously without biases to incorporate any other new information. Un-
der this form, the usage of technical and fundamental analysis, that is the evaluation of
a company’s financial performance and prospects are ineffective in order to consistently
generate abnormal profits. Finally, the strong form assumes that prices incorporate all
information, that is historical information (weak form), new public information (semi-
strong) and private information regarding the asset [11].
Depsite the prominence that EMH holds in financial theory, it has faced criticism partic-
ularly in relations to behavioural finance. Behavioural finance challenge the assumption
of investor rationality, highlighting that there are psychological biases, such as investor
mood swings, herd mentality and loss aversion [2]. Additionally, observations on financial
markets have shown asset bubbles and crashes, most notably the financial crisis of 2008
which serve as a reminder of instances where prices have deviated substantially from their
intrinsic values. Fama’s EMH theory does argue under specified assumptions of the in-
vestor and economy, and under set assumptions, his theory holds true. Thus showcasing
the fundamental dynamics of capital markets and how anamolies in these assumptions can
produce a different outcome.
The Law of One Price and No Arbitrage
The Law of One Price (LOOP) is a fundamental principle in financial economics, which
argue that two identical or equivalent assets with the same risk profile and cash flows
should trade at the same price in all markets. The principle is a constituent of market
eﬀiciency, as it ensures there is consistency in terms of pricing and prevent arbitrage
opportunities [2].
At its essence, LOOP is based on the idea that investors are rational and there is an
interconnection between different financial markets. Similarly to the EMH and arbitrage,
when markets are eﬀicient, the rational investor would act on price discrepancies (higher
self-gain for the investor) between the identical assets, ultimately creating a self-correcting
mechanism which would align the prices of the identical assets across the different markets
[2]. The principle works under two assumptions. First assumption is that markets are
frictionless. This means there are no significant transaction costs, taxes, or barriers to
trade. The second assumption includes that information is freely and equally available to
all parties involved, thus that prices reflect the same underlying data [12].
Essentially, LOOP is a vital concept that ensures consistency and transparency in financial
markets. The concept incorporates the interconnectedness of global stock markets and the
role that arbitrage plays in aligning prices of identical but different assets [2]. LOOP is a
contributing factor in further understanding how stock markets work in terms of how assets
are priced and understood. Ultimately, the thesis delves in the challenges of being able
to predict stock price movements in an environment which is situated around maintaining
alignment through various mechanisms, one of them being LOOP.
The no-arbitrage on the other hand serves as a supporting factor of the theoretical founda-
tions of asset pricing and market eﬀiciency. The no arbitrage simply states that in eﬀicient
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
5
==PAGE:13==
markets, opportunities to make risk-free through arbitrage, that is buying an undervalued
asset on one market, while coincidentally selling it on a different market where it is over-
valued, can not persevere in a significant length of time, due to the market participants
exploiting the arbitrage opportunity, coinciding at a new equilibrium level ([13].
The no arbitrgage differs from LOOP in terms of its scope and application, although being
closely related. The financial principle no arbitrage serves as a key principle that ensures
LOOP stays true. A key distinction lies in the types of mispricing addressed by the two
different principles. While LOOP deals exclusively with identical or equivalent assets, to
certify they are priced consistently across different markets, the no arbitrage extends to
scenarios involving related financial instruments, giving it a broader scope.
The broader scope of the no arbitrage is simply derived from the conditions it states,
that is no arbitrage can occur, and once it does occur, the market will adjust itself to
correct for the discrepancy, similarly to the EMH. Ultimately, constituting the theoretical
market forces behind eﬀicient markets such as the stock market and how its operations
are dictated i.e., the elimination of risk-free profits, further illustrating the challenges
associated in attempting to outperform the stock market as a whole, due to the market’s
integrity and transparency.
2.1.2
Alpha Generation
Given that financial markets are inherently eﬀicient, consistently outperforming the market
becomes quite complex. The process of outperforming the market, against a predefined
benchmark, when adjusted for risk is defined as alpha generation. In this context, we
measure alpha through assessing the historical performance of the asset in relation to its
expected return predicted by the Security Market Line (SML) [2]. For context regard-
ing the SML, it is a visual graphical representation of the Capital Asset Pricing Model
(CAPM), displaying the relationship between an asset’s expected return and its systematic
risk (beta). Thus, everything above the SML are undervalued stocks, given they perform
better than its expected return, whereas everything below the SML are overvalued stocks,
given they underperform relative to their expected return [14].
The importance of alpha generation lies in its role as a measure of determining profitability
of an investment. Alpha reflect the efforts of investment strategies and their effectiveness
in terms of either exploiting market ineﬀiciencies, market timing or stock selection serving
as a key metric to assess the value added.
Although a quite simple concept, generating alpha is inherently challenging.
Consis-
tently generating alpha i.e., outperforming the market is demanding to achieve, given the
eﬀiciency of modern financial markets and its intense competition. As mentioned, mar-
kets adopt new information almost instantaneously, leaving little room for investors to
utilise consistent mispricing to achieve immediate returns. Given that generating alpha
consistently requires active investment management strategies, involves taking on more
unsystematic risk, which can lead to greater losses during periods of market volatility i.e.,
greater risk greater reward/loss.
2.1.3
Systematic Trading Approaches
Systematic trading approaches represent a disciplined and rule-based methodology for
making investment decisions in financial markets. In its essence, it contains a wide range
of various trading strategies, aimed at identifying and exploiting market ineﬀiciencies or
recurring patterns. Systematic trading relies on a predefined set of rules or algorithms and
quantitative models which emphasis on generating trading signals. The idea is to rest on
consistency, removing investor biases, and base decisions solely on data and logical rules.
6
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:14==
The sole reliance on repeatable and testable strategies, allows traders to continuously val-
idate their methods through back testing and forward testing, ensuring that their models
perform well, relative to their market conditions [15].
Systematic trading approaches can be essentially identified with the following five charac-
teristics:
• Rules based execution
• Quantitative Foundation
• Automation
• Risk Management
• Backtesting and Optimisation
As mentioned, the systematic trading approaches help in the elimination of trading biases
of investors, which is quite essential. These biases also referred to as Systematic Trading
Biases can be quite troublesome for investors as these biases tend to introduce systematic
uncertainty into prices and can therefore significantly impact the market behaviour. An
example of this is the disposition effect, which refers to a physiological fallacy where
investors tend to hold onto losing assets in hopes of the asset one day increasing rather
than cutting their losses, while prematurely selling winners, increasing their opportunity
cost, ultimately constituting ineffacious behaviour which can distort price movements and
thereby reduce the overall market eﬀiciency [2].
Additionally, humans are inherently responsive to its environmental influence. This can
create biases such as investor mood swings which are triggered by external events such
as weather or geopolitical developments, which can lead to irrational trading patterns,
resulting in prices deviating from their intrinsic values. Moreover, herd behaviour where
investors would mimic each other’s actions can result in intensifying these issues by boost-
ing price trends and increase volatility than what can be justified by financial fundamentals
[2]. Notably, a recent example being the GameStop short squeeze.
Thus, in its essence systematic trading approaches can help in providing a framework
for achieving consistent and objective decision-making in capital markets by reducing
or eliminating biases and relying solely on data-driven strategies. Naturally, systematic
trading approaches are not unsusceptible to criticism, when it comes to incorporating the
right data and understanding the right time frame. However, if executed well, it can help
in addressing common investor fallacies such as disposition effect, investor mood swings
and herd mentality, promoting greater eﬀiciency and long-term performance.
2.2
Machine Learning for Trading
The integration of machine learning into trading can perceived as a greater shift in the
dynamics of the financial markets in terms of how they are analysed and navigated. As
continuously mentioned throughout this paper, trading strategies are adjusted and devel-
oped to generate alpha, however, as markets are eﬀicient, the challenge is discovering the
correct assets and their intrinsic values, in order to exploit these ineﬀiciencies to capture
actionable returns. machine learning excels, as it possesses the capabilities of aggregating,
analysing and processing diverse datasets in order to identify relationships providing a bet-
ter holistic view, helping the investor in making actionable insights that would otherwise
have been undetected.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
7
==PAGE:15==
2.2.1
Benefits of Machine Learning In Trading
Additionally, machine learning’s ability to adapt itself to changing market condition is
quite beneficial. Unlike a traditional rule-based system, which would require manual re-
calibration when there are shifts in market dynamics, machine learning algorithms provide
greater autonomy through evolved learning from new data. This is especially vital in capi-
tal markets, where an assets relationship with its price is heavily dependent on the newest
available information such as macroeconomic shifts, geopolitical events or even investor
sentiment. Reinforced learning exemplifies this ability, as it enables the model to refine
the strategy through training and testing, ensuring that it remains dynamic in different
environments.
Furthermore, the non-linear capabilities of machine learning allows for it to caputre com-
plex, non-linear relationships between input variables and target outcomes. Traditional
trading models often take assumptions of linearity, which is not wrong, additionally it
has the risk of oversimplifying capital market behaviour, thus not reflecting the true in-
formation bearing risk of reducing the investor’s credibility on their investment decision.
Neural networds and ensemble learning model interactions and dependencies are typically
situated outside the confines of traditional techniques, thus enhancing their predictive
accuracy.
However, one of the most notable features of machine learning is its hefty focus on em-
pirical performance over theoretical.
As we know now, the EMH assumes that prices
fully reflect all available information, which in turn leaves little to no room for predic-
tive opportunities, reflecting a perfect economy, under the perfect conditions. However,
in a real-world scenario this does not always hold true, as we observe behavioural biases
(systematic trading bias), information assymetries, and structural ineﬀiciencies. This is
where machine learning thrives as it is quite agnostic in relation to such assumptions,
with a sole reliance on a data-centric approach. machine learning thrives in these imper-
fect conditions, detecting subtle ineﬀiciencies and anamolies which can be leveraged for
alpha generation.
2.2.2
Challenges of Machine Learning in Trading
Despite machine learning’s transformative potential it posses, machine learning in trading
is not without its challenges. One noteable limitation is the risk of overfitting, that is
where models may perform well on historical or test data but fail to generalise itself to
new or unseen data. Such a scenario can bear significant consequences, especially when
considering that capital markets are non-stationary and assets patterns and relationships
are under constant evolution. Moreover, data quality and availability are a given con-
cern, as some financial data can be noise, incomplete or biased, ultimately leading to
inaccurate predictions, subsequently leading to poor trading decisions. Preprocessing and
data cleaning are required to warrant that models are trained on reliable and credible
information.
The interpretability of machine learning models poses as an additional challenge due to its
particularly complex architectures like the deep neural networks. Although these models
can offer a high level of predictive accuracy, their “black box” nature poses a hinderance in
understanding the reasoning behind their outputs. This lack of transparancy can obstruct
adoption in regulated environments or contexts where accountability is critical. In order
to address this, investors tend to divert efforts to the development of explainable AI
techniques, which aim to make machine learning models more understandable without
sacrificing its performance.
All things considered, machine learning in trading reflects a shift in systematic trading
8
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:16==
through the introduction of adaptability, ability to process large and complex data sets,
and its emphasised focus on empirical performance rather than theoretical assumptions.
Its characteristics deviate slightly from traditional practices, yet with great eﬀiciency,
thus the emphasised focus from industry practitioners to indoctrinate machine learning
models into their systems. It is evidently known that all good things in life, come with its
challenges.
2.3
MLOps
As of now we have established the foundations of capital markets and their fundamental
dynamics, systematic trading approaches, and Machine Learning in trading. Therefore,
we turn our attention towards the crucial aspect of deploying these strategies in practice:
Machine Learning Operations (MLOps). The following section will introduce what MLOps
is, its relevance, and how it specifically applies to systematic trading implementations.
MLOps represents a framework that bridges the gap between model development and pro-
duction deployment [16]. It combines well-established practices from Development Opera-
tions (DevOps) with solutions to the unique challenges posed once deploying and managing
machine learning models in production environments. Although DevOps initially focused
on bridging the gap between software development and IT operations, MLOps extends this
even further by including additional disciplines of data engineering and machine learning
engineering [17].
Figure 2.1: Core components of MLOps framework showing the interconnected nature of
machine learning systems operations.[18]
The emergence of MLOps stems from the growing need of effectively managing the com-
plete machine learning lifecycle. This means, from data preparation and model training
through to deployment, while monitoring and maintaining [19]. Considering that finan-
cial institutions have become increasingly data-driven. Hence, the potential of utilising
machine learning practices to generate alpha has led to a significant shift in how ma-
chine learning is perceived and implemented. Eradicating its limitations of confining it to
solely research environments, rather becoming a crucial component of production trading
systems. Transitioning machine learning models from research to real-world trading appli-
cations has been proven to be a complex challenge. Although many financial institutions
idealise implementing machine learning based trading strategies, only few successfully
manage to deploy and maintain them in production [20]. MLOps henceforth emerged a
as a solution to this gap, considering it provides a more structured approach to stream-
lining the machine learning lifecycle, while ensuring validity, reproducibility, scalability
and reliability of models in production. It is important to note that a key characteristic
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
9
==PAGE:17==
of MLOps is its circular nature. This means it is never a completed process, but rather
a continuous cycle of monitoring, improvement, and redeployment. This becomes quite
critical in systematic trading, where market conditions consistently evolve and model per-
formance must be vigorously evaluated and improved. The implementation relies on three
core continuous processes:
1. Continuous Integration (CI): Automating the integration of code changes and
running automated tests to ensure quality and provide rapid feedback to developers.
2. Continuous Deployment (CD): Automating the deployment process to enable
frequent and reliable releases of model updates to production.
3. Continuous Training (CT): Automatically retraining and validating models when
new data becomes available or when model performance degrades.
Furthermore, in the context of systematic trading, these processes face unique challenges.
Market data is constantly streaming, meaning that strategies must be able to adapt to
changing market conditions, and any deployment issues can pose serious financial conse-
quences. Therefore, to address these challenges, MLOps implementations in systematic
trading, tend to incorporate several key components:
• Automated data pipelines that handle both historical data for training and real-time
market data for trading
• Comprehensive version control that tracks not only code but also data, model arti-
facts, and environmental configurations
• Robust monitoring systems that track both technical metrics (like prediction latency)
and financial metrics (like strategy returns)
• Governance frameworks that ensure compliance with financial regulations and risk
management requirements
Additionally, the deployment of MLOps in systematic trading further solidifies the claim
that there has been a significant evolution from traditional trading systems. Traditional
systems tend to rely on static rules and periodic updates, whereas MLOps allows for a
more dynamic and responsive approach. The models can be automatically retrained should
market conditions change, deployments can be rolled back if anomalies are detected, and
finally providing the ability to monitor and optimise the entire life cycle continuously.
Looking ahead, as systematic trading strategies become increasingly sophisticated and in-
clude multiple data sources and complex machine learning models, the role that MLOps
carries becomes more critical [21]. The framework facilitates the structure necessary in
order to manage this complexity while maintaining the agility to adapt to market condi-
tions.
The following chapters will delve into great detail in regards to multiple services, tools
and frameworks in order to build the MLOps pipeline for this thesis paper. Diving deeper
into the thought process and reasoning behind the decisions made to lay the foundation
for a solid and end to end pipeline taking most of the design and architectural decisions
within our domain of systematic trading into consideration.
10
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:18==
3
System Design & Implementation
3.1
System Requirements
The design of a machine learning based trading system requires thoughtful consideration of
multiple factors to ensure reliable workflows, maintainable code and reproducible results.
The following section will cover the key requirements guiding the system’s design and
architecture - focusing on the specific needs of a classification based strategy operating on
daily market data from companies listed on the S&P500 index.
3.1.1
Data Requirements
The foundation of the system is the ability to acquire, process and analyse financial market
data. The primary data source should consist of daily stock prices for a chosen number of
stocks listed on the S&P500 based on explanatory data analysis. The system must acquire
historical data over a timespan where flucatations in market conditions can be captured
for suﬀicient model training.
Furthermore the system must be able to compute and process technical indicators that
should serve as features for the machine learning models. The processing should include
trend, momentum and volatility indicators to capture movements over time while handling
the inherent challenges of rolling window computations and maintaining data integrity.
To support the classification approach to trading on daily data, the processing should
generate target variables based on next day movements. The target generation process
must strictly avoid look-ahead bias ensuring that only information available at the time
of prediction is used in the feature computation.
3.1.2
Development Infrastructure
The development infrastructure must support both research activities and seamless de-
ployments. The system requires a modular architecture that separates concerns across the
software development lifecycle and incorporating:
• Packaging and dependency management
• Data collection and storage capabilities
• Feature engineering and target generation
• Model training and evaluation metrics
• Model prediction and inference pipeline
The infrastructure needs to be deployed on one of the main cloud service providers using:
• Scalable data storage and retrieval
• Containerisation and model registry
• Computational resources for model training
• Automated backup and version management
• Identity Access Management (IAM)
Centralised configuration management should be incorporated, allowing for maintainabil-
ity across different environments - including file paths, environment specific variables along
with model parameters etc.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
11
==PAGE:19==
3.1.3
MLOps Requirements
The underlying MLOps infrastructure should support reproducibility and maintainability
of the machine learning pipeline through automation. Version control should extend be-
yond code to handle data versions, feature engineering parameters and model artifacts.
Monitoring mechanisms should be enabled, ideally tracking the overall system health dur-
ing the project lifecycle.
The system requires CI/CD capabilities for:
• Implementations specific and data updates
• Feature computation and target generation
• Model training and inference
• Performance monitoring and reporting
These requirements pave the way for implementing an automated trading system that
combines machine learning capabilities with traditional software engineering best prac-
tices. The specific technologies, tools and frameworks chosen to meet these requirements
will be detailed in the following section.
3.2
Platform Foundation
The implementation of a production-grade machine learning trading system demands
meticulous attention to the foundational architecture that supports both development
and deployment workflows. Through careful analysis of various architectural approaches,
I developed a platform foundation that prioritises reproducibility, scalability, and main-
tainability. This section details the core components of this foundation, exploring the
rationale behind key technical decisions and their implications for the overall system.
3.2.1
Ruff
Ruff was used at the linting tool due to its superior performance in comparison to linters
as Flake8 and Black. It consists of a comprehensive rule set of over 800 rules that can be
configured through the pyproject.toml aligning with a projects requirements. [22] The
linting configuration within the repository enforced code quality aspects including error
checking rules (E) and docstring (D) validation which ensured comprehensive documenta-
tion of our classes and functions. Within the pyproject.toml file some documentation rules
related to module-level strings were (D100 - D107) intentionally excluded as they had to
align with the sphinx documentation standards covered in the next section. Furthermore
file organisation and import management rules were enforced on essential project direc-
tories while ignoring common development artifacts and cached files. Due to ruff’s fast
performance, it was able to complete its checks in approximately 1 second both locally
and within the CI/CD pipeline. Furthermore integrating it within Github Actions, led
to code and quality assurance maintaining consistent styling and good practices for the
subsequent build and deployment steps.
3.2.2
Sphinx Documentation Server
Sphinx was used as the documentation framework, enabling automated API documenta-
tion generation served through a web interface. The documentation server ensured ac-
cessibility of technical documentation extracting docstrings from the codebase providing
an API library of all the functions from data processing to model implementations. Fur-
thermore Google-style docstrings were used and the service was automatically configured
to run on port 8080 as part of the post-startup command in the development container,
making the documentation instantly accessible on launch. Enabling real-time preview of
12
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Features module in Sphinx Documentation
the documentation facilitated an iterative approach to access the lastest documentation
reflecting the current codebase.
The documentation structure followed a hierarchical structure showcasing the project’s
architecture with dedicated sections for the data pipeline, model implementations and
deployment procedures. A snippet of the features module can be seen in Figure 3.1.
3.2.3
Poetry Dependency Management
The complexity of machine learning systems presents its challenges in managing depen-
dencies. These systems often rely on circular networks of interdependent libraries, each
requiring specific version combinations to function correctly. This complexity is further
increased in the context of financial trading systems, where consistency and reliability are
key of the essence. After evaluating several dependency managers, Poetry[23] was selected
as the primary tool for handling our project’s dependencies. Poetry represents a significant
evolution in Python dependency management, offering advantages over traditional tools
like pip or Conda[24]. Its core strength lies in its deterministic approach to dependency
resolution, coupled with a modern packaging workflow that aligns with current Python
packaging standards. The decision to use Poetry was influenced by several critical factors.
First, its ability to create reproducible environments through a comprehensive .lockfile
ensures that development and production environments remain consistent. Second, its
intuitive CLI and project management features streamline common development tasks,
reducing the cognitive overhead of environment management. At the core of handling
our project dependencies lies the pyproject.toml file, which served as the central con-
figuration for the entire project. This file not only declared direct dependencies but also
specified their version constraints in a clear and maintainable format:
The decision to explicitly pin dependency versions was intentional as more flexible version
constraints might had been appropriate for general-purpose applications, the potential
risks of dependency updates within our systematic trading pipeline outweighed the benefits
of automatic updates. Each dependency version was carefully selected and tested to ensure
compatibility with the system’s requirements.
The transition from local development to cloud based production represents a challenge
in all sorts of systems including machine learning. Traditional development approaches
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: Pyproject.toml poetry configuration
often lead to discrepancies between development and production environments, result-
ing in unexpected behaviour when models are deployed.
To address this challenge, a
comprehensive containerisation strategy using Visual Studio Code’s Development Con-
tainers[25] extension was used. The decision to use this great extension was driven by
the need to create a development environment that precisely mirrored the production
configuration while maintaining the functional design necessary for eﬀicient development.
This approach ensured that code developed locally behaved identically when deployed
to production, eliminating the ”it works on my machine” class of problems that often
plague software systems. The implementation of Development Containers required care-
ful consideration of both the development workflow and the underlying container archi-
tecture. The container configuration was designed to support rapid development cycles
while maintaining strict environment consistency. This configuration was defined in the
.devcontainer/devcontainer.json file as seen in Figure 3.3
3.2.4
Development Environment Containerisation
[htbp]
This configuration encapsulated several key design decisions.
First, the use of a bind
mount for the workspace directory enabled real-time code synchronisation between the host
machine and container, facilitating quick development iterations. Second, the inclusion
of specific VS Code extensions ensured that the same extensions and tools were available
within the container.
The selection of these extensions were based on their ability to
enhance development productivity while maintaining compatibility with the containerised
environment.
Inheriting from the same base image, ensured that development environments were con-
14
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.3: Dev-container.json file
sistent with production while providing additional tooling for debugging and development
locally:
Figure 3.4: Base docker image
Another consideration in the development container was the management of Poetry de-
pendencies. While conventional practices often suggest using virtual environments with
Poetry, the deliberate decision was made to install packages from the host machine directly
into the container. The reason was influenced by the fact that Docker containers already
provide environmental isolation, adding an additional layer of virtualisation through Po-
etry’s virtual environment seemed redundant.
3.2.5
Container Architecture
The container architecture for the project’s platform required careful consideration of
multiple competing concerns: development eﬀiciency, system reliability and performance.
After investigating for a few days the decision to implement a multi-stage build pat-
tern was researched to handle different requirements while maintaining consistency and
maintainability going forward. This approach represented an evolution from traditional
single-stage container builds, offering greater flexibility and eﬀiciency in both development
and production contexts.
As seen in Figure 3.4, the foundation of such an architecture was established within the
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.5: Docker Multistage Builds
base stage of our Dockerfile.
This base configuration introduced several important architectural decisions. The use of
the slim Python image variant minimised the container size while providing necessary
Python functionality. The careful cleaning of package caches and removal of Python byte-
code files demonstrated attention to security and performance considerations. These op-
timisations became important within our project as resource utilisation directly impacted
system performance and reliability.
Building upon this base stage, multiple stages were built transferring only the necessary
components into other stages by the use of targets which can be seen within the Dockerfile
on Figure 3.5.
The data stage built upon the poetry stage added the project’s data directory to the
container.
Separate stages for each machine learning model including Logistic regres-
sion, LSTM, and XGBoost were created. These stages copied over model-specific files
and configurations, isolating each model’s dependencies and logic to prevent conflicts. For
training and inference, additional stages were defined for each model. Training stages, such
as logistic_train, lstm_train, and xgboost_train, encapsulated their respective training
scripts, set the working directory to /opt/ml/code for SageMaker AI runtime compatibil-
ity, and defined entry points to execute the training scripts. Similarly, inference stages,
such as logistic_predict, lstm_predict, and xgboost_predict, included their respective in-
ference scripts, exposed port 8080, and defined entry points for serving predictions. These
inference stages were optimised for deployment for AWS SageMaker, with the SAGE-
MAKER_PROGRAM environment variable used to indicate the relevant inference script.
This use of Docker multi-stage builds provided several advantages. Reusing common lay-
ers across stages significantly reduced build times and storage requirements. The modular
16
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:24==
structure isolated dependencies and logic for each model, simplifying maintenance and
debugging. Cleaning unnecessary files and caches optimised image sizes, making them
production-ready. Most importantly, this approach ensured consistency across develop-
ment, training, and inference environments, laying a solid foundation for scalable and
reproducible machine learning workflows. Each stage served a specific purpose, ensuring
the platform was eﬀicient, organised, and suited to both local and production use cases.
3.3
Data Pipeline
As mentioned in the requirements above the data pipeline forms the foundation of our
trading system, responsible for acquiring, processing and storing relevant financial data
for model training and inference. This section describes the design considerations along
with relevant implementation details of the components within this step of the pipeline.
3.3.1
Data Flow
The pipeline was defined in four stages e.g.
a simple explanatory data analysis, data
collection, feature engineering and persisting to a file storage. Each stage was implemented
as a separate module within the repository ensuring a clear separation of concerns and
single responsibility. Figure 3.2 shows a simplified flowchart of the process.
Figure 3.6: Simplified flowchart of the data pipeline
The pipeline processed daily stock data on a 10 year timeframe which will be discussed in
the next section. Raw data was collected using the Yahoo Finance API [26], as it is an open
source, developer friendly library to download and fetch market data from. Furthermore
the raw data was stored for each stock symbol in OHLCV format [27] from which the
technical indicators and the target variables were computed. After the computation of
the features and target, data stored in the processed directory of the code repository was
synced through S3 sync operation as a part of the automated build process on Github
Actions which will be covered in detail later.
3.3.2
Data Collection
As mentioned above, data was acquired through the YFinance API. The data collection
strategy focused on acquiring high-quality historical data, with a particular emphasis on
the most significant companies listed on the S&P500 index. The implementation consisted
of two components: explanatory data analysis for stock selection and their respective
historical prices.
The first step involved analysing the most suitable candidates for our trading strategy.
Market capitalisation served as the primary selection criteria as it tends to correlate with
stock liquidity and trading ability. Stocks with larger market capitalisation tend to exhibit
more consistent trading patterns across retail and institutional investors on the market
hence impacting buy/sell decisions. The decision to focus on the top 20 stocks by market
capitalisation, reflected a balance between managing 20 datasets over a 10 year time frame
along with their market representation. These companies demonstrated higher trading
volumes which minimised the concerns about market impact and slippage in real-world
applications. Furthermore, these companies have more detailed analyst coverage, leading
to more eﬀicient price discovery and higher quality data for model training. Figure 3.7
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
17
==PAGE:25==
shows the function that fetches, analyses and stores the top 20 selected stocks based on
their market cap.
Figure 3.7: Stocks selection primarily based on market capitalisation
The function in Figure 3.7 generated a CSV file which was stored within the project
repository. The generated CSV file contained high level information of the selected 20
stocks which was then passed on to a fetch\_data function which fetched data from 2014
to present day of the script execution for each of the symbols.
The time frame starting from 01-01-2014 was chosen with careful consideration due to
several factors. This period consisted of multiple significant market regimes, including the
post-2008 recovery period, the 2020 COVID-19 market crash and recovery along with the
massive 2022 layoffs within the technology sectors. The diversity and fluctuations during
these market conditions provided a dataset with exposure to bullish and bearish markets
which the models would capture to potentially improve their prediction and generalisation
capabilities.
As we can see in Figure 3.8, the collected data contained the daily price information from
1 Jan 2014 including opening, high, low and closing prices along with trading volumes.
Both raw and adjusted prices were requested to account for corporate actions such as stock
splits and dividend distributions (Insert kide her). With this approach, we ensured data
integrity and reflected true historical performance for each ticker for further analysis.
3.3.3
Feature Engineering
The feature engineering process involved in the transformation of the raw historical data
into meaningful technical indicators that captured different aspects of market behaviour.
This implementation used the pandas-ta library, which provided functions to eﬀiciently
compute technical indicators through its programmatic API. The feature set was designed
18
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.8: Fetch data function storing OHLCV features
to capture three primary aspects of market behaviour: momentum, trend and volatility.
Each category of indicators provided different insights into markets regimes. While volatil-
ity metrics quantified market uncertainty, momentum indicators recorded the strength of
price movements, and moving averages and their derivatives aided in trend identifications.
The computation of these features can be seen inadd_technical_indicators function in
Figure 3.9.
We will now cover the indicators briefly. The trend indicators computed included Simple
Moving Averages (SMA) and Exponential Moving Averages (EMA) at 20-day and 50-day
intervals. The reasoning for these timeframes were selected as they represent standard
periods used in technical analysis and captured both short and medium term price trends.
EMA assigns more weights to recent price movements in comparison to the SMA, taking
recent market movements into consideration.
The Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD) and Relative Strength Index (RSI)
were used to measure momentum. The RSI, which oscillates between 0 and 100, estimates
the direction and magnitude of price fluctuations. Compared with exponential moving
averages through various periods, the MACD created both its signal line and the MACD
line, which combined trend and momentum. The strength of price changes could be in-
ferred through the plotted histograms of their differences also available within the code
repository.
Bollinger Bands, which include an upper and lower band positioned two standard devia-
tions apart and a middle band (20-day moving average), were used to measure volatility.
These bands adjust to changes in the market by getting wider during erratic times and
getting smaller during steady ones. The rolling standard deviation of daily returns was
also used to calculate a custom volatility measure.
Furthermore the computation of the target variable: target_class was a crucial part of
the process, as it defined meaning to market movements for our strategy. The implemen-
tation used a multinomial classification approach with three distinct classes representing
various magnitudes of price movements. This design reflected the reality of financial mar-
kets, where price movements often exhibit periods of both significant directional change
and relative stability. The first step in creating the target variable was to calculate the
forward returns. For any given day t, we calculated the return Rt that would be achieved
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.9: Function to compute technical indicators capturing, momentum, trend and
volatility measures
by buying at today’s closing price and selling at tomorrow’s closing price. This is mathe-
matically expressed as:
Rt = Pt+1
Pt
−1
(3.1)
This calculation was implemented as the following:
\centering
df["target_return"] = df["Adj Close"].shift(-1) / df["Adj Close"] - 1
The shift(-1) operation aligned each day’s price with the next day’s price, effectively
moving the entire price series backward by one day to create our forward-looking return.
For example, if a stock’s adjusted closing price on Monday was 100 and Tuesday’s price
was 102, the calculated return for Monday would be (102/100) - 1 = 0.02, representing a
2% potential return if we were to buy at Monday’s close.
These calculated returns were then categorised into three classes based on predetermined
thresholds:
target_class =





0 (Downward movement)
if return < −0.5%
1 (Neutral movement)
if −0.5% ≤return ≤0.5%
2 (Upward movement)
if return > 0.5%
The threshold of ±0.5% for significant price movements was chosen after careful consider-
ation of daily price volatility in our dataset. This value striked a balance between several
considerations:
20
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:28==
1. Signal-to-noise ratio: Daily stock prices often perform small random fluctuations.
The ±0.5% threshold helped filtering out this noise by only identifying movements
that were likely to represent genuine market signals rather than random variation.
2. Trading costs: In practical applications, trading costs (including commissions, slip-
page, and bid-ask spreads) necessitate that predicted price movements be large
enough to generate profitable trades.
The chosen threshold help to ensure that
identified opportunities had suﬀicient potential to overcome these transaction costs
to make a profit.
3. Class balance: The threshold created a reasonable distribution between classes,
avoiding severe class imbalances that could complicate the model training process.
This design created a natural hierarchy in the prediction task: the model had to first
determine if a significant movement was likely (distinguishing neutral from directional
movements) and then identify the direction of that movement. This structure aligned
well with market dynamics, where the presence of a strong directional move often involves
different factors than the determination of its direction. The implementation ensured that
there was no lookahead bias by carefully managing the data timeline and splits. Since Rt
is calculated using Pt+1, we were creating a target that represented the actual forward-
looking return we aimed to predict, while ensuring all features were computed using only
information available at time t. The use of adjusted closing prices accounted for corporate
actions such as splits and dividends, providing a more accurate representation of actual
investment returns. Any NaN values created by the shift operation at the end of the series
were dropped during the data cleaning process. (Add code in appendix)
3.4
Model Architecture
3.4.1
Classification Framework
When designing the trading system, one of the first decisions was to frame the prediction
problem. As many previous research papers tend to focus towards binary predictions (i.e.,
up or down), within a classification setting the decision was made to work on a multinomial
classification approach with three states: downward, neutral, and upward movements.
The rationale behind adding an additional classification stemmed from mitigating the
disposition effect, attempting to eliminate the risk of prematurely selling winners and
losers [2]. In essence sometimes the best strategy can be no action.
The choice of a classification approach over regression was intentional.
Although pre-
dicting the exact price movements may have appeared more informative, in practice, we
emphasised more on capturing significant moves while avoiding over-trading during side-
ways market. Thus, the ±0.5% thresholds for defining significant moves were not arbitrary,
rather they represented a balance between capturing the meaningful price movements and
maintained a reasonable distribution of trading opportunities.
This framework also made the system easier to monitor in production. When running
trading strategies, having clear, discrete predictions made it straightforward to track per-
formance and identify when things might be going wrong. It’s was easier to set up alerts
and monitoring when dealing with classification accuracy rather than continuous predic-
tions.
3.4.2
Model Selection and Design
Instead of immediately jumping to complex models, we decided to test multiple ap-
proaches, starting with Logistic Regression as a baseline.
There’s often a temptation
in machine learning projects to immediately reach for the most sophisticated tools, but I
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
21
==PAGE:29==
found that simpler models can provide valuable insights and sometimes even outperform
more complex approaches.
The LSTM model was included to explore whether the temporal patterns in market data
could improve predictions. While neural networks are powerful, they also introduce sig-
nificant complexity in a production environment.
Training usually takes longer, more
computing resources are required, they require more careful monitoring, and when they
fail, it’s often harder to backtrack why [28].
XGBoost represents something of a middle ground. It can capture non-linear patterns
while remaining relatively interpretable through feature importance metrics.
It’s also
more lightweight than deep learning models, making it easier to retrain and deploy at a
relative pace [29].
The goal wasn’t necessarily to find the ”best” model, but rather to understand the trade-
offs each approach presented in a production environment. Different models might perform
better under different market conditions, and having multiple options gave the system more
flexibility.
3.4.3
Model Comparison Strategy
When comparing these models, we looked beyond just accuracy metrics. In a production
trading system, many other factors come into play. How quickly can the model be retrained
if market conditions change? How easy is it to monitor the model’s predictions and detect
when it’s starting to degrade? How much computational resource did it require?
These practical considerations often matter more than small differences in predictive accu-
racy. A model that’s slightly less accurate but more stable and easier to monitor might be
a better choice for production deployment. The comparison framework that was developed
considered both traditional performance metrics and operational factors.
The testing process involved running models in parallel, allowing for systematic comparison
under the same market conditions.
This approach also made it possible to gradually
transition between different models if market conditions suggested a change would be
beneficial.
Maintaining multiple model options, the system could adapt to changing market conditions
while ensuring reliable operations. This flexibility had proven valuable during the tests,
as different models showed strengths and weaknesses during different market regimes.
3.4.4
Practical Implementation Considerations
The implementation of multiple models brought its own set of challenges. Each model
required different handling in terms of data preprocessing and feature engineering. For the
Logistic Regression model, standardising features and handling class imbalances through
SMOTE proved essential. The LSTM required careful consideration of sequence length
and batch size, while XGBoost needed attention to regularisation parameters to prevent
overfitting.
A key learning from this process was the importance of maintaining consistent data
pipelines across different models.
Initially, we tried to optimise the data preparation
for each model separately, but this quickly became diﬀicult from an operational stand-
point. Instead, a standardised preprocessing pipeline was developed that would adapt to
model constraints. This trade-off between perfect performance and operational simplicity
was a recurring theme throughout our development pipeline.
22
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:30==
3.4.5
Training and Validation Strategy
The temporal nature of financial data required special attention to the training and val-
idation approach. Unlike typical machine learning problems where random splitting is
common, we implemented a time-based validation strategy to properly simulate real-world
trading conditions. This meant always training on past data and validating on future data,
maintaining the temporal order that would exist in real world scenarios.
One particularly interesting challenge was determining the optimal training window size.
Too much historical data might include market regimes that were no longer relevant, while
too little data might not capture enough market scenarios for gradual learning. Through
experimentation, we found that training on approximately 8 years of data provided a good
balance, with the ability to retrain periodically as new data became available.
3.4.6
Production Readiness
Preparing these models for production deployment revealed several practical considera-
tions that weren’t immediately evident during the initial development. For instance, the
need to version not just the models but also the preprocessing steps and features became
clear. Each model deployment needed to be completely reproducible, from data prepro-
cessing to serving predictions.
An approach was implemented to model artifacts, storing not just the trained model but
also:
• Feature preprocessing parameters
• Training data logs
• Model performance metrics
• Training configuration details
This comprehensive versioning approach ensured that we could not only reproduce any
model’s predictions but also dive deeper into how and why a particular model was per-
forming in a certain way at any point in time.
The monitoring strategy also evolved through this process. While initial tests focused on
prediction accuracy, it became clear that monitoring needed to include a broader set of
metrics:
• Prediction distribution changes
• Model confidence metrics
• System performance metrics
These operational aspects led to some interesting decisions about model selection. For
example the XGBoost model, with its clear feature importance metrics and more stable
behaviour, proved easier to monitor and maintain despite sometimes showing slightly lower
accuracy during various test runs.
This experience reinforced the importance of considering the full lifecycle of a model in
production, not just its performance in controlled testing environments. The ability to
quickly diagnose issues, retrain models when needed, and maintain consistent performance
became as important as raw predictive accuracy.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
23
==PAGE:31==
3.5
AWS Infrastructure
For this platform, a complete end to end cloud architecture was designed and implemented
using Amazon Web Services (AWS), focusing on scalability, reliability, and operational
eﬀiciency. It centered around three primary AWS services: Simple Storage Service (S3)
for data management, Elastic Container Registry (ECR) for Docker image management,
and SageMaker AI for model training and deployment. This section details the cloud in-
frastructure decisions and implementations that enabled the systematic trading strategies
to operate in a cloud environment.
The infrastructure design followed a microservices-oriented architecture[30] decomposing
the trading system into smaller components that could be scaled and managed indepen-
dently. This architectural approach was chosen after considering several factors: the need
for independent scaling, the ability to update individual services without affecting the
entire system, and the requirement for informative monitoring and fault tolerance.
3.5.1
S3 - Data Lake
The data infrastructure utilises Amazon S3, serving as a centralised data lake[31] that
maintained both historical data, derived features and trained model artifacts. The decision
to use S3 as the primary storage solution was driven by a few key requirements. First,
the need to maintain immutable versions of the training data and model artifacts for
reproducibility and backtracking purposes. Second, the requirement for scalable storage
that could eﬀiciently handle both daily market data updates and periodic model retraining
cycles. Third, data storage should come at a cost friendly rate.
The data lake followed a well-defined organisational structure that seperated different
types of data and artifacts. Raw market data, collected through the YFinance API, was
stored in the raw/| directory, maintaining the original OHLCV (Open, High, Low, Close,
Volume) format. This data served as the source of truth for all subsequent processing
steps. The processed/ directory contained feature-engineered data along with the train-
ing, validation and training splits.
Figure 3.10: S3 bucket containing model artifacts and raw data
3.5.2
Elastic Container Registry - ECR
Amazon Elastic Container Registry (ECR)[32] was an essential component within our
platform managing our docker images. It provided a centralised and secure repository for
storing our modular implementation stages, such as model training and inference scripts.
Each repository was dedicated to host prediction and training scripts for our 3 models
e.g. Logistic Regression, LSTM, and XGBoost. This modular organisation ensured clear
separation of concerns, simplified debugging, and enhanced system maintainability.
24
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.11: Overview of our 6 model repositories in ECR
The ECR repositories followed a systematic naming convention that showcased their dedi-
cated purpose, such as mlops\_trading/xgboost-train and mlops\_trading/xgboost-predict.
This ensured that dependencies and configurations for each model were isolated, avoiding
conflicts and supporting modular updates. The repositories maintained multiple versions
of each image to allow reproducibility along with backtracking.
Each image in the repository was versioned using tags, more specifically the latest tag,
generated by the CI/CD pipeline during the build phase. The latest tag was assigned
to the most recently pushed image. Following this approach helped striking a balance
between consistency across deployments which will be covered in the next section detailing
the SageMaker AI setup. A snippet of the XGBoost training repository can be seen in
Figure 3.12 with the latest image versioning tag.
Figure 3.12: Overview of images within XGBoost training repository
3.5.3
SageMaker AI
Amazon SageMaker AI[33] is a managed service in AWS for Machine Learning which also
was the main component within our platform. It served as the main execution engine
for 3 main purposes: model training, deployment and inference.
For training of the
models, SageMaker was configured to run training jobs[34] for each of our model specific
Docker images stored within their respective repositories on ECR. Each training job was
configured with appropriate resources based on the computational requirements for each
model. With SageMaker AI, you only pay for what you use, and it allows for two payment
types: on-demand pricing offering minimum fees and no upfront commitments or the
SageMaker savings plan that offers a flexible, usage-based pricing model in exchange for a
commitment to a consistent amount of usage.[35] During this project, on-demand pricing
was chosen paying for compute resources only when they were being used.
Training jobs
Training jobs form the backbone of the platform’s machine learning pipeline, which en-
abled us to train our Logistic Regression, XGBoost and LSTM models on processed data
from S3. Within the context of the project, they were initiated programmatically using
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
25
==PAGE:33==
SageMaker’s Python SDK, and implemented in the training\_job.py within each model
specific directory.
Figure 3.13: Overview of the configured XGBoost training job
The workflow reads the input data from the processed/ directory in the mlops-trading
bucket. This data consisted of our feature-engineered datasets containing technical in-
dicators such as RSI, MACD along with the rolling statistics and the target variable
representing upward, neutral or downward price movements.
The system dynamically
retrieved the input data path passed within the job configuration allowing for flexibility
instead of hardcoded configurations.
Each training job used computational resources depending on the specific model being
trained.
For instance, the Logistic Regression model being relatively lightweight was
trained on an ml.m5.large instance to account for cost and performance. The LSTM
model, which involved sequential data and benefitted from GPU acceleration, was trained
on an ml.p3.2xlarge to optimise the training eﬀiciency and time without incurring un-
necessary costs due to their runtime pricing model.
Furthermore the training job for each model read the model specific training images from
ECR which included all the necessary dependencies encapsulated within their respec-
tive containers.
Due to the nature of our Docker multistage builds, with the help of
targets, each container was configured to run a specific training script initiated by the
SAGEMAKER_PROGRAM environment variable. This modular based setup ensured that the
training process was consistent and reproducible across our 3 different models and their re-
spective executions. Once the training job completed, SageMaker saved the trained model
artifacts, logs and evaluation metrics to the models directory within the S3 bucket. This
output path was defined within our implementation of the training job. The models were
stored using the model name concatenated with a unique id generated by the JobManager
class orchestrating and manage our training and inference jobs. The models were saved
back in a serialised format as joblib files within their respective output directory along
with their features and scalers if relevant. The entire training process was monitored using
Amazon Cloudwatch, which captured the logs and metrics during training including model
accuracy, classification reports, confusion matrixes and training/validation loss. Real time
logging provided us immediate insights into the training process and the logs were stored
within S3 for later postmortem analysis in case certain training runs had to be analysed
in further detail.
26
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:34==
3.5.4
Model creation and Inference
Once the training job saved the model artifacts along with their respective features, the
models were ready for creation and deployment delivering predictions in either real-time
or batch workflows. Real-time predictions were chosen for model serving and each model
implementation was assigned a unique endpoint configuration that specified the inference
environment including parameters as instance type, IO formats and environment vari-
ables defined within their respective create_model.py scripts. This script facilitated the
creation and endpoint registration and used the trained artifacts from S3 to register a
SageMaker model instance by linking them with their matching images hosted in ECR.
Figure 3.14: Example of the create model script for XGBoost
Once the models were registered, they were deployed as SageMaker endpoints to enable
real-time predictions. Each endpoint was configured based on the requirements of the
specific model and an example of that can be seen in the Figure 3.14. CPU based instances
were used for our Logistic Regression and XGBoost models while the LSTM model ran on
a ml.p3.2xlarge GPU instance. These endpoints were set to scale automatically based on
traﬀic spikes. SageMaker’s built in auto-scaling was responsible for adjusting the number
of endpoint instances dynamically, ensuring low latency during spikes in traﬀic.
3.5.5
Inference
The inference service was built using FastAPI[36], served our predictions in real time. The
implementation followed a standardised pattern for our 3 models while accommodating
their unique characteristics and requirements.
The inference service was served as a RESTful API that exposed two primary endpoints.
The first endpoint being a simple health check endpoint (/ping), which Sagemaker used
for timed health checks monitoring service availability. The second, and more complex
endpoint (/invocations) handled the actual prediction requests.
This dual-endpoint
structure aligned with SageMaker’s conventional patterns and followed best practices as
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
27
==PAGE:35==
defined within their documentation.
The prediction workflow was initiated when a request was sent to the /invocations
endpoint containing a stock symbol within the JSON body. The service validated the
input and retrieved the appropriate model artifacts for the symbol from the /opt/ml/model
directory essentially pointing to our input paths in S3 where the model artifacts were stored
with their features. This organisation ensured clean separation between each model while
simplifying version management and updates.
For each prediction request, the service handled not just the basic prediction task but also
provides comprehensive metadata about the prediction confidence and model performance.
The XGBoost model, for instance, returned not only the predicted market direction (up-
ward, neutral, or downward) but also probability scores for each class, enabling more
nuanced trading decisions. Error handling was implemented as well, reflecting the criti-
cal nature of trading operations. The service implemented a hierarchical error handling
strategy, differentiating between various types of failures - from simple validation errors
to more serious model loading issues. Each error response included detailed context with
HTTP error codes, timestamps, and request identifiers facilitating rapid debugging and
system monitoring. The standardisation extended to the response formats as well. Every
successful prediction returned a structured JSON response containing the core prediction
data along with model-specific metrics and confidence scores. These responses maintained
consistency in their basic structure while accommodating the unique outputs of different
model architectures. Performance monitoring were an integral part throughout the im-
plementation. Every prediction request generated a suite of metrics, from basic latency
measurements to detailed model behaviour statistics. These metrics flowed automatically
to CloudWatch, enabling real-time monitoring and alerting. This comprehensive monitor-
ing approach ensured that any degradation in model performance or system health could
be quickly identified and addressed. All these components ran within Docker containers
isolated by model type but following consistent patterns. The containerisation strategy,
implemented through our multi-stage Dockerfile and the use of ECR as a service, ensured
that each model’s environment remained clean and reproducible while sharing common
infrastructure and monitoring capabilities. Through this implementation, the inference
service completed our MLOps pipeline, providing not just predictions but a complete op-
erational framework for deploying and monitoring machine learning models in a end to end
MLOps pipeline. The service balanced the competing demands of performance, reliability,
and maintainability while providing the detailed insights needed for effective operations.
3.6
Deployment Pipeline
Now that we have covered all the operational aspects of our platform, from data inges-
tion, feature engineering, training and inference we bridge all the steps together using
our deployment pipeline. This automation framework not only ensured consistency and
reliability but also enabled quick iterations while maintaining strict quality control. We
will now look at the core components of the pipeline in the following sections.
3.6.1
Github Actions
The code repository was hosted on Github and as a part of that, Github Actions had
been used.
It allowed us to automate and execute our development workflow directly
within our repository using Github workflows. A .github/workflow directory had been
created which contained the build.yaml orchestrating a series of interconnected steps
that transformed code commits into production-ready model deployments. The workflow
file was initiated when a pull request or commits were merged into the main branch of the
repository.
28
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:36==
The process began with code quality assurance through Ruff liniting, ensuring that all
code adhered to predefined standards and rules defined within our pyproject.toml file.
Following successful linting, the workflow handled AWS credentials passed in as secrets
within the workflow environment establishing secure access to our cloud infrastructure.
This step enabled the following steps to interact with AWS services from S3 for data
storage, ECR for container management and SageMaker for model training and inference.
- name: Run Ruff Linting
uses: astral-sh/ruff-action@v3
with:
src: "./mlops_trading"
- name: Configure AWS credentials
uses: aws-actions/configure-aws-credentials@v2
with:
aws-access-key-id: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
aws-secret-access-key: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
aws-region: eu-west-2
Figure 3.15: Ruff linting and AWS credentials configuration
After the steps above, the data processing steps were executed which were also detailed
in section 3.3.
- name: Explanatory Data Analysis
run: poetry run python mlops_trading/eda.py
- name: Fetch data
run: poetry run python mlops_trading/fetch_data.py
- name: Generate features
run: poetry run python mlops_trading/features.py
- name: Prepare splits
run: poetry run python mlops_trading/prepare_splits.py
- name: Sync to S3
uses: jakejarvis/s3-sync-action@master
with:
args: --follow-symlinks --delete
env:
AWS_S3_BUCKET: ${{ secrets.AWS_S3_BUCKET }}
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
AWS_REGION: "eu-west-2"
SOURCE_DIR: "./data"
Figure 3.16: Data pipeline defined in Github Actions
As mentioned in section 3.3 each script served a purpose. The EDA scripts analysed mar-
ket data and identifies suitable trading stocks, the fetch data script retrieved historical
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
29
==PAGE:37==
data while the features script computed technical indicators and target generation. Fi-
nally prepare splits created the training, validation and test datasets necessary for model
development. Another crucial step was the S3 sync command which synchronised all the
feature engineered data files from the build to our S3 bucket following our bucket’s ver-
sioning strategy.
The Docker build strategy implemented several advanced features to optimise build times
and image sizes. One particular aspect was the use of multi-stage builds combined with
layer caching and targeted builds.
- name: Build Docker Image for XGBoost Train
run: |
docker build --tag xgboost-train --target xgboost_train \
--cache-from 848170132452.dkr.ecr.eu-west-2.amazonaws.com/mlops_trading/xgboost-train:
docker tag xgboost-train 848170132452.dkr.ecr.eu-west-2.amazonaws.com/mlops_trading/xgbo
Figure 3.17: Docker multistage build for XGBoost
As seen in the Figure 3.18, the --target flag enabled building specific stages from our
multi-stage Dockerfile. Each model type has dedicated stages for training and inference,
relying on shared base dependencies. It made it significantly easier to manage, build and
deploy images reducing the overhead of having 6 different Dockerfiles with almost identical
steps but different entrypoints.
The --cache-from flags was crucial as it implemented an eﬀicient caching strategy. Ref-
erencing the latest image pushed to ECR, Docker could reuse unchanged layers from
previous builds, significantly reducing build times. This was particularly valuable when
building multiple model types as they shared common-based layers. The caching worked
by, pulling the latest image from ECR as a cache source if it existed, reusing layers that
had not changed since the last build, building only the layers affected by code changes
and at last pushing the new images while maintaining the layer structure.
When a new build ran, only the stages affected by code changes had to be rebuilt. For
example, if only the Logistic Regression training code changed, the build process reused
cached layers for the base, poetry and data stages only rebuilding Logistic Regression spe-
cific layers. The tagging strategy complemented this caching mechanism. Using the idea
of consistently using the latest tag, we ensured that subsequent builds could effectively
utilising the cache while maintaining a clear reference to the most recent version. Hav-
ing this approach the effectiveness of building and deploying various model types helped
maintain quick deployment cycles ensuring reliability and consistency.
30
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:38==
FROM python:3.11-slim AS base
WORKDIR /app
# Lock package versions
ENV POETRY_VERSION=1.8.5
ENV AWS_CLI_VERSION=1.36.38
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir "poetry==$POETRY_VERSION"
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir "awscli==$AWS_CLI_VERSION"
FROM base AS poetry
COPY pyproject.toml poetry.lock ./
RUN poetry config virtualenvs.create false && \
poetry install --no-root --no-dev
FROM poetry AS base
COPY data data
FROM data AS logistic
COPY models/logistic_regression models/logistic_regression
FROM logistic AS logistic_train
COPY mlops_trading/modeling/logistic_regression/train.py /opt/ml/code/train.py
WORKDIR /opt/ml/code
RUN chmod +x train.py
ENTRYPOINT ["python", "train.py"]
FROM logistic AS logistic_predict
COPY mlops_trading/modeling/logistic_regression/inference.py /opt/ml/code/inference
WORKDIR /opt/ml/code
EXPOSE 8080
ENTRYPOINT ["python", "inference.py"]
Figure 3.18: Docker multistage build for Logistic Regression with base dependencies
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
31
==PAGE:39==
32
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:40==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Model Performance
The primary objective of this thesis was the design and implementation of an MLOps
pipeline to support systematic trading strategies. However, evaluating the performance of
the models trained and deployed within this pipeline was essential to validate its eﬀicacy.
This section presents the results of three machine learning models—Logistic Regression,
LSTM, and XGBoost—trained to predict stock price movements across three classes:
upward, neutral, and downward. The results provide insights into the pipeline’s ability to
support real-world scenarios and highlight areas for potential improvement.
4.1.1
Comparative Model Performance
Table 4.1 summarizes the performance of the three models in terms of validation accuracy
and key evaluation metrics, including precision, recall, and f1-score. These metrics were
computed for predictions made on the validation dataset, consisting of unseen stock price
data for each stock included in the analysis.
Table 4.1: Validation Performance Metrics by Model
Model
Accuracy (%)
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1-Score (%)
Logistic Regression
30–45
33–42
34–45
35–43
LSTM
30–48
35–45
34–48
35–46
XGBoost
33–43
38–44
36–47
37–45
The table highlights the range of validation accuracies achieved by each model across
multiple stocks, as well as the variability in class-wise metrics.
While XGBoost and
LSTM generally outperformed Logistic Regression, all models faced challenges related
to class imbalance, overfitting, and generalisation to unseen data.
4.1.2
Model-Specific Performance Analysis
Logistic Regression
Logistic Regression served as a baseline for comparison, leveraging its simplicity and in-
terpretability. Validation accuracies for this model ranged from 30% to 45%, with slightly
higher performance observed for volatile stocks such as TSLA and NVDA. Class-wise eval-
uation metrics highlighted significant challenges in predicting the neutral class, with lower
precision and recall compared to the upward and downward classes. These results under-
score the limitations of Logistic Regression in capturing complex relationships in stock
price data.
Despite these limitations, the inclusion of Logistic Regression in the pipeline demonstrated
the pipeline’s flexibility in handling different types of models. It also provided a valuable
benchmark for evaluating the performance of more advanced algorithms, such as LSTM
and XGBoost.
LSTM
The LSTM model was designed to capture temporal dependencies in stock price data.
Validation accuracies ranged from 30% to 48%, with higher performance observed for
stocks characterised by significant price volatility.
For instance, the model achieved a
validation accuracy of 45.61% for TSLA and 48.37% for NVDA, indicating its ability to
detect sequential patterns in highly dynamic data.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
33
==PAGE:41==
However, the model exhibited instability in its performance across epochs, with validation
accuracies often peaking early and subsequently declining. This suggests a tendency to
overfit to the training data, despite regularisation techniques such as dropout. The results
emphasise the need for further architectural refinements, including the use of early stopping
and additional hyperparameter tuning.
The successful training and evaluation of the LSTM model within the pipeline underscored
its capability to manage resource-intensive workflows, including GPU-enabled training
and the processing of sequence data.
This demonstrates the pipeline’s scalability and
adaptability to advanced deep learning models.
XGBoost
XGBoost exhibited strong performance, with validation accuracies ranging from 33% to
43%. The model consistently outperformed Logistic Regression and, in some cases, LSTM,
particularly for stocks with moderate volatility. The class-wise evaluation metrics showed
relatively balanced precision and recall across all three classes, although challenges in gen-
eralisation were evident from the discrepancy between training and validation accuracies.
The pipeline effectively integrated XGBoost, automating the processes of feature engineer-
ing, basic hyperparameter configuration, and artifact management. These results validate
the pipeline’s robustness and its ability to support iterative model development. Further
improvements, such as advanced feature selection and automated hyperparameter tuning,
could enhance the model’s predictive power.
4.1.3
Key Observations and Challenges
The results across all models reveal several common trends and challenges:
• Class Imbalance: All models struggled to accurately predict the neutral class,
reflecting imbalances in the target variable. Techniques such as oversampling, un-
dersampling, or adjusting class weights should be explored further to address this
issue.
• Overfitting: The gap between training and validation accuracies, particularly for
LSTM and XGBoost, highlights the need for stronger regularisation techniques and
larger training datasets.
• Feature Representation: The consistent feature set used across all models may
not fully capture the nuances of stock price movements for certain stocks. Incorpo-
rating additional features, such as fundamental, macroeconomic indicators or news
sentiment, could improve predictive performance.
4.1.4
Implications for the MLOps Pipeline
While model performance was modest, the results validate the pipeline’s ability to manage
the complete lifecycle of machine learning workflows. Key achievements include:
• The seamless integration of containerised environments for training and inference.
• Automated data preprocessing and feature engineering across multiple datasets.
• Scalable and reproducible workflows for deploying and evaluating diverse models.
These capabilities ensure that the pipeline supported iterative improvements and adapt
to evolving data and modelling requirements.
4.1.5
Future Directions
The results suggest several avenues for further development, both for the pipeline and the
models:
34
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:42==
• Hyperparameter optimisation: Incorporate automated tuning jobs to optimise
model configurations and improve performance.
• Feature Engineering: Expand the feature set to include additional indicators,
external data sources, and stock-specific attributes.
• Pipeline Monitoring: Implement continuous monitoring and automated retrain-
ing workflows to address model drift and ensure sustained performance.
The purpose of addressing these areas is that the pipeline can evolve into a solid system
capable of supporting production-grade trading strategies into real world trading environ-
ments.
4.2
Trading Strategy Performance
Backtesting is an approach to evaluate the performance of a trading strategy by analysing
its risk and profitability on historical data. The primary objective is to evaluate how a
strategy would have performed retrospectively given the market conditions. Functioning
as a simulation executing trades, it serves as a confidence measure to understand future
behaviour based on past performance. Within this project, backtesting was implemented
to bridge the gap between our model predictions and real-world trading scenarios.
A
prerequisite for an ideal backtest is to choose sample data from a relevant time period
that reflects different market regimes. Within our implementation we used our test dataset
which was truly out-of-sample data as the model artifacts generating the predictions were
based on the training dataset. This approach ensured no data leakage from training to
ensure validated and unbiased results.
We implemented a simple backtest on our Logistic Regression and XGBoost models for
evaluation purposes. As mentioned the implementation used out-of-sample data to give
an unbiased insight into the model predictions.
The backtest was initialised with a capital of $100000 using a fixed position sizing strat-
egy where 10% of the portfolio’s existing value was allocated to each trade. Predictions
generated by the machine learning models were categorised into 3 classes:
• Short (0): Sell position predicting price depreciation
• Neutral (1): No significant direction, close position
• Long (2): Buy position predicting price appreciation
The trading logic used these predictions and executed corresponding buy, sell or hold
positions.
During backtesting the script calculated realised P&L for each trade based on the price
difference between entry and exit points. Furthermore the portfolio value was monitored
daily with updates showing the changes based on trades executed along with unrealised
gains or losses from open positions. This was also visualised using an equity curve during
the testing time period providing a continuous view of the strategy’s performance over
time. On the last day of the testing period, open positions were closed at the last available
market price.
For each stock the implementation generated the following metrics:
• Total Return: The percentage change in portfolio value over the test period.
• Win Rate: The proportion of trades resulting in a profit.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
35
==PAGE:43==
• Final Capital: The remaining portfolio value after all trades were executed over the
test period.
Stock
Model
Total
Re-
turn (%)
Win Rate
(%)
Final
Capital
($)
Number
of Trades
AAPL
XGBoost
-3.69
38.36
96,311.05
73
Logistic Re-
gression
-4.38
37.68
95,618.87
69
AMZN
XGBoost
6.27
55.38
106,272.29
65
Logistic Re-
gression
-5.54
42.22
94,459.23
90
AVGO
XGBoost
1.04
51.24
101,042.41
121
Logistic Re-
gression
7.07
54.62
107,072.41
119
COST
XGBoost
2.37
55.56
102,370.21
63
Logistic Re-
gression
-5.74
31.75
94,259.56
63
GOOGL
XGBoost
3.73
47.83
103,730.88
92
Logistic Re-
gression
-5.32
39.36
94,681.11
94
NVDA
XGBoost
-1.47
48.12
98,525.99
133
Logistic Re-
gression
7.01
55.22
107,007.22
134
META
XGBoost
-4.20
43.40
95,798.16
106
Logistic Re-
gression
-10.61
33.65
89,390.41
104
TSLA
XGBoost
-0.48
49.62
99,524.36
133
Logistic Re-
gression
-5.01
49.24
94,993.57
132
XOM
XGBoost
-0.87
45.45
99,133.34
77
Logistic Re-
gression
0.85
52.70
100,850.77
74
Table 4.2: Final Backtesting Results Summary
The backtesting results reveal both methodological strengths and significant limitations
in the current implementation. While the framework successfully demonstrates the fea-
sibility of machine learning-driven trading strategies, several critical observations require
discussion.
An intriguing behavioural pattern emerged in the Logistic Regression model.
Despite
being properly implemented with multinomial classification capabilities, SMOTE resam-
pling for class balance, and appropriate regularisation (C=0.1), the model demonstrated a
strong bias toward single-class predictions during backtesting. This behaviour is particu-
larly noteworthy as it suggests potential challenges in maintaining the model’s discrimina-
tive power when faced with out-of-sample data, even though the training implementation
included proper multinomial classification architecture and class balancing techniques. De-
spite this limitation, it is noteworthy that the model achieved positive returns in several
cases (AVGO: +7.07%, LLY: +7.29%, NVDA: +7.01%), though these results should be
interpreted within the context of this observed prediction behaviour.
36
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:44==
The XGBoost implementation demonstrated more theoretically sound behaviour, properly
utilising the multinomial classification system. This is evident in the trading patterns and
equity curves, which show more balanced directional predictions. However, the model’s
overall performance metrics, with average win rates below 55%, suggest room for improve-
ment in prediction accuracy. The relatively high trading frequency across both models,
ranging from 43 to 134 trades per stock, raises questions about potential overtrading and
transaction cost implications in real-world applications.
Risk management parameters, including a 2% stop-loss, 4% take-profit, and 20-day max-
imum hold period, were uniformly applied across all securities without consideration for
individual stock characteristics or market regimes. This one-size-fits-all approach, while
providing implementation consistency, may not optimise performance across different mar-
ket conditions and volatility regimes.
The implementation demonstrates several strengths, including proper separation of train-
ing and testing periods to ensure no look-ahead bias, consistent evaluation metrics across
models enabling direct comparison, comprehensive visualisation of trades and equity curves
facilitating performance analysis, and implementation of basic risk management parame-
ters. However, key limitations must be acknowledged, including the disparity between the
Logistic Regression’s design and observed behaviour in prediction distribution, uniform
risk parameters across diverse securities, absence of market regime consideration in the
trading logic, and limited exploration of position sizing beyond the fixed 10% allocation.
These observations suggest several avenues for future research, including investigation
into maintaining multi-class discrimination capabilities across different market regimes,
development of adaptive risk parameters based on individual security characteristics, inte-
gration of market regime filters to improve trade timing, and investigation of sophisticated
position sizing strategies. The results, while mixed, provide valuable insights into the chal-
lenges and considerations in implementing machine learning-based trading strategies. The
demonstrated limitations, particularly the unexpected behaviour of the Multinomial Lo-
gistic Regression model despite proper implementation, offer constructive direction for
future improvements in both model effectiveness and trading strategy design.
4.3
System Performance
The performance analysis of the implemented MLOps pipeline focuses on a few critical
steps that represent the primary interaction points for both development operations and
production workloads.
4.3.1
Development Environment Performance
The Development Container environment, implemented through VS Code’s remote con-
tainer functionality, demonstrated eﬀicient resource utilisation patterns. The container
environment, based on Python 3.11-slim, establishes its core configuration in under two
seconds, followed by a dependency resolution phase of approximately 47 seconds. This
initial setup involved Poetry installation and core dependency configuration, representing
the most time-intensive portion of the development environment initialisation.
The multi-stage build strategy proves particularly effective in managing resource utilisa-
tion. System package updates complete in approximately 11 seconds, followed by Python
environment configuration including Poetry and AWS CLI installation, which together re-
quire roughly 10 seconds. Project-specific setup, including the installation of development
dependencies, requires an additional 19 seconds. This staged approach ensured eﬀicient
resource allocation while maintaining a comprehensive development environment.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
37
==PAGE:45==
Layer caching demonstrates significant impact on iteration speed during development. Ini-
tial container builds, while requiring several minutes for complete configuration, benefit
substantially from Docker’s layer caching mechanism. Subsequent builds leverage these
cached layers effectively, reducing build times to mere seconds when only project-specific
components require updating. This optimisation significantly enhances developer produc-
tivity by minimising wait times during iterative development cycles.
4.3.2
Container Images
The container images in the Elastic Container Registry demonstrate consistent growth
patterns across development iterations.
The training and prediction images show dis-
tinct size characteristics, all training images stabilising at approximately 1570 MB, while
prediction containers maintain comparable sizes.
A notable trend emerged during the
development phases where base images initially sized at approximately 1300 MB evolved
to 1570 MB as additional functionalities were integrated. This growth pattern aligns with
the incremental enhancement of model capabilities and the integration of comprehensive
monitoring tools.
4.3.3
Model Training & Inference Performance
The training infrastructure exhibits distinct performance characteristics across different
model architectures, revealing clear patterns in resource utilisation and execution eﬀi-
ciency.
The LSTM implementation demonstrates the highest computational demands,
with training cycles averaging 10 minutes and 53 seconds. This extended duration reflects
the complexity of deep learning architectures and their associated computational require-
ments. Despite this complexity, the deployment phase maintains consistency with other
models, completing in approximately three minutes and 35 seconds.
Logistic Regression training presents a more moderate resource profile, completing its
training cycles in three minutes and 28 seconds. This eﬀiciency stems from its simpler
architectural requirements and effective CPU utilisation. The model maintains compa-
rable deployment times to its more complex counterparts, requiring three minutes and
36 seconds for endpoint creation. Similarly, XGBoost training demonstrates eﬀicient re-
source utilisation, completing its cycles in two minutes and 58 seconds, with deployment
operations concluding in three minutes and six seconds.
A notable consistency emerges in deployment times across all model architectures, av-
eraging approximately three and a half minutes regardless of model complexity.
This
uniformity suggests effective standardisation within the deployment pipeline and eﬀicient
resource allocation strategies in the production environment. The variation in training
times, ranging from approximately three minutes for traditional machine learning ap-
proaches to nearly eleven minutes for deep learning models, accurately reflects the inherent
complexity differences between these architectures.
4.3.4
System Integration
The complete end-to-end pipeline execution, triggered through GitHub Actions, demon-
strates the comprehensive nature of the system’s automation. A full pipeline run, en-
compassing environment setup, data processing, model training, and deployment across
all architectures, completes in approximately 40 minutes. This duration represents the
thorough validation of all system components, from initial code validation through data
pipeline execution to the final deployment of model endpoints. While this might seem sub-
stantial, it ensures complete system validation and maintains the integrity of the MLOps
workflow. The time is justified by the sequence of critical operations: code quality checks,
data processing, multiple model training cycles, and the creation of production endpoints
38
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:46==
for each model architecture. This comprehensive execution time reflects the system’s em-
phasis on reliability and completeness over raw speed, ensuring that each deployment
maintains consistent quality standards across all components. This integration of devel-
opment eﬀiciency, model training performance, and automated deployment capabilities
demonstrates the successful implementation of MLOps principles in a systematic trad-
ing context.
The balance between rapid development iterations and thorough system
validation establishes a robust foundation for maintaining and scaling machine learning
operations in a production trading environment.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
39
==PAGE:47==
40
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:48==
5
Conclusion
The research presented an extensive MLOps framework for systematic trading purposes,
demonstrating the practicality and challenges of implementing MLOps in capital markets.
The research successfully integrated machine learning models into an end-end systematic
trading pipeline, simultaneously ensuring operational reliability and reproducibility.
Firstly, the development of an eﬀicient MLOps infrastructure on AWS, including S3 for
data management, ECR for container registry, and SageMaker AI for model training and
deployment.
This proved effective in managing the complete development lifecycle of
our machine learning models. Additionally, the system was able to successfully handle
multiple different model architectures, from Multinomial Logistic Regression, XGBoost
and more complex LSTM networks, whilst guaranteeing consistent deployment patterns
and monitoring capabilities.
Secondly, the multi-stage Docker build strategy, orchestrated through Github Actions,
further demonstrated advantages in managing development and production environments.
This approach, accomplished build time optimisations through layer caching, reducing iter-
ation cycles from minutes to seconds, also proving itself valuable in handling the intricacies
of different model implementations and deployments.
Thirdly, the backtesting results showed mixed trading performance, however still validated
the pipeline’s capability to support systematic trading strategies. Additionally, the imple-
mentation of XGBoost further demonstrated more balanced and directional predictions
compared to the Multinomial Logistic Regression model, yet both showed limitations in
consistently generating alpha. Ultimately showcasing the challenges of market predictions,
further substantiated by Fama’s Eﬀicient Market Hypothesis, that industry practitioners
are unable to capture asset returns in a long period of time as markets revert to equilib-
rium.
Finally, performance analysis revealed that the platform was able to maintain reasonable
resource utilisation across different operational phases. The pipeline execution completed
in around 40 minutes including all build steps.
These metrics showcased the frame-
work’s reliability in managing complex MLOps workflows, while also maintaining the
transparency needed for systematic trading operations.
Thus, the research demonstrates that MLOps principles are able to be successfully ap-
plied into systematic trading strategies, supplying a foundation for reliable and scalable
machine learning operations in capital markets. The framework developed provides a tem-
plate for future development of production-grade trading systems, as well as the identified
limitations supplying clear guidance for continued research and improvement.
All in all, the research contributes to the broader understanding of MLOps implementation
in financial contexts, offering both insights into practical challenges as well as solutions for
maintaining machine learning models in production trading environments. The findings
suggest that although technical implementation of MLOps practices was achievable, the
unique and wide dynamics of capital markets require more careful examination in system
design and operational management.
Figure 5.1 concludes the platform that was designed and implemented for the purpose of
this research.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.1: Final Platform Architecture
42
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
[1]
L. N. Mintarya et al. “Machine learning approaches in stock market prediction: A
systematic literature review”. In: Procedia Computer Science (2023), pp. 96–102.
[2]
J. Berk and P. DeMarzo. Corporate Finance - 5th Global Edition. Pearson, 2019.
[3]
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Rules and Regulations. https://www.sec.
gov/rules-regulations. Aug. 2024.
[4]
T. Brock and V. Velasquez. What Does the S&P 500 Index Measure and How Is
It Calculated? Investopedia. July 2024. url: https://www.investopedia.com/ask/
answers/040215/what-does-sp-500-index-measure-and-how-it-calculated.asp#:~:
text=The%20S%5C%26P%20500%20measures%20the%20movements%20of%20the%
20U.S.%20stock,weighted%20toward%20large%2Dcap%20stocks..
[5]
P. Gratton, C. Murry, and K. R. Schmitt. “What Is the Stock Market and How Does
It Work?” In: Investopedia (Apr. 2024). url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/
s/stockmarket.asp.
[6]
A. Hayes, C. Potters, and V. Velasquez. “Volatility: Meaning in Finance and How
It Works With Stocks”. In: Investopedia (July 2024). url: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/v/volatility.asp.
[7]
J. Bian, K. Chan, and W.-M. Fong. “Investor participation and the volatility-volume
relation: Evidence from an emerging market”. In: Emerging Markets Review 45
(2020).
[8]
W. Pinsent, S. Silberstein, and S. Kvilhaug. “Understanding Stock Price and Value”.
In: Investopedia (Aug. 2024). url: https://www.investopedia.com/articles/stocks/
08/stock-prices-fool.asp.
[9]
A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny. “The Limits of Arbitrage”. In: The Journal of Finance
(1997), pp. 35–55.
[10]
E. F. Fama. “Eﬀicient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work”.
In: The Journal of Finance (1969), pp. 383–417.
[11]
A. G. Titan. “The Eﬀicient Market Hypothesis: review of specialized literature and
empirical research”. In: Procedia Economics and Finance (2015), pp. 442–449.
[12]
C. Potters. “Law of One Price: Definition, Example, and Assumptions”. In: Investo-
pedia (May 2024). url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/law-one-price.asp.
[13]
J. Fernando, S. Silberstein, and P. Rathburn. “Arbitrage: How Arbitraging Works
in Investing, With Examples”. In: Investopedia (Dec. 2023). url: https://www.
investopedia.com/terms/a/arbitrage.asp.
[14]
W. Kenton, T. Brock, and V. Velasquez. “Security Market Line (SML) Definition
and Characteristics”. In: Investopedia (Mar. 2022). url: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/s/sml.asp.
[15]
R. Carver. Systematic Trading: A unique new method for designing trading and
investing systems. Harriman House, 2015.
[16]
Mark Treveil et al. Introducing MLOps: How to Scale Machine Learning in the
Enterprise. O’Reilly Media, 2020.
[17]
David Sculley et al. “Hidden technical debt in machine learning systems”. In: Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems 28 (2015).
[18]
Google Cloud. MLOps: Continuous delivery and automation pipelines in machine
learning. https://cloud.google.com/architecture/mlops- continuous- delivery- and-
automation-pipelines-in-machine-learning. 2025.
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
43
==PAGE:51==
[19]
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D Lawrence. “Challenges in deploying
machine learning: a survey of case studies”. In: ACM Computing Surveys (2020).
[20]
Marcos L’opez de Prado. “Machine learning for asset managers”. In: Cambridge
Elements: Quantitative and Computational Finance (2020).
[21]
Chip Huyen. Designing Machine Learning Systems: An Iterative Process for Production-
Ready Applications. O’Reilly Media, 2022.
[22]
Astral. Ruff Documentation. An extremely fast Python linter, written in Rust.
[23]
Poetry. Poetry Documentation. Python Dependency Management and Packaging
Made Easy.
[24]
Conda Developers. Conda Documentation. Package, Dependency and Environment
Management for Any Language.
[25]
Microsoft. Developing Inside a Container. Visual Studio Code Documentation.
[26]
Ran Aroussi. yfinance. Yahoo! Finance market data downloader. url: https://github.
com/ranaroussi/yfinance.
[27]
Geek Culture. “What Is OHLCV Data in Finance?” In: Medium (2021). url: https:
//medium.com/geekculture/what-is-ohlcv-data-in-finance-5f53527cd5ce.
[28]
O. Sezer, M. Gudelek, and A. Ozbayoglu. “Financial time series forecasting with deep
learning: A systematic literature review: 2005–2019”. In: Applied Soft Computing
(2020).
[29]
T. Chen and C. Guestrin. “XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System”. In: KDD
’16: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 785–
794.
[30]
Amazon Web Services (AWS). What are Microservices? https://aws.amazon.com/
microservices/.
[31]
Amazon Web Services (AWS). Amazon S3 – Cloud Object Storage. https://aws.
amazon.com/s3/.
[32]
Amazon Web Services (AWS). What is Amazon Elastic Container Registry? https:
//docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECR/latest/userguide/what-is-ecr.html.
[33]
Amazon Web Services (AWS). What is Amazon SageMaker? https://docs.aws.
amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/whatis.html.
[34]
Amazon Web Services (AWS). Access Training Data in Amazon SageMaker. https:
//docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/model-access-training-data.html.
[35]
Amazon Web Services (AWS). Amazon SageMaker Pricing. https://aws.amazon.
com/sagemaker-ai/pricing/.
[36]
Sebastián Ramírez. FastAPI Documentation. https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/.
44
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:52==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Github Actions including latest build
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.2: Github Actions latest build - part 1
Figure A.3: Github Actions latest build - part 2
46
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:54==
Figure A.4: SageMaker AI Training Jobs
Figure A.5: VSCode Dev Container Build Times
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.6: AAPL Logistic Backtest
Figure A.7: AAPL XGBoost Backtest
48
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.8: Amazon Logistic Backtest
Figure A.9: Amazon Logistic Backtest
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.10: AVGO Logistic Backtest
Figure A.11: AVGO XGBoost Backtest
50
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.12: Google Logistic Backtest
Figure A.13: Google XGBoost Backtest
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.14: NVDA Logistic Backtest
Figure A.15: NVDA XGBoost Backtest
52
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.16: TSLA Logistic Backtest
Figure A.17: TSLA XGBoost Backtest
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
53
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.18: LLY Logistic Backtest
Figure A.19: LLY Logistic Backtest
54
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.20: ECR Logistic Train Images
Figure A.21: ECR Logistic Predict Images
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.22: ECR LSTM Train Images
Figure A.23: ECR LSTM Predict Images
56
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
==PAGE:64==
Backtesting and Deploying Systematic Trading Strategies with Machine Learning and MLOps
57
==PAGE:65==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
