==PAGE:1==
MSC CHEMICAL AND BIOCHEMICAL ENGINEERING   
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Com-
pounds Using Electrospun Polysac-
charide Nanofibers 
Master Thesis 
Andreia Lopes, s223607 
February 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
Content 
Abstract................................................................................................................................ 3 
1. 
Introduction ................................................................................................................ 4 
1.1 
Electrospinning ....................................................................................................................... 4 
1.2 
Polysaccharides nanofibers ................................................................................................... 6 
1.3 
Porphyrins .............................................................................................................................. 7 
2. 
Goal and objectives ................................................................................................. 11 
3. 
Materials and Methods ............................................................................................ 12 
3.1 
Materials ............................................................................................................................... 12 
3.2 
Methods for the characterization of the nanofibers............................................................... 12 
3.3 
Electrospinning setup ........................................................................................................... 14 
3.4 
Reactive oxygen species (ROS)........................................................................................... 17 
4. 
Results and discussion............................................................................................ 18 
4.1 
Production of electrospun polysaccharides nanofibers ........................................................ 18 
4.2 
Production of electrospun polysaccharides nanofiber encapsulating TMePyP .................... 22 
4.3 
Production of electrospun polysaccharides nanofiber encapsulating TPyOHP .................... 33 
4.4 
Reactive oxygen species assay for TMePyP and TPyOHP ................................................. 44 
4.5 
Overview TMePyP and TPyOHP nanofiber matrices ........................................................... 46 
4.6 
TPFPP: Matrices flexibility to another type of porphyrin BF and FTIR .................................. 47 
5. 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................... 50 
Reference .......................................................................................................................... 52 
Appendix A [Heading] ........................................................................................................ 59 
Tak til ................................................................................................................................. 67 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
3 
Abstract  
The encapsulation of active compounds using electrospun polysaccharide nanofibers presented 
interesting results that allow their use for food and biomedical applications. 
In this study, monoaxial and coaxial nanofibers composed of pullulan (Pu), ethylcellulose (EC), 
and polyethylene oxide (PEO) were developed to encapsulate three porphyrins: TMePyP, 
TPyOHP, and TPFPP. The study aimed to optimize the fibers by optimizing their formulations 
and evaluating their morphology, encapsulation efficiency (EE%), chemical profile, and mechan-
ical properties. 
 
Bright-field and Fluorescence fields revealed a successful encapsulation of porphyrins, reveal-
ing well-structured fiber with homogenous distributions. SEM imaging showed that the morphol-
ogy of the fibers varied in diameter depending on their compositions. FTIR showed that the in-
corporations of the porphyrins did not significantly affect the chemical structure of the nano-
fibers, as no significant shifts in the spectra were observed. Raman analysis suggested possible 
molecular interactions that affected the vibrational modes. 
 
The solubility assays demonstrated that EC+PEO fibers remained intact upon contact with wa-
ter, while pullulan matrices maintained their integrity in DMF. The encapsulation efficiency was 
studied, demonstrating that coaxial formulations with EC+PEO achieved the highest efficiency, 
namely 92% for TMePyP and 88% for TPyOHP. 
 
Additionally, AFM showed that the encapsulation of porphyrins affects the young modulus and 
adhesion of the nanofiber matrices and that they follow a pattern that depends on formulation 
composition and fiber type. The ROS generation assay demonstrated that the encapsulated 
electrospun fibers generated oxygen singlets for the tested samples while remaining immobi-
lized in the matrix, suggesting their potential application in photodynamic antimicrobial and bio-
medical systems. 
 
Overall, it was found that porphyrin encapsulation in electrospun fibers was successful and that 
the coaxial formulations retain the active compound more efficiently within the core of the nano-
fiber. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
1. Introduction 
Nanotechnology has recently garnered attention due to its size, demonstrating potential applica-
tions across various fields. It is being utilized to develop coatings, surfaces, and contact materi-
als for food safety in the food industry. The biomedical sector is also advancing drug delivery, 
tissue engineering, and cosmetic systems, among other industries.1–3 
 
Within nanotechnology, nanoencapsulation has been studied. This process involves encapsu-
lating active compounds by developing coatings involving the active compound, nanocarriers, or 
active packages applied in the biomedical and food industries.4,5 
The techniques often used in nanotechnology to encapsulate compounds include microencap-
sulation by coacervation, spray drying, and liposome development, among others, for the phar-
maceutical and food industries. However, these methods often face challenges regarding their 
stability, the controlled release, and the controlled delivery of the bioactive compound into the 
system, meaning that it is an area in continuous progress. 1,3,5,6 
 
Within the nanosystems developed, nanofibers have brought attention because of the vast field 
in which they can operate with their diameter. The application may vary according to the poly-
mer used and the active compound introduced in the formulation. The basic method to create 
nanofibers is by electrospinning. This technique is valuable since it can form porous fine-diame-
ter fibers and facilitate the release of the encapsulated compound. Additionally, the develop-
ment of nanofiber by electrospinning does not require extreme temperatures or aggressive sol-
vents. It operates under mild conditions, protecting active compounds such as antioxidants, an-
timicrobials, and pharmaceuticals in this way.1,7,8 
 
1.1 Electrospinning 
 
Electrospinning, also called electrical electrospinning, represents a fiber-forming technique that 
employs electrostatic forces to produce continuous fibers from charged threads of polymer solu-
tions or melts. In this methodology, a polymer solution is ejected from a syringe positioned 
within a high-voltage electrostatic field, resulting in the stretching and thinning of the solution 
into fine fibers as it moves toward a collector. Initially developed in the early 20th century by 
Formhals and Gladding, electrospinning has undergone significant advancements and now 
finds diverse applications across various industries. These include textile manufacturing, filter 
production, food safety, and particularly prominent biomedical applications, such as tissue engi-
neering scaffolds, wound dressings, and drug delivery systems. In these applications, electro-
spinning is particularly valued for its ability to incorporate bioactive compounds into the fibers, 
enhancing material performance through improved mechanical properties, bioactivity, and con-
trolled release profiles.9–12 
 
Four main approaches are used within the electrospinning technique to produce nanofibers: 
monoaxial (needle-based) electrospinning, coaxial electrospinning, multi-needle electrospin-
ning, and needless electrospinning.13 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
5 
1. The process of needle-based electrospinning is as follows: This is the most 
traditional method of electrospinning, which uses a single spinneret to eject a 
polymer solution through an electric field, thereby forming nanofibers.  
2. Coaxial electrospinning is a variant of the technique mentioned above. In co-
axial electrospinning, two solutions are simultaneously ejected through two concentric needles, 
forming core-shell fibers.  
3. Multi-needle electrospinning is a technique that employs multiple needles to 
facilitate the increase in the quantity of formed fibers.  
4. Needleless Electrospinning: This technique utilizes a rotating drum or disc to 
create nanofibers. The process involves the formation of multiple Taylor cones, which increases 
the volume of fibers produced. It is an efficient method for large-scale production, particularly in 
textile and filtration applications. 
 
1.1.1 Parameters of electrospinning 
 
Multiple parameters, including solution, process, and environment, influence the electrospinning 
process. 
 
Solution parameters:   
This parameter includes the type of solvent used, the polymer's properties, and the solution's 
viscosity.  
The solvent is essential in this process because it must dissolve the polymer in high concentra-
tions and have good volatility to allow the formation of fibers and avoid the accumulation of the 
solution on the tip of the needle. Notably, solvents with high volatility frequently result in undesir-
able accumulation, which can compromise the efficacy of the process. Organic solvents such as 
acetone, DMF, ethanol, DMSO, and THF are the most common solvents for electrospinning. In 
certain instances, water is employed in the context of hydrophilic polymers. The formation of fi-
bers necessitates the entanglement of polymeric chains, a process influenced by molar mass, 
functional groups, and the polymer's structure. Generally, a higher molar mass results in greater 
entanglement and cross-linking. This increased entanglement increases solution viscosity, re-
sulting in a more fluid and homogeneous jet. Achieving the appropriate balance between high 
and low viscosity is crucial for obtaining a satisfactory fiber structure and efficient process. 
Functional groups within the solution can complicate the electrospinning process due to the im-
pact of these charges on the fiber formation process, which can result in repulsion. To address 
this challenge, PCL or PEO is often utilized to stabilize the electrospinning process.9,14,15 
 
Process parameters:  
This parameter includes the voltage, flow rate, and working distance utilized during electrospin-
ning. 
The voltage applied is a critical component of the electrospinning process. However, the current 
literature lacks concrete values for the voltage required for specific solutions. Nonetheless, it is 
generally accepted that the applied voltage must exceed a certain threshold, ensuring that the 
repulsion of charges in the jet is greater than the drop's surface tension. Consequently, increas-
ing the applied voltage can lead to an increase in the charge density, a reduction in the jet ra-
dius, and, by extension, the fiber diameter, ultimately resulting in an unstable jet. 
The flow rate plays a crucial role in the process as well. When the flow rate is excessively high, 
it affects the jet, resulting in a fiber with excessive humidity, the formation of beads, or even the 
==PAGE:6==
6 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
cessation of the electrospinning process. The working distance, defined as the distance be-
tween the tip of the needle and the collector, plays a fundamental role in determining the trajec-
tory of the fiber. Often, this distance is maintained with a range of 5 to 15 centimeters. This al-
lows sufficient time for solvent evaporation and successful deposition of the dried fiber. A re-
duced working distance can result in fibers that are overly saturated with moisture, leading to 
their gradual dissolution or the deposit of a film within the collector. 14–16 
 
Environmental parameters:  
The environmental factors of humidity and temperature have been demonstrated to influence 
the electrospinning process. Environmental moisture has been shown to affect the rate of sol-
vent evaporation. Low humidity levels result in accelerated evaporation, an advantageous 
method for solidifying and desiccating the resulting fibers. The temperature also exhibits a com-
parable effect, as elevated temperatures can promote accelerated solvent evaporation, which 
can be problematic depending on the specific solvent and its volatility.16 
 
Understanding these methods and parameters is crucial when choosing fiber-forming materials 
and solvents.  
 
1.2 Polysaccharides nanofibers 
 
Polysaccharides, a class of natural biopolymers, have been studied in electrospinning due to 
their versatile properties, such as biocompatibility, biodegradability, and the ability to form com-
plex polymer matrices. Biopolymers like cellulose, pullulan, alginate, and chitosan are widely 
used in nanofibers. These materials offer benefits in biomedical and food applications, namely 
controlled drug release systems and active packaging.17–19 
 
In the present study, the materials selected for electrospinning were chosen based on their 
origin and sustainability. The elected polysaccharides were ethyl cellulose, pullulan, and a syn-
thetic polymer, polyethylene oxide. This section provides a more detailed discussion of these 
materials.  
 
1- Ethyl cellulose (EC) 
Ethyl cellulose is a cellulose derivative with hydroxyl groups in the repeated glucose groups, 
converted to the ethyl ether group. This characteristic makes EC a good material for many phar-
maceutical, cosmetic, nail polish, vitamin coating, and food packaging applications. This hydro-
colloid is generally used for electrospinning and food preservation; the fact that EC is hydropho-
bic is a convenient feature for producing encapsulated electrospun fibers with antimicrobial 
compounds for food packaging.20,21 
 
2- Pullulan (Pu) 
Pullulan is a water-soluble polysaccharide hydrocolloid consisting of maltotriose units connected 
by α-1,6 glycosidic bonds produced by the fungus Aureobasidium pullulans. This polysaccha-
ride has several applications in the food industry, such as fillers, edible substances, and taste-
less additives. Therefore, it is a valuable polymer to include in the project.22–24 
 
3- Polyethylene oxide (PEO) 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
7 
Polyethylene oxide (PEO) is a biodegradable synthetic polymer used as an additive to improve 
the solution viscosity in the electrospinning process. It is a water-soluble polymer that can pro-
duce viscous solutions, helping to produce uniform fibers. This polymer is often used in biomed-
ical applications, paper coating, and textile fibers. These properties make PEO a suitable choice 
for this project's nanofibers formulation.25,26   
 
1.3 Porphyrins 
 
Porphyrins are a class of macrocycles comprising four pyrrole groups. They form a substantial 
aromatic structure capable of complexing with metal ions. This tetrapyrrolic structure has been 
extensively studied due to its optical and redox properties and its structural similarity to the 
heme group of hemoglobin, which has generated considerable interest in learning these com-
pounds. Due to its structure and characteristic spectra, with unique absorption around 400 nm, 
studies in the biomedical field examine porphyrins as photosensitizers in photodynamic thera-
pies, typically with metalloporphyrins.27,28 
Porphyrins possess intrinsic antimicrobial and antiviral properties, including TMePyP, attributed 
to their capacity to catalyze peroxidase and oxidase reactions, absorb photons, and generate 
reactive oxygen species (ROS).29–31 
This study evaluates the following porphyrins: TPP, TPFPP, TPyP, TMePyP, and TPyOHP. 
However, the characterization of encapsulation in nanofibers was conducted only for the last 
two mentioned. 
 
TMePyP (tetrakis(4-N-methyl) pyridyl-porphyrin) 
 
Figure 1- Chemical structure of TMePyP. 
 
TMePyP is characterized by methylated pyridyl groups with a positive charge and is soluble in 
water. Its antimicrobial properties have been studied in gram-positive and gram-negative bacte-
ria. Its absorption range of 400-430nm generates ROS, leading to the oxidation of the cellular 
compounds and the destruction of microorganisms.29,30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
8 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
TPyOHP ((tetra-4-hydroxyphenyl) porphyrin) 
 
Figure 2- Chemical structure of TPyOHP 
 
TPyOHP is characterized by its hydroxyl groups, which confer solubility in water and enable 
ROS generation upon light activation.32. This porphyrin exhibits an absorption spectrum range 
of around 420nm; however, studies investigating its bactericidal efficacy are currently lacking. 
Nonetheless, its structural similarity to TMePyP suggests a comparable mechanism of action. 
 
TPP (Tetraphenylporphyrin) 
 
Figure 3- Chemical structure of TPP. 
 
TPP is a meso-substituted porphyrin and a phenyl porphyrin. It is hydrophobic due to its phenyl 
aromatic cycles. This porphyrin has been studied in nanofiber matrices due to its photosensitiv-
ity and ability to produce oxygen singlets, which can decrease virologic activity. 33–35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
9 
TPFPP(5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(pentafluorophenyl)porphyrin) 
 
Figure 4-Chemical structure of TPFPP 
 
TPFPP is characterized by its pentafluorophenyl functional groups, which confer higher hydro-
phobicity. Among other porphyrins, TPFPP is photosensitive and capable of generating reactive 
oxygen species. This photodynamic activity presents promising innovations that may stem from 
its properties.36 
 
TPyP(5,10,15,20-Tetra(4-pyridyl)-21H,23H-porphyrin) 
 
Figure 5-Chemical structure of TPyP 
 
TPyP is characterized by its pyridyl groups, which confer a more hydrophilic profile for this por-
phyrin. Similarly to the previous porphyrins mentioned, TPyP is also photosensitive and can 
generate ROS under radiation.37  
 
Encapsulation of porphyrins 
The encapsulation of metallic and non-metallic porphyrins has been researched for various ap-
plications. The intrinsic properties of porphyrins, particularly their photosensitivity and ability to 
generate singlet oxygen, render them valuable for inhibiting microbial growth and for utilization 
in photodynamic therapies (PDT), which are applicable in food safety and biomedical fields. Nu-
merous studies have indicated that encapsulated porphyrins exhibit antimicrobial activity and 
enhance the shelf life of food products. Furthermore, nanocarriers incorporating porphyrins are 
more easily monitored through fluorescence techniques.  38–42 
 
==PAGE:10==
10 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
Previous studies have demonstrated the production of films and monoaxial nanofibers to incor-
porate bioactive compounds, including porphyrins. Few studies use polysaccharides as fiber 
materials, such as chitosan, alginate, pullulan, cellulose derivatives, and ethyl cellulose, often 
combined with synthetic polymers or copolymers. 17,40,43–48 
Conversely, coaxial and monoaxial formulations using the polysaccharides from this study to 
encapsulate non-metallic porphyrins have been less studied, highlighting the importance of ana-
lyzing and characterizing these formulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
11 
 
 
2. Goal and objectives 
This thesis investigates the encapsulation of selected porphyrins in electrospun fiber matrices. 
The following objectives have been established to reach the main project goal: 
 
i. 
Development and optimization of fiber matrices capable of encapsulating water-soluble 
and hydrophobic porphyrins. 
 
ii. 
Evaluation of the potential and performance of monoaxial versus coaxial electrospun 
fibers in encapsulating porphyrins. 
 
iii. 
Assessment of how the choice of the efficacy of different solvents and polymer content 
influences fiber formation, morphology, and electrospinning processes. 
 
 
iv. 
Determination of solubility characteristics of the fiber matrices. 
 
v. 
Assessment of the potential of the developed matrices encapsulating photosensitive ac-
tive porphyrins to generate ROS. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
12 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
3. Materials and Methods 
3.1 Materials 
The polymers employed in electrospinning nanofibers consisted of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), 
with an average molecular weight of 200,000 g/mol, obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Ethylcellu-
lose, obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, exhibited an ethoxyl basis of 48.0-49.5% (w/w). Pullulan was 
obtained from Hayashibara, Nagase Viita, in Okayama, Japan. The porphyrins designated as 
bioactive compounds in the formulations (TPP, TPFPP, TPYP, TMEPYP, TPYOHP (the last two 
are more hydrophilic, the remaining are mostly hydrophobic)) were extracted and purified at the 
University of Aveiro, Portugal. 
The solvents utilized in the formulations included acetone by ENSURE, supplied by Merk, and 
absolute ethanol, supplied by VWR Chemicals. Furthermore, N, N-dimethylformamide (DMF), 
with a purity of 99.8%, was procured from Sigma-Aldrich.  
 
3.2 Methods for the characterization of the nanofibers 
This section is composed of the initial formulation and the optimizations of the results discussed 
in this work in section 3.2.2. 
 
3.2.1 Initial formulation with acetone as solvent 
 
The formulations were prepared using two different polymer systems. Ethyl cellulose (EC) was 
dissolved in the solvent to produce a solution containing 20% (w/w) EC, and the mixture was 
stirred at 300 rpm overnight to ensure complete dissolution and homogeneity. Similarly, pullulan 
was dissolved in water to obtain a 20% (w/w) solution, which was also stirred at 300 rpm over-
night. The porphyrins were initially dissolved by adding 3.3 mg of porphyrin to 1 mL of DMF to 
obtain a concentrated stock solution. To achieve a final porphyrin concentration of 260 µg/mL in 
the polymer formulations, 394 µL of the stock solution was added to 5 mL of the respective poly-
mer solutions. These prepared solutions were then used in the electrospinning process. 
 
Table 1- Formulations for electrospinning 
Sample number 
Core/solvent 
used 
Shell/solvent 
used 
Porphyrin [260 
µg/ml] 
A1 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
20% EC/ acetone 
TPP 
A2 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
20% EC/ acetone 
TPFPP 
A3 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
20% EC/ acetone 
TPyP 
A4 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
20% EC/ acetone 
TPyOHP 
A5 
20% EC/ acetone 
20% Pu/water 
TPyOHP 
A6 
- 
20% Pu/water 
- 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
13 
A fluid jet that could continue without many interventions was necessary to produce fiber mats. 
Acetone had a low evaporation point, so different solvents or additives were tested to increase 
this point without clogging the needle tip. The following table shows the formulations for the for-
mulation optimization. 
 
Table 2- Optimization for EC solvent 
Sample number 
Core/solvent 
used 
A7 
20% EC/ Ethanol 
A8 
20% EC/ Ethanol: 
DIH2O (80:20) 
A9 
15% EC/ Ethanol 
A10 
13,6% EC/ Etha-
nol 
A11 
20% EC 1% PEO / 
ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
 
 
3.2.2 Formulations for electrospinning to produce nanofiber mats 
 
The formulations were prepared using two different polymer systems. Ethyl cellulose (EC) and 
polyethylene oxide (PEO) were dissolved in ethanol: DIH2O (90:10) to produce a solution con-
taining 20% (w/w) EC and 1% (w/w) PEO, and the mixture was stirred at 200 rpm overnight to 
ensure complete dissolution and homogeneity. Similarly, pullulan was dissolved in deionized 
water to obtain a 20% (w/w) solution, stirring at 300 rpm overnight. The porphyrins were initially 
dissolved by adding 3.3 mg of porphyrin to 1 mL of DMF to obtain a concentrated stock solution. 
To achieve a final porphyrin concentration of 260 µg/mL in the polymer formulations, 394 µL of 
the stock solution was added to 5 mL of the respective polymer solutions. These prepared solu-
tions were then used in the electrospinning process. As displayed in Table 3, the formulations 
tested are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
14 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
Table 3-Formulation of the polysaccharide formulations. 
Sample number 
Core/solvent 
used 
Shell/solvent 
used 
Porphyrin [260 
µg/ml] 
F1/A6 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
- 
- 
F2 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
- 
TPyOHP 
F3 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
- 
TMePyP 
F4/A11 
20% EC 1% PEO / 
ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
- 
- 
F5 
20% EC 1% PEO / 
ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
- 
TPyOHP 
F6 
20% EC 1% PEO / 
ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
- 
TMePyP 
F7 
20% EC 1% PEO / 
ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
  
F8 
20% EC 1% PEO / 
ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
TPyOHP 
F9 
20% EC 1% PEO / 
ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
TMePyP 
F10 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
20% EC 1% PEO / 
ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
  
F11 
20% Pu/DIH2O 
220% EC 1% PEO 
/ ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
TPyOHP 
F12 
2020% Pu/DIH2O 
20% EC 1% PEO / 
ethanol: DIH2O 
(90:10) 
TMePyP 
 
 
3.3 Electrospinning setup  
 
The electrospinning process was configured horizontally and executed in a laboratory-scale 
configuration. Core and shell solutions were loaded into 10-mL disposable syringes and 
mounted on two syringe pumps (New Era Pump System Inc., Farmingdale, NY, USA). The solu-
tions were dispensed for the coaxial fibers through a three-fluid spray nozzle (part of BUCHI B–
290 Mini Spray Dryer, BÜCHI Labortechnik AG, Essen, Germany). The nozzle comprised an in-
ner needle with a diameter of 0.7 mm (internal) and 1.5 mm (external) for the core solution, sur-
rounded by a nozzle tip with a diameter of 2 mm (internal) for the shell solution. The outer diam-
eter of the nozzle was 25 mm. 
The coaxial electrospinning process was executed with a flow rate of 0.4 mL/h for the shell solu-
tion and 0.09 mL/h for the core solution over 3 hours. A single G-19 needle was utilized for 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
15 
monoaxial fibers, and the polymer solution was delivered at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/h for 0.967 
hours. 
The applied voltage was 25 kV at the needle (positive electrode) and 5 kV at the collector (neg-
ative electrode), ensuring the consistent production of monoaxial and coaxial fibers under con-
trolled conditions. 
 
3.3.1 Morphology: Bright, Fluorescence, and Scanning Electron Microscopy 
 
The morphological features of the nanofibers were observed using an EXCOS bright field and 
fluorescence microscope, which allowed the study of the fiber structure and any potential fluo-
rescence from the porphyrins. Images were captured with a 40x/0.75 objective, and fluores-
cence was detected with a TXRED filter. The figures scale bar was obtained by using ImageJ. 
 
SEM (scanning electron microscopy) 
 
The surface morphology of the nanofibers was analyzed using a Phenom Pro Desktop SEM, 
(Phenom-World, Netherlands). SEM was performed with an accelerating voltage of 5 kV, a 
working distance of approximately 5 mm, and magnifications of 3500x and 8500x using a sec-
ondary electron detector (ETD). Electrospun nanofibers on aluminum foil (approximately 0.5 × 
0.5 cm) were transferred to SEM specimen holders using carbon adhesive tape (Agar Scien-
tific). To minimize charging effects and improve resolution, the samples were sputter-coated 
with gold for 10 seconds at a sputter current of 20 milliamperes (mA) using an automated sput-
ter coater (Q 150T, Quorum Technologies Ltd., Lewes, UK) before imaging. 
This SEM technique provided high-resolution images to evaluate fiber diameter and uniformity. 
The fiber diameter and scale bar were measured using ImageJ. 
 
3.3.2 Raman spectroscopy and FTIR: Study of interactions 
 
FTIR 
 
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were measured using an iS50 FT-IR spectrometer 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) to identify functional groups and chemical bonds 
in the polymer matrices and porphyrins. Spectra were acquired at room temperature in the 
4000-375 cm-¹ wave number range with a resolution of 32. Each spectrum represents the aver-
age of 64 scans recorded in absorbance mode. 
 
RAMAN 
 
Raman spectra were obtained using a DXR3 Raman microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
Waltham, MA, USA) with Omnic software. Measurements were performed with a laser wave-
length of 532 nm, nine mW laser power, 60x magnification, and 50 µm pinhole aperture, cover-
ing the spectral range from 4000 to 400 cm-¹. To ensure a representative analysis, spectra were 
collected from four randomly selected points within a mapped area. Baseline corrections were 
applied to the data. This approach allows a comprehensive structural analysis of the fibers and 
their chemical interactions. 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
16 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
 
3.3.3 AFM: Topography and mechanical properties of nanofibers. 
 
A Bruker JPK NanoWizard® 4 XP BioScience atomic force microscope (AFM) (Berlin, Ger-
many) was utilized to assess the mechanical properties of the nanofibers that were produced. 
The measurements were performed using a Bruker RFESPG–75 scanning probe (cantilever), 
which operates within a resonant frequency range of 50–100 kHz and has a spring constant of 
approximately 1.7 N/m. 
The topographical images of the nanofibers were captured in air and at ambient temperature 
using quantitative imaging (QI) mode, with a scanning area of 10 µm × 10 µm for each image. 
The stiffness (Young's modulus) and adhesion properties of the nanofiber surfaces were meas-
ured across approximately 16000 points per sample, covering both monoaxial and coaxial fiber 
formulations. 
 
The obtained parameters were thoroughly analyzed and quantified using specialized JPK data 
processing software, version 8.0.98 (Bruker, Berlin, Germany). Based on Hooke's law, Young's 
modulus, which characterizes the elastic behavior of the fibers under stress, was calculated. 
 
 
3.3.4 The Solubility of Nanofiber Matrices  
 
The fibers' solubility behavior was analyzed using an Olympus SZ61 microscope to observe 
morphological changes after exposure to different solvents. A 1 × 1 cm sample was tested by 
applying four drops of DMF and DIH2O. The swelling process was recorded at two different 
times (0 and 10 minutes). These solvents were chosen to further test the fibers' ability to gener-
ate reactive oxygen singlet (ROS). 
 
3.3.5 Encapsulation Efficiency  
 
The nanofibers' encapsulation efficiency (EE) was determined by a spectrophotometric method 
using the NanoDrop™ One/OneC Microvolume UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific, Madison, WI, USA). The quantification method was adapted from previously published 
protocols [49,50] with modifications. 
A 6 mg sample of the nanofiber film was immersed in 5 mL DMSO and stirred at 300 rpm for 50 
min to wash the porphyrin at the surface. The amount of encapsulated porphyrin was quantified 
using a calibration curve generated from known concentrations of TMePyP and TPyOHP dis-
solved in DMSO, with correlation coefficients (R2) of 0.99 for both compounds. The absorbance 
of TMePyP and TPyOHP was measured at 430 nm and 420 nm, respectively. The encapsula-
tion efficiency was then calculated using the following formula: 
 
𝐸𝐸% = 𝐵−𝐴
𝐴
∗100 
 
In this method, A refers to the theoretical concentration of porphyrin in the sample. At the same 
time, B represents the amount of porphyrin determined using the calibration curve equation 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
17 
based on the Lambert-Beer law. All measurements were performed twice in triplicate to ensure 
accuracy and reproducibility, and the results were statistically analyzed. 
 
As the formulations exhibited varying solubilities for samples composed exclusively of pullulan, 
the calculation of encapsulation efficiency was guided by a previously published article [51,52], 
which is based on the total dissolution of the film. Similarly, a 6 mg sample of the nanofiber film 
was immersed in 5 mL DMSO and stirred at 300 rpm for 50 min, allowing for the complete dis-
solution of the fiber matrices. The quantity of encapsulated porphyrin was then quantified using 
a calibration curve generated from known concentrations of TMePyP and TPyOHP dissolved in 
DMSO. The calibration curve demonstrated correlation coefficients (R2) of 0.99 for both com-
pounds. The spectrophotometric readings of TMePyP and TPyOHP were measured at 430 nm 
and 420 nm, respectively. The encapsulation efficiency was subsequently calculated using the 
following formula: 
  
𝐸𝐸% = 𝐵
𝐴∗100 
 
In this method, A refers to the theoretical concentration of porphyrin in the sample. At the same 
time, B represents the amount of porphyrin determined using the calibration curve equation 
based on the Lambert-Beer law. The measurements were performed two times in triplicate to 
ensure accuracy and reproducibility, and the results were statistically analyzed. 
 
Statistical analysis 
The statistical data were processed utilizing the software Origin 2025. The means and standard 
deviations were calculated for the fiber diameters, Young's modulus, adhesion values, and en-
capsulation efficiency (EE). A significance level of 0.05 was applied to all samples. A two-sam-
ple t-test was employed to compare the control formulations with those containing the active 
compound. Additionally, boxplots were utilized in atomic force microscopy (AFM) to provide a 
more precise visualization of the cohesiveness of the samples. An analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) was conducted to assess the different formulations for encapsulation efficiency. A 
Tukey test was subsequently performed to group the most similar formulations, identifying which 
compositions exhibited significant differences and which could be more viable for future applica-
tions.   
 
3.4 Reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
 
Dr. Nuno Moura conducted the assay at the University of Aveiro to evaluate the photochemical 
stability of electrospun polysaccharide nanofibers in generating reactive oxygen species.  
The reactive oxygen species assay typically uses dimethylformamide (DMF) as the solvent, as 
illustrated in the literature.53  
However, as DMF dissolved the samples, it was adapted, and 9,10-dimethyl anthracene (DMA) 
was used instead. 
The generation of singlet oxygen was measured by the absorption decay of the 1O2 scavenger, 
in this case, DMA, at 378 nm. A sample of 5 mg was immersed in a solution of DMA in water at 
30 µM. Subsequently, the sample was irradiated with white light at an intensity of 20 mW/cm² at 
room temperature while gently stirring with a magnetic stirrer. The production of 1O2 was moni-
tored by the decay of the DMA absorption band at λmax = 378 nm after 15 and 30 minutes of 
==PAGE:18==
18 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
irradiation. A control without the nanofibers was also performed under the same conditions for 
comparative purposes, with each measurement of 1O2 production carried out in triplicate for all 
samples. 
 
4. Results and discussion 
The following sections present the results and discussions for the samples, beginning with the 
primary formulations, followed by their optimization, and the characterization of TPyOHP, 
TMePyP, the formulation's flexibility with TPFPP, and finally, the ROS assays for F1 to F12 
samples. 
 
4.1 Production of electrospun polysaccharides nanofibers 
 
4.1.1 Bright field and fluorescence microscopy: Initial formulations and 
EC solution optimization 
 
Initially, the formulations used acetone as the solvent for EC in this coaxial formulation, with Pul-
lulan as the shell of the nanofiber. This section will illustrate the primary findings of this formula-
tion with different porphyrins. 
As shown in Figure 1, bright-field microscopy was applied to assess the morphology of the fi-
bers produced with acetone as the solvent for EC and water for pullulan. 
Effect of the solvent 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
19 
 
==PAGE:20==
20 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
 
Figure 6- Microscopic images from samples A1 to A6, in bright and fluorescent fields (if applicable) 
with 40x objective, where A1 to A4 is a coaxial formulation with EC on the shell and Pu on the core 
with TPP, TPFPP, TPyP, and TPyOHP respectively. A5 is coaxial with Pu as the shell, EC as the 
core with TPyOHP, and A6 monoaxial of pullulan. 
 
For coaxial formulations, it has been observed that using acetone to dissolve EC is effective, as 
illustrated in Figure 6 with samples A1 to A4, where the shell is made of EC, and the fibers are 
long and fine. Regarding the core (A1 to A4), the monoaxial formulation A6, and even the shell 
in A5, all composed of pullulan dissolved in water, the fiber structure is also well-defined. This 
indicates that the solvent significantly influences the structure and formation of the fibers.  
Regarding porphyrin encapsulation, it is noted that under fluorescent light from A1 to A5 (Figure 
1), all of the porphyrins appear to be well-distributed. However, in A5, the fluorescence is not as 
distinctly visible as in the remaining porphyrins samples. This may be attributed to the cationic 
charges of TPyOHP and the hydrophilic profile of this porphyrin, which is opposite to the EC 
core polymer material.  Overall, these formulations were revealed to be versatile along the dif-
ferent porphyrins, and the reserved coaxial formulation, figure 1-A5, showed promising results. 
The formulations for the nanofibers were further improved by using different solvents, polysac-
charide concentrations, and the addition of synthetic polymers to enhance the stability of the for-
mulations, as shown in Figure 7. 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
21 
Effect of EC concentration 
 
 
Figure 7- Microscopic images from monoaxial samples A7 to A11, in the bright field with 40x objec-
tive. A1 to A10 variations of EC concentration dissolved in ethanol. A11 EC+PEO dissolved in etha-
nol: water (90:10). 
 
As illustrated in Figure 7, the representative images depict the fibers formed under varying EC 
(A7-A10) concentrations and the presence of PEO in the formulation A11. 
Lower concentrations of EC formed spheres rather than fibers, indicating that the solution's vis-
cosity was insufficient to produce a stable jet. This led to interruptions in electrospinning and 
subsequent syringe clogging, as seen in Figures 2 A7 to A10. 
A11 illustrates the addition of PEO into the formulation, enabling the production of uniform fibers 
and uninterrupted electrospinning. 
The incorporation of PEO successfully stabilized the electrospinning process, as evidenced in 
Figure 2-A11. This effect is consistent with previous studies [ 54], who demonstrated that adding 
PEO improves the electro-spinnability of ethyl cellulose-based solutions for a monoaxial setup 
by increasing viscosity and chain entanglement, essential parameters for a stable jet formation 
and uniform fiber morphology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
22 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
4.2 Production of electrospun polysaccharides nanofiber encapsulating 
TMePyP 
4.2.1 Morphological analysis 
 
The samples were morphologically analyzed using bright and fluorescence field and scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM).  
 
Figure 8-Bright-field and fluorescence microscopy images (40x objective) of monoaxial fibers. F1: 
Pullulan fibers without porphyrin. F3: Pullulan fibers with TMePyP, [F3-txred filter at 20x due to 
technical limitations]. F4: EC + PEO fibers without porphyrin. F6: EC + PEO fibers with TMePyP. 
 
As demonstrated in Figure 8, the bright-field image of F1 exhibited long and fine fibers. Upon 
the addition of TMePyP (F3), the fibers maintained their structure and morphology. Under fluo-
rescence microscopy, TMePyP appeared to be homogeneously distributed throughout the fi-
bers, indicating successful encapsulation of the active compound. Regarding F4, the matrix ex-
hibited well-defined fibers. With the incorporation of TMePyP (F6), the fiber morphology re-
mained intact, and fluorescence microscopy revealed a uniform distribution of the porphyrin 
throughout the fibers, suggesting effective encapsulation. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
23 
 
 
Figure 9-SEM images of monoaxial fibers at 3500x magnification and 5 kV. F1: Pullulan fibers with-
out porphyrin. F3: Pullulan fibers with TMePyP. F4: EC + PEO fibers without porphyrin. F5: EC + 
PEO fibers with TMePyP. 
Table 4-Mean fiber diameters of monoaxial formulations. Measurements were obtained from SEM 
images, with N=100 fibers measured per sample. 
Sample 
N 
Mean±SD [nm] 
F1 
100 
191 ± 56 
F3 
100 
349 ± 109 
F4 
100 
328 ± 131 
F6 
100 
391± 114 
 
As illustrated in Figure 9, the SEM images of the samples highlight their structural features and 
mean fiber diameters. F1 exhibited fine, long fibers with a mean diameter of 191 ± 56 nm. In 
contrast, the addition of TMePyP to F3 resulted in a significant increase in the mean diameter to 
349 ± 109 nm (p<0.0001) [Table 4], suggesting that the active compound influenced the solution 
properties, potentially altering its viscosity and/or electrical conductivity. These alterations could 
have affected the stretching forces during the electrospinning, leading to thicker fibers. 
F4 exhibited a mean diameter of 328 ± 131 nm, suggesting that this formulation creates thicker 
fibers, likely due to the PEO in its composition. Similarly, F6 resulted in fibers with a significantly 
increased diameter of 391 ± 114 nm (p<0,0001) [Table 9].  
==PAGE:24==
24 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
Figure 10-Bright-field and fluorescence microscopy images (40x objective) of coaxial fiber formula-
tions. F7: Coaxial fibers with pullulan shell and EC + PEO core. F9: Same formulation with TMePyP. 
F10: Coaxial fibers with EC + PEO shell and pullulan core. F12: Same formulation with TMePyP. 
 
As illustrated in Figure 10, the bright field images indicated that the control formulations (F7 and 
F10) had a uniform morphology and a homogeneous distribution of fibers without significant de-
fects such as beads or fiber ruptures. Additionally, F9 and F12 observations under fluorescence 
microscopy confirmed a homogeneous distribution of the porphyrin throughout the fibers. This 
outcome corroborates the successful encapsulation of the porphyrin within these samples.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
25 
 
 
Figure 11-SEM images of coaxial fiber formulations (F7, F9, F10, and F12) at 3500x magnification 
and 5 kV provide detailed insights into the morphology and fiber diameter. 
 
Table 5-Mean fiber diameters of Coaxial formulations. Measurements were obtained from SEM im-
ages, with N=100 fibers measured per sample 
Sample 
N 
Mean±SD [nm] 
F7 
100 
359 ± 139 
F9 
100 
384 ± 200 
F10 
100 
686 ± 185 
F12 
100 
543± 199 
 
As demonstrated in Figure 11, the mean diameter of F7 was 359 ± 139 nm, while F9 exhibited a 
slight increase to 384 ± 200 nm. However, this increase was not statistically significant (p = 
0.30593) [Table 5]. This negligible change in diameter may be attributed to the incorporation of 
TMePyP, which potentially influenced the fiber structure, although not significantly. 
In contrast, the measured diameter for F10 was 686 ± 185 nm, while F12 exhibited a significant 
decrease to 543 ± 199 nm (p < 0.0001) [Table 5]. This substantial decrease in F12 was statisti-
cally significant, likely due to the affinity between the porphyrin and the core solution. In F12, the 
core is pullulan, which possesses a greater hydrophilicity, potentially resulting in a more stable 
structure.  
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
4.2.2 FTIR  
 
FTIR analysis was conducted to examine the surface of the electrospun formulations and as-
sess potential interactions between the porphyrin and the polymer matrix. 
 
 
Figure 12-FTIR spectra for monoaxial formulations: F1, F2, F4 and F6, and coaxial formulations F7, 
F9, F10 and F12. 
 
Figures 7 and 8 illustrate the FTIR spectra of the TMePyP formulations and compare them with 
their respective controls (F1, F4, F7, and F10). The controls revealed characteristic peaks of the 
materials, including bands around 3300 cm⁻¹ attributed to the O-H group, 2800-2950 cm⁻¹ re-
lated to C-H bonds, at 1600 cm⁻¹ is associated with O-H bending in pullulan 1380 cm⁻¹ at-
tributed to the CH2 group, and 1050 cm⁻¹ associated with C-O-C bonds. These peaks thus con-
firm the presence of the polymeric matrices formed by pullulan, EC, and PEO [55,56].  
F3, F6, F9, and F12, the spectra exhibited similar patterns to the controls, with no emergence of 
new peaks attributable to the porphyrin. This finding indicates that the porphyrin is encapsulated 
within the fibers, being undetectable by FTIR due to its limited penetration beam. 
Differences were noted regarding the intensity of the peaks in the monoaxial samples of pullu-
lan, namely at 3300 cm⁻¹, where the intensity of F3 was 0.80 A.U. In contrast, the control F1 
had 0.75A.U., at 1600cm⁻¹, there was also an increase in the intensity in F2 (approximately 
0.12A.U.), while the control had 0.05 A.U. Regarding the intensities on the monoaxial EC+PEO 
samples it was observed that at 1050cm⁻¹  the intensity was 0.45, while F4 presented an inten-
sity of 0.35A.U. However, this information is worth nothing since it is not possible to confirm that 
this increase in the intensities was due to the encapsulation of the porphyrin. 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
27 
Despite this, the comparative analysis between the controls and the formulations with TMePyP 
supports the hypothesis that the bioactive compound was efficiently encapsulated. 
Raman spectroscopy was employed to obtain additional spectroscopic data to further examine 
the polymeric structure and potential intermolecular interactions within the nanofiber matrices.  
 
4.2.3 RAMAN  
 
Raman spectroscopy analyzed the chemical structure and interactions within the nanofiber. Due 
to technical limitations, the analysis was conducted solely for samples F10 and F12. Note that 
F12 exhibited the highest encapsulation efficiency (section 4.3.4), thereby the inclusion in the 
Raman analysis is pertinent to elucidate the chemical interactions associated with TMePyP en-
capsulation. 
 
 
Figure 13- RAMAN spectra for samples F10 and F12. 
 
As shown in Figure 13, Raman spectroscopy shows that the spectra exhibit characteristic peaks 
consistent with the polymers used in formulations. Vibrations between 2800 and 3000 cm⁻¹ cor-
respond to CH and CH2 vibrations indicative of the polymeric shell composed of EC+PEO and 
the pullulan core. O-H stretching vibrations around 3200 to 3500 cm⁻¹ are attributed to the hy-
drophilic groups present in PEO. At 1400cm⁻¹, the region cm⁻¹ of CH2 cm⁻¹, at 1200 cm⁻¹ corre-
sponding to C-O-H and C-O bonds, and at 700 cm⁻¹, the characteristic peaks of EC. A study 
where the capsules of ethylcellulose also reveal identical peaks.57 
Notable differences were observed between F10 and F12. The addition of TMePyP led to a 
peak at 2800 cm⁻¹ with three distinct maxima, while the absence of the porphyrin in F10 re-
sulted in a peak with only one maximum. These can indicate that the encapsulation of TMePyP 
led to this change. 
The O-H region between 3500-3200 cm⁻¹ showed some variations, namely in the reduction of 
intensity in F12, suggesting that the encapsulation of TMePyP reduced this intensity. In con-
trast, at 1050 cm⁻¹, F12 exhibited an increased intensity. 
Raman provided insights revealing that the encapsulated electrospun fibers affect the interac-
tions between the porphyrin and the polymer matrix. However, it is not possible to pinpoint 
which exact interactions had occurred. 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
28 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
4.2.4 AFM 
 
Electrospun monaxial Pullulan fibers (F4) with TMePyP (F6) 
 
 
Figure 14- AFM analysis of nanofiber matrix samples F1 and F3 with the respective boxplots and 
surface images. 
 
Figure 14 represents the young modulus and adhesion by AFM. For the young modulus, F1 had 
a mean f 181.91±145.24 MPa. In contrast, F3 had a significantly decreased mean of 
97.61±65.91MPa (p<0.0001), suggesting that the incorporation of the porphyrin affected the 
elasticity of the matrices, likely due to the affinity between the porphyrin and pullulan. 
Regarding adhesion, F1 exhibited a mean of 20.12± 10.99nN, while F3 showed a significant de-
crease to 16.98±4.36nN(p=0.0088). This indicates a difference in the surface of the fiber, which 
is less adherent when encapsulating the porphyrin. 
 
Electrospun monaxial EC+PEO fibers (F4) with TMePyP (F6) 
 
 
Figure 15- AFM analysis of nanofiber matrices of F4 and F6, with the respective boxplots and sur-
face images. 
 
The young modulus for F4 in Figure 15 shows a mean elastic modulus of 165.23±141.75MPa. 
At the same time, F6 had a significantly higher mean of 215.21±168.57 MPa (p=0.024), reveal-
ing the lower affinity between the porphyrin and EC+PEO, and higher diameter when the por-
phyrin is added can affect the elasticity of the nanofiber. 
Regarding adhesion, the opposite effect was shown: F4 had a mean adhesion of 14.83 
±13.37nN, while F6 had a lower adhesion of 11.81±6.12nN(p=0.042), indicating that the addi-
tion of TMePyP reduced the adhesive properties of the nanofiber.  
==PAGE:29==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
29 
 
Electrospun coaxial fibers [shell: Pu, core: EC+PEO] (F7) with TMePyP (F9) 
 
 
Figure 16- AFM analysis of nanofiber matrices of F7 and F9, with the respective boxplots and sur-
face images. 
Figure 16 illustrates the coaxial samples F7 and F9 studied. The mean young modulus for F7 
was 263.13 ±224.24MPa. At the same time, F9 has a slightly reduced elasticity of 236.42± 
202.93 MPa with no statistical significance (p=0.379), indicating that the addition of porphyrin 
does not have a meaningful impact on the elasticity of the nanofiber. 
Regarding adhesion, F7 had a mean value of 6.98 ±3.52nN, and F9 had a considerably higher 
mean adhesion of 12.65± 5.21nN, which was statistically significant according to a two-sample 
t-test. This finding suggests that TMePyP affects the adhesion of the surface of the nanofiber, 
perhaps due to the lower affinity of the porphyrin with the EC+PEO core or the cationic porphy-
rin affected these properties. 
 
Electrospun coaxial fibers [shell: EC+PEO, core: Pu] (F10) with TMePyP (F12) 
 
 
 
Figure 17- AFM analysis of nanofiber matrices of F10 and F12, with the respective boxplots and 
surface images. 
 
The AFM analysis was performed in F10 and F2 samples, Figure 13. The coaxial control F7 had 
a mean young modulus of 87.17 ±34.05MPa, which increased significantly with the addition of 
porphyrin to 336.27 ±265.71MPa (p<0.0001), suggesting molecular interactions that enhance 
the rigidity of the fiber likely due to TMePyP interacting with the pullulan core. 
==PAGE:30==
30 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
Similarly, the adhesion also slightly increased in F12 compared to its control F10, with a mean 
adhesion value of 7.14± 4.33nN for F10 and 7.82 ±1.94nN for F12. This difference was not sta-
tistically significant (p=0.1583). This difference indicates that TMePyP affects the fiber's elastic-
ity while their surface does not affect maintaining similar values of adhesion. 
Previous studies with the incorporation of porphyrins into polyurethane-based nanofibers affect 
the mechanical properties of the mats.58 
  
4.2.5 Solubility assay  
 
As demonstrated in Tables 6 and 7, the findings of the solubility assay performed on formula-
tions. The figures illustrate the original state and the state following exposure to solvents. These 
assessments were conducted to evaluate the integrity of the matrix and its structural robust-
ness. 
Table 6-Dissolution of matrix with DMF on the fibers. 
 
 
 
As shown in Table 6, the solubility assay with DMF revealed that F3 was more resistant to the 
solvent, maintaining its structure. In contrast, F6, F9, and F12 exhibited significant solubility, in-
dicating lower compatibility with the solvent. 
These findings highlight that pullulan was the most suitable formulation for maintaining its struc-
ture for this purpose. Note that results may vary with an increase in the volume of mechanical 
movements. 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
31 
Table 7-Dissolution of matrix with DIH2O on the fibers 
 
 
As Table 7 shows, the solubility tests of the fiber matrices in water were conducted at two dis-
tinct time points.  
The results indicated that both F3 and F9 exhibited solubility of the matrix, which aligns with the 
composition of their content and outer shell, made up of pullulan, a hydrophilic polymer.  In F3, 
complete matrix dissolution was observed, while in F9, some folding occurred alongside the dis-
solution. This suggests that the shell, composed of pullulan, was the primary component that 
dissolved, leaving the core, composed of EC+PEO and porphyrin, intact. In contrast, F6 and 
F12 exhibited minimal folding at the edges of the squared samples, suggesting that their matrix 
structures maintained their integrity. This behavior can be attributed to the hydrophobic nature 
of EC, which, in conjunction with the minimal concentration of PEO, did not significantly impact 
the structural stability when exposed to water. 
These results highlight that the presence of EC in the shell effectively enhances the structural 
resistance of the matrices, demonstrating their potential as a protective layer for hydrophilic 
cores. 
 
4.2.6 Encapsulation efficiency 
 
Table 13 illustrates the mean encapsulation efficiency values (EE%) and the corresponding 
standard deviations for the various formulations. 
==PAGE:32==
32 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
Table 8- Mean values and standard deviations of the encapsulation efficiency (EE%) of the different 
formulations with TMePyP. 
Formulation 
EE%±SD 
F3 
82.73±9.49 
F6 
50.94±5.88 
F9 
88.85±1.63 
F12 
92.26±0.168 
 
Table 8 shows the encapsulation efficiency of the formulations with TMePyP. The encapsulation 
successfully achieved values of >50%. The formulation that was revealed to have the best en-
capsulation efficiency was F12, with 92.26± 0.168%. This suggests that the core is protected by 
the EC+PEO shell, maintaining its structure and, therefore, not allowing the escape of the por-
phyrin.  
The analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed for all TMePyP samples, and the p-value was 
0.00576, indicating statistically significant differences between the formulations. 
 The Tukey test was also used to evaluate the differences between the mean EE of the formula-
tions, which were divided into two groups. The Tukey test grouped F12, F9, and F3 into a statis-
tically similar group (p=0.00639, p=0.00879, and p=0.01659, respectively) with no statistical dif-
ferences and F6 into another group with statistical significance, indicating that this formulation 
may not be ideal for the encapsulation of TMePyP. 
The highest efficiency in F12 demonstrates that the shell hydrophobicity conferred by EC is cru-
cial to retaining the porphyrin within the nanofiber. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
33 
4.3 Production of electrospun polysaccharides nanofiber encapsulating 
TPyOHP 
 
4.3.1 Morphological analysis 
 
Bright and fluorescence field microscopy and SEM were employed to offer a morphologic analy-
sis of the incorporation of TPyOHP into the polymer solutions and how this can affect the struc-
ture of nanofiber matrices. 
 
 
Figure 18-Bright-field and fluorescence microscopy images (40x objective) of monoaxial fibers. F1: 
Pullulan fibers without porphyrin. F2: Pullulan fibers with TPyOHP. F4: EC + PEO fibers without 
porphyrin. F5: EC + PEO fibers with TPyOHP. 
 
Figure 18 illustrates some structural differences that occurred after adding the porphyrin. The 
control F1 exhibited long and uniform fiber in BF upon the addition of TPYOHP (F2); the fiber 
structure was maintained, although some minor splashes were seen both in BF and FL, the por-
phyrin appeared to be homogenously distributed, suggesting efficient encapsulation of the por-
phyrin. 
 
Regarding F4 (Figure 18), well-defined and continuous fibers were observed. Adding porphyrin 
(F5) to the fiber structure suggests that the porphyrin did not compromise the fiber’s integrity. 
Under the fluorescence filter (F5-filter txred), the porphyrin was found to be homogeneously dis-
tributed throughout the fibers, thereby confirming the successful incorporation of the bioactive 
compound. 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
 
 
Figure 19-SEM images of monoaxial fibers at 3500x magnification and 5 kV. F1: Pullulan fibers 
without porphyrin. F2: Pullulan fibers with TPyOHP. F4: EC + PEO fibers without porphyrin. F5: EC 
+ PEO fibers with TPyOHP. 
 
Table 9-Mean fiber diameters of monoaxial formulations. Measurements were obtained from SEM 
images, with N=100 fibers measured per sample. 
Sample 
N 
Mean±SD [nm] 
F1 
100 
191 ± 56 
F2 
100 
354 ± 84 
F4 
100 
329 ± 132 
F5 
100 
273 ± 97 
 
 
Figure 19 presents the SEM topographic morphology and fiber diameter. F1 exhibited elongated 
and fine fibers with a mean diameter of 191 ± 56 nm [Table 9], forming a homogeneous matrix. 
In the case of F2, the incorporation of TPyOHP increased fiber diameter to 353 ± 109 nm 
(p<0.0001) [Table 9], statistically significant according to a two-sample test. In comparison, pre-
vious studies on the monoaxial electrospinning containing only pullulan reported fiber diameters 
of approximately 300 nm [59], which are higher than F1 but similar to that observed in the 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
35 
TPyOHP formulation. There is no certainty that the incorporation of porphyrin led to this in-
crease since the study reported identical diameters only with pullulan. The positive charges of 
TPyOHP might interact with the electrical field, not necessarily affecting the fiber diameter. 
Therefore, there is no guarantee that TPyOHP can directly affect the diameter.   
 
For F4(Figure 19), the monoaxial control with EC + PEO, the fibers exhibited a higher mean di-
ameter of 328 ± 131 nm [Table 9], with good morphology and no apparent structural defects. 
However, when the active compound (TPyOHP) was incorporated (F5), a decrease in fiber di-
ameter was observed, measuring 273 ± 97 nm (p<0.0001) [Table 9], in comparison to F4. As 
reported in previous literature[60], the diameters of electrospun cellulose and polyethylene oxide 
monoaxial fibers have ranged from 1.94 ± 0.92 to 2.35 ± 1.05 μm. These values are considera-
bly higher than those obtained in F4. This can be attributed to the specific formulation used, in-
cluding the electrospinning conditions and PEO and EC at different concentrations. 
 
 
Figure 20-Bright-field and fluorescence microscopy images (40x objective) of coaxial fiber formula-
tions. F7: Coaxial fibers with pullulan shell and EC + PEO core. F8: Same formulation with TPyOHP. 
F10: Coaxial fibers with EC + PEO shell and pullulan core. F11: Same formulation with TPyOHP. 
 
 
As illustrated in Figure 20, the coaxial formulations presented long and uniform fibers. F7 and 
F8 are similar in BF, and in FL, the porphyrin is shown to be homogeneously distributed.  
Similarly, the inversed core-shell formulations for F10 and F11 also revealed long and uniform 
fibers, and under fluorescent field, the distribution of porphyrin is homogenous. 
These findings suggest that the encapsulation was successful for all the TPyOHP samples. 
 
==PAGE:36==
36 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
 
Figure 21- SEM images of coaxial fiber formulations (F7, F8, F10, and F11) at 3500x magnification 
and 5 kV provide detailed insights into the morphology and fiber diameter.  
 
Table 10-Mean fiber diameters of Coaxial formulations. Measurements were obtained from SEM im-
ages, with N=100 fibers measured per sample 
Sample 
N 
Mean±SD [nm] 
F7 
100 
359 ± 140 
F8 
100 
301 ± 89 
F10 
100 
686 ± 184 
F11 
100 
334 ± 108 
 
 
SEM analysis is shown in Figure 21, where all samples showed long and well-structured fibers 
with differences in diameter. In the case of F7, the fibers exhibited a mean diameter of 359 ± 
140 nm, while F9 exhibited a decrease to 301 ± 89 nm (p < 0.001) [Table 10]. The charged 
groups of TPyOHP can affect the electrical field of the electrospinning, and since the core is 
mainly hydrophobic (EC), this could lead to some instability. 
F10 displayed a homogenous morphology through the nanofiber matrix with a fiber’s mean di-
ameter of 686 ± 184 nm, a higher diameter than the previous formulation likely due to the shell 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
37 
compositions that, besides EC, contain PEO, a compound with a high molecular mass. How-
ever, upon the addition of TPyOHP(F11), the mean fiber’s diameter decreased to 334 ± 108 nm 
(p < 0.001) [Table 10], similar to what occurred in F8.  
Overall, the addition of porphyrin did not affect the structure of the fibers, maintaining a well-
structured matrix; however, in both cases, the addition reduced the fiber’s diameter. This might 
be related to the fact that TPyOHP is positively charged, affecting the electrical field of the elec-
trospinning process. 
 
4.3.2 FTIR  
 
FTIR was carried out to identify the presence of encapsulated porphyrins for both monoaxial 
and coaxial formulations. 
 
 
 
Figure 22- FTIR spectra for monoaxial formulation F1, F2, F4 and F5. 
 
Figure 22 illustrates the FTIR spectra for the monoaxial formulations. F1 and F2 are composed 
of pullulan without and with porphyrin, respectively, while F4 and F5 refer to EC+PEO formula-
tion without and with porphyrin, respectively. 
The samples exhibited characteristic peaks associated with the fiber components at 3300cm⁻¹, 
stretching the hydroxyl group (O-H) vibrations in pullulan and PEO. At 2950 and 2800cm⁻¹ C-H, 
stretching vibrations were present in pullulan and EC,1600 cm⁻¹  is associated with O-H bend-
ing in pullulan at 1380 cm⁻¹  CH2 bending also in pullulan, and at 1050 cm⁻¹, the C-O-C region 
regarding EC, PEO, and pullulan.55,56  
Figure 7 shows no substantial differences in the spectra containing porphyrins (F2 and F5) com-
pared to their controls (F1 and F4). Apart from the similarity of the peaks, F5 has a higher inten-
sity at 1350 cm⁻¹ of approximately 0.45 A.U., while its control has 0.35 A.U. 
This suggests that the incorporation of the porphyrins into the polymer matrix was not detected 
due to the beam's FTIR penetration depth, indicating that the structure of the porphyrins was 
preserved. 
==PAGE:38==
38 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
Figure 23-FTIR spectra for formulation F7, F8, F10 and F11. 
 
The FTIR spectra exhibited by the coaxial formulations (F7, F8, F10, and F11) in Figure 23 
demonstrated behavior similar to that observed in the monoaxial formulations, with characteris-
tic peaks indicative of the polymers present in the fiber shell. 
Furthermore, the FTIR spectra exhibited analogous characteristic peaks in the coaxial formula-
tions (F7, F8, F10, and F11), as previously described. The peak at 3300 cm⁻¹ demonstrated the 
hydroxyl group (O-H) of pullulan in the formulations with a pullulan shell, whilst the peaks at 
2950 cm⁻¹ and 2800 cm⁻¹ corresponded to C-H stretching in the formulations with an EC and 
PEO shell. At 1600 cm⁻¹ is associated with O-H bending in pullulan. At 1350 cm⁻¹, C-H bending 
also in pullulan; and at 1050 cm⁻¹, the C-O-C region regarding EC, PEO, and pullulan. 55,56 
From Figure 23, the only differences detected were at the OH region in F8 with a higher absorb-
ance than the control, namely 0.12 for F8 and 0.05 for F7. The absence of significant differ-
ences in the spectra of the samples containing porphyrins (F8 and F11) compared to the con-
trols (F7 and F10) reinforces the hypothesis that the porphyrins are encapsulated inside the fi-
bers. 
 
4.3.3 AFM 
Atomic force microscopy was employed to study the mechanical properties of the nanofibers, 
namely the young modulus and adhesion. 
 
Electrospun Pullulan fibers (F1) with TPyOHP (F2) 
  
 
Figure 24- AFM analysis of F1 and F2 nanofiber matrices with the respective boxplots and surface 
images. 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
39 
 
As illustrated in Figure 24, AFM is applied to F1 and F2 samples to assess the matrices' young 
modulus and adhesion. F1 demonstrated a slightly higher young modulus mean value than F2, 
with a mean of 181.91 ± 145.24 MPa for F1 and 163.22 ± 141.82 MPa for F2. Nevertheless, this 
difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.358), as indicated by the two-sample t-test, sug-
gesting that the addition of the active compound did not affect the elasticity of the nanofiber ma-
trices, maintaining its structure, indicating the effective porphyrin encapsulation without disrupt-
ing the polymer matrix, even when the fiber’s diameter increased.  
Regarding adhesion, a statistically significant decrease (p<0.0001) was observed for F2 com-
pared to F1. The control sample (F1) exhibited a mean adhesion value of 20.12 ± 10.99 nN, 
while F2 showed a reduced mean value of 9.13 ± 5.35 nN. This decrease in the addition of 
TPyOHP may be attributed to the charges of porphyrin, which can affect the ability of the fibers 
to adhere to materials. 
Adding TPyOHP reduces both elastic properties and adhesion. Previous studies reported that 
adding porphyrin to polyurethane-based nanofibers affected the stiffness of the nanofiber, de-
pending on the concentration and interactions with the polymer matrix.58 
 
Electrospun EC+PEO fibers (F4) with TPyOHP (F5) 
 
 
Figure 25-AFM analysis of monoaxial nanofiber matrices of F4, and F5, with the respective box-
plots and surface images. 
 
Figure 25 represents the AFM analysis for F4 and F5, revealing insights into the mechanical 
properties of the nanofiber matrices. The Young's modulus of F4 showed a mean value of 
165.23 ± 141.75 MPa, while F5 exhibited a slightly higher mean of 202.90 ± 196.53 MPa; never-
theless, the two-sample t-test revealed no statistical difference between the two formulations (p 
= 0.1216), suggesting that the addition of TPyOHP does not alter the elasticity of the nanofiber 
matrices. 
Considering adhesion, F4 demonstrated a mean adhesion value of 14.83 ± 13.37 nN, compared 
to 13.28 ± 8.10 nN for F5, where no statistical differences were observed (p = 0.3233). These 
results indicate that the encapsulation of the porphyrin did not significantly affect the fiber's sur-
face, having similar adhesion values. 
The observed results suggest the effectiveness of incorporating the active compound, which 
has decreased in diameter but increased in elasticity, maintaining similar adhesion values. 
Some literature has shown that adding porphyrins, depending on their concentration, can affect 
the mechanical properties.58. 
 
==PAGE:40==
40 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
Electrospun coaxial fibers [shell: Pu, core: EC+PEO] (F7) with TPyOHP (F8) 
 
 
Figure 26- AFM analysis of nanofiber matrices of F7 and F8, with the respective boxplots and sur-
face images. 
 
The AFM analysis in Figure 26 illustrates Young’s modulus and adhesion for samples F7 and 
F8. The mean Young's modulus of F7 was 263.13 ± 224.24 MPa, while F8 exhibited a slightly 
lower mean value of 245.28 ± 206.44 MPa. The two-sample t-test revealed no significant differ-
ence between the samples (p = 0.558), suggesting that the addition of TPyOHP did not affect 
the elasticity of the nanofibers. 
Regarding adhesion, F7 demonstrated a mean adhesion value of 6.98 ± 3.52 nN, whereas F8 
showed a significantly higher mean adhesion value of 10.80 ± 7.79 nN. A t-test confirmed this 
difference is statistically significant (p < 0.0001). The increased adhesion in F8 may be at-
tributed to the porphyrin cationic charges, enabling greater surface adhesion.  
Such findings align with previous studies that show that porphyrins may affect the mechanical 
properties of the nanofiber matrices, namely with polyurethane-based nanofibrous mats with (N-
methyl pyridinium-4-yl) porphyrin tetra tosylate salt. 58 
 
Electrospun coaxial fibers [shell: EC+PEO, core: Pu] (F10) with TPyOHP (F11) 
 
 
Figure 27- AFM analysis of nanofiber matrices of F10 and F11, with the respective boxplots and 
surface images. 
 
Figure 27 illustrates the AFM analysis comparing the mechanical properties of F10 and F11, 
namely the young modulus and adhesion properties. In the young modulus, F10 revealed a 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
41 
mean of 85.17±34.05 MPa, whereas F11 had a higher mean value of 349.38±38 MPa; the two-
sample t-test confirmed that this difference is statistically significant (p<0.0001). Such a differ-
ence suggests that the inclusion of TPyOHP in F11 increased the stiffness of the nanofiber ma-
trix, potentially caused by the cationic porphyrin with pullulan in the core, and that the increased 
volume of fibers can ‘dilute’ the real young modulus value for F10. 
Regarding adhesion, the results were similar to F10, having a mean adhesion of 7.15±4.32 nN, 
and F11 with a mean adhesion of 7.43±0.91 nN. However, this difference was not statistically 
significant, with a p-value of 0.5258. These results indicate that adding porphyrin does not affect 
the surface of the core-shell fiber. 
With this, it was determined that the encapsulation of TPyOHP substantially impacts the fiber 
diameter and the elasticity of the matrix but does not affect the adhesion of the nanofibers. 
These effects reflect that the incorporation of porphyrin ((N-methyl pyridinium-4-yl) porphyrin tet-
ratosylate salt) does impact the mechanical properties of the polymer matrix, as noticed in other 
studies involving porphyrin-based systems.58 
 
4.3.4 Solubility assay 
Tables 11 and 12 illustrate the results of the stability tests conducted on formulations containing 
porphyrins. The images reflect the initial state and the state after exposure to solvents.  
==PAGE:42==
42 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
Table 11-Dissolution of matrix with DMF on the fibers. 
 
As illustrated in Table 11, the experimental findings indicate that the F2 matrix exhibited struc-
tural integrity during solvent testing. The F5, F8, and F11 samples presented dissolution of the 
matrix upon contact with the solvent, being soluble when in contact with DMF.  
The solubility and structural integrity of various nanofiber formulations (F2, F5, F8, and F11) 
were also evaluated in the solvent H2O. Throughout 10 minutes, the behavior of the matrices 
was analyzed to assess the influence of polymer composition and porphyrin encapsulation. 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
43 
Table 12-Dissolution of matrix with DIH2O on the fibers. 
 
 
The F2 (Table 12) matrix exhibited signs of swelling and the formation of bubbles, which ulti-
mately resulted in the dissolution of its structural integrity. This behavior suggests a high solubil-
ity of pullulan in water, which may compromise the stability of this formulation. This phenome-
non is due to the hydrophilic nature of pullulan, which facilitates rapid interaction with water. 
In contrast, the F5 matrix maintained its structural integrity due to the incorporation of EC, a hy-
drophobic polymer.  
F8 exhibited a folding behavior yet demonstrated an incomplete dissolution profile, which can 
be due to its core-shell structure, where the external layer is hydrophilic, but the core is hydro-
phobic; as the sample was not completely dissolved, this may suggest that the solubility is 
mainly governed by shell characteristics. In the case of F11, minimal folding was observed, and 
the integrity of its primary structure was maintained; the hydrophobic properties of the EC-based 
shell are likely the reason for this, providing a protected core from the environment. 
 
==PAGE:44==
44 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
4.3.5 Encapsulation efficiency 
 
Table 13 presents the mean encapsulation efficiency values (EE%) and the respective standard 
deviations for the different formulations. 
 
Table 13- Mean values and standard deviations of the encapsulation efficiency (EE%) of the differ-
ent formulations with TPyOHP. 
Formulation 
EE%±SD 
F2 
75.31±0 
F5 
53.76±14.97 
F8 
47.14±17.25 
F11 
88.78±1.322 
 
As indicated in Table 13, the encapsulation efficiency for TPyOHP formulations, achieving effi-
ciencies above 47%., with the highest efficiency of 88.78±1.32% (F11), followed by F2 with 
75.31±0%, these values can be attributed to the fact that the OH groups from the porphyrin had 
a higher affinity with pullulan, rather than DMSO, and when washed they maintained its interac-
tions with it. 
The mean encapsulation efficiencies (EE%) for the formulations examined were not statistically 
significant. 
Despite the observed variations in EE%, the ANOVA p-value (0.06364) revealed that the differ-
ences were not statistically significant, suggesting that the null hypothesis (all means are equal) 
cannot be rejected. Tukey’s post-hoc test also confirmed this finding since no statistically signifi-
cant differences were observed between individual pairs of formulations. 
While the EE% did not demonstrate significant differences, F11 was the formulation that could 
encapsulate more content of the porphyrin; with this, maintaining a hydrophobic shell and a hy-
drophilic core may be suitable for promoting stable encapsulation. 
As described in the literature, studies have shown that pullulan and EC are suitable polymers to 
use in these systems, stabilizing the system and promoting an efficient encapsulation, namely 
thymol-loaded porphyrin metal for pullulan and different porphyrin photosensitizers for cellulose-
based films[40,48]. 
 
4.4 Reactive oxygen species assay for TMePyP and TPyOHP 
They studied the ability of the produced nanofiber matrices to generate ROS under certain pho-
todynamic conditions.48,61 
The photochemical properties of electrospun nanomaterials F1–F12 were evaluated to deter-
mine the production of 1O2 when exposed to light. 
The generation of 1O2 was determined through an indirect method. The photooxidation of DMA 
in water, a chemical 1O2 trap with maximum absorption at 487nm, reacts with 1O2 in a [4 + 2] cy-
cloaddition process, producing a colorless endoperoxide derivative. Tracking the decay in the 
absorption of DMA at 378nm allows one to follow the formation of the oxygen singlet spectro-
scopically. The results obtained by tracking the DMA decay after the red light irradiation for 15 
and 30 minutes are presented in Figure 28. 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
45 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0,0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
 DMA
 F4
 F6
 F5
 F10
 F12
 F11
 F7
 F9
 F8
Ln(A0/A) (l = 378 nm)
Time (min)
 
Figure 28 - Photo-oxidation of DMA (30 µM) sensitized by electrospun nanomaterial F4-F6, F10-F12, 
and F7-F9 in water under white light irradiation at an irradiance of 20 mW.cm-2 for 15 and 30 min. 
 
The results show that all the porphyrin-based electrospun materials can generate 1O2. It is worth 
noting that after 30 min of irradiation, there was no noticeable decrease in the DMA absorption 
in the control assay, carried out in the absence of electrospun materials nor within electrospun 
materials F4, F7, and F10. This shows that DMA photodecomposition is only promoted when 
the DMA solution is irradiated with porphyrin-based electrospun materials. Additionally, 1O2 gen-
eration assays were not performed for the monoaxial pullulan electrospun nanomaterial series 
(F1-F3) since these materials are water-soluble. Additionally, studies must be performed to as-
sess the capability of these nanomaterials to generate 1O2.  
As can be seen in Figure 28, F4 generated the highest singlet oxygen, followed by F11 and 
F12. The natural logarithm of the ratio of the initial absorbance to the measured absorbance in-
dicates the disintegration of DMA and, therefore, an increase in 1O2.  
The more significant decomposition of DMA in F4 is likely due to the monoaxial formulation in 
which the porphyrin is closer to the fiber's surface, being more prone to irradiation and generat-
ing more oxygen singlets, allied to that the hydrophobic profile of EC also allowed higher stabil-
ity of the fibers. On the other hand, in coaxial formulations, as they have the shell, the radiation 
cannot be sufficient to reach the porphyrins within the core, limiting the diffusion of 1O2. and re-
ducing the efficiency of 1O2 generation. It is worth mentioning that the 1O2 produced is not liber-
ated into the liquid medium, implying that the porphyrin is immobilized in the polysaccharide ma-
trix. Studies show that the immobilization of porphyrin in the polymeric matrices is typical and 
desirable. 62 
 
This qualitative experiment demonstrated that the tested encapsulated porphyrins generate sin-
glet oxygen when exposed to radiation, confirming their photosensitizing properties. As a result, 
they may have valuable applications in the medical and food industries. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
46 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
4.5 Overview TMePyP and TPyOHP nanofiber matrices 
 
Analyzing the data obtained for the morphological analysis, BF and FL illustrated that the en-
capsulated electrospun fibers were successful and demonstrated that the encapsulation of the 
hydrophilic porphyrins did not lead to the creation of beads or fiber rupture upon the electrospin-
ning process.  
SEM also demonstrated a good morphological profile with fine and long fibers, although the 
measured diameters varied within the sample. It was found that the encapsulation of the fibers 
led to a change in the diameters of the fibers due to these changes and that the measured val-
ues had relatively high standard deviations for both porphyrins. With this, it is not possible to di-
rectly correlate the diameter with the AFM or EE% tested. 
 
In general, FTIR demonstrated a few alterations upon the encapsulation of the porphyrins, as 
no shifts in the characteristic peaks were found. There were changes in the absorbance of the 
peaks, especially in the monoaxial formulations with porphyrins, and this might be because the 
porphyrins can be more on the surface of the fiber here and affect the reading of the peaks. In 
contrast, the coaxial formulations were equal for all samples tested. Since FTIR is a surface 
technique, this is more likely to be expected. 
 
Reviewing the results obtained for TPyOHP and TMePyP samples in AFM, although the stand-
ard deviations were high, it was possible to conclude that a pattern exists between the composi-
tion of the formulations and the mechanical properties of AFM. For monoaxial pullulan, both pre-
sented a decrease in young modulus and adhesion. However, in monoaxial EC+PEO, the re-
sults show that the young modulus increased while the adhesion had values similar to those of 
the control sample (F4). Regarding the coaxial formulation with a shell of pullulan and a core of 
EC+PEO, adding both porphyrins revealed decreased elastic modulus and increased adhesion. 
Lastly, the coaxial formulation with EC+PEO as the shell and pullulan as the core revealed an 
increase in the young modulus and a similar adhesion value compared to the control (F10) upon 
adding porphyrins. 
This overview indicates that pullulan creates more fragile matrices with lower Young's modulus 
values, while EC+PEO imparts robustness to the matrices, thus resulting in higher elastic modu-
lus values. This is due to the nature of each polymer, which gives out different mechanical prop-
erties.  
 
With the collected data, there is no guarantee that the encapsulation efficiency was more likely 
when the AFM characteristics were a certain way or if the diameter influenced the encapsula-
tion. It was demonstrated that for both porphyrins, the best formulation to encapsulate them was 
F11 and F12 by the encapsulation efficiency assay. This may be due to the porphyrins having a 
hydrophilic profile, while the core of the formulation is also hydrophilic. Even though PEO was 
present in the shell at a low concentration, the hydrophobic characteristics of the shell were 
mainly attributed to the EC. This way, the shell protected the active compounds in the core, 
achieving high encapsulation values. 
  
Regarding the ROS data, it was possible to conclude that only the encapsulated porphyrin elec-
trospun fibers could generate 1O2, whereas the monoaxial of F4 presented higher results. How-
ever, this is insufficient to conclude that this formulation is the best among the tested ones. 
When evaluating both 1O2 generation and EE%, it is noted that F10 and F11 might be the best 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
47 
formulations to encapsulate porphyrins generating ROS and having the highest efficiency for 
both porphyrins. In contrast, the monoaxial of EC+PEO presented the highest decay of DMA, 
but the EE was lower but consistent between the porphyrins, with 50% of EE% for F6 and 54% 
for F5. 
 
Coaxial formulations might be the ideal formulation to use. However, to promote a better gener-
ation of 1O2, the period of radiation must be extended. The specific application of the electro-
spun fibers must also be taken into consideration; depending on its application, it might be ideal 
to use either coaxial or monoaxial formulations. 
  
 
4.6 Encapsulation of TPFPP (hydrophobic porphyrin) within electrospun 
fibers  
The formulation's potential to encapsulate a hydrophobic porphyrin was also investigated. 
A third porphyrin, TPFPP, was tested to assess the formulations' flexibility. Unlike the other 
tested porphyrins, this porphyrin is hydrophobic. For this, BF, FL, and FTIR analyses were con-
ducted. The following results show the encapsulation of this porphyrin. 
The numbering of the samples studied is as follows: 
I 
Monoaxial pullulan + TPFPP 
II 
Monaxial EC+PEO+TPFPP 
III 
Coaxial shell pullulan; core EC+PEO+TPFPP 
IV 
Coaxial shell EC+PEO; core pullulan + TPFPP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.6.1 Bright-field and fluorescence microscopy 
 
==PAGE:48==
48 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
Figure 289-Bright-field and fluorescence microscopy images (40x objective) of TPFPP formula-
tions. I-monoaxial pullulan +TPFPP; II- monoaxial EC+PEO+TPFPP; III- coaxial pullulan shell, core 
EC+PEO+TPFPP; IV- coaxial EC+PEO shell, core pullulan+ TPFPP.  
 
As demonstrated in Figure 29, the analysis of BF and FL microscopy. The nanofiber matrices in 
the BF microscopic analysis exhibited a uniform fiber distribution devoid of any visible defects, 
such as beads or ruptures. 
A distinctive property of TPFPP is its pronounced fluorescence under the DAPI filter. This fluo-
rescence behavior can be attributed to the pentafluorophenyl substitutions that influence its 
electronic transitions, resulting in a broader emission spectrum. 
Some differences became evident under the microscope's fluorescent field. In formulations 
where pullulan was in direct contact with TPFPP (I and IV), the fluorescence images appeared 
less defined, with light distributed across the inspected areas. In II and III, the fluorescent field 
images are well-defined and appear to have a homogenous porphyrin distribution.  
These findings highlight the formulation's adaptability to different porphyrins. Even when the hy-
drophilic profile does not match the polymer, the fiber's structure remains without significant de-
fects. 
 
 
4.6.2 FTIR 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
49 
 
Figure 30- FTIR spectra for I, II, III, and IV formulations with TPFPP, compared to the respective 
controls F1, F4, F7, and F10. 
 
FTIR analysis was performed to characterize the chemical structure and investigate potential 
interactions between the nanofiber matrices and the encapsulated TPFPP porphyrin, as illus-
trated in Figure 30. The resulting spectra revealed characteristic peaks similar to those ob-
served in formulations with TPyOHP and TMePyP. Vibrations corresponding to O-H groups 
were detected around 3300 cm⁻¹, indicating the presence of hydrophilic structures typical of Pul-
lulan and PEO. In addition, the regions around 2950 cm⁻¹ and 2800 cm⁻¹ exhibited C-H stretch-
ing vibrations, indicative of polymeric matrices. Furthermore, 1600 cm⁻¹ is associated with O-H 
bending in pullulan, and CH2 bending vibrations were identified at 1380 cm⁻¹, indicative of struc-
tural components of the polymers, while C-O stretching vibrations were found at 1050 cm⁻¹, as-
sociated with glycosidic linkages in Pullulan and ester functionalities in EC.55,56 
Regarding the intensity of the peaks in FTIR, the addition of TPFPP showed that in the formula-
tion, the sample I had a lower intensity at 3300cm⁻¹ with 0.10 A.U while the control F1 had 0.20 
A.U, within this sample at 1050cm⁻¹, resulting in a flatter peak. Again, TPFPP had a lower inten-
sity of 0.50 A.U. while F1 had 0.75 A.U. Regarding the monoaxial EC+PEO (II), it showed an 
increase of intensity (0.45 A.U) while the control F4 had 0.35 A.U. This increase in intensity was 
also observed in the coaxial sample III, where at 1050cm⁻¹, the intensity was 0.45 A.U. while 
the control F7 had 0.35 A.U. Nevertheless, these differences in intensity cannot be directly at-
tributed to specific interactions between porphyrin and polymers. 
A comparison of the control samples with the porphyrin-loaded formulations revealed no signifi-
cant alterations in the nanofiber matrices, suggesting that the incorporation of TPFPP did not 
==PAGE:50==
50 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
result in substantial changes to the overall structure. However, a slight increase in the degree of 
absorption at approximately 1050 cm⁻¹ was observed in the spectra of sample II, which may 
suggest the presence of weak interactions between the porphyrin and the polymer matrix. 
 
These findings affirm the efficacy of the encapsulation process, which has been successfully im-
plemented. Thus, the nanofiber matrices' structural integrity is preserved, and compatibility be-
tween the polymer system and the porphyrin is demonstrated. 
 
 
5. Conclusion 
This thesis demonstrated the development and optimization of the polysaccharide’s fiber matri-
ces, which were capable of encapsulating water-soluble porphyrins without affecting the fiber 
structure. The morphological analysis in bright fluorescence microscopy and SEM confirmed 
that the electrospinning process did not lead to fiber rupture or bead formation, validating the 
stability of the optimized formulations. 
 
The findings highlight that coaxial formulations provide a better structure for the encapsulated 
electrospun fibers, protecting the core containing the active compound. In particular, the coaxial 
formulation with EC+PEO features a shell that exhibits higher rigidity and greater encapsulation 
efficiency for both porphyrins (≈92% for TMePyP and ≈88% for TPYOHP), promoting the reten-
tion of the active compound. 
The election of the correct solvents and concentrations of the polymer was also noted as a cru-
cial feature for the formation of electrospun fibers; specifically, lower concentrations of EC lead 
to the formation of beads or ruptured fibers. Moreover, selecting the solvent for EC is crucial 
when it is necessary to create thicker nanofiber matrices, noting that for an extended period of 
electrospinning, the solvent cannot be highly volatile, as this can lead to clogging of the spin-
neret. Additionally, the solvent should not have an evaporation point that is too high since this 
can result in excessively humid fibers or splashes in the collector that can dissolve the matrix. 
 
The solubility assays revealed that most formulations suffer some degradation when in contact 
with DMF or water. The fact that pullulan by itself has maintained its integrity does not mean 
that the fibers will maintain their structure when the volume of solvent is higher and/or if some 
mechanical movements, such as stirring, can affect their structure afterward. The same sce-
nario can occur in the formulations with EC+PEO as they sell in water, especially because this 
formulation contains PEO in its structure, which is water-soluble. 
 
The generation of oxygen singlets was assessed, confirming that the electrospun nanofiber 
loaded with porphyrin generated oxygen singlets upon irradiation for the times tested. However, 
further studies are required to assess their antimicrobial efficacy and cellular impact. 
The addition of TPFPP to the formulation revealed a good fiber structure, with FTIR results simi-
lar to those obtained with TPyOHP and TMePyP. This reflects the formulation's flexibility in en-
capsulating hydrophobic porphyrins.   
 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
51 
Despite achieving the established objectives, challenges and future directions have emerged. 
Namely, the differences detected in the fiber diameters captured by SEM indicate that within the 
same formulations, the fiber diameter can differ largely. This may be due to electrospinning pa-
rameters, such as voltage, humidity, flow rate, or the formulations themselves, which led to un-
stable jet-producing fibers in several diameters.  
 
Regarding the AFM results, although there exists a pattern between formations, there were 
some contradictions, namely samples with the same components in their shell or in the mono-
axial presented opposite values in their adhesion, even though they were in a similar range of 
values, allied to the difference in the volume of fibers study can affect the real reading of the 
mechanical properties of matrices. 
 
Assessing Raman for the remaining samples is also crucial work to do in the future since it was 
shown that some interactions between the porphyrin and the polymer may occur, causing 
starching vibrations in some regions. 
 
Lastly, ROS generation needs to be performed in the pullulan matrices, perhaps with a different 
solvent system that can detect the generation of oxygen singlets. The tested porphyrins were 
shown to produce oxygen singlets; it is now important to assess whether they can act as inhibi-
tors for microbial growth or cell death. Moreover, biological tests also need to be assessed to 
evaluate the antimicrobial activity or phototoxicity.  
 
In conclusion, this thesis offers significant insights into porphyrin-encapsulated electrospun pol-
ysaccharide nanofibers, emphasizing their morphological characteristics, mechanical behavior, 
and potential for photodynamic applications. 
==PAGE:52==
52 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
Reference 
1. Nadaf, A. et al. Recent update on electrospinning and electrospun nanofibers: current trends 
and their applications. RSC Adv. 12, 23808–23828 (2022). 
2. Singh, R. et al. Future of Nanotechnology in Food Industry: Challenges in Processing, Pack-
aging, and Food Safety. Glob. Chall. (2023). 
3. Mamidi, N. & Otero, J. F. F. Sustainable innovations in biomedical materials: A review of eco-
friendly synthesis approaches. Glob. Transl. Med. 3, 4698 (2024). 
4. Morris, V. J. Food Technologies: Nanotechnology and Food Safety. in Encyclopedia of Food 
Safety (ed. Motarjemi, Y.) 208–210 (Academic Press, Waltham, 2014). doi:10.1016/B978-0-
12-378612-8.00277-8. 
5. Catherine, A. Nanoencapsulation-The Future era. 
6. Ayyaril, S. S. et al. Recent progress in micro and nano-encapsulation techniques for environ-
mental applications: A review. Results Eng. 18, 101094 (2023). 
7. Munteanu, B. S. & Vasile, C. Encapsulation of Natural Bioactive Compounds by Electrospin-
ning—Applications in Food Storage and Safety. Polymers 13, 3771 (2021). 
8. Nikmaram, N. et al. Emulsion-based systems for fabrication of electrospun nanofibers: food, 
pharmaceutical and biomedical applications. RSC Adv. 7, 28951–28964 (2017). 
9. Lim, L.-T., Mendes, A. C. & Chronakis, I. S. Chapter Five - Electrospinning and electrospray-
ing technologies for food applications. in Advances in Food and Nutrition Research (eds. 
Lim, L.-T. & Rogers, M.) vol. 88 167–234 (Academic Press, 2019). 
10. 
Mendes, A. C., Stephansen, K. & Chronakis, I. S. Electrospinning of food pro-
teins and polysaccharides. Food Hydrocoll. 68, 53–68 (2017). 
11. 
Wen, P., Zong, M.-H., Linhardt, R. J., Feng, K. & Wu, H. Electrospinning: A novel 
nano-encapsulation approach for bioactive compounds. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 70, 56–
68 (2017). 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
53 
12. 
Lee, K. Y., Jeong, L., Kang, Y. O., Lee, S. J. & Park, W. H. Electrospinning of 
polysaccharides for regenerative medicine. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 61, 1020–1032 (2009). 
13. 
Poshina, D. N., Tyshkunova, I. V., Petrova, V. A. & Skorik, Yu. A. Electrospinning 
of Polysaccharides for Tissue Engineering Applications. Rev. Adv. Chem. 11, 112–133 
(2021). 
14. 
Wu, Z. et al. All-natural and triple-inspired Janus electrospun fibers with inte-
grated functions for high-performance liquid food packaging. Chem. Eng. J. 491, 151794 
(2024). 
15. 
Haider, A., Haider, S. & Kang, I.-K. A comprehensive review summarizing the ef-
fect of electrospinning parameters and potential applications of nanofibers in biomedical and 
biotechnology. Arab. J. Chem. 11, 1165–1188 (2018). 
16. 
Xue, J., Wu, T., Dai, Y. & Xia, Y. Electrospinning and Electrospun Nanofibers: 
Methods, Materials, and Applications. Chem. Rev. 119, 5298–5415 (2019). 
17. 
Priya, S. et al. Polysaccharide-based nanofibers for pharmaceutical and biomedi-
cal applications: A review. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 218, 209–224 (2022). 
18. 
Lin, Z. et al. Electrospun Food Polysaccharides Loaded with Bioactive Com-
pounds: Fabrication, Release, and Applications. Polymers 15, 2318 (2023). 
19. 
Rashidi, M. et al. Electrospun nanofiber based on Ethyl cellulose/Soy protein iso-
lated integrated with bitter orange peel extract for antimicrobial and antioxidant active food 
packaging. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 193, 1313–1323 (2021). 
20. 
Niu, B. et al. Electrospinning of zein-ethyl cellulose hybrid nanofibers with im-
proved water resistance for food preservation. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 142, 592–599 (2020). 
21. 
Pirsa, S. & Hafezi, K. Hydrocolloids: Structure, preparation method, and applica-
tion in food industry. Food Chem. 399, 133967 (2023). 
22. 
Nasrollahzadeh, M., Sajjadi, M., Sajadi, S. M. & Issaabadi, Z. Chapter 5 - Green 
Nanotechnology. in Interface Science and Technology (eds. Nasrollahzadeh, M., Sajadi, S. 
M., Sajjadi, M., Issaabadi, Z. & Atarod, M.) vol. 28 145–198 (Elsevier, 2019). 
==PAGE:54==
54 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
23. 
Jiang, T., Singh, B., Choi, Y.-J., Akaike, T. & Cho, C.-S. 6 - Liver tissue engineer-
ing using functional marine biomaterials. in Functional Marine Biomaterials (ed. Kim, S.-K.) 
91–106 (Woodhead Publishing, 2015). doi:10.1016/B978-1-78242-086-6.00006-6. 
24. 
Lochhead, R. Y. Chapter 13 - The Use of Polymers in Cosmetic Products. in 
Cosmetic Science and Technology (eds. Sakamoto, K., Lochhead, R. Y., Maibach, H. I. & 
Yamashita, Y.) 171–221 (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2017). doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-802005-
0.00013-6. 
25. 
Silva, T. L. da, Araujo, F. P. de, Silva, E. C. da, Furtini, M. B. & Osajima, J. A. 
Degradation of Poly(Ethylene Oxide) Films Using Crystal Violet. Mater. Res. 20, 869–872 
(2018). 
26. 
Arya, A. & Sharma, A. L. Insights into the use of polyethylene oxide in energy 
storage/conversion devices: a critical review. J. Phys. Appl. Phys. 50, 443002 (2017). 
27. 
Kelson, A. B., Carnevali, M. & Truong-Le, V. Gallium-based anti-infectives: tar-
geting microbial iron-uptake mechanisms. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 13, 707–716 (2013). 
28. 
Ptaszek, Marcin. Rational Design of Fluorophores for In Vivo Applications. in Pro-
gress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science vol. 113 59–108 (Elsevier, 2013). 
29. 
Muehler, D., Brandl, E., Hiller, K.-A., Cieplik, F. & Maisch, T. Membrane damage 
as mechanism of photodynamic inactivation using Methylene blue and TMPyP in Escherichia 
coli and Staphylococcus aureus. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 21, 209–220 (2022). 
30. 
Sułek, A., Pucelik, B., Kobielusz, M., Barzowska, A. & Dąbrowski, J. M. Photody-
namic Inactivation of Bacteria with Porphyrin Derivatives: Effect of Charge, Lipophilicity, ROS 
Generation, and Cellular Uptake on Their Biological Activity In Vitro. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 8716 
(2020). 
31. 
Stojiljkovic, I., Evavold, B. D. & Kumar, V. Antimicrobial properties of porphyrins. 
Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs 10, 309–320 (2001). 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
55 
32. 
Monteiro, C. J. P., Neves, M. G. P. M. S., Nativi, C., Almeida, A. & Faustino, M. 
A. F. Porphyrin Photosensitizers Grafted in Cellulose Supports: A Review. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24, 
3475 (2023). 
33. 
PubChem. Tetraphenylporphyrin. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/com-
pound/86280046. 
34. 
Lhotáková, Y. et al. Virucidal Nanofiber Textiles Based on Photosensitized Pro-
duction of Singlet Oxygen. PLOS ONE 7, e49226 (2012). 
35. 
Conrado, P. C. V. et al. A systematic review of photodynamic therapy as an anti-
viral treatment: Potential guidance for dealing with SARS-CoV-2. Photodiagnosis Photodyn. 
Ther. 34, 102221 (2021). 
36. 
Aljabri, M. D. et al. Supramolecular nanomaterials with photocatalytic activity ob-
tained via self-assembly of a fluorinated porphyrin derivative. Fuel 254, 115639 (2019). 
37. 
Zhu, Z.-H. et al. Nanoscale Metal-Organic Framework Leveraging Water, Oxy-
gen, and Hydron Peroxide to Generate Reactive Oxygen Species for Cancer Therapy. Adv. 
Funct. Mater. n/a, 2419548. 
38. 
Borzęcka, W. et al. Encapsulation of glycosylated porphyrins in silica nanoparti-
cles to enhance the efficacy of cancer photodynamic therapy. Mater. Adv. 2, 1613–1620 
(2021). 
39. 
Yan, H. et al. Gelatin‒carboxymethyl cellulose film incorporated porphyrin metal–
organic frameworks with photodynamic/photothermal synergistic antibacterial activities for 
pork packaging application. J. Food Eng. 353, 111556 (2023). 
40. 
Min, T. et al. Electrospun pullulan/PVA nanofibers integrated with thymol-loaded 
porphyrin metal−organic framework for antibacterial food packaging. Carbohydr. Polym. 270, 
118391 (2021). 
41. 
Bai, H., Yang, L., Wu, L., Xiao, D. & Dong, A. Enhanced food preservation plat-
form integrating photodynamic and chemical antibacterial strategies via geraniol-loaded por-
phyrin-based MOFs for cherry tomato storage. Chem. Eng. J. 498, 155503 (2024). 
==PAGE:56==
56 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
42. 
Shi, L. et al. Encapsulation of Hydrophobic Porphyrins into Biocompatible Nano-
particles: An Easy Way to Benefit of Their Two-Photon Phototherapeutic Effect without Hy-
drophilic Functionalization. Cancers 14, 2358 (2022). 
43. 
González López, E. J. et al. Light-Activated Antibacterial Ethylcellulose Electro-
spun Nanofibrous Mats Containing Fluorinated Zn(II) Porphyrin. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 6, 
7691–7704 (2024). 
44. 
Amani, M. et al. pH-sensitive bilayer electrospun nanofibers based on ethyl cellu-
lose and Eudragit S-100 as a dual delivery system for treatment of the burn wounds; prepa-
ration, characterizations, and in-vitro/in-vivo assessment. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 249, 126705 
(2023). 
45. 
Quadrado, R. F. N. et al. Design of a light-responsive porphyrin/polysaccharide 
hybrid film for smart release of hydrocortisone. Colloids Surf. Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 674, 
131877 (2023). 
46. 
Deng, Z.-A. et al. Microfluidic-blow-spinning of carvacrol-loaded porphyrin 
metal − organic framework nanofiber films with synergistic antibacterial capabilities for food 
packaging. Food Chem. 460, 140707 (2024). 
47. 
Zhao, J. et al. Recent advances in coaxial electrospun nanofibers for wound 
healing. Mater. Today Bio 29, 101309 (2024). 
48. 
Monteiro, C. J. P., Neves, M. G. P. M. S., Nativi, C., Almeida, A. & Faustino, M. 
A. F. Porphyrin Photosensitizers Grafted in Cellulose Supports: A Review. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24, 
3475 (2023). 
49. 
Fallahasghari, E. Z., Stubbe, P. R., Chronakis, I. S. & Mendes, A. C. Ethyl Cellu-
lose-Core, OSA Starch-Shell Electrosprayed Microcapsules Enhance the Oxidative Stability 
of Loaded Fish Oil. Nanomaterials 14, 510 (2024). 
50. 
Fallahasghari, E. Z., Filtenborg, K. G., Mendes, A. C. & Chronakis, I. S. Antioxi-
dant efficacy of amino acids on vitamin A palmitate encapsulated in OSA-starch elec-
trosprayed core-shell microcapsules. Food Biosci. 61, 104673 (2024). 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
57 
51. 
Ali, K., Jiang, B., Ashraf, W., Bin Tahir, A. & Ul Haq, F. Improving the functional 
characteristics of thymol-loaded pullulan and whey protein isolate-based electrospun nano-
fiber. Food Biosci. 57, 103620 (2024). 
52. 
Celebioglu, A. & Uyar, T. Electrohydrodynamic encapsulation of eugenol-cy-
clodextrin complexes in pullulan nanofibers. Food Hydrocoll. 111, 106264 (2021). 
53. 
Chaves, I. et al. Can Porphyrin–Triphenylphosphonium Conjugates Enhance the 
Photosensitizer Performance Toward Bacterial Strains? ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 7, 5541–5552 
(2024). 
54. 
Zaitoon, A. & Lim, L.-T. Effect of poly(ethylene oxide) on the electrospinning be-
havior and characteristics of ethyl cellulose composite fibers. Materialia 10, 100649 (2020). 
55. 
Singh, R., Saini, G. & Kennedy, J. Pullulan production in stirred tank reactor by a 
colour-variant strain of Aureobasidium pullulans FB-1. Carbohydr. Polym. Technol. Appl. 2, 
100086 (2021). 
56. 
Huang, W. Acetate – Poly(ethylene oxide) Nonwovens for the Encapsulation and. 
57. 
Fallahasghari, E. Z., Stubbe, P. R., Chronakis, I. S. & Mendes, A. C. Ethyl Cellu-
lose-Core, OSA Starch-Shell Electrosprayed Microcapsules Enhance the Oxidative Stability 
of Loaded Fish Oil. Nanomaterials 14, 510 (2024). 
58. 
Saghebasl, S. et al. Polyurethane-based nanofibrous mat containing porphyrin 
with photosensitivity and bactericidal properties can promote cutaneous tissue healing in 
rats. J. Nanobiotechnology 21, 313 (2023). 
59. 
Li, R. et al. Electrospinning Pullulan Fibers from Salt Solutions. Polymers 9, 32 
(2017). 
60. 
Qosim, N., Majd, H., Ahmed, J., Williams, G. & Edirisinghe, M. Making fibers 
from cellulose derivatives by pressurized gyration and electrospinning. Cellulose 31, 2815–
2832 (2024). 
61. 
Di Mascio, P. et al. Singlet Molecular Oxygen Reactions with Nucleic Acids, Li-
pids, and Proteins. Chem. Rev. 119, 2043–2086 (2019). 
==PAGE:58==
58 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
62. 
Castro, K. A. D. F. et al. New Materials Based on Cationic Porphyrins Conju-
gated to Chitosan or Titanium Dioxide: Synthesis, Characterization and Antimicrobial Effi-
cacy. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 2522 (2019). 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
59 
Appendix A 
[Heading] 
A.1. SEM at 8500x magnification 
 
 
A.2. FTIR compiled spectra  
Monoaxial pullulan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
60 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
Monoaxial ethylcellulose + peo 
 
 
Coaxial shell pullulan, core ethylcellulose + peo 
 
 
Coaxial shell ethylcellulose + peo core pullulan 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
61 
A.3. Calibration curves for EE calculations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.4. Two sample t-test reports for diameter measures 
 
TPyOHP samples 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
62 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
TMePyP samples 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
63 
A.5. AFM statistics 
TPyOHP samples 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
64 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
 
 
 
TMePyP samples 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
66 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
A.6. nova reports from EE 
TPyOHP samples 
 
 
TMePyP samples 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
Encapsulation of Bioactive Compounds Using Electrospun Polysaccharide Nanofibers 
67 
Acknowledgements  
Firstly, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my advisors, Ana and Ioannis, for allowing 
me to join the lab and this project, as well as for their guidance, support, and patience through-
out this endeavor. I am truly grateful for being accepted and could not be happier or more ful-
filled with the subjects I have learned these past months.  
 
I want to thank Katrine for her assistance in the laboratory and Dr. Nuno Moura for clarifying my 
doubts. I am also grateful to my lab colleagues for providing such a great work environment, 
which made this journey even more enjoyable.  
 
Finally, I extend my heartfelt thanks to Jorge and my family and friends for their emotional sup-
port during the more stressful times. 
 Thank you all for believing in me. 
 
 
 
