==PAGE:1==
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
Proof of Concept
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
Proof of Concept
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Valgeir Einarsson, DTU Compute
Supervisor
Joe Naoum-Sawaya, DTU Management
Project period
September 2, 2024 - February 2, 2025
ECTS
30
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Operations and Sup-
ply Chain Management, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Sci-
ence in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
The code for the proof of concept is available on GitHub and in the accompanying zip-
folder.
Valgeir Einarsson - s222987
Signature
Date
ii
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Solving optimization problems has immerse value in the ever-growing world of businesses
optimizing their operations. Commonly, problems are solved by paying for commercial
solvers on centralized computing resources using parallel processes. We propose an
alternative way to obtain solutions to optimization problems; a distributed optimization
platform which runs on a decentralized network of distributed computers that are being
wasted without any benefit. It is a marketplace where owners of problems instances pay
for the service while owners of computing resources get paid for computational effort. In-
spired by blockchain applications solving proof of work, there is potential to solve useful
real world optimization problems using simple algorithms.
In this thesis project, the aim is to validate the distributed optimization platform to make
case for future developments. A proof of concept was designed and implemented that
lays the foundation for the platform by defining the underlying framework and protocols.
Experiments were conducted on the implementation, which uses simple algorithms to ran-
domly generate solutions to real world binary problem instances.
The proof of concept shows promising results which makes case for future work. Us-
ing random generation of solutions, feasible solutions are found to real world problem
instances. The solution quality improves with increasing computational power on the plat-
form. However, lack of computing power prevented further conclusions for validation of
the platform.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to my supervisor, Joe. He provided me with the interesting topic of the
distributed optimization platform. I am grateful for his valuable input and his interest in my
project. After our meetings I always came out with a clearer vision of the platform based
on his input.
I would also like to thank the DTU Computing Center (DCC) for giving me private access
to a machine on their cluster to conduct the experiments.
iv
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The platform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Scope of project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Mathematical optimization solution methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Commercial solvers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Complex problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Distributed optimization platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Proof of useful work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Theoretical work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Not implemented yet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Proof of concept - Architecture
11
3.1
Platform design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Distributed and decentralized systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Proposed platform architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.1.3
Mechanisms for distributed optimization platform . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.1
Server node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.2
Agent node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2.3
Client
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Communication protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Proof of concept - Implementation
23
4.1
Implemented platform architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Server node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2.1
API endpoints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2.2
Data management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Agent node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3.1
Solution methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Proof of concept - Experiments
33
5.1
Experimental focus and setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.1.1
Platform general solving capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.1.2
Platform convergence analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Platform configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.3
Platform execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Results
41
6.1
Platform general solving capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.1.1
Random sampling algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
v
==PAGE:8==
6.1.2
Random flip heuristic algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Platform convergence analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Future Work
51
7.1
Computational resources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.1.1
Increased computational power for experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.1.2
Owners of wasted computational resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.2
Problem types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.3
Solution methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.4
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.4.1
Server node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.4.2
Client
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.4.3
Reward mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.4.4
Consensus mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.4.5
Trust mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.4.6
Identification mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
8
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
59
A Appendix
61
A.1 Configuring and running platform for experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
vi
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The rise of analytics and the increasing trend for organizations to collect data are some of
the reasons for the steadily growing importance of mathematical optimization. By solving
optimization problems, organizations can enhance their operations, leading to improved
decision making and efficiency. Many industries in areas such as manufacturing, trans-
portation, construction, and energy are using optimization techniques to their advantage
to stay ahead of their competitors [1].
Despite the very rapid development of optimization solvers, the common architecture is
to have a solver that runs on a single computer or a centralized computing resource using
parallel processes. To solve problem instances, it is common to pay for a commercial
solver license and cloud computing resources. These commercial solvers have their limi-
tations and are not able to solve all problems, especially those of large scale where other
methods are often preferred.
We propose an alternative approach of solving mathematical optimization problems us-
ing wasted computing resources. The energy consumption and e-waste of blockchain
applications such as Bitcoin is well known, it has been reported to be of a medium sized
country although it may be an overestimation [2] [3] [4]. These computing resources could
be used for an alternative purpose, to solve optimization problems on an open decentral-
ized platform. Blockchain applications most commonly use an energy intensive proof of
work consensus to validate transactions by solving cryptographic hash functions in a brute
force manner. We seek inspiration from this, we propose to use simple algorithms paired
with huge amounts of distributed computing resources to solve optimization problems.
1.1
The platform
The proposed decentralized platform, which is a distributed optimization solver, is visioned
to be a marketplace for individuals like Bitcoin miners with available computing resources
to participate in solving useful optimization problems for financial gains. The platform is
not meant to be used as the typical commercial solver where users buy a license and use
computing resources to solve problem instances. Rather, it aims to find any solution to a
problem instance, with the time and resources allocated to each instance on the platform
being purely decided by economical incentives such as demand and supply.
The platform is decentralized, and it should be without a central authority that manages
the platform. Instead, it relies on a distributed network of nodes where participants col-
laboratively maintain the platform’s operations and integrity given a well defined set of
protocols. We envision the platform having two types of participants, those who need
solutions to optimization problems, clients, and those who have computing resources to
aid in the solution process of optimization problems, computing worker nodes. Problems
are submitted to the platform by clients who are willing to pay for solutions to their prob-
lems, which gives financial incentives to workers to participate on the platform. Workers
are competing to find solutions to the problems, and they need to publish their solutions
on the platform in order to gain rewards. This sharing of solutions could offer increased
potential in solution quality, when workers can start from other workers’ solutions. The
platform is open and no rules are enforced upon workers who have joined the platform, but
the protocols should be designed in a way that gives financial incentives to follow them.
Workers use their computing resources to aid in the solution process, typically either by
solving problems or by validating them, while additional roles may emerge as the platform
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
1
==PAGE:10==
matures.
Clients submit problem instances to the platform, specifying a reward and possibly setting
a time limit for receiving a solution. A client can receive a solution in one of two ways.
Either when allocated reward is depleted or when the time limit has been reached. On
completion, and if pre-defined conditions have been met, the client would reward workers
for their computational effort.
On the platform different workers could serve different purposes, but the main role of
worker nodes is to solve optimization problems. Workers can use whichever solution
method they want to maximize their financial gains. The initial inspiration for this platform
came from Bitcoin where miners solve complex hash functions by using brute force meth-
ods to guess solutions. This makes problems of combinatorial nature with a finite set of
solutions well suited for such brute force methods. However, we emphasize that there
are no theoretical limitations for the type of optimization problems, whether discrete or
continuous, or of the solution methods used on the platform.
The decentralized platform forms the underlying framework and protocols for a functional
distributed optimization solver made out of a network of computer worker nodes solving
problems submitted by clients. It does not concern the implementation details of work-
ers or the specific solution methods used by them. Rather, it defines how clients submit
problems and how workers can allocate their computational resources to ensure an op-
erational and fair platform.
The platform needs to be attractive for workers to join, this is the role of a reward mech-
anism. This mechanism makes sure participants get paid for their work on the platform,
whether it is solving problems, verifying solutions, or doing other useful work. There needs
to be agreement on the platform on which solutions should get rewarded, this is the role
of a consensus mechanism. Finally, a trust mechanism is needed to establish trust be-
tween participants, prevent malicious behavior, and ensure data integrity and consistency
across the platform.
1.2
Related work
To the best of our knowledge, there does not exist a platform as the one we are proposing.
Although distributed solvers do exist, they are usually run on a single machine using
parallel processes or on a closed network of computers that solve the same problem
concurrently, such as Gurobi’s distributed solver [5].
The concept of proof of useful work, used on decentralized blockchain applications such
as Bitcoin’s, has been theorized to function as a distributed solver, similar to what we have
been describing. In this approach miners solve useful optimization problem distributively
to validate transactions on a blockchain. However, this has not been implemented in
practice [6] [7] [8].
1.3
Scope of project
In this project, we will develop and implement a proof of concept that validates the pro-
posed solution of solving optimization problems distributively using simple algorithms and
makes the case for future developments. Specifically in our case, we want to investigate
if there is any value in randomly generating solutions. Through the development, imple-
mentation, and testing of this proof of concept, we seek to gain valuable insights that will
lay the foundation for future work.
An architecture, suitable for a decentralized open platform, will be proposed for the proof
of concept and an implementation based on a simplified version of the architecture, where
workers are programmed to only find solutions to binary optimization problems, will be ex-
perimented on. Finally, the results will be analyzed to make case for future work.
2
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:11==
In Chapter 2, we go over commonly used methods to solve mathematical optimization
problems, and how different algorithms can be used in the setting of a distributed opti-
mization platform. We also introduce the concept of proof of useful work, which is an
alternative approach of using wasted computing resources used by blockchain applica-
tions, and how it would essentially be a distributed optimization solver similar to what we
are proposing.
In Chapter 3, a proposed architecture for the distributed optimization platform is presented
as a proof of concept. It should provide a high level outline of the participants, protocols,
and other key components required on a decentralized platform that aims to solve op-
timization problems. Chapter 4 will present a simplified implementation of the platform,
based on the previously described architecture, in which distributed nodes randomly gen-
erate solutions to binary problems.
In Chapter 5, we will present the experiments conducted to validate the platform’s ability
to solve optimization problems and gain insights into its behavior. This chapter will also
detail the setup of the implemented platform for the experiments. In Chapter 6, we present
and analyze the results from these experiments.
Chapter 7, details which future work is needed to for a future realization of the distributed
optimization platform, both based on findings from the development of the platform and
from the experiments.
Finally, Chapter 8 concludes the work done in this thesis project.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature review
In this chapter, we go over the relevant field of mathematical optimization solvers, the
commonly used to solve complex problems, and how different methods can be utilized
on the proposed distributed optimization platform. We introduce the theoretical concept
of proof of useful work, which could enable decentralized blockchain applications to solve
useful problems such as optimization problems in a distributed manner.
2.1
Mathematical optimization solution methods
A common way to solve complex real world mathematical optimization problems, such as
those that often arise in the fields of production, energy, and transport, is to use powerful
computing resources and a commercial optimization solver. Often, people pay for cloud
computing resources and a commercial solver license to obtain solutions to the problem
at hand.
Depending on the type and complexity of mathematical optimization problems, some
methods may be more suitable than others. For a wide range of problems, commercial
solvers using MIP methods are extremely useful and these solvers have been improv-
ing constantly throughout the years to solve increasingly difficult problems. However, for
some even more complex problems, for example large scale problems, other methods
may be more suitable. These methods can require a special problem structure and, in
some cases, a specially designed algorithm tailored to the problem at hand for effective
solving. For example, decomposition methods have been used successfully to solve large
scale problems. Another increasingly popular method is to use metaheuristics to gener-
ate good approximative solutions in limited amount of time for complex problems.
In this section, we will give a brief overview of commonly used commercial solver in the
field of mathematical optimization, their limitations, and alternatives suited for difficult and
large scale problems. Finally, we will speculate how different solution methods can work
on distributed optimization platform such as the one we are proposing.
2.1.1
Commercial solvers
There have been decades of progress in solving complex decision support problems and
countless of advancements since the pioneering work of George Dantzig in the late 1940s.
From solving small linear programming (LP) problems using the simplex algorithm to the
current state of the art commercial solvers that use highly developed methods such as a
parallel implementation of a branch-and-cut algorithm [9] [10].
Improvements are constantly being made to solve optimization problems, both on the
algorithm side and hardware side. This has resulted in a significant speed up of mathe-
matical programming solvers, and they are able to solve problems that were out of reach
the years before [11]. With advancement in computing hardware, many solution methods
have been adapted to utilize parallel computations, while other methods are less suitable
to parallelize. For example, barrier algorithms have been effectively parallelized, while
there has been limited success in parallelizing simplex algorithms [9]. Still, the real solv-
ing power of mathematical programming methods does not come from parallelism but
from the combinatorial nature of MIP which effectively exploits the large solution space.
Parallelism can only moderately accelerate the computations [12].
Commercial solver companies have adapted the numerous advancements into a compact
software solution that is able to solve a wide range of optimization problems. Among the
leading solvers in the industry are Gurobi, CPLEX, Xpress, and Mosek. The solvers offer
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
5
==PAGE:14==
a similar toolset suitable for various problem types, including linear, linear quadratic, and
mixed-integer. Today’s commercial MIP solvers are equipped with an arsenal of features,
these include, among others, presolve, branch-and-bound, cutting planes and heuristics
[10] [12]. These methods have been highly optimized, and a common architecture is to
run these software solutions on a single computer or a centralized computing resource
using parallel processes. For example, Gurobi offers parallel solvers for single machines
and distributed solvers that utilize multiple computing resources [5].
2.1.2
Complex problems
Despite the diverse range of problems commercial solvers can solve, there are problems
that are too difficult to solve with the methods typically used by those solvers. For exam-
ple, in the case of large scale MIP problems, the branch and bound search tree can grow
exponentially leading to memory constraints, which makes current commercial solvers un-
suitable for those types of problem. Gurobi offers a distributed MIP solver that can mitigate
this memory issue by distributing the search tree in a branch and bound algorithm across
multiple machines. However, this generally only scales up to 8-16 machines, meaning
there is limited gain to be found using this solution if the problem would take excessively
long time to solve regardless [5]. For distributed systems, special algorithms are often
used. These algorithms can be problem specific and take advantage of the underlying
problem structure, which is not viable to be used with out of the box commercial solvers,
which are usually targeted at more typical problem structures [11].
Still, there exist commercial solutions that are also well suited for large scale problems.
One example of such a solver is Mosek, which offers its interior point solver for large scale
linear programs that stems from the original research of its founders [13].
However, in general, commercial solvers are not a one in all kind of solution for all prob-
lems, especially for those of large scale. Thus, for complex problems that commercial
solvers cannot effectively handle, other methods are often preferred. For example, de-
composition methods and metaheuristics.
Decomposition methods
Decomposition methods are well suited for solving large scale problems that adhere to
a structure that makes it possible to split the problem into subproblems, which can be
solved separately on different machines in parallel [14].
Such problem structures are common in large scale optimization problems and they ap-
pear widely, such as in network optimization problems and optimal control problems. This
has made decomposition methods, such as Benders decomposition and the alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM), a favorable option when solving large scale prob-
lems[15].
Metaheuristics
Metaheuristics are an increasingly popular solution method when solving both complex
and large scale optimization problems, especially those of combinatorial nature.
Metaheuristics are high level strategies that guide the search process through the solution
space in a robust and efficient manner, often giving good solutions for complex solution
spaces. These methods are especially useful when good approximative solutions are de-
sired in a limited amount of time. They can offer a good trade-off between solution quality
and computing time for many problems, especially when exact solvers cannot solve the
problems to optimality [16] [17].
Metaheuristics have been successfully applied to continuous, discrete, and combinato-
rial problems ranging from several thousand dimensions to millions of decision variables.
For example, population based methods such as genetic algorithms have been reported
to give good solutions to a broad range of problems [18]. While metaheuristics are most
effectively applied when adapted to the specific problem at hand, that is developing a prob-
6
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:15==
lem specific heuristic algorithm using a particular metaheuristics framework, there are also
benefits to use robust general purpose metaheuristic frameworks to achieve good solution
quality. But to achieve world class performance metaheuristics have to be customized to
use problem specific design [17].
2.1.3
Distributed optimization platform
The proposed way of solving optimization problems, on a decentralized platform where
autonomous computing nodes are solving problems in a competitive but also collaborative
manner by sharing solutions, aims to be an alternative for owners of optimization prob-
lems to get solutions to their problems, instead of, for example, using commercial solvers
and cloud computing resources.
The initial idea with the proof of concept implemented for this thesis project, was to use
simple solution methods to solve optimization problems in a distributed way using au-
tonomous worker nodes. The most rudimental version of this, in the case of combinatorial
optimization problems, would be to simply guess random solutions and use a large net-
work of agents to find solutions, similarly as miners do on Bitcoin’s platform when solving
cryptographic hash functions. Which is what we will do in this project. With autonomous
agents, it is their choice which strategy or method they use to solve problems to maximize
their profits. On a mature platform this could result in agents using different methods to
solve these problems, both general purpose methods or specifically implemented for the
problem at hand.
The proposed optimization platform would be a market driven solution, agents are likely to
use different algorithms to maximize their profits. This can make foundation for a robust
and versatile optimization platform.
The benefits of combining different optimization methods is not a heavily investigated topic
after our brief review of this topic. However, for a long time, exact methods and heuris-
tics have been used together, for example before using a branch and bound algorithm,
a heuristic algorithm is typically run on the problem before to reduce the solution space,
this is referred to as a warm start. Recently, more research has been done on the effect
of combining different optimization methods together to use their individual strengths to
make up for a more robust method, often called hybrid methods. In the case of using exact
mathematical programming methods and metaheuristics, it is often called matheuristics
[19], and when using different metaheuristics together, it is often called hybrid metaheuris-
tics [20]. Although most commonly these hybrid algorithms are integrated together, that is
components from different methods are mixed together to form a single method, instead
of using them together sequentially or in parallel, as we are hinting at here. Regardless
of the currently limited research on the topic of running different methods in parallel to
achieve better solution convergence, such an approach would produce at least as good
solutions as the best method in the group of different methods applied. And we probably
would see even faster convergence if workers collaborated by sharing solutions with each
other, although we have no proof for this.
On the platform, autonomous workers can work together, for example, as in Bitcoin mining
pools where miners divide the work of solving the hash function between them to be more
competitive as a team [21]. For the simple scenario of using random enumerations, work-
ers could divide the set of solutions amongts each other to accelerate the computations.
Another option would be to use decomposition methods to divide the workload between
workers in the same mining pool. Yet another option would be to use different methods,
either exact methods or metaheuristics, to collaboratively share information gained form
different algorithms to aid in the solution process [22].
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Proof of useful work
Several cryptocurrencies, most famously, Bitcoin, use proof of work to secure transactions
recorded on a blockchain [23]. The proof of work protocol is energy intensive and it incen-
tivizes miners to spend more computational resources to stay ahead of its competitors,
which can create a cycle of useless energy spending [6]. Bitcoin’s energy consumption
has been reported to be that of a medium sized country [2], although some believe the
energy consumption of Bitcoin and other blockchain applications to be overestimated [4].
Proof of useful work has been proposed as an alternative consensus mechanism to proof
of work. The idea is to spend computational effort to solve useful problems, such as opti-
mization problems, instead of solving hash functions that bring no additional value except
to secure the blockchain. If such a protocol were to be successfully implemented, there
would be no wasted energy since it would be put to good use.
One realization of a distributed optimization solver would be to replace proof of work with
proof of useful work, effectively making platforms such as Bitcoin a distributed optimiza-
tion solver. This is a different approach from our proposed platform, but it may be one
possible future realization of a distributed optimization solver.
In this section we will introduce how the computational power used by cryptocurrencies
such as Bitcoin can be used differently to solve optimization problems. We will briefly
go over the theoretical work made towards proof of useful work, and the challenges pre-
sented if replacing proof of work with proof of useful work on a decentralized platform such
as Bitcoin’s.
2.2.1
Theoretical work
Several protocols have been theorized that use proof of useful work as a consensus mech-
anism in a blockchain, instead of other protocols such as proof of work or proof of stake
[6][7][8]. All of these protocols can be described as a decentralized optimization solver.
Optimization problems are solved concurrently by miners which are a part of a decentral-
ized network of miners competing against each other.
To replace proof of useful work with proof of work on platforms such as Bitcoin, several
properties of proof of work need to be considered [24]:
• Can not pre-solve the problem: It should not be possible to do any computations
on the problem in advance by incorporating elements that make it possible to do
so. This ensures the work performed remains tied to the current block and prevents
pre-solving of problems.
• Adjustable problem hardness: The problem difficulty should be adjustable to en-
sure consistent block intervals, which is approximately 10 minutes in the case of
Bitcoin.
• Fast verification: The properties of the problem should make it easy to verify the
solutions to it. This ensures efficient consensus amongst miners.
• Problem is parallelizable: To effectively utilize the distributed computing power in
a network of miners, the problem should be parallelizable for the collective work of
the miners to be considered useful. Miners can combine their efforts in mining pools
to solve problems in parallel.
Mathematical optimization problems can be argued to satisfy these properties, although
integrating them effectively in a proof of useful work protocol is non trivial. Many opti-
mization problems are NP-hard, those should be diverse enough to allow for adjustable
difficulty, and they are also easy to verify. Combinatorial optimization problems are inher-
ently parallelizable, for example by using brute force methods of enumerating all possible
8
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:17==
solutions to such problems, miners can explore a subset of solutions in parallel.
Other challenges related to a protocol that would replace hash functions with optimization
problems include determining which problem from the pool should be selected for miners
to solve and establishing how miners can reach consensus on the best solution without
relying on centralized entities or trusted third parties. Additionally, the public verifiability
of problem instances and their solutions can cause issues for owners of the optimization
problems in the case of privacy issues.
The theorized proof of useful work protocols presented in [6][7][8] try to address the prop-
erties and challenges presented above. Without going into too much detail, all these
protocols involve miners solving optimization problems competitively, although collabora-
tion is also possible, for example in [6], where miners build on previous found solutions.
The protocols also address the problem of selecting appropriate instances based on their
difficulty. Lastly, miners are able to reach consensus quickly without central control. This
establishes that there is potential for proof of work to be replaced by proof of useful work,
with the useful work being solving optimization problems.
2.2.2
Not implemented yet
As far as we have investigated, there does not exist a platform in which proof of use-
ful work has been successfully implemented as the consensus mechanism, in particular
where the useful work is solving mathematical optimization problems. Although there ex-
ist cryptocurrencies such as Primecoin [25] that use proof of useful work, it is debatable
how useful it is to computing sequences of Cunningham Chains as is the case for Prime-
coin [6]. So far, only theoretical work has been made on replacing proof of work with
proof of useful work that satisfies both the security and usefulness requirements of such
a protocol.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:19==
3
Proof of concept - Architecture
Before implementing the proof of concept which aims to validate if the proposed idea of
the distributed optimization platform is feasible, we decided on an architecture that our
implementation would be based on, and future implementations could benefit from. The
architecture should follow distributed and decentralized principles, and it should provide
insight into the protocols and mechanisms that may be needed for such a system to func-
tion.
The presented architecture is a high level outline of the platform, showing the roles of par-
ticipants, necessary protocols, and key components. It does not include implementation
details but serves as a guide for understanding how the platform could work.
In this chapter, we will go over the design for the decided architecture of the distributed
optimization solver platform, along with best practices for distributed and decentralized
systems. We describe the participants on the platform and the components needed for
such a platform to function, such as a consensus mechanism over solutions and a reward
mechanism. We define a set of protocols that give insight into how participants on the
platform could communicate on a high level.
3.1
Platform design
3.1.1
Distributed and decentralized systems
The proposed platform will be a decentralized system with computer nodes solving opti-
mization problems distributively.
It is a known practice to solve difficult problems by the means of distribution. It can be
beneficial to use collaborating entities to solve difficult optimization problems concurrently.
Centralized systems can be relatively straightforward to implement and are often consis-
tent in terms of data integrity, security, and decision making efficiency. However, for a
large scale system, which is the end goal with this optimization solver platform, central-
ized architecture suffers from significant drawbacks, including a single point of failure and
scalability issues as the network of computer nodes grows. Decentralized architectures
address those challenges, however, with the drawback of increased complexity in system
design, for example, in the form of data synchronization, and overhead in communications
[26] [27].
A distributed system is a collection of independent entities that cooperate to solve a prob-
lem that cannot be individually solved. Such systems are made out of a network of com-
puters that communicate and coordinate in order to achieve their common goal of solving
said problem by passing messages [27] [26].
A decentralized system is a system without a single controlling central entity. Decision
making and control is distributed across multiple nodes, enhancing fault tolerance and
scalability [26] [28].
Distributed systems can be decentralized. For such systems, additional mechanisms
need to be considered for it to function, since each distributed entity would be making
their own decisions such as how to uphold trust, how to prevent malicious behavior, and
how to give incentive to join the system [29] [30].
Bitcoin
Bitcoin is a motivational factor for this platform, as we have mentioned before. Both, in
terms of wasted computing power and in terms of a decentralized system that successfully
solves difficult cryptographic puzzles distributively.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
11
==PAGE:20==
Bitcoin is based on a relatively simple idea of a unstructured peer-to-peer network with
anonymous and autonomous participants. There are no rules nodes have to adhere to
and they can join and leave the network at will [23]. Mining pools in Bitcoin are another
concept of relevance for a distributed way of solving difficult problems. Nodes in the same
mining pool split the computational work, each attempting to solve a portion of the puzzle
to compete with other mining pools or individual miners [21].
3.1.2
Proposed platform architecture
The architecture was designed on the basis of a few requirements inspired by distributed
and decentralized principles we have mentioned above in Section 3.1.1. We wanted the
platform to be scalable and without a single central authority, to enhance robustness, fault
tolerance, and scalability.
The initial idea for this platform was a fully decentralized peer-to-peer network of computer
worker nodes that would all have the same rights and responsibilities. All workers would
have the same copy of the data and would need to communicate with each other to keep
the platform’s state updated, along with other complications such an architecture can
bring. Often in practice, alternative architectures are necessary when designing such
systems to meet security and trust requirements and minimize system inefficiencies for
millions of computer nodes [31]. Thus, instead of having all nodes in the network with the
same responsibilities we split the role of the worker node into two separated roles that
communicate together on the platform in a client-server manner, agent nodes who solve
optimization problems distributively, and server nodes store and manage the problem
instance and solution data for clients and agent nodes.
Agent nodes are autonomous but would typically solve problems and vote on other agents’
generated solutions. Server nodes are also autonomous but more trust is required from
them since agents and clients rely on getting the correct information from server nodes.
The architecture that was finally decided on, describes the platform as a distributed opti-
mization solver, where millions of agent nodes solve optimization problems concurrently
without relying on a single authority by having the data decentralized in the form of a fully
connected group of thousands of server nodes. By having the data and decision making
decentralized the idea is that there will be high availability and no downtime on getting
resources, along with increased trust between participants if the correct mechanisms are
implemented on the platform to prevent malicious behavior.
A diagram of the architecture is shown in Figure 3.1. Agent nodes communicate to server
nodes over the internet in a client-server manner, while the server nodes are connected
to each other and communicate through this ”black box” which is the decentralized ad-
ministration.
In short, the platform could function as follows on a high level. Optimization problem in-
stances are submitted to the platform by clients who want to get a solution to a problem
and are willing to pay for it. Each problem instance has a reward attached to it that the
nodes, server nodes and agent nodes, can claim according to a defined reward system
on the platform. Agents can download problem instances and solution data from server
nodes to solve the instance. By allowing agents to download solution data as well, it en-
ables agents to build on the current best solution in order to generate better solutions.
When an agent finds a solution, it can submit it to a server node, where the platform must
reach consensus through validation and voting on the solution. If in agreement the solu-
tion is accepted as the best one found for the particular problem instance and the agent
node gets rewarded for its effort. Agents can continue to solve and validate the problem
instance until some stopping criteria provided by the client are met for that specific in-
stance. Or alternatively, download different instances to do computational work on those
12
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:21==
instead.
The decentralized administration plays an important role regarding how the server nodes
function on the platform. It is a component of the server nodes and was introduced in
order to keep the server nodes decentralized by enabling communication and data syn-
chronization between them. It should also handle which server node responds to an agent
node or client request from the group of server nodes.
Network
Clients
Solver
Parser
Verifier
p1.mps
p1.sol
p3.mps
p3.sol
Agent
Node
Network
Server
Node
p2.mps
p2.sol
p3.mps
p3.sol
p2.mps
p2.sol
p4.mps
p4.sol
p1.mps
p1.sol
p2.mps
p2.sol
p3.mps
p3.sol
Server
Node
Server
Node
p1.mps - p1.sol
p2.mps - p2.sol
p3.mps - p3.sol
p4.mps - p4.sol
Decentralized
administration
Decentralized
administration
p1.mps - p1.sol
p2.mps - p2.sol
p3.mps - p3.sol
p4.mps - p4.sol
Decentralized
administration
p1.mps - p1.sol
p2.mps - p2.sol
p3.mps - p3.sol
p4.mps - p4.sol
p1.mps
p1.sol
p3.mps
p3.sol
Network
p2.mps
p2.sol
p1.mps
p1.sol
p4.mps
p4.sol
p2.mps
p2.sol
p1.mps
p1.sol
p4.mps
p4.sol
Network
Figure 3.1: Proposed architecture of the distributed optimization solver platform.
It is worth noting again that even though the server nodes are displayed on the figure as
a central entity which shares the same hardware, memory or ownership. It should not be
understood as such. It is just for illustrative purposes. Server nodes are completely unre-
lated entities and don’t share any resources or ownership, making the platform decentral-
ized. It is the role of decentralized administration to allow server nodes to communicate
together over the internet and share their state and data with each other. In order for the
platform to be consistent, it is important that the server nodes are synchronized regularly
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
13
==PAGE:22==
so that agents communicating to different server nodes get the same information.
The same goes for agents being connected to a single server node, it is also for illustrative
purposes. Ideally, there should be some kind of load balancing mechanism that would
make sure server nodes are evenly loaded, this would also be handled by the decentral-
ized administration.
3.1.3
Mechanisms for distributed optimization platform
As mentioned previously in Section 3.1.1 there are additional measures needed for de-
centralized systems in order to make a functional system that is both fair and honest. For
the distributed optimization solver platform, the most important ones are; consensus over
submitted solutions, trust between participants, reward system for computational effort on
the platform, and identification of participants.
Consensus mechanism
When decisions are not taken by a central or controlling entity, there needs to be a con-
sensus amongst the participants of the platform about its state. In our case, there needs
to be a consensus on which solution for each problem instance is considered to be the
best at all times to ensure trust on the platform [29].
The responsibility of reaching consensus should be in the hand of agent nodes. Agents
are the ones who have a stake in which solutions are accepted as the best ones on the
platform since they are competing with each other to find good solutions, and should thus
be the ones who vote on the matter. Now, since the architecture does not allow commu-
nication between agents, it is the server nodes who act as an intermediate to collect votes
from agents.
This consensus mechanism on how to reach agreement over solutions is defined by the
solution validation phase in Section 3.2.1 which is managed by the server nodes. It re-
quires agents to be able to identify themselves. Otherwise, it opens up the possibility of
the same agent voting multiple times on the same solution.
Reward mechanism
In order for participants to participate on the platform, both agent nodes and server nodes
need to be rewarded for their computational work. This is where a reward system, or
a reward mechanism, needs to be utilized to give incentive to be a part of the platform.
Smart contracts could be one solution to distribute rewards securely and transparently
based on predefined conditions. They have proven useful in decentralized systems [32].
A reward mechanism could also address malicious behavior of nodes, both agent nodes
and server nodes. Ideally, there should be more incentive to be honest than malicious for
participants [23] [30] [33].
For agent nodes on the platform, rewards should be given so that the agents behave in a
way that makes the platform generate as good solutions as possible. For example, incen-
tivize agents to constantly submit good solutions so that other agents can build on those
solutions to improve the overall solution quality. There should be incentive for agents to
spend most of their time on solving optimization problems, but also an incentive to validate
submitted solutions so that the platform can reach consensus on those. Most likely such
a reward mechanism would be dynamic and it would adjust based on where the highest
demand for work is. For example, if there are many solutions submitted to the platform,
there is need to validate those solutions in order to reach consensus, which can increase
the reward given out to agent nodes who validate.
Ideally, the reward mechanism for agents should also make it desirable not to be ma-
licious. Malicious agent behavior for this optimization platform would most likely be in
the form of agent nodes that always reject solutions when validating. By doing so, an
agent hopes the platform will not reach a consensus over the solutions, which means that
14
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:23==
the solution quality does not improve, making it easier for the agent to find an improved
solution.
For server nodes on the platform, the reward system would be built on different principles
than the one for agent nodes. Server nodes would likely be rewarded for their availability,
network latency, storage capabilities, and consistent and trustful behavior.
For server nodes, a reward mechanism could also prevent malicious behavior, such as
deliberately giving out incorrect information or fixing votes when agents are voting on
solutions.
Trust mechanism
On the platform, resources are given to agent nodes from server nodes, which requires
trust from agents. Clients also expect server nodes to provide them with correct informa-
tion on found solutions. A trust mechanism would be needed to maintain trust between
participants on the platform. Smart contracts, which we mentioned above for the reward
mechanism, could be one piece of a trust mechanism.
For our platform, a trust mechanism of this sort has not been implemented nor thought
about in any detail.
Identification mechanism
An additional feature that may be needed on the platform is a way to identify participants.
Ideally, each participant should only be able to have a single identity, but this could be
difficult to enforce. For the current design of how agents reach consensus over submitted
solutions, defined by the solution validation phase, it is important that each agent can only
vote once for each submitted solution to prevent cheating. Furthermore, if using smart
contracts, participants need to be able to identify themselves.
As for most other mechanisms suggested for this platform, this one is not designed for the
current proof of concept, but it may be needed for a future implementation of the platform.
3.2
Participants
3.2.1
Server node
The server node can be described as a web server in this architecture. It provides data
and resources to the agent nodes on request. It stores all the problem instances available
on the platform and for each instance it stores the best solution that has been found by
agents. It has a database attached to it that needs to keep track of information such
as problem instance information and validation responses of agents during the solution
validation phase.
A server node should not have any say on decisions taken by agents, meaning that it
should only respond to agent requests and should not have any say on important decisions
such as which problem agent are solving and which solutions get accepted.
Along with providing resources to the agent nodes, the server nodes need to oversee
and manage a two important tasks; the solution validation phase and the availability of
problem instances on the platform.
• The solution validation phase is an important process on the platform. It is the
process on the platform that most nodes participate in. With this process the platform
reaches consensus on which solutions are accepted as the best ones found. The
process is shown in Figure 3.2. It starts with an agent thinking it has found the
best solution on the platform for a particular problem instance. It sends the solution
data to a server node, which starts the solution validation phase, in collaboration
with other server nodes through the decentralized administration, that allows other
agents to validate and vote on the submitted solution. An agent should only be able
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
15
==PAGE:24==
to validate each solution once, thus it is important the server node can identify the
agent somehow. If an agent validates the solution, he gets a reward for it. The server
nodes keep track of all responses from agent nodes that have validated the solution,
until some stopping criteria for the solution validation phase has been reached. At
that point, the server node determines if the agents have reached consensus over
the solution by looking at all of the received responses. If consensus is reached,
the server node confirms the solution as a new best solution and the agent who
submitted the solution will be rewarded for its effort.
Solution
validation phase
Agent node has a
solution he believes
is the best one so
he submits it to get
reward in return
Solution data
Is stopping criteria
for solution validation
reached?
Server node
collects validation
responses from
agent nodes
Server node
makes solution
available for
validation for other
agent nodes
Is there consensus 
to accept the
solution?
Solution validation
phase ended
Server node
rewards the agent
node who
submitted the
solution
Server node
accepts the
solution validation
request and
updates data
data
sync
data
sync
data
sync
No
No
Yes
Yes
Figure 3.2: Solution validation phase managed by the server nodes.
• The server nodes are responsible for the availability of problem instances on
the platform. They add and remove problem instances from the platform based on
clients’ criteria which are the owners of the instances. The client criteria would be
reward spent, time used, or both, and once it has been reached the client should be
notified of the results.
Decentralized administration
Every server node needs to have a functionality that makes the group of server nodes
decentralized. In the architecture, this is what we refer to as decentralized administration.
It is a ”black box” component that every server node should have that makes it possible
to scale from single server node to multiple server nodes. Its main functionalities are the
following:
• Synchronize the state and data of the server nodes. Data synchronization is cru-
cial for maintaining the integrity of the platform. If server nodes do not have the same
copy of the database or problem instance storage, inconsistencies could arise. For
example, by giving out problem instances to agents that are not active on the plat-
form anymore.
• Providing a single access point to the platform over the internet. When agents
and clients communicate with a server node over the internet, the decentralized
administration will decide which server node will handle the request. The idea is to
make it function as a load balancer but without centralization.
It is important to note that the decentralized administration is not supposed to be a single
entity. It would make the platform rely on a centralized component, which breaks our
requirements of fault tolerance by having a single point of failure. Instead it is a feature,
or a requirement, the server nodes need to have so that the group of server nodes form
a decentralized collective. But again, this is a ”black box” solution we introduce to the
16
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:25==
architecture since it is out of the scope of this project to create an architecture with every
detail completely thought of.
3.2.2
Agent node
The agent node can be described as a client in a client-server model in this architecture.
It can use the defined protocols, described in Section 3.3, to communicate with the server
node in order to solve and validate optimization problems to maximize its profits. The
idea is that distributed agents solve optimization problems concurrently, both competi-
tively and collaboratively. They are competing in finding improved solutions to the current
best solution, but also have an incentive to share a solution when they believe they have
found such a solution to get rewards in return. This sharing of solutions can facilitate the
convergence towards better solutions.
Agents can download the best solution known so far on the platform. This can be helpful
in two ways; first the agent does not submit solutions it knows are going to get rejected
since it is worse than the current best one, and secondly the agent can use this solution
as a starting point if it uses more advanced methods to solve the problem than randomly
generating solutions, for example improvement metaheuristics. By having access to the
current best solution, it is at least as likely the agent will find an improved solution than
without having access to it. Therefore, this can help agents get more rewards and in
return find better solutions for the client, the owner of the optimization problem.
An agent node is autonomous, meaning that it should have the freedom to control itself
without any involvement of other agent nodes or the server nodes. It should be able to join
and leave the platform at any point. However, for an agent to get any rewards, it needs to
be able to solve and validate optimization problems. Thus, ideally it should at least have
the three following components:
• Parser: a program that reads a file with the problem instance data, and brings the
data to a form that the solver is able to read.
• Solver: a program that reads the parsed data and generates a solution to the opti-
mization problem. This can be whichever solver the agent chooses to use.
• Verifier: a program that reads a file with solution data, and validates if the solution
is feasible and if it is the best one found so far on the platform.
3.2.3
Client
The client is the owner of a particular optimization problem which he wants to get a solution
to and is willing to pay for it. The client uploads a problem instance to the platform with
a reward attached to it. Moreover, there may be other requirements from the client, such
as a time limit attached to the problem. After the client’s criteria, whether reward, time, or
both, is met the client should be able to access the best solution found on the platform.
3.3
Communication protocols
For the platform to function, there needs to be a clear protocol for communication between
participants. Since the communication is always initiated by agents and clients, resulting
in a response from the server nodes, the protocol must outline how agents and clients
communicate and how server nodes adhere to these standards. This way, all participants
can interact to achieve their intended outcomes on the platform efficiently.
The communication protocols defined below show how the participants on the platform,
client, server node, and agent node, can communicate on a high level. They are meant
to provide information on which protocols may be needed for future implementations.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
17
==PAGE:26==
We note that these protocols are not a complete set, there could be additional protocols
needed as the platform evolves.
We will go over the different protocols that agents and clients can use on the platform by
communicating with server nodes, where a flowchart will be used to visually explain them.
The protocols are as follows:
• Client upload problem instance to platform.
• Client get problem instance solution result.
• Agent get problem instances information.
• Agent download problem instance by ID.
• Agent check problem instance status.
• Agent download current best solution for problem instance.
• Agent submit solution.
• Agent get solution to validate.
• Agent submit solution validation result.
Client upload problem instance to platform
For there to be problem instances for agents to solve on the platform, clients need to pro-
vide problem instances and pay for the service of getting a solution to those. The problem
instances should be uploaded to the platform with a reward attached to it, along with other
possible constraints such as a time limit. The protocol is shown in Figure 3.3. By means
of the decentralized administration, the client provides a server node with the problem
instance data and other necessary metadata. Other server nodes will have access to
the same data, and agents will be able to download and do computational work for this
problem instance.
Client uploads
problem
instance to
platform 
Client contacts
one server node
and provides
necessary
problem instance
data
Decentralized
adminstration
Server node has
problem instance
data available
locally.
Problem
instance is
available on
platform
data
sync
Problem
instance data
 and
metadata
Figure 3.3: Client provides a problem instance on the platform for it to be solved.
Client get problem instance solution result
Once the client’s criteria for the problem instance has been met, such as reward or time
limit, it should be given the solution. The protocol is shown in Figure 3.4. Client needs to
request the solution which will be given to him by a server node when his defined criteria
for the problem instance has been met.
Client get
solution result
Server node
notifies client of
the solution result
when client's
criteria is met
Client has
solution data
Client requests to
get solution data
when his defined
criteria is met
Figure 3.4: Client gets back solution results from the platform.
An alternative design could be to allow the client to track the solution process live. It could
then decide to make the problem instance inactive on the platform and get the solution
result back immediately once satisfied with the solution quality.
18
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:27==
Agent get problem instances information
Before downloading a specific problem instance the agent needs to get its ID. Agents can
get information about a pool of problem instances from server nodes. This information
is to help agents decide which problem instance to download, or the agents can simply
download all of them. The protocol is shown in Figure 3.5. On request, the server node
provides information to the agent about a pool of problem instances. Given that informa-
tion, the agent knows the IDs of said problem instances and can choose to download a
problem instance using its ID.
It is important that agent is not given any information about the problem instances that
could prevent agents to solve certain problem instances. Only information about the prob-
lem instance itself should be provided. For example, if agent would know how much re-
ward is left for the problem instance or how many have tried solving the problem instance,
it could prevent the agent from wanting to solve that problem instance. We do not want to
create a bias towards certain problem instances because it could affect clients negatively
that submit the problem instances.
Agent node gets
problem
instances
information
Agent node
requests to get
problem instances
information
Server node
sends to agent
node information
about problem
instance from a
pool of problem
instances
Agent node
 has IDs of
problem
instances from
pool
Figure 3.5: Agent gets information about problem instances.
Download problem instance by ID
The protocol for downloading a problem instance by its ID is shown in Figure 3.6. If
agent knows problem instance ID, then it can request the problem data for that instance.
Agent requests the problem instance by giving the instance’s ID. On request, the server
node sends the problem instance data and metadata, and the best known solution in the
platform for that instance if it exists.
Agent node
downloads a
problem
instance by ID
Agent node
requests to get a
problem instance
by ID
Server node
sends problem
instance data and
best solution (if
exists) to agent
node
Agent node has
problem instance
data available
locally
Problem
instance ID
Figure 3.6: Agent downloads a problem instance by using ID.
Check problem instance status
Agents do not want to waste computational resources on problem instances that are not
active anymore on the platform. They should be able to check the status for the problem
instances they are working on. The protocol is shown in Figure 3.7. Agent uses the
problem instance ID to get information about the problem instance’s status.
It is important that the agent only gets to know if the problem instance is active or not,
because again, as with the problem instance information, we do not want agents to know
information that indicates that this problem instance has for example little time or reward
left since that might lead to a bias towards certain problem instances.
Agent check
problem
instance status
Agent node
requests to get to
know if the
problem instance
is still active
Problem
 instance ID
Server node
sends if the
problem instance
is active or not
Agent node has
updated status on
problem instance
Figure 3.7: Agent checks status of problem instance.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
19
==PAGE:28==
Download best solution for problem instance
This protocol is important to allow for greater potential to generate good solutions to op-
timization problems. We do not only want agents to solve the problems concurrently in a
competitive manner, but also using previous solutions to generate improved solutions in
a collaborative manner.
The protocol is shown in Figure 3.8. Agent requests the solution by giving the problem
instance ID. On request, the server node sends the solution data to the agent if a solution
exists.
Agent node
asks for best
solution for
problem
instance
Agent node
requests to get
the best known
solution for a
problem instance
Problem
 instance ID
Server node
sends solution to
agent node if it
exists
Agent node
solution available
locally
Figure 3.8: Agent downloads the best solution for problem instance.
Submit solution
After an agent has solved a problem instance, it wants to get rewarded for its solution if
it improves the previous best known solution on the platform. The protocol is shown in
Figure 3.9. Agent sends the solution data and corresponding problem instance ID to the
server node, which then starts the solution validation phase we described above, handled
by the server node in Section 3.2.1. After some time the solution validation phase ends
and the agent will get rewarded if the solution was accepted by the platform as the best
one, otherwise not.
Agent node
submits solution
Agent node has a
solution for a
problem instance
Problem
instance ID
and solution
data
Server node
starts solution
validation phase
Agent node
has submitted a
solution and will
possibly get
reward later
Figure 3.9: Agent submits a solution.
Get solution to validate by problem instance ID
An essential feature of the platform is that agents vote on which solutions are accepted
as the best found. It builds the trust needed for a decentralized system. This is part of the
consensus mechanism for accepting solutions on the platform.
Agent has to ask for a solution to validate and in return it gets a reward after validating.
The protocol is shown in Figure 3.10. By sending a problem instance ID, the agent is given
solution data for an active solution submission, that is a solution that is still in the validation
phase maintained by the server node. The solution also cannot have been validated
before by the agent and cannot be from the agent’s own solution submission. Additionally,
the agent needs to get some kind of identification token for the solution submission. This
is necessary for the server node to be able to track the solution validation votes from all
of the agents. Now, the agent can validate the solution, submit the validation result, and
get rewarded in return.
The protocol does not specify what criteria the server node uses to decide which solution
to give to the agent, for example a random one or the oldest active one.
20
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:29==
Agent node
requests
solution to
validate
Agent node requests
to get a solution that
is still in validation
phase by problem
instance ID
Problem
instance ID
Server node sends
solution data and
identification token for
a solution the agent
has not validated
before and is not his
own solution
Agent node
can now validate
solution and send
results to server
node
Figure 3.10: Agent downloads a solution that other agent nodes have submitted for solu-
tion validation.
Submit solution validation result
After agent has validated a solution that was generated by another agent node, it can
send its vote to the server node to get rewarded in return. The protocol is shown in Figure
3.11. The agent sends the validation result and identifies the solution submission using an
identification token it obtained from the server node when downloading the solution data
for this submission. Server node accepts the validation result and sends reward to agent
if the agent has not validated this solution submission before and it is not the agent’s own
solution submission.
Agent node
submits solution
validation result
Agent node has
validated a solution
Solution
validation 
result and
solution
submission
token
Server node gives
reward if the agent has
not validated this
solution before and if
validation phase is still
active
Agent node has
now received
reward for
validating 
Figure 3.11: Agent submits validation result after validating a solution submission.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:31==
4
Proof of concept - Implementation
We decided on a simplified version of the architecture described in Chapter 3 that our
implementation would be based on. The implemented proof of concept is a centralized
version of the proposed architecture. The implementation is still, naturally, distributed in
terms of agent nodes, but since there is only a single server node, it is no longer decen-
tralized but instead centralized. This is not the design we aim to use in a more developed
future version of this platform due to drawbacks to centralized architecture, such as lack
of fault tolerance and scalability issues. However, it still enables us to simulate the plat-
form without having to implement complicated communication and synchronization of the
server nodes, and it should give us a good idea of how the distributed solving functionality
actually performs to determine the viability of a distributed optimization solver platform.
The implementation assumes that all participants are trusted. No emphasis is put on mak-
ing the platform secure against malicious behavior by the use of mechanisms for trust and
rewards.
The implementation includes two types of participants, agent nodes and a single server
node, while the client role is omitted. The agents are programmed only to solve binary
optimization problems due to the simplicity of generating random solutions to such prob-
lems. The server node is implemented as a simple web server with a database, it handles
agents requests and manages the data on the platform.
In this chapter we go over the implementation, how it differs from the proposed archi-
tecture, and other simplifications related to the implementation. We describe the imple-
mented participants, agent nodes and server node, and their roles on the platform.
4.1
Implemented platform architecture
The main difference between the implementation and the proposed architecture in Section
3.1.2 lies in the usage of a single server node instead of multiple ones. This simplifies the
implementation by not having to think about data synchronization between server nodes,
along with the complexity of deciding which server node should handle which request
using a load balancing mechanism, both of which handled by the decentralized adminis-
tration. The client role is also omitted due to the additional complications it brings without
adding any value to the goal of making an implementation that validates the solution qual-
ity of the distributed optimization platform.
The main simplifications for the implemented proof of concept are as follows:
• Single server node: this eliminates the need for the decentralized administration
role that is responsible for making the group of server nodes decentralized. With a
single server node, there is no need for data synchronization between nodes and
deciding which server node handles a request from an agent node based on the
load on the platform.
• No client role: all problem instances are added to the platform on initialization with
an attached reward to it.
A diagram of the implemented proof of concept is shown in Figure 4.1. The implemented
version functions similarly on a high level as the proposed architecture, but with some
simplifications. A client-server model is used for communication between the agent nodes
and the server node. Agent nodes need to initiate all communications and request all
resources they may need from the server node.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
23
==PAGE:32==
In short, agents download problem instances to solve and validate, and get rewards in
return that have been allocated to the problem instance. Agents can also download the
best solution found on the platform, if available. If an agent finds an improved solution, he
can submit it to the server node, which begins a solution validation phase for the submitted
solution. The solution validation phase is run for some period of time and at the end of it,
agents will have reached an agreement whether to accept or reject the submitted solution
as the best one found for the corresponding problem instance on the platform. During the
validation phase, agents can validate a solution by downloading the submitted solution
and reporting back to the server node the result of its validation with a simple vote. A
problem instance is available on the platform as long as it has still any reward attached
to it, which is tracked by the server node.
Network
Server
Node
Solver
Parser
Verifier
p1.mps
p1.sol
p1.mps - p1.sol
p2.mps - p2.sol 
Agent
Node
p2.mps
p2.sol
p2.mps
p1.sol
p2.mps
p1.sol
p1.mps
p1.sol
p1.mps
p1.sol
p1.mps
p2.sol
p2.mps
p2.sol
p2.mps
p2.sol
p1.mps
p1.sol
p1.mps
p1.sol
Figure 4.1: Architecture of the implemented proof of concept for the distributed optimiza-
tion solver platform.
On an open platform, which is the vision for this distributed optimization platform, agent
nodes and server nodes are autonomous. However, in our implementation, both of them
were implemented in a way that makes them take deterministic decision for all scenar-
ios. For example, if an agent finds a solution it only submits it to the server node if it is
better than its own current best solution and the platform’s current best solution. And the
server node will, for example, always give agents the oldest available solution, given it
is not their own solution and they have not previously voted on it, when they ask for a
solution to validate. However, this does not mean all agents behave exactly the same.
They can be programmed to only solve a single problem instance, or solve multiple prob-
lem instances. Some agents might focus only on validating solutions, others on solving
24
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:33==
problem instances, and some may do both.
In Chapter 3, we mentioned important mechanisms that are needed for decentralized sys-
tems. The ones we identified for our platform were mechanisms for reward, identification,
trust, and consensus. These mechanisms were not a focus point in this implementation,
and most of them are out of the scope for this project. However, a simple version of some
of those mechanisms was implemented, for example, because they were needed for im-
portant processes such as the solution validation phase.
There is no implemented reward mechanism. However, there is an attached reward to
each problem instance that the server node knows about, monitors, and distributes to
agents. This was added for a more realistic feel of the platform, and to have the infras-
tructure ready for possible future experiments. Agents collect constant rewards for solving
and validating. No rewards are allocated to the server node.
A simple, non-secure, identification mechanisms for agents was implemented. Agents
are required to register to the platform before being able to access resources from the
server node. The server node manages this registration and simply gives each agent a
unique ID when registering. This was added to the implementation due to it being possi-
ble for the server node to track agent votes on solutions in the solution validation phase.
No trust mechanism was implemented. All participants are assumed to be trusted in the
implementation. For example, agents are assumed to register to the platform only a sin-
gle time. Otherwise an agent could validate its own solution from another account and
validate the same solution multiple times using the different accounts.
The only mechanism implemented is a consensus mechanism for agents to reach an
agreement over solutions on the platform. This is the solution validation phase, which we
designed in Chapter 3.
There are two important parameters for the solution validation phase. They can be ad-
justed and they impact how a consensus is reached over solutions on the platform. The
two parameters are:
• Length of solution validation phase: The solution validation phase should be as
short as possible but long enough for agents to reach a consensus in a fair way, to
build trust around which solutions are accepted as the best found on the platform. It
should be relatively short to avoid long delays in making the best solutions available
on the platform for other agents to access. It can slow down the collaboration feature
of the platform if agents are not building their solutions from the current best ones.
• Consensus ratio: This defines the proportion of agents who must accept a solution,
out of all agents voting, for it to be considered the best one found.
The proof of concept was implemented using Python. Python classes were developed for
agent and server node roles, ensuring a modular design. The server node is deployed
using a web server built with FastAPI, which allows agent nodes to access the resources
of the server node using the defined API.
An important aspect of the implementation is its modular design. For future work, it should
be straightforward to add and change functionality of server and agent nodes, such as
using different solvers for different agents, and even run solvers implemented in different
programming languages as a subprocess in Python.
4.2
Server node
The server node is essentially a web server with a database and file storage system. The
server node and agent communicate in a client-server architecture. It receives requests
from agent nodes and responds according to a defined API. The server node does not
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
25
==PAGE:34==
make any decisions about which problem instances agents are solving or validating, nor
does it have any say in the result of a solution validation phase or if a problem instance
is available on the platform.
The server node cannot initiate communication with the agent nodes or broadcast infor-
mation to the network of agents. The agent nodes need to contact the server node for all
resources. Therefore, we need to make the necessary endpoints available for the agents
to get updated information about the platform’s data and state.
4.2.1
API endpoints
The server node provides an API interface for agent nodes to communicate with it to get
and post resources, using HTTP. The HTTP requests are handled synchronously by the
server node, meaning they are processed one at a time. The current implementation
does not use FastAPI’s option of asynchronous handling of requests, which may be more
efficient for larger scale implementations.
The API endpoints are shown in Table 4.1. A more detailed documentation of the API
has been generated with Swagger. It can be accessed by running the server node web
server and navigating to /docs. The code is available in the accompanying zip-folder and
on GitHub.
Table 4.1: API endpoints provided by the server node.
Method
URI
Description
POST
/register
Register a new agent to the platform.
Agent gets a unique identification (not se-
cure).
GET
/problem_instances/info
Get information about a pool of problem
instances.
GET
/problem_instances/download/
{problem_instance_name}
Download problem instance data and
best solution found on platform, if avail-
able.
GET
/problem_instances/status/
{problem_instance_name}
Get status of problem instance, if it is ac-
tive or not.
POST
/solutions/submit/
{problem_instance_name}
Submit a solution. Starts a solution vali-
dation phase for the solution.
GET
/solutions/submit/status/
{solution_submission_id}
Get status of a solution submission. Also
allows agent to claim reward if the solution
submission was accepted (not secure).
GET
/solutions/best/download/
{problem_instance_name}
Download best solution found on plat-
form, if available.
GET
/solutions/validate/download/
{problem_instance_name}
Download solution for an active solution
submission, if exists (oldest one not vali-
dated before).
POST
/solutions/validate/
{solution_submission_id}
Send vote from result of solution valida-
tion. Get reward in return.
26
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:35==
4.2.2
Data management
The server node manages the problem instance and solution data on the platform, and
oversees the solution validation phase. It has a file storage with problem instances in
.mps file format and best solutions found in .sol file format. It also has a database that
it uses to track the state of the platform. It needs to be able to know which agents are
registered, where the problem instances and best solutions are stored, and it needs to
track the responses of agents validating for the solution validation phase.
We implemented a simple SQLite database. A diagram of the database schema is shown
in Figure 4.2, describing the contents of the database and the relationship between its
tables [34]. The database has five tables:
• agent_nodes: stores ID of every agent that is registered to the platform.
• problem_instances: stores information about problem instance such as the accu-
mulated reward and location of the problem instance data. It also has a column,
active, which tells if the instance is active on the platform or not.
• best_solutions: stores information about the best solution found for a problem
instance. There can be a maximum of one best solution for each problem instance.
• all_solutions: stores information about all solutions that have been submitted to
the platform by agents.
• active_solutions_submissions_validations: stores validation responses from agents
during an active validation phase. It is cleaned up after the solution validation phase
has finished for the solution submission.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
27
==PAGE:36==
problem_instances
PK
name
description
file_location
reward_accumulated
reward_budget
active
agent_nodes
PK
id
all_solutions
PK
id
FK
problem_instance_name
FK
agent_node_id
submission_time
validation_end_time
objective_value
reward_accumulated
accepted
active
sol_file_location
best_solutions
PK,FK
problem_instance_name
FK
solution_id
file_location
active_solutions_
submissions_validations
PK,FK
solution_submission_id
PK,FK
agent_validated_id
FK
problem_instance_name
validation_response
objective_value
reward
Figure 4.2: Schema for the server node database.
Solution validation phase
The main complication of the database schema is related to the solution validation phase.
When an agent submits a solution, the server node starts the solution validation phase. It
inserts a row in all_solutions table for the solution submission. During the span of the solu-
tion validation phase, defined by a time limit, validation_end_time for this implementation,
the server node tracks agents validation responses in the active_solutions_submissions_validations
table by inserting a new row for each time an agent validates that solution submission.
An agent can only validate a solution once. When the solution validation phase ends,
the server node determines if it should accept or reject the solution based on the agents’
votes and the decided consensus ratio. If the solution was accepted as the best one,
the server node updates the best_solutions and all_solutions tables. Finally, it deletes all
the rows from active_solutions_submissions_validations table for the non-active solution
submission.
We note that our implementation assumes that agents only submit each solution once,
since there is no mechanism preventing agents to submit the same solution multiple times
and get rewarded for all of them. This limitation would have to be considered in future im-
plementations on an open platform of agents.
It is worth mentioning that there is a high chance that there are many solution validation
phases running simultaneously on the platform. It depends on how many solutions agents
are submitting at a given time. In this implementation, each solution validation phase is
handled by a separate virtual thread by utilizing Python’s Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) for
concurrent execution.
28
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:37==
Reward tracking
In this implementation, the time period that a problem instance is active on the platform
depends on the reward attached to it. A problem instance is initialized with a reward bud-
get when put on the platform. The server node monitors the reward status of problem
instances and updates the reward used when agents get rewarded for their actions. This
is necessary so that a problem instance will be declared inactive on the platform when
the reward depletes, at which point agents cannot get rewards for solving or validating for
that instance.
The implementation allows agents to claim rewards by simply including in the HTTP re-
sponses the reward. When an agent sends its solution validation result to the server node
using /solutions/validate/{solution_submission_id}, the server node includes the
reward given to agent in the response. For an accepted solution submission, the server
node deducts a reward on its completion, while the agent can claim its reward by using
the endpoint /solutions/submit/status/{solution_submission_id}.
The reward tracking and distribution is not meant to be secure in any way. The only pur-
pose of it is to have the infrastructure ready so that we can analyze the reward distribution
in the experiments and look into how an implemented reward mechanism could affect the
platform. But as we have stated before the reward mechanism is not a point of interest
for this project, thus no experiments will be performed related to that.
Agent registration
All agents need to register to the platform before being able to get any resources from the
server node. It makes the implementation more straight forward if it is the server node’s
responsibility to track agents on the platform to make sure they do not perform illegal
actions, such as validating their own solutions.
In this implementation, the server node manages this registration by giving the agent
a unique ID to identify itself with. It keeps track of which agents are registered on the
platform in the agent_nodes table.
4.3
Agent node
The agent node is the client in this client-server architecture that is our implementation, it
uses the provided API endpoints by the server node to participate on the platform. Its goal
is to solve and validate optimization problems to get rewards in return for its computational
work.
In this implementation, all agent nodes are an object from the same class, but we allow
for some adjustable parameters which can differ agent from agent, such as if an agent is
malicious or not. But again, malicious behavior is not a point of focus in this project.
The agents are implemented so that they can keep track of their own data. An agent can
work on multiple problem instances without having to download the data from the server
node each time it wants to do work on a different problem instance, if it chooses to do so.
The same goes for when solving problem instances, the agent only needs to parse the
problem instance a single time. This makes the agents more efficient, instead of having
to download the same problems constantly and parsing it each time.
Agents can collect and track rewards for their computational work. For the goal of our im-
plementation this is not a necessary feature, but it may be useful for later implementation
if wanting to analyze distribution of rewards and a reward mechanism for agents.
For agents to have any value on the platform, they need to either solve problem instances,
validate solutions, or do both. To do those actions, it needs to have the following compo-
nents:
• Parser: Problem instances need to be converted into a format that the solver can
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
29
==PAGE:38==
process. The parser is a program that takes in a file, for us a .mps file, and translates
its contents to a suitable format, such as constructing a constraint matrix. We use
PuLP, which is an open source Python library for LP and MIP, to parse the .mps files.
• Solver: The solver is a program that takes in parsed problem instance data and re-
turns a feasible solution to the problem, if found. In our implementation, the solver is
designed to make it relatively easy for agents to change its solution method, whether
it is an algorithm written in Python, an algorithm written in C, or an external solver
program such as a commercial solver. If an agent downloads the best solution on
the platform for a problem instance, the solver program has access to the solution.
This is a part of the collaborative functionality on the platform, where agents can
build their solution on previously known best solutions.
• Verifier: Solutions need to be validated to check for feasibility and if it is improving
the best known objective value on the platform. The verifier is a program that reads
a file containing a solution, for us a .sol file, and uses the parsed problem instance
data to evaluate each constraint to check for feasibility, and calculate the objective
value of the solution.
The solver is the component that varies the most between autonomous agents, while
the parser and verifier are more basic components that have less impact if implemented
differently. We used two different solution algorithms in our platform’s implementation and
experiments.
4.3.1
Solution methods
The aim of the proof of concept was to use simple algorithms, where the most simple
version is random sampling of solutions, to solve mathematical binary programming prob-
lems. We developed two different algorithms that generate solutions randomly to be used
by the agent nodes during the experiments. One that essentially guesses a solution by
using random sampling of binary solutions, and the other a simple heuristic that modifies
a random solution by randomly flipping variables that are violating the constraints.
Random sampling algorithm
The simplest algorithm to find binary solutions is to use random sampling. The pseudo
code is shown in Algorithm 1. Random binary solutions are generated iteratively within a
time limit, and their feasibility is checked. If feasible and it is improving the best known
solution on the platform, the solution is returned.
Algorithm 1 Pseudo code for random sampling of binary solutions.
1: while elapsed_time < max_time do
2:
s ←RandomBinarySolution()
3:
if CheckFeasibility(s) and BestFoundPlatform(s) then
4:
return s
5:
end if
6: end while
7: return ∅
Random flip heuristic algorithm
During preliminary experiments to test the functionality of the platform, before starting
the final experiments, it was quickly realized that solving real world binary optimization
problems by merely guessing solutions randomly, using the random sampling algorithm,
was not giving any feasible solutions with the limited hardware we had access to for the
experiments. For instance, we ran the platform using 20 agents for 12 hours on a problem,
supportcase16 from MIPLIB, without being able to generate a single feasible solution.
30
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:39==
Thus, it was decided to implement the most simple random heuristic we could think of,
which would be able to find feasible solutions to real world binary problem instances.
The pseudo code is shown in Algorithm 2. A random binary solution is generated, which is
then adjusted until it becomes feasible and it is improving the best known solution on the
platform within a set time limit. In every iteration, all unsatisfied constraints are adjusted,
one by one, in a random order by flipping a random binary variable that is violating the
constraint. If the solution is stuck for a certain amount of iterations, that is the number
of satisfied constraints is not improving, a new random binary solution is generated to be
adjusted the same way as before.
Algorithm 2 Pseudo code for random binary flip heuristic algorithm.
1: s ←RandomBinarySolution()
2: while elapsed_time < max_time do
3:
for each constraint ci in random order do
4:
while Constraint ci is violated do
5:
x ←SelectRandomViolatingVariable(ci, s)
6:
Flip(x)
7:
end while
8:
end for
9:
if CheckFeasibility(s) then
10:
if BestFoundPlatform(s) then
11:
return s
12:
else
13:
s ←RandomBinarySolution()
14:
end if
15:
end if
16:
if Stuck(s) then
17:
s ←RandomBinarySolution()
18:
end if
19: end while
20: return ∅
A violating variable is a variable that contributes to violating a constraint because it has a
non-zero coefficient in the constraint and negatively affects its satisfaction. For example,
this might be a variable with a positive coefficient in a ”less than or equal to” constraint.
If this variable has the value 1, it increases the left hand side of the constraint, and by
flipping its value to 0 the left hand side reduces which might satisfy the constraint or at
least push it to the right direction.
We note that by satisfying one constraint, it might violate another. But that is also a part of
the randomness that this heuristic should apply to the generated solutions. It is important
that the algorithm does not generate the same solutions repeatedly.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:41==
5
Proof of concept - Experiments
The initial idea with the implemented proof of concept for this distributed optimization
platform, was to explore if there would be any value by solving optimization problems using
simple algorithms, most notably by generating solutions randomly. With the experiments,
we aim to test the platform’s usefulness by solving real world optimization problems from
MIPLIB using the implemented proof of concept in Chapter 4.
In the experiments, binary problems are the only mathematical programming problems
of interest to us. The implemented proof of concept is programmed to only solve those.
Although the initial idea with this proof of concept was to use random sampling of solutions,
the random flip heuristic algorithm will mostly be used as the solution algorithm for the
experiments, due to the limited solving capabilities of the random sampling algorithm with
the computational resources available to us as we have noted in Section 4.3.
There are two focus points of the experiments. Firstly, to see if there is any value in the
implemented proof of concept by solving randomly selected binary problems. Secondly, to
analyze further the platform’s behavior when solving these problem instances by taking a
closer look at the solution quality convergence of specifically selected problem instances
when the number of agents on the platform increases.
For all of the experiments, only a single problem instance is solved at a time. By solving a
single problem instance at a time, the results will be more consistent since all experiments
will use the same amount of solution time for the different problem instances.
Although the platform is implemented to handle the scenario of different agents solving
different problem instances concurrently, there is no real gain using that scenario for the
experiments. When solving the problem instances using randomly generating solution
algorithms, the only thing that matters is the computational power of the agents. Solving
five problems concurrently for five hours would give similar results as solving a single
problem five times for one hour each. Additionally, when using random algorithms there
will be no indirect collaboration between agents as in the case if they would, for example,
use improvement metaheuristics that start from the best known solution on the platform,
which we have briefly mentioned before.
The experiments were performed on a single machine provided by DTU Computing Cen-
ter (DCC). The machine is equipped with a 24 core CPU, Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2650
v4 @ 2.20GHz. The machine was privately occupied by us for the whole duration of the
experiments to obtain consistent results between different runs of the platform.
The limited computing power used for the experiments might not be able to give us clear
answers about the solving capability our proposed platform. Benefits of such a platform,
which randomly generates solutions, might only be realized for large scale networks with
millions of agents, due to the exponential number of possible solutions O(2n) for binary
problems.
In this chapter we will go over the experiments performed, to validate the platform and to
gain more insights into its performance. We describe how and which problem instances
were chosen from MIPLIB, along with how the platform was set up and configured for the
experiments.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
33
==PAGE:42==
5.1
Experimental focus and setup
To test the implemented optimization platform and get real meaningful results, we wanted
to use problem instances that were realistic and not specially constructed toy instances
made by us. We used the newest MIPLIB library available at the time, from 2017 [35].
The Mixed-Integer Programming Library (MIPLIB) is a publicly available collection of real
world mixed-integer programming instances. It is regularly updated due to the advances
in this field to make it a representative testing bed for current state of the art optimization
solvers [36] [37]. These characteristics make the MIPLIB library a good testing bench-
mark for the experiments performed on our optimization platform.
The platform’s implementation with its two available solution methods, is currently limited
to handle only binary optimization problems. Binary problems were chosen due to the
simplicity of generating solutions randomly, compared to other combinatorial problems
such as integer problems where each variable can take on a broader range of values,
making the solution space significantly larger.
In total there are 183 feasible binary problem instances available on MIPLIB (all variables
must be binary variables), both from the collection set and benchmark set. Due to hard-
ware memory considerations and limitations of the solution methods used, we decided
to restrict the selection of problem instances to be less than 25.000 variables and less
than 25.000 constraints. In terms of memory constraints, this would result in a constraint
matrix of just under 5GB. Just to load larger problem instances into memory would take
too much time given the 2 hour time frame we used for most of the experiments. In terms
of the random flip heuristic algorithm we developed, it would take too much time simply
to iterate through all the constraints to try to find feasible solutions. This left out a total of
92 problem instances that were suitable to experiment with.
In the experiments, we focused on two types of experiments in order to get meaningful
information and insights out of the implemented optimization platform.
Firstly, we wanted to see if the current implementation that uses a simple random algorithm
to find feasible solutions is able to find solutions to real world binary problem instances,
and if it is actually able to improve solutions with time. This might give us an idea if there
is any value in solving these problem instances using a distributed platform of agents. For
these experiments, we chose 20 problem instances randomly out of the 92 preselected
instances.
Secondly, to further analyze the platform’s behavior and how its performance scales with
increasing number of agents participating, three problem instances were carefully chosen
based on their characteristics.
5.1.1
Platform general solving capabilities
In order to test the general performance of the optimization platform, and get unbiased
results in regards to the platform’s solving capabilities, 20 problem instances were chosen
at random from the 92 preselected instances. Only 20 instances were chosen due to time
restrictions left for the experiments. Each problem instance was solved by launching the
platform once with a single agent and once with 20 agents for two hours, both using the
random sampling algorithm and the random flip heuristic algorithm. It is of interest to
test the platform’s solving capabilities when using the maximum computational resources
available to us, which are 20 agents, and to compare the performance when increasing
the number of agents from 1 to 20.
The 20 randomly selected problem instances are shown in Table 5.1. All instances have
no more than 25.000 variables or constraints, and all instances are classified as easy
according to the MIPLIB criteria on the problem’s status, which can be in one of the three
categories: easy, hard, and open.
34
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:43==
Table 5.1: 20 problem instances selected at random from a group of pre-selected in-
stances from MIPLIB to experiment with.
Problem instance
#Variables
#Constraints
Status
ab67-40-100
12812
12092
easy
chromaticindex256-8
18432
16895
easy
mod010
2655
146
easy
app2-1
3283
1038
easy
p0201
201
133
easy
sp97ic
12497
1033
easy
bab5
21600
4964
easy
tanglegram6
9182
17712
easy
neos-1516309
4500
489
easy
ab69-40-100
12622
11911
easy
acc-tight2
1620
2520
easy
f2gap401600
1600
40
easy
graph20-20-1rand
2183
5587
easy
sp98ar
15085
1435
easy
app2-2
1266
335
easy
neos-1324574
5256
5904
easy
sp97ar
14101
1761
easy
ab71-20-100
6689
6380
easy
cvs16r106-72
2848
3608
easy
neos-953928
23305
12498
easy
5.1.2
Platform convergence analysis
During preliminary testing of the platform, few interesting observations were made that we
wanted to explore further. Those might give us a better idea of the current status of our
implemented platform when solving binary problems by randomly generating solutions.
To be able to analyze the platform even further, and get insightful information how it be-
haves and how its performance scales with increasing number of agents, three problem
instances were carefully chosen to experiment with further. It is of interest to see if there
are any promising trends in solution convergence which we can identify when increasing
the number of agents.
The three chosen problems are shown in Table 5.2. For these experiments, the platform
was launched with 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents, while the solution algorithm and the running
time of the platform varied between experiments.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 5.2: Three selected problem instances to experiment further with.
Problem instance
#Variables
#Constraints
Status
Constrain
classes[38]
glass-sc
214
6119
easy
Set Covering
supportcase16
319
130
easy
Variable Bound,
Set Partitioning,
Set Packing,
Cardinality
reblock354
3540
19906
hard
Precedence,
Knapsack
The drawback with these experiments is that we only use at maximum 20 agents. It may
be difficult to see any real benefit of using 20 agents over 1 agent for difficult real world
problems such as we are experimenting on. In general, you would need exponentially
more computing power to see a change in the solution convergence when using randomly
generated solutions as we are doing, due to the exponential number of possible solutions,
O(2n) for binary problems.
glass-sc
This problem instance, along with another similar instance, was the only one we were able
to generate feasible solutions by using the random sampling algorithm. This is due to the
structure of these problem instances, but they only have one constraint type, called Set
Covering constraints on the form ∑xi ≥1, xi ∈0, 1∀i, which makes it easy to randomly
guess feasible solutions.
In the experiments, this problem instance was solved with 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents using
both the random sampling algorithm and the random flip heuristic algorithm for six hours
each. The experiments were repeated three times to get more reliable results because of
the randomness of the solutions generated by the algorithms.
supportcase16
During preliminary testing, we saw that this problem instance was quite easily solved to
optimality using the random flip heuristic algorithm. Thus, it would make an interesting
use case that there do exist problem instances that are easily solvable to optimality using
simple random algorithms.
In the experiments, this problem instance was solved with 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents using the
random flip heuristic algorithm for two hours each. The experiments were repeated three
times to get more reliable results because of the randomness of the solutions generated
by the algorithm.
reblock354
This problem instance, unlike all problem instances we experimented on, including the
20 random ones, is classified as hard according to MIPLIB difficulty measurements. By
solving this specific problem instance we are able to showcase that it is possible to use the
optimization platform with simple algorithms to generate feasible solutions to hard MIPLIB
problem instances. It is also of interest to see if there will be any notable difference in the
solution quality compared to other instances of similar size which are classified as easy.
In the experiments, this problem instance was solved with 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents using the
random flip heuristic algorithm for six hours each. The experiments were repeated three
times to get more reliable results because of the randomness of the solutions generated
by the algorithm.
36
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:45==
This problem instance, unlike the other two instances, was chosen to run for six hours
due to it being substantially larger in size.
5.2
Platform configuration
The implementation of the server node in the proof of concept, covered in Chapter 4, left
a few adjustable parameters that control how the platform operates. These parameters,
along with how the agent is programmed to use the defined API endpoints provided by
the server node, control how the platform will run. For the purpose of the experiments,
in which we want to showcase if there is potential to solve optimization problems using
distributed agents that are randomly generating solutions, it is important to configure the
platform so that there is focus on generating solutions to optimization problems without
any unwanted complications.
In the experiments, we use a fixed set of parameters for the server node and agent nodes,
and all agents are programmed to be the same. This configuration makes the platform
deterministic in terms of agent behavior, which is well suited for experiments because,
for example, there will be no solutions overlooked that would have improved the best
solution found so far due to lack of agents validating. However, on a public platform this
deterministic behavior would naturally not be the case since agents are autonomous and
they would not all be programmed to be the same.
Server node
The server node parameters used are as follows:
• Length of solution validation phase: This is how much time the platform has to
reach a consensus over a submitted solution. It was chosen to be 300 seconds for
the experiments.
• Consensus ratio: This is the ratio of how many agents need to accept a solution
submission out of all agents who are able to vote on it, for us all agents registered
on the platform. It was chosen to be 0.5 for the experiments.
Before running the experiments, the server node’s database was initialized with the rele-
vant problem instance information, and the problem instance was made available to it in
a .mps format stored in local file storage. The problem instance is initialized with an ”in-
finite” reward budget, so that the problem instance will stay active on the platform during
the whole runtime of the experiments.
Agent node
The agent behavior is programmed to be so that agents spend as much time solving
the problem instance while still validating all solution submissions that are submitted to
the server node. They solve and validate alternately. Agents begin to solve until they
have found an improved solution or until a maximum solve time has been reached. After
solving, they validate all the solutions that are available for validation.
The agents are configured so that all solutions submitted to the platform are validated by
all agents. This is done to not miss out on solutions due to lack of agents validating. This
is achieved by limiting the time agents spend solving without exiting the solve action. This
time needs to be shorter than the length of the solution validation phase defined by the
server node. This maximum time spent solving by agents is defined by the parameter:
• Maximum solve time: This is the maximum time that an agent spends solving a
problem instance without exiting the solve action to perform other actions such as to
validate solutions. This is the max_time parameter in Algorithm 1 and 2 in Section
4.3.1. It was chosen to be 240 seconds for the experiments.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
37
==PAGE:46==
If this parameter is longer than the solution validation phase or not existing at all, then
there are high chances that when solutions are hard to improve, agents will miss out on
validating others agents’ solutions since they are stuck solving, which would result in no
solutions being accepted on the platform due to lack of agents validating.
By programming agents this way, we are using as much of the computing power trying to
solve the problems, without missing out on solutions that would have improved the best
known solution on the platform due to lack of agents validating. In general, agents spend
most of their time solving problems, and usually over 99% of their total computational time
is used to solve problems.
Finally, we note the difference of using multiple agents compared to using a single agent
for the experiments on the platform. For a fair comparison of a single agent and multiple
agents, we try to minimize all overhead when running the experiments when using a sin-
gle agent on the platform. Ideally, single agent experiments should not be a part of such
a platform with the additional overhead of the solution validation phase and communica-
tion with the server node. However, for the sake of tracking the relevant data needed to
conclude from the experiments we still deploy the platform when using a single agent for
the experiments. For the single agent, we omit the solution validation phase since there
are no other agents to verify solutions in order to reach consensus. Thus, there will be
no delay to accept a solution as the best one, as it is for a multi-agent platform with the
delay corresponding to the length of the solution validation phase.
The programmed agent behavior for both multi-agent platform and single-agent platform
is shown in Listing A.2 and A.3, respectively, in Appendix A.1.
5.3
Platform execution
The platform was launched for the experiments by using the bash script in Listing A.1
in Appendix A.1. This script starts a single instance of the server node web server that
creates a server node object which manages the data on the platform and is able to
receive HTTP requests from agent nodes. After starting the server node web server on a
single thread, the agent nodes are started one by one as separate processes on separate
threads by using the taskset command.
On Figure 5.1 we can see how the computer hardware is being utilized by the nodes.
It shows a snapshot of the load on each thread by using the htop command. For this
particular snapshot, 20 agents are being run on threads 1-20 while the server node is on
thread 0. We notice that the agent nodes are using all of their resources trying to solve
problem at every point in time, while the server node is almost idle and is just waiting on
request from agent nodes to respond to.
Figure 5.1: Agents are run using separate threads using the taskset command. Here 20
agents are being run on threads 1-20 while the server node is run on thread 0.
For sanity check, we wanted to see if the agents are actually only using the single thread
they have been assigned to. This is to make sure that we are actually using more com-
putational power when we increase the number of agents in the experiments. We would
except the accumulative number of solve iterations to scale sub-linearly with the number
of agents. There is additional overhead due to validation requirements when the plat-
form has multiple agent nodes, and more communication load which server node needs
to handle synchronously. Figure 5.2 shows how the number of solve iterations, that is
38
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:47==
the number of randomly generated solutions, scales with increasing number of agents.
Figure 5.2a shows the speedup with the platform solving problem instance glass-sc with
agents using the random sampling algorithm, and Figure 5.2b shows the speedup with the
platform solving problem instance reblock354 with agents using the random flip heuristic
algorithm.
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Number of Agents
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Speedup relative to 1 agent
Speedup
Linear Speedup
(a) Problem instance glass-sc solved using the
random sampling algorithm.
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Number of Agents
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Speedup relative to 1 agent
Speedup
Linear Speedup
(b) Problem instance reblock354 solved using
the random flip heuristic algorithm.
Figure 5.2: The cumulative number of solve iterations shown with increasing number of
agents in a speedup plot. The data is an average from three experiments for 1, 5, 10 and
20 agents.
As expected, the speedup is sub-linear where it is just below the line for linear speedup.
We have observed a similar trend for other problem instances.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:49==
6
Results
Experiments were performed to validate the platform’s solving ability when agents ran-
domly generate solutions to binary optimization problems, and to explore further the be-
havior of the platform due to its design and implementation details.
In this chapter we will present and discuss the results from the performed experiments.
To test the platform’s general solving capabilities, 20 random problem instances were se-
lected to be solved. Further more, three specifically selected instance were chosen to
analyze further in order to gain more insight into the platform.
6.1
Platform general solving capabilities
To validate the implemented platform’s usefulness in generating solutions to real world
binary problems, we ran the experiments using 20 random preselected problem instances
from MIPLIB.
Two algorithms were used by agents on the platform to solve the problem instances, both
of which generate solutions randomly, the random sampling algorithm and the random
flip heuristic algorithm. The experiments were run for two hours, both with the platform
configured to use a single agent and with it configured to use 20 agents.
6.1.1
Random sampling algorithm
As we have noted before with the current scale of the platform, solutions are not easily
found when using the random sampling algorithm. In fact, not a single feasible solution
was found for the 20 random problem instances, neither when using a single agent or 20
agents.
On average during the 2 hour experiments, the total number of generated solutions for
each problem instance was between 1e8 and 1e10, when using 20 agents. Note that,
since solutions are generated randomly, some may be repeated. The number of iterations
is less for the larger instances and more for the smaller instances. It both depends on the
number of variables and number of constraints, where most of the time to generate a
single solution goes to check the feasibility of each random sample.
6.1.2
Random flip heuristic algorithm
The random flip heuristic algorithm was developed to be used as an alternative solution
method for agents so that we could get any numerical results from the experiments, espe-
cially to compare the platform’s performance when using 1 agent compared to 20 agents.
We wanted to see if the solution quality scales with an increasing number of agents.
As before, the platform was run for 2 hours, once when using a single agent and once
when using 20 agents, for each of the 20 randomly chosen problem instances.
The results for the single agent experiments are shown in Table 6.1 and for the 20 agent
experiments are shown in Table 6.2. For both cases, feasible solutions were found for 15
out of 20 problem instances. It seems that when using the random flip heuristic algorithm
some problems are simply too difficult to find any solutions to, at least given the compu-
tational resources we have. For the other 15 instances, feasible solutions were usually
found quite easily. With larger instances, less solutions are generated in the same time
span. However, in general, we do not see any clear correlation between the size of the
problem instances and the solution quality when comparing to MIPLIB. It seems to be
more dependent on the problem structure, for example, for the three similar instances
sp98ic, sp98ar, and sp97ar, the solution quality is far away from the best known solu-
tion from MIPLIB. The solution quality when compared to the best known solution from
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
41
==PAGE:50==
MIPLIB, varies a lot for different problem instances. The deviation is calculated as the
absolute difference between the two values, relative to the MIPLIB value.
We notice that the solution quality is improving with time, both when using 1 and 20 agents.
In general there is more improvement for the single agent experiments. However, we note
that when using a single agent, the first solution is recorded as the best one found even
though it is a bad one, while for 20 agents, the agents need to reach consensus over so-
lutions which means that the worst solution accepted on the platform is in general better
for the 20 agent experiments than for the single agent experiments. Thus, in general,
resulting in a smaller improvement of solutions when using 20 agents, although the final
best solution found is more often than not better.
The improvement is calculated as the absolute difference between the two values, relative
to the minimum absolute value of the two. This ensures that the improvement remains
consistent regardless of whether the objective values are positive or negative. For exam-
ple, if the objective improves from 40 to 20 or from -20 to -40, the improvement is 100%
in both cases.
Table 6.1: Results of solving 20 random problem instances on the platform for two hours
with a single agent using the random flip heuristic algorithm.
Problem
instance
Total
generated
solutions
Worst
platform
objective
Best
platform
objective
Platform
best
improvement
from worst
MIPLIB
best
objective
Platform
deviation
from
MIPLIB
ab67-40-100
16095
-348475151
-1723190326
395%
-11186253442
85%
chromaticindex256-
8
9202
4
4
0%
4
0%
mod010
1700487
-
-
-
6548
-
app2-1
76974
2286400.8
636025.3
259%
19294.1
3196%
p0201
8261451
11865
8665
37%
7615
14%
sp97ic
14138
29620234433.9 27223837117.3 9%
427684487.7
6265%
bab5
21190
-
-
-
-106411.8
-
tanglegram6
20144
8353
8057
4%
1224
558%
neos-1516309
842187
58717
41266
42%
35954
15%
ab69-40-100
16950
-338968607
-1728140934
410%
-11186281442
84%
acc-tight2
319259
-
-
-
0
-
f2gap401600
149337
-
-
-
82307
-
graph20-20-
1rand
149605
-
-
-
-9
-
sp98ar
42452
16689000436.0 15520832829.0 8%
29740623.2
2830%
app2-2
143879
13803060
9998565.8
38%
212040.4
4615%
neos-1324574
79317
36
36
0%
8
350%
sp97ar
15657
22681625060.1 21541135684.1 5%
660705645.8
3160%
ab71-20-100
51281
-1214621140
-2050830281
69%
-1042030597
80%
cvs16r106-72
159314
-20
-30
50%
-81
63%
neos-953928
7695
-32.7
-59.7
83%
-99.9
40%
42
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:51==
Table 6.2: Results of solving 20 random problem instances on the platform for two hours
with 20 agents using the random flip heuristic algorithm.
Problem
instance
Total
generated
solutions
Worst
platform
objective
Best
platform
objective
Platform
best
improvement
from worst
MIPLIB
best
objective
Platform
deviation
from
MIPLIB
ab67-40-100
298151
-622589682
-2057417854
230%
-11186253442
82%
chromaticindex256-
8
179944
4
4
0%
4
0%
mod010
33285151
-
-
-
6548
-
app2-1
1399358
1923488.18
470454.4
309%
19294.1
2338%
p0201
157341686
12075
8440
43%
7614.999
11%
sp97ic
260456
29320966368.6 27236949073.8 8%
427684487.7
6268%
bab5
413995
-
-
-
-106411.8
-
tanglegram6
362436
8337
7957
5%
1224
550%
neos-1516309
15935602
50519
38384
31%
35954
7%
ab69-40-100
304480
-828668847
-2070239420
150%
-11186281442
81%
acc-tight2
6246819
-
-
-
0
-
f2gap401600
3094431
-
-
-
82307
-
graph20-20-
1rand
3030301
-
-
-
-9
-
sp98ar
780750
16512504605.1 15357734022.7 8%
529740623.2
2799%
app2-2
5633125
14284944.1
9396800.8
52%
212040.4
4332%
neos-1324574
1562202
36
36
0%
8
350%
sp97ar
290503
22950301981.1 21278951134.7 8%
660705645.8
3120%
ab71-20-100
998798
-806338561
-2421288005
200%
-10420305975
77%
cvs16r106-72
3104247
-21
-32
52%
-81
60%
neos-953928
135251
-45.6
-64.7
42%
-99.9
35%
If we compare again the results between the two tables, we see that the total number of
generated solutions scales approximately proportionally when using 20 agents instead of
a single agent. There is some overhead, as previously observed in Figure 5.2. There
are benefits when using more agents, but quite minimal. For all except a single instance,
the platform is generating better or as good solutions when using more agents. Table 6.3
shows a comparison of the best found objective values found on the platform when using
1 and 20 agents. The improvement is calculated the same as before.
Although the approximate 20-fold increase in number of generated solutions, the solution
quality does not improve in the same scale. For NP hard problems when randomly gen-
erating solutions, achieving significant improvements in solution quality likely requires an
exponential increase in computational power. There might be clear benefits from using
a single agent to using thousands of agents, and from using thousand agents to using
millions of agents, and so on.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 6.3: Comparison of the best found objective value found on the platform shown in
Table 6.1 and 6.2, where the platform was launched for two hours with 1 and 20 agents,
respectively, using the random flip heuristic algorithm.
Problem instance
1 agent
best
objective
20 agents
best
objective
Improvement
20 agents over
1 agent
ab67-40-100
-1723190326
-2057417854
19%
chromaticindex256-8
4
4
0%
mod010
-
-
-
app2-1
636025.3
470454.4
35%
p0201
8665
8440
3%
sp97ic
27223837117.3 27236949073.8 -0%
bab5
-
-
-
tanglegram6
8057
7957
1%
neos-1516309
41266
38384
8%
ab69-40-100
-1728140934
-2070239420
20%
acc-tight2
-
-
-
f2gap401600
-
-
-
graph20-20-1rand
-
-
-
sp98ar
15520832829.0 15357734022.7 1%
app2-2
9998565.8
9396800.8
6%
neos-1324574
36
36
0%
sp97ar
21541135684.2 21278951134.7 1%
ab71-20-100
-2050830281
-2421288005
18%
cvs16r106-72
-30
-32
7%
neos-953928
-59.6
-64.7
8%
6.2
Platform convergence analysis
Three problem instances were specifically chosen to further analyze the platform. We
wanted to visually see how the solutions are converging with time and to gain insights
into how the platform is operating, especially the solution validation phase.
The three problem instances that we investigated are glass-sc, supportcase16, and re-
block354.
glass-sc
We noticed when developing the implementation that solutions were easily found for this
problem instance when using the random sampling algorithm. As we have noted before
it is due to this instance only having Set Covering constraints which are easily satisfi-
able. Thus, we wanted to see how the solution quality would converge when generating
solutions randomly.
The results for the two algorithms, random sampling algorithm and random flip heuristic
algorithm, when running the platform for two hours using 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents are
shown in Table 6.4 and Figure 6.1, and in Table 6.5 and Figure 6.2, respectively. For
both algorithms, the results are more or less the same. We see an improvement when
using multiple agents over a single agent, but the improvement is less noticeable when
comparing the 5, 10, and 20 agent experiments. By visually inspecting the two figures,
the most obvious thing to notice is the amount of accepted solutions when the number of
agents is increasing. Additionally, the solutions might form a slightly steeper curve when
increasing the number of agents but it is not too clear.
After giving the results more thought, it is clear that it was redundant to also use the
random flip heuristic algorithm for the experiments when solving glass-sc. Since the Set
Covering constraints are easily satisfied, it was our experience that almost every random
sample was a feasible solution. Thus, the two algorithms are essentially the same in this
44
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:53==
case, which might explain the almost identical solution quality on average for both, as
seen in Table 6.4 and 6.5.
Table 6.4: Results when running platform three times with agents solving problem in-
stance glass-sc using random sampling algorithm.
#Agents
Average best
platform
objective
MIPLIB
best
objective
Deviation
from MIPLIB
1
81.67
23
255%
5
78.33
23
240%
10
78.67
23
242%
20
77.67
23
238%
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
80
90
100
110
120
Objective Value
1 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
(a) 1 agent.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
80
90
100
110
120
Objective Value
5 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Solution validation phase
(b) 5 agents.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
80
90
100
110
120
Objective Value
10 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Solution validation phase
(c) 10 agents.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
80
90
100
110
120
Objective Value
20 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Solution validation phase
(d) 20 agents.
Figure 6.1: Convergence of best (accepted) solutions found on the platform, with agents
solving problem instance glass-sc using random sampling algorithm.
Platform was
launched three times using 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents. The same scale for the y-axis is
used for all plots for better comparison.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
45
==PAGE:54==
Table 6.5: Results when running platform three times with agents solving problem in-
stance glass-sc using random flip heuristic algorithm.
#Agents
Average best
platform
objective
MIPLIB
best
objective
Deviation
from MIPLIB
1
81.67
23
255%
5
78.67
23
242%
10
76.33
23
232%
20
77.33
23
236%
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
80
90
100
110
120
Objective Value
1 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
(a) 1 agent.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
80
90
100
110
120
Objective Value
5 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Solution validation phase
(b) 5 agents.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
80
90
100
110
120
Objective Value
10 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Solution validation phase
(c) 10 agents.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
80
90
100
110
120
Objective Value
20 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Solution validation phase
(d) 20 agents.
Figure 6.2: Convergence of best (accepted) solutions found on the platform, with agents
solving problem instance glass-sc using random flip heuristic algorithm. Platform was
launched three times using 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents. The same scale for the y-axis is used
for all plots for better comparison.
supportcase16
We wanted to explore this problem instance further because during preliminary testing of
the platform and of the random flip heuristic algorithm, solutions close to the best known
solution from MIPLIB, were generated for this instance.
The results when running the platform for two hours using 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents are
shown in Table 6.6 and Figure 6.3. Indeed, the solution quality for all experiments is close
to, or the same as, the best known MIPLIB solution. We again, as for glass-sc, see a slight
improvement when using multiple agents instead of a single one. However, the difference
is minimal and the results when using 5, 10 or 20 agents are almost identical.
46
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:55==
Table 6.6: Results when running platform three times with agents solving supportcase16
using random flip heuristic algorithm.
#Agents
Average best
platform
objective
MIPLIB
best
objective
Deviation
from MIPLIB
1
290.33
288
0.8%
5
288.67
288
0.2%
10
288.33
288
0.1%
20
288.67
288
0.2%
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
290
300
310
320
330
Objective Value
1 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Best Known Solution
(a) 1 agent.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
290
300
310
320
330
Objective Value
5 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Best Known Solution
Solution validation phase
(b) 5 agents.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
290
300
310
320
330
Objective Value
10 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Best Known Solution
Solution validation phase
(c) 10 agents.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Time from start (seconds)
290
300
310
320
330
Objective Value
20 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Best Known Solution
Solution validation phase
(d) 20 agents.
Figure 6.3: Convergence of best (accepted) solutions found on the platform, with agents
solving problem instance supportcase16 using random flip heuristic algorithm. Platform
was launched three times using 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents. The same scale for the y-axis is
used for all plots for better comparison.
reblock354
This problem instance was chosen because, unlike all other instances we have exper-
imented on, both in Section 6.1 and in this section, it is classified as hard according to
MIPLIB criteria. Note that we did not try to solve any other hard instances, and thus it may
be difficult to claim anything on the difference between easy and hard instances based
on the results.
For this problem instance, the experiments were run for six hours instead of the usual two
hours. During preliminary runs we noticed that the solution quality was still quite actively
improving close to the two hour mark. Thus, to not miss out on any valuable information,
we decided to run it for a longer time. The reason why this instance converged more
slowly compared to the two other instances is most likely due to it being substantially
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
47
==PAGE:56==
larger in size, but it could also be related to it being classified as hard.
The results when running the platform for six hours using 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents are
shown in Table 6.7 and Figure 6.4. We again, as for the two other problem instance, see
a slight improvement when using multiple agents instead of a single one. However, the
difference is minimal and the results when using 5, 10 or 20 agents is the same.
We note that the solution quality for reblock354 is better than for glass-sc, even though
the former is classified as hard while the latter is classified as easy.
Table 6.7: Results when running platform three times with agents solving reblock354 using
random flip heuristic algorithm.
#Agents
Average best
platform
objective
MIPLIB
best
objective
Deviation
from MIPLIB
1
-19648583
-39280521
50%
5
-20294770
-39280521
48%
10
-20820066
-39280521
47%
20
-20356357
-39280521
48%
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Time from start (seconds)
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
Objective Value
1e7
1 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
(a) 1 agent.
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Time from start (seconds)
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
Objective Value
1e7
5 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Solution validation phase
(b) 5 agents.
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Time from start (seconds)
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
Objective Value
1e7
10 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Solution validation phase
(c) 10 agents.
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Time from start (seconds)
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
Objective Value
1e7
20 Agent/s
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Solution validation phase
(d) 20 agents.
Figure 6.4: Convergence of best (accepted) solutions found on the platform, with agents
solving problem instance reblock354 using random flip heuristic algorithm. Platform was
launched three times using 1, 5, 10, and 20 agents. The same scale for the y-axis is used
for all plots for better comparison.
Now lets take a closer look at the results from all three problem instances, glass-sc, sup-
48
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:57==
portcase16, and reblock354, too see how the platform is operating during these experi-
ments. As we have mentioned for all three problem instances, and also for the 20 random
instances in Section 6.1, there seems to be some gain when using multiple agents instead
of a single agent.
For all three problem instances, the solution convergence is fast to begin with but then it
plateaus shortly after and improves very slowly with time. Possibly, there is faster con-
vergence when using more agents but it is difficult to see it a definite manner. Given the
lack of computational resources and the nature of NP-hard optimization problems this is
not a big surprise. For faster convergence when generating solutions randomly, we would
most likely need exponential computing power due to the exponential number of possible
solutions these problems can have.
The solution convergence occurs slower with time for reblock354 than for the other two in-
stances. This is most likely due to it being much larger than the other two. Even though it
is classified as hard, that does not seem to matter too much for the solution convergence.
The solution quality is better for reblock354 than for glass-sc and it is also in the higher
ranks compared to the 20 random problem instances in Section 6.1, although those in-
stances were only solved for two hours.
In general, as we have stated in Section 6.1, the solution quality seems to depend mainly
on the problem instance structure not on the size of the instance, specifically which con-
straints are a part of the instance.
When using multiple agents on the platform there is a small delay in the solution con-
vergence due to the solution validation phase which enables agents to reach consensus
over solutions, as seen in Figure 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, and 6.4. In the first moments of running the
platform there is a lot of chaos, agents are constantly submitting solutions since there is
no best solution yet to compare to as can be seen in Figure 6.1d. This can lead to worse
solutions being accepted than other submitted solutions. In fact, this problem is not only
occurring in the beginning of platform runs, worse solutions can also get accepted in gen-
eral when solutions are submitted in close temporal proximity to each other, which can
evidently be seen in Figure 6.2b. This is a limitation of the current design of the solution
validation phase.
This chaotic acceptance of solutions seems to get worse with more agents. For only
20 agents this is already evident, imagine how it would be for thousands or millions of
agents. However, we note that for these experiments the consensus ratio was set to 0.5.
This means that it is not too difficult to get solutions accepted, especially during the first
moments when there is no known best solution on the platform that agents can refer-
ence. If the consensus ratio would be higher, there would be less unnecessary solutions
accepted in our experiments. This would work well on our closed experimental platform
with our controlled agents but on an open platform where there are malicious agents it
could be risky. It could lead to no solutions getting accepted.
These limitations of the solution validation phase could potentially be mitigated by cleverly
configuring the relevant parameters or implementing mechanisms that incentivize desired
agent behavior to minimize these issues. Or possibly, a redesign of how agents reach
consensus over solutions may be required.
6.3
Summary
We have established that for the computational power used for the experiments the plat-
form is not able to generate feasible solutions when agents use the random sampling al-
gorithm, except for very specific problem instances such as glass-sc. Instead, for most of
the experiments we used a different solution method, the random flip heuristic algorithm,
which enabled the platform to generate feasible solutions to more problem instance, or
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
49
==PAGE:58==
to be exact 15 out of the 20 random instances experimented on. It is important to note
that the random flip heuristic algorithm does not seem to converge to the same solutions
as can be the case with heuristics. It utilizes enough randomness to prevent agents from
generating the same solutions constantly, or at least that is the case for the time span we
ran the experiments.
We experienced a slight improvement in solution quality when using 20 agents on the plat-
form instead of a single agent. The solution quality does not seem to be highly correlated
with the problem instance size when randomly generating solutions using the random flip
heuristic algorithm. Rather, it seems to be more dependent on the problem structure and
on which types of constraint it includes. However, we note that for larger instances, fewer
solutions are generated in the same time span as for smaller instances. The convergence
of solution quality is fast in the early moments of launching the platform, and then it almost
plateaus shortly after. This is due to the nature of the NP-hard problem instances experi-
mented on. When randomly generating solutions, it is relatively easy to improve from the
worst solutions, but finding better solutions becomes exponentially harder over time. The
shape of the convergence curve would be the same, it would just be more compressed
with time because more solutions are generated in the same amount of time. And this is
also why we did not see big improvements when using 20 agents on the platform instead
of a single agent. We would most likely need exponentially more computational power to
see clear improvements.
To further investigate the solving power of the platform when randomly generating so-
lutions, more computational power is required. Ideally, using thousands or millions of
agents. This might give us more concrete results when using the random sampling algo-
rithm to see if it is feasible to generate solutions in a totally random manner.
We have seen how the proposed architecture, mainly how consensus is reached among
agents over the best solutions on the platform, has its flaws. Worse solutions than pre-
viously found solutions are being accepted as the best one found, and the amount of
solutions accepted is high, especially for increasing number of agents on the platform.
We might need an alternative method of reaching consensus, or possibly configuring the
current solution validation phase to mitigate these issues, for example, by using additional
mechanisms that incentives desired agent behavior.
50
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:59==
7
Future Work
We recall that for this project the aim was to design and implement a proof of concept
for the proposed distributed optimization platform that would validate the platform’s capa-
bilities as a solver when using simple algorithms. In addition, to gain insights into what
is needed for such a decentralized system to function, that is, the protocols and mecha-
nisms needed. We wanted to lay a foundation which would prove useful to solve difficult
real world mathematical optimization problems, and which would prove useful for future
work on the platform. That is, which pieces might be needed for it to function in an open
decentralized environment.
During the development and testing of the platform, a few observations were made that
made case for future work, both short term and long term. A summary of the main points
is as follows:
• Experiment with large scale platform. More computing power is required to get
concrete results for the feasibility of using randomly generated solutions to solve
difficult problems.
• Where to get computational resources for the platform in the future? There needs
to be an incentive for people to spend their computational resources on this platform
instead of, for example, Bitcoin’s platform.
• Usefulness in solving different types of optimization problems on the platform.
Currently, only binary problems are solved by this proof of concept, but other types
of combinatorial problem might be of interest and they can be solved using random
enumeration of solutions. Other types of problems may require different solution
methods.
• Alternative solution methods used by agents on the platform.
Agents are au-
tonomous and can use whichever solution method they want.
• Full implementation of a decentralized platform, which was proposed in Chapter
3. Our implementation in Chapter 4 did not feature the full decentralized platform,
including protocols and mechanisms for the platform to function on an open network
of computers. Among others, a reward mechanism and a trust mechanism.
In this chapter, the above points are discussed in more detail.
7.1
Computational resources
7.1.1
Increased computational power for experiments
For the experiments we only used a single machine with 24 cores. At most we launched
the platform using 20 agents where each agent was run on its own thread. This resulted
in not finding a single feasible solution when using completely random generation of so-
lutions with the random sampling algorithm. The random generation of solutions is the
closest analogy to what Bitcoin miners do when solving hash function. Thus, it was an
important area to research if we can solve these useful problems in that manner. This is
also related to the point of how we can make it desirable for people with computational
power to join this platform, which we discuss below in more detail.
For future work, given substantially more computational power we might be able to gen-
erate feasible solutions using the random sampling algorithm. It is difficult to say how
much computational power would be needed, but in this case more is always better. To
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
51
==PAGE:60==
get more concrete results and a better idea how much computational power is required,
it might be helpful to use smaller problem instances since they naturally have a smaller
set of solutions. Although there are not too many of them available on MIPLIB.
7.1.2
Owners of wasted computational resources
A motivational factor behind this proposed platform is the wasted computational power of
other decentralized systems such as the cryptocurrency Bitcoin. The idea is to make it
appealing for people with available computational power to join the distributed optimiza-
tion platform we are proposing. This is a big task and needs to be looked at from many
angles for future work.
Most importantly, participants need to get paid for their computational work, which re-
quires a reward mechanism that allocates rewards to participants in a fair manner. We
cover the reward mechanism in more detail in Section 7.4.3.
Another thing to note is which solution methods are used by agents on the platform. We
have been adamant that agents should be autonomous and are free to use whichever
solution method they like. However, this might pose a problem if some agents have a
big advantage over other agents. This might be the case where those who program the
agents have substantial knowledge in the field of mathematical programming and would
therefore use more sophisticated methods to solve the problems.
If we use Bitcoin as an example again, and this is probably the case for other cryptocur-
rencies, then the hardware used by miners, ASIC chips, are specialized to only solve hash
functions [3]. It is not straightforward for those miners to suddenly decide to use their com-
putational resources to join our platform to solve mathematical optimization problems.
7.2
Problem types
The general idea of the proposed platform was to use wasted computing power to solve
any useful problems with simple algorithms, such as randomly guessing solutions. This
includes mathematical programming problems such as binary problems, which we are
experimenting on with the implemented proof of concept for this project.
In general, it should be feasible to solve problems of combinatorial nature by randomly
generating solutions since they have a finite set of solutions. Although for integer problems
the solution space would be far greater than for binary problems of the same size, and
it would most likely require using methods to restrict the solution space by getting tighter
bounds on the variables. Possibly making such problems intractable to be solved using
simple methods, as we are proposing.
Continuous problems would, however, require a different strategy of solving. Randomly
generating solutions would not prove useful for those types of problems. There is naturally
the possibility of discretizing continuous problems but that would generate a huge solution
space for all reasonably sized problems.
Other types problems may be useful to solve on the platform. That is, problems from other
fields than from mathematical programming. We remember that agents are autonomous
and can use whichever solution method they want, which means that, for example, con-
tinuous problems may be well suited to be solved on the platform as well as discrete
problems. However, if we are aiming for an all purpose platform where agents are using
simple solution methods and would not know before hand which types of problems they
would be solving, it might restrict the solving ability of the platform. We cover this in more
detail in Section 7.3.
For future work, the types of problems suitable for the platform would need to be investi-
gated further, both for computational feasibility and for client demand.
52
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:61==
Another point to note regarding which problems can be solved on the platform is related
to the secrecy of the problems. It might be a client requirement that the problem and
its solution cannot be shared with other people. Problems of this nature might not be
desirable to be solved on an open decentralized platform.
7.3
Solution methods
The initial idea was to use simple algorithms, more specifically to randomly generate so-
lutions. It is inspired by Bitcoin, where miners can solve difficult cryptographic hash func-
tions by randomly generating solutions. The proof of concept developed for this project
aims to do the same, that is to let a network of agents on the platform generate ran-
dom solutions to solve binary problems. However, as we have noted before it is an open
platform and agents who join it should be autonomous. This means that they can use
whichever method they want to solve the problems. This could prove to be both positive
and negative.
The architecture was designed so that agents can access best known solutions on the
platform. This is the collaboration feature that might improve solution quality on the plat-
form. This feature is redundant for the implemented proof of concept where agents only
randomly generate solutions. However, if agents use different solution methods that can
benefit from knowing previously good solutions, this collaboration feature could prove
useful. There is potential to generate better solutions if agents use more sophisticated
methods than simply randomly generating solutions. This might require less computa-
tional power on the platform for the same quality of solutions. We also talked about the
idea of collaborating and mixing different kind of solution methods in more detail in Sec-
tion 2.1.3.
For future experiments it may be worth it to try to equip agents with more types of solution
methods and run the platform so that different agents are using different methods, for
example general purpose metaheuristics. It would be interesting to see how that affects
the solution quality. Firstly, if we will see a faster convergence of solutions by the use
of more sophisticated methods, and secondly, if the collaboration has any effect or not.
One type of experiment to test the collaboration feature could be to run the platform once
when agents do not use the best known solutions as a starting point, and once when they
do.
With agents using whichever solutions method they want, it might lead to it being unattrac-
tive for people with computational power to join the platform as agents. People with back-
ground in mathematical programming could have a huge advantage over those who do
not, as we have previously noted in Section 7.1.
In the current architecture, it is not decided which information agents should know about
problem instances on the platform before downloading an instance from a pool of prob-
lem instances. Depending on the given information, agents might evolve differently on
the platform. If agents know the type of problems, they may opt to use more sophis-
ticated methods specially made for certain types of problem. This could make simple
general methods that randomly generate solutions not beneficial for agents who want to
maximize their rewards. However, if agents would not know this type of information, it
might force them to use more general purpose methods to be competitive over a range of
problem types. This may minimize the advantage gap between people of different back-
grounds.
For future work, more research may be needed regarding the platform’s protocols and how
they can affect the goal of solving useful problems on an open decentralized platform.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
53
==PAGE:62==
7.4
Architecture
The proof of concept was not only meant to investigate the feasibility of solving difficult
optimization problems by randomly generating solutions, but also to lay foundation for the
proposed distributed optimization platform. What kind of architecture may be suitable, its
protocols and other valuable insights.
During the development and experiments of the proof of concept platform, valuable in-
sights were gained concerning the architecture and its protocols. In a future realization of
this platform, the goal is that it would be an open platform, and thus there are many tools,
or mechanisms, which are needed for it to function as we have mentioned previously in
Section 3.1.3. In the following sections, we will go over which future work may be nec-
essary for future versions of the proposed architecture from Chapter 3 and was missing
from our implementation from Chapter 4, along with additional insights gained from the
experiments.
7.4.1
Server node
The role of the server node in the proposed architecture is relatively well defined, how-
ever, several aspects remain unresolved for implementation. The group of decentralized
server nodes maintain the data related to the problem instances and offer communication
protocols for agents and clients to interact on the platform. However, there are pieces,
defined in the architecture, that were not needed for our implementation, which may be
needed for future implementations.
In our implementation, there is only a single server node. This eliminated the need for the
decentralized administration which we introduced in the architecture to make the group
of server nodes decentralized by handling data synchronization and load balancing of
communications with agents and clients. If using more computational power for future
experiments, the implementation might need to include multiple server nodes, or make
the current server more efficient and powerful by, for example, handling requests asyn-
chronously and running it on a larger centralized computer. In either case, for a future
vision of the platform, the server nodes are decentralized which requires the above men-
tioned things handled by the decentralized administration to work, and possibly function-
alities we overlooked.
The solution validation phase is handled by the server nodes. This is the implemented
consensus mechanism for agreeing on solutions on the platform by agents. It is managed
by the server nodes. There are issues related to this mechanism and it might need to be
redesigned, as we discuss in more detail in Section 7.4.4.
7.4.2
Client
The client role is not part of our implementation. In future implementations on an open
network of computers, the client plays a big role and it is important the client trusts the
other participants. Thus, the architecture around the client needs to be better defined,
including which protocols are required, how the rewards are given from clients to partici-
pants, potentially via smart contracts, and other essential mechanisms.
We recall that this optimization platform was indented as an alternative for clients instead
of, for example, buying licenses to commercial solvers. It should be straightforward for
clients to upload a problem instance with rewards attached to it and get a solution to the
instance.
7.4.3
Reward mechanism
A reward mechanism is necessary to incentivize participants to join the platform by re-
warding computational work. Furthermore, it could address malicious behavior on the
platform [23] [30].
No reward mechanism was designed for the proof of concept platform. However, we did
54
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:63==
implement the proof of concept so that the server node and agent nodes would be able to
track rewards given out for computational work. Although rewards were not a focus point
for this project, the experiments showed that when agents gained constant rewards for
improving the solution and validating submitted solutions, the total accumulated reward
for the problem instance grew when increasing the number of agents. However, the so-
lution quality did not improve on the same scale as the rewards grew. This observation
encourages a dynamical reward system to mitigate overspending of client’s budget for his
problem instances.
Smart contracts may be one way to facilitate the reward mechanism by securely dis-
tributing rewards in a decentralized network of computer nodes, executing transactions
automatically when predefined conditions are met.
For future work, a study surrounding a reward mechanism suitable for our platform would
need to be conducted.
7.4.4
Consensus mechanism
On a decentralized system such as the distributed optimization platform, there needs to
be a mechanism how to reach a consensus over the state of the data. For the platform,
it is which solution should be recognized as the current best one found for each problem
instance on the platform. This is the purpose of the solution validation phase.
For the proof of concept platform, we developed and implemented this solution validation
phase, managed by the server node, where agents vote on solutions to reach a consen-
sus. We have noted in Section 6.2 limitations concerning the solution validation phase,
for example that worse solutions than the current best can get accepted. Additionally, the
current implementation might allow too much involvement of server nodes which requires
a lot of trust between agents and server nodes over the votes on solutions.
For future work, these limitations need to be investigated further, and to see if they can
be prevented by changing the current implementation or by introducing supporting mech-
anisms. Or possibly, a new mechanism is needed for agents to reach consensus over
solutions on the platform.
7.4.5
Trust mechanism
For an open decentralized platform there needs to be trust between autonomous partici-
pants. Mechanisms or protocols are needed to force trusted behavior or to disincentivize
malicious behavior. For example, a reward mechanism can address malicious behavior
[23] [30]. For our design of the platform, it is mostly related to server nodes giving out
correct information about the data they manage, and the results of the solution validation
phase in which malicious agent nodes and server nodes can affect the outcome.
In our proof of concept implementation, the participants where assumed to be trusted.
For future implementations, the vulnerabilities of the platform would have to be studied to
determine what is needed to prevent malicious behavior.
7.4.6
Identification mechanism
Participants on the platform need to be able to identify themselves, and ideally each par-
ticipant should only be able to use a single identity.
For future work, identification mechanisms would need to be implemented, and it would
need to be thought of in relation to the solution validation phase and the handling of re-
wards on the platform, possibly via smart contracts.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:65==
8
Conclusion
We have designed and implemented a proof of concept that lays the foundation for a
distributed optimization solver that aims to use wasted computing power to solve useful
problems. We have investigated the feasibility of solving real world optimization problems
by randomly generating solutions.
Reviewing the field of mathematical optimization solvers, by focusing on methods used to
solve complex problems, gave background on how problems are solved today and how
these methods could be used on a distributed optimization platform. Wasted computing
power has been proposed in literature as means to solve useful problems. Theoretical
work has been done in this area to solve proof of useful work instead of proof of work,
which is essentially a distributed solution method, similar to what we are proposing.
A high level architecture was proposed for the distributed optimization platform, outlining
the necessary components and protocols needed for such a system. It describes a decen-
tralized system where autonomous computer nodes solve problems in a distributed man-
ner. The architecture was designed using principles from decentralized and distributed
systems. A simplified version of the proposed architecture was implemented where so-
lutions to binary problem instances were found using algorithms that randomly generate
solutions. Experiments were conducted on real world problem instances from MIPLIB to
validate the solution capabilities of the implemented platform and to better understand
how it operates. Using the computing power available for the experiments, no feasible
solution were found for any of 20 randomly chosen problem instances by using a ran-
dom sampling algorithm. However, when using a different algorithm, but still simple, to
randomly generate solutions, feasible solutions were found for 15 of the instances. The
results showed improvement in solution quality with increasing time and number of agents
on the platform. The solution quality varied significantly between problem instances, and
it did not seem to be heavily controlled by the size of the instances, but rather by the
problem structure.
The proof of concept could not validate the proposed distributed optimization solver. It
could not determine the feasibility of solving real world binary optimization problems by
repeatedly sampling random solutions on a large scale network of computers due to the
limited computing power used for the experiments. However, using a different algorithm
to randomly generate solutions, feasible solutions were found for most instances, and
the quality of the solution improved both with time and with increasing number of agents,
although minimally. Making case for future work. Furthermore, the development and ex-
perimentation gave us insights to which components might be needed for such a platform
to function on an open network of computers.
An important aspect of this project was that the proof of concept should provide as initial
work, which would lay the foundation for the proposed distributed optimization platform.
For future work, a larger scale network would be needed to get more concrete ideas if
it is possible to generate feasible solutions to these binary problems by using random
sampling of solutions. It is also of interest to investigate other more sophisticated solution
methods, for example, those who gain from the availability of other agents’ solutions on
the platform. Given the platform is seen as a viable idea, more work will be needed on
the architecture and its design for it to work effectively on a decentralized open network
of computers.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Frederick S. Hillier and Gerald J. Lieberman. Introduction to operations research.
McGraw-Hill Education, 2021.
[2]
Digiconomist. Bitcoin Energy Consumption Index. URL: https://digiconomist.net/
bitcoin-energy-consumption (visited on 12/20/2024).
[3]
Alex De Vries and Christian Stoll. “Bitcoin’s growing e-waste problem”. In: Resources,
conservation and recycling 175 (2021), p. 105901.
[4]
Harald Vranken. “Sustainability of bitcoin and blockchains”. In: Current opinion in
environmental sustainability 28 (2017), pp. 1–9.
[5]
Gwyneth Butera. When is distributed optimization useful? 2024. URL: https : / /
support . gurobi . com / hc / en - us / articles / 13177925107601 - When - is - distributed -
optimization-useful (visited on 12/30/2024).
[6]
Matthias Fitzi et al. “Ofelimos: Combinatorial optimization via proof-of-useful-work:
A provably secure blockchain protocol”. In: Annual International Cryptology Confer-
ence. Springer. 2022, pp. 339–369.
[7]
Naoki Shibata. “Proof-of-search: combining blockchain consensus formation with
solving optimization problems”. In: IEEE Access 7 (2019), pp. 172994–173006.
[8]
Milan Todorović et al. “Proof-of-useful-work: Blockchain mining by solving real-life
optimization problems”. In: Symmetry 14.9 (2022), p. 1831.
[9]
Robert Bixby. “A brief history of linear and mixed-integer programming computa-
tion”. In: Jan. 2012, pp. 107–121. ISBN: 978-3-936609-58-5. DOI: 10.4171/dms/6/
16.
[10]
LLC Gurobi Optimization. Mixed-Integer Optimization (MIP) - A Primer on the Ba-
sics. 2024. URL: https://www.gurobi.com/resources/mixed-integer-programming-
mip-a-primer-on-the-basics/ (visited on 12/30/2024).
[11]
Thorsten Koch et al. “Progress in mathematical programming solvers from 2001 to
2020”. In: EURO Journal on Computational Optimization 10 (2022), p. 100031.
[12]
Tobias Achterberg and Roland Wunderling. “Mixed integer programming: Analyzing
12 years of progress”. In: Facets of combinatorial optimization: Festschrift for martin
grötschel. Springer, 2013, pp. 449–481.
[13]
Erling D Andersen and Knud D Andersen. “The MOSEK interior point optimizer for
linear programming: an implementation of the homogeneous algorithm”. In: High
performance optimization. Springer, 2000, pp. 197–232.
[14]
Stephen Boyd et al. “Notes on decomposition methods”. In: Notes for EE364B, Stan-
ford University 635 (2007), pp. 1–36.
[15]
Stephen Boyd et al. “Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the alter-
nating direction method of multipliers”. In: Foundations and Trends® in Machine
learning 3.1 (2011), pp. 1–122.
[16]
Fred W Glover and Gary A Kochenberger. Handbook of metaheuristics. Vol. 57.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2003.
[17]
Kenneth Sörensen and Fred Glover. “Metaheuristics”. In: Encyclopedia of opera-
tions research and management science 62 (2013), pp. 960–970.
[18]
Mohammad Nabi Omidvar, Xiaodong Li, and Xin Yao. “A review of population-
based metaheuristics for large-scale black-box global optimization—Part I”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 26.5 (2021), pp. 802–822.
[19]
Martina Fischetti and Matteo Fischetti. “Matheuristics”. In: Handbook of heuristics.
Springer, 2018, pp. 121–153.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
59
==PAGE:68==
[20]
Christian Blum et al. “Hybrid metaheuristics in combinatorial optimization: A survey”.
In: Applied soft computing 11.6 (2011), pp. 4135–4151.
[21]
Yoad Lewenberg et al. “Bitcoin mining pools: A cooperative game theoretic analy-
sis”. In: Proceedings of the 2015 international conference on autonomous agents
and multiagent systems. 2015, pp. 919–927.
[22]
Hesamoddin Tahami and Hengameh Fakhravar. “A literature review on combining
heuristics and exact algorithms in combinatorial optimization”. In: European Journal
of Information Technologies and Computer Science 2.2 (2022), pp. 6–12.
[23]
Satoshi Nakamoto. “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system”. In: Satoshi
Nakamoto (2008).
[24]
Felix Hoffmann. “Challenges of proof-of-useful-work (pouw)”. In: 2022 IEEE 1st
Global Emerging Technology Blockchain Forum: Blockchain & Beyond (iGETblockchain).
IEEE. 2022, pp. 1–5.
[25]
Sunny King. “Primecoin: Cryptocurrency with prime number proof-of-work”. In: July
7th 1.6 (2013).
[26]
George F Coulouris, Jean Dollimore, and Tim Kindberg. Distributed systems: con-
cepts and design. pearson education, 2005.
[27]
Ajay D Kshemkalyani and Mukesh Singhal. Distributed computing: principles, algo-
rithms, and systems. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[28]
GeekForGeeks. Centralized vs. Decentralized vs. Distributed Systems. 2024. URL:
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/comparison-centralized-decentralized-and-distributed-
systems/ (visited on 12/16/2024).
[29]
Yang Xiao et al. “A survey of distributed consensus protocols for blockchain net-
works”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 22.2 (2020), pp. 1432–1465.
[30]
Fatima Lamia Haddi and Mahfoud Benchaı￿ba. “A survey of incentive mechanisms in
static and mobile p2p systems”. In: Journal of Network and Computer Applications
58 (2015), pp. 108–118.
[31]
Ralf Steinmetz and Klaus Wehrle. Peer-to-peer systems and applications. Vol. 3485.
Springer, 2005.
[32]
Zibin Zheng et al. “An overview on smart contracts: Challenges, advances and plat-
forms”. In: Future Generation Computer Systems 105 (2020), pp. 475–491.
[33]
Kun Lu et al. “A dynamic reward-based incentive mechanism: reducing the cost of
P2P systems”. In: Knowledge-Based Systems 112 (2016), pp. 105–113.
[34]
Lucid Software Inc. Entity-Relationship Diagram Symbols and Notation. URL: https:
//www.lucidchart.com/pages/ER-diagram-symbols-and-meaning (visited on 12/18/2024).
[35]
Zuse Institute Berlin (ZIB). MIPLIB 2017 – The Mixed Integer Programming Library.
2024. URL: https://miplib.zib.de/index.html (visited on 01/10/2025).
[36]
Ambros Gleixner et al. “MIPLIB 2017: Data-Driven Compilation of the 6th Mixed-
Integer Programming Library”. In: Mathematical Programming Computation (2021).
DOI: 10.1007/s12532-020-00194-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12532-020-00194-
3.
[37]
LLC Gurobi Optimization. MIPLIB 2024: Call for Submissions. 2024. URL: https://
www.gurobi.com/resources/miplib-2024-call-for-submissions/ (visited on 01/10/2025).
[38]
Zuse Institute Berlin (ZIB). Guide to the Instance Statistics. 2024. URL: https://
miplib.zib.de/statistics.html (visited on 01/10/2025).
60
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
A.1
Configuring and running platform for experiments
We launch the platform by starting the server node web server which initiates a single
instance of the server node that manages the data on the platform and solution valida-
tion phase. It responds to agent HTTP requests. Agents are programmed to run for a
specific amount time for the experiments. Each agent node runs on a separate thread,
which we enable by using the taskset command. This is to emulate each agent being a
independent computer with its own resources and data handling.
Code listing A.1 shows how the server node web server and agent nodes are started for
the experiments. While code listings A.2 and A.3 show the programmed agent behavior
for multi-agent experiments and single agent experiments, respectively.
1
#!/bin/bash
2
3
# - Run as a background process to avoid blocking the shell (for experiments)
4
#
nohup ./run_experiment_local.sh > experiment.log 2>&1 &
5
# - See which cores are being used by the processes
6
#
ps -e -o pid,psr,comm | grep python
7
#
htop
8
9
10
####
----------------------------------------- ####
11
# Define the unexpected_interuption function
12
unexpected_interuption() {
13
echo "The experiment has been interrupted unexpectedly (data won't be
trustworthy). Killing processes..."
14
echo "Stopping agent nodes..."
15
for PID in "${AGENT_PIDS[@]}"; do
16
kill $PID
17
done
18
echo "Stopping server node web server..."
19
kill -SIGINT $SERVER_PID
# Send SIGINT to server node server
20
wait $SERVER_PID
# Wait for the process to terminate
21
}
22
# Trap SIGINT and SIGTERM signals and call the cleanup function
23
trap unexpected_interuption SIGINT SIGTERM
24
25
# Function to check and enforce CPU affinity
26
check_and_enforce_affinity() {
27
local PID=$1
28
local EXPECTED_CORES=$2
29
local CURRENT_AFFINITY=$(taskset -cp $PID | awk -F': ' '{print $2}')
30
31
if [ "$CURRENT_AFFINITY" != "$EXPECTED_CORES" ]; then
32
echo "Error: Process $PID is not running on expected core(s)
$EXPECTED_CORES. Current affinity: $CURRENT_AFFINITY"
33
kill -9 $PID
34
exit 1
35
fi
36
}
37
####
----------------------------------------- ####
38
39
40
# Run from the root directory of this project
41
cd ../
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
61
==PAGE:70==
42
DIR=$(pwd)
43
echo "Running experiment from $DIR"
44
45
# Activate the virtual environment
46
source .venv/bin/activate
47
48
# Start the server node web server on CPU core 0
49
taskset -c 0 python -m network.server_node_web_server &
# Bind to core 0
50
SERVER_PID=$!
51
sleep 10 # Wait for the server node web server to start
52
echo "Server node web server with PID $SERVER_PID is running on core(s):"
53
taskset -cp $SERVER_PID
54
55
# Define total time to run the agents and problem instance to solve
56
TOTAL_TIME=7200
# 2 hours
57
PROBLEM_INSTANCE=glass-sc
58
59
# Start agent nodes on specific
cores
60
NUM_AGENTS=20
61
START_CORE=1
62
AGENT_PIDS=() # To keep track of agent process IDs
63
for i in $(seq 1 $NUM_AGENTS); do
64
CORE=$((START_CORE + i - 1))
65
echo "Starting agent $i on core $CORE..."
66
taskset -c $CORE python experiments/
agent_behavior_many_agents_single_problem.py $TOTAL_TIME
$PROBLEM_INSTANCE &
67
AGENT_PID=$!
68
AGENT_PIDS+=($AGENT_PID) # Record the PID of the agent
69
sleep 1
# Allow process to start
70
71
# Print and verify the CPU affinity of the newly started process
72
echo "Agent $i (PID $AGENT_PID) is running on core(s):"
73
taskset -cp $AGENT_PID
74
check_and_enforce_affinity $AGENT_PID "$CORE"
75
done
76
77
# Use `wait` for all agent PIDs
78
# NOTE we need to wait for all agents to complete before killing the server
79
# node web server since agents send requests to the web server on
80
# clean up, and as soon as any SIGINT is used in this shell script the uvicorn
81
# web server will stop, even if we send to the agent node processes
82
echo "Waiting for agents to complete..."
83
for PID in "${AGENT_PIDS[@]}"; do
84
wait $PID
85
done
86
87
# Cleanup - kill server node web server after agents have completed
88
echo "Experiment completed successfully. Cleaning up..."
89
kill -SIGINT $SERVER_PID
# Send SIGINT to server node server
90
wait $SERVER_PID
# Wait for the process to terminate
Listing A.1: Script to start the platform for the experiments.
1
### Agent event loop in experiment - agent will solve a single problem
instance ###
2
3
# Command line arguments:
4
# 1. Execution time in seconds
5
# 2. Problem instance name (without .mps extension)
6
7
# Agent does the following:
62
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:71==
8
# 1. Downloads a single problem instance
9
# 2. Solves only this whole problem instance the whole time
10
# 3. After solving the problem instance the agent validates all available
solutions from other agents
11
# 4. Agent will check the status of his solution submissions every 10 minutes
to claim reward for a unclaimed accepted solution submission
12
# 5. Repeat step 2, 3 and 4 until the execution time has passed
13
14
import sys
15
import os
16
import time
17
import schedule
18
19
sys.path.append(os.path.dirname(os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(__file__))))
20
from network.agent_node import AgentNode
21
22
# Input arguments
23
execution_time = int(sys.argv[1])
24
problem_instance_name = sys.argv[2]
25
26
# Agent
27
agent = AgentNode(experiment_time=execution_time)
28
29
# Agent events
30
def download_problem_instance_data_by_name(problem_instance_name):
31
problem_instance = agent.download_problem_instance_data_by_name(
problem_instance_name)
32
return problem_instance
33
34
def solve_problem_instance(problem_instance_name):
35
agent.solve_problem_instance(problem_instance_name)
36
37
def check_submit_solution_status(problem_instance):
38
if agent.problem_instances.get(problem_instance) is not None:
39
active_solution_submission_ids = agent.problem_instances[
problem_instance]["active_solution_submission_ids"].copy()
#
copy the list since we will remove elements from it
40
for solution_submit_id in active_solution_submission_ids:
41
agent.check_submit_solution_status(solution_submit_id)
42
43
def validate_solutions(problem_instance):
44
# Validate solutions until all are validated this agent can validate at
the moment
45
success = True
46
while success:
47
success = agent.validate_solution_request(problem_instance)
48
49
# Schedule agent events
50
schedule.every(10).minutes.do(check_submit_solution_status ,
problem_instance_name)
# check if solution has been validated to claim
reward and free up memory
51
52
# Download problem instance before starting the "event loop"
53
problem_instance = download_problem_instance_data_by_name(
problem_instance_name)
54
55
if problem_instance is not None:
56
try:
57
# We assume that the max_solve_time defined for the agent is shorter
than the solution validation phase
58
# so that agent can solve and then validate all solutions from other
agents before validation phase is over
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
63
==PAGE:72==
59
start_time = time.time()
60
elapsed_time = 0
61
time_spent_solving = 0
62
time_spent_validating = 0
63
while elapsed_time < execution_time:
64
# Solve problem instance
65
start_solving_time = time.time()
66
solve_problem_instance(problem_instance_name)
67
time_spent_solving += time.time() - start_solving_time
68
69
# Validate solutions
70
start_validating_time = time.time()
71
validate_solutions(problem_instance_name)
72
time_spent_validating += time.time() - start_validating_time
73
74
schedule.run_pending()
75
elapsed_time = time.time() - start_time
76
77
except KeyboardInterrupt:
78
pass
79
80
finally:
81
time.sleep(5)
# wait a little bit since agent might still be
validating a solution (to avoid unexpected errors)
82
83
print(f"""Agent might be stuck solving in the end of the execution
time so out of the planned execution time of {execution_time}
seconds the agent effectively spent \
84
\n{time_spent_validating} seconds validating and {execution_time -
time_spent_validating} seconds solving ratio of \
85
\n{time_spent_validating/execution_time} and {1-
time_spent_validating/execution_time} respectively""")
86
87
# Clean up agent
88
agent.clean_up()
89
print(f"Agent {agent.id} finished execution")
Listing A.2: Programmed agent behavior for a multi-agent platform experiment.
1
### Agent loop in experiment - single agent on platform will solve a single
problem instance (no need to validate since no other agents) ###
2
3
# Command line arguments:
4
# 1. Execution time in seconds
5
# 2. Problem instance name (without .mps extension)
6
7
# Agent does the following:
8
# 1. Downloads a single problem instance
9
# 2. Solves only this whole problem instance the whole time
10
# 3. Agent will check the status of his solution submissions every 10 minutes
to claim reward for a unclaimed accepted solution submission
11
# 4. Repeat step 2 and 3 until the execution time has passed
12
13
import sys
14
import os
15
import time
16
import schedule
17
18
sys.path.append(os.path.dirname(os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(__file__))))
19
from network.agent_node import AgentNode
20
21
# Input arguments
64
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
==PAGE:73==
22
execution_time = int(sys.argv[1])
23
problem_instance_name = sys.argv[2]
24
25
# Agent
26
agent = AgentNode(experiment_time=execution_time)
27
28
# Agent events
29
def download_problem_instance_data_by_name(problem_instance_name):
30
problem_instance = agent.download_problem_instance_data_by_name(
problem_instance_name)
31
return problem_instance
32
33
def solve_problem_instance(problem_instance_name):
34
agent.solve_problem_instance(problem_instance_name)
35
36
def check_submit_solution_status(problem_instance):
37
if agent.problem_instances.get(problem_instance) is not None:
38
active_solution_submission_ids = agent.problem_instances[
problem_instance]["active_solution_submission_ids"].copy()
#
copy the list since we will remove elements from it
39
for solution_submit_id in active_solution_submission_ids:
40
agent.check_submit_solution_status(solution_submit_id)
41
42
def validate_solutions(problem_instance):
43
# Validate solutions until all are validated this agent can validate at
the moment
44
success = True
45
while success:
46
success = agent.validate_solution_request(problem_instance)
47
48
# Schedule agent events
49
schedule.every(10).minutes.do(check_submit_solution_status ,
problem_instance_name)
# check if solution has been validated to claim
reward and free up memory
50
51
# Download problem instance before starting the "event loop"
52
problem_instance = download_problem_instance_data_by_name(
problem_instance_name)
53
54
if problem_instance is not None:
55
try:
56
start_time = time.time()
57
elapsed_time = 0
58
while elapsed_time < execution_time:
59
# Solve problem instance
60
solve_problem_instance(problem_instance_name)
61
62
schedule.run_pending()
63
elapsed_time = time.time() - start_time
64
65
except KeyboardInterrupt:
66
pass
67
68
finally:
69
time.sleep(5)
# wait a little bit since agent might still be
validating a solution (to avoid unexpected errors)
70
71
# Clean up agent
72
agent.clean_up()
73
print(f"Agent {agent.id} finished execution")
Listing A.3: Programmed agent behavior for a single agent platform experiment.
Platform for a Distributed Optimization Solver
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
