==PAGE:1==
Simulation and Optimisation of
Scheduling in the Brewery Industry
Master’s Thesis
Written by:
Andreas Juhl Sørensen (s194160)
University Supervisor:
Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom (DTU Chemical Engineering)
Industry Supervisor:
Kevin Feldmann (GEA Process Engineering A/S)
Technical University of Denmark
January 26, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This thesis was written as a partial fulfilment of the requirements for the M.Sc. degree
in Chemical and Biochemical Engineering. The project was undertaken at the PROSYS
(Process and System Engineering Centre) Research Centre within the Department of
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The work presented in the thesis was done over a period from the 26th of August 2024 to
the 26th of January 2025 and corresponds to 30 ECTS credits for the author.
The project was supervised by Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom (Associate Professor at DTU) as
the university supervisor, and Kevin Feldmann (Digital Optimization Specialist at GEA
Process Engineering A/S) as the industry supervisor.
Kgs. Lyngby – January 26, 2025
Andreas Juhl Sørensen - ajuso@dtu.dk - s194160
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to sincerely thank my supervisors, Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom and Kevin Feld-
mann, for their help, time, guidance and expertise throughout the project.
Furthermore, I would like to thank the Digital Optimization Group at GEA for pro-
viding me with a workspace and for their hospitality and support during the project.
Lastly, I would like to express my appreciation to my girlfriend, family and friends for
their endless support, patience and understanding throughout my work on this thesis.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
A systematic approach to production scheduling, which is a decision-making process where
limited resources are allocated to competing tasks over a given time, is required in many
production processes. In academic literature, production scheduling through mathemati-
cal optimisation by developing a state-space scheduling model has been proven to improve
scheduling for various industries compared to traditional scheduling methods. This thesis
focuses on the development and evaluation of a tailored state-space scheduling model for
breweries.
A general scheduling model was developed by defining equations and constraints responsi-
ble for unit states, batch sizes and material inventory, which were extracted from relevant
literature. This general model was found to reproduce documented results from an aca-
demic article.
Based on this, a novel state-space scheduling model for scheduling tasks in a brewhouse
was developed. Results demonstrate the model’s ability to appropriately batch, sequence
and assign tasks to corresponding units and account for maintenance of units through
cleaning-in-place (CIP) operations.
However, computational challenges were observed
since the computation time grew exponentially with each added layer of complexity. Com-
pared to scheduling in a software-based scheduling tool, INOSIM, notable advantages of
the developed model were noticed, such as the ability to perform batching automati-
cally. As such, this thesis contributes to improving operational efficiency in breweries by
developing a tailored brewhouse scheduling model.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Introduction
1
1
Background and Motivation
2
1.1
Beer and Breweries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Market and Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
The Overall Brewing Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Production Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Generalised Scheduling Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Illustrative Example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Motivation for Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Literature and Theory
10
2.1
Brewery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
The Brewing Process in Detail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Production Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
Mathematical Optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
State-Task Network Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.3
State-Space Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.4
State-Space Scheduling Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.5
Scheduling Model Extensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.6
Industrial Scheduling in Literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.2.7
Brewery Scheduling in Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3
Case Study I: Documented Example
37
3.1
System Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Documented Modelling and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:6==
3.3
Programming of State-Space Scheduling Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.1
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.2
Simulation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4
Software Simulation in INOSIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.5
Main Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
Case Study II: Brewhouse Scheduling
49
4.1
Modelling and Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.1
STN Representation of the Brewhouse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.2
Model Development Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
Initial Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.2
Modelling and Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.3
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2.4
Modified Implementation for Practicality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3
Implementation of Different Beer Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.1
Recipes and Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.4
Implementation of CIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.4.1
Periodic CIP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.4.2
CIP at Change of Recipe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.5
Realistic Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.5.1
Expected Behaviour of Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.5.2
Results using Scheduling Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.5.3
Results using INOSIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.6
Computation Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.7
Main Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5
Case Study III: Investigation of Assumptions
82
5.1
Processing Times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
5.2
Required Time for CIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
==PAGE:7==
5.3
Periodic CIP on Other Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5.4
Main Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
6
Discussion
91
6.1
Usefulness of the Scheduling Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.2
Comparison of Scheduling Model and INOSIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
Conclusion
95
==PAGE:8==
Introduction
Production scheduling is necessary for production processes to maximise operational effi-
ciency by influencing resource allocation, throughput and production costs. Traditionally,
scheduling is performed manually by operators or through software-based solutions. In
recent decades, scheduling through mixed-integer linear programmes (MILPs) has been a
major research area of interest in process systems engineering because they allow for the
tailoring of scheduling to process specifications and reactive scheduling. MILP schedul-
ing has notable advantages over traditional scheduling by allowing for customisation and
being able to automatically adjust production, in a similar manner to process control.
However, because it is a relatively new field of research, all relevant industries and pro-
cesses are yet to have tailor-made MILP scheduling models in place. One such industry is
beer production, where few academic articles deal with the scheduling problem in brew-
eries. Consequently, there are no state-of-the-art MILP scheduling models in breweries,
which highlights the possibility of innovation. Furthermore, the brewing process contains
production on different time scales since fermentation is on a much larger time scale than
the remaining production. Additionally, maintenance of units through cleaning-in-place
(CIP) can be necessary through fouling or a change of beer recipe. These factors lead to
manual scheduling being highly time-consuming, and scheduling in software tools is likely
not to have the desired degree of customisation to produce meaningful schedules because
of the generality of their frameworks.
This thesis will deal with developing an MILP scheduling model to address the scheduling
problem in breweries. This will be done by setting up a general scheduling model and
reproducing results documented in literature. Subsequently, the model will be tailored to
brewhouse scheduling to perform batching, sequencing and assignment of units and tasks,
while simultaneously enforcing maintenance through CIP. Ultimately, the goal is to de-
velop an MILP scheduling framework that can agilely be adjusted to incorporate specific
brewery data since different breweries can have very different layouts and, consequently,
data.
Page 1 of 96
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Background and Motivation
1.1
Beer and Breweries
Beer is an alcoholic beverage made from a source of starch, most commonly a malted
grain, without concentrating the ethanol.[1] ”Brewery” is the commonly used name for a
place where beer is commercially produced, and the process of making beer is referred to
as ”brewing”.[2] The brewing process is outlined in section 1.1.2.
1.1.1
Market and Scale
Beer is a highly popular alcoholic beverage enjoyed at home and establishments. In 2023,
357 million litres of pilsner equivalents1 were sold in Denmark alone.[3] Additionally, Dan-
ish breweries generated a total global revenue of 83.7 billion DKK in 2022.[4] To put this
into perspective, this corresponds to just under 3% of the annual gross domestic product
(GDP) of Denmark in 2022.[5] Furthermore, beer in Denmark is an established market
and, therefore, a relatively stable market with sales that have been roughly constant
throughout the last 10 years with only minor variations between years.[3]
On a global scale, 192 billion litres of pilsner equivalents were consumed in 2022,[6] and
retail and establishment sales generated 3,800 billion DKK of revenue in the same year.[7]
As in Denmark, the market is relatively stable with respect to beer sales in recent years –
albeit with a minor decrease in beers sold in Europe and North America and a moderate
increase in Asia.[6] However, this can partially be explained by a rapid growth in the
market for non-alcoholic beers, especially in Europe and North America.[8] For example,
2.3 million litres of non-alcoholic beer were sold in Denmark in 2012, while 7.2 million
1A pilsner equivalent is a standard measure for beer sales, defined as the amount of pure alcohol
produced for beer (16.5 million in Denmark) distributed in 4.6 vol% alcohol beers.
Page 2 of 96
==PAGE:10==
1.1. BEER AND BREWERIES
litres were sold in 2021, highlighting rapid growth.[9]
In summary, the beer market is quite large and relatively stable, and beer sales are a
significant factor in both the Danish and global economy.
1.1.2
The Overall Brewing Process
Many different types of beer exist, but the general types of ingredients and the steps
taken in the brewery process remain the same regardless of the type of beer. The general
ingredients for beer brewing are water, malt, hops, yeast and sometimes adjuncts.[10] The
brewing process at an industrial scale is summarised in figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Simplified diagram summarising the brewing process at an industrial scale.
In figure 1.1, it is indicated at which point the different ingredients enter the brewing pro-
cess. The brewing process is divided into three distinct categories based on their function:
the brewhouse, fermentation and bottling. The term ”brewhouse” refers to the hot side
of the brewery, i.e. where the primary heat exchange takes place. It is not to be confused
with a brewery, which the term brewhouse may colloquially be used to refer to.[10] For
the sake of consistency, the term ”brewhouse” will be used to refer to the hot side of the
brewery throughout this work. The brewhouse consists of several tasks, all of which are
performed in batches on a time scale of hours. The fermentation category contains the
main fermentation, maturation and the immediate processing hereafter. The steps in the
fermentation category are also performed in batches, on a time scale of days to weeks.
The bottling category contains the primary packaging steps. It is often referred to as
”the line” because these steps are performed continuously, contrary to the brewhouse and
fermentation.[11] The steps in the brewing process are explained in detail in section 2.1.
Page 3 of 96
==PAGE:11==
1.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
In summary, the brewing process contains many steps on different time scales. Namely,
the fermentation is on a much longer time scale (days to weeks) than the brewhouse and
the line (hours). Furthermore, the bottlenecks of the brewing process depend primarily
on the available equipment at a given beer production facility.[10] Because of this, the
assignment of tasks to units and the sequencing of brewing tasks is a complex prob-
lem, especially for large-scale breweries, and therefore requires a systematic production
scheduling approach.
1.2
Production Scheduling
In short, production scheduling is a decision-making process in which limited resources are
allocated to competing tasks over a given time to optimise some set objective(s).[12],[13] It is
an important tool for many different industries because it can maximise the productivity
of a given production line within given process constraints. It differentiates itself from
planning based on the time scale. The overall planning of a production process is long-
term and contains many supply chain management tools. Here, production scheduling
is simply one component, which in comparison is on a short time scale. This is because
scheduling deals with operational objectives and can be revised and/or improved whenever
new information is available.[12] Although scheduling can be performed manually by an
operator or scheduler based on experience with the given production line, scheduling
becomes especially powerful at maximising production productivity when it is automated,
even more so for large scheduling problems. This is because an automated algorithm
and/or program can consider many different variables and constraints based on process
properties, real-time data and system interactions.[13]
Scheduling as a tool plays an important role in manufacturing and production systems,
as well as transportation, distribution and other types of service industries. Production
scheduling is a relatively new field in chemical and biochemical industries that became
a major research area in the late 1990s. Today, several scheduling solutions exist for
complex chemical and biochemical problems, e.g.
within the oil and pharmaceutical
sectors. However, the power of scheduling is not yet fully utilised in all relevant chemical
and biochemical production lines.[12]
Page 4 of 96
==PAGE:12==
1.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
1.2.1
Generalised Scheduling Problem Statement
The general scheduling solution for processing industries can be summarised in three
major decisions:
1. Selection and sizing of tasks – ”Batching”
2. Assignment of tasks to units – ”Assignment”
3. Sequencing and/or timing of tasks on each unit – ”Sequencing”
These scheduling decisions are to be fully determined given the following process infor-
mation:
1. Facility data
2. Production recipes
3. Production costs
4. Resource availability and compatibility with tasks
5. Product demand or a set production target
Here, facility data encompasses the capacities of units and storage vessels, while produc-
tion recipes include processing times and required resources for each task. Production
costs are the cost of resources and utilities. It is worth noting that these process param-
eters could either be considered fixed or time-varying, such as the demand for a specific
product.
The goal is to find the optimal schedule through the three scheduling deci-
sions while simultaneously satisfying all process information, constraints and some set
objective(s), which could be profit or throughput maximisation. In this way, the three
scheduling decisions fully determine the development over time of material inventory and
products due to the number, type, size and timing of tasks being defined.[12]
1.2.2
Illustrative Example
The role of scheduling in processing industries is easily seen through an illustrative exam-
ple. The parameters in the following are intentionally ambiguous and in arbitrary units,
Page 5 of 96
==PAGE:13==
1.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
as this could be relevant in many industries. Given are demands for four products: A,
B, C and D as 10, 5, 3 and 2 in arbitrary units, respectively. Two units are available for
production, both of which can produce all four products. Unit 1 has a capacity of 4 and
unit 2 has a capacity of 3 in the same arbitrary units. When a unit switches from pro-
ducing one product to another, an additional setup time is required. Without considering
the processing time to produce each product in detail, figure 1.2 shows how a solution to
this scheduling problem could unfold.
Figure 1.2: Illustrative example showing the nature of solving a scheduling problem
through the three major decisions: batching, assignment and sequencing. The example
contains 4 products to be produced: A, B, C and D with a given demand of 10, 6, 4
and 3, respectively. Unit 1 and 2 can produce all products with capacities of 4 and 3,
respectively. All units are arbitrary. The turquoise box is a ”Gantt chart”.
In figure 1.2, the scheduling solution is represented in a Gantt chart – a bar chart com-
monly used to illustrate project or production schedules.[13] The illustrated setup time
could be due to equipment maintenance and restart among other things.
It is worth
noting that this example applies to both continuous and batch-type processes, the only
difference being the continuous process would release the product over time, while a batch
process would release the product all at once. The solution shows that 3 productions of A
of 4, 4 and 2 are performed in unit 1 followed by one production of C, while a production
Page 6 of 96
==PAGE:14==
1.3. MOTIVATION FOR PROJECT
of D is performed in unit 2 followed by 2 productions of B of 3. The reason for this
task distribution is primarily the capacity of the units. However, the setup time required
when switching from producing one product to another on a unit also plays a role, since
it requires the attention of operators. Therefore, the two setup times may not be able
to overlap in a practical case, e.g. if the number of operators is a limiting factor, which
leads to product D being produced before B in unit 2.
Finally, this example is intentionally simplified, but for a real system, there may be sub-
sequent units and several of them, which would make the scheduling problem much more
complex. For example, if one were to perform scheduling on the brewery process, the
scheduling problem would contain many subsequent units and the scheduling solution
would therefore have to account for the interaction between each subsequent unit. This
simple example clearly shows that a different batching may lead to a less optimal schedule.
Hence, in larger scheduling problems, a systematic approach to scheduling is required.
1.3
Motivation for Project
Now that the general concepts of beer brewing and scheduling have been introduced
separately, this section will focus on the union of the two, i.e. scheduling in breweries.
The scheduling of brewing is a difficult problem compared to other scheduling problems,
because of the big difference in time scales between brewing stages, such as the brew-
house and fermentation. Furthermore, the many steps involved in brewing can lead to
large models, making computation times inconveniently long when studying industrial-
size cases.[14] Additionally, because the brewhouse and fermentation are carried out in
batches and bottling is carried out continuously, a general brewery model must operate
in a combination of discrete-time and continuous-time, further complicating the compu-
tation. Therefore, while production scheduling as a whole is a prevalent research area,
few academic articles address the scheduling problem in breweries.[15]
Because of this, there is no unanimous state-of-the-art when it comes to scheduling brew-
eries.
In many cases, brewing schedules are generated manually by engineers and/or
operators. In such a case, the quality of the schedules is highly dependent on the rules
and data that stem from the experience of the operators with respect to the produc-
Page 7 of 96
==PAGE:15==
1.4. PROBLEM STATEMENT
tion process.[16] In other cases, commercially available software-based scheduling tools are
utilised to automate the scheduling of breweries. The main advantage of these scheduling
tools is the fast generation of feasible scheduling solutions. However, these scheduling
tools are based on simple rules and constraints to ensure said low computation time and
feasibility.[14]
As such, the absence of a clear state-of-the-art for scheduling breweries highlights the
possibility of improvement and innovation. Due to the limited research in this area, it is
also possible that an advanced and simultaneously feasible model can be developed that
can automatically set an optimal schedule. Overall, this is the motivation for the project:
to locate an optimal scheduling method for breweries.
1.4
Problem Statement
Based on the motivation of the project described in section 1.3, the overall goal is to de-
velop a sophisticated model that is an improvement over the current methods for brewery
scheduling. This will be assessed by directly comparing the solutions of the developed
scheduling model to the solutions from a scheduling software to determine the level of
improvement. In this way, the goal is ultimately to improve the scheduling of breweries
by implementing a tailor-made model. To achieve this, it has been determined that the
following sub-goals must be reached throughout this work:
1. Seek information regarding the steps and unit operations in the brewing process on
an industrial scale.
2. Conduct a literature review on the modelling of production scheduling in various
industries.
3. Extract modelling steps used in literature relevant to breweries and set up a general
model.
4. Apply the general literature model to a simple example documented in the literature
to ensure mastery of the scheduling problem.
Page 8 of 96
==PAGE:16==
1.4. PROBLEM STATEMENT
5. Compare the solutions of the general model to solutions obtained from solving the
same documented example in the scheduling software INOSIM.
6. Rewrite the general model to schedule breweries with desired functionalities, based
on brewery data found in the literature and relevant assumptions.
7. Evaluate the performance of the developed scheduling model by comparing its so-
lutions to solutions from the scheduling software INOSIM.
8. Investigate the assumptions and how the model can be modified to account for
different behaviour.
Page 9 of 96
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Literature and Theory
2.1
Brewery
2.1.1
The Brewing Process in Detail
As mentioned earlier, there are many different types of beer. Most types of beer arise from
variations in the brewing steps, which means that one brewery can brew many different
types of beer on an industrial scale because the equipment is standardised. A diagram
of the brewing process on an industrial scale, showing the steps performed and at which
point each ingredient enters the process, can be seen in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Illustrative diagram of beer production at an industrial scale.
As in section 1.1.2, the brewing process is divided into three distinct categories: The
brewhouse, fermentation and bottling/”the line”. The steps and unit operations in each
brewing category are explained in the following, along with the function of each ingredient.
Page 10 of 96
==PAGE:18==
2.1. BREWERY
2.1.1.1
The Brewhouse
Malt refers to grain seeds that have been allowed to partially sprout and then killed
by heating through a process called modification. The type of grain used depends on
the type of beer sought to be produced – barley is the most common grain type used,
while wheat is used for certain types of beer. Furthermore, oats, rye and other grains
are used to produce certain regional and speciality beers.[10] During modification, the
grain releases hormones to produce enzymes, which later help convert the grain seeds to
malt by breaking down starch molecules into fermentable sugars. The malting process is
often done by an external supplier, called maltsters, and is therefore not a part of most
industrial-size breweries, hence the exclusion in figure 2.1.[11]
The mashing step encompasses both milling and mashing. During milling, the seeds
are crushed allowing the aforementioned enzymes to attack starch molecules and convert
them to fermentable sugars during mashing, which is the treatment of the crushed seeds
with hot water. This is done in a vessel called a mash tun.[11] The mixture now contains
spent grain and sweet wort. The sweet wort is isolated from the spent grain through a
process called lautering. This is done in a vessel called a lauter tun, which essentially
works like a large sieve by having a perforated floor. This holds back the spent grain
and allows the sweet wort to pass through.[11] The sweet wort is then transferred to a
kettle where it undergoes boiling to kill unwanted microbes and drive off undesirable
flavours and oxygen. Hops, which are flowers of the common hop plant Humulus lupulus,
are then added to the sweet wort either before boiling or at regular intervals during the
boiling to provide bitterness and flavour. Furthermore, adjuncts, which are unmalted
grains, are sometimes added during this as well to supplement the starch in the primary
malted grain.[10] After boiling, the remaining solids, primarily stemming from the hops
and adjuncts, are removed in a whirlpool. The whirlpool is a tank, where the hot wort is
forced to flow in a circle. This causes the solids to build up at the centre, where the motion
is slowest, allowing for the collection of said solids.[11] Then, the hot wort is transferred
to a cooling tank, where it is quickly cooled from approximately 100°C (boiling point)
to the desired fermentation temperature (≈7 −22°C). The cooled wort is then ready to
be fermented and is therefore transferred to a fermentation tank.[10]
Page 11 of 96
==PAGE:19==
2.1. BREWERY
2.1.1.2
Fermentation
The fermentation itself is an anaerobic fermentation, commonly referred to as the alco-
holic fermentation, which is generally written as:[17]
C6H12O6 (Sugar)
Yeast
−−−→2 C2H5OH (Ethanol) + 2 CO2
(2.1)
The type of yeast used depends on the desired type of beer, where Saccharomyces cere-
visiae, commonly referred to as ”brewer’s yeast”, is used in ale and Saccharomyces pas-
torianus is used in lager. The time scale of the fermentation is roughly days (for ale) to
weeks (for lager) but highly depends on the sub-type of beer.[10]
After fermentation, the product undergoes maturation to clean up the beer. The type
of maturation highly depends on the type of beer that is brewed. In general, commercial
beers are brewery-conditioned, which means that the maturation is carried out exclusively
in the brewery. This is to ensure that no undesirable changes happen to the beer between
release from the brewery and end consumption. In most cases, this involves transferring
it to a maturation tank, along with additives. Initially, it is then vented, allowing unde-
sirable volatile components to escape. It is then allowed to mature over a time scale of
days to weeks.
While the fermentation itself provides carbon dioxide (CO2) for the beer, subsequent
carbonation is performed to yield the desired CO2-concentration and give the beer its
characteristic foam. The most common method is ”forced carbonation”, which is the
addition of carbon dioxide (CO2) under pressure.[11]
2.1.1.3
Bottling (The Line)
Following the fermentation steps, the beer enters ”the line”. First, the beer is filled into
containers, i.e. bottles or cans for consumers or casks or kegs for resale in establishments.
For consumer-sized packaging, pasteurisation is performed, which is the heat treatment
of the beer to kill and inhibit the growth of microorganisms to prolong shelf-life. This
can be done in two ways: Through tunnel pasteurisation after sealing of containers, as
indicated in figure 2.1, or through flash pasteurisation as part of the fermentation steps
before bottling. Because of this, flash pasteurisation is referred to as in-line pasteurisa-
Page 12 of 96
==PAGE:20==
2.1. BREWERY
tion.[10] Finally, the beer containers are sealed and labelled, before packing the final
product, e.g. into boxes, cases etc. The beer is then ready to be delivered to its end use
in either retail or establishments.[11]
2.1.1.4
Variations in the Brewing Process
As explained, the steps taken during brewing are the same regardless of beer type. How-
ever, each beer type stems from variations in the brewing steps, including the type of
malt, yeast and adjuncts, the temperature during boiling and the timing of the addition
of hops, among other things. This is why the same industrial brewery can produce differ-
ent types of beer, because the equipment, to an extent, is standardised.[10] The emergence
of the many different types of beer and their respective variations in the brewing process
is a science in itself and will therefore not be explored in detail, as it is considered out of
scope.
2.1.1.5
Cleaning of Equipment – CIP
The cleaning of brewery equipment is a crucial part of brewing because it prevents fouling,
which is the build-up of material sticking to the surfaces. Fouling can result in several
undesired phenomena in breweries if not dealt with, such as increased operating costs
due to worsening heat transfer, longer processing times and cross-contamination between
different beer types.[18] As such, the cleaning of brewery equipment ensures that fouling
is kept at an acceptable level to prevent these undesired phenomena.
The state-of-the-art for cleaning of brewery equipment is a process known as ”cleaning-in-
place” (CIP). CIP is an integrated cleaning system that allows for cleaning and sanitation
without dismantling any equipment. A CIP system typically consists of cleaning and
rinsing fluid agents and corresponding tanks, a pump and a drain.[10]
The exact layout of a CIP system and the number of necessary CIP systems depend on
the size and type of the specific brewery. Additionally, the frequency of CIP on equipment
depends on the particular unit. For example, units where heat is exchanged and fermenter
tanks require a high frequency of CIP, i.e. after a set number of batches, while other types
of equipment simply need to be cleaned every week or month. However, these simple CIP
frequency rules only apply when brewing one or similar types of beer, as some beer
Page 13 of 96
==PAGE:21==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
types require the equipment to be cleaned before/after they are brewed. For example,
all brewery equipment must usually be cleaned before producing organic beer to comply
with organic food-quality regulations.[19] Therefore, the cleaning of units in a brewery
presents a unique scheduling challenge. This is because the need for CIP can be triggered
by different criteria, such as an unacceptable degree of fouling and the switchover to
and/or from certain types of beer. Here, a systematic approach to production scheduling
is required to ensure an optimal schedule that balances production time and beer quality
by cleaning of units.
Because of this, relevant information from literature regarding
production scheduling is highlighted in the following sections.
2.2
Production Scheduling
In general, scheduling decisions are limited to batching, assignment and sequencing ac-
cording to the generalised problem statement in section 1.2.1, while planning decisions
contain more overarching decisions such as production targets, storage management and
employment, among other things.[20] Production scheduling of industrial-sized processes
is solved in three main ways: Manually by operators, with simulation tools or through
mathematical optimisation.
Historically, manual scheduling relied on operators’ and engineers’ experience and know-
how with the process, and led to the generation of a schedule in some physical form for
visual reference. Today, spreadsheet solutions such as Microsoft Excel that contain facility
data, such as the expected run-time of a unit, are used to generate the schedules manually.
While this improves manual scheduling by directly employing facility data, the schedules
are still manually generated, which is time-consuming, and therefore the generation of
schedules can be inflexible.[13] Comparatively, software-based scheduling simulation tools
are less time-consuming, as production schedules can be generated relatively fast and
automatically. Here, the complexity of the generated schedules is limited by the level of
customisation possible in said software-based tool’s framework.[12] Finally, mathematical
optimisation is the method with the most interest from academia, as it can be created
with the desired amount of complexity in terms of variables and objectives. In this way, it
can be customised to a given industry and process, leading to flexible scheduling. Further-
Page 14 of 96
==PAGE:22==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
more, it allows for the consideration of scheduling at all times, ensuring that the optimal
schedule is possible to be set at any time (c.f. section 2.2.1.4). However, the process
of setting up a mathematical optimisation-based model is time-consuming. Because of
this, it is very prevalent in some industries, where a tailored model has been developed,
while these models are yet to be extensively implemented in other industries, such as
breweries.[21]
The focus of this project will be on a mathematical optimisation-based scheduling model,
while its solutions will be compared to that of a commercially available software-based
scheduling tool. Therefore, the following sections outline the general concepts and frame-
work of mathematical optimisation-based scheduling.
2.2.1
Mathematical Optimisation
In mathematical optimisation-based scheduling models, optimisation is often formulated
as maximising a profit function or minimising a cost function. In general, optimisation
problems can be written on the form:
max f(x)
subject to: g(x) = 0
h(x) ≤0
(2.2)
, where f is a function of variable x, and g and h are vector functions containing the equal-
ity and inequality constraints, respectively. The above is a linear optimisation problem if
and only if all of f, g and h are linear. However, for scheduling models, the optimisation
is further complicated by the necessity of integer variables.[12]
2.2.1.1
Mixed-Integer Programming
Mixed integers are introduced to solve scheduling optimisation problems by storing the
status of physical phenomena. For example, mixed integers can store information about
whether a unit is running or idle by use of a binary (0 or 1) to represent the binary choice.
In such a case, a value of 1 would represent the unit in its running state, and a value of
0 would represent the unit in its idle state. These mixed integers are therefore in nature
Page 15 of 96
==PAGE:23==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
logical (Boolean) variables. The mixed-integer optimisation problem, commonly referred
to as mixed-integer programming, is described in the following general form:[22]
max (cT x + h y)
subject to: A x + G y ≥b
x ≥0
y ≥0
(2.3)
, where x is a vector of variables, y is a vector of integer variables, e.g. binary variables,
b, c, h, A and G are coefficient vectors and matrices characterising the system. Here,
cT x + h y represents the objective function and because of this c and h are defined with
respect to the desired objective. If the imposed constraints are linear, equation (2.3) is
commonly referred to as mixed-integer linear programming (MILP). The software-based
scheduling tools, such as INOSIM,[23] are also based on equation (2.3) as the solution
backbone.
2.2.1.2
Branching Algorithms
The mixed-integer nature of MILPs means that normal linear optimisers cannot solve
them since mixed-integers are by definition discontinuous.
The possible solutions to
MILPs can be thought of as trees, where a new branch exists for each binary variable.
This concept is schematised in figure 2.2 for three binary variables, y.
The trend seen in figure 2.2, where the number of possible solutions is doubled whenever
a new binary variable is introduced, continues for any number of binary variables. That
is, if we let Y denote the number of binary variables y, then the number of possible so-
lutions is given by 2Y . This highlights the importance of defining a system so that the
amount of mixed-integer variables are minimised to minimise resulting computation time
and feasibility.[24],[25]
Because of the discontinuous nature of mixed-integers and the branching nature, MILPs
are solved by branching algorithms. For example, the commercial solver CPLEX utilises a
branch-and-cut algorithm. Assuming all mixed-integers, y, are binary, the branch-and-cut
algorithm follows the following overall steps:[26]
Page 16 of 96
==PAGE:24==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
Figure 2.2: Visualisation of the branching nature of the possible solutions to MILPs for
3 binary variables y.
1. The integer condition of all binary variables is relaxed to 0 ≤y ≤1.
2. The resulting linear optimisation problem is solved.
3. If any y in the current solution are non-integers, i.e.
not 0 or 1, and if linear
constraints which cut off the current solution while satisfying all integer points
exist, they are added to the optimisation problem.
4. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated until either a feasible solution is located or the algorithm
cannot cut off any more planes.
5. If the MILP is not solved at this point, the algorithm splits into two branches by
setting y = 0 for one branch and y = 1 for the other.
6. For these branches, steps 2-5 may be repeated, and this procedure continues until
the optimal solution is located or a set optimality target has been met (c.f. sec-
tion 2.2.1.3).
This procedure is similar if y is not binary, albeit creating one more branch for each
possible integer value y can take. As such, because of the branching nature of mixed-
integers, the computational size of a problem increases exponentially for an increasing
number of mixed-integer variables.
Page 17 of 96
==PAGE:25==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
2.2.1.3
MILP Optimality Gap
Depending on the computational size of the problem, i.e. the number of mixed-integer
variables and normal variables, the branching algorithm can require significant compu-
tational power and time to obtain the optimal solution. Therefore, commercial solvers
allow for the definition of an ”optimality gap” or MILP gap, which is expressed as:[27]
MILP gap = |Best relaxed solution −Best integer solution|
10−10 + |Best integer solution|
(2.4)
Here, the ”Best relaxed solution” is when the binary variable condition is relaxed to
0 ≤y ≤1 in the branch-and-cut algorithm. The term 10−10 in the denominator is used to
avoid division by 0 when the best integer solution is 0. The ”best solutions” refer to the
maximum objective value found by the solver in both cases. In this way, the MILP gap
describes how close the best integer solution is to the theoretically best linear solution. A
solver such as CPLEX allows the user to define this tolerance.[27] This allows the solver to
accept suboptimal solutions within the specified tolerance, which can be necessary if the
unambiguously best solution is impossible to obtain in the case of an intractable model.
2.2.1.4
Reactive Scheduling
”Reactive scheduling” is based on the concept of generating a new schedule each time a
disturbance is observed, and is often also referred to as rescheduling or online schedul-
ing. In reactive scheduling, when a disturbance is observed, part of the schedule that
was already carried out is fixed, and the remaining considered scheduling horizon is then
rescheduled taking the disturbance into account. In scheduling theory, this is called a
rolling horizon, where the model is solved repeatedly, and the interval is moved forward
in time after each solution. In this way, it is similar to the moving horizon control optimisa-
tion from control theory.[13] Reactive scheduling is especially applicable for industrial-sized
processes, where several disturbances might be expected. However, the discontinuous na-
ture of mixed-integers also means that it is required to discretise the time for solving
MILPs. Therefore, the discrete time grid must be chosen carefully so that all expected
disturbances can be observed and taken into account with reactive scheduling. The time
grid cannot be too fine, as this would lead to inconveniently long computation times. The
concept of choosing the discrete-time grid is explained in the following.
Page 18 of 96
==PAGE:26==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
2.2.1.5
Modelling of Time
If the number of discrete time points is N, then all time points can be described by
t = 0,1,2,...,N. The distance between each time point can be defined in several ways,
most commonly it is defined as an equal distance, denoted δ. Here, δ is chosen based
on achieving a desired time grid. The natural choice for δ is the largest common factor
for all time-related data, τ.[12] In this way, all time-related data can be redefined in the
discrete-time grid as:
¯τ = τ
δ
(2.5)
In other words, the choice of δ is governed by the event that is expected to occur most
often, i.e. on the lowest time scale. This is often called discrete event analysis, in which all
time-related data is considered to choose δ so that the system only needs to be evaluated
when a critical event or disturbance occurs.[13]
2.2.1.6
Scheduling Software Issues
In this section, the concepts of mathematical optimisation and mixed-integer program-
ming were introduced, which is also the backbone for commercial scheduling software.
The discretisation of time is also automated in software solutions, such as INOSIM, en-
suring that the scheduling problem can be solved relatively fast.[23] One problem with
scheduling software is that the underlying processes are not entirely transparent. This
means it is unclear if the solution to complex problems is the most optimal or if some per-
formance is sacrificed for low computation times. Furthermore, scheduling software has
been developed to solve scheduling problems in general and provides little customisation
for different industries.[21] Therefore, a tailored model with full control over disturbance
handling, discretisation and process-specific behaviour might provide better performance.
The existing literature on producing such a model is outlined in the following sections.
2.2.2
State-Task Network Representation
In production scheduling, both material flows and task operations are considered. While
a traditional flowsheet representation can visualise the material flows to and from units,
it lacks the ability to represent that units can be able to execute several different tasks.
Page 19 of 96
==PAGE:27==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
Because of this, a state-task network (STN) representation is commonly used in literature
to visualise material flows and tasks when dealing with scheduling problems. In the STN
representation, the system is treated as a network of tasks that are processed on units
and able to consume or produce materials, i.e.
states.
This representation was first
introduced in [28]. The advantage of using the STN representation over the traditional
flowsheet representation can be visualised with an example, shown in figure 2.3, where
the overall brewery process (c.f. figure 1.1) is visualised in both flowsheet and state-task
network (STN) representations.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of a flowsheet representation and a state-task network (STN)
representation of the overall brewery process in figure 1.1, highlighting their differences.
M=Material.
In figure 2.3, tasks 1-4 in the STN representation show the conversion of material in the
brewhouse, fermentation tanks, maturation tanks and the line, respectively, similar to
that of the flowsheet representation above. Tasks 5-7 represent storage between tasks 1-4
in the event that the subsequent unit is not ready. With the colour coding in figure 2.3,
this suggests that the storage is done in the units themselves in the brewhouse (task 5),
fermentation tanks (task 6) and maturation tanks (task 7). This is not an uncommon
way to deal with bottlenecks in a production line, but tasks 5-7, i.e. storage, could have
alternatively been performed in vessels specifically for intermediate storage. It is worth
noting that representations in figure 2.3 are simplified since the brewhouse and line con-
tain several sub-processes (c.f. section 2.1).
Page 20 of 96
==PAGE:28==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
Other scheduling representations exist, such as the resource-task network (RTN), which
is similar to the STN representation without directly indicating the materials. However,
this can create ambiguities in cases where a unit can consume or produce two or more ma-
terials. Therefore, the STN representation is often preferred. Additionally, more detailed
representations exist, but for most cases where the tasks and materials are of a similar
nature, and therefore also for this project, the STN representation is adequate.[29]
2.2.3
State-Space Models
In process control theory, inputs are manipulated to regulate to or maintain at a set
value. Here, model predictive control (MPC) is the most popular process control strategy
in most industries. MPC is a closed-loop control strategy, and linear state-space models
can describe the MPC behaviour by relating the states, input, output and disturbances
of a physical system. The general state-space model formulation in continuous time is:
˙x = A x + B u + Bd d
y = C x + D u
(2.6)
, where y is the output, u is the input, x is the states, and A, B, Bd C, D are the
characteristic system state-space matrices.[30] It is important to note that the definition
of a ”state” here is different from the definition of state for the STN representation, where
it relates to materials.
In control theory, the controllers are designed to optimise the process based on a set
objective, and the MPC framework is therefore also an optimisation-based problem. Fur-
thermore, reactive scheduling (c.f. section 2.2.1.4) is also in nature closed-loop. This
means that the state-space formulation is directly applicable to production scheduling.
This is a big advantage since the concepts and ideas from MPC are well known and can
be used directly to consider production scheduling (c.f. section 2.2.4).[15]
To use the state-space formulation for scheduling, it has to be in discrete time, due to the
discontinuous nature of mixed integers (c.f. section 2.2.1.1). The state-space formulation
Page 21 of 96
==PAGE:29==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
can be rewritten in discrete time as:[30]
x(t + 1) = A x(t) + B u(t) + Bd d(t)
(2.7)
y(t) = C x(t) + D u(t)
In most production environments, there is no feedthrough of the input, meaning that the
output is simply a function of the states, simplifying the equation for the output to:
y(t) = C x(t)
(2.8)
Finally, constraints can be imposed on the state-space model, which for linear constraints
take the general form:
Ex x(t) + Eu u(t) + Ed d(t) + g ≤0
(2.9)
, where the E-matrices and g-vector are defined based on knowledge of what the state-
space model is used to describe. The outlined state-space models are used to formulate
MPC controllers along with constraints and an objective. As such, the performance of
the controller is directly linked to the accuracy of the model, which will then also be the
case for such a scheduling model. The control objective and constraints for MPC and
scheduling are set based on the desired operation and overall goals. This means that
the scheduling problem through the state-space formulation can be treated in the same
manner as an MPC problem.[12]
2.2.4
State-Space Scheduling Model
In this section, a state-space formulation for chemical production scheduling from [15] will
be introduced. This state-space formulation provided the framework for many subsequent
academic articles researching scheduling in various industries (c.f. section 2.2.6). This
formulation is based on an STN representation (c.f. section 2.2.2), meaning that materials
and units are distinct, rather than a large set of resources where materials and units
are indistinct.
Furthermore, the formulation utilises MPC theory to solve scheduling
problems. In the following, the relevant steps of the model formulation will be explained.
Page 22 of 96
==PAGE:30==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
2.2.4.1
Nomenclature
The state-space formulation includes many symbols, indices and subscripts, all of which
are outlined in table 2.1 to provide an overview for the reader.
Table 2.1: Nomenclature used in this section to introduce the state-space scheduling
formulation.
Sets
Notation
Description
i ∈I
Tasks
j ∈J
Units
k ∈K
Materials
t ∈T
Time periods
I ⊇Ij
Tasks able to be carried out in unit j
I ⊇I+
jk
Tasks producing material k
I ⊇I−
jk
Tasks consuming material k
Parameters and Variables
Symbol
Description
γij
Production cost of task i
νk
Storage cost of material k
ρijk
Task conversion coefficient
τij
Processing time of task i
βmin/max
ij
Min. and max. capacity of task i
Wij(t) ∈[0,1]
1 if task i starts at t
Bij(t)
Batch size of task i
Sk(t)
Inventory of material k
Here, the systematic naming is worth noting, where sets are uppercase bold Latin letters,
parameters are Greek letters and variables are uppercase Latin letters. Furthermore, it
is important to note that the time t denotes a discrete time period per the description in
section 2.2.1.5.
2.2.4.2
States and Inputs
When a unit, j, is started with task, i, at time, t, the binary variable Wij(t) is set to 1,
otherwise it is set to 0. To carry this decision onwards in time, i.e. to indicate that a
unit is running and has been running for n discrete periods, a lifted variable W
n
ij(t) that
stores this information is introduced:
W
n
ij(t) = Wij(t −n)
∀i, j, t, n ∈[1,2,...,τij]
(2.10)
In this way, the lifted variable describes a task that was started at time t −n, where
n indicates the progress towards the total processing time of task i in unit j, τij. The
Page 23 of 96
==PAGE:31==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
development of the lifted variable over time is described by:
W
n
ij(t + 1) = W
n−1
ij
(t)
∀i, j, t, n ∈[1,2,...,τij]
(2.11)
In the same way, a lifted variable can be introduced to carry the decision of the batch
size of a task on a unit through time, B
n
ij(t), which analogously develops through time:
B
n
ij(t + 1) = B
n−1
ij
(t)
∀i, j, t, n ∈[1,2,...,τij]
(2.12)
, where its non-lifted counterpart is defined similarly as Bij(t). This is not a binary
variable, but it can take on many different values equal to the corresponding batch size.
However, Bij(t) is 0 when Wij(t) = 0 and only takes on a non-zero value when Wij(t) = 1.
For constant batch sizes, this is not an additional state and can be fully described by
W
n
ij(t). For variable batch sizes, this state is however necessary.
Finally, the inventory of material k at time t is denoted as Sk(t). Since it is not a binary
variable, it does not require lifting, and its development over time is simply described by
the amount of material that was produced or consumed between each time step, in the
following manner:
Sk(t + 1) = Sk(t) +
X
j
X
i ∈I+
jk
(ρijk B
τij
ij (t)) +
X
j
X
i ∈I−
jk
(ρijk Bij(t))
∀k, t ≥1
(2.13)
Here, B
τij
ij (t) would indicate that a task with a certain batch size is finished at the next time
period, and the sum adds the resulting material production to the inventory. Similarly,
Bij(t) indicates that a task with a certain batch size is started at the next time period,
and the sum updates the amount of material consumed. As indicated, equation (2.13)
requires an initial condition corresponding to the initial inventory, Sk(0). Furthermore,
in some cases, a unit is only able to carry out one process-specific task, in which case
there is no need for distinction between running units and active tasks, which can further
simplify equations (2.11) to (2.13).
Equations (2.11) to (2.13) are on the form of equation (2.7) and constitute the general
scheduling state-space model. Here, W
n
ij(t), B
n
ij(t) and Sk(t) are the states, which are
Page 24 of 96
==PAGE:32==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
assumed equal to outputs through equation (2.8) with C as the identity matrix. However,
to achieve a model with physical meaning, physical constraints must be imposed on the
model, which are outlined in the following section.
2.2.4.3
Constraints
To ensure that the model includes that only one task can be performed on each unit at a
time, the unit decision variable, W
n
ij(t), is subject to the following constraint:
X
i ∈Ij
Wij(t) +
X
i ∈Ij
τij−1
X
n=1
W
n
ij(t) ≤1
∀j, t
(2.14)
Here, the first term deals with a unit that has just been started at time t, and the second
term deals with a unit that has been running for n time intervals and has not yet finished.
Here, it is worth noting that it is assumed that a task can be started in the same time
interval as another task finished, i.e. when n = τij.
For the batch sizes, a minimum and maximum capacity of each unit would lead to the
following constraint:
βmin
ij
Wij(t) ≤Bij(t) ≤βmax
ij
Wij(t)
∀i ∈Ij, j, t
(2.15)
Here, the first inequality is not strictly necessary but can be utilised to ensure that batches
are of a physically meaningful size. The second inequality is simply the capacity of the
given unit.
Finally, the inventory of a material, Sk(t), can be unconstrained if storage capacity is not
a bottleneck. Otherwise, it can be constrained by a maximum storage capacity in the
following manner:
Sk(t) ≤Smax
k
∀k, t
(2.16)
To summarise, the state-space scheduling model from [12] consists of the state-space
equations (2.11) to (2.13) subject to constraints given by equations (2.14) to (2.16). Ad-
ditionally, it can be seen that equations (2.14) to (2.16) are all linear constraints on the
form in equation (2.9), since equation (2.15) can be thought of as a combination of two
separate, linear constraints.
Page 25 of 96
==PAGE:33==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
2.2.4.4
Conceptual Example
The behaviour of the states over time introduced in the state-space scheduling model
above becomes more intuitive after considering a conceptual example. The states are the
decision variables Wij(t) and Bij(t) and the inventory Sk(t). In this conceptual example,
a simple scheduling system is considered, which contains a single unit, ”Unit 1”, with two
competing tasks: ”Task A” and ”Task B”. Both tasks take a single raw material ”M”,
where Task A produces one product ”P1” and Task B produces another product ”P2”.
The units of time and mass/volume are intentionally arbitrary to show the generality of
the scheduling problem. Task A requires 3 time units to be carried out and has a fixed
batch size of 1 unit. Task B requires 2 time units to be carried out and has a fixed batch
size of 2 units. Assuming an optimal schedule is already in place where Task A is carried
out first, followed by Task B (c.f. the Gantt chart in figure 2.4), then the development
of the states becomes as shown in figure 2.4b. Furthermore, in figure 2.4, the scheduling
system is also shown through an STN representation in figure 2.4a.
(a) Simple scheduling system.
(b) Scheduling solution.
Figure 2.4: Simple conceptual example introduced in this section with (a) the considered
scheduling system and (b) the corresponding scheduling solution.
As it can be seen in figure 2.4a, the decision variables Wij(t) and Bij(t) take on values at
the same time, i.e. when a unit starts carrying out a task. While Wij(t) is always 1 when
a task on a unit starts, since it simply indicates the unit starting, Bij(t) can take up any
value corresponding to the batch size of the corresponding task, i.e. 1 and 2 for Task A
Page 26 of 96
==PAGE:34==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
and B in this conceptual example, respectively. The lifted variables for Wij(t) based on
the scheduling solution in figure 2.4 for both tasks can then be written as:
W
2
A1(3) = W
1
A1(2) = W
0
A1(1) = WA1(1) = 1
(2.17)
W
1
B1(6) = W
0
B1(5) = WB1(5) = 1
(2.18)
In the same way, the batch decision variable Bij(t) is described by its lifted variable in
the following manner:
B
2
A1(3) = B
1
A1(2) = B
0
A1(1) = BA1(1) = 1
(2.19)
B
1
B1(6) = B
0
B1(5) = BB1(5) = 2
(2.20)
It is worth noting for the lifted variable that when n = τij, i.e. when the lifted index is
equal to the task processing time, the lifted variables are by definition equal to 0, due to
the constraint in equation (2.14):
W
τij
ij (t) = B
τij(t) = 0
(2.21)
This is so that a task may start once another has finished.
In the example, Task B
waits for one time step after Task A is finished, which is done intentionally for the sake
of visualisation so that material is not both produced and consumed in the same time
interval, t.
For the development of material inventory Sk(t), it is worth noting that the task feeds,
which is just material M in this conceptual example, are consumed exactly at the start
of a task, while task products (P1 and P2) are released exactly at the end of a task.
However, this might not always be the case in practice since material can also be released
during a task.
2.2.4.5
Control Objective
To allow for reactive scheduling using the introduced state-space model, a control objective
has to be imposed based on the desired operation, subject to the imposed constraints.
The article [15] elaborates that an economic MPC control objective may be employed but
Page 27 of 96
==PAGE:35==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
that recursive feasibility must be ensured, i.e. at least one feasible solution exists at each
sample time. An example of an economic control objective could be expressed as:
min
X
i,j,t
γij Wij(t) +
X
k,t
νk Sk(t)
(2.22)
, where the first term deals with the production cost of carrying out tasks, and the second
term deals with the inventory/storage cost of materials. In general, the control objective
would be chosen based on the desired operation but is commonly based on economics.
Examples of common objective functions are the minimisation of production costs, max-
imisation of profits, maximisation of throughput and minimisation of makespan.
2.2.5
Scheduling Model Extensions
The state-space scheduling model outlined in section 2.2.4 is a general MILP state-space
scheduling model formulation, which can be applied to several practical cases.[15] However,
production facilities may contain many other events that need to be accounted for in the
scheduling model. In such a case, the model requires relevant extensions. For example, it
may be necessary to model disturbances such as shipments, task yields, task delays, unit
breakdowns, processing times and storage.[12],[13],[15],[31] Furthermore, a process-tailored
scheduling model may also need to account for maintenance and the nature of the main-
tenance tasks.[12],[32]
This section highlights relevant theory concerning model extensions for the work carried
out in this project, namely the big-M method, unit deterioration and maintenance and
task changeovers.
2.2.5.1
Nomenclature
The new parameters and variables introduced for the model extensions in this section
are summarised in table 2.2 to provide an overview for the reader. Additionally, the set
I ⊇IM is introduced, which are maintenance tasks, where also iM ∈IM.
Page 28 of 96
==PAGE:36==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
Table 2.2: Nomenclature used in this section for model extensions to the state-space
scheduling formulation.
Variables
Symbol
Description
Hj(t)
Residual life (health) of unit j
H+
j (t)
Health restoration of unit j by maintenance
Xij(t) ∈[0,1]
1 if unit j is in mode i at t
Yii′j(t) ∈[0,1]
1 if changeover from task i to i′ on unit j at t
Parameters
Symbol
Description
M
Big-M coefficient
θi
Residual life consumption of task i
ηmax
j
Maximum residual life of unit j
σii′
Changeover time from task i to i′
2.2.5.2
Big-M Method
When setting up and considering constraints and equalities with some desired behaviour
in MILPs, nonlinearities can be encountered. In most cases, these nonlinearities can be
linearised using the so-called big-M method, as outlined in the following. Let xi and z
denote non-integer variables, y denote a binary variable and ai denote a scalar. Suppose
xi should be equal to 0 when y is equal to 0, and xi should take up some desired value
based on z when y is equal to 1, then this would correspond to the following expression:
X
i
aixi = z y
(2.23)
However, this expression is non-linear. To avoid this, equation (2.23) can be linearised
through the following set of constraints:[12]
z −M (1 −y) ≤
X
i
aixi ≤z + M (1 −y)
(2.24)
xi ≥0
(2.25)
xi ≤M y
(2.26)
, where M is a sufficiently large parameter so that the value of xi enforced by equa-
tion (2.24) does not clash with equation (2.26) when y = 1. In this way, equation (2.24)
ensures that the expression P
i aixi is exactly equal to z for y = 1, and equations (2.25)
and (2.26) ensures that it is exactly equal to 0 for y = 0. It is important to note that M
should also be chosen so that it is not unnecessarily large since this could lead to computa-
tional instability when solving the MILP. For a practical case, a suitable parameter value
Page 29 of 96
==PAGE:37==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
for M may already be defined in the model based on process data. Then, the definition
of an arbitrary M can be avoided.[22]
2.2.5.3
Unit Deterioration and Maintenance
In many production systems, units deteriorate over time when carrying out tasks, leading
to worsened performance over time. For example, the capacity, conversion and processing
times of units can decrease over time due to deterioration. Here, maintenance such as
cleaning of equipment is required to restore the unit to its original performance level.[12]
This is also the case in breweries, where cleaning of equipment is achieved by CIP, as
described in section 2.1.1.5.
In some cases, the number of tasks a unit can perform before requiring maintenance has
been determined by operators based on experience. Using this, the deterioration of units,
assuming no decrease in batch sizes and task yields, can be accounted for in the state-
space scheduling model through the equations outlined in this section. Let Hj(t) denote
a state describing the residual life (health) of unit j at time t; then the following equation
describes the development of the unit health over time:[12]
Hj(t) = Hj(t −1) −
X
i ∈Ij
(θi Wij(t)) + H+
j (t)
∀j, t ≥1
(2.27)
, where θi is the amount of health consumed by task i on unit j, and H+
j (t) is a variable
representing the amount of unit health restored at time t. Furthermore, ηmax
j
can be used
to describe the maximum health of unit j, and therefore Hj(t) is constrained by:[12]
0 ≤Hj(t) ≤ηmax
j
∀j, t
(2.28)
As such, if θi = 1 for all tasks i, ηmax
j
denotes the number of batches that can be run on
unit j before maintenance is strictly required before further production can commence
on a unit. Additionally, equation (2.27) requires an initial condition Hj(0) as indicated,
corresponding to the initial health of each unit j. Usually, this is defined as Hj(0) = ηmax
j
,
so that the units may carry out production at the start of the scheduling period.
The health restoration variable H+
j (t) can be implemented in such a way that it only
Page 30 of 96
==PAGE:38==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
takes two values: Exactly enough to restore Hj(t) to ηmax
j
or 0, depending on whether
maintenance is executed at time t or not. This can be achieved through the following
expression:[12]
H+
j (t) = WiMj(t)
 ηmax
j
−Hj(t −1)

∀j, t ≥1
(2.29)
, where subscript iM denotes a maintenance task. However, due to the binary nature
of the decision variable WiMj(t), equation (2.29) is non-linear. To avoid this non-linear
behaviour, this equation can be linearised1 into the following linear constraints:[32]
H+
j (t) ≤ηmax
j
WiMj(t)
∀j, t
(2.30)
H+
j (t) ≤ηmax
j
−Hj(t −1)
∀j, t ≥1
(2.31)
H+
j (t) ≥ηmax
j
WiMj(t) −Hj(t −1)
∀j, t ≥1
(2.32)
In this way, equation (2.27) ensures that the health of the unit deteriorates whenever
a task is performed while also ensuring that the health is restored to ηmax
j
whenever
maintenance is performed – in combination with equations (2.30) to (2.32). The general
concept of these equations is visualised in figure 2.5, where the residual life of a single unit
decreases for each task carried out and is restored to ηmax
j
once a maintenance (cleaning)
task is carried out.
Figure 2.5: Visualisation of the modelling of unit deterioration and maintenance by the
introduced residual life state, Hj(t), described by equations (2.27) and (2.30) to (2.32).
1This linearisation employs an analogous big-M method to the one described in section 2.2.5.2 with
ηmax
j
as M.
Page 31 of 96
==PAGE:39==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
In figure 2.5, the tasks are carried out in such a way that the residual life of the considered
unit, Hj(t), reaches near 0 after the last performance of task A. However, it is worth noting
that the equations relating to Hj(t) are also capable of handling when the maintenance
task is carried out before Hj(t) reaches 0. In this way, the placement of the required
maintenance tasks is determined by the optimisation of the control objective, as long as
the constraints for Hj(t) are satisfied.
2.2.5.4
Task Changeovers
In production systems, the changeover of tasks on units may force certain events to occur.
In such a case, a systematic modelling of task changeovers is required. One method of
changeover modelling relies on the introduction of the following new binary variables:[12]
• Xij(t), which is equal to 1 if unit j is setup to carry out task i at time t, and 0
otherwise. In other words, Xij(t) = 1 indicates which mode i unit j is in at time t.
• Yii′j(t), which is equal to 1 if the mode of unit j is changed from mode i to mode i′
at time t, and 0 otherwise.
These new variables allow for the modelling of changeover delays and changeover costs.
The objective function can include the changeover cost to ensure that the scheduling
model does not unnecessarily change tasks. These new binary variables are defined so
that they are correctly activated according to the definitions above. First, if a task i is at
any stage of its execution in unit j at time t, then unit j must also be in mode i at time
t:[12]
t−1
X
t′=t−τij
Wij(t′) ≤Xij(t)
∀i ∈Ij, j, t ≥τij
(2.33)
In other words, equation (2.33) enforces that a task i can only be carried out when the
unit j is in the corresponding mode at time t. Furthermore, a ”mode balance” over time
can be expressed as:
Xij(t) = Xij(t −1) +
X
i′̸=i
Yi′ij(t −σi′i −1) −
X
i′̸=i
Yii′j(t −1)
∀i ∈Ij, j, t ≥1 (2.34)
, where σi′i is the required changeover time from mode i′ to mode i. Furthermore, this
correctly activates the binary variable Yii′j(t) with the definition of Xij(t) through equa-
Page 32 of 96
==PAGE:40==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
tion (2.33). It follows from equation (2.34) that unit j is not in a mode i during the
execution of a changeover for σi′i > 0. Additionally, equation (2.34) requires an initial
condition for the mode i at time t = 0 as indicated, which needs to be chosen based on de-
sired operation and model behaviour. Lastly, equation (2.34) does not include changeovers
for i′ = i, because they by definition are 0:[12]
Yiij(t) = 0
∀i ∈Ij, j, t
(2.35)
To visualise the behaviour of the new binary variables Xij(t) and Yii′j(t) introduced in
this section to model changeovers, a simple example is considered, where a single unit ”1”
undergoes a changeover from task A to task B with a changeover time of σAB = 1. This
example is shown in figure 2.6 along with the corresponding values of the binary variables
Xij(t) and Yii′j(t).
Figure 2.6: Visualisation of the modelling of changeovers in production scheduling de-
scribed by equations (2.33) to (2.35).
As shown in figure 2.6, the unit is in mode A, i.e. XA1 = 1, during the entire execution of
task A, and similarly for task B. Furthermore, the changeover to task B happens 1 time
period before the mode for B is activated, Xij(t), which is enforced by the changeover time
σAB = 1. Finally, it is worth noting that the unit is not in a mode during the execution
of the changeover since σAB = 1 > 0
2.2.6
Industrial Scheduling in Literature
In the literature, the successful implementation of MILP-based scheduling in various
industries is well documented.
To emphasise the potential improvement MILP-based
Page 33 of 96
==PAGE:41==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
scheduling offers, a literature review on successful industrial size modelling and simula-
tions has been conducted and the results are summarised in table 2.3. The literature
review is systematic since the focus has been on breweries and adjacent industries and/or
similar model developments as in section 2.2.4.
Table 2.3: Literature review on successful implementation of production scheduling for
industrial-sized processes, showing the reported economic improvement in various articles
and industries.
*Only a sub-process of the production line is considered, which the reported improvement is based on.
Industry
Breweries
Beverages
Food
Chemicals
< 10% improvement
[16]
[33]
[34], [35]
[36], [37], [38]
10-20% improvement
[39]
20-30% improvement
[40]
[41]
[42]
30-40% improvement
[43]
40-50% improvement
[14]
> 50% improvement
[44]*
[45]
All of the reported improvements in table 2.3 are based on economic metrics introduced
in the respective articles compared to scheduling solutions provided from real plant data
or traditional scheduling models at the time of publishing. It is worth noting that the
articles with little economic improvement in table 2.3 either provide a novel scheduling
formulation or deal with other metrics, such as computation time.
Specifically, [33],
[34], [38], [39] provide novel industry-specific scheduling frameworks that perform better
than traditional scheduling through efficiency and/or flexibility. Furthermore, [16] reports
up to 4 times lower computation time to obtain the same optimal scheduling solutions
as traditional scheduling, [35] obtains significantly lower computation time with a more
flexible model compared to existing literature, and [36] obtains a scheduling solution which
is 2% less costly but 12 times faster than traditional scheduling.
In conclusion, the literature review shows much room for improvement in production
scheduling by developing sophisticated, process-tailored models compared to traditional
scheduling.
Page 34 of 96
==PAGE:42==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
2.2.7
Brewery Scheduling in Literature
To the best of the author’s knowledge, only four academic articles have been published
that deal with the scheduling problem in breweries, all of which were included in table 2.3.
The first article of the four [44] was published in 2011 and solves the scheduling of a beer
production facility by assuming the production bottleneck is bottling. In this way, it is
entirely a continuous scheduling problem. However, it is not always the case that bottling
is the bottleneck, meaning that the conclusions from [44] may not be applicable to all
breweries.
In 2014, the scheduling problem in breweries was expanded to the whole brewery process
in [16]. Here, the authors simplify the process by dividing it into two stages. Stage I is liq-
uid preparation and contains three combined steps: Mashing and lautering, cooling, and
finally fermentation and maturation. Stage II is liquid bottling and contains similar steps
to those in figure 2.1. Between stages I and II, the liquid is transferred to holding tanks.
Specifically, the article only focuses on the process bottlenecks, which are mentioned as
fermentation for stage I and bottle filling for stage II. Because of the batch nature of stage
I, the scheduling problem is set up through a state-space formulation analogous to the
one in section 2.2.4. For stage II, a binary variable is introduced based on which holding
tank is used for filling bottles, and another based on if there is a liquid changeover in the
filling line. In this way, a novel MILP model for stage II is developed, while the over-
all procedure has some similarities to the outlined state-space model. That is, the line,
which in nature is continuous, is modelled as a consecutive series of batch tasks to utilise
the discrete state-space formulation. The objective function employed is economical and
minimises demand backlogging. In this article, only one bottling line is considered, and
the performance of the employed method, when extended to several lines at a large scale,
would therefore have to be investigated.
A larger scale was considered in [40], published in 2020, where a case study on a Heineken
brewery in Mexico was carried out. Here, the brewing process is divided into 4 overall
steps: Brewing, fermentation, maturation and the line (as in figure 1.1). The main in-
novation in this work is applying a discrete-continuous algorithm[46] (DCA). Here, the
state-space formulation outlined in section 2.2.4 is part of the DCA and is implemented
Page 35 of 96
==PAGE:43==
2.2. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
directly with some further extensions, such as the storage of material in units, the in-
troduction of storage vessels and material handling restriction. This is used to generate
an initial rough scheduling solution with relatively large discretisation steps, which then
enters a mapping algorithm to allow for reactive scheduling, i.e. the algorithm checks for
the occurrence of specific events such as disturbances. Finally, the results from the al-
gorithm enter a linear programming optimisation, where the results from the state-space
approach are refined and approximation errors are eliminated, and the final schedule is
generated. While the detailed procedure is confidential, it is reported that the employed
approach is faster at generating schedules than a stand-alone discrete-time model as the
one in section 2.2.4, which for the brewery case could lead to an intractable model.
Finally, another article [14] models the brewing process as two bottleneck steps: fermen-
tation and filling. Based on this, an MILP model is developed which for the fermentation
step is similar in nature to the state-space formulation, and the bottling is again han-
dled as consecutive batch tasks albeit with novel equations describing changeovers in the
production line. As such, a large system of 30 fermentation tanks, 5 filling lines and 40
distinct beer products is scheduled in different scenarios, with a cost minimisation control
objective. The main innovation in this article is the simulation of the brewery process on
a large scale with classical MILP formulation and algorithms without ending up with an
intractable model. Furthermore, improvements of up to 50% are reported on this large
scale.
In conclusion, all four articles on the production scheduling of breweries apply different
methods. While [16] and [14] are similar in the simplification of the model, the latter
concerns a much larger scale and modifies the model to handle this. One takeaway from
these articles is that the process must be simplified based on bottlenecks to avoid an in-
tractable or infeasible model, since relevant, albeit different, simplifications are performed
in all of the articles.
Page 36 of 96
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3
Case Study I: Documented Example
This chapter deals with a representative example in [28] and setting up a state-space
scheduling model using the theory in section 2.2.4 capable of reproducing the documented
results by simulation. This is done to ensure mastery of the scheduling problem and to
reach a MILP scheduling model framework that has been proven to work by reproducing
documented results. The outlined state-space scheduling model is hypothesised to be able
to reproduce the documented results, because [28] also uses an STN representation to set
up an MILP scheduling model, which is explained in the following.
3.1
System Definition
The example system in [28] considers the production of two products 1 and 2, from three
feedstocks A, B and C, through four intermediate materials ”Hot A”, AB, BC and E. The
STN representation of the system is shown in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: STN representation of the example system from [28], where feed, interme-
diate and product materials are in blue, orange and green, respectively. Products 1 and
2 are abbreviated as P1 and P2.
Page 37 of 96
==PAGE:45==
3.1. SYSTEM DEFINITION
In figure 3.1 the duration of each task, τij, is indicated in parentheses. Furthermore, the
tasks are defined from the following recipes:
• Heating consumes feed A and releases Hot A after 1 hour.
• Reaction 1 consumes 50% feed B and 50% feed C and releases intermediate BC
after 2 hours of reaction.
• Reaction 2 consumes 40% ”Hot A” and 60% intermediate BC and releases 60%
intermediate AB and 40% product 1 after 2 hours of reaction.
• Reaction 3 consumes 20% feed C and 80% intermediate AB and releases interme-
diate E after 1 hour of reaction.
• Separation consumes intermediate E and releases 90% product 2 after 1 hour and
10% intermediate AB after 2 hours by distillation.
It is worth noting that [28] deals with mass flows, and therefore the recipes in the above
are defined in mass percentages. To carry out these tasks, the following equipment is
available:
• A heater is available for the heating task and has a capacity of 100 kg.
• Reactor 1 can facilitate reactions 1, 2 and 3 and has a capacity of 80 kg.
• Reactor 2 can facilitate reactions 1, 2 and 3 and has a capacity of 50 kg.
• A still is available for the separation task and has a capacity of 200 kg.
Finally, the storage capacities of each material, i.e. maximum inventories, are summarised
in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: The storage capacity, Smax
k
, of each material k.
Material
A
B
C
Hot A
AB
BC
E
Product 1
Product 2
Capacity, Smax
k
[kg]
∞
∞
∞
100
200
150
100
∞
∞
Based on the available equipment and the task recipes, the system can also be represented
in a traditional flowsheet, which can be seen in figure 3.2.
Page 38 of 96
==PAGE:46==
3.2. DOCUMENTED MODELLING AND RESULTS
Figure 3.2: Flowsheet of the example system from [28] based on task recipes and avail-
able equipment.
While the flow sheet representation in figure 3.2 is useful for visualising the physical layout
of a plant, it contains less information about the tasks carried out in the system compared
to the STN representation. Specifically, the STN representation shows each reaction that
can be performed on the reactors, as well as showing the purpose of the intermediate
materials.
3.2
Documented Modelling and Results
The state-space scheduling model outlined in section 2.2.4 from [15] is a more general
modelling procedure compared to that employed in the documented example in [28]. It is
desired to set up a model according to the procedure in section 2.2.4, so this section serves
the purpose of highlighting the assumptions and other differences used in the modelling
in [28], while also outlining the modelling decisions made in the article.
The notable assumptions are:
• The feeds are available in surplus and there is no limitation in product storage, both
of which are indicated with infinite storage capacity in table 3.1.
• The task durations, τij, are the same in reactor 1 as in reactor 2, which means that
all task durations are independent of the employed unit and are denoted as τi.
• No task may be interrupted once started.
• There are no units active at the start of the scheduling horizon, and all tasks must
be finished at the end of the scheduling horizon.
Page 39 of 96
==PAGE:47==
3.2. DOCUMENTED MODELLING AND RESULTS
• There are no transfer times, i.e. material is transferred instantaneously from states
to tasks, and vice versa.
• All data is fixed over the chosen scheduling horizon.
Based on these simplifying assumptions, the modelling in [28] follows a simplified proce-
dure analogous to that in section 2.2.4. A scheduling horizon, H, of 10 hours is considered,
and the time interval, δ, is defined as 1 hour, which is intuitive because it is the largest
common factor for all time-related data with the heating task and reaction 3 having a
processing time of 1 hour and release of E from the separation occurring after 1 hour.
The objective function imposed is:
max
X
k
νk Sk(H)
(3.1)
, where νk is defined as the value of each material. Note that the summation is only
over material k and is evaluated at time t = H. In this way, this objective seeks to
maximise the inventory value at the end of the time horizon of 10 hours. Here, the values
of feeds A, B and C are defined as 0 and the values of products 1 and 2 are defined as 10.
Furthermore, the value of intermediate materials is defined as −1, which corresponds to
imposing a storage cost on the intermediate materials. This makes it so that the objective
function equation (3.1) seeks to produce as much product as possible in the time horizon
of 10 hours. Based on this modelling, [28] proposes an optimal schedule, which is shown
in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Recreation of the optimal schedule of the example system in section 3.1
presented in [28] based on the modelling and assumptions outlined in this section with
the objective function in equation (3.1). ”R” is short for reaction.
Page 40 of 96
==PAGE:48==
3.3. PROGRAMMING OF STATE-SPACE SCHEDULING MODEL
The optimal schedule from [28] presented in figure 3.3 leads to an objective value of 2744
units through the production of 136 kg of product 1 and 147.4 kg of product 2, with a
residual of intermediate AB of 89.4 kg.
3.3
Programming of State-Space Scheduling Model
This section deals with the reproduction of the documented results in [28] to ensure
mastery of the scheduling problem before considering the more complex brewery case.
3.3.1
Modelling
As in the example in the article, the system described in section 3.1 is considered over
a time horizon of H = 10 hours and it is desired to maximise product production. Fur-
thermore, the modelling in the following is based on the same assumptions made in the
article, as outlined in section 3.2.
Based on the state-space scheduling model in section 2.2.4, the binary unit decision vari-
able Wij(t) and the batch size decision variable Bij(t) are introduced. A problem with
the lifted variable procedure in section 2.2.4 is that it is unable to store information about
the amount of material in a task when material is released from a unit during a task and
not at the end. This is the case for the separation task in the example, where the total
processing time is 2 hours, but product 2 is released after 1 hour. Inspired by a procedure
in [47], an additional decision variable Mj(t) is introduced to handle this, which indicates
the amount of material in unit j at time t and develops in the following manner over time:
Mj(t + 1) = Mj(t) +
X
i ∈Ij
Bij(t + 1) −
X
i ∈Ij
X
k ∈Ki
k ∋t−¯τik≥0
ρijk Bij(t −¯τik + 1)
∀j, t
(3.2)
, where Ki denotes the materials fed by task i and ¯τik denotes the time to release of
material k after the start of task i. In this way, Mj(t) contains the same information that
the lifted decision variables introduced in section 2.2.4 would, while also keeping track of
the material released during tasks. This requires a modification to the unit assignment
constraint from equation (2.14) stating that only one unit can be active at a time, which
Page 41 of 96
==PAGE:49==
3.3. PROGRAMMING OF STATE-SPACE SCHEDULING MODEL
is transformed to:
X
i ∈Ij
t−τi+1
X
n=t
Wij(n) ≤1
∀j, t
(3.3)
Furthermore, since the article example assumes no active units at the end of the scheduling
horizon, i.e. at t = H, it follows for Mj(H) that:
Mj(H) = 0
∀j
(3.4)
, which constrains the units to not have any material at time t = H corresponding to all
units being inactive at time t = H.
Since the capacity of each unit is independent of the task performed, the unit capacity
constraint from equation (2.15) may be written as:
βmin
j
Wij(t) ≤Bij(t) ≤βmax
j
Wij(t)
∀i ∈Ij, j, t
(3.5)
Lastly, the material inventory is also rewritten to allow for release of material during
tasks, and it now develops in the following manner:
Sk(t + 1) = Sk(t) +
X
j
X
i ∈I+
jk
i ∋t−¯τik≥0
(ρijk Bij(t −¯τik)) +
X
j
X
i ∈I−
jk
(ρijk Bij(t))
∀k, t (3.6)
, where a maximum inventory constraint is described by equation (2.16). As such, the
example system from [28] can be fully described by the decision variables Wij(t), Bij(t),
Mj(t) in equation (3.2) and the inventory variable Sk(t) in equation (3.6), and their
constraints in equations (2.16) and (3.3) to (3.5). To generate an optimal schedule, an
objective function is required to set up an optimisation problem, and it is desired to use
the same objective function as the article, i.e. equation (3.1).
3.3.2
Simulation Setup
To simulate the example problem from [28] using the model described above, the model
has been set up in a Pyomo programme. Pyomo is a Python-based optimisation package
allowing for structured optimisation applications, such as MILP,[48] and a brief justifi-
Page 42 of 96
==PAGE:50==
3.3. PROGRAMMING OF STATE-SPACE SCHEDULING MODEL
cation for this choice of programming language is provided in Appendix A.1. Based on
the model in the above, the optimisation problem was set up in Pyomo with the full set
of equations in equations (3.2) and (3.6) and constraints in equations (2.16) and (3.3)
to (3.5), and full documentation on the implementation of the code is available in Ap-
pendix A.2. The programme was set up in a general manner so that when expanded to
the brewery scheduling problem in the later sections, the code would still have the same
general form.
During the process of reproducing the documented results outlined in section 3.2 it be-
came apparent that while the objective function in equation (3.1) punished the system
for intermediate material inventory, it did not put a cost on running a task on a unit.
This meant that while the overall schedule was similar, the optimisation would lead to
very small batches (< 1 kg) being made on units between the tasks shown in figure 3.3 for
slight improvements in the final objective value. However, in practice, these batch sizes
are likely physically meaningless. To avoid this, the objective function from equation (3.1)
was modified to the following:
max
X
k
νk Sk(H) −
X
i,j,t
γij Wij(t)
(3.7)
, where the first term describes the total material value at time t = H and the second
term the total cost of running units from time t = 0 to t = H, where γij is the cost
of running task i on unit j. As in the article, feeds A, B and C are given a value of 0,
intermediate materials Hot A, AB, BC and E are given a value of -1 and products 1 and 2
are given a value of 10. To ensure that small batches are eliminated while still generating
a schedule similar to [28], a task cost of γij = 0.01 is defined for all tasks in all units so
that the contribution of the second term in equation (3.7) is several orders of magnitude
smaller than that of the first term.
Based on the model and the modified objective function, the optimal schedule is generated
by solving the optimisation problem, where CPLEX was used as the solver of choice with
a default optimality gap of 10−4 (c.f.
equation (2.4)).
The results are shown in the
following.
Page 43 of 96
==PAGE:51==
3.3. PROGRAMMING OF STATE-SPACE SCHEDULING MODEL
3.3.3
Results
The optimal schedule based on the model outlined in section 3.3.1 and the modified
objective function in equation (3.7) is shown in figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: The optimal schedule of the example system in section 3.1 based on the
model developed in this work (c.f. section 3.3.1) with a default optimality gap of 10−4.
”R” is short for reaction.
The optimal schedule in figure 3.4 leads to an objective value of 2744 units through the
production of 136 kg of product 1 and 147.4 kg of product 2, with a residual of interme-
diate AB of 89.4 kg.
Compared to the metrics from [28], the exact same objective value and inventories are
obtained. However, the schedules in figures 3.3 and 3.4 are not completely identical. The
reason for this is that the objective function from [28], shown in equation (3.1), is evalu-
ated at the end of the scheduling horizon and therefore only evaluates the final inventories.
One of the differences between the schedules is the sequencing of the heating tasks, where
they are placed immediately before Hot A is needed for reaction 2 in figure 3.3 and signifi-
cantly sooner in figure 3.4. In total, 136 kg of Hot A must be produced before hour 8 with
52 kg before hour 2, 32 kg before hour 4 and the remaining 52 kg before hour 8, which
both schedules satisfy. Because of this, both schedules can produce the optimal amount
of product, which means that both schedules are optimal with respect to objective value
and product inventories. The schedule produced in this work simply performs heating
in 2 batches rather than 3, due to the task cost imposed in the modified objective in
equation (3.7).
Page 44 of 96
==PAGE:52==
3.4. SOFTWARE SIMULATION IN INOSIM
In summary, the two schedules in figures 3.3 and 3.4 are variations of the same optimal
schedule, which proves that the developed model works as intended. As highlighted above,
there are small variations between the two schedules, which is further highlighted by
some batch sizes being sequenced differently. In general, it seems that the schedule from
[28] prioritises producing intermediate materials as late as possible, while still generating
enough to reach the optimal objective value, as opposed to the schedule generated by the
developed model. However, while a storage cost is imposed on intermediate materials,
this is only evaluated for the final inventories, and therefore the developed model is unable
to obtain the same schedule. If the storage costs on intermediate materials at each time
point were to reduce the profit significantly in a practical case, the objective function
would have to be modified accordingly so that the storage costs were evaluated at each
time point. However, this would drastically change the optimal schedule and is therefore
not explored in detail here, since the main purpose was to reproduce the documented
results in [28]. This shows that when applying this model to a practical case, such as
the brewery scheduling problem, careful consideration has to go into setting an objective
based on what is considered optimal for generating practically meaningful schedules.
3.4
Software Simulation in INOSIM
Instead of building a novel MILP model and writing a program to set an optimal schedule,
commercially available software could be used to solve the scheduling problem for a given
case. A commonly used commercial software scheduling tool is INOSIM. In theory, it is
less time-consuming to set up a scheduling problem in a software tool, such as INOSIM,
assuming adequate knowledge of the software. This is because the software already pro-
vides the framework for generating schedules, which is less time-consuming than manually
writing up a model and programming it. Therefore, in this section, the ease of implemen-
tation and usefulness of the generated INOSIM schedules will be investigated based on
the documented example in [28] explored in the previous sections.
The procedure for generating a schedule for the example in INOSIM is described in de-
tail in Appendix A.3. In short, the following steps were taken to apply the documented
example from [28] in INOSIM:
Page 45 of 96
==PAGE:53==
3.4. SOFTWARE SIMULATION IN INOSIM
1. The materials and available equipment were defined and connected within the flow
sheet structure.
2. The capacities of all units and intermediate materials were defined through thresh-
olds – for intermediate materials by always transferring them to a tank and setting
a threshold for each tank.
3. The master recipes were defined based on the task recipes in section 3.1 – for each
recipe, a new version was created for each different batch size.
4. The orders of each recipe were defined to recreate the schedule in figure 3.4 – some
orders had to be enforced to start at a given time to satisfy capacity
constraints and obtain the same schedule.
Problems encountered when implementing this example problem in INOSIM have been
marked in bold in the steps above and will be discussed below. The resulting schedule
produced in INOSIM is shown in figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: The optimal schedule of the example system in section 3.1 based on the
simulation in INOSIM described in this section.
As seen in figure 3.5, the exact same schedule as in figure 3.4 can be obtained. This
at least shows that the schedule is within the feasible region in the INOSIM framework.
However, as a tool for setting an optimal schedule in this example case, INOSIM is less
Page 46 of 96
==PAGE:54==
3.5. MAIN FINDINGS
powerful than the MILP model for this example problem. This is because, as mentioned
above, INOSIM does not perform batching itself so it has to be done manually. Further-
more, the orders were defined so that the sequencing corresponded to that of the schedule
in figure 3.4. As such, INOSIM requires a starting point for the sequencing of the op-
timal schedule to reproduce the optimal schedule. Subsequently, INOSIM can perform
assignment based on defined batching and sequencing. Additionally, optimality for the
INOSIM framework is defined as the least time to carry out the given tasks, commonly
referred to as minimisation of makespan. It was noticed that this does not always satisfy
the capacity constraints defined within the simulation, as some tasks are set earlier than
possible based on the capacity constraints. Therefore, some of the tasks were forced to
be placed at certain times, specifically the second heating task and the second separation
task (c.f. Appendix A.3). In summary, in terms of setting an optimal schedule for the
example problem INOSIM would not be adequate alone because of the inability to per-
form batching and sequencing and satisfy capacity constraints. This could be because of
the non-sequential nature of the considered example system (c.f. figure 3.1). Therefore,
INOSIM’s applicability for scheduling of breweries would have to be investigated as well.
In this case, when an optimal schedule has been set through other means, INOSIM can
still be useful for performing ”What-If” analyses. This is because, once the batching and
sequencing are known, INOSIM contains many capabilities to investigate a schedule’s lim-
itations. For example, unit breakdowns and delays can be directly included in INOSIM,
as can resource limitations such as a limited number of operators.
3.5
Main Findings
A general scheduling state-space MILP model was set up in Pyomo – a Python-based
optimisation language. This scheduling model was able to reproduce documented results
from [28]. Compared to [28], the objective function for this model had to include a term
imposing an operating cost of running units to avoid batches of a physically meaningless
size. Furthermore, the produced schedule had a different sequencing than the schedule
in [28], but yielded the same objective function. This is because the solution in [28] is
not unique and the produced schedule was an equivalent solution. This schedule was also
Page 47 of 96
==PAGE:55==
3.5. MAIN FINDINGS
able to be reproduced in the software-based scheduling tool INOSIM. However, problems
were identified with the implementation in INOSIM. Namely, INOSIM is unable to per-
form batching and therefore requires known batch sizes beforehand. Furthermore, the
sequencing had to be defined through orders based on the optimal schedule from the
MILP model. Finally, capacity constraints were not satisfied, so starting times had to be
manually enforced. These problems were partly attributed to the non-sequential nature of
the example problem, and it is therefore hypothesised that INOSIM may be more suitable
for a more sequential scheduling problem, such as a brewery, which therefore needs to be
investigated further.
Page 48 of 96
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4
Case Study II: Brewhouse Scheduling
When considering the literature that deals with the scheduling problem in breweries, as
outlined in section 2.2.7, it becomes clear that the brewery system must be simplified to
some extent to develop a feasible and tractable model. Furthermore, the three distinct
phases of a brewery, i.e. the brewhouse, fermentation and the line, are vastly different
scheduling problems. The brewhouse sets the possible productivity by producing cold
wort for fermentation, assuming that the number of fermentation tanks is not a limiting
factor. Additionally, the brewhouse is the phase that requires the most attention from
operators because processes occur on a relatively short time scale. This is different for
fermentation – while fermentation requires monitoring of fermentation conditions, it is
on a much longer time scale.[11] Because of this, it is decided to develop a novel MILP
scheduling model for the brewhouse so that the overall productivity of a brewery may be
improved and/or scheduling of the brewhouse may be made easier for operators.
Full documentation on the code used in this chapter can be found in Appendix B.1.
4.1
Modelling and Methodology
4.1.1
STN Representation of the Brewhouse
The overall process in the brewhouse was shown in figure 2.1 and contains the overall
steps: mashing, lautering, boiling, whirlpooling and cooling. Based on information from
[49], an example of the units required to carry out these tasks is visualised in a flow sheet
in figure 4.1 based on off-site malting and only one line in the brewhouse, that is, one of
each unit.
Page 49 of 96
==PAGE:57==
4.1. MODELLING AND METHODOLOGY
Figure 4.1: Flow sheet showing an example of a brewhouse layout based on information
from [49]. Units marked in green are without any direct heat exchange, units in red are
with addition of heat and units in blue are with cooling.
As shown in figure 4.1, the malt is first milled in a wetmill. Milling could also be carried
out in a dry mill, both of which are prevalent in industry.[49] This is followed by mashing
and lautering in mash tuns and lauter tuns, respectively. After this, a pre-run-tank is in
some cases placed to act as a buffer for the wort kettle because it can be a bottleneck.
Subsequently, the wort is pre-heated and then boiled in the wort kettle with the addition
of hops. Finally, the boiled wort is whirlpooled to separate hot residue and then cooled
in a heat exchanger to the desired fermentation temperature.[11]
It is desired to transform the flow sheet in figure 4.1 into an STN representation to provide
the framework for modelling the scheduling problem. To do this, it could be beneficial to
combine some of the units in figure 4.1 into defined tasks. This is because some of the
units continuously deliver material to the subsequent unit, even though the brewhouse
overall behaves as batch-processes. This is the case for the following units,[49] which are
combined according to the description:
• The wetmill continuously transfers wet, milled malt to the mash tun, which starts
mashing as soon as the first malt is delivered. These are combined into one task
denoted as mashing1 in accordance with figure 2.1, and the combined unit is referred
to as a ”MillMash”.
1Here, this formatting will be used when referring to the roles of the units and tasks in the
simulation, so they are not confused with their roles in practice.
Page 50 of 96
==PAGE:58==
4.1. MODELLING AND METHODOLOGY
• The pre-run-tank acts as a buffer tank for the wort kettle and is obsolete if the
wort kettle is ready when the lauter tun is finished. In the STN representation,
the tank can simply be handled by defining the adequate storage capacity of the
corresponding intermediate material.
• The pre-heater continuously transfers pre-heated wort into the wort kettle, which
starts running when all pre-heated wort is transferred. The pre-heating can therefore
be considered part of the boiling task.
• The whirlpool continuously transfers clear wort into the heat exchanger.
This
means that the heat exchanger runs whenever the whirlpool does. Therefore, they
are combined into one task, which is denoted as ”whirl-cooling”, and their com-
bined unit is referred to as a ”WhirlCool”.
In this way, the brewhouse system can be reduced to 4 batch tasks: mashing, lau-
tering, boiling and whirl-cooling with corresponding units: MillMash, Lauter
Tun, Wort Kettle and WhirlCool. The combination of these tasks rules out the
possibility of a more advanced schedule configuration. As an example, in practice, a wet-
mill could deliver cold mash to two or more mash tuns to lower overall processing times
– and the combination of these two tasks into one rules out the investigation of such
a configuration, if it were part of an optimal schedule. However, this would require a
well-defined model for the processing times itself, which is not available in literature. Ad-
ditionally, to avoid an intractable model, it is desired to set up a relatively simple model
first and subsequently expand it. When such a model has been developed, the limitations
stemming from the assumptions made will be discussed (c.f. section 6.1).
Then, to represent the brewhouse system in an STN, the materials need to be defined.
The definition of all materials in the brewhouse system is shown table 4.1 according to
typical brewing nomenclature, along with suitable abbreviations for certain materials.
In table 4.1, hops are not included, as they are usually added in amounts of 200-300
g/hL,[50] which corresponds roughly to 0.2-0.3 mass%, and therefore it is assumed that
they do not add to the total volume. This is thought to be a valid simplification since they
are removed during whirlpooling immediately after boiling. Using the material definitions
in table 4.1, the STN representation is visualised in figure 4.2.
Page 51 of 96
==PAGE:59==
4.1. MODELLING AND METHODOLOGY
Table 4.1: Defined materials in the brewhouse system, their corresponding chosen ab-
breviations and a description of which tasks each material is a part of.
Material
Abbreviation
Description
Malt
-
Feed to mashing
Water
-
Feed to mashing and lautering
Hot Mash
HM
Product from mashing and feed to lautering
Spent Grain
SG
”Product” from lautering (waste)
Wort
W
Product from lautering and feed to boiling.
Boiled Wort
BW
Product from boiling and feed to whirl-cooling.
Cold Wort
CW
Product from whirl-cooling, i.e. final brewhouse product
Figure 4.2: STN representation of the brewhouse system based on the combined tasks
outlined in this section and the materials shown in table 4.1.
As it can be seen in figure 4.2 this STN representation is fairly simple and shows the
sequential nature of the brewhouse tasks.
4.1.2
Model Development Procedure
A brewhouse scheduling model can quickly become complex if it considers more than
one production line, different beer recipes and intermittent CIP all at once. Therefore,
building up the model step by step is desired, i.e., adding one layer of complexity at a time.
Firstly, this is because troubleshooting the model and debugging the code implementation
is much easier if it relies on a framework that has been proven to work. Furthermore,
the process of developing such a model is iterative, and since brewhouse scheduling is
a relatively novel research area, the learnings obtained during each step are thought to
Page 52 of 96
==PAGE:60==
4.2. INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION
be highly useful. Because of this, the development of a brewhouse scheduling model is
desired to be carried out in the following steps:
1. Set up and simulate a simple brewery scheduling model for one beer type based
on the framework developed in Case Study I (c.f. chapter 3), data from relevant
literature and reasonable assumptions as an initial implementation.
2. Expand the model to include several types of beer based on recipes in relevant
literature.
3. Include CIP in the model both periodically and when switching the production
between certain beer types.
Each step may then also contain a degree of iteration to ensure the desired behaviour of
the brewhouse scheduling model.
4.2
Initial Implementation
As an initial implementation for scheduling of the brewhouse, the modelling for the doc-
umented example in chapter 3 is applied directly to the brewhouse, as described below.
4.2.1
Data
A brewhouse containing 2 wetmills, 2 mash tuns and 2 lauter tuns and only one line
for the rest of the equipment in figure 4.1 is considered. This is assumed because an
industrial-sized brewhouse usually has more of the mentioned equipment.[49] Then, to
be able to simulate the brewhouse scheduling problem, relevant data has been extracted
from literature and some parameter values have been calculated based on such data.
An extensive description of the data collection process from literature is provided in
Appendix B.2. The data used to simulate the scheduling of a brewhouse is summarised
in table 4.2.
Page 53 of 96
==PAGE:61==
4.2. INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION
Table 4.2: Data used to simulate scheduling of a brewhouse in this chapter, where an
extensive description of the data collection process from literature is provided in Ap-
pendix B.2. ξ is the input ratio of feeds.
Tasks
Feed(s)
ξ1
ξ2
Product(s)
ρ1
ρ2
τ [min]
βmax [hL]
Ref.
Mashing
Malt, Water
0.25
0.75
HM
0.9025
-
135
273
[49, 51]
Lautering
HM, Water
0.75
0.25
W, SG
0.7315
0.23
90
328
[49]
Boiling
W
1
-
BW
0.8574
-
105
450
[49]
Whirl-cooling
BW
1
-
CW
0.9025
-
60
411
[49, 52]
In summary, the data from table 4.2 was collected in the following manner:
1. The input ratios, ξ, are volumetric and for mashing is based on a mashing-in ratio2
of 4.[51]
2. The output ratios, ρ, are volumetric and are based on an assumed 5% yield loss
in each unit in figure 4.1 due to residue and/or fouling, where the pre-run-tank is
considered part of the boiling task. The ratio of spent grain (SG) to wort (W)
large-scale is based on an average ratio provided in [49].
3. The processing times, τ, are chosen based on typical values in literature for large-
scale brewhouses (c.f. Appendix B.2).
4. The capacity of the whirl-cooling task is based on a medium-large sized brewery
capacity, which is 500,000 hL of beer per year.[53] The remaining capacities, βmax, are
defined to be able to deliver this to the whirl-cooling task with an intentional
lower capacity for boiling to create a capacity bottleneck here.
All minimum
capacities, βmin, are defined as 0.
Furthermore, the inventory capacities are defined such that only one batch from each
unit can be intermediately stored, corresponding to the case where a unit holds material
until the subsequent unit is ready. Additionally, feeds are assumed to be in surplus, and
it is assumed that there are no storage limitations on waste and product streams. The
inventory capacities are summarised in table 4.3.
2The mashing-in ratio is defined as the volumetric ratio of water to malt added during mashing and
lautering.[51]
Page 54 of 96
==PAGE:62==
4.2. INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION
Table 4.3: Material capacities used to simulate scheduling of a brewhouse in this chapter.
Material
Malt
Water
HM
SG
W
BW
CW
Capacity, Smax
k
[hL]
∞
∞
520
∞
510
440
∞
4.2.2
Modelling and Simulation
The equations and constraints from the documented example remain unchanged. That is,
scheduling of the brewhouse is described with the full set of equations in equations (3.2)
and (3.6) and constraints in equations (2.16) and (3.3) to (3.5). Furthermore, the desired
objective is chosen as maximisation of throughput. However, to prevent the simulation
from creating very small batches for very small improvements, as it was found earlier
(c.f. section 3.3.2), a small cost on running units is included. In this way, the objective
function is defined as:
max
 
SCW(H) −
X
i,j,t
γij Wij(t)
!
(4.1)
, where the first term deals with maximisation of throughput, i.e. the final product CW
(cold wort), at the scheduling horizon H, and the second term deals with an operating
cost of running units.
Based on the processing times in table 4.2, the time interval is chosen as δ = 15 minutes,
since this is the greatest common factor of the processing times. A case is considered,
where 6 batches of cold wort are to be produced. The first batch will take 6.5 hours to
produce since this is the sum of the processing times of each unique unit in table 4.2.
Then, the subsequent batches will be produced with an interval of 2.25 hours, equal
to 135 minutes, since the longest task processing time is mashing with a required 135
minutes, and this task will therefore be the limiting factor in terms of production time.
The required scheduling horizon to produce all 6 batches is then:
H = 6.5 h + 5 · 2.25 h = 17.75 h
(4.2)
, since the first batch is produced after 6.5 hours and the subsequent 5 batches will be
produced at an interval of 2.25 hours. Based on this calculation, the scheduling horizon
is defined as H = 20 hours to allow for unexpected behaviour. To ensure that exactly 6
Page 55 of 96
==PAGE:63==
4.2. INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION
batches are able to be produced, the initial inventories are defined as shown in table 4.4.
Table 4.4: Initial inventories used to simulate scheduling of a brewhouse in this chapter.
Material
Malt
Water
HM
SG
W
BW
CW
Initial Inventory, Sk(0) [hL]
767
∞
0
0
0
0
0
In table 4.4, it is the amount of malt that limits the simulation to exactly 6 batches,
which is based on a calculation that is provided in Appendix B.3. Furthermore, the cost
of running each unit, γij, is defined as 0.01 for all tasks and units to ensure that its
contribution to the objective function in equation (4.1) is several orders of magnitude
lower than that of the throughput of cold wort (CW). Lastly, to account for the yield
losses, a dummy material was defined to handle all waste accumulated by the system.
Such a dummy material is necessary to simulate the brewhouse scheduling problem since
it ensures that all system, unit and material mass balances are satisfied.
4.2.3
Results and Discussion
The optimal brewhouse schedule obtained by simulating the initial implementation out-
lined above is shown in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: The optimal brewhouse schedule based on the model developed in this work,
data in tables 4.2 and 4.3 for H = 20 hours and with a default MILP gap of 10−4.
As it can be seen in figure 4.3, the model obtains an optimal schedule for the defined
objective function in equation (4.1), which maximises production of cold wort.
This
optimal schedule has an objective value of 2089, which means that 2089 hL of cold
wort is produced within 20 hours. However, there are some practical issues connected
Page 56 of 96
==PAGE:64==
4.2. INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION
with this schedule. Namely, the batch size on each unit is varied quite significantly. In
practice, this would require a lot of attention from operators to carry out such a schedule
compared to utilising the sequential nature of the brewhouse units. Furthermore, it is
possible that carrying out small batches on units, e.g. the 66 hL being processed on
MillMash 2 after 5 hours, might not obtain the desired behaviour of the unit, because
it is designed for much larger batches.
Additionally, the model does not yet include
an incentive to finish producing the batches as early as possible. It is desired that the
brewhouse scheduling model also needs to include the minimum time of production, also
known as the minimisation of makespan. This is because makespan in a practical case is
the main measure of optimality, as long as the schedule also ensures the production of the
maximum number of batches. Furthermore, the appropriate minimisation of makespan
would also make the simulations independent of the defined scheduling horizon, assuming
that it is long enough to produce the defined amount. That is, the production of all
batches should be carried out in the same amount of time, irrespective of the scheduling
horizon, H. Therefore, it is desired to modify the model so that the sequential nature of
the brewhouse is exploited to ensure ease of operation and desired unit behaviour, and so
that minimisation of makespan is included in the objective function.
4.2.4
Modified Implementation for Practicality
Based on the learnings in the previous section, the objective function in equation (4.3)
is redefined to impose a cost on intermediate material storage and to include a value of
product for each time interval, so that the model is incentivised to produce cold wort as
early as possible:
max
 
SCW(H) +
X
k,t
νk Sk(t) −
X
i,j,t
γij Wij(t)
!
(4.3)
, where νk is the value of 1 unit of material k in inventory per time interval, t. Here, νk
is defined as -0.01 for all intermediate materials (HM, W, BW in figure 4.2) to punish
the storage of intermediate material, while still being an order of magnitude lower than
the first term relating to the amount of cold wort produced. Furthermore, to include
the minimisation of makespan, the product (cold wort) value is defined as 0.03, which
Page 57 of 96
==PAGE:65==
4.2. INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION
is chosen because it ensures the desired behaviour. This is because it is larger than the
negative value for intermediate materials, while having an appropriate size. In this way,
the objective function also minimises makespan since the product value ensures that the
largest objective value is found when cold wort is produced as early as possible. The
optimal schedule based on this modified objective function is shown in figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: The optimal brewhouse schedule based on the model developed in this work
with the modified objective function in equation (4.3) for H = 20 hours and with a default
optimality gap of 10−4.
The arrows for the first batch indicate which subsequent unit, the units deliver material to.
They are included as an aid for the reader – it is not included in the code implementation.
As it can be seen in figure 4.4, the optimal schedule is now sequential between each unit,
as the schedule performs 6 batches from mashing to whirl-cooling sequentially. As a re-
sult, the schedule is now also much easier to read. In figure 4.4, the arrows for the first
batch indicate which subsequent unit the units deliver material to. That is, MillMash
1 delivers material to Lauter Tun 1 and MillMash 2 delivers material to Lauter
Tun 2, where both lauter tuns deliver material to the Wort Kettle which then finally
delivers material to the WhirlCool. This is based on the batch sizes, since MillMash
1 and Lauter Tun 1 contain the bigger batches, and vice versa for MillMash 2 and
Lauter Tun 2. In practice, the batch sizes might be averaged out across the two units,
i.e. the MillMashes and the Lauter Tuns. However, this batching emerges because
this schedule, in terms of the objective value, is equal to a situation where the batch sizes
are averaged out on the two units. Since these two situations are equivalent in terms of
the simulation, no further modifications to the model are deemed necessary in this case.
Furthermore, the schedule contains what is known in scheduling theory as a cyclic solu-
tion,[12] since there is a repeating pattern in the schedule. This means that the simulation
could be run for any number of hours beyond this for more batches, and this pattern
Page 58 of 96
==PAGE:66==
4.3. IMPLEMENTATION OF DIFFERENT BEER TYPES
would repeat continuously. This optimal schedule has an objective value of 4126 with
2089 hL of cold wort produced within 20 hours. As such, the inclusion of the product
value means that the objective value is not equal to the amount of cold wort produced.
In conclusion, the two issues connected with the schedule in figure 4.3 have been solved,
since the schedule in figure 4.4 would be much easier to carry out for operators because
it follows the sequential nature of the brewhouse, and because the batches are produced
as early as possible. In this case, the 6 batches were able to be produced in 17.75 hours,
as expected (c.f. equation (4.2)).
4.3
Implementation of Different Beer Types
In this section, the modified implementation with the optimal schedule in figure 4.4 will
be expanded to distinguish between types of beer. Four types of beer will be focused on:
pilsner, wheat beer, schwarzbier and organic pilsner.
4.3.1
Recipes and Implementation
To implement the different types of beer, their recipes have to be considered. For all
beer types, it is assumed that the mashing-in ratio of 4 still applies. In this way, the
only change to the process for each beer type is the composition of malt types in the
mashing task.
For pilsner and organic pilsner beers, mostly or only their respective
malt, pilsner and organic pilsner malt are typically used, respectively.[10] Therefore, it is
assumed only pilsner malt is used for pilsner and only organic pilsner malt for organic
pilsner. Furthermore, the malt compositions of wheat beer and schwarzbier are based on
recipes in [54] and [55]. The resulting recipes for the four beer types, i.e. the feed ratios
for the mashing task, are summarised in table 4.5 and a detailed description of how these
malt compositions were calculated is provided in Appendix B.2.
Page 59 of 96
==PAGE:67==
4.3. IMPLEMENTATION OF DIFFERENT BEER TYPES
Table 4.5: The input ratios (in %) of water and malt types for the mashing task for
the four beer types: Pilsner, wheat beer, schwarzbier and organic pilsner.
Beer Type
Water [%]
Pilsner Malt [%]
Wheat Malt [%]
Roasted Malt [%]
Organic Malt [%]
Pilsner
75
25
0
0
0
Wheat Beer
75
9
16
0
0
Schwarzbier
75
23.5
0
1.5
0
Organic Pilsner
75
0
0
0
25
Using this, the recipes were implemented using the same framework as in section 4.2.4.
To distinguish between each type of beer, the products from each task are kept unique.
That is, for the mashing, lautering, boiling and whirl-cooling tasks, 4 versions
have been created corresponding to each of the different types of beer. In this way, the
model is able to tell which type of beer is being processed on which unit, and the final
product (cold wort, CW) is unique for each beer type. The objective function was not
changed, c.f. equation (4.3), but the inventory for each type of cold wort was included in
the objective.
Furthermore, the model has no incentive to produce different types of beer because of the
nature of the objective function. To force the production of each beer type, the initial
malt inventories were limited so that the schedule was required to contain different beer
types – 2 batches of pilsner, 2 batches of wheat beer, 1 batch of schwarzbier and 1 batch of
organic pilsner to be exact. These initial malt inventories can be found in Appendix B.4.
Additionally, since it was found that 6 batches were able to be produced within 17.75
hours, the scheduling horizon was changed to H = 18 hours.
4.3.2
Results
The results from implementing the recipes as explained above are shown in figure 4.5,
where the short form notation of the beer types is: P for pilsner, W for wheat beer, S for
schwarzbier and O for organic pilsner.
As seen in figure 4.5, the model can now include and keep track of the 4 different types
of beer. The defined batches of 2 batches of pilsner, 2 batches of wheat beer, 1 batch
of schwarzbier and 1 batch of organic pilsner are produced. It is worth noting that the
schedule in figure 4.5 is equivalent to the schedule in figure 4.4 if the beer recipes are
Page 60 of 96
==PAGE:68==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
Figure 4.5: The optimal brewhouse schedule based on the model developed in this work
with the recipes in table 4.5 and the capacities in Appendix B.4 for H = 18 hours and
with a default optimality gap of 10−4.
P=Pilsner (blue), W=Wheat beer (purple), S=Schwarzbier (orange) and O=Organic pil-
sner (green).
disregarded. The objective value is 3625 with 2089 hL of cold wort production within
18 hours. The only difference to the objective value for the schedule in figure 4.4 is that
the scheduling horizon is shorter, and therefore the product values are compounded less.
It is also worth noting that the optimal schedule in figure 4.5 is not unique. This is
because the batches in the schedule could have been placed in any sequential order with
respect to beer type, and the resulting schedule would have the same objective value.
In fact, in practice, it would have made more sense to produce the 2 batches of pilsner
immediately after each other, and similarly for the 2 batches of wheat beer. However, the
model at this point is not able to take this into account and therefore does not produce
a schedule based on this. This will be included in the following section.
4.4
Implementation of CIP
To further improve the practical meaningfulness of the produced schedules of the model,
the cleaning of equipment through CIP, as described in section 2.1 is considered. It is
assumed that the following two events trigger the need for cleaning of equipment through
CIP:
Page 61 of 96
==PAGE:69==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
1. A unit has carried out several batches without cleaning, and the amount of fouling
makes the unit less efficient or impractical for production, requiring CIP. Units
where heat is exchanged need to be cleaned more regularly due to a higher rate of
fouling.[18]
2. The beer recipe is switched, and the types of beer make it so that cross-contamination
is unacceptable, requiring CIP. This is the case for organic beers, which usually re-
quire clean equipment to meet food quality standards. Furthermore, dark beers
usually require cleaning equipment when switching to another recipe so that the
subsequent beer type does not have an undesired colour.[19]
CIP might also be necessary in other cases, such as in the event of unit breakdowns and
unit maintenance. However, these scenarios are usually less frequent, so the two CIP
scenarios listed above will be focused on.
Furthermore, the implementation of CIP in an STN-based scheduling model for breweries
is a novel problem, as – to the best of the author’s knowledge – no literature on the matter
exists. Likely, this is because the nature of CIP does not fit with the STN formulation
since the states and tasks responsible for CIP are disconnected from the main production
line, which is visualised in figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: STN representation of the brewhouse system with the inclusion of CIP.
As seen in figure 4.6, two dummy materials (CIPin and CIPout) must be created for the
CIP task to fit with the STN formulation. It can directly be seen that the CIP task is
disconnected from the brewhouse STN representation. Therefore, there is no incentive for
CIP to be performed through a traditional objective function. However, it is hypothesised
Page 62 of 96
==PAGE:70==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
that through relevant redefinition of the model and constraints, the system can be forced
to perform CIP based on simple rules. This is explored in the following sections.
4.4.1
Periodic CIP
To expand the model one step at a time and catch undesired model behaviour, the two
main types of CIP will be included in the model one at a time. First, periodic CIP for
when a unit has carried out batches without cleaning for prolonged periods will be in-
cluded in the model. As an initial implementation, the units with heat exchanged will be
focused on since these need to be cleaned every so often based on the number of batches
run on the units. In contrast, other units are usually cleaned every week or month. This
is because the build-up of fouling in units with heat exchanged is much faster.[18]
As such, for the units responsible for the Wort Kettle and the WhirlCool, a new
task corresponding to the CIP task in figure 4.6 is included for each and the dummy
materials (CIPin and CIPout) have been defined. A cycle of CIP usually takes 60-90 min-
utes in industrial-sized breweries,[56] and therefore it is assumed that a CIP cycle takes a
constant 90 minutes. Also, because of the connected nature of the combined units, it is
assumed that one CIP cycle cleans the pre-heater and wort kettle simultaneously.
Now, to include that the heat exchanging units must be cleaned after a set number of
batches, the unit health procedure in section 2.2.5.3 can be applied directly, i.e. by includ-
ing equations (2.27), (2.28) and (2.30) to (2.32) in the model. To apply these equations
and constraints directly, it is assumed that the deterioration of units has no effect on
batch size and task yield. Furthermore, the equipment used for CIP is standardised, and
a CIP unit can be used to clean several units. Because of this, breweries have a limited
number of CIP units.[18] It is assumed that only one CIP unit is available, which also
means that a CIP cycle can only be performed on one unit at a time. This is handled
through the following constraint:
t−τCIP+1
X
n=t
WCIPj(n) ≤1
∀j, t
(4.4)
, so that only one CIP cycle can be active at a time.
To test this periodic CIP implementation, the brewhouse scheduling problem has been
Page 63 of 96
==PAGE:71==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
simulated for one recipe (c.f. section 4.2.4) with the inclusion of the CIP task and the
CIP dummy materials. Again, a scheduling horizon of H = 18 hours is considered. The
maximum health of heat exchanging units, i.e. the Wort Kettle and the WhirlCool,
is defined as ηmax
j
= 3. While this is likely much lower than in practice,[10] it is intentional
so that a long scheduling horizon is not necessary for considering the behaviour around
periodic CIP. For all other units, the maximum health is defined as ηmax
j
= 30, so that
CIP is not necessary within this relatively short scheduling horizon. It is also assumed
that all tasks degrade their corresponding units equally with θi = 1. Here, the CIP tasks
are an exception, where θi is defined as 0, so that undesired model behaviour is avoided,
as the CIP tasks will then not consume and regenerate health at the same time interval.
The results are shown in figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: The optimal brewhouse schedule based on the model developed in this work
with the inclusion of periodic CIP (red) with ηmax
j
= 3 for units with heat exchanged for
H = 18 hours and with a default optimality gap of 10−4.
As seen figure 4.7, the optimal schedule is still able to produce 6 batches in total within
the 18 hours, even with a CIP cycle on both the Wort Kettle and the WhirlCool
after 3 batches. Interestingly, the 6 batches are produced in 17.75 hours, which is the
same as the case without CIP. As such, the placement of CIP does not affect the amount
of time required for the production of 6 batches. This is achieved by intermediate storage
of wort on the fourth batch of lautering. In practice, this could be achieved by storage
in the pre-run-tank until the wort kettle has undergone CIP. Here, the implication is that
the pre-run-tank is not also undergoing CIP simultaneously with the wort kettle. Since
the pre-run-tank is only used when the wort kettle is not available, this is thought to
be a reasonable assumption. If this is not the case, the fifth batch of lautering would
have to wait until the Wort Kettle had undergone CIP, since it starts before the
fourth batch on the Wort Kettle is being processed. Furthermore, this solution would
Page 64 of 96
==PAGE:72==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
be practically obtainable by operators since it only includes the intermediate storage of
material in the pre-run-tank and does not require several switchovers, as was the case in
section 4.2.3. This schedule has an objective value of 3535 with 2089 hL of cold wort
production. Compared to the objective value of 3625 for the schedule in figure 4.5, which
had the same scheduling horizon, it is slightly lower in this case because of the imposed
cost on intermediate material storage. However, while intermediate material storage is
punished, the schedule still minimises makespan, highlighting the appropriate definition
of the product value of νCW = 0.03.
4.4.2
CIP at Change of Recipe
As mentioned earlier, switching the recipe to or from certain other beer types can require
CIP of the whole system.
With the four defined beer types, specifically 2 events are
assumed to force CIP of all equipment:
1. The brewhouse changes the recipe from schwarzbier to any other type of beer, and
CIP of all equipment is required before the next batch can be produced. This is
also regularly enforced in a brewhouse in practice, so that the subsequent beer type
produced does not have an undesired colour.[49]
2. The brewhouse changes the recipe to organic pilsner from any other type of beer,
and CIP of all equipment is required before organic pilsner can be produced. In
practice, this is necessary to comply with organic food quality standards, i.e. so that
the organic beer is not cross-contaminated and it can be labelled as ”organic”.[19]
To the best of the author’s knowledge, no literature exists where maintenance on units in
an entire system is enforced by the changeover of recipes for an MILP model. Therefore,
the model developments in the following are novel and are explained in detail along with
the thought process behind them.
4.4.2.1
Changeover Handling
The nature of the 2 events that cause the requirement for CIP is not the same, as CIP is
required after the last batch of schwarzbier has been produced and before the first batch of
Page 65 of 96
==PAGE:73==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
organic pilsner is produced. This means that they need to be handled differently through
constraints. However, the two events have in common that they relate to changeovers,
i.e.
from schwarzbier and to organic pilsner.
Therefore, the procedure for handling
changeovers through the binary variables Xij(t) and Yii′j(t), as outlined in section 2.2.5.4,
is implemented. Here, no changeover times are assumed, i.e. σii′ = 0 for all changeovers,
and it is hypothesised that equation (2.34) can be used directly with σii′ = 0:
Xij(t) = Xij(t −1) +
X
i′̸=i
Yi′ij(t −1) −
X
i′̸=i
Yii′j(t −1)
∀i ∈Ij, j, t ≥1
(4.5)
, where the constraints in equations (2.33) and (2.35) still apply. In the introduction of
the changeover variables in section 2.2.5.4, it was mentioned that a unit j is not in a mode
i during the execution of a changeover. However, now it is assumed that σii′ = 0, which
means that a unit j is always in a mode i:
X
i
Xij(t) = 1
∀j, t
(4.6)
, which can be used to reduce computation time by guiding the solver in the right direc-
tion since it makes the optimisation problem more defined initially, if applicable. In the
following sections, it will be explained how the enforcement of CIP after production of
schwarzbier and CIP before production of organic beer are handled.
4.4.2.2
CIP after Schwarzbier
With how the model is set up now, cleaning by CIP is forced by the development of the
unit health, Hj(t). As such, the requirement of CIP after production of schwarzbier can
be handled by forcing Hj(t) = 0 after production of schwarzbier. That is, Hj(t) = 0 needs
to be forced when a changeover from schwarzbier occurs. It is hypothesised that this can
be handled by defining a new variable H−
j (t) in the equation for the unit health that
ensures Hj(t) = 0 whenever a changeover from schwarzbier occurs. The development of
Hj(t) could then be modified to:
Hj(t) = Hj(t −1) −
X
i ∈Ij
(θi Wij(t)) + H+
j (t) −H−
j (t)
∀j, t ≥1
(4.7)
Page 66 of 96
==PAGE:74==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
, where the desired behaviour of the introduced variable H−
j (t) would ensure Hj(t) = 0 if
and only if a changeover from schwarzbier occurs, i.e. Yii′j(t) = 1 for a task i that relates
to schwarzbier. This can be expressed as:
H−
j (t) = Hj(t −1) · Yii′j(t)
∀i ∈Ij,S, i′ ∈Ij, j, t ≥1
(4.8)
, where Ij,S is every task relating to schwarzbier on unit j. Equation (4.8) ensures that
H−
j (t−1) is subtracted from Hj(t) in equation (4.7) so that Hj(t) = 0 when there is a task
changeover from schwarzbier which is described by Yii′j(t) = 1 for i relating to schwarzbier.
However, equation (4.8) is non-linear because of the multiplication of the non-integer
variable Hj(t −1) and the binary variable Yii′j(t).
Because of this, equation (4.8) is
linearised using the Big-M method as described in section 2.2.5.2 with ηmax
j
as a suitable
Big-M parameter, which yields the following linear constraints:
H−
j (t) ≥Hj(t −1) −ηmax
j
(1 −Yii′j(t))
∀i ∈Ij,S, i′ ∈Ij, j, t ≥1
(4.9)
H−
j (t) ≤Hj(t −1) + ηmax
j
(1 −Yii′j(t))
∀i ∈Ij,S, i′ ∈Ij, j, t ≥1
(4.10)
H−
j (t) ≥0
∀j, t
(4.11)
H−
j (t) ≤ηmax
j
Yii′j(t)
∀i ∈Ij,S, i′ ∈Ij, j, t
(4.12)
In this way, H−
j (t) is either equal to Hj(t−1) when Yii′j = 1 or 0 when Yii′j = 0 for task i
relating to schwarzbier. As desired, this means that Hj(t) is set to 0 whenever a changeover
from schwarzbier occurs, i.e. whenever Yii′j = 1 for task i relating to schwarzbier. This
forces CIP on all equipment if more batches need to be produced. This also means that
an optimal schedule could, in theory, place the schwarzbier tasks at the very end of the
scheduling horizon so that CIP is not required because no more batches need to be carried
out. This is taken into account in the implementation in section 4.4.2.5.
4.4.2.3
CIP before Organic Pilsner
As before, in the current model setup it is found that the requirement of CIP before
production of organic pilsner corresponds to forcing Hj(t) = ηmax
j
before production of
organic pilsner. Since the regeneration of Hj(t) is already handled by performing CIP
Page 67 of 96
==PAGE:75==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
tasks on the unit through the variable H+
j (t) in equation (4.7), no new variables are
necessary. Instead, the requirement of CIP before production of organic pilsner can be
implemented with a single constraint ensuring Hj(t) = ηmax
j
when a changeover to organic
pilsner occurs:
ηmax
j
Yii′j(t) ≤Hj(t −1)
∀i ∈Ij, i′ ∈Ij,O, j, t
(4.13)
, where Ij,O is every task relating to organic pilsner on unit j. Here, the health is one
time interval behind, Hj(t −1) as opposed to Hj(t), so that a task relating to organic
pilsner may be carried out exactly when CIP has finished, where Hj(t) would then be
one health lower than ηmax
j
. In this way, Hj(t) can take up any value within its usual
bounds when Yii′j(t) = 0 but must be ηmax
j
one time interval before Yii′j(t) = 1 for task
i′ relating to organic pilsner. This forces CIP on all equipment before organic pilsner can
be produced. This could mean that organic pilsner is always the most optimal to place
at the start of the scheduling horizon, since all equipment is assumed to be clean at the
start and consequently Hj(0) = ηmax
j
. However, it could also mean that organic pilsner
is not favoured by the simulation compared to the competing recipes, because of the CIP
requirement, if the initial inventories are not limited. This is taken into account in the
implementation in section 4.4.2.5.
4.4.2.4
Desired Model Behaviour
Before considering the results from implementing the procedure above for CIP after
schwarzbier and before organic pilsner, it is useful to consider the desired nature of the
schedules produced by the model. Assume that a batch of schwarzbier has been produced
and that it is desired to switch the production to organic pilsner. Here, both CIP after
schwarzbier and before organic pilsner would be satisfied by running a single CIP task on
all units. Since only one CIP task can run on any unit at a time (c.f. equation (4.4)), it is
hypothesised that the optimal behaviour would be to place CIP on units in a sequential
manner. That is, corresponding to their chronologic placement at the production of a
batch, meaning that MillMashes would be cleaned first, then the Lauter Tuns and
so on. Then, the desired behaviour can manually be drawn out, as visualised in figure 4.8.
Page 68 of 96
==PAGE:76==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
Figure 4.8:
Desired and expected model behaviour in the occurrence of subsequent
changeovers from schwarzbier to CIP to organic pilsner. The indicated batch sizes are
based on previous simulations, and the average for the two units for MillMash 1 & 2
and Lauter Tun 1 & 2.
S=Schwarzbier (orange), O=Organic pilsner (green) and CIP=Cleaning-in-Place (red).
In figure 4.8, the tasks on the Wort Kettle and Lauter Tun 2 after CIP are placed
immediately after the corresponding CIP tasks are finished to allow for the earliest pos-
sible production of cold organic pilsner wort. It is possible that some tasks, specifically
mashing, might be executed even earlier to allow for faster production of subsequent
batches, e.g. the second organic pilsner batch. This is because the mashing task was
found to be the bottleneck in earlier schedules, and a similar behaviour was observed for
periodic CIP in figure 4.7. In this visualisation, it takes 6 hours from when the schwarz-
bier batch is finished to when the organic pilsner batch is finished. In its simple form
figure 4.8 can be used to compare results in the implementation below to the desired
model behaviour.
4.4.2.5
Implementation and Results
The implementation introduced in this section builds on the implementation with differ-
ent beer recipes outlined in section 4.3. In section 4.3 it was found out that the brew-
house scheduling model did not have an incentive to place tasks of the same beer type
subsequently if possible – as they would be in practice. However, now that the binary
changeover variable Yii′j(t) has been introduced, the model can minimise changeovers
through the objective function. This is because a sum over Yii′j(t) over the scheduling
horizon would describe the total number of changeovers, and the objective function in
Page 69 of 96
==PAGE:77==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
equation (4.3) could be modified accordingly:[12]
max
 X
k∈CW
Sk(H) +
X
k,t
νk Sk(t) −
X
i,j,t
γij Wij(t) −
X
i,i′,j,t
χii′j Yii′j(t)
!
(4.14)
, where χii′j is the ”cost” of a changeover from task i to task i′ on unit j.
This is implemented into the model with χii′j = 0.1 for all changeover types to ensure
grouping of tasks relating to the same beer type, and that the contribution is at least
an order of magnitude lower than the throughput. Furthermore, the enforcement of CIP
after production of schwarzbier is included in the model by implementing equations (4.7)
and (4.9) to (4.12), and similarly for CIP before production of organic pilsner by imple-
menting equation (4.13). Here, it is assumed that one CIP cycle takes 90 minutes for the
defined, combined units due to the connected nature of the wetmills and mash tuns; the
pre-run-tank, pre-heater and wort kettle; and the whirlpool and cooling heat exchanger.
To investigate the behaviour of this implementation, an example is considered, where 3
batches of schwarzbier and 3 batches of organic pilsner are to be produced. To ensure
that only these batches can be produced, the initial inventories have been limited so that
exactly 3 batches of each can be produced (c.f. Appendix B.5). To force the schedule to
include CIP at change of recipe, the initial mode of all units, Xij(0) in equation (4.5),
has been set to tasks relating to schwarzbier on all units j. This is enforced for the first
405 minutes, where the mode Xij(t) = 1 for all tasks relating to schwarzbier. If this is
not done, the optimal schedule would place organic pilsner first, where the equipment is
clean, and schwarzbier last, so the equipment does not need to be cleaned, as no further
batches are to be produced. Here, 405 minutes is chosen since it is the duration of 3
mashing tasks, enabling the production of 3 schwarzbier batches during the initial period.
Furthermore, the periodic CIP is effectively disabled by setting all ηmax
j
= 30, where 30
is an arbitrarily chosen large number. This is done so that the scheduling model can only
place CIP based on equations (4.7) and (4.9) to (4.13), so that the simulation can be used
to determine if these equations provide the desired behaviour. The scheduling horizon is
chosen as H = 21.5 hours based on a simple calculation:
H = 6.5 h + 4 · 2.25 h + 6 h = 21.5 h
(4.15)
Page 70 of 96
==PAGE:78==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
, since it takes 6.5 hours for the first batch to be produced and 2.25 hours between each
batch afterwards. Here, the exception is the time interval between the batches, where CIP
on all units is placed, and based on the discussion in section 4.4.2.4 it is found to be 6
hours. Ultimately, this leads to an expected production time for all 6 batches of 21.5 hours.
The results of the implementation in this section, with objective function in equation (4.14)
and CIP at change of recipes through equations (4.7) and (4.9) to (4.13) can be seen in
figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: The optimal brewhouse schedule based on the model developed in this work
with the inclusion of CIP at change of recipes for H = 21.5 hours for the introduced
example, with a resulting optimality gap of 1.2%.
S=Schwarzbier (orange), O=Organic pilsner (green) and CIP=Cleaning-in-Place (red).
The resulting optimality gap indicated in figure 4.9 of 1.2% is a product of the compu-
tation time being limited to get results in a reasonable amount of time. This was done
because the number of binary variables is increased significantly through the introduction
of Xij(t) and Yii′j(t), which led to a sharp increase in computation time. This is because
of the branching nature of the binary variables, as outlined in figure 2.2. A more detailed
discussion of the computation times for each implementation is provided in section 4.6.
However, the optimality gap of 1.2% does not necessarily mean that the simulation is not
optimal or near-optimal, as it could also mean that the solver has not removed sufficient
degrees of relaxation in the binary variables (c.f. section 2.2.1.3). In fact, for the last
half of the simulation, the objective function was not improved, whereas the best-relaxed
Page 71 of 96
==PAGE:79==
4.4. IMPLEMENTATION OF CIP
solution slowly decreased. For sufficient computation time, it is intuited that the best
relaxed solution would decreasingly converge to the true value of the objective function.
As it can be seen in figure 4.9, the resulting schedule aligns with the expectations in
section 4.4.2.4, where CIP follows the chronological placement of units in the brewhouse
when carrying out batches. The schedule leads to an objective value of 4064 with 2089
hL of cold wort being produced in total, half of which is for each of the two beer types.
Interestingly, the enforcement of CIP here makes the Wort Kettle the bottleneck for
the subsequent 2 tasks after CIP on all units – just as was observed for the periodic CIP
in figure 4.7. In this case, it occurs because the first task on Lauter Tun 1 after CIP is
placed slightly earlier than expected. This allows the MillMashes to carry out the next
batch within the defined capacities. However, the material capacities were introduced so
that they corresponded to the units holding the materials in a waiting position. Here, the
MillMashes are not able to do so because of the subsequent task. Lauter Tun 2 has
not yet finished its CIP cycle, which means that the material from the other batch that
does not directly go to the earlier lautering task has to be stored. However, the next
batches on the MillMashes make it so that intermediate storage in the MillMashes
is impossible. As such, this breaks the general idea of how the material capacities were
defined, and the schedule in figure 4.9 would not be able to be carried out in practice in
a brewhouse with the available units. Therefore, it is physically meaningless.
To avoid this behaviour, the intermediate storage from the MillMashes is disallowed
by setting the material capacity of hot mash to 0 (compared to table 4.3). The resulting
schedule is shown in figure 4.10
As it can be seen in figure 4.10, the undesired behaviour from figure 4.9 with the physi-
cally impossible intermediate storage from the MillMashes is avoided. Now, the Mill-
Mashes correctly wait until both lauter tuns are available to finish their first batch, so
that material can be delivered, and the next batch can be carried out. The schedule in
figure 4.10 has an objective value of 4030, which is slightly lower than before. This
can easily be explained by the fact that it takes slightly longer, i.e. 21.5 hours compared
to 20.75 hours, to produce the 6 batches. This schedule also completely aligns with the
expectation outlined in section 4.4.2.4, and it is possible to be carried out in practice.
Page 72 of 96
==PAGE:80==
4.5. REALISTIC EXAMPLE
Figure 4.10: The optimal brewhouse schedule based on the model developed in this work
with the inclusion of CIP at change of recipe for H = 21.5 hours disallowing intermediate
storage from the MillMashes for the test example, with a resulting optimality gap of
0.8%.
In conclusion, by disallowing of intermediate storage from the MillMashes, the devel-
oped scheduling model now has the desired physically meaningful behaviour when CIP at
change of recipe is required.
4.5
Realistic Example
At this point, the developed brewhouse scheduling model contains the desired amount of
functionalities within the project scope. To test these functionalities, a realistic example
is considered. In this realistic example, all 4 types of beer are to be produced through
7 batches of pilsner, 6 batches of wheat beer, 2 batches of schwarzbier and 3 batches
of organic pilsner, i.e. 18 batches in total. The initial malt inventories to achieve this
are listed in Appendix B.6.
Here, the full CIP implementation from section 4.4.2 is
used, where CIP at change of recipes from schwarzbier and to organic pilsner is enforced.
Periodic CIP is also enforced for units with heat exchanged, i.e. the Wort Kettle
and WhirlCool, by defining ηmax
j
= 9 for these units, as the interval for cleaning of
these units is commonly 8-12 batches in literature.[49] The remaining units still have a
maximum health of ηmax
j
= 30, so that CIP on these units is not enforced by periodic CIP
but only CIP at change of recipes over the scheduling horizon. The scheduling horizon
Page 73 of 96
==PAGE:81==
4.5. REALISTIC EXAMPLE
is defined as H = 48.5 hours, which was found by a similar calculation to the one in
equation (4.15), as it was found in section 4.4.1 that periodic CIP does not require extra
time in the optimal schedule. Lastly, the initial mode of every unit, Xij(0), is set to all
tasks relating to pilsner.
Based on this, the behaviour of the scheduling model developed in this chapter will be
investigated. Furthermore, to provide a comparison between the developed model and
scheduling software, the realistic example will also be simulated in INOSIM.
4.5.1
Expected Behaviour of Schedule
Before investigating the results, it is useful to consider the expected behaviour in an
optimal schedule. For the introduced example, it follows that periodic CIP on units with
heat exchanged will be enforced after at most 9 batches, i.e. half of the total batches.
Furthermore, batches of both schwarzbier and organic pilsner have to be produced and it
is not possible to place organic pilsner at the start of the schedule. Therefore, the optimal
schedule will likely ensure that the periodic CIP and the CIP at change of recipe will
coincide. This is because it will prevent the need for intermediate storage in the case of
periodic CIP, which is punished in the objective function (c.f. equation (4.14)). While
the batches of schwarzbier could, in theory, still be placed at the end of the scheduling
horizon, which would eliminate the CIP requirement after these batches, this would not
minimise the number of changeovers.
This is because the 7 batches of pilsner and 2
batches of schwarzbier exactly correspond to 9 batches where all units will require CIP,
as hypothesised. It is known that the production of organic pilsner requires all units to
be clean, and therefore the alternative would be to produce 2 batches of wheat beer after
the 7 batches of pilsner. However, this would require one more changeover on all units,
since more wheat beer batches would have to be produced before schwarzbier is placed at
the end.
To summarise, the optimal schedule is hypothesised to be 7 batches of pilsner then 2
batches of schwarzbier followed by CIP of all units, then the 3 batches of organic pilsner
and finally the 6 batches of wheat beer.
Page 74 of 96
==PAGE:82==
4.5. REALISTIC EXAMPLE
Figure 4.11: The optimal brewhouse schedule based on the model developed in this work for the realistic example, with a resulting
optimality gap of 0.6%.
P=Pilsner (blue), W=Wheat beer (purple), S=Schwarzbier (orange), O=Organic pilsner (green) and CIP=Cleaning-in-Place (red).
Page 75 of 96
==PAGE:83==
4.5. REALISTIC EXAMPLE
4.5.2
Results using Scheduling Model
The resulting schedule for the realistic example obtained from the developed scheduling
model is shown in figure 4.11.
As it can be seen in figure 4.11, the schedule is exactly as expected, as outlined in sec-
tion 4.5.1. As such, all batches can be produced within 48.5 hours. The objective value
is 22,059 with 6267 hL of cold wort production in total across the 4 different beer types.
Interestingly, for this simulation with a longer scheduling horizon, no new behaviour can
be observed. As such, the optimal behaviour for a simulation with a longer scheduling
horizon can be observed through appropriately defined simulation with a shorter schedul-
ing horizon. This is important because this simulation was much more computationally
expensive than any previous simulation, which is discussed in detail in section 4.6. Con-
clusively, the scheduling horizon can be kept relatively low to investigate the behaviour
around certain events, e.g. periodic CIP and CIP at the change of recipes as in this case,
potentially avoiding an intractable model.
4.5.3
Results using INOSIM
For the documented example, it was argued that INOSIM lacked some functionalities
compared to the developed scheduling model, because of the nonsequential nature of the
documented example. However, it is possible that the sequential nature of the brewhouse
makes INOSIM more appropriate as a scheduling tool than for the documented example.
Therefore, the realistic example has been implemented in INOSIM (c.f. Appendix B.7).
In summary, the following steps were taken to produce a schedule in INOSIM:
1. The materials and available equipment were defined and connected within the flow
sheet structure.
2. The master recipes were defined based on the recipes in table 4.5 and the observed
batch sizes in previous schedules. As for the documented example, batching has to
be performed manually and could not be done automatically in INOSIM. Further-
more, a recipe for the CIP of all units was created.
3. The orders were defined according to the expected behaviour outlined in section 4.5.1.
Page 76 of 96
==PAGE:84==
4.5. REALISTIC EXAMPLE
Figure 4.12: The optimal schedule of the realistic example as simulated in INOSIM.
Page 77 of 96
==PAGE:85==
4.6. COMPUTATION TIME
As such, no capacities were defined through thresholds because of the constant batch size
in the brewhouse. Likely, this makes INOSIM even more appropriate for scheduling of
the brewhouse, since these were found to be problematic in section 3.4. However, this
assumes that batching has been performed by other means prior to implementation in
INOSIM. In a practical case, this is likely a reasonable assumption, because breweries
tend to have constant batch sizes for certain recipes.[49] The resulting schedule produced
in INOSIM for the realistic example in the brewhouse is shown in figure 4.12.
As it can be seen in figure 4.12, INOSIM is able to obtain an optimal schedule, where all
batches are produced after 48.5 hours. INOSIM achieves this with its built-in minimisa-
tion of makespan by assuming waiting positions for the units, when they are waiting for
material to be delivered by previous tasks. As such, the 18 batches are produced in the
same amount of time as the brewhouse scheduling model. This is under the assumption
that the expected behaviour of the schedule outlined in section 4.5.1 had been used as
a starting point. This is because the placement of the batches was fully defined within
INOSIM’s order list. As such, it would require knowledge about the brewhouse schedules
to arrive at the expected behaviour and then include it in the INOSIM simulation. How-
ever, it is thought to be a reasonable assumption that a brewery operator could arrive at
the same expected schedule behaviour since it is a relatively simple analysis.
In conclusion, for this realistic example, INOSIM produces the same schedule as the
developed scheduling model by manual batching. However, for more advanced implemen-
tations, INOSIM lacks some functionality, which is discussed in detail in section 6.2.
4.6
Computation Time
In this section, the computation time of the modelling steps in this chapter will be dis-
cussed. The computation time of the MILP simulations depends on both the complexity
of the employed model, i.e. the number of binary variables (c.f. section 2.2.1.2), and the
computational power of the computer system used for the simulation. To provide a more
general basis for comparison and eliminate the significance of the computer system used,
Page 78 of 96
==PAGE:86==
4.6. COMPUTATION TIME
the relative computation time, ω, is introduced, which is defined as:
ω = ωs
ωini
(4.16)
, where ω is the computational time, s is the considered simulation and ini is the initial
simulation implementation (c.f. section 4.2). In this way, the relative computation time
can be used to evaluate the effect each layer of added complexity to the model has on the
computation time. For the sake of a systematic approach with respect to computation
times, each computationally inexpensive simulation in this chapter was performed 5 times,
and the relative computation times are based on averages based on these 5 simulations.
The simulations with CIP at change of recipe enforced are computationally expensive
and were therefore only simulated once.
Documentation on the relative computation
times calculated for each implementation is provided in Appendix B.8.
The relative
computation times, number of variables and binary variables, the number of constraints
and the resulting optimality gap for each implementation are shown in table 4.6.
Table 4.6: The relative computation times, number of variables and binary variables,
number of constraints and the resulting optimality gap for each implementation in this
chapter (Case Study II). Here, implementation ”Initial” refers to the implementation in
section 4.2.3, ”Modified” in section 4.2.4, ”Recipes” in section 4.3, ”Per. CIP” to the im-
plementation of periodic CIP in section 4.4.1, ”R. CIP Ini.” to the initial implementation
of CIP at change of recipes in section 4.4.2, ”R. CIP Mod.” its modified counterpart and
”Rep. Example” in section 4.5.
Implementation
Initial
Modified
Recipes
Per. CIP
R. CIP Ini.
R. CIP Mod.
Rep. Example
Rel. Computation Time, ω
1.0
0.97
125
3.8
2.1 · 104
2.1 · 104
3.1 · 105
No. of Variables
1900
1901
5624
2631
2631
56467
124612
No. of Binary Variables
438
438
1752
876
49590
49590
109440
No. of Constraints
2928
2929
7747
3732
37523
37523
77444
Optimality Gap
10−4
10−4
10−4
10−4
0.012
0.008
0.006
As seen in table 4.6, the computation time and number of variables and constraints are
connected. It is specifically the binary variables that increase computation time, in theory,
because of their branching nature. This is confirmed qualitatively in table 4.6, where the
lowest computation times are observed for the cases with the lowest number of binary
variables and constraints. However, the ”Modified” and ”R. CIP Mod.” implementations
(c.f.
section 4.2.4 and section 4.4.2) are interesting cases since they are slightly less
Page 79 of 96
==PAGE:87==
4.7. MAIN FINDINGS
computationally expensive. One explanation for this is a slight variation in the simulation
times. However, another possible explanation for this is that for both these cases, the
behaviours of the resulting schedules are changed. This means that the simulation could
be more defined, which could help the optimisation solver more easily locate the optimal
schedule. A more defined objective function could also reduce the number of equivalent
solutions, i.e. increase the uniqueness of an optimal schedule, which could lead to better
performance.
Lastly, for the simulations after the implementation of CIP at change of recipe, the number
of binary variables increased significantly. As a result, the computation time also increases
significantly, and the model is nearing intractability. This highlights that the number of
binary variables needs to be minimised as much as possible to avoid an intractable model.
While the introduction of the binary changeover variables Xij(t) and Yii′j(t) provided
the most general way of dealing with the enforcement of CIP at change of recipe, it is
possible that they are not strictly necessary if for example the number of batches for each
beer type is known within a given scheduling horizon. However, the model would then
lose generality and could therefore not be applied for an unknown number of batches.
Therefore, this has not been investigated further.
4.7
Main Findings
In this chapter, the general scheduling state-space MILP model developed in chapter 3
was tailored for the scheduling of cold wort production in a brewhouse.
The model
is now able to schedule recipes for four different types of beer and maintenance of units
through CIP. Here, CIP can be enforced both periodically and based on a change of recipe
from schwarzbier and/or to organic pilsner. The objective function now maximises the
amount of cold wort at the scheduling horizon while simultaneously minimising makespan,
intermediate storage, cost of running units and changeovers through appropriate weighing.
It was found that the inclusion of changeover variables significantly increased the required
computation time due to an increase in binary variables. As such, for each added layer of
complexity to the model, the computation time grew exponentially in a manner visualised
in figure 4.13.
Page 80 of 96
==PAGE:88==
4.7. MAIN FINDINGS
Figure 4.13: Visualisation of the exponential growth in computation time for each added
layer of complexity added to an MILP scheduling model.
The proposed relationship between required computation time and model complexity in
figure 4.13 can be attributed to the branching nature of binary variables.
For a realistic example, it was found that the developed brewhouse scheduling model
produced an optimal schedule that aligned with expectations and contained the desired
functionality. Furthermore, for this realistic example with a long scheduling horizon, no
new behaviour was observed when compared to the earlier implementations testing the
desired behaviours for a shorter scheduling horizon. As such, the model behaviour can
be observed for a shorter scheduling horizon for further model developments to avoid
model intractability due to the relationship in figure 4.13. Lastly, INOSIM was able to
produce the same optimal schedule for the realistic example. Compared to Case Study
I, the sequencing was much more straightforward because of the sequential nature of the
brewhouse. Therefore, INOSIM is deemed more applicable for the brewhouse scheduling
problem than the documented example. However, a prerequisite to an INOSIM imple-
mentation for brewhouses is known batch sizes since INOSIM cannot perform batching.
On the other hand, the developed brewhouse scheduling model is able to perform batching
automatically.
Page 81 of 96
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 5
Case Study III: Investigation of As-
sumptions
In this chapter, it will be investigated how notable assumptions influence the behaviour
of the scheduling model and the resulting optimal schedules. The simulations in this
chapter are directly built on the existing implementations in the previous chapter (Case
Study II). Therefore, the implementations will not be explained in detail. Furthermore,
they also have similar computation times and resulting optimality gaps, and these will
therefore not be discussed in detail either. Additionally, for each section in this chapter,
only one assumption is investigated, which means that the framework in each section is
the original implementations. That is, the modified assumptions are not carried on to the
next section.
5.1
Processing Times
In literature, the processing times of each task on each unit are highly dependent on the
specific brewery. The assumed processing times were therefore chosen within the lowest
and highest processing times found in literature.[49] Because of this, a practical case in
a brewhouse might have significantly different processing times than the ones assumed
earlier.
Therefore, it is desired to investigate the effect different processing times have on the
scheduling model behaviour. Here, only the process bottlenecks govern the behaviour
of the scheduling, as found earlier. In literature, the mash tuns and wort kettles are
mentioned as the usual bottlenecks.[49] Therefore, the processing times of the mashing
and boiling tasks are now both set to 120 minutes, instead of the 135 and 105 minutes
Page 82 of 96
==PAGE:90==
5.1. PROCESSING TIMES
assumed earlier, respectively. In this way, a batch from start to finish will still take 6.5
hours as before. Because of this, the behaviour of schedules without CIP is expected to be
the same. However, it was found for the two cases, where CIP was introduced periodically
and at change of recipe (c.f. section 4.4.1 and section 4.4.2.5) that the optimal schedules
saved time by performing the bottleneck task (mashing) earlier than expected. Therefore,
a new behaviour is expected now that both the mashing and boiling tasks have the
same processing times, which are still the highest in the whole brewing process. The new
optimal schedules for periodic CIP and CIP at change of recipe for a processing time of
120 minutes for both mashing and boiling are shown in figure 5.1.
(a) Optimal schedule for periodic CIP.
(b) Optimal schedule for CIP at change of recipes.
Figure 5.1: Optimal schedules with modified processing times of 120 minutes for both
mashing and boiling for the (a) Periodic CIP and (b) CIP at change of recipe imple-
mentations.
First, for periodic CIP in figure 5.1, it can be seen that the enforcement of CIP on the heat
exchanging units creates a gap in the schedule, where the mashing task is not running
Page 83 of 96
==PAGE:91==
5.1. PROCESSING TIMES
between 6 and 7.5 hours. This gap is exactly 90 minutes, which corresponds to the CIP
cycle. This means that CIP effectively delays production for 90 minutes, while the total
duration of CIP is 180 minutes because two units undergo CIP. As such, the mashing
tasks are not initiated earlier here to allow for faster subsequent production as was the
case for the original processing times in figure 4.7. This is because the processing times of
mashing and boiling are now equal, so time would not be saved in this manner. However,
the two schedules finish the production of 6 batches of cold wort in 18 hours, which is
15 minutes slower than the original schedule. As such, in this case, the processing times
affect the nature of the schedule but only slightly affect the required time to produce all
batches.
For CIP at change of recipes figure 5.1, an interesting behaviour can be observed in
the optimal schedule.
Here, the order of CIP on units is oscillating in terms of the
unit sequence. That is, one MillMash is cleaned first, then a Lauter Tun, then the
next MillMash, then the Wort Kettle, then the next Lauter Tun and finally the
WhirlCool. Likely, this behaviour emerges because it allows for the Wort Kettle
to carry out its first batch as early as possible, since the clean MillMash and Lauter
Tun are able to be run twice to deliver the batch amount to the Wort Kettle. This
leads to the 6 batches being produced in 20 hours. In practice, this schedule would only
be possible if the first lautering task on Lauter Tun 1 is able to deliver its processed
material to the pre-run-tank. As such, the pre-run-tank would need to not undergo CIP
when the wort kettle undergoes CIP. Since the pre-run-tank is only used when wort is
waiting for the wort kettle to be ready, it is thought to be a reasonable assumption that
CIP is not required since it is already clean. However, for a longer schedule, where the
pre-run-tank has already been used, this schedule would be practically infeasible. The
alternative would be to force the schedule place CIP consecutive on sequential units in
the brewhouse, as was observed earlier, which can be seen in figure 5.2.
Page 84 of 96
==PAGE:92==
5.1. PROCESSING TIMES
Figure 5.2: Optimal schedule with modified processing times of 120 minutes for both
mashing and boiling for the CIP at change of recipe implementation with CIP forced
to be consecutive on sequential units.
As it can be seen in figure 5.2, the 6 batches are instead produced in 20.5 hours when CIP
is consecutive on sequential units, compared to the 20 hours obtained in figure 5.1. As
such, the oscillating nature of the CIP unit sequence in figure 5.1 saves 30 minutes when
producing the 6 batches. However, the behaviour in figure 5.1 also means that certain
units, in this case MillMash 2 and Lauter Tun 1, are run more times than the total
number of batches carried out in the brewhouse, i.e. 4 runs to 3 batches. In theory, this
could lead to an earlier placement of subsequent cleaning through CIP, i.e. by periodic
CIP. On the other hand, wetmills, mash tuns and lauter tuns require less frequent CIP
in a time-frame of weeks to months, compared to heat exchanging units that require CIP
every so often in a time-frame of hours to days.[18] Therefore, it is possible that it would
not change the placement of CIP on these units significantly or even at all, because the
next CIP might be enforced by other factors such as a change of recipe. Furthermore,
the schedule in figure 5.1 still, with the exception of the placement of CIP, follows the
sequential nature of the brewhouse, and therefore could relatively easily be obtained by
operators.
In conclusion, the schedule for CIP at change of recipes in figure 5.1 shows a very in-
teresting optimal schedule, which saves 30 minutes over the schedule in figure 5.2. Here,
the schedule in figure 5.2, which takes 20.5 hours to complete the 6 batches, represents
Page 85 of 96
==PAGE:93==
5.2. REQUIRED TIME FOR CIP
what would likely be the first intuition when trying to hypothesise an optimal schedule.
However, the schedule in figure 5.1 does require certain criteria to be met, i.e. that the
pre-run-tank is clean. At the very least, this serves as an indication that the brewhouse
scheduling model developed in this work can be used as a tool to optimise cold wort
and beer production by minimising makespan reaching further than what can be intuited
while still being obtainable by operators.
5.2
Required Time for CIP
Another assumption was that the connected nature of some units that were combined in
the STN representation (c.f. figure 4.1 and figure 4.2) made it possible for only one CIP
cycle to be necessary on the combined units. If this is not the case, more than one CIP
cycle is necessary to clean the combined units in question. To investigate the effect this
would have, the required time for CIP is increased to 180 minutes for the MillMashes
and Wort Kettle, which corresponds to 2 CIP cycles with a duration of 90 minutes.
This is because the MillMashes consist of a wetmill and a mash tun, and the Wort
Kettle consists of a pre-run-tank, pre-heater and wort kettle. For the Wort Kettle,
although 3 units are involved, it is assumed that the pre-run-tank, which is only in use
when the wort kettle is occupied, is cleaned as part of the cleaning of the pre-heater.
Furthermore, the WhirlCool is set to have a CIP duration of 90 minutes for periodic
CIP, since only the cooling heat exchanger needs to be cleaned, and a duration of 180
minutes for CIP at change of recipes, since the WhirlCool consists of a whirlpool and a
cooling heat exchanger. Evidently, this would only change the behaviour of the schedules,
where CIP is necessary. The Lauter Tuns are still assumed to only require a single
CIP cycle of 90 minutes. The new optimal schedules for periodic CIP and CIP at change
of recipe for a CIP duration of 180 minutes on the combined units are shown figure 5.1.
Here, the scheduling horizons have been redefined to an appropriate value to allow for the
delay in production that emerges from longer CIP cycles.
Page 86 of 96
==PAGE:94==
5.2. REQUIRED TIME FOR CIP
(a) Optimal schedule for periodic CIP.
(b) Optimal schedule for CIP at change of recipes.
Figure 5.3: Optimal schedules with modified CIP durations based on the number of
units used for each task for the (a) Periodic CIP and (b) CIP at change of recipe imple-
mentations.
As it can be seen in figure 5.3, the 6 batches are now able to be produced in 19 hours,
compared to the 17.75 hours of the original schedule. However, the schedule is effectively
delayed by 90 minutes (1.5 hours) by the longer CIP duration on the Wort Kettle. As
such, 15 minutes are saved compared to the delay of 90 minutes. Albeit, this schedule is
only possible if the first 90 minutes of CIP on the Wort Kettle are used to clean the
pre-run-tank and pre-heater, so that the fourth batch from lautering can be intermediately
stored in the pre-run-tank. Otherwise, the fifth batch of lautering would not be possible
as early as they are placed, since the lauter tuns would be filled with material from the
previous batch. As such, the schedule only takes 19 hours because the Wort Kettle
runs as early as possible after the CIP cycles.
For CIP at change of recipes, the same behaviour can be observed, where the pre-run-
tank is taken into use to allow for the batches to be run on the wort kettle as early as
Page 87 of 96
==PAGE:95==
5.2. REQUIRED TIME FOR CIP
possible. However, this schedule is not physically possible, since the whirl-cooling
task is performed later than the Wort Kettle allows for.
That is, the fifth batch
in the wort kettle is performed when there is, in theory, still material from its previous
batch since it has not yet been delivered to the WhirlCool. This can be corrected by
disallowing the intermediate storage from the Wort Kettle, and the resulting schedule
can be seen in figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Optimal schedule with modified CIP durations based on the number of
units used for each task for the CIP at change of recipe implementation, disallowing
intermediate storage from the Wort Kettle.
In figure 5.4, the schedule now correctly displays a situation that is physically obtainable.
The 6 batches are now produced in 26.25 hours, i.e. 26 hours and 15 minutes. For these
new CIP durations, a total of 6 hours of extra CIP time is added. However, previously, the
schedule was finished in 21.5 hours, so the total delay was only 4 hours and 45 minutes.
This is the case because of the intermediate storage from the lauter tuns in the pre-run-
tank for the fourth batch, which makes the wort kettle able to carry out its task as early
as possible. On the fifth batch, the lauter tuns are instead waiting to deliver the processed
wort to the wort kettle once the fourth batch is finished on the wort kettle. This analysis
also shows that it is likely necessary to also disallow the intermediate storage from the
wort kettle in the simulation so that it is only allowed for the lauter tuns, where the
pre-run-tank is available for intermediate storage.
Page 88 of 96
==PAGE:96==
5.3. PERIODIC CIP ON OTHER UNITS
5.3
Periodic CIP on Other Units
It has previously been mentioned that the units with heat exchanged require more frequent
CIP, i.e. in a time-frame of hours to days, than other units, which require periodic CIP
in a time-frame of weeks to months.[18] However, in practice, a situation may emerge
where all units without heat exchanged need to undergo CIP, while the units with heat
exchanged do not require it yet. To test the behaviour of the developed scheduling model
in such a situation, the implementation with periodic CIP has been modified, so that the
units without heat exchanged have a maximum health of ηmax
j
= 4, while the units with
heat exchanged have a maximum health of ηmax
j
= 30. The resulting optimal schedule is
shown in figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Optimal schedule for periodic CIP simultaneously on units responsible for
mashing and lautering. The arrows are included as an aid to the reader, indicating
which tasks deliver to which subsequent task.
In figure 5.5, the arrows indicate which tasks deliver to which subsequent task. These
show that the only intermediate storage in this solution happens from the Lauter Tuns
to the Wort Kettle, which can be achieved in practice by utilising the pre-run-tank.
Furthermore, the optimal schedule minimises the production time for all 6 batches by
alternating between cleaning of a MillMash and then a Lauter Tun, leading to 6
batches being produced in 18 hours. This schedule is not necessarily straightforward to
carry out in practice since operators would have to balance disconnected production in
MillMash 1 and 2 and similarly Lauter Tun 1 and 2 at certain times, i.e. for the third
and fourth batch. In conclusion, this example shows that the developed scheduling model
can be used to locate optimal schedules that might not be intuited. However, it would have
to be evaluated if this schedule would be practically appropriate for operators to carry out,
compared to carrying CIP out consecutively with respect to the sequential placement of
Page 89 of 96
==PAGE:97==
5.4. MAIN FINDINGS
the units in the brewhouse. It is also possible that when these units undergo CIP, it would
always be beneficial to carry out the CIP on the Wort Kettle and WhirlCool as
well, as they have to undergo CIP more frequently than the units considered here, which
could save time overall.
5.4
Main Findings
To summarise, the behaviour that can be observed in the optimal schedules produced by
the developed MILP brewhouse scheduling model highly depends on the processing times
that are assumed. As a result, this model requires well-defined processing and CIP times
to produce practically meaningful results. Furthermore, it was found by changing the
duration of CIP on combined units that disallowing intermediate storage from the Wort
Kettle is necessary for the developed model to produce physically meaningful results in
some cases.
Page 90 of 96
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
Usefulness of the Scheduling Model
As it has been shown in this project, a scheduling model can quickly become near-
intractable. In this project, the introduction of the binary changeover variables Xij(t)
and Yii′j(t) made the model close to intractable for a personal computer system. Likely,
for a longer scheduling horizon than 48.5 hours, which was the longest scheduling hori-
zon considered in this project, the model would become intractable and a simulation
would therefore not be able to finish within a reasonable time-frame. However, it was
also shown that the longer scheduling horizon did not produce a unique behaviour of the
optimal schedule. Therefore, the scheduling model developed in this work is likely more
useful when investigating the behaviour around critical events, such as CIP, on a shorter
time scale. In this way, it can be investigated for a tractable model how the optimal
schedule might behave for a much longer scheduling horizon, where the model would have
been intractable.
Furthermore, the developed brewhouse scheduling model can relatively easily be modified
to include different brewhouse layouts, e.g. more brewlines than the brewhouse investi-
gated in this project. In this way, it can quickly be tailored for a specific brewhouse. The
model can also take specific plant data into account by changing the corresponding data
– this was the case when investigating the underlying assumptions in chapter 5.
Lastly, for the brewhouse scheduling model developed in this work to be more useful in
a practical case, other functionalities would need to be added, which are discussed in
section 6.3. The specific functionalities would require an analysis of the critical events of
a brewhouse and the corresponding schedules.
Page 91 of 96
==PAGE:99==
6.2. COMPARISON OF SCHEDULING MODEL AND INOSIM
6.2
Comparison of Scheduling Model and INOSIM
In this project, the brewhouse has been simulated in two ways: by developing a tailored
brewhouse state-space scheduling model, and in INOSIM. Both of these have some no-
table advantages and drawbacks, which are highlighted in this section.
Developing a tailored scheduling model has the advantage of being fully customisable
and can therefore include all desired functionalities and objectives. Furthermore, such a
scheduling model can be developed fully open-source. However, the development of such
a model is highly time-consuming as indicated by the work done in this project.
On the other hand, INOSIM’s main advantage is its ease of implementation. That is, the
INOSIM framework can produce schedules within a relatively short time-frame, assuming
the user is experienced with the specific production process, e.g. an operator. However,
scheduling in INOSIM is not as easily customisable to include the desired functionalities,
and its objective is entirely based on the minimisation of makespan. An example of this,
which was encountered in this project work, is periodic CIP (c.f. section 4.4.1). Here,
the user would have to define CIP of the specific units after a known number of batches
through recipes. However, this is not necessarily the optimal behaviour, as the CIP could
be placed earlier to minimise changeovers or similar. The alternative to this within the
INOSIM framework is including ”Alternative Branches” within the recipes, but these are
based on probabilities of 2 competing branches occurring and it is therefore not appli-
cable to use for CIP, which needs to happen based on certain criteria. INOSIM does,
however, provide customisation through internal VBA coding, and it is possible that the
desired functionalities could be included in INOSIM by utilising this. However, this has
not been investigated in detail in this project due to scope. Furthermore, it would also be
time-consuming to learn VBA coding and develop a model in INOSIM with the desired
functionalities, so this counteracts the ease of implementation. Additionally, it was found
that INOSIM cannot perform batching on its own, as the user has to specify it. Therefore,
it is strictly required that the user knows the batch sizes for implementation in INOSIM.
Here, the developed scheduling model is able to perform batching on its own. Lastly,
INOSIM is a licensed product and therefore requires payment to use.
Page 92 of 96
==PAGE:100==
6.3. FUTURE WORK
As such, in a practical case, the decision to apply either a scheduling model or INOSIM
for the scheduling of brewhouses would likely be based on a consideration of the end-use.
If the functionalities of INOSIM are adequate, then a significant amount of time could be
saved compared to developing a brewhouse scheduling model as in this project. However,
if certain desired functionalities are not able to be included in INOSIM, the development
of a state-space scheduling model, as in this project, is required.
As it was mentioned earlier, the scheduling model could instead be used to investigate
the behaviour around critical events on a shorter time-scale. In this way, the scheduling
model could be used to locate the optimal schedule around critical events. This is espe-
cially useful when there is a lack of an adequate expectation of the schedule behaviour
for implementation in INOSIM. As such, there could be benefits to using the developed
scheduling model and INOSIM in tandem.
6.3
Future Work
In this section, possible improvements to the developed scheduling model, which have not
been investigated in this project due to project scope and/or lack of time, will be outlined.
First, desired functionalities of the scheduling model that have not yet been implemented
will be considered. For the deterioration of units in the brewhouse, it was assumed that
it does not affect batch sizes or task yields so that the equations in section 2.2.5.3 could
be applied directly. If data is available for the decrease in batch size and/or task yield
based on unit deterioration, this can be included in the scheduling model based on a
procedure in [12]. However, in the brewhouse it is to a higher extent the processing times
that are affected by unit deterioration through fouling. That is, the processing times are
increased based on the extent of fouling.[57] This would require the development of a novel
mathematical model describing an increase in processing times as the units deteriorate, as
this does not exist in literature to the best of the author’s knowledge. Here, the handling
of decreasing batch sizes and task yields as the units deteriorate in [12] could be used as
inspiration – much like the implementation of H−
j (t) to enforce the residual unit life to
be fully consumed after production of schwarzbier was based on the documented variable
H+
j (t).
Page 93 of 96
==PAGE:101==
6.3. FUTURE WORK
Furthermore, the scheduling model could be expanded to more brewlines to investigate
the behaviour of the schedules for a different brewhouse layout. In this way, the units
could also be expanded so that, for example, the wetmill and mash tun were considered
distinctly different units. This would allow the model to account for a wetmill to deliver
cold mash to two (or more) mash tuns or vice versa, but this requires specific data re-
garding the corresponding processing times. Finally, a systematic uncertainty analysis to
investigate the effect of different data, assumptions and disturbances, such as unit delays
and breakdowns, could be considered to expand the analysis in chapter 5 (Case Study
III).
Also, the focus in this project has been on the development of the scheduling model and
its desired functionalities, the scheduling model has not been optimised with respect to
computational efficiency. Here, some areas of potential improvement have been identified:
1. It was found that for beer recipes which had a malt type in common, i.e. pilsner,
wheat beer and schwarzbier, which all require pilsner malt, the solver would spend
a significant amount of time locating the optimal distribution of pilsner malt – even
with appropriate definition of initial malt inventories. Therefore, the computational
efficiency would likely be increased if the malt required for each beer type was
unique. The programme would then lose information about the amount of each
malt consumed but these could quite easily be calculated after the fact through the
recipes in table 4.5.
2. A systematic tuning of the weight on terms in the objective function could increase
the computational efficiency.
3. Similarly, a tuning of the solver parameters could also increase the computational
efficiency. For the solver employed in this project, CPLEX, a detailed guide on
solver performance tuning is provided in [25].
In conclusion, the order of further model development would be determined by the desired
application of the brewhouse scheduling model, where some areas of improvement have
been suggested in the above.
Page 94 of 96
==PAGE:102==
6.3. FUTURE WORK
Conclusion
Throughout this thesis, a state-space scheduling model for brewhouse operations in a
brewery has been developed and subsequently investigated. The model was developed
iteratively by adding one layer of complexity at a time. First, a general state-space MILP
scheduling model was set up through definition of equations and constraints responsible
for unit states, batch sizes and material inventory, extracted from relevant literature. This
general model was found to be able to reproduce documented results from an academic
article. When simulating this documented example in the software-based scheduling tool
INOSIM, it was identified that it was unable to perform batching and sequencing auto-
matically.
Then, the scheduling model was tailored to the production of cold wort in a brewhouse
capable of accounting for different recipes of beer and CIP operations. Here, the final
objective function included maximisation of throughput and minimisation of makespan,
changeovers, operating costs and intermediate storage by appropriate weighing. It was
found that the model could appropriately batch, sequence and assign tasks to corre-
sponding units, and account for maintenance of units through cleaning-in-place (CIP)
operations. Furthermore, it was observed that the computation time grew exponentially
for each added layer of complexity, and the model neared intractability. However, for a
realistic example with a longer scheduling horizon, it was realised that no new behaviour
in the optimal schedule could be observed compared to the test examples with shorter
scheduling horizons.
Therefore, intractability can be avoided by investigating the be-
haviour of the optimal schedule around critical events on a shorter time scale. Lastly,
INOSIM was found to be more applicable for brewhouse scheduling than for the docu-
mented example, because of the sequential nature of brewhouse operations. It was able
to produce the same optimal schedule for the realistic example, albeit still incapable of
performing batching automatically.
Page 95 of 96
==PAGE:103==
6.3. FUTURE WORK
When investigating the assumptions made when developing the model, it was found that
its behaviour highly depends on the processing times that are assumed, and therefore it re-
quires well-defined processing times to produce practically meaningful results. However,
these assumptions were made based on information in relevant literature. In a practi-
cal case, the model would incorporate specific brewhouse data and the process-specific
scheduling behaviour would consequently be captured by the model.
At the very least, the brewhouse scheduling model developed in this work establishes a
foundation for future advancements with respect to improving scheduling of a brewery.
For future work, it is suggested to develop a mathematical model describing an increase in
processing times as units deteriorate based on brewery data. Furthermore, computational
efficiency may be improved so that model intractability is avoided for future model de-
velopments. By implementing these improvements, the developed brewhouse scheduling
model can further bridge the gap between theoretical optimisation and practical imple-
mentation in an industrial brewery.
Page 96 of 96
==PAGE:104==
Bibliography
[1]
“BEER — English meaning - Cambridge Dictionary”. url: https://dictionary.
cambridge.org/dictionary/english/beer. Date Accessed: 28/08/2024.
[2]
“BREWERY — English meaning - Cambridge Dictionary”. url: https://dictionary.
cambridge.org/dictionary/english/brewery. Date Accessed: 28/08/2024.
[3]
“Salg af alkohol og tobak - Danmarks Statistik”. url: https://www.dst.dk/da/
Statistik/emner/erhvervsliv/handel/salg- af- alkohol- og- tobak. Date Accessed:
31/08/2024.
[4]
“Danske bryggeriers og tapperiers globale omsætning - Bryggeriforeningen”. url:
https://bryggeriforeningen.dk/tal/drikkevarebranchen/dkbryggeriomsaetning/.
Date Accessed: 31/08/2024.
[5]
“Key figures for the national accounts (GDP) - Statistics Denmark”. url: https:
//www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/oekonomi/nationalregnskab/noegletal-for-
nationalregnskabet-bnp. Date Accessed: 31/08/2024.
[6]
“Global Beer Consumption by Country in 2022 — 2023 — Kirin Holdings”. url:
https://www.kirinholdings.com/en/newsroom/release/2023/1222 04.html. Date
Accessed: 31/08/2024.
[7]
“Beer - Worldwide — Statista Market Forecast”. url: https://web.archive.org/
web/20221118174800/https://www.statista.com/outlook/cmo/alcoholic-drinks/
beer/worldwide. Date Accessed: 31/08/2024.
[8]
Mateusz Jackowski and Anna Trusek. “Non-Alcoholic beer production-an overview”.
In: Polish Journal of Chemical Technology 20.4 (2018), pp. 32–38.
[9]
“Alkoholfri øl fortsætter succesen - Bryggeriforeningen”. url: https://bryggeriforeningen.
dk/alkoholfri-oel-fortsaetter-sin-succes/. Date Accessed: 31/08/2024.
[10]
Chris. Boulton. Encyclopaedia of Brewing. Wiley-Blackwell, Credo Reference, 2017.
==PAGE:105==
[11]
Roger Barth. The Chemistry of Beer: The Science in the Suds. 2013.
[12]
Christos T. Maravelias. Chemical Production Scheduling. Cambridge University Press,
May 2021.
[13]
Michael L. Pinedo. Scheduling: Theory, Algorithms and Systems. 2008.
[14]
Georgios P. Georgiadis, Apostolos P. Elekidis, and Michael C. Georgiadis. “Opti-
mal production planning and scheduling in breweries”. In: Food and Bioproducts
Processing 125 (Jan. 2021), pp. 204–221.
[15]
Kaushik Subramanian, Christos T. Maravelias, and James B. Rawlings. “A state-
space model for chemical production scheduling”. In: Computers and Chemical En-
gineering 47 (Dec. 2012), pp. 97–110.
[16]
Tamara A. Baldo et al. “An optimization approach for the lot sizing and scheduling
problem in the brewery industry”. In: Computers and Industrial Engineering 72.1
(2014), pp. 58–71.
[17]
David Hillis. LIFE: The Science of Biology. 12th ed. 2020.
[18]
Jifeng Yang. “Novel Strategies for Cleaning-in-Place Operations”. PhD thesis. 2018.
[19]
Harry Laing et al. “Investigating cleaning in place (CIP) chemical, water, and energy
use: A comparative study of standard operating procedure (SOP) for UK North East
microbreweries”. In: Journal of Brewing and Distilling 10.1 (May 2021), pp. 17–28.
[20]
Iiro Harjunkoski et al. “Scope for industrial applications of production scheduling
models and solution methods”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 62 (Mar.
2014), pp. 161–193.
[21]
Carlos A. M´endez et al. “State-of-the-art review of optimization methods for short-
term scheduling of batch processes”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 30.6-
7 (May 2006), pp. 913–946.
[22]
Georgios M Kopanos and Luis Puigjaner. Solving Large-Scale Production Scheduling
and Planning in the Process Industries.
[23]
“Process Simulation Software - Digital Twins - INOSIM”. url: https :/ /www .
inosim.com/. Date Accessed: 18/09/2024.
==PAGE:106==
[24]
“Practical guidelines for solving difficult mixed integer linear programs”. Surveys in
Operations Research and Management Science.
[25]
“CPLEX Performance Tuning for Mixed Integer Programs”. url: https://www.
ibm.com/support/pages/cplex-performance-tuning-mixed-integer-programs. Date
Accessed: 25/12/2024.
[26]
Rafael Mart´ı and Gerhard Reinelt. The Linear Ordering Problem. Vol. 175. Applied
Mathematical Sciences. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
[27]
“Relative MIP gap tolerance - IBM Documentation”. url: https://www.ibm.com/
docs/en/icos/20.1.0?topic=parameters-relative-mip-gap-tolerance. Date Accessed:
17/11/2024.
[28]
E Kondili, C C Pantelides, and R W H Sargent. “A General Algorithm for Short-
Term Scheduling of Batch Operations - I. MILP Formulation”. In: Computers and
Chemical Engineering 17.2 (1993), pp. 211–227.
[29]
Amin Samadi and Christos T. Maravelias. “A comprehensive chemical production
scheduling representation”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 181 (Feb.
2024).
[30]
Dale E Seborg et al. Process Dynamics and Control. 4th ed. 2017.
[31]
Dhruv Gupta and Christos T. Maravelias. “A general state-space formulation for
online scheduling”. In: Processes 5.4 (Dec. 2017).
[32]
Matteo Biondi, Guido Sand, and Iiro Harjunkoski. “Optimization of multipurpose
process plant operations: A multi-time-scale maintenance and production scheduling
approach”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 99 (2017), pp. 325–339.
[33]
C¸aˇgri Sel and Bilge Bilgen. “Hybrid simulation and MIP based heuristic algorithm
for the production and distribution planning in the soft drink industry”. In: Journal
of Manufacturing Systems 33.3 (2014), pp. 385–399.
[34]
Georgios M. Kopanos, Luis Puigjaner, and Michael C. Georgiadis. “Efficient math-
ematical frameworks for detailed production scheduling in food processing indus-
tries”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 42 (July 2012), pp. 206–216.
==PAGE:107==
[35]
Martijn A.H. Van Elzakker et al. “Scheduling in the FMCG industry: An industrial
case study”. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 51.22 (June 2012),
pp. 7800–7815.
[36]
A D Dimitriadis, N Shah, and C C Pantelides. “RTN-based Rolling Horizon Algo-
rithms for Medium Term Scheduling of Multipurpose Plants”. In: Computers and
Chemical Engineering 21 (1997), pp. 1061–1066.
[37]
Xiaoxia Lin et al. “Continuous-time optimization approach for medium-range pro-
duction scheduling of a multiproduct batch plant”. In: Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry Research 41.16 (Aug. 2002), pp. 3884–3906.
[38]
Stacy L. Janak et al. “Production scheduling of a large-scale industrial batch plant.
II. Reactive scheduling”. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 45.25
(Dec. 2006), pp. 8253–8269.
[39]
Munawar A. Shaik and Christodoulos A. Floudas. “Novel unified modeling approach
for short-term scheduling”. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 48.6
(Mar. 2009), pp. 2947–2964.
[40]
Hojae Lee and Christos T Maravelias. “Combining the advantages of discrete-and
continuous-time scheduling models: Part 3. General algorithm”. In: Computers and
Chemical Engineering 139 (2020), pp. 84–92.
[41]
Deisemara Ferreira, Reinaldo Morabito, and Socorro Rangel. “Solution approaches
for the soft drink integrated production lot sizing and scheduling problem”. In:
European Journal of Operational Research 196.2 (July 2009), pp. 697–706.
[42]
Peter M M Bongers and B H Bakker. “Application of multi-stage scheduling”. In:
16th European Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engineering. 2006, pp. 1917–
1922.
[43]
Alyne Toscano, Deisemara Ferreira, and Reinaldo Morabito. “Formulation and MIP-
heuristics for the lot sizing and scheduling problem with temporal cleanings”. In:
Computers and Chemical Engineering 142 (Nov. 2020).
==PAGE:108==
[44]
Georgios M. Kopanos, Luis Puigjaner, and Christos T. Maravelias. “Production
planning and scheduling of parallel continuous processes with product families”. In:
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 50.3 (Feb. 2011), pp. 1369–1378.
[45]
Deisemara Ferreira et al. “Single-stage formulations for synchronised two-stage lot
sizing and scheduling in soft drink production”. In: International Journal of Pro-
duction Economics 136.2 (Apr. 2012), pp. 255–265.
[46]
Hojae Lee and Christos T. Maravelias. “Combining the advantages of discrete- and
continuous-time scheduling models: Part 1. Framework and mathematical formula-
tions”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 116 (Aug. 2018), pp. 176–190.
[47]
“ND Pyomo Cookbook”. url: https://jckantor.github.io/ND-Pyomo-Cookbook/
README.html#. Date Accessed: 26/10/2024.
[48]
“About — Pyomo”. url: https://www.pyomo.org/about. Date Accessed: 28/10/2024.
[49]
Wolfgang Kunze. Technology: Brewing and Malting. 6th ed. 2019.
[50]
Mark Magiera et al. “Brewer Panel: Winter Hops Conference”. In: University of
Vermont. 2011.
[51]
“Understanding Mash Thickness - Brew Your Own”. url: https://byo.com/article/
understanding-mash-thickness/. Date Accessed: 19/11/2024.
[52]
“What is ”whirlpooling” your beer - Brew Your Own”. url: https://byo.com/mr-
wizard/what-does-whirlpooling-your-beer-mean-and-how-do-you-do-it/. Date
Accessed: 19/11/2024.
[53]
Simon Bolwig et al. “Beyond animal feed?: The valorisation of brewers’ spent grain”.
In: From Waste to Value: Valorisation Pathways for Organic Waste Streams in
Circular Bioeconomies. Taylor and Francis, Jan. 2019, pp. 107–126.
[54]
“Castle Malting: Beer recipe Belgian Wheat Beer”. url: https://www.castlemalting.
com/CastleMaltingBeerRecipes.asp?Command=RecipeView&RecipeID=12. Date
Accessed: 28/11/2024.
[55]
“Schwarzbier”. url: https://byo.com/wp-content/uploads/woocommerce uploads/
Schwarzbier-2.pdf. Date Accessed: 29/11/2024.
==PAGE:109==
[56]
“The Importance of CIP Systems in Breweries”. url: https://blog.foodsafedrains.
com/importance-of-cip-systems-in-breweries. Date Accessed: 02/12/2024.
[57]
K. L. Tse, A. M. Pritchard, and P. J. Fryer. “The Rate and Extent of Fouling in a
Single-Tube Wort Boiling System”. In: Food and Bioproducts Processing 81.1 (Mar.
2003), pp. 13–22.
==PAGE:110==
Appendices
A
Supplementary Material – Case Study I
A.1
Choice of Programming Language
In the interest of the industry collaboration with GEA, the possible programming lan-
guages were restricted to MATLAB and Python-based. Both programming languages al-
low for the simulation of MILP problems – in MATLAB through built-in functions of the
”Optimization Toolbox”-package and in Python through Pyomo or other optimisation-
based packages.
Here, Pyomo-based programming was preferred due to the straight-
forward optimisation structure and the ability to integrate commercial solvers, such as
CPLEX, allowing for better comparison to computation times in the literature. Lastly,
Pyomo has been shown to be able to solve complex MILP problems in a previous Master’s
thesis at the department, meaning that proof of concept already exists in Pyomo and is
therefore thought to be the safer choice.
A.2
Python Code and Documentation
All code used for this thesis can be found on https://github.com/ajusodtu/Masters-Thesis
Brewhouse-Scheduling, where the ”read-me” serves as a guide.
A.3
Procedure for Software Simulation in INOSIM
This appendix serves the purpose of providing information so that an individual with prior
knowledge of INOSIM implementation can recreate the results provided in section 3.4.
As such, the structures such as how to set up a recipe and order will not be explained,
since this is not an INOSIM guide. If a guide is desired, this exists within the software’s
help function.
Page A1 of A5
==PAGE:111==
A database and project were created and the relevant units, i.e. available equipment,
from the example problem from [28] were defined, leading to the unit interface shown in
figure A.1.
Figure A.1: Defined units in INOSIM based on the example problem from [28].
Then, the relevant materials were defined and connected to the relevant units. Using
these, the unit and material capacities were defined directly in the process units and
tanks, respectively.
(a) Material capacity, here defined for ”Hot A” in unit ”Tank Hot A”.
Page A2 of A5
==PAGE:112==
(b) Unit capacity, here defined for ”Heater” in INOSIM unit ”Heat Exchanger”.
Figure A.2: Examples of the defined thresholds in INOSIM for the implementation of
(a) material and (b) unit capacities in the example problem from [28].
The master recipes for each task are then implemented as shown in figure A.3.
(a) Heating for a batch size of 84 kg.
(b) Reaction 1 for a batch size of 80 kg.
Page A3 of A5
==PAGE:113==
(c) Reaction 2 for a batch of 80
kg.
(d) Reaction 3 for a batch size of 47.5 kg.
(e) Separation for batch of 50 kg.
Figure A.3: Examples of the defined master recipes for the implementation of tasks (a)
Heating, (b) Reaction 1, (c) Reaction 2, (d) Reaction 3 and (e) Separation.
Page A4 of A5
==PAGE:114==
Figure A.4: List of orders based on the recipes to recreate the schedule in figure 3.4.
As it can be seen in figure A.3, the batch sizes are implemented directly in the task
recipes. This means that for each task, several versions have been made, corresponding
to different batch sizes to recreate the schedule in figure 3.4. This was recognised as one
of the problems with the INOSIM analysis, as the software cannot perform batching on
its own, as shown directly in figure A.3.
Based on the recipes, orders were defined so that the same schedule as in figure 3.4 was
produced. The orders are shown in figure A.4. As it can be seen in figure A.4, three orders
have been forced to start at a certain time, namely the separation tasks and the second
heating task. For the first separation task, it is because it is set to a waiting position for
the first 6 hours, and it is only done to clear up the resulting schedule. However, for the
second heating task and the second separation task it is done because these tasks would
be scheduled sooner than the capacity constraints would allow. This was also recognised
as a problem with the implementation of this scheduling problem in INOSIM, and the full
discussion can be found in section 3.4. Again, it is also worth noting that the different
versions of the recipes correspond to different batch sizes – the overall structure of the
master recipes is the same as in figure A.3.
Page A5 of A5
==PAGE:115==
B
Supplementary Material – Case Study II
B.1
Python Code and Documentation
All code used for this thesis can be found on https://github.com/ajusodtu/Masters-Thesis
Brewhouse-Scheduling. Here, the ”read-me” contains all information necessary to navi-
gate the repository.
B.2
Data Collection for Case Study II
This appendix section will outline how the data presented in tables 4.2, 4.3 and 4.5 was
collected and the connected assumptions will be outlined.
Input Ratios for Task Feeds
First, the input ratios, ξ, for the milling, mashing and lautering were defined based
on a mashing-in ratio of 4, meaning that the volumetric ratio of malt to water is 1:4. This
is obtained by adding water during milling and mashing in a 1:3 volumetric malt to water
ratio and 3:1 malt to water ratio during lautering (as sparge water). That is 25% malt to
75% water during milling and 75% mash to 25% water during lautering. In this way, the
wort consists of exactly 20% malt satisfying the mashing-in ratio of 4, in accordance with
examples in [49]. In the remaining tasks, i.e. boiling and whirl-cooling, the input
ratio of the feed, which is the product from the previous task, is set to 1. For the boiling
task specifically, this is because hops are assumed to not add to the total volume.
Output Ratios for Task Products
The output ratios of each task are based on an assumed 5% yield loss in each unit in
figure 4.1. Both the wetmill and mash tun units are used for mashing. Because of this,
the overall yield of the mashing task can be calculated in the following manner:
ρmashing,HM = ρmilling · ρmashing = 0.95 · 0.95 = 0.9025
(B.1)
Page B1 of B12
==PAGE:116==
Similarly, for the boiling and whirl-cooling tasks, where the pre-run-tank is consid-
ered part of the boiling task:
ρboiling,BW = ρPRT · ρpre-heating · ρboiling = 0.95 · 0.95 · 0.95 = 0.8574
(B.2)
ρwhirl-cooling,CW = ρwhirlpooling · ρcooling = 0.95 · 0.95 = 0.9025
(B.3)
For the lautering task, the fraction of wort (W) to the total volume was defined as 0.77
based on a usual range of 75-79% provided in [49]. Assuming only spent grain makes up
the remaining volume, the yield of the lautering task can be calculated in the following
manner:
ρlautering,W =
VW
VW + VSG
· ρlautering = 0.77 · 0.95 = 0.7315
(B.4)
Task Processing Times
Then, the processing times of each task on corresponding units were defined based on
typical values reported in the literature.
Most literature on the matter refers to an
upper and lower bound for the processing time because it highly depends on the type
and size of equipment. These upper and lower bounds for processing time for each task
are summarised in table B.1 along with the assumed processing time.
The assumed
processing times are in general intermediate values in the range defined by the lower and
upper bounds because a medium-large sized brewhouse is assumed (see below).
Table B.1: Literature ranges for processing time for each task and their corresponding
reference along with the assumed processing time based on a medium-large sized brew-
house.
Task
Lower bound [min]
Upper bound [min]
Assumed, τij [min]
Ref.
Wetmilling
25
40
30
[49]
Mashing
90
120
105
[49]
Lautering
80
110
90
[49]
Boiling with pre-heating
60
140
105
[49]
Whirlpooling with cooling
45
70
60
[52]
As such, based on the assumed processing in table B.1, the mashing task has a processing
time of 135 minutes, while the processing times for the 3 remaining tasks as defined in
Page B2 of B12
==PAGE:117==
the STN representation in figure 4.2 is directly indicated in table B.1.
Unit Capacities
Based on the processing time in table B.1, the total processing time for sequential oper-
ation of the tasks is 6.5 hours. Assuming that on average the next batch is started at
mashing when the previous batch is done with whirl-cooling, the number of batches
per day can be calculated to be:
Batches per day =
24 hours/day
6.5 hours/batch = 3.69 batches/day
(B.5)
A medium-large sized brewhouse with a capacity of 500,000 hL of cold wort production
per year, since this is a usual size in industry for medium-large sized beer production
facilities.[53] Based on this, and the number of batches per day, the amount of cold wort
required to be produced in each batch can be calculated in the following manner:
CW Production =
500,000 hL/yr
3.69 batches/day · 365 days/yr = 371 hL/batch
(B.6)
The capacity of the whirl-cooling task and corresponding unit needs to be higher than
this, because of the yield loss in each unit. This is accounted for when calculating the
whirl-cooling capacity:
βmax
whirl-cooling = CW Production
ρwhirl-cooling,CW
=
371 hL/batch
0.9025 per batch = 411 hL
(B.7)
Using this capacity, the remaining unit capacities can be calculated in reverse order of the
STN representation in figure 4.2 by calculating the required capacity using the input and
output ratios. For the boiling task and corresponding unit, it follows that it must be
able to deliver the required amount to the whirl-cooling task. This can be achieved
by accounting for the yield of the boiling task, as such:
βmax
boiling = βmax
whirl-cooling
ρboiling,BW
= 411 hL
0.8574 = 479 hL
Page B3 of B12
==PAGE:118==
This is the theoretical maximum capacity for the boiling task – however, since the
boiling task is desired to be the bottleneck in terms of unit capacity since this is often
the case in practice.[49] Because of this, a slightly lower capacity was defined for use in
the simulations, which was:
βmax
boiling = 450 hL
(B.8)
Similarly, for the lautering task and Lauter Tuns, the maximum capacity can be
calculated based on the output ratio, but also the fact that 2 units are available. Further-
more, it is based on the non-lowered unit capacity of the boiling task, so that it does
not also become a bottleneck, as such:
βmax
lautering = 1
2
βmax
boiling
ρlautering,W
= 1
2 · 479 hL
0.7315 = 328 hL
(B.9)
Lastly, for the mashing task, it is calculated based on delivering the required amount to
supply the lautering task at its maximum capacity. Here, it is not necessary to account
for the 2 units available, since this was already done for the lautering task. However,
the input to the lautering task is only 75% hot mash, which needs to be accounted for,
and therefore it is calculated as:
βmax
mashing = ξlautering,HM · βmax
lautering
ρmashing,HM
= 0.75 · 328 hL
0.9025
= 273 hL
(B.10)
As such, the data presented in table 4.2 has been outlined in this section – the input ratios
are based on a mashing-in ratio of 4, the output ratios are calculated in equations (B.1)
to (B.4), the processing times are based on literature and are shown in table B.1 and the
maximum unit capacities are calculated in equations (B.7) to (B.10).
Material Capacities
For the material capacities, all feeds, products and waste streams were defined to have
unlimited capacity, while feeds were defined as being in surplus. Both of these things
were achieved by defining the capacity and initial value as several orders of magnitude
greater than the unit capacities. Furthermore, it was decided to define the capacity of
the intermediate materials so that it would correspond to each unit being able to hold
Page B4 of B12
==PAGE:119==
material for a period of time, with an additional safety margin of roughly 30 hL. Hot mash
(HM) is the product of the mashing task, and the capacity for hot mash can therefore be
calculated from the number of available units and the task yield, in the following manner:
Smax
HM = 2 · βmax
mashing · ρmashing,HM = 2 · 273 hL · 0.9025 = 493 hL
(B.11)
Similarly, for wort (W), which is the intermediate material from lautering, and boiled
wort (BW), which is the intermediate material from boiling:
Smax
W
= 2 · βmax
lautering · ρlautering,W = 2 · 328 · 0.7315 = 479 hL
(B.12)
Smax
BW = βmax
boiling · ρboiling,BW = 480 · 0.8574 = 411 hL
(B.13)
As such, how the material capacities have been defined in table 4.3 has been outlined in
this section through equations (B.11) to (B.13).
Recipes
As mentioned in section 4.3, the mashing-in ratio for each type of beer was assumed
constant at 4. This is because the mashing-in ratio is usually kept constant for industrial-
size breweries for ease of operation.[10] As explained earlier, this is obtained by a 1:3
malt-to-water ratio in the mashing task and a subsequent 3:1 mash-to-water ratio in the
lauter tun, both based on volume. As such, the amount of malt for the mashing task
needs to be 25 vol% in total, which can be composed of several malt types.
For pilsner and organic pilsner beers mostly or only pilsner and organic pilsner malt,
respectively, is typically used. Because of this, it is assumed that pilsner is made only
from pilsner malt and organic pilsner from organic pilsner malt, which is where the 25%
pilsner and organic pilsner malt in table 4.5 originates. For wheat beer, a recipe in [54]
specifies a 1:3 pilsner malt to wheat malt ratio, which corresponds to the following input
fractions, considering the malts combined need to make up 25% of the input volume in
total:
ξmashing(P),pilsner = 0.25 · 0.25 = 0.0625
(B.14)
ξmashing(P),wheat = 0.25 · 0.75 = 0.1875
(B.15)
Page B5 of B12
==PAGE:120==
Since some wheat beers use less wheat,[11] the above is modified slightly to 9% pilsner
malt and 16% wheat malt. Lastly, the malt composition for schwarzbier in table 4.5 is
based on recipes from [55], where certain types of schwarzbier are brewed with pilsner
malt as the main malt and 10% roasted malt or below of the total amount of malt. As
such, a recipe of 23.5% pilsner malt and 1.5% roasted malt is assumed, corresponding to
6% of the total amount of malt being roasted malt.
B.3
Calculation of Required Malt for a Batch
The required amount of malt to produce a single batch is directly dependent on the
maximum amount of cold wort, the brewhouse can produce in a single batch.
This
is limited by the capacity of the Wort Kettle, which is the intentional bottleneck, as
explained in section 4.2.1, and is 450 hL. The corresponding amount processed on average
in the 2 Lauter Tuns is then:
BLauterTun =
450 hL
2 · 0.7315 = 307.6 hL
(B.16)
, since there are 2 Lauter Tuns with a yield of 0.7315. Here, 25% of the amount being
processed is sparge water (c.f. table 4.2), and the amount of hot mash being processed is
therefore:
BLauterTun,HM = 307.6 hL · 0.75 = 230.7 hL
(B.17)
, and similarly the amount being processed on average in the 2 MillMashes is:
BMillMash = 230.7 hL
0.9025 = 255.6 hL
(B.18)
, since the emergence of 2 units has already been taken into account. 25% of this amount
is malt (c.f. table 4.2) and is used on 2 MillMashes, so the total amount of malt for
one batch is:
B2MillMash,Malt = 255.6 hL · 0.25 · 255.6 = 127.81 hL
(B.19)
, corresponding to 766.86 hL of malt required for 6 batches to be carried out in the
brewhouse, which is the amount indicated in table 4.4.
Page B6 of B12
==PAGE:121==
B.4
Initial Malt Inventories for Implementation of
Recipes
The initial malt inventories used to force the model to include all types of beer in the
optimal schedule in the implementation of recipes in section 4.3 are shown in table B.2.
These correspond to exactly 2 batches of pilsner, 2 batches of organic pilsner, 1 batch of
schwarzbier and 1 batch of organic pilsner. These were calculated based on the required
malt volume for a batch of 127.81 hL as calculated in Appendix B.3 and the recipes in
table 4.5. In this way, other than the implementation of the different recipes, the only
change in the model implementation is the definition of the initial inventories in table B.2.
Table B.2: Initial inventories of the different types of malt used to simulate the imple-
mentation of different beer recipes in the brewhouse in section 4.3.
Malt type
Pilsner
Wheat
Roasted
Organic Pilsner
Initial, Sk(0) [hL]
467.78
163.60
7.67
127.81
B.5
Initial Malt Inventories for Implementation of
CIP at Change of Recipe
From previous simulations, it was found that a batch, leading to the observed production
of 348 hL of cold wort from 386 hL being processed with the whirl-cooling task,
requires exactly 127.81 hL of malt in total. As such, since 6% roasted malt and 94%
pilsner malt is required for the production of schwarzbier and 100% organic pilsner malt
is required for the production of organic pilsner, the required initial inventories of malt
corresponding to 3 batches of both schwarzbier and organic pilsner could be calculated
directly. These initial inventories of malt are shown in table B.3.
Table B.3: Initial inventories of the different types of malt used to simulate the imple-
mentation of CIP at change of recipe in section 4.4.2.
Malt type
Pilsner
Wheat
Roasted
Organic Pilsner
Initial, Sk(0) [hL]
900
100
∞
400
Page B7 of B12
==PAGE:122==
B.6
Initial Malt Inventories for Realistic Example
As in Appendix B.5 above, the initial malt inventories are calculated based on a batch
size of 127.81 hL malt and the recipes in table 4.5. The resulting initial malt inventories
are shown in table B.4.
Table B.4: Initial inventories of the different types of malt used to simulate the imple-
mentation for the realistic example in section 4.4.2.
Malt type
Pilsner
Wheat
Roasted
Organic Pilsner
Initial, Sk(0) [hL]
1411
491
15.4
384
Page B8 of B12
==PAGE:123==
B.7
Procedure for INOSIM Simulation of the Real-
istic Example
This appendix serves the purpose of providing information so that an individual with prior
knowledge of INOSIM implementation can recreate the results provided in section 4.5.3.
As such, the structures such as how to set up a recipe and order will not be explained,
since this is not an INOSIM guide. If a guide is desired, this exists within the software’s
help function.
A database and project were created and the relevant units, i.e. available equipment,
from table 4.2 were defined, leading to the unit interface shown in figure B.5.
Figure B.5: Defined units in INOSIM for simulation of the brewhouse based on the
realistic example in section 4.5 and unit data in table 4.2.
Then, the relevant materials were defined and connected to the relevant units, and subse-
quently the master recipes for each batch type were implemented. Here, a recipe for each
beer type was defined, and a recipe for CIP of all units sequentially was defined – in total
5 recipes. This is shown in figure B.6, where only one recipe for a beer type (pilsner) is
shown, as the only difference is the corresponding materials
Page B9 of B12
==PAGE:124==
(a) Recipe for a pilsner batch.
(b) Recipe for CIP of all units.
Figure B.6: Examples of the defined master recipes for the INOSIM implementation
with (a) Pilsner recipe and (b) Recipe for CIP of all units.
Page B10 of B12
==PAGE:125==
Based on these recipes, orders were defined based on the expected schedule behaviour
outlined in section 4.5.1. The orders are shown in figure B.7.
Figure B.7: List of orders based on the realistic example in section 4.5.
As such, the schedule in figure 4.12 could be generated based on the definition of units,
recipes and orders outlined in this appendix.
Page B11 of B12
==PAGE:126==
B.8
Relative Computation Time
As presented in section 4.6, the relative computation time is defined as:
ω = ωs
ωini
(B.20)
, where ω is the computational time, s is the considered simulation and ini is the initial
simulation implementation in section 4.2.3. All simulations in this work were performed
on a desktop computer system with Intel i5-9400F processors at 2.90 GHz and 32 GB of
RAM. Based on this, the computation times used to calculate relative computation times,
ω, presented as part of the results in chapter 4, are shown in table B.5.
Table B.5: Data collected for calculation of relative computation time, ω presented as
part of the results in chapter 4. The computation times refer to a desktop computer
system with Intel i5-9400F processors at 2.90 GHz and 32 GB of RAM. Here, implemen-
tation ”initial” refers to the implementation in section 4.2.3, ”modified” in section 4.2.4,
”recipes” in section 4.3 and ”Periodic CIP” in section 4.4.1.
Implementation
Initial
Modified
Recipes
Periodic CIP
Simulation 1 [s]
0.338
0.336
42.6
1.51
Simulation 2 [s]
0.428
0.335
42.7
1.41
Simulation 3 [s]
0.227
0.356
43.8
1.18
Simulation 4 [s]
0.391
0.350
43.5
1.27
Simulation 5 [s]
0.343
0.335
42.2
1.26
Average [s]
0.345
0.350
43.1
1.33
Rel. Computation Time, ω
1.0
0.97
125
3.8
For the simulations for CIP at change of recipes and for the realistic example, their
simulations were computationally expensive, so they were only run once each with a
limited simulation time. These limited simulation times were 7200 seconds (2 hours) and
108000 seconds (30 hours), respectively, corresponding to the relative computation times
indicated in table 4.6.
Page B12 of B12
