==PAGE:1==
Modelling and analysing drivers of change
in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for
present state and future scenarios
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem
for present state and future scenarios
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Maria Leonor MendonГ§a
Supervisors
Patrizio Mariani
Martin Olof Lindegren
Pedro Afonso
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
EcosystemВӯbased management is a key approach for ensuring the sustainable use of maВӯ
rine resources while maintaining ecosystem integrity. To support this, ecosystem modВӯ
els are essential tools for understanding complex ecological interactions, assessing the
impacts of different pressures such as climate change and species extraction, and inВӯ
forming management decisions (Heymans et al., 2019). This study focuses on the conВӯ
figuration and application of the StrathE2E model, an endВӯtoВӯend ecosystem model, to
analyze the North Atlantic marine ecosystem, with particular emphasis on the Azores reВӯ
gion. The model was parameterized using observational data, including nutrient concenВӯ
trations, production rates, productionВӯtoВӯbiomass ratios, dietary compositions, biological
events and fisheries data. The model was calibrated using two climate models, CNRM
and GFDL, yielding partial ПҮ2 values of 0.3196 and 0.3165, respectively, indicating an
acceptable model fit to the available data.
Once configured, the model was used to simulate the impact of climate change and fishВӯ
eries under different scenarios. Two climate scenarios were used, following two Shared
Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP126 and SSP370), to evaluate how the ecosystem may
evolve through the 2060s. Fisheries were modeled using three scenarios: a baseline sceВӯ
nario representing current fishing practices, a noВӯfishing scenario, and narrativeВӯdriven
scenarios aligned with the respective SSP frameworks.
The results indicate that climate change is the primary driver of ecosystem changes, with
a general decline in biomass driven by reductions in nutrient availability and primary proВӯ
duction. These effects cascade through the food web, reinforcing a bottomВӯup controlled
system. Among the most affected groups, seabirds and demersal fish exhibit significant
declines, suggesting increased vulnerability under future climate conditions.
While current fishing practices appear to have limited effects on most guilds, migratory
fish emerge as the most sensitive to fishing pressure. A more detailed analysis of the
three most exploited guildsвҖ”demersal, migratory, and planktivorous fishвҖ”was conducted
to assess their response to increased fishing activity. The inshore planktivorous guild,
the migratory guild and the inshore demersal guild appeared to be the most sensitive
to an increase in fishing activity. Despite these localized effects, the overall structural
integrity of the ecosystem remained relatively stable with or without fishing activity. Finally,
the ecological importance of migratory and planktivorous fish within the ecosystem was
examined. While migratory fish had a limited influence on broader ecosystem dynamics,
planktivorous fish played a central role, reinforcing their crucial position within the food
web.
The model has some limitations and uncertainties, particularly due to data gaps on proВӯ
duction rates as well as simplifications in species representation. However, despite these
limitations, the model proved to be a valuable tool, reinforcing the importance of integratВӯ
ing climate change considerations into fisheries management strategies. Future research
should focus on addressing data gaps and exploring different scenarios in order to evalВӯ
uate management options.
ii
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Patrizio Mariani, Senior Researcher Вӯ DTU, Supervisor
I would like to thank Patrizio for the valuable guidance and availability throughout the
project. I am very grateful an opportunity was created to collaborate so closely with the
Azores.
Pedro Afonso, Senior Researcher Вӯ IMAR, External Supervisor
I would like to thank Pedro for the guidance and help throughout the project. I really
appreciated learning about the Azorean ecosystem and fisheries in such as holistic way.
Martin Olof Lindegren, Senior Researcher Вӯ DTU, CoВӯsupervisor
I would like to thank Martin for the many valuable advice throughout the project.
Christopher Kim Pham, Researcher Вӯ IMAR
I would like to thank Chris for the crucial help throughout the project, the availability during
demanding times and the many Zoom meetings Вӯ many of which with a baby in the lap.
Micheal Heath and Jack Laverick, Professor and ChancellorвҖҷs Fellow Вӯ University of
Strathclyde
I would like to thank Jack and Mike for the availability and thorough and patient explanaВӯ
tions throughout the project.
InГӘs Gomes, Researcher Вӯ IMAR
I would like to thank InГӘs for the warm welcome to the Azores, for the help and overall
support throughout the thesis.
Ana PabГіn, Researcher Вӯ IMAR
I would like to thank Anita for providing me with valuable information that was very helpful
for the project.
Julia Petroski Olher, PhD Student Вӯ USP
I would like to thank Julia for her work regarding the migratory fish using the SEAPODYM
model.
Afonso Luz
Finally, I would like to thank Afonso for the support throughout the thesis (and for the
computer, which is much more powerful than mine).
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Ecosystem modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Study region: the Azores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Aims and motivations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2
Methods
12
2.1
StrathE2E2 model overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2
Annual target data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3
Event timings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4
Fisheries data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.5
Harvest ratios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.6
Future scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3
Results
29
3.1
Model overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.2
Impact of climate scenarios on ecosystem dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.3
Impact of fisheries scenarios on ecosystem dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.4
Trophic significance of migratory and planktivorous fish
. . . . . . . . . . . 42
4
Discussion
44
4.1
Model configuration and fitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.2
Climate influence on ecosystem dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.3
Fisheries influence on ecosystem dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.4
Management implications and future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.5
Model limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5
Conclusion
48
Bibliography
50
A Methods
55
A.1 Model overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.2 Annual target data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
v
==PAGE:7==
A.3 Fishing data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
B Resuts
66
B.1 Model Inputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
vi
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Marine ecosystems are complex and interconnected systems that play a vital role in the
well functioning of our planet. However, these ecosystems are facing increasing threats
from human activities. The main pressures affecting marine environments worldwide inВӯ
clude climate change, destruction of habitats, overfishing, various forms of pollution, and
the introduction of nonВӯnative species (Halpern et al., 2019).
These pressures not only have direct consequences on individual species but also indiВӯ
rect effects that ripple through entire ecosystems (Pershing et al., 2015). The intricate
nature of marine ecosystems, where species are linked through trophic interactions and
abiotic factors, means that changes in one component can have farВӯreaching and ofВӯ
ten unexpected consequences throughout the system. This complexity underscores the
importance of examining marine ecosystems holistically, rather than on a speciesВӯbyВӯ
species basis, to effectively understand and manage these environments. Furthermore,
pressures exerted on marine ecosystems often act simultaneously rather than in isolation.
These combined pressures can have cumulative or even synergistic effects, amplifying
their overall impact on ecosystem structure (Halpern et al., 2015). It is therefore necessary
to understand how multiple drivers interact and affect the system.
Sustainably managing ocean resources is intrinsically linked to our ability to assess and
predict drivers of change and their subsequent impacts on marine ecosystems. InternaВӯ
tional frameworks such as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals and the
Convention on the Law of the Sea advocate for ecosystemВӯbased management to conВӯ
serve the structure and functioning of oceanic ecosystems within sustainable reference
points (Long et al., 2015). This shift in perspective is also evident in fisheries manageВӯ
ment, which has evolved from focusing solely on sustainable harvesting of commercially
important species to adopting an ecosystem approach to fisheries that considers the imВӯ
pacts of fishing on the ecosystem as a whole (Short et al., 2008).
Ecosystem modeling serves as a valuable management tool to understand and predict
the complex interactions in marine environments (Heymans et al., 2019). These models
allow researchers and policymakers to explore different scenarios, such as the impacts
of climate change, overfishing, or conservation measures, and to predict their outcomes
on ecosystem dynamics.
As part of the EU H2020 MISSION ATLANTIC project (henceforth Mission Atlantic), the
StrathE2E ecosystem model is being used to assess the state of different ecosystems
under various scenarios of climate change and resource exploitation. Given the signifiВӯ
cance of the Azores as a biodiversity hotspot, playing an important role in the connectivity
of the Atlantic Ocean, it is important to study how this ecosystem will evolve throughout
the century and what are the major pressures on it.
This thesis aims to implement the StrathE2E ecosystem model in the region of the Azores
and understand what will be the impact of climate change and fishing in the next decades,
specifically until the 2060s, by exploring different climate and fisheries scenarios.
1.1
Ecosystem modelling
Ecosystem models are important tools for understanding how ecosystems work and inВӯ
teract (Heymans et al., 2019). These models help describe the complexity of ecosystems
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
1
==PAGE:9==
by bringing together knowledge, data, and information from different sources. They also
support monitoring efforts and improve our ability to understand how ecosystems change
over time. This includes studying the impacts of environmental changes, like climate
change, and predicting how marine ecosystems might respond in the future.
Ecosystem models are also very useful for managing marine environments. Effective
management needs a broad understanding of ecosystems, looking at the big picture
rather than focusing on single species or specific issues. These models help guide deciВӯ
sions about how to manage marine resources, protect biodiversity, and ensure ecosysВӯ
tem services are used sustainably (RodriguezВӯPerez et al., 2023). For example, they can
inform decisions about where to create Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) or help assess
the role of oceans in storing carbon (Commission et al., 2021). Ecosystem models are
also used to check whether ecosystems are healthy, evaluate management strategies,
and conduct Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) to see how human activities might
affect ecosystems.
The growing amount of ocean data, especially about biodiversity and biological systems,
is opening up new possibilities for ecosystem modeling (Heymans et al., 2019). However,
no single model is perfect for every situation. The right model depends on the specific
question or issue being addressed. This makes it important to carefully choose a model
that fits the problem being studied.
There are many different types of ecosystem models, each designed for specific purposes.
Some focus on physical and chemical processes, while others include food webs, species
sizes, or multiple interconnected systems. For example, simpler models like Nutrient,
Phytoplankton, Zooplankton and Detritus (NPZD) models focus on the lower levels of
the food chain (GonzГЎlez et al., 2022). In contrast, more complex EndВӯtoВӯEnd (E2E)
models look at everything from the physical environment to top predators, as well as
human activities (Fulton, 2010). The level of detail in a model depends on the question
it is designed to answer, whether itвҖҷs for scientific research or for guiding decisions about
managing ecosystems. For a comprehensive perspective on ecosystem dynamics, as
required in this project, an endВӯtoВӯend model was essential.
The endВӯtoВӯend ecosystem model used in this project is StrathE2E, developed by Michael
Heath and colleagues in 2012 (M. R. Heath et al., 2022a). The model comes as an R packВӯ
age but also has an app that can directly and intuitively be used by stakeholders. The aim
of StrathE2E is to provide a вҖҳbig pictureвҖҷ marine ecosystem modelling tool which enables
parameter optimization, sensitivity analysis and model exploration from an ordinary comВӯ
puter. In order to achieve this, some spatial, taxonomic and biological granularity needed
to be sacrificed allowing the model to encompass the entire ecosystem and food web from
physical processes, nutrients, and microbes to megafauna and fishing fleets. While other
models represent the system at a greater resolution, this means greater implementation
challenges which limit the ability to fully assess uncertainty. Models which only represent
a subset of the system at a greater resolution may struggle to accurately capture broader
ecosystem dynamics and interactions, as they can fail to account for important factors
outside their focus.
StrathE2E was first developed for the North Sea region where it has been used for several
assessments. Morris et al., 2014 conducted a global sensitivity analysis of StrathE2E,
focusing on factors affecting the biomass of fish and benthos in the North Sea. M. Heath
et al., 2015 used StrathE2E to model wholeВӯecosystem impacts of trawling. M. R. Heath
and Cook, 2020 assessed risks to North Sea fish stocks and wildlife in postВӯBrexit fishery
negotiations. There is also a version adapted to the Arctic, StrathE2EPolar, which has
2
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:10==
been used to evaluate the consequences of warming and seaВӯice loss on marine food
webs and fisheries (M. R. Heath et al., 2022b). Under the Mission Atlantic project, the
model has been or is being configured to several regions, including the Norwegian Sea,
Southern Benguela, St Helena, Ascension, Southern Brazil, Sao Pedro e Sao Paulo,
Canary Islands, Celtic Sea, the Western Sahara, Senegal & Mauritania and the Azores.
1.2
Study region: the Azores
1.2.1
Study region
The Azores is a Portuguese archipelago consisting of nine islands located in the midВӯNorth
Atlantic Ocean. Its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) spans approximately 1 million km2,
between 33вҖ“43В°N and 20вҖ“35В°W. The region is defined by the absence of a continental
shelf and vast areas of deep ocean. The average depth across the EEZ is around 3000
m, with approximately 85% classified as abyssal zones (Peran et al., 2016). Less than
1% of the EEZ lies at depths shallower than 600 m (Peran et al., 2016). As a relatively
young volcanic archipelago, the seafloor surrounding the islands is predominantly rocky
and highly irregular, featuring diverse submarine geomorphological structures such as
seamounts and hydrothermal vents.
Several water masses are present in this region: the North Atlantic Central Water until
about 700 m depthНҫ the Northern SubВӯPolar Water, the Antarctic Intermediate Water, and
the Mediterranean Outflow Water at intermediate depthsНҫ and the North Atlantic Deep
Water below 2,000 m depth (Amorim et al., 2017). Figure 1.1 shows the water masses in
temperatureВӯsalinity diagram.
Figure 1.1: TemperatureВӯsalinity (TВӯS) diagram representing the different water masses
present in the Azores region. Depth is represented as a colour gradient.
The Azorean archipelago sits between the two extensions of the Gulf stream, the North
Atlantic current to the north, and the Azores Current to the south. Both of these current
flow eastwards with large amounts of eddies propagating westwards. These currents
transport warm water from the south. The Global Ocean OSTIA Sea Surface Temperature
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
3
==PAGE:11==
and Sea Ice Analysis dataset from Copernicus Marine Services (CMEMS) reveals a clear
temperature gradient in the region, with cooler mean sea surface temperatures (SSTs)
in the northern part of the region and warmer SSTs in the southern part, reflecting the
influence of the Azores Current (Figure 1.2) (CMEMS, 2024b). Sea surface temperature
ranges between 15ВәC and 27ВәC. Analyzing its seasonal variability reveals a twoВӯseasonal
pattern, with temperatures averaging around 17ВәC during Winter and Spring and rising to
approximately 22ВәC in Summer and Fall (CMEMS, 2024b). The Global Ocean Low and
Mid Trophic Levels Biomass Content Hindcast dataset from CMEMS indicates that during
winter, the mixed layer extends to a depth of approximately 150 meters, while in summer,
the euphotic zone reaches a depth of about 20 meters (Figure 1.3) (CMEMS, 2024a).
Figure 1.2: Seasonal average sea surface temperatures for the decade of 2010 in the
Azores EEZ (CMEMS, 2024b).
4
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.3: Seasonal average mixed layer depth for the decade of 2010 in the Azores
EEZ (CMEMS, 2024a).
The Global Ocean Physics Reanalysis dataset from CMEMS reveals that salinity levels
remain rather constant throughout the year. A spatial gradient can be observed, with
higher salinity observed in the southern region, averaging 36.8 PSU, and lower salinity
in the northern region, averaging 35.9 PSU (CMEMS, 2024c)). This is due to the higher
salinity levels in the subtropical gyres of the Atlantic Ocean, where high evaporation and
low precipitation occur (Busecke et al., 2014).
Figure 1.4: Average salinity for the decade of 2010 in the Azores EEZ (CMEMS, 2024c).
The Global Ocean Low and Mid Trophic Levels Biomass Content Hindcast shows that net
primary production (NPP) begins to increase during Winter and intensifies in Spring with
concentrations up to around 700 mgC mвҲ’2 dayвҲ’1 (CMEMS, 2024a). NPP displays an
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
5
==PAGE:13==
inverse relationship with SST, with higher NPP values observed in the northern part of the
study area where SST is lower. This pattern occurs because nutrientВӯrich waters reaching
the surface are typically colder compared to their surroundings. The lowest concentration
values are observed in Summer and Fall, dropping to approximately 300 mgC mвҲ’2 dayвҲ’1.
It can be observed that NPP values are also higher around the islands, which could be
explained by the вҖқisland mass effect.вҖқ This phenomenon occurs when the flow of ocean
currents is disrupted by an island or group of islands, leading to nutrient enrichment and
increased biological activity in the surrounding waters. The ability of islands to retain propВӯ
erties of the incoming flow was coined by Wolanski as the вҖңsticky water effectвҖқ (Wolanski
and Spagnol, 2000). In the case of the Azores, the combined interaction of the islands
with the incoming flow likely enhances nutrient retention and supporting higher productivВӯ
ity (Caldeira and Reis, 2017).
Figure 1.5: Seasonal average of net primary productivity for the decade of 2010 in the
Azores EEZ вҖң Global Ocean Low and Mid Trophic Levels Biomass Content Hindcast.
(Accessed on 23Вӯ010Вӯ2024)вҖқвҖқ, n.d.
The oceanographic conditions of the Azores, shaped by the influence of the Azores CurВӯ
rent and its interaction with a complex seafloor, create a unique environment that supports
a remarkable diversity of oceanic fauna. This region serves as a migratory crossroads,
connecting the eastern and western basin margins while also linking the cold, producВӯ
tive boreal waters to the warmer tropical and equatorial seas, making it an important and
diverse ecosystem (Caldeira and Reis, 2017).
Approximately 460 fish species have been documented in the Azores. The main small
pelagic species in the region include blue jack mackerel (Trachurus picturatus), Atlantic
chub mackerel (Scomber japonicus), European pilchard (Sardina pilchardus), and bogue
(Boops boops).
The demersal fish community in the Azores is diverse and structured by depth zones.
Among the dominant species are common mora (Mora moro), bluemouth rockfish (HeliВӯ
colenus dactylopterus), and blackspot seabream (Pagellus bogaraveo) (Menezes et al.,
2006). At depths shallower than 200 m, within the shallowВӯshelf and shelfВӯbreak zones,
6
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:14==
the community is characterized by species such as red porgy (Pagrus pagrus), white
seabream (Diplodus sargus), blackspot seabream (Pagellus bogaraveo), and forkbeard
(Phycis phycis) (Menezes et al., 2006). The upper slope, at depths between 200 and
600 m, is dominated mainly by blackspot seabream (Pagellus bogaraveo) and bluemouth
rockfish (Helicolenus dactylopterus) (Menezes et al., 2006). The midВӯslope, ranging from
600 to 800 m, is predominantly characterized by common mora (Mora moro), bluemouth
rockfish (Helicolenus dactylopterus), smooth lanternshark (Etmopterus pusillus), and arВӯ
rowhead dogfish (Deania profundorum) (Menezes et al., 2006). At the deep midВӯslope,
between 800 and 1200 m, the fish community is composed mainly of common mora (Mora
moro), KaupвҖҷs arrowtooth eel (Synaphobranchus kaupii), and birdbeak dogfish (Deania
calcea) (Menezes et al., 2006).
The benthic community in the Azores includes species such as the Azorean barnacle
(Megabalanus azoricus), black sea urchin (Arbacia lixula), stony sea urchin (ParacentroВӯ
tus lividus), bearded fireworm (Hermodice carunculata), Azorean limpet (Patella aspera),
limpet (Patella candei), slipper lobster (Scyllarides latus), and spiny lobster (Palinurus eleВӯ
phas), commonly found in the intertidal zone and the shallow subtidal areas. The toothed
rock crab (Cancer bellianus) is the dominant species in coastal crab communities, with
the deepВӯsea red crab (Chaceon affinis) being more prevalent in deeper waters.
The Azores is also a hotspot for many species of marine megafauna (Afonso et al., 2020).
TwentyВӯeight species of cetacean have been recorded in the region.
Some of these
species are resident such as bottlenose and RissoвҖҷs dolphins, some are present yearВӯ
round like the sperm whales, common and striped dolphins, pilot whales, Mesoplodon
beaked whales and others come seasonally such as the baleen whale, the Atlantic spotВӯ
ted dolphin and the northern bottlenose whale. The sperm whale, the common and the
spotted dolphins also use this area as a nursery.
The region is also home to a variety of large fish, including six types of tropical and temВӯ
perate tuna, five species of billfish, five sun and moon fish, large groupers, and over 60
species of sharks and rays that live in both benthic and pelagic environments (Afonso et
al., 2020). Some, like tropical tuna, billfishes, mobulid rays, and whale sharks, are mainly
seen during the warmer months of the year. Others, such as groupers and deepwater
sharks, appear to stay in the region all year. The area is an important nursery where
juvenile sharks, including blue sharks, smooth hammerheads, and tope sharks, grow and
develop (Afonso et al., 2020).
Six out of the seven species of sea turtles, meaning all the Atlantic species, have been
spotted in the Azores (Barcelos et al., 2023). The loggerhead (Caretta caretta) is by
far the most common species followed by the leatherback turtle (Dermochelys coriacea).
The green turtle (Chelonia mydas), the olive ridley sea turtle (Lepidochelys olivacea), the
KempвҖҷs ridley sea turtle (Lepidochelys kempii) and the hawksbill sea turtle (Eretmochelys
imbricata) are occasional visitors (Barcelos et al., 2023).
This region plays a key role in birdlife, serving as a transition zone between tropical and
temperate environments. CoryвҖҷs shearwater (Calonectris diomedea borealis) is the most
common seabird in the area, while the common tern (Sterna hirundo) is also frequently
found throughout the Azores. The Azorean population of the roseate tern (Sterna dougalВӯ
lii) is believed to be the largest in Europe (Amorim et al., 2009). Additionally, the region is
vital for several species, hosting the entire global breeding population of MonteiroвҖҷs storm
petrel, nearly 75% of CoryвҖҷs shearwater, up to 33% of Barolo shearwater, and almost half
of EuropeвҖҷs roseate tern population (Afonso et al., 2020).
The Azores archipelago is also a significant hotspot for coldВӯwater coral diversity in the
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
7
==PAGE:15==
Northeast Atlantic. These corals are found across various submarine features, includВӯ
ing seamounts, island slopes, and midВӯocean ridges, often at depths exceeding 1000
meters (BragaВӯHenriques et al., 2013). The coral fauna in the Azores is taxonomically
diverse, comprising 164 species across four major groups: alcyonaceans, scleractinians,
antipatharians, and stylasterids (BragaВӯHenriques et al., 2013). Some of these corals,
particularly black corals, have been found to attain millennial ages (CarreiroВӯSilva et al.,
2013). The Azores also host significant deepВӯsea sponge communities, particularly below
500 meters depth, covering extensive areas. Due to their slow growth, coldВӯwater corals
and deepВӯsea sponges are recognized as vulnerable and worth conserving. Coral garВӯ
dens, deepВӯsea sponge aggregations and Lophelia pertusa reefs are considered threatВӯ
ened and declining habitats, according to OSPAR (OSPAR, 2023).
TwentyВӯone species found in the Azores are listed on the OSPAR list of threatened and
declining species (OSPAR, 2023).
This includes two invertebrates, the Azorean barВӯ
nacle (Megabalanus azoricus) and the Azorean limpet (Patella ulyssiponensis aspera),
both of which have faced significant exploitation in the region.
Four seabird species
are also part of the list: the little shearwater, roseate tern, blackВӯlegged kittiwake, and
Balearic shearwater. Additionally, it features seven pelagic and deepВӯwater sharks, such
as the Portuguese dogfish, gulper shark, leafscale gulper shark, and basking shark. The
leatherback and loggerhead turtles, two seahorse species, bluefin tuna, orange roughy,
and two cetaceans, the blue whale and the northern right whale, are also included.
Table 1.1: Some species present in the Azores: a) Cold Water Corals (From: Azores
Deepsea Research). b) Azorean Barnacle (From: Maria Ana Dionisio). c) Blue Slipper
Lobster (From: JoГЈo Pontes). d) Bluemouth Rockfish (From: JoГЈo Pontes). e) Blacktail
Comber (From: JoГЈo Pontes). f) Dusky Grouper (From: JoГЈo Pontes). g) BigВӯEyed Tuna
(From: Brussels Times). h) Common Dolphin (From: CWAzores). i) Mobulid Ray (From:
Manta Trust). j) Whale Shark (From: Azores Whale Watch). k) Sperm Whale (From:
Velvet Escape). l) CoryвҖҷs Shearwater (From: Leonor MendonГ§a)
According to the deliverable 7.1 of Mission Atlantic, the most important pressures in the
Azores are species extraction, bycatch, contaminants, marine litter, and the introduction
of nonВӯindigenous species. These pressures are mainly linked to the following human acВӯ
tivities: fishing, tourism and recreation, and shipping. The introduction of nonВӯindigenous
species has increased from 1.1 per year between 1950 and 1999, to 2.1 per year between
2000 and 2015 (ICES, 2022). Shipping, particularly through ballast water and the biofoulВӯ
ing of hulls, is the main species introduction vector, followed by water currents. Regarding
8
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:16==
marine litter, Pham et al., 2017 reported that 83% of loggerhead turtles found dead had
ingested plastics, while CodinaВӯGarcГӯa et al., 2013 discovered plastic fragments in 94%
of the stomachs of deceased CoryвҖҷs shearwater fledglings.
DeepВӯsea mining poses a potential future threat to the Azores, as the region includes arВӯ
eas of interest for exploration and the International Seabed Authority has already granted
multiple contracts for polymetallic sulphide exploration along the MidВӯAtlantic Ridge south
of the Azores (Morato et al., 2022). Of particular concern is the potential overlap of mining
plumes with coral gardens, as deepВӯsea corals are slowВӯgrowing and highly vulnerable.
Studies have shown that seafloor massive sulphide mining plumes can cause rapid and
high mortality rates in coldВӯwater corals, making such interactions a serious environmental
risk (CarreiroВӯSilva et al., 2022).
An endВӯtoВӯend ecosystem model has been previously developed for the region of the
Azores using the Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) foodВӯweb modeling tool, which can be used
to build trophic static massВӯbalanced snapshots (Ecopath) and to create temporal dyВӯ
namics (Ecosim) of an ecosystem. The current version of the Azores model was built
upon previous models developed for this region and associated seamounts (Morato et
al., 2009). The present model focuses mostly on intermediate and deepВӯwater species
present in the Azores ecosystem. The model has been used for several assessments
such as to analyze the ecosystem structure of the openВӯocean and deepВӯsea environВӯ
ments of the Azores (Morato et al., 2016) or to study its drivers of trophodynamics (Brito
et al., 2024).
1.2.2
Fisheries in the Azores
Although fishing activity has always been a key driver of the Azorean economy, it remains
mainly artisanal, representing only a small portion of the Portuguese total landings. Most
fishing boats are under 12 meters long and are therefore not obliged to carry Automatic
Identification System (AIS) transmitters.
Historically, commercial whaling was the regionвҖҷs first largeВӯscale fishery, peaking in the
1940s, declining by the 1960s, and finally banned in the 1980s. Nowadays, the Azorean
fisheries are centered around four main activities: smallВӯnet fisheries targeting small
pelagic speciesНҫ poleВӯandВӯline fisheries targetting tunasНҫ bottom longline and handline
fisheries for demersal speciesНҫ and pelagic longline fisheries targeting swordfish (Xiphias
gladius) (Pham et al., 2013). Smaller artisanal fleets also engage in fishing for commercial
invertebrates by harvesting or setting traps and squid using a jig. An experimental deepВӯ
water drifting longline fishery for black scabbardfish was introduced in the late 1990s but
remains small and is decreasing (Pham et al., 2013). Additionally, recreational fishing
is an important and growing sector, targeting coastal and demersal species as well as
large pelagics, driven by increasing tourism (Torres et al., 2022). Certain fishing pracВӯ
tices, such as deepВӯsea trawling, purseВӯseine nets for tuna, and drift gillnets, are banned
in the region.
Demersal and deepВӯsea bottom longline fisheries are the most significant in terms of landВӯ
ings by both weight and value (Fauconnet et al., 2019). These fisheries primarily operate
at depths between 300 and 500 meters, therefore, on areas near the islands, offshore
banks, and seamounts. A study has found that 22% of the demersal stocks are overВӯ
fished (MedeirosВӯLeal et al., 2023). Additionally, these fisheries frequently have bycatch
of deepВӯsea sharks (Fauconnet et al., 2023). Tuna fishing, while the second most imporВӯ
tant in the region, shows significant annual variation in catch volumes, influenced by tuna
abundance, migration patterns, and quota regulations. The pelagic longline fishery tarВӯ
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
9
==PAGE:17==
gets large predators such as swordfish, blue shark (Prionace glauca), and shortfin mako
shark (Isurus oxyrinchus) (Pham et al., 2013). This fishery includes a regional fleet and
longВӯdistance fleets from Spain and mainland Portugal. The regional fleet is the smallest
and operates closer to the islands, while the larger Spanish and Portuguese fleets have
been more prominent in recent years, operating more than 100 nautical miles from the
coast.
The fisheries targeting coastal invertebrates have severely depleted barnacle and limpet
stocks, leading to their inclusion on the OSPAR threatened species list in 2006 (ICES,
2022). In response, conservation measures have been implemented, establishing noВӯ
catch areas and restricting harvesting to specific months of the year (Faria et al., 2024).
Fisheries management in the Azores is governed by the EU Common Fishery Policy,
which regulates total allowable catches (TACs) for some key species. Most of the demerВӯ
sal/ deepВӯwater, small pelagic, and tuna resources are monitored and routinely assessed
by ICES or ICCAT (ICES, 2022). The regional government enforces additional measures,
including minimum landing sizes and weights, to promote sustainable fisheries manageВӯ
ment.
Marine protection history of the Azores dates back to the 1980s where the first few MPAs
were created. By 2015, 79 MPAs had been implemented covering an area of 110 000 km2
within and beyond the EEZ, including 18 Natura 2000 sites, 3 Unesco Biosphere Reserves
and 7 in the OSPAR network (Abecasis et al., 2015). In October 2024, the Azores passed
a legislation to create the largest MPA network in the North Atlantic, covering 287,000
square kilometers and protecting 30% of the archipelagoвҖҷs surrounding waters (DiГЎrio da
RepГәblica, 2024). Half of this area is fully protected, prohibiting all extractive activities and
the other half is designated as highly protected, allowing only limited, lowВӯimpact activities
(DiГЎrio da RepГәblica, 2024).
1.3
Aims and motivations
This study complements the results of the Mission Atlantic project, an international colВӯ
laborative project which aims to map and assess the present and future status of Atlantic
marine ecosystems. It is working on seven regional case studies, in subВӯArctic and TropВӯ
ical regions of the Atlantic Ocean, including the Azores.
Mission Atlantic is using Integrated Ecosystem Assessments (IEA) to evaluate the risks
posed by human activities and climate change, supporting the sustainable management
of Atlantic ecosystems. An IEA works as an iterative cycle that starts by defining key
management objectives and human activities affecting the ecosystems, followed by deВӯ
veloping indicators for assessing status. It then assess the risks and vulnerabilities of the
ecosystems, simulates ecosystem state and dynamics under various scenarios of climate
change, resource exploitation and social development and finally refines management
options to achieve desired outcomes. Testing these scenarios is done using ecosystem
modeling and therefore one of the goals of the project is to develop a StrathE2E ecosysВӯ
tem model for each case study, including in the Azores.
Objectives:
Configure the StrathE2E ecosystem model for the Azores case study
The development of the StrathE2E model for the region of the Azores had already started
prior to the beginning of this project. Part of the aim of this project was to further develop
its implementation. This was done by collecting observational data that would be used to
10 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:18==
optimize the models parameters. This included data on dietary intakes, production rates,
nutrient concentrations, among other. Data on temporal dynamics of the model such
as migration seasons, spawning and recruitment periods were also assessed. Finally,
fisheries data was gathered including information on landings, fishing effort, discards,
spatial distribution, processing, and harvest ratios. After gathering this data, the model
was fitted by Michael Heath.
Simulate future scenarios under different climate and fisheries scenarios
Once the model was configured, simulations were conducted to project ecosystem changes
under two different climate scenarios and three different fishing scenarios from the decade
of 2010 to the decade of 2060.
Assess the impact of fishing pressure on the most exploitable guilds and their imВӯ
pact on ecosystem structure
An analysis on the most exploited guilds, the demersal, migratory and planktivorous fish,
was done looking at how an increase in overall fishing activity would affect biomass levels
and fishing mortality. Additionaly, the impact of the different fisheries scenarios on the
overall structure of the ecosystem was assessed. Finally, the relative importance of the
migratory and planktivorous fish guilds was evaluated.
These objectives aimed to address the following research questions:
вҖў What are possible evolutions in the ecosystems of the Azores?
вҖў What are the main drivers of change in the marine ecosystems of the Azores?
Specifically, what is the impact of climate and fisheries on the ecosystems?
вҖў What is the effect of an increase in fishing activity on the planktivorous, demВӯ
ersal and migratory fish guilds?
вҖў What is the relative importance of the migratory and planktivorous fish guilds
within the ecosystem?
вҖў What are the strengths and limitations of this ecosystem model?
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
11
==PAGE:19==
2
Methods
2.1
StrathE2E2 model overview
StrathE2E2 model consists of two main components: the ecology model and the fishing
fleet model, which work together to simulate ecosystem dynamics.
Ecology model
The ecology model simulates the dynamics of biomass, nutrients, and detritus in marine
ecosystems using a system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). It represents the
ecosystem as a network of interacting guilds, which aggregate species based mainly on
feeding behaviors and diet preferences. The food web is simplified into four dissolved
inorganic nutrients guilds, six dead organic material and bateria guilds, two primary proВӯ
ducer guilds, six zooplankton guilds, two benthic guilds, three fish guilds and three top
predator guilds. A more detailed description can be found in the Annex A.1. The pinniped
guild, one of the topВӯpredator guilds in the model, was excluded from this case study as
there are no pinnipeds present in the Azores region. With the exception of macrophytes,
all state variables are represented in terms of nitrogen mass, as nitrogen is the usual limВӯ
iting factor in temperate shelf seas. Macrophytes are expressed in terms of nitrogen and
carbon mass with dynamic stoichiometry due to their ability to absorb and store nitrogen.
The ODEs capture biological processes such as feeding, metabolism, reproduction, and
migration, as well as physical processes like advection and nutrient cycling (equation in
A.1). Feeding dynamics follow a Holling II function relationship between each predatorВӯ
prey couplet in the food web (Eq A.2), and incorporate a density dependent mortality
control. A proportion of the food is converted into new body mass while the rest is evenly
split between contributions to organic detritus and ammonia, representing defecation and
the metabolic processes of feeding.
The model is spatially divided into two horizontal zones: the inshore zone, characterized
by shallow, vertically wellВӯmixed waters and dependent on tides and freshwater inputs,
and the offshore zone, which is deeper, possibly seasonally stratified, and influenced
by interactions with the external ocean. The offshore zone is further divided into two
vertical layers: a shallow layer and a deep layer. The shallow layer of the offshore zone
is connected, through advection and mixing, with the inshore zone. The shallow layer
interacts with the atmosphere, whilst the deep layer interacts with the seafloor. There are
four types of sediment classes: mud, sand, gravel and rock.
The nutrient recycling network is divided into six organic detritus groups: suspended maВӯ
terial, labile and refractory sediment material, macrophyte debris, corpses, and discards.
Fishing fleet model
The fishing fleet model in StrathE2E2 quantifies the interactions between fishing activities
and resource guilds in the ecosystem. It can simulate up to 12 different types of mГ©tiers,
each characterized by the following parameters:
вҖў Activity Rate: Operational intensity of each fleet, measured as the amount of time
spent fishing per unit area per day, expressed in seconds per square meter per day.
12 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:20==
вҖў Fishing Power: Efficiency of a gear type in harvesting biomass from a particular
resource guild, quantified in millimoles of nitrogen per second.
вҖў Discard Rate: Proportion of catch rejected and returned to the sea, assumed dead.
вҖў Processing at Sea: Proportion of retained catch processed at sea (e.g., offal proВӯ
duction).
вҖў Seabed Abrasion Rate: Extent of seabed disturbance caused by gear type.
вҖў Spatial Distribution of Fishing Activities: Proportion of fishing activity in each
seabed habitat type.
External drivers for the model consist of factors such as sea surface irradiance, temperaВӯ
ture, hydrodynamic flows, freshwater discharge, and inputs of nitrate and ammonia from
rivers and the atmosphere and ocean boundaries.
The model outputs include time series of nitrogen mass across all state variable compoВӯ
nents, along with fluxes between components resulting from processes such as feeding,
excretion, and exports to the ocean, atmosphere, and fisheries landings.
Parameter optimization
Many parameters in the StrathE2E2 model cannot be independently determined due to
limited data or their association with broad functional guilds. Therefore, optimization is
required to fit the model to relevant observational data.
The model employs a simulated annealing algorithm, the MetropolisВӯHastings algorithm,
for parameter optimization (M. Heath and Speirs, 2023)). The algorithm is designed to
find the bestВӯfit parameter set by iteratively exploring the parameter space and evaluating
how well the model matches observed data. The algorithm starts with an initial set of
parameters to run the model and calculate the likelihood of the observed data given the
modelвҖҷs outputs. At each iteration, a new parameter set is proposed by adding a small
random variation to the previous parameter set. If the new parameter set has a higher
likelihood of the observed data than the previous one, it is accepted as a base for the next
iteration. To avoid local optima, a вҖқtemperatureвҖқ function is introduced which will accept a
proportion of worse results to enhance exploration. The probability of the observed data
given a set of parameters is expected to converge to its maximum value, representing the
best possible fit between the model outputs and the observations, based on the model
structure and driving data.
In this study, the model was fitted independently to two distinct sets of driving data generВӯ
ated by two climate models: one developed by the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics LaboraВӯ
tory (GFDL) and the other by the National Center for Meteorological Research (CNRM).
2.2
Annual target data
As previously stated, the model is fitted using a set of observational data, referred to as
the target data, which represent various aspects of the realВӯworld ecosystem and their
uncertainties. These indices include properties such as production rates, production to
biomass (P/B) ratios, dietary intakes, fishery landings and discards, nutrient concentraВӯ
tions, denitrification rates, and others. The full set of indices is represented in Table A.2
in appendix. The reference period for this target data was from 2010 to 2019, the period
for which the model is fitted.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
13
==PAGE:21==
Assessing many of these parameters is challenging due to limited data availability. While
having more parameters improves the modelвҖҷs accuracy, it is not essential to assess all
target data for the fitting process. Overall, there are 84 target data parameters, but this
number reduces to 77 if pinnipeds are excluded. Of these 77 parameters, 40 were asВӯ
sessed, representing approximately 50%.
2.2.1
Nutrient concentrations
Data on nitrate, ammonia and organic nitrogen concentrations in the deep and shallow
layers were requested for winter (November to February) and summer (May to August), in
porewater of sand and mud (for nitrate and ammonia) and in these sediments (for organic
nitrogen).
No inВӯsitu data was not found for ammonia or organic nitrogen concentrations for the
Azores EEZ, as well as for nitrate concentrations in porewater.
The nitrate concentration data was taken from the World Ocean Atlas 2018 (WOA 2018)
(Garcia2018WorldSilicate.). This database provides average values for all available
years between 1955 and 2017. Within the Azores EEZ, nitrate data was available in the
locations shown below (Figure 2.1). These values were used as an estimate for the entire
Azores EEZ.
Figure 2.1: Locations where nitrate samples have been taken from the period of 1955 to
2017.
WOA 2018 provides annual values up to 5500 m depth and seasonal and monthly values
up to 800 m. Taking seasonal or monthly values for the deep layer would compromise the
average, as it would not take into account the majority of the water column. Looking at
Figure 2.2, it seems that the nitrate concentration in the deep layer is quite similar for the
different seasons. For this reason, the mean deep layer nitrate concentration was kept
the same for winter and summer.
In the surface layer, the summer mean was calculated by averaging the seasonal datasets
for AprilвҖ“June and JulyвҖ“September, while the winter mean was based on the dataset for
OctoberвҖ“December. These were the only available datasets, as there were no nitrate
measurements from the monthly datasets for December, January, February, and August,
14 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.2: Mean nitrate concentration vs Depth for four WOA 2018 datasets.
or from the seasonal dataset for JanuaryвҖ“March. The standard deviation for the sumВӯ
mer mean (Пғ) was calculated using the formula Пғ =
вҲҡ
Пғ2
1 + Пғ2
2, where Пғ1 and Пғ2 are the
standard deviations for the AprilвҖ“June and JulyвҖ“September subsets, respectively. This
method was chosen because the sample sizes in both subsets are similar.
Table 2.1: Seasonal means and uncertainties for nitrate concentrations in surface and
deep layers.
Layer
Season
Nitrate Concentration (mol/m3)
Surface layer
Summer
0.7257 Вұ 0.0741
Winter
1.4014 Вұ 0.0745
Deep layer
Summer
16.0810 Вұ 0.2092
Winter
16.0810 Вұ 0.2092
2.2.2
Production to biomass rates
The P/B ratio measures the amount of production of a certain guild relative to its existing
biomass, indicating how quickly it replenishes itself.
The P/B ratios were taken from the Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) model previously develВӯ
oped for the OpenВӯOcean and DeepВӯSea Environments of the Azores Morato et al., 2016.
Although the modelвҖҷs reference year is 1997, this was the most reliable data available for
use. The two ecological models have different guild structures. It was, therefore, necesВӯ
sary to aggregate certain functional groups from the Ecopath model and allocate them to
the corresponding StrathE2E guilds. The reclassification is shown in appendix A.2.1.
The P/B ratios for each EwE guild were weighted by the biomass outputs of their respecВӯ
tive guilds to calculate the P/B ratio for the StrathE2E guild. Ratios for the larvae and
macrophyte guilds were not possible to obtain.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
15
==PAGE:23==
Table 2.2: P/B ratios for each guild.
Guild
P/B ratio (per year)
Omnivorous zooplankton
11.41
Carnivorous zooplankton
4.78
Suspension/Deposit Feeding Benthos
1.315
Carnivorous/Scavenge Feeding Benthos
2.419
Planktivorous fish
2.676
Demersal fish
0.570
Migratory fish
0.328
Seabirds
0.250
Cetaceans
0.032
2.2.3
Gross production rates
Annual gross production is the total amount of biomass produced by a specific guild over
the course of one year.
These estimations were obtained by using the P/B ratios of the EwE model and multiВӯ
plying them by the biomass outputs of the model. Taking the same guild aggregations
as before, the annual productions of the EwE guilds were summed to determine the anВӯ
nual production rates of the StrathE2E guilds. The units were then converted into units of
nitrogen following the conversions on Table A.3. The results are presented in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Annual gross production rates calculated for each guild.
Guild
Production rate (mMN/m2/y)
Planktivorous fish
8.15739051
Demersal fish
1.55810242
Migratory fish
0.104608998
Supension/ Deposit feeding benthos
2.24489906
Carnivorous/ Scavenge Benthos
11.3237201
Carnivorous zooplankton
21.09444592
Ominivorous Zooplankton
63.73625282
Seabirds
0.00006295
Cetceans
0.006441044
2.2.4
Annual consumption and diet preferences
Data on the annual consumption rates was requested for various trophic interactions.
Specifically, for the consumption of omnivorous zooplankton by carnivorous zooplankton,
omnivorous zooplankton by fish, benthic species by fish, demersal fish by fish, planktivВӯ
orous fish by fish, of seabirds and cetaceans. For birds and cetaceans, the proportion of
planktivorous, demersal and migratory fish in their diet was also asked.
These calculations were made using data from the EwE model. Information regarding
the consumption over biomass ratio of each guild was available and was multiplied to the
biomass outputs from the model in order to obtain the consumption estimate of each guild.
Using information on dietary intakes of each guild it was possible to calculate the annual
16 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:24==
consumption rates of for the different trophic interactions. No information was available
on larvae consumption. The results, which were converted in units of nitrogen following
Table A.3, are presented in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Annual consumption and diet preferences of different trophic groups.
Annual Consumptions
Value (mMN/m2/y)
Planktivorous fish by fish
2.2331
Demersal fish by fish
1.0204
Omnivorous zooplankton by fish and fish larvae
4.4268
Omnivorous zooplankton by carnivorous zooplankton
39.1350
Benthos by fish
8.6633
Seabirds
0.0084
Cetaceans
0.7124
Diet preferences
Proportion
Planktivorous fish in diet of birds
0.62
Demersal fish in diet of birds
0.06
Migratory fish in diet of birds
0.00
Planktivorous fish in diet of cetaceans
0.2159
Demersal fish in diet of cetaceans
0.0076
Migratory fish in diet of cetaceans
0.0404
2.2.5
Landings and bycatch
Official landings from 2010 to 2019 were obtained from a database maintained by the
Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, University of the Azores in conjunction with
LotaГ§or SA, the Azorean auction house. Species were grouped in StrathE2E guilds to
calculate the total landings per guild. The average from 2010 to 2019 was taken and
converted into units of nitrogen using Table A.3. Results are presented in Table 2.5.
Table 2.5: Annual average landings from 2010 to 2019 for each StrathE2E guild.
Guild
Landings (mMN/m2/y)
Planktivorous fish
0.004244845
Demersal fish
0.007095663
Migratory fish
0.024344496
Suspension/ Deposit feeding benthos
0.000121323
Carnivorous/ Scavenge benthos
0.00002728
Carnivorous zooplankton
0.000643509
Macrophyte
0.000789951
Bycatch rates were asked for the cetacean and seabird guilds. In the Azores, although
there have been some observations of cetacean bycatch, mostly of common dolphins, all
of them have been reportedly released alive (Cruz et al., 2018, Silva et al., 2011). In the
model, since everything that is caught, even if discarded, is assumed to be dead, it was
decided to add zero bycatch for the cetacean guild. Regarding the seabird guild, although
there are no information on bycatch, it is known to be negligible. In fact, most fisheries
in the Azores rely on line and hook which are less threatening to seabirds compared to
other gear types such as gillnets (RamГӯrez et al., 2024).
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
17
==PAGE:25==
2.3
Event timings
Spawning, recruitment, and migration timings are excluded from the optimization process
under the assumption that they can be established from external sources. These paramВӯ
eters will define the temporal dynamics of functional guilds in the StrathE2E model.
2.3.1
Spawning seasons
Information on the spawning seasons of demersal fish, planktivorous fish, carnivorous/sВӯ
cavenging benthic species, and filter/depositВӯfeeding benthic species was requested. To
determine this, an assessment was made of the most abundant species in each guild for
which spawning data existed.
Planktivorous fish
Due to lack of biomass estimates on planktivorous fish, the most important species for this
guild were evaluated taking into account fisheries landings. Four species represent more
than 95% of the catch from 2010 to 2018: the blue jack mackerel (Trachurus pictarus) is
by far the most fished species (at вүғ60%), with significantly lower catches of Atlantic chub
mackerel (Scomber colias) (вүғ22%) and sardine (Sardina pilchardus) (вүғ7%), and even
fewer of bogue (Boops boops) (вүғ2%). Spawning data was only available for the blue
jack mackerel (Garcia et al., 2015), the Atlantic chub mackerel (Santos et al., 2020) and
the bogue (Froese and Editors., 2024). These are represented in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Spawning seasons for three key species of the planktivorous fish guild.
The spawning seasons of these three species occur mostly in the first half of the year and
exhibit some overlap. Given the significance of the blue jack mackerel, its spawning seaВӯ
son was used as the starting point for defining the spawning season of the planktivorous
fish guild, beginning in January. To better align the Atlantic chub mackerel, the season
was extended an additional month beyond the end of the blue jack mackerelвҖҷs spawning
period. The chosen spawning season for the planktivorous guild was therefore from the
beginning of January to the end of June.
Demersal fish
For the demersal fish guild, spawning periods were gathered on the most important species
identified in the Azorean demersal longline survey of 2010 (M. Pinho et al., 2020), for
which data was available.
Out of the species recorded in the survey, information on
18 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:26==
spawning existed for the common mora (Mora moro) (Santos et al., 2020), the blackbelly
rosefish (Helicolenus dactylopterus) (MendonГ§a et al., 2006), the blackspot seabream
(Pagellus bogaraveo), the european conger (Conger conger) (A. et al., 2002), the forkВӯ
beard (Phycis phycis) (MendonГ§a et al., 1998), the common seabream (Pagrus pagrus)
(MendonГ§a et al., 1998), the offshore rockfish (Pontinus kuhlii) (MendonГ§a et al., 1998)
and the wreckfish (Polyprion americanus) (Froese and Editors., 2024), which are preВӯ
sented in Figure 2.4. Considering the relative abundance of these species (Figure 2.5),
a weighted average was calculated, leading to a spawning season for the demersal guild
from September to March. In this way, the spawning season of the whole guild encomВӯ
passes the months with the highest spawning activity.
Figure 2.4: Spawning seasons of key demersal fish species.
Figure 2.5: Relative abundance of key demersal fish species for which there is available
information on spawning seasons.
Carnivorous/ scavenge benthos
Of the carnivorous/ scavenge benthic species fished, information regarding spawning seaВӯ
sons was available for the deepВӯsea red crab (Chaceon affinis) (M. R. Pinho et al., 2001),
the toothed rock crab (Cancer bellianus) (M. Pinho, 2001), the common spiny lobster (PalВӯ
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
19
==PAGE:27==
inurus elephas) (Santos et al., 2020) and the Mediterranean slipper lobster (Scyllarides
latus) (Rost Martins, 1985). They are presented in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Spawning seasons of selected carnivorous/ scavenge benthic species.
With three of the four species having overlapping spawning seasons, the guildвҖҷs spawning
period was defined as spanning from the beginning of October to the end of March.
Suspension/deposit feeding benthos
For suspension and depositВӯfeeding species, data was available only for the Azorean
barnacle (Megabalanus azoricus) (Dionisio et al., 2007), whose spawning season spans
from beggining of January to the end of June. While a single species is not ideal for
representing an entire guild, this spawning season was adopted as the guildвҖҷs spawning
period due to the lack of data on other species.
2.3.2
Recruitment seasons
Due to lack of data, recruitment seasons were defined to begin four months after the start
of the spawning season and to last for the same duration.
2.3.3
Migratory information
Migration information includes the timing of migration seasons and the proportion of biomass
entering the model domain relative to the global biomass of migratory species.
In the Azores, migratory species primarily consist of tuna and tunaВӯlike fish, pelagic sharks,
and cetaceans. However, since cetaceans are classified in their own guild, they cannot
simultaneously be included in the migratory guild.
Among tuna species in the Azores, the most prevalent are bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus)
and skipjack (Katsuwonus pelamis), while albacore (Thunnus alalunga), Atlantic bluefin
tuna (Thunnus thynnus) and yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares) represent a smaller fracВӯ
tion of the tuna population (Silva et al., 2011). Landings data from 2010 to 2019 appears to
indicate an overall migration period starting around March, peaking from June to August,
and declining through October. Specifically, for bigeye tuna, the migration period spans
from March to September, peaking in June. For skipjack, migration occurs between June
and October, peaking in August. Albacore show a migration peak during June, July, and
August.
Reliable biomass estimates for these species are not available. To address this, data from
20 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:28==
the SEAPODYM model, a spatial ecosystem and population dynamics model, which proВӯ
vides biomass estimates for tuna migrations throughout the year, was used. SEAPODYM
model outputs and migratory inputs into the StrathE2E were carried out by Julia Petroski
Olher.
The model focuses on two tuna species: the skipjack (Katsuwonus pelamis) and the
albacore (Thunnus alalunga). The model outputs are shown in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Biomass projections from the SEAPODYM model for skipjack and albacore
tuna within the Azores EEZ. The upper panel illustrates intraВӯannual biomass variation
across decades up to the 2060s, while the lower panel shows mean annual biomass
for the same period. Red represents SSP370 scenarios, and blue represents SSP126
scenarios. Solid lines correspond to the CNRM climate model and dotted lines represent
the GFDL model.
The model predicts an increase in biomass over the decades across both climate modВӯ
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
21
==PAGE:29==
els and scenarios, likely driven by the northward shift of skipjack tuna, a species typiВӯ
cally found in tropical waters. The GFDL model projects a greater biomass influx into the
Azores EEZ compared to the CNRM model.
For the 2010 decade, SEAPODYM estimates suggest an early migration period, peaking
around MarchВӯApril. This timing does not fully align with observed migration patterns, inВӯ
dicating a potential mismatch in the modelвҖҷs representation of actual migration dynamics.
Despite this limitation, SEAPODYM data remains the best available source for an initial
assessment.
2.4
Fisheries data
The collection of fishery data began prior to the start of this thesis project and was carried
out in close collaboration with Christopher Kim Pham.
2.4.1
Fishing mГ©tiers
The fishing mГ©tiers incorporated into the model had been previously determined based on
the most representative fishing practices in the Azores. Table 2.6 presents an overview
of these mГ©tiers.
Table 2.6: Descriptions and primary catch of the fishing mГ©tiers included in StrathE2E.
Fishing MГ©tier
Description
Primary Catch
Bottom longline
Stationary line with baited hooks
laid on or near the seabed.
Blackspot seabream,
conger eel, demersal
species
Pots, traps, and
harvesting
Stationary gear used to trap
crustaceans and mollusks.
Limpets, crabs,
lobsters, octopuses
Drifting deepwater
longline
Floating line with baited hooks set
at depth.
Black scabbardfish
Handline
Simple line with baited hooks
operated manually.
Demersal species
Jigging
Method using baited lines and
hooks moved up and down.
Squid
Pelagic longline
regional
A line with baited hooks
suspended in the water column
near the Azores.
Blue shark, swordfish,
pelagic species
Pole and line
A technique using rods with baited
hooks.
Tuna species
Purse seine
A large net encircles schools of fish
near the surface.
Mackerel
Pelagic longline
mainland
A longline deployed offshore by
vessels from mainland Portugal.
Swordfish, blue shark,
shortfin mako
Pelagic longline
Spanish
Offshore longline fishing by
Spanish fleets.
Swordfish, blue shark,
shortfin mako
2.4.2
Fishing activity
Fishing activity represents the amount of time each mГ©tier spends fishing per unit time.
Ideally, this would be calculated using data on the time spent actively fishing per trip.
However, because this information is not available, the time spent at sea was used as a
22 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:30==
proxy for certain mГ©tiers, assuming that fishing constitutes a significant portion of the total
time at sea. For mГ©tiers where this assumption was not valid, estimates were made to
assess the actual time spent fishing based on expert knowledge.
In the model, fishing activity is expressed in units of seconds per square meter per day.
To scale it to a meter square, the result was divided by the total area of the Azores EEZ.
This work was done in collaboration with Christopher Kim Pham.
Bottom longline
The number of days per trip for the bottom longline mГ©tier was determined using obserВӯ
vational data from 2010 to 2019, resulting in an average of 2.77 days per trip. The annual
number of trips (dockings) for the same period was calculated from official landing data,
averaging 8.76 trips per day.
This resulted in a fishing activity of 25.26 days per day, corresponding to 2.20 Г— 10вҲ’6
sec/m2/day.
Handline
For the handline mГ©tier, the number of days per trip was also determined from observaВӯ
tional data for the same period, averaging to 2.04 days per trip. The average number of
trips per day from 2010 to 2019 was 43.55.
The fishing activity was therefore estimated at 88.84 days per day, translating to 8.05 Г—
10вҲ’6 sec/m2/d.
Pots, traps and harvesting
Due to lack of data, the amount of time per trip was estimated using expert knowledge.
It was assumed that pots and traps are typically left in place for one full day and that a
quarter of a day is used to set and retrieve them. This resulted in an estimated duration
of 1.25 days per trip. Using the official number of dockings for the combined mГ©tiers, an
average of 7.56 trips per day was calculated for the period of 2010 to 2019.
The overall fishing activity resulted at 9.45 days per day, equivalent to 8.56 Г— 10вҲ’7
sec/m2/d.
Drifting deepwater longline
Observational data on this fishery was available from 1999 to 2005. The amount of days
per trip was averaged to 12.77. The number of dockings was retrieved from official data,
resulting in an average of 0.15 trips per day.
This resulted in a fishing activity of 1.89 days per day, i.e. 1.71 Г— 10вҲ’7 sec/m2/d.
Jigging
For this fishery, an estimate was made based on expert knowledge assuming that a fishing
trip usually lasts one day. The amount of dockings from 2010 to 2019 were taken from
official data, resulting in an average of 20.11 dockings per day.
The activity rate was calculated to be 20.11 days per day, i.e. 1.82 Г— 10вҲ’6 sec/m2/d.
Pole and line
The amount of days per trip was calculated using observational data from 2010 to 2019
and averaged to 5.77 days per trip. The official number of dockings was used for the
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
23
==PAGE:31==
same period and resulted in an average of 4.29 trips per day.
This led to a fishing activity of 24.76 days per days, corresponding to 2.24 Г— 10вҲ’6 sec/m2/d.
Purse seine
Due to lack of observational data, an estimate of one day per trip was made based on
expert knowledge. The amount of dockings was taken from official data from 2010 to
2019, resulting in an average of 10.50 trips per day.
The fishing activity is therefore 10.50 days per day, i.e. 1.21Г— 10вҲ’5 sec/m2/d.
Pelagic longline regional
For this fishery, no observational data was available to estimate the amount of time at
sea. However, it was possible to calculate the number of sets per day using the average
amount of weight fished in a set and the total amount fished per day taken from official
landings. Official landings from 2011 to 2018 were of 219 kilos per day and each set
captures on average 323 kilos, resulting in 0.68 sets per day.
Assuming a set is typically one day, the fishing activity was calculated to be 0.68 days per
day, equivalent to 6.15Г— 10вҲ’8 sec/m2/d.
Pelagic longline mainland
For this fishery, using the amount of time per trip did not seem like a reasonable proxy,
since these boats come from mainland Portugal and spend a significant portion of their
time traveling rather than fishing. Instead, the official number of sets from 2010 to 2019
was used as a basis for this estimation. With an average of 1.73 sets per day and assumВӯ
ing that each set lasts typically one day, the fishing activity was calculated at 1.73 days
per day or 1.57 Г— 10вҲ’7 sec/m2/d.
Pelagic longline spanish
The fishing activity was calculated using the same reasoning as for the mainland pelagic
longline.
The average number of sets from 2010 to 2019 was of 2.06 per day, resulting in the fishing
activity of 1.86 Г— 10вҲ’7 sec/m2/d.
2.4.3
Fishing discards
The fishing discards represent the proportion of total catch returned to the sea and asВӯ
sumed to be dead. These values had been previously calculated by Christopher Kim
Pham, using data on the reconstruction of the total marine catch (Pham et al., 2013). The
results are presented in Table A.4 in appendix.
2.4.4
Fishing power
The fishing power of a specific mГ©tier is defined as the total catch, including landings and
discards, of each guild, divided by the mГ©tierвҖҷs activity rate.
To make this calculation, official landing data were analyzed for each mГ©tier and species.
Species were grouped into StrathE2E guilds, and the official mГ©tiers were converted to
24 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:32==
their corresponding StrathE2E mГ©tiers. This process provided official landing data cateВӯ
gorized by guild and mГ©tier. These values were then converted into units of nitrogen with
the conversion rates given in Table A.3.
To estimate the total catch, discard proportions calculated previously were applied. The
discard rate is defined as the ratio of discards to total catch (landings + discards). Using
this relationship, the total catch was determined using the formula:
Total catch =
Landings
1 вҲ’Discard rate
In cases where the discard rate was 1 and the official landings were 0, the total catch was
assumed to be 0.
The results are presented in Table A.5 in appendix.
2.4.5
Fishing distribution
The fishing distributions refers to the proportion of fishing done over each seabed habitat.
This is relevant because the processed and discarded parts will be assumed to fall in that
specific seabed habitat which will have consequences in the nutrient recycling network.
The spatial distribution was determined by overlaying the seabed habitat map with the
spatial effort data for different mГ©tiers obtained from observational records. For fishing
fleets lacking observational data, specific fishing areas were identified, and the proporВӯ
tion of seabed habitats within these areas was used as an estimate. This approach was
applied to purse seine, jigging, and pelagic longline fisheries.
For purse seine fishing, it was assumed that activities occur within the inshore zone,
meaning in the shallower waters which surround the islands. Jigging typically takes place
along the slopes at depths of 150 to 200 meters. Regional pelagic longline fishing is conВӯ
ducted approximately 30 nautical miles from the coast, while pelagic longline fishing by
mainland and Spanish fleets occurs around 100 nautical miles offshore.
This overlaying was done by Christopher Kim Pham, using the GIS software.
2.4.6
Fishing processing
Processing represents the proportion of the catch which is eviscerated at sea and thrown
back at sea.
In the Azores, this practice is limited to three species: the shortfin mako (Isurus oxyrinchus),
the blue shark (Prionace glauca), and the swordfish (Xiphias gladius), all of which are
classified as migratory fish in the model. Official statistics from LotaГ§or provided the proВӯ
portions removed at sea, which are 0.31 for shortfin mako, 0.59 for blue shark, and 0.26
for swordfish.
To determine the overall processing rate for each mГ©tier, the proportion of these species
in the total catch of each fleet type was calculated. The resulting processing rates are
presented in Table 2.7.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
25
==PAGE:33==
Table 2.7: Proportion of migratory fish catch eviscerated at sea and thrown back at sea.
MГ©tier
Proportion gutted
Bottom longline
0.005
Drifting deepwater longline
0.001
Handline
0.005
Pelagic longline regional
0.477
Pelagic longline mainland
0.496
Pelagic longline foreign
0.469
2.5
Harvest ratios
The harvest ratio is defined as the proportion of biomass caught in a specific guild relative
to the total biomass of that guild. This parameter is included in the general food web
component ODE as the proportion of biomass removed by fisheries and has the units
dayвҲ’1.
To make this calculation, it is necessary to have data regarding biomass of the different
guilds. This was feasible only for the demersal fish guild for which there was relative
abundance data from the Azorean demersal longline survey (M. Pinho et al., 2020) and
biomass estimates for one of its species, the blakspot seabream (Pagellus bogaraveo).
Due to insufficient data, it was not possible to estimate this parameter for the other fish,
zooplankton and benthic guilds.
For the demersal guild, data from the 2010 Azores demersal longline survey, which meaВӯ
sured the amount of individuals present from each species up to a maximum depth of 1200
m, was used. The biomass estimate of blackspot seabream from 2010 was of 1743.24
tonnes, with a relative abundance of 3.6% recorded in the survey. A crossВӯproduct apВӯ
proach was applied to scale the biomass of the blackspot seabream proportionally to
the other demersal species. This resulted in an overall biomass of 48092.18 tonnes for
the demersal guild. Using official landings data for 2010, the harvest ratio for blackspot
seabream was calculated. With a total catch of 687 tonnes, the harvest ratio was deterВӯ
mined to be 0.39 per year. This ratio was then applied to all fished species identified in the
demersal survey, resulting in an estimated total catch of 5946.28 tonnes for the demersal
guild. The harvest ratio for the demersal guild was therefore estimated at 0.00034 dayвҲ’1.
Since there is no fishing of the cetacean and bird guilds, these harvest ratios consist
in bycatch ratios. As previously stated, these guilds have negligible bycatch rates and
therefore their harvest ratios were set to zero.
2.6
Future scenarios
To explore the potential impacts of climate change and fishing practices on the Azorean
marine ecosystem, six future scenarios were developed, spanning from the present to
the 2060s. These scenarios combine two distinct climate trajectories with three fishing
strategies, in order to evaluate the combined and isolated effects of these drivers.
26 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:34==
Climate Scenarios
The climate scenarios are based on two Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs). SSPs
are a set of climate change scenarios, defined by the IPCC, based on possible future
socioeconomic developments (OвҖҷNeill et al., 2014).
вҖў SSP126 (Conservative Scenario): This scenario assumes a radiative forcing inВӯ
crease of 2.6 W/mВІ by the end of the century, representing a trajectory consistent
with global efforts to mitigate climate change.
вҖў SSP370 (Regional Rivalry Scenario): This scenario assumes a higher radiative
forcing increase of 7.0 W/mВІ, reflecting a fragmented world with increasing economic
competition between countries and limited climate mitigation.
These climate projections were derived using two global climate models, CNRM, develВӯ
oped by the National Centre for Meteorological Research, and GFDL, developed by the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, to incorporate variability and uncertainty in the
physical forcing used to drive the ecosystem model.
Fishing Scenarios
Three fishing strategies were designed to assess the interaction between climate change
and fishing practices.
вҖў No Fishing Scenario: This scenario eliminates all fishing activity, isolating the efВӯ
fects of climate change on the ecosystem. It provides a baseline to understand the
systemвҖҷs response to environmental changes without anthropogenic extraction.
вҖў Baseline Scenario: This scenario assumes that current fishing practices remain
unchanged throughout the projection period. Fisheries is modeled using data from
the 2010s, used for the fitting process, serving as a reference point for comparison
with the other scenarios.
вҖў NarrativeВӯDriven Scenarios: Two narrativeВӯdriven scenarios were designed based
on the Ocean System Pathways (OSPs), an extension of the SSPs into fisheries
management (Maury et al., 2024). In these scenarios the SSPs are aligned with the
socioeconomic mentality of the region, translating in different fisheries management
approaches.
1. Sustainability Scenario OSP1: Guided by principles of sustainability and bioВӯ
diversity conservation, this scenario envisions a shift towards environmentally
conscious fisheries management. In the Azores, this is modeled as the estabВӯ
lishment of additional Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) and the prohibition of
two gear types, pelagic and bottom longlines, which are associated with high
discard rates and significant shark bycatch (Fauconnet et al., 2023).
2. Regional rivalry Scenario OSP3: Reflecting a breakdown in fisheries manВӯ
agement, economic rivalry and a focus on shortВӯterm survival, this scenario
represents a more exploitative approach. In the Azorean context, this is modВӯ
eled as an intensification of the bottom longline fishery, which is currently the
most profitable gear type. Additionally, foreign fleets, such as Spanish and
mainland pelagic longliners, are removed, consolidating the fishery for local
operators but increasing pressure on local stocks.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
27
==PAGE:35==
To incorporate these future scenarios into the ecosystem model, specific adjustments
were made to the model parameters, particularly those controlling fishing activity. Each
scenario was translated into quantitative changes to the вҖқgear multipliersвҖқ, a parameter
that scales the fishing activity of each mГ©tier in the model.
No Fishing Scenario:
For this scenario, all fishing activity was eliminated by setting the gear multipliers for all
mГ©tiers to zero.
NarrativeВӯDriven Scenarios:
In the sustainability scenario, fishing activity for the bottom and pelagic longlines were
eliminated by setting their gear multipliers to zero.
In November 2024, a network of MPAs was established in the Azores as part of the reВӯ
gionвҖҷs commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, aiming to protect
30% of the ocean within the Azorean EEZ. This MPA network was incorporated into the
model for the sustainability scenario. The MPAs are categorized into two types: total proВӯ
tection areas, where all fishing activities are prohibited, and high protection areas, which
allow only certain fishing practices. In the model, these fisheries are handline, jigging and
pole and line.
To evaluate their impact, the MPA map was overlaid with the spatial distribution of each
mГ©tier. The proportion of fishing occurring within the MPAs was subtracted from the total
fishing activity for each mГ©tier by changing the gear multipliers.The mГ©tier distributions
used for this analysis were consistent with those previously defined for seabed habitat
fishing distributions. This approach assumed that fishing activities within the MPAs would
not be redirected to other areas but entirely removed, representing a вҖқbestВӯcase scenarioвҖқ.
The overlay analysis was conducted by Christopher Kim Pham using GIS tools. The
reduction in fishing activity is show in Table 2.8.
Table 2.8: Proportion of estimated fishing activity falling inside the MPA network.
MГ©tier
Proportion inside MPAs
Pole and line
0.02
Handline
0.12
Bottom
0.26
Drifting deepwater longline
0.01
Jigging
0.03
Purse seine
0.01
In the regional rivalry scenario, the increase in the bottom longline fishery was represented
by increasing its gear multiplier by 1.5, representing a 50% rise in fishing activity. The gear
multpliers of the spanish and mainland pelagic longlines were set to zero.
All the analysis was done in the R software, using the StrathE2E package.
28 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:36==
3
Results
3.1
Model overview
The model fitting to the two climate models, CNRM and GFDL, yielded partial ПҮ2 likelihood
values of 0.3196 and 0.3165, respectively.
Figures 3.1 and 3.2 show the correspondence between the model results outputs and the
target data for the CNRM and GFDL models, respectively.
Figure 3.1: Comparison of 2010Вӯ2019 target data from the Azores (black boxВӯplots) with
corresponding values derived from a single run of the CNRM model (red symbols). For
the observations, the box spans 50% of the distribution of observations and the whiskers
99%.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.2: Comparison of 2010Вӯ2019 target data from the Azores (black boxВӯplots) with
corresponding values derived from a single run of the GFDL model (red symbols). For
the observations, the box spans 50% of the distribution of observations and the whiskers
99%. The median is shown by a black tick mark.
The match between target data and model outputs is quite similar for both climate modВӯ
els, with most parameters falling within the 99% range of observational data. Production
rates were generally estimated slightly lower than the target values for most guilds, with
the exception of omnivorous zooplankton. Some dietary intakes and consumption rates,
especially for fish, birds, and cetaceans, were also lower than observed data. Similarly,
P/B ratios were estimated lower for all guilds, except for cetaceans, which was slightly
higher.
The StrathE2E model generates various outputs, including biomass concentrations across
different ecosystem regions, flow matrices, and key ecosystem indicators such as trophic
levels and omnivory indices. In this analysis, biomass trends of different guilds were exВӯ
amined over multiple decades under two climate scenarios and three fishing scenarios.
Based on these results, the impact of fishing pressure on the most exploited guilds was
evaluated, along with the effects of each fishing scenario on the overall ecosystem strucВӯ
ture. Lastly, the relative importance of the migratory and planktivorous fish guilds within
the ecosystem was assessed.
3.2
Impact of climate scenarios on ecosystem dynamics
The model was simulated for five decades from 2010 to 2060 under the two climate sceВӯ
narios, SSP126 and SSP370, and the two climate models, CNRM and GFDL, maintaining
the baseline fishing scenario. Figure 3.3 illustrates the biomass of each guild across the
decades.
30 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.3: Biomass estimates in millimoles of nitrogen per meter square of each guild
for the whole model domain, according to different climate scenarios and climate models.
Upper graph shows the dissolved inorganic nutrients, bacteria, and dead organic material
while the lower graph shows the primary production, zooplankton, benthos, fish and top
predator guilds. Red represents the SSP370 scenarios while blue represents the SSP126
scenario. The solid line is the CNRM climate model and the dotted line is the GFDL model.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
31
==PAGE:39==
Analysis of the model outputs reveals a general decreasing trend in biomass across most
guilds over time, except for the migratory fish guild. The increase in the migratory fish
guild is due to the increase in biomass entering the model domain each decade.
Notably, there is minimal divergence between the SSP126 and SSP370 climate scenarios,
with most guilds exhibiting similar biomass trajectories. In the SSP126 scenario, biomass
experiences a steeper decline in the 2030s, followed by a recovery in the 2040s, unlike
in SSP370, where this pattern is not seen. This seems to be linked to a faster rise in
temperature and a drop in vertical diffusivity during the 2030s in SSP126, which is not
so significant for the SSP370 (Figures B.1 and B.2). The SSP370 scenario also demonВӯ
strates a slight increase in nitrate levels during the 2060s, corresponding to an increase
in macrophyte biomass and overall system biomass.
The most significant variation, however, is observed between the CNRM and GFDL cliВӯ
mate models, with GFDL generally predicting lower biomass values for most guilds. For
certain guilds, such as carnivorous and scavenger benthos, and filterВӯdeposit and susВӯ
pension feeding benthos, this discrepancy exceeds 50% in biomass estimates between
the two models. Conversely, predictions for cetaceans, demersal fish, carnivorous zooВӯ
plankton, and planktivorous fish show greater resemblance between the climate models.
The model results suggest a вҖқbottomВӯupвҖқ control response, where decreases in nitrate
concentrations and phytoplankton biomass propagate through the food chain, leading to
overall biomass reductions.
Excluding dissolved inorganic nutrients, bacteria, and dead organic material, the guild with
the highest initial biomass is omnivorous zooplankton, followed by planktivorous fish and
carnivorous zooplankton. Cetaceans and birds exhibit the lowest biomasses, consistent
with their position as top predators.
The trophic level of the entire ecosystem starts at 3.07 (GFDL) and 3.04 (CNRM) in 2010,
showing a slight decline by 2060 to 3.05 (GFDL) and 3.01 (CNRM), indicating a small
shift in the ecosystemвҖҷs trophic structure over time. The trophic level of the fish guilds is
at 4.16, while that of top predators is 4.89 for both GFDL and CNRM climate models. The
landings trophic level is of 4.03 for CNRM and 4.07 for the GFDL model.
To quantify biomass changes over time, percent differences between the initial decade
(2010) and the subsequent decades (2030s, 2040s, 2050s, and 2060s) were calculated.
Dissolved inorganic nutrients, bacteria, and dead organic material were excluded from
this analysis.
32 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.4: Percent change in biomass in the 2030 decade relative to the 2010 decade
for each guild under different climate scenarios and models. The blue colors represent
climate scenario SSP126 and the red SSP370. The dark colors represent the CNRM
model and the light the GFDL model.
Figure 3.5: Percent change in biomass in the 2040 decade relative to the 2010 decade
for each guild under different climate scenarios and models. The blue colors represent
climate scenario SSP126 and the red SSP370. The dark colors represent the CNRM
model and the light the GFDL model.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.6: Percent change in biomass in the 2050 decade relative to the 2010 decade
for each guild under different climate scenarios and models. The blue colors represent
climate scenario SSP126 and the red SSP370. The dark colors represent the CNRM
model and the light the GFDL model.
Figure 3.7: Percent change in biomass in the 2060 decade relative to the 2010 decade
for each guild under different climate scenarios and models. The blue colors represent
climate scenario SSP126 and the red SSP370. The dark colors represent the CNRM
model and the light the GFDL model.
34 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:42==
Again, most guilds exhibit a declining trend, with the exception of migratory fish, which
show an increase in biomass from the 2050s onwards. For ten out of the fifteen guilds, the
CNRM model estimate bigger declines than the GFDL model. The bird guild experiences
the most significant decline, reaching a complete loss by the 2030s under SSP126 and
by the 2040s under SSP370. Demersal fish and demersal fish larvae also face significant
reductions, with biomass decreasing by approximately 75% in the 2060s under the CNRM
model and around 50% under the GFDL model. The most resilient guilds appear to be
the macrophyte guild, phytoplankton, omnivorous zooplankton and planktivorous fish and
larvae, with decreases around 10Вӯ15%.
The decrease in demersal fish biomass results in a shift in the relative composition of
the fish guilds over time. In the 2010 decade, planktivorous fish comprised 71.46% Вұ
1.00% of the total fish biomass, demersal fish 24.65% Вұ 1.36%, and migratory fish 3.89%
Вұ 0.39% across the entire model domain. By the 2060s, planktivorous fish are projected
to constitute 81.98% Вұ 3.00% of total fish biomass, migratory fish 5.68% Вұ 0.27%, and
demersal fish 12.33% Вұ 3.25%.
3.3
Impact of fisheries scenarios on ecosystem dynamics
Three fishing scenarios were implemented to the model for each climate scenario: a
вҖқbaselineвҖқ scenario, where fisheries remained the same as in the 2010 decade, a вҖқno
fishingвҖқ scenario, where all fisheries were removed, and a scenario adjusted to eah climate
narrative, OSP1 for SSP126 and OSP3 for SSP370. The resulting biomass estimates for
each guild over the decades are presented in Figure 3.8.
For most guilds, the вҖқbaselineвҖқ and вҖқno fishingвҖқ scenarios cannot be seen in the graphs,
as their respective lines overlap with the OSP scenarios in Figure 3.8. In fact, for most
guilds, the biomass estimates remain largely unaffected by changes in fishing pressure
under these scenarios. However, exceptions include the migratory fish guild, which shows
a 62.46% Вұ 0.45% increase in biomass under the вҖқno fishingвҖқ scenario compared to the
baseline, and the demersal fish guild, where biomass increases slightly by 7.33% Вұ 0.92%
in the absence of fishing pressure.
Under SSP126, the OSP1 scenario results in a 16.23% Вұ 0.13% increase in migratory fish
biomass and a smaller increase of 4.68% Вұ 0.68% for demersal fish. However, it does
not seem to produce any significant change for the other guilds. Similarly, under SSP370,
the OSP3 scenario does not produce any significant deviation from the baseline for any
guild.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.8: Biomass estimates in millimoles of nitrogen per meter square of each guild
for the whole model domain, according to different climate scenarios and climate models,
for different fisheries scenarios. The top graph represents the SSP126 scenario and the
bottom graph shows the SSP370 scenario. The solid line is the CNRM climate model and
the dotted line is the GFDL model. The вҖқbaselineвҖқ fishing scenario is represented in green,
the вҖқno fishingвҖқ scenario is represented in yellow and the OSP1 for the SSP126 and the
OSP3 for the SSP370 are represented in purple. In this case, the dissolved inorganic
nutrients, bacteria, and dead organic material guilds were not plotted.
36 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:44==
3.3.1
Effects of fishing pressure on key fished guilds and ecosystem
structure
Given the overall low sensitivity of ecosystem biomass to these fishing scenarios, a more
detailed analysis was conducted for the 2010 decade looking at the effect of fishing presВӯ
sure on the three most heavily exploited guilds: demersal, migratory, and planktivorous
fish. Furthermore, an analysis of the impact of these fishing scenarios on the structural
dynamic of the ecosystem was done.
To examine the effects of fishing pressure on the different guilds, biomass values were
plotted against fishing mortality for an increasing вҖқgear multiplierвҖқ parameter over all mГ©tiers.
Figure 3.9: Planktivorous fish biomass in relation to fishing mortality for the 2010 decade.
Units of biomass are in millimoles of nitrogen per square meter. Each point represents a
different gear multiplier: 0 (no fishing), 0.5, 1 (baseline fishing effort), 1.5, and subsequent
increments of 2. The blue line represents the inshore zone, the red line the offshore zone
and the green one the whole domain.
At the baseline fishing activity, the inshore planktivorous fish guild exhibits a fishing morВӯ
tality of 0.42, indicating that 42% of total mortality is attributable to fishing, considered a
moderate fishing pressure. The inshore biomass appears highly sensitive to increased
fishing pressure, with fishing mortality rising sharply as the gear multiplier increases. At
an eightfold increase in fishing activity, mortality reaches 1, meaning all deaths are due
to fishing. However, the overall biomass decline is moderated, likely due to the model acВӯ
counting for densityВӯdependent movement between inshore and offshore zones, driven
by population density and prey availability.
Although the purse seine fishery targeting planktivorous operates exclusively inshore,
additional fisheriesвҖ”such as bottom and pelagic longlines and handline fisheriesвҖ”also
contribute to planktivorous fish mortality, whether as targeted catch or bycatch. HowВӯ
ever, offshore fishing mortality is significantly lower at 0.0005 under baseline conditions,
suggesting that fishing pressure in this zone has minimal impact. The offshore group is
less sensitive to increasing fishing effort, with only a slight increase in fishing mortality
in response to a higher gear multiplier. The observed decline in offshore biomass may
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
37
==PAGE:45==
therefore be partially driven by movement towards inshore areas, rather than direct fishing
pressure.
Figure 3.10: Demersal fish biomass in relation to fishing mortality for the 2010 decade.
Units of biomass are in millimoles of nitrogen per square meter. Each point represents a
different gear multiplier: 0 (no fishing), 0.5, 1 (baseline fishing effort), 1.5, and subsequent
increments of 2. The blue line represents the inshore zone, the red line the offshore zone
and the green one the whole domain.
The offshore demersal fish guild exhibits a fishing mortality rate of 0.003 at the baseline
fishing activity, a relatively low value given that fisheries such as bottom and drifting deepВӯ
water longlines, as well as handline fisheries, operate in this region. In contrast, inshore
fishing mortality is significantly higher at 0.15 under baseline conditions, still considered a
sustainable/ moderate fishing pressure. Although, most of the fishing effort for the guild is
situated offshore, a considerable percentage of the handline mГ©tier also catches inshore.
The demersal guild, inshore and offshore, seems to be quite sensitive to an increase in
fishing activity, with an eightfold increase in the fishing activity driving the biomass to half of
its nonВӯfished values. Offshore, the observed decline in biomass, however, is followed by
a minor increase in fishing mortality, which may be attributed to a loss in prey availability,
leading to an increase in natural mortality. Inshore, biomass appears to decline at a similar
rate but fishing mortality reaches bigger values than offshore. Fishing pressure appears
to have a bigger weight on the demersal guild inshore than offshore.
38 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.11: Migratory fish biomass in relation to fishing mortality for the 2010 decade.
Units of biomass are in millimoles of nitrogen per square meter. Each point represents a
different gear multiplier: 0 (no fishing), 0.5, 1 (baseline fishing effort), 1.5, and subsequent
increments of 2. The blue line represents the inshore zone, the red line the offshore zone
and the green one the whole domain.
At baseline fishing activity, the migratory fish guild offshore exhibits a rather light fishВӯ
ing pressure with a 0.07 fishing mortality. In contrast, the fishing mortality inshore is of
0.77, appearing to be overexploited. The fishing mГ©tiers targeting migratory fish rarely
fish inshore, making this result somewhat unexpected. However, because of the lower
biomass, the proportion of fish caught in this region might be relatively higher.
The migratory fish guild appears to be highly sensitive to an increase in fishing activity,
exhibiting a rapid decline in biomass and a corresponding rise in fishing mortality in both inВӯ
shore and offshore regions. A 50% increase inshore and a 100% increase offshore would
drop the biomass levels to more than half of their nonВӯfished values. This heightened
sensitivity is primarily due to the mГ©tiers targeting this guild, the pole and line targeting
tunas, the regional pelagic longlines but, more specifically, the Spanish and mainland
Portuguese pelagic longline fisheries, which are the most efficient in terms of landings
per unit effort. As a result, even a small percentage increase in fishing activity leads to a
disproportionately large increase in landings compared to other mГ©tiers. Additionally, the
naturally low biomass of migratory fish further amplifies its vulnerability.
An analysis was conducted to evaluate the effects of different fishing scenarios on the
structural integrity of the ecosystem, again focusing on the three most exploited guilds.
The relationship between landed biomass over the whole domain and the ecosystem
trophic level was examined to assess how varying levels of fishing pressure influence
both fishery productivity and trophic stability within the ecosystem. A curve was generated
representing an identical increase in fishing activity across all mГ©tiers. Initially, at zero
fishing pressure, the curve starts at a high trophic level with no landings, positioned in the
bottomВӯright corner of the graph. As fishing pressure increases, driven by adjustments in
the gear multiplier, the curve moves upward and to the left, indicating rising catches and
a decline in the trophic level. However, once landings surpass the maximum sustainable
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
39
==PAGE:47==
yield, the curve begins to descend, eventually reaching a point where landings drop to
zero at a lower trophic level. In a management perspective, this analysis helps to situate
the different mГ©tier combinations that could optimize the relationship between landings
and structure of the ecosystem.
The results are presented in Figures 3.12, 3.13, and 3.14 for planktivorous, demersal and
migratory fish, respectively.
Figure 3.12: Relationship between landed NPP and ecosystem trophic level for plankВӯ
tivorus fish under different fishing scenarios in the 2010 decade. The вҖқbaselineвҖқ fishing
scenario is represented in green, the вҖқno fishingвҖқ scenario in yellow , OSP1 in light pruple
and OSP3 in dark purple. A reference curve represented in blue, represents a theoretical
increase in fishing pressure across all mГ©tiers.
Figure 3.13: Relationship between landed NPP and ecosystem trophic level for demersal
fish under different fishing scenarios in the 2010 decade. The вҖқbaselineвҖқ fishing scenario
is represented in green, the вҖқno fishingвҖқ scenario in yellow , OSP1 in light pruple and OSP3
in dark purple. A reference curve represented in blue, represents a theoretical increase
in fishing pressure across all mГ©tiers.
40 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.14: Relationship between landed NPP and ecosystem trophic level for migratory
fish under different fishing scenarios in the 2010 decade. The вҖқbaselineвҖқ fishing scenario
is represented in green, the вҖқno fishingвҖқ scenario in yellow , OSP1 in light pruple and OSP3
in dark purple. A reference curve represented in blue, represents a theoretical increase
in fishing pressure across all mГ©tiers.
Ecosystem trophic levels show a slight decrease as fishing pressure increases. This
happens because the landing trophic level is 4.05 Вұ 0.02, so when their numbers decline
due to fishing, the overall trophic level of the ecosystem goes down. However, this decline
is likely to lead to an increase in the omnivorous zooplankton guild, which is not fished and
has a lower trophic level of 2.97. As a result, the overall trophic level of the ecosystem
does not change much from its average value.
As shown in Figure 3.12, planktivorous fish landings remain consistently low across all
fishing scenarios, suggesting that this guild is underexploited when looking at the whole
domain. The biomass trajectories under different fishing scenarios closely resemble those
observed in the вҖқno fishingвҖқ scenario, indicating that fishing pressure has minimal impact
on this guild. Consequently, the ecosystem trophic level remains largely unchanged comВӯ
pared to its state in the absence of fishing activity.
For demersal fish (Figure 3.13), a greater divergence is observed among the fishing sceВӯ
narios. The OSP3 scenario yields the highest landings, followed by the baseline scenario
and OSP1. However, overall landings remain relatively low in terms of total harvested
biomass, suggesting that this guild is not overexploited. Additionally, trophic levels reВӯ
main stable, with minimal variation across fishing scenarios, consistently around 3.03.
For migratory fish, landings are substantially higher in all three fishing scenarios compared
to the вҖқno fishingвҖқ scenario, suggesting a heavy exploitation of this guild. The baseline and
OSP3 scenarios exhibit similar catch levels, whereas OSP1 yields slightly lower landings.
Despite these higher catch values, the ecosystem trophic level remains relatively stable,
showing little deviation from the trophic level observed in the absence of fishing.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
41
==PAGE:49==
3.4
Trophic significance of migratory and planktivorous fish
3.4.1
Migratory fish
Given the high sensitivity of the migratory fish guild to fishing activity, as well as its low
biomass and high power rates of the mГ©tiers applied to it, it is important to assess its
broader ecological role. This guild could also be subject to increasing fishing pressure,
possibly due to rising demand driven by tourism. Additionally, its biomass is regulated
not only by local ecosystem dynamics but also by conditions across the Atlantic Ocean,
given its migratory nature. To explore its ecological importance, a worstВӯcase scenario
was simulated by setting the percentage of migratory fish biomass entering the model to
zero. The percent change in biomass of other functional guilds following this removal is
presented in Figure 3.15.
Figure 3.15: Percent change in biomass of functional guilds following the removal of miВӯ
gratory fish. The blue colors represent climate scenario SSP126 and the red SSP370.
The dark colors represent the CNRM model and the light the GFDL model.
The results indicate a trophic cascade effect, with the removal of migratory fish leading
to an increase in omnivorous and carnivorous zooplankton, as well as planktivorous fish,
which constitute its primary prey. Conversely, a decline is observed in demersal fish,
seabirds and cetaceans, which rely on migratory fish as a food source. Additionally, a
reduction in suspension and deposit filterВӯfeeding benthos is observed, likely due to a
decrease in fishery discards. Pelagic longline fisheries, which primarily target migratory
species, discard nearly 50% of their catch, thereby providing a food source for scavengers.
The reduction in available discards may explain the observed decrease in carnivorous and
scavenger benthos, which, in turn, results in an increase in macrophytes due to lower
grazing pressure.
However, despite these trophic interactions, the overall magnitude of change is relatively
small, with the largest observed impact being a 0.75% decrease in cetacean biomass and
a 3% decrease in the SSP126 scenario using the GFDL model. This suggests that the
migratory fish guild plays a relatively minor role in structuring the ecosystem, likely due to
its low biomass compared to other functional groups.
42 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:50==
3.4.2
Planktivorous fish
For comparison, the ecological importance of planktivorous fish was also assessed. As
the functional guild with the highest biomass and a central component of the food web,
planktivorous fish play a crucial role in energy transfer between lower and higher trophic
levels. This analysis also aimed to analyze the possible consequences of a severe deВӯ
pletion of planktivorous fish. To simulate this scenario, the gear multiplier parameter was
progressively increased for the purse seine fishery, which primarily targets this guild, until
the biomass of planktivorous fish was reduced to zero. The resulting changes in biomass
for other functional groups are presented in Figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16: Percent change in biomass of functional guilds following the removal of miВӯ
gratory fish. The blue colors represent climate scenario SSP126 and the red SSP370.
The dark colors represent the CNRM model and the light the GFDL model.
The removal of planktivorous fish results in a Вұ 90% decrease in seabirds, Вұ 35% in demВӯ
ersal fish biomass and a Вұ 5% in cetaceans, all of which are major predators of planktivВӯ
orous fish. Conversely, carnivorous zooplankton exhibit an 18% increase, as they are no
longer subject to predation from planktivorous fish. Other functional groups experience
only minor fluctuations in biomass.
These findings highlight the critical ecological role of planktivorous fish in sustaining predaВӯ
tor populations and maintaining trophic balance. Unlike migratory fish, which have limВӯ
ited influence on the overall ecosystem structure, planktivorous fish are fundamental to
ecosystem dynamics, underscoring the need for sustainable management strategies for
this guild to prevent overexploitation, which would have cascading effects throughout the
food chain. Additionally, it emphasizes the vulnerability of the seabird guild in particular,
but also of the demersal fish.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
43
==PAGE:51==
4
Discussion
4.1
Model configuration and fitting
The StrathE2E model was successfully implemented for the Azores region, integrating a
variety of data sources. Observational data regarding P/B ratios and dietary intakes were
estimated based on inputs from the EwE model. To constrain the model fitting, biomass
outputs from EwE were used to estimate annual production rates. Migration patterns
were incorporated using data from SEAPODYM model outputs, while spawning seasons
were estimated by averaging available spawning data across multiple species. Fisheries
data regarding landings, discards, activity rates, power rates, spatial distributions and
processing were gathered from Pham et al., 2013 and from official statistics provided by
LotaГ§or.
The model was fitted against two distinct climate models, CNRM and GFDL, with the
resulting partial ПҮ2 values of 0.3196 and 0.3165, respectively, indicative of an acceptable
model fit to the available data.
4.2
Climate influence on ecosystem dynamics
Analysis of the modelsвҖҷ response to two climate scenarios extending to the 2060s indiВӯ
cates a general declining trend in biomass across multiple trophic levels. This decline
appears to be primarily driven by a reduction in nutrient availability, which subsequently
impacts phytoplankton biomass and cascades through the food web. This suggests a
вҖқbottomВӯupвҖқ controlled ecosystem response. It is plausible that the spatial configuration
of upper ocean temperatures renders the Azorean trophodynamics more strongly reguВӯ
lated by bottomВӯup than topВӯdown drivers. Barcelos e Ramos et al., 2017 demonstrated
that nutrient enrichment experiments in the Azores resulted in significant increases in
phytoplankton biomass, reinforcing the idea that this region is typically nutrientВӯlimited.
Changes in nutrient availability, therefore, are likely to exert a strong influence on primary
production. The Azores, positioned at the interface between colder, more productive waВӯ
ters to the North and warmer, oligotrophic waters to the South, may experience increased
вҖқoligotrophicationвҖқ of its marine environment in the coming decades with increasing waВӯ
ter temperatures. Studies indicate a trend towards smaller phytoplankton species and a
decrease in larger phytoplankton (ICES, 2022), characteristics more commonly associВӯ
ated with oligotrophic waters. This shift in community composition could potentially affect
overall primary production, as larger phytoplankton typically contribute more to total NPP.
Notably, the different climate scenarios, SSP126 and SSP370 which reflect different radiaВӯ
tive forcings over the course of the century, did not significantly alter the general biomass
decline trend.
Model projections suggest that seabirds may represent the least resilient guild, with simВӯ
ulations predicting a complete loss by the 2030s. Given that such a sharp decline seems
quite unlikely, further investigation into the factors influencing this prediction is needed.
While this specific outcome might be an overestimation, a study done using species disВӯ
tribution models for coastal marine species found that over 12% of the modeled units
could lose suitable climate by the end of the century (25% under a high carbon emissions
scenario), a loss most significant for seabirds (GonzГЎlezпҝҝTrujillo et al., 2024).
44 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:52==
Demersal fish also exhibit a significant decrease throughout the simulation period. ManВӯ
agement strategies focusing on these guilds should be carefully considered, although
model predictions indicate that current levels of demersal fishing pressure are relatively
low.
Guilds which appeared most resilient, included macrophytes, phytoplankton, omnivorous
zooplankton and planktivorous fish, with decreases of around 10Вӯ15% in the 2060 decade
compared to the 2010s.
4.3
Fisheries influence on ecosystem dynamics
For most guilds, current fishing practices do not appear substantially different from a вҖқno
fishingвҖқ scenario. This may be related to the fact that exploitation rates in the Azores
seem to be quite low for most fishing methods. The local fishing practices employed in
the Azores are primarily characterized by smallВӯscale operations using hookВӯandВӯline gear
(Carvalho et al., 2011). These methods are often highly selective and generally cause less
damage to the seafloor and marine habitats compared to more disruptive practices, such
as bottom trawling, potentially minimizing ecosystemВӯwide effects (Pham et al., 2013).
However, the migratory fish guild, targeted by more industrialized fleets, presents a noВӯ
table exception. The model predicted that a 50% (inshore) to 100% (offshore) increase in
the current fishing activity targeting this guild would reduce the biomass to nearly half of
its unfished level. This underscores the importance of implementing careful management
strategies for these fisheries.
The SSPВӯbased scenarios showed little difference from the вҖқno fishingвҖқ scenario. In OSP1,
the effort reduction from MPA implementation was minimal, leading to no substantial imВӯ
pact on the ecosystem. Additionally, the removal of certain mГ©tiers had little effect, as their
contribution to overall biomass changes was already estimated small. The only exception
was for migratory fish, where the elimination of pelagic longline resulted in a noticeable
impact. In the regional rivalry scenario, the increase in local fishing effort was balanced
out by the reduction of foreign fleets, ultimately causing no significant deviation from the
baseline scenario.
It is crucial to acknowledge that these model outputs should not be interpreted as evidence
that fishing practices in the Azores are inherently sustainable. It is also, important to
stress that the model looks at guilds rather than specific stocks. Even if the guild appears
to have a low exploitation, it doesnвҖҷt mean that all stocks are under exploited. In fact,
MedeirosВӯLeal et al., 2023 found that, although 45% of demersal fish stocks were fished
at a sustainable level, 22% were overexploited.
Analyzing the impact of fishing pressure on the most heavily exploited guilds revealed
that they are actually quite sensitive to increased fishing activity, with the offshore plankВӯ
tivorous guild being the only exception, as it is not directly targeted. This suggests that a
potential industrialization of the fishing fleet could lead to significant changes in biomass
levels and trophic dynamics, potentially altering the balance of the ecosystem.
4.4
Management implications and future research
Climate appears to be the dominant factor governing biomass changes across the simuВӯ
lated decades. This conclusion aligns with a study conducted by Brito et al., 2024, who
employed the EwE model to investigate trophodynamics and determined that ecosystem
structure was predominantly explained by environmental conditions, specifically primary
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
45
==PAGE:53==
production.
These results highlights the importance of considering future climateВӯinduced changes
when developing management plans, as failure to do so may compromise the achieveВӯ
ment of biodiversity and sustainability targets.
The findings presented here represent only an initial analysis of the model outputs. AddiВӯ
tional research and analysis could provide further insights relevant to management deciВӯ
sions. For instance, analyzing the relationship between landed biomass and trophic level
could help identify fishing configurations that optimize landings while minimizing impacts
on ecosystem structure. Sensitivity analyses could also be used to pinpoint the model
parameters with the greatest influence on the simulated annealing optimization process
and to determine which parameters are most sensitive for particular guilds or processes
within the model. Additionally, taking a closer look at the effects of each mГ©tier would
help improve understanding of their individual influence on the ecosystem. Furthermore,
the effects of areaВӯbased management strategies, such as marine protected areas, could
be evaluated.
4.5
Model limitations
The construction of the model highlighted the lack of valuable data for certain components
of the ecosystem. Particularly significant was the scarcity of reliable production rate estiВӯ
mates for the various guilds. To address this gap, estimates were derived from biomass
outputs of the EwE model of the Azores. However, this data was either estimated by the
model or empirically by the authors (GuГ©nette and Morato, 2001). Additionally, many inВӯ
put parameters, including diet composition and P/B and Q/B ratios, were often estimated
based on data from other regions. The absence of comprehensive data on concentration
ratios between inshore and offshore areas for various guilds, stemming from the lack of
overall biomass data, also presented a challenge. Nutrient concentration data, especially
for ammonia and inorganic nitrogen, and data on sediment nutrients were also lacking.
Other data gaps include information on larvae (particularly larval consumption by fish),
macrophytes, and specific biological events, such as recruitment seasons. Moreover,
the assessment of spawning seasons for entire guilds was based on data from a limited
number of species within each guild.
Regarding the migratory fish guild, biomass estimates for tunas and pelagic sharks and
rays entering the model were unavailable. To overcome this, SEAPODYM model outputs
were used. However, these outputs only accounted for two tuna species (skipjack and
albacore) and did not include bigeye tuna, an important species in the Azores. Pelagic
sharks and rays were also not considered in these estimates. This could be underestimatВӯ
ing the biomass of this guild, therefore overestimating its vulnerability and its insignificance
in trophic dynamics.
The modelвҖҷs design also presents some mismatches with the characteristics of the Azorean
ecosystem. For example, the cetacean guild in the model is treated as resident, whereas
a substantial proportion of cetaceans in the Azores are migratory (Afonso et al., 2020),
which would influence ecosystem dynamics differently. A similar issue exists for birds.
Additionally, the model does not account for reptiles, specifically marine turtles. The miВӯ
gratory guild in the model was conceptualized for species like mackerel, placing this guild
lower in the food chain than the trophic position of adult tunas in the Azores, which have
a trophic level of approximately 4 (SarГ  and SarГ , 2007).
Finally, using ecosystem models to project their state decades into the future poses subВӯ
46 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:54==
stantial challenges. As argued by Planque, 2016, the inherent uncertainties and comВӯ
plexities of ecological systems, including chaos and ecological surprises, may limit the
reliability of longВӯterm projections. Additionally, significant differences in the driving data
from the two climate models reinforce the uncertainties inherent in climate projections and
their subsequent impact on model outputs.
Despite these limitations, this model represents an important step towards addressing
ecosystemВӯbased management questions.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
47
==PAGE:55==
5
Conclusion
As part of the broader Mission Atlantic project, which aims to assess the current and future
state of Atlantic marine ecosystems, this study focused on configuring and applying the
StrathE2E model to the Azores region. The model is composed of 26 functional guilds
from nutrients to top predators, linking an ecological model with a fishing fleet model. The
primary goal was to evaluate the effects of climate change and fisheries on ecosystem
dynamics by developing an endВӯtoВӯend model capable of simulating trophic interactions
and external pressures over time.
To configure the model observational data was gathered, which included nutrient conВӯ
centrations, annual productions rates, P/B ratios, dietary intakes. Additionally, biological
events, such as spawning periods and migration seasons, were analyzed, and harvest
ratios for demersal fish were estimated. Fisheries data were also gathered, covering landВӯ
ings, fishing activity rates, power rates, discard rates, spatial distribution, and processing
rates.
The model was then fitted to two climate models, CNRM and GFDL, achieving partial chiВӯ
squared values of 0.3196 and 0.3165, respectively, indicating an acceptable fit to available
data. Once calibrated, the model was used to simulate ecosystem changes under differВӯ
ent climate and fisheries scenarios. The study explored two climate scenarios based
on the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways: the SSP126, representing a low emissions,
sustainable management trajectory, and SSP370 assuming a high emissions, increased
environmental stress path. Additionally, three fisheries scenarios were tested: a baseline
scenario reflecting current fishing practices, a noВӯfishing scenario to isolate climate efВӯ
fects, and narrativeВӯdriven scenarios aligned with the respective SSPs. The sustainability
scenario, OSP1, included MPA expansion and gear restrictions, while the regional rivalry
scenario, OSP3, intensified bottom longline and removed foreign fleets, increasing local
fishing pressure.
The results suggest that climate change is the dominant driver of ecosystem change, leadВӯ
ing to declines in biomass across multiple trophic levels due to reduced nutrient availability
and lower primary production. These impacts propagate through the food web, reinforcing
a bottomВӯup controlled system. Among trophic groups, seabirds and demersal fish appear
to be particularly vulnerable. A closer look at the three most heavily fished guilds, demВӯ
ersal, migratory, and planktivorous fish, showed that all these guilds were quite sensitive
to an increase fishing activity, except for the planktivorous fish guild offshore which is not
targeted. However, despite these localized effects, the overall structure of the ecosystem
remained fairly stable across the different fishing scenarios. Additionally, the ecological
importance of migratory and planktivorous fish within the ecosystem was analyzed. While
migratory fish appeared to have little impact on overall ecosystem dynamics, planktivoВӯ
rous fish played a key role, highlighting their significance in maintaining trophic balance
and facilitating energy flow through the food web.
Several caveats must be considered when interpreting these results. The modelвҖҷs repВӯ
resentation of complex ecological processes necessarily involves simplifications and asВӯ
sumptions. Data limitations, particularly regarding production rates and migratory patВӯ
terns, introduce uncertainties into the modelвҖҷs predictions. The model could also benefit
from further refinement through the incorporation of more detailed data on trophic interВӯ
actions, nutrient dynamics, and the spatial distribution of key species. Furthermore, adВӯ
48 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:56==
ditional simulations with a broader range of climate and fishing scenarios would provide
a more comprehensive assessment of potential ecosystem responses.
In spite of its limitations, this study provides a valuable tool for exploring the potential
consequences of different management actions and for identifying key areas for future
research and monitoring. The application of an endВӯtoВӯend ecosystem model to this region
offers a holistic perspective that is essential for effective ecosystemВӯbased management.
The findings reinforce the need for integrating climate change considerations into fisheries
management strategies. Future research should focus on addressing data gaps, refining
model parameters, and evaluating the effectiveness of different management options.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
49
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
A., C., E., I., C., A., & J., C. (2002). Age, growth, distribution and ecological aspects of
Conger conger leptocephali collected in the Azores, based on otolith analysis of
premetamorphic specimens. Marine Biology, 141(6), 1141вҖ“1151. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00227-002-0908-4
Abecasis, R. C., Afonso, P., ColaГ§o, A., Longnecker, N., Clifton, J., Schmidt, L., & Santos,
R. S. (2015). Marine Conservation in the Azores: Evaluating Marine Protected
Area Development in a Remote Island Context. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2015.00104
Afonso, P., Fontes, J., Giacomello, E., MagalhГЈes, M. C., Martins, H. R., Morato, T., Neves,
V., Prieto, R., Santos, R. S., Silva, M. A., & Vandeperre, F. (2020). The Azores: A
MidВӯAtlantic Hotspot for Marine Megafauna Research and Conservation. Frontiers
in Marine Science, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2019.00826
Amorim, P., Figueiredo, M., Machete, M., Morato, T., Martins, A., & SerrГЈo Santos, R.
(2009). Spatial variability of seabird distribution associated with environmental facВӯ
tors: a case study of marine Important Bird Areas in the Azores. ICES Journal of
Marine Science, 66(1), 29вҖ“40. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsn175
Amorim, P., PerГЎn, A. D., Pham, C. K., Juliano, M., Cardigos, F., Tempera, F., & Morato,
T. (2017). Overview of the Ocean Climatology and Its Variability in the Azores ReВӯ
gion of the North Atlantic Including Environmental Characteristics at the Seabed.
Frontiers in Marine Science, 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00056
Barcelos, L., Vandeperre, F., Parra, H., & Barreiros, J. (2023). Sea turtle (Reptilia, TesВӯ
tudines) diversity and occurrence in the Azores Archipelago (NE Atlantic). BiodiВӯ
versity Data Journal, 11. https://doi.org/10.3897/BDJ.11.e98589
Barcelos e Ramos, J., Schulz, K. G., Voss, M., Narciso, ГҒ., MГјller, M. N., Reis, F. V.,
CachГЈo, M., & Azevedo, E. B. (2017). NutrientВӯspecific responses of a phytoВӯ
plankton community: a case study of the North Atlantic Gyre, Azores. Journal of
Plankton Research, 39(4), 744вҖ“761. https://doi.org/10.1093/plankt/fbx025
BragaВӯHenriques, A., Porteiro, F. M., Ribeiro, P. A., de Matos, V., Sampaio, OcaГұa, O.,
& Santos, R. S. (2013). Diversity, distribution and spatial structure of the coldВӯ
water coral fauna of the Azores (NE Atlantic). Biogeosciences, 10(6), 4009вҖ“4036.
https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-10-4009-2013
Brito, J., Soszynski, A., Heymans, J. J., Libralato, S., Giacomello, E., Fauconnet, L.,
Menezes, G. M., & Morato, T. (2024). Drivers of trophodynamics of the openВӯ
ocean and deepВӯsea environments of the Azores, NE Atlantic. Progress in OceanogВӯ
raphy, 229, 103357. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pocean.2024.103357
Busecke, J., Gordon, A. L., Li, Z., Bingham, F. M., & Font, J. (2014). Subtropical surface
layer salinity budget and the role of mesoscale turbulence. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Oceans, 119(7), 4124вҖ“4140. https://doi.org/10.1002/2013JC009715
Caldeira, R. M. A., & Reis, J. C. (2017). The Azores Confluence Zone. Frontiers in Marine
Science, 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00037
CarreiroВӯSilva, M., Andrews, A., BragaВӯHenriques, A., de Matos, V., Porteiro, F., & Santos,
R. (2013). Variability in growth rates of longВӯlived black coral Leiopathes sp. from
the Azores. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 473, 189вҖ“199. https://doi.org/10.
3354/meps10052
CarreiroВӯSilva, M., Martins, I., Riou, V., Raimundo, J., Caetano, M., Bettencourt, R., Rakka,
M., Cerqueira, T., Godinho, A., Morato, T., & ColaГ§o, A. (2022). Mechanical and
50 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:58==
toxicological effects of deepВӯsea mining sediment plumes on a habitatВӯforming
coldВӯwater octocoral. Frontiers in Marine Science, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmars.2022.915650
Carvalho, N., EdwardsВӯJones, G., & Isidro, E. (2011). Defining scale in fisheries: Small
versus largeВӯscale fishing operations in the Azores. Fisheries Research, 109(2Вӯ
3), 360вҖ“369. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2011.03.006
CMEMS. (2024a). Global Ocean Low and Mid Trophic Levels Biomass Content Hindcast.
E.U. Copernicus Marine Service Information (CMEMS). Marine Data Store (MDS).
CMEMS. (2024b). Global Ocean OSTIA Sea Surface Temperature and Sea Ice Analysis.
E.U. Copernicus Marine Service Information (CMEMS). Marine Data Store (MDS).
CMEMS. (2024c). Global Ocean Physics Reanalysis. E.U. Copernicus Marine Service
Information (CMEMS). Marine Data Store (MDS).
CodinaВӯGarcГӯa, M., MilitГЈo, T., Moreno, J., & GonzГЎlezВӯSolГӯs, J. (2013). Plastic debris in
Mediterranean seabirds. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 77(1Вӯ2), 220вҖ“226. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2013.10.002
Commission, E., European Climate, I., Agency, E. E., Ruskule, A., OulГЁs, L., Zamparutti,
T., Dworak, T., Lieberknecht, L., Strosser, P., Gea, G., Veidemane, K., & Piet, G.
(2021). Guidelines for implementing an ecosystemВӯbased approach in maritime
spatial planning вҖ“ Including a method for the evaluation, monitoring and review of
EBA in MSP. Publications Office. https://doi.org/doi/10.2926/84261
Cruz, M. J., Machete, M., Menezes, G., Rogan, E., & Silva, M. A. (2018). Estimating
common dolphin bycatch in the poleВӯandВӯline tuna fishery in the Azores. PeerJ, 6,
e4285. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.4285
DiГЎrio da RepГәblica. (2024). Decreto Legislativo Regional n.Вә 14/2024/A, de 24 de dezemВӯ
bro.
Dionisio, M., Rodrigues, A., & Costa, A. (2007). Reproductive biology of Megabalanus
azoricus (Pilsbry), the Azorean Barnacle. Invertebrate Reproduction & DevelopВӯ
ment, 50(3), 155вҖ“162. https://doi.org/10.1080/07924259.2007.9652240
Faria, J., Vale, M., Ribeiro, P., Hawkins, S. J., & Martins, G. M. (2024). The ecological value
of fully enforced, noпҝҝentry, marine protected areas: A case study of harvested
limpets. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 34(2). https:
//doi.org/10.1002/aqc.4086
Fauconnet, L., Pham, C., Canha, A., Afonso, P., Diogo, H., Machete, M., Silva, H., VanВӯ
deperre, F., & Morato, T. (2019). An overview of fisheries discards in the Azores.
Fisheries Research, 209, 230вҖ“241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2018.10.001
Fauconnet, L., Catarino, D., Das, D., Giacomello, E., GonzalezВӯIrusta, J. M., Afonso, P.,
& Morato, T. (2023). Challenges in avoiding deepВӯwater shark bycatch in Azorean
hookВӯandВӯline fisheries. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 80(3), 605вҖ“619. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsac178
Froese, R., & Editors., D. P. (2024). FishBase. World Wide Web electronic publication.
www.fishbase.org, version (06/2024).
Fulton, E. A. (2010). Approaches to endВӯtoВӯend ecosystem models. Journal of Marine
Systems, 81(1Вӯ2), 171вҖ“183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmarsys.2009.12.012
Garcia, A., Pereira, J. g., Canha, ГӮ., Reis, D., & Diogo, H. (2015). Life history paramВӯ
eters of blue jack mackerel <i>Trachurus picturatus</i> (Teleostei: Carangidae)
from northВӯeast Atlantic. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United
Kingdom, 95(2), 401вҖ“410. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025315414001751
Global Ocean Low and Mid Trophic Levels Biomass Content Hindcast. (Accessed on 23Вӯ
010Вӯ2024)вҖқ. (n.d.). E.U. Copernicus Marine Service Information (CMEMS). Marine
Data Store (MDS).
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
51
==PAGE:59==
GonzГЎlez, J., FernГЎndez, E., & Figueiras, F. (2022). Assessing the effect of oil spills on the
dynamics of the microbial plankton community using a NPZD model. Estuarine,
Coastal and Shelf Science, 265, 107734. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.2021.
107734
GonzГЎlezпҝҝTrujillo, J. D., Naimi, B., Assis, J., & AraГәjo, M. B. (2024). Reshuffling of Azorean
Coastal Marine Biodiversity Amid Climate Change. Journal of Biogeography, 51(12),
2546вҖ“2555. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbi.15008
GuГ©nette, S., & Morato, T. (2001). вҖқThe Azores Archipelago, 1997вҖқ in Fisheries Impacts on
North Atlantic Ecosystems: Models and Analyses, eds S. GuГ©nette, V.Christensen,
and D. Pauly. Vancouver, BC: Fisheries Centre Research Reports,University of
British Columbia, 241вҖ“270.
Halpern, B. S., Frazier, M., Afflerbach, J., Lowndes, J. S., Micheli, F., OвҖҷHara, C., ScarВӯ
borough, C., & Selkoe, K. A. (2019). Recent pace of change in human impact on
the worldвҖҷs ocean. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 11609. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
019-47201-9
Halpern, B. S., Frazier, M., Potapenko, J., Casey, K. S., Koenig, K., Longo, C., Lowndes,
J. S., Rockwood, R. C., Selig, E. R., Selkoe, K. A., & Walbridge, S. (2015). Spatial
and temporal changes in cumulative human impacts on the worldвҖҷs ocean. Nature
Communications, 6(1), 7615. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms8615
Heath, M., Wilson, R., & Speirs, D. (2015). Modelling the WholeВӯEcosystem Impacts of
Trawling. Fisheries Innovation Scotland, St Andrews.
Heath, M. R., Benkort, D., Brierley, A. S., Daewel, U., Laverick, J. H., Proud, R., & Speirs,
D. C. (2022a). Ecosystem approach to harvesting in the Arctic: Walking the tightrope
between exploitation and conservation in the Barents Sea. Ambio, 51(2), 456вҖ“470.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-021-01616-9
Heath, M. R., Benkort, D., Brierley, A. S., Daewel, U., Laverick, J. H., Proud, R., & Speirs,
D. C. (2022b). Ecosystem approach to harvesting in the Arctic: Walking the tightrope
between exploitation and conservation in the Barents Sea. Ambio, 51(2), 456вҖ“470.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-021-01616-9
Heath, M. R., & Cook, R. M. (2020). Risks to North Sea Fish Stocks and Wildlife if PostВӯ
Brexit Fishery Negotiations Fail to Reach Agreement on Quotas and Access to
UK Waters : Extended Technical Report. (tech. rep.). University of Strathclyde.
Glasgow.
Heath, M., & Speirs, D. (2023). StrathE2E2 version 4.0.1: Model parameter optimization,
sensitivity analysis and Monte Carlo computation of credible intervals of outputs.
(tech. rep.). Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow, UK.
Heymans, S. J. J., Skogen, M., Schrum, C., & Solidoro, C. (2019). Enhancing EuropeвҖҷs
capability in endВӯtoВӯend marine ecosystem modelling for societal benefit. https:
//doi.org/10.31230/osf.io/jhqvu
ICES. (2022). Azores ecoregion вҖ“ Ecosystem overview. Report of the ICES Advisory
Committee, 2022. ICES Advice 2022 Section 3.1.
Long, R. D., Charles, A., & Stephenson, R. L. (2015). Key principles of marine ecosystemВӯ
based management. Marine Policy, 57, 53вҖ“60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.
2015.01.013
Maury, O., Tittensor, D., Eddy, T., Allison, E., Bari, T., Barrier, N., Campling, L., Cheung,
W., Frieler, K., Fulton, B., Guillotreau, P., Heneghan, R., Lam, V., LeclГЁre, D.,
Lengaigne, M., LotzeВӯCampen, H., Novaglio, C., OrtegaВӯCisneros, K., Schewe,
J., вҖҰ Blanchard, J. L. (2024). The Ocean System Pathways (OSPs): a new sceВӯ
52 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:60==
nario and simulation framework to investigate the future of the world fisheries.
https://doi.org/10.22541/essoar.171587166.60970779/v1
MedeirosВӯLeal, W., Santos, R., Peixoto, U. I., CasalВӯRibeiro, M., NovoaВӯPabon, A., Sigler,
M. F., & Pinho, M. (2023). Performance of lengthВӯbased assessment in predictВӯ
ing smallВӯscale multispecies fishery sustainability. Reviews in Fish Biology and
Fisheries, 33(3), 819вҖ“852. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11160-023-09764-9
MendonГ§a, A., Estacio, S., Krug, H., Menezes, G. M., Branco, J., & Pinho, M. R. (1998).
Reproduction Aspects Of Some Demersal Fishes Captured In Azores Archipelago.
1998 ICES Annual Science Conference, Cascais, Portugal.
MendonГ§a, A., Isidro, E., Menezes, G., Rui Pinho, M., Melo, O., & EstГЎcio, S. (2006).
New contribution to the reproductive features of bluemouth &ltНҫi&gtНҫHelicolenus
dactylopterus dactylopterus&ltНҫ/i&gtНҫ from northeast Atlantic (Azores Archipelago).
Scientia Marina, 70(4), 679вҖ“688. https://doi.org/10.3989/scimar.2006.70n4679
Menezes, G., Sigler, M., Silva, H., & Pinho, M. (2006). Structure and zonation of demВӯ
ersal fish assemblages off the Azores Archipelago (midВӯAtlantic). Marine Ecology
Progress Series, 324, 241вҖ“260. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps324241
Morato, T., Bulman, C., & Pitcher, T. J. (2009). Modelled effects of primary and secondary
production enhancement by seamounts on local fish stocks. Deep Sea Research
Part II: Topical Studies in Oceanography, 56(25), 2713вҖ“2719. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.dsr2.2008.12.029
Morato, T., Juliano, M., Pham, C. K., CarreiroВӯSilva, M., Martins, I., & ColaГ§o, A. (2022).
Modelling the Dispersion of Seafloor Massive Sulphide Mining Plumes in the Mid
Atlantic Ridge Around the Azores. Frontiers in Marine Science, 9. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmars.2022.910940
Morato, T., Lemey, E., Menezes, G., Pham, C. K., Brito, J., Soszynski, A., Pitcher, T. J.,
& Heymans, J. J. (2016). FoodВӯWeb and Ecosystem Structure of the OpenВӯOcean
and DeepВӯSea Environments of the Azores, NE Atlantic. Frontiers in Marine SciВӯ
ence, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2016.00245
Morris, D. J., Speirs, D. C., Cameron, A. I., & Heath, M. R. (2014). Global sensitivity analВӯ
ysis of an endВӯtoВӯend marine ecosystem model of the North Sea: Factors affectВӯ
ing the biomass of fish and benthos. Ecological Modelling, 273, 251вҖ“263. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2013.11.019
OвҖҷNeill, B. C., Kriegler, E., Riahi, K., Ebi, K. L., Hallegatte, S., Carter, T. R., Mathur, R., &
van Vuuren, D. P. (2014). A new scenario framework for climate change research:
the concept of shared socioeconomic pathways. Climatic Change, 122(3), 387вҖ“
400. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-0905-2
OSPAR. (2023). Quality Status Report (tech. rep.). Ospar Comission. London.
Peran, A. D., Pham, C. K., Amorim, P., Cardigos, F., Tempera, F., & Morato, T. (2016).
Seafloor Characteristics in the Azores Region (North Atlantic). Frontiers in Marine
Science, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2016.00204
Pershing, A. J., Mills, K. E., Record, N. R., Stamieszkin, K., Wurtzell, K. V., Byron, C. J.,
Fitzpatrick, D., Golet, W. J., & Koob, E. (2015). Evaluating trophic cascades as
drivers of regime shifts in different ocean ecosystems. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 370(1659), 20130265. https://doi.
org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0265
Pham, C. K., Canha, A., Diogo, H., Pereira, J. G., Prieto, R., & Morato, T. (2013). Total
marine fishery catch for the Azores (1950вҖ“2010). ICES Journal of Marine Science,
70(3), 564вҖ“577. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fst024
Pham, C. K., RodrГӯguez, Y., Dauphin, A., CarriГ§o, R., Frias, J. P., Vandeperre, F., Otero,
V., Santos, M. R., Martins, H. R., Bolten, A. B., & Bjorndal, K. A. (2017). Plastic
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
53
==PAGE:61==
ingestion in oceanicВӯstage loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta) off the North
Atlantic subtropical gyre. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 121(1Вӯ2), 222вҖ“229. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.06.008
Pinho, M. (2001). Biology and abundance of Cancer bellianus (Decapoda, Brachyura)
around the Azores. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 58(4), 896вҖ“903. https://doi.
org/10.1006/jmsc.2001.1079
Pinho, M., MedeirosВӯLeal, W., Sigler, M., Santos, R., NovoaВӯPabon, A., Menezes, G., &
Silva, H. (2020). Azorean demersal longline survey abundance estimates: ProВӯ
cedures and variability. Regional Studies in Marine Science, 39, 101443. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rsma.2020.101443
Pinho, M. R., GonГ§alves, J. M., Martins, H. R., & Menezes, G. M. (2001). Some aspects of
the biology of the deepВӯwater crab, Chaceon affinis (MilneВӯEdwards and Bouvier,
1894) off the Azores. Fisheries Research, 51(2Вӯ3), 283вҖ“295. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0165-7836(01)00252-1
Planque, B. (2016). Projecting the future state of marine ecosystems, вҖңla grande illusionвҖқ?
ICES Journal of Marine Science: Journal du Conseil, 73(2), 204вҖ“208. https://doi.
org/10.1093/icesjms/fsv155
RamГӯrez, I., Mitchell, D., Vulcano, A., Rouxel, Y., Marchowski, D., Almeida, A., Arcos,
J. M., Cortes, V., Lange, G., MorkЕ«nas, J., Oliveira, N., & Paiva, V. H. (2024).
Seabird bycatch in European waters. Animal Conservation, 27(6), 737вҖ“752. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/acv.12948
RodriguezВӯPerez, A., Tsikliras, A. C., Gal, G., Steenbeek, J., FalkВӯAndersson, J., & HeyВӯ
mans, J. J. (2023). Using ecosystem models to inform ecosystemВӯbased fisheries
management in Europe: a review of the policy landscape and related stakeholder
needs. Frontiers in Marine Science, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2023.
1196329
Rost Martins, H. (1985). Biological Studies of the Exploited Stock of the Mediterranean
Locust Lobster Scyllarides Latus (Latreille, 1803) (Decapoda: Scyllaridae) in the
Azores. Journal of Crustacean Biology, 5(2), 294вҖ“305. https://doi.org/10.2307/
1547877
Santos, R., MedeirosВӯLeal, W., & Pinho, M. (2020). Synopsis of biological, ecological and
fisheriesВӯrelated information on priority marine species in the Azores region. ArВӯ
quipelago Вӯ Life and Marine Sciences.
SarГ , G., & SarГ , R. (2007). Feeding habits and trophic levels of bluefin tuna Thunnus
thynnus of different size classes in the Mediterranean Sea. Journal of Applied
Ichthyology, 23(2), 122вҖ“127. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0426.2006.00829.x
Short, K., Graham, A., & Grieve, C. (2008). EcosystemВӯbased management of marine capВӯ
ture fisheries: not a theoretical concept but useful operational reality! The ecosysВӯ
tem approach to fisheries (pp. 76вҖ“85). CABI. https://doi.org/10.1079/9781845934149.
0076
Silva, M. A., Machete, M., Reis, D., Santos, M., Prieto, R., DГўmaso, C., Pereira, J. G.,
& Santos, R. S. (2011). A review of interactions between cetaceans and fisheries
in the Azores. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 21(1),
17вҖ“27. https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.1158
Torres, P., Milla i Figueras, D., Diogo, H., & Afonso, P. (2022). Risk assessment of coastal
fisheries in the Azores (northВӯeastern Atlantic). Fisheries Research, 246, 106156.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2021.106156
Wolanski, E., & Spagnol, S. (2000). Sticky Waters in the Great Barrier Reef. Estuarine,
Coastal and Shelf Science, 50(1), 27вҖ“32. https://doi.org/10.1006/ecss.1999.0528
54 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:62==
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
55
==PAGE:63==
A
Methods
A.1
Model overview
Table A.1: StrathE2E guilds.
Guild
Description
Inorganic dissolved
nutrients
2 Nitrate
In both water column and sediment poreВӯ
water.
2 Ammonia
In both water column and sediment poreВӯ
water.
Dead organic
material and bacteria
Suspended
detritus
and bacteria
Organic particles suspended in the water
column.
Labile sediment detriВӯ
tus and bacteria
Organic matter that decomposes relaВӯ
tively quickly in the sediment.
Refractory
sediment
detritus
Organic matter that decomposes more
slowly in the sediment.
Macrophyte debris
Decomposed material from macrophytes.
Corpses
Dead remains of organisms.
Fishery discards
Unwanted catch returned to the sea.
Primary producers
Phytoplankton
Growth driven by light and nutrient availВӯ
ability.
Macrophytes
Large algae that dominate rocky inshore
habitats and utilize nitrate and ammonia.
Zooplankton
Omnivorous
zooВӯ
plankton
Consume
phytoplankton,
suspended
bacteria, and detritus.
Carnivorous
zooВӯ
plankton
Feed on other zooplankton (omnivorous
and carnivorous).
Larvae
Includes larvae from planktivorous fish,
demersal fish, and benthic invertebrates.
Benthos
Suspension/Deposit
Feeding Benthos
Filter suspended particles or ingest sediВӯ
ment detritus.
Carnivorous/Scavenger
Feeding Benthos
Predators and scavengers feeding on
benthic species and organic material.
Fish
Planktivorous fish
Consume zooplankton, including larvae
from other guilds.
Demersal fish
BottomВӯdwelling species that feed on benВӯ
thic organisms.
Migratory fish
Species that move in and out of the modВӯ
eled area seasonally, feeding on zooВӯ
plankton.
Top predators
Seabirds
Feed on fish, zooplankton, and benthic
species.
Pinnipeds
Feed on fish, zooplankton, and benthic
species.
Cetaceans
Feed on fish, zooplankton, and benthic
species.
56 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:64==
The change in biomass (X) of a food web component is governed by the following ODE:
dX
dt = A
вҲ‘
UX(Nk) вҲ’
вҲ‘
UY (X) вҲ’Пө(t)X вҲ’ОҙX2 + FX вҲ’H(t)X вҲ’D(t)X + RX
(A.1)
Where:
X: Biomass of the food web component.
A: Assimilation efficiency of ingested food.
вҲ‘UX(Nk): Total biomass gained by consuming prey Nk.
вҲ‘UY (X): Biomass loss due to predation.
Пө(t): TemperatureВӯdependent basal metabolic rate.
ОҙX2: DensityВӯdependent mortality rate.
FX: Net flux due to advection, mixing, or migration.
H(t): Harvest ratio representing fishing impact.
D(t): Developmental export rate (e.g., between life stages).
RX: Recruitment flux to the biomass pool.
Feeding dynamics follow a Holling II function relationship between each predatorВӯprey
couplet in the food web (Eq A.2), and density dependent mortality control.
Uv1(v2) = v1 В· v2 В· ПҒv1(v2) В· Umax,v1
v2 + hv1
(A.2)
Where:
v1: Biomass of the predator.
v2: Biomass of the prey.
ПҒv1(v2): Predators preference for prey v2.
Umax,v1: Maximum uptake rate of the predator, scaled by temperature.
hv1: HalfВӯsaturation constant of predator v1.
ADD EQUATIONS FOR PHYTOPLANKTON AND TOP PREDATORS
A.2
Annual target data
Table A.2: List of observational indices of ecosystem state available for inclusion in the
likelihood calculation.
Description
Units
Whole domain annual total primary production
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual new production from depth integrated
nitrate drawdown
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
57
==PAGE:65==
Description
Units
Annual within forest net production of macroalgae
gC.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual omnivorous zooplankton gross producВӯ
tion
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual carnivorous zooplankton gross producВӯ
tion
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual planktivorous fish gross production
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual demersal fish gross production
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual filter/deposit feeding benthos gross proВӯ
duction
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual carnivorous/scavenge feeding benthos
gross production
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual net production of birds
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual net production of pinnipeds
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual net production of cetaceans
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual maximum monthly averaged concentraВӯ
tion of larvae of filter/deposit feeding benthos
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain annual maximum of monthly averaged concenВӯ
tration of larvae of carnivorous/scavenge feeding benthos
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain annual consumption of planktivorous fish by fish
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual consumption of demersal fish by fish
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual consumption of omnivorous zooplankВӯ
ton by fish and fish larvae
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual consumption of omnivorous zooplankВӯ
ton by carnivorous zooplankton
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual consumption of benthos by fish
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual food consumption by birds
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain proportion planktivorous fish in diet of birds
dimensionless
Whole domain proportion demersal fish in diet of birds
dimensionless
Whole domain proportion migratory fish in diet of birds
dimensionless
Whole domain proportion discards in diet of birds
dimensionless
Whole domain annual food consumption by pinnipeds
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain proportion planktivorous fish in diet of pinnipeds
dimensionless
Whole domain proportion demersal fish in diet of pinnipeds
dimensionless
58 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:66==
Description
Units
Whole domain proportion migratory fish in diet of pinnipeds
dimensionless
Whole domain annual food consumption by cetaceans
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole
domain
proportion
planktivorous
fish
in
diet
of
cetaceans
dimensionless
Whole domain proportion demersal fish in diet of cetaceans
dimensionless
Whole domain proportion migratory fish in diet of cetaceans
dimensionless
Whole domain annual planktivorous fish landings (live weight)
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual demersal fish landings (live weight)
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual migratory fish landings (live weight)
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual filter/deposit feeding benthos landings
(live weight)
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual carnivorous/scavenge feeding benthos
landings (live weight)
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual carnivorous zooplankton landings (live
weight)
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual macrophyte landings (live weight)
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain annual carbon gross production:biomass ratio
of macrophytes
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio of larvae
of filter/deposit feeding benthos
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio of larvae
of carnivorous/scavenge feeding benthos
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio of filВӯ
ter/deposit feeding benthos
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio of carВӯ
nivorous/scavenge feeding benthos
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio omnivoВӯ
rous zooplankton
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio of carВӯ
nivorous zooplankton
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio of larvae
of planktivorous fish
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio of larvae
of demersal fish
yВӯ1
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
59
==PAGE:67==
Description
Units
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio planktivВӯ
orous fish
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio of demВӯ
ersal fish
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual gross production:biomass ratio of migraВӯ
tory fish
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual net production:biomass ratio of birds
yВӯ1
Whole domain annual net production:biomass ratio of pinВӯ
nipeds
yВӯ1
Whole
domain
annual
net
production:biomass
ratio
of
cetaceans
yВӯ1
Annual average proportion of kelp carbon uptake which is exВӯ
uded
dimensionless
Whole domain annual average molar nitrogen:carbon ratio of
kelp
dimensionless
Whole domain annual denitrification
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
Whole domain proportion of demersal fish catch discarded
dimensionless
Annual average ammonia concentration in inshore and offВӯ
shore porewater of sand (grain size >0.15mm)
mMN.mВӯ3
Annual average ammonia concentration in inshore and offВӯ
shore porewater of mud (grain size < 0.15mm)
mMN.mВӯ3
Annual average nitrate concentration in inshore and offshore
porewater of sand (grain size >0.15mm)
mMN.mВӯ3
Annual average nitrate concentration in inshore and offshore
porewater of mud (grain size < 0.15mm)
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain average winter (NovВӯFeb) nitrate concentration
in the shallow layer
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain average summer (MayВӯAug) nitrate concentraВӯ
tion in the shallow layer
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain average winter (NovВӯFeb) nitrate concentration
in the deep layer
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain average summer (MayВӯAug) nitrate concentraВӯ
tion in the deep layer
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain average winter (NovВӯFeb) ammonia concentraВӯ
tion in the shallow layer
mMN.mВӯ3
60 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:68==
Description
Units
Whole domain average summer (MayВӯAug) ammonia concenВӯ
tration in the shallow layer
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain average winter (NovВӯFeb) ammonia concentraВӯ
tion in the deep layer
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain average summer (MayВӯAug) ammonia concenВӯ
tration in the deep layer
mMN.mВӯ3
Whole domain cetacean landings by whaling vessels
mMN.mВӯ2.yВӯ1
A.2.1
Production to biomass rates
Data conserning some of the P/B ratios, annual consumptions and deitary information
was taken from the Ecopath model developed for the OpenВӯOcean and DeepВӯSea EnviВӯ
ronments of the Azores Morato et al., 2016. The two ecological models have different
guild structures. It was, therefore, necessary to aggregate certain functional groups from
the Ecopath model and allocate them to the corresponding guilds in the StrathE2E model.
Below is the reclassification, whith a brief justification when necessary.
Phytoplankton:
вҖў Phytoplankton
Macrophytes:
вҖў Macro algae
Omnivorous zooplankton:
вҖў SmallВӯsize zooplankton: species included are from Copepoda Calanoida and CopeВӯ
poda Poecilostomatoida families, all omnivorous.
Carnivorous zooplankton:
вҖў Large size zooplankton: species included Thaliacea, Mysids, Euphausiids (some
species), Chaetognaths, Decapod Larvae, Hydrozoa, Scyphozoa. All of these species
are primarily or often carnivorous, therefore they were placed in this category.
Planktivorous fish:
вҖў Small size pelagic fish: the diet composition of this guild is 78% planktivorous with
a percentage of 13% benthos and 2% cannibalism. Due to the high planktivorous
percentage, it was placed in the planktivorous guild.
вҖў Mesopelagic fish: the diet composition is 77% plankton. Due to the high planktivoВӯ
rous percentage, it was placed in the planktivorous guild.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
61
==PAGE:69==
Demersal:
вҖў Medium size pelagic fish: this guild only has a 6% plankton consumption and a
80% small pelagic fish consumption. Although they are pelagic it was placed in the
demersal guild due to itвҖҷs feeding habits.
вҖў Large size pelagic fish: diet does not include plankton. It has a 22% demersal fish
consumption and a 22% cephalopod consumption. It was, therefore, placed in the
demersal guild.
вҖў Bathypelagic fish: diet composition is 25% plankton, 45% benthos and 30% mesopelagic
fish. It was therefore placed in the demersal guild.
вҖў Small size demersal fish
вҖў Medium size demersal fish
вҖў Large size demersal fish
вҖў SmallВӯsize shallow fish: species in this category include Chelon labrosus, ScorВӯ
paena scrofa, Boops boops, Scorpaena maderensis, Parablennius ruber, Coris julis
and Echiichthys vipera. Because most of these species are demersal (except for
Boops boops), this group was placed in the demersal fish guild.
вҖў MediumВӯsize shallow fish: species in this category include Diplodus sargus sargus,
Balistes capriscus, Xyrichtys novacula, Mullus surmuletus, Pagellus acarne and BoВӯ
dianus scrofa. Because all of these species are demersal, this group was placed in
the demersal fish guild.
вҖў LargeВӯsize shallow fish: species in this category include Muraena helena, GymВӯ
nothorax unicolor, Sparisoma cretense, Serranus atricauda, Pseudocaranx dentex,
Epinephelus marginatus, Labrus bergylta and Sarpa salpa. Because all of these
species are demersal, this group was placed in the demersal fish guild.
вҖў Small size bathydemersal fish: includes species such as Alepocephalus rostratus,
Borostomias antarcticus, Chlorophthalmus agassizi, and Physiculus dalwigki. Since
these species are not planktivorous and generally interact with the seafloor, they
were placed in this guild.
вҖў Medium size bathydemersal fish: includes species such as Epigonus telescopus,
Hoplostethus atlanticus, Bathygadus melanobranchus, and Trachyscorpia cristulata
echinata. These species are not planktivorous and interact with the seafloor.
вҖў Large size bathydemersal fish: includes species such as Aphanopus carbo, Coryphaenoides
guentheri, and Synaphobranchus kaupii. These species are not planktivorous and
interact with the seafloor.
вҖў Helicolenus dactylopterus: demersal species.
вҖў Conger conger: demersal species.
вҖў Pontinus kuhlii: demersal species.
вҖў Raja clavata: demersal species.
вҖў Phycis phycis: demersal species.
62 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:70==
вҖў Pagrus pagrus: demersal species.
вҖў Beryx splendens: demersal species.
вҖў Beryx decadactylus: demersal species.
вҖў Pagellus bogaraveo: demersal species.
вҖў Mora moro: demersal species.
вҖў Lepidopus caudatus: demersal species.
вҖў Benthic sharks and rays: includes species like Galeorhinus galeus, Dasyatis pastiВӯ
naca, and Manta birostris. Interaction with the seafloor places them in this guild.
вҖў Deepwater sharks: includes species such as Centroscymnus coelolepis, Etmopterus
spinax, and Squaliolus laticaudus.
Migratory Fish:
вҖў Tunas: Highly mobile species with migratory patterns.
вҖў Pelagic sharks: Highly mobile species with migratory patterns.
Suspension/ Deposit feeding benthos:
вҖў Benthic filter feeders: Deposit feeders such as filter feeders.
вҖў Benthic worms: Includes deposit feeders like Polychaetes and Annelida.
Carnivorous/ Scavenger benthos:
вҖў Shrimps: Includes species such as Plesionika narval, Heterocarpus laevigatus, and
Funchalia villosa. Primarily benthic.
вҖў Cephalopods: Primarily carnivorous, including both pelagic and benthic species.
вҖў Crabs: Considered benthic species.
Birds
вҖў Seabirds
Cetaceans
вҖў Dolphins
вҖў Baleen whales
вҖў Toothed whales
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
63
==PAGE:71==
A.2.2
Gross production rates
Table A.3:
Conversion from grams of wet weight (gWW) to mMN for the different
StrathE2E guilds
Guild
mMN per gWW
Planktivorous fish
2.038
Demersal fish
1.34
Migratory fish
2.314
Filter/ Deposit feeding benthos
0.503
Carnivore/ Scavenger benthos
1.006
Carnivore Zooplankton
1.258
Omnivorous Zooplankton
1.258
Seabirds
2.518
Cetaceans
2.518
Macrophytes
2.07
A.3
Fishing data
A.3.1
Fishing discards
Table A.4: Discard rates
MГ©tier
PF
DF
MF
FSB
CSB
CZ
SB
CT
KP
Bottom longline
0.56
0.12
0.71
0
0
0
1
1
0
Pots, traps and harvesting
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
Drifting deepwater longline
0.08
0.03
0.03
0
0
0
1
1
1
Handline
0.56
0.06
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
Jigging
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
Pelagic longline regional
0.27
0
0.41
1
0
0
1
1
1
Pole and line
0.12
0.21
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
Purse seine
0.11
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
Pelagic longline mainland
0.27
1
0.02
1
1
1
1
1
1
Pelagic longline foreign
0.27
1
0.02
1
1
1
1
1
1
PF: Planktivorous fishНҫ DF: Demersal fishНҫ MF: Migratory fishНҫ FSB: Filter/ Deposit feedВӯ
ing BenthosНҫ CSB: Carnivore/ Scavenger BenthosНҫ CZ: Carnivorous ZooplanktonНҫ SB:
64 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:72==
SeabirdsНҫ CT: CetaceansНҫ KP: Macrophytes.
A.3.2
Fishing power
Table A.5: Power rate measured in mMN/sec
Gear name
PF
DF
MF
FDB
CSB
CZ
BD
CT
KP
Bottom
longline
5.20EВӯ01
2.09E+00
1.28EВӯ01
6.28EВӯ07
7.50EВӯ04
1.86EВӯ03
0
0
7.44EВӯ07
Pots, traps
and
harВӯ
vesting
1.07EВӯ03
3.48EВӯ03
1.86EВӯ03
6.79EВӯ02
7.86EВӯ02
7.60EВӯ05
0
0
8.13EВӯ01
Drifting
deepwater
longline
5.03EВӯ03
1.34E+00
4.46EВӯ03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.31EВӯ05
0
0
0.00E+00
Handline
2.78EВӯ01
2.53EВӯ01
7.19EВӯ03
4.24EВӯ07
4.66EВӯ04
2.66EВӯ03
0
0
2.18EВӯ07
Jigging
3.40EВӯ03
9.26EВӯ03
1.21EВӯ03
1.59EВӯ06
9.79EВӯ04
9.46EВӯ01
0
0
0
Pelagic
longline
regional
2.31EВӯ01
9.02EВӯ02
3.99E+01
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.77EВӯ02
0
0
0
Pole
and
line
1.47EВӯ02
6.62EВӯ03
1.73E+01
0.00E+00
7.65EВӯ06
1.11EВӯ03
0
0
0
Purse seine
5.49EВӯ01
1.55EВӯ03
2.11EВӯ04
4.67EВӯ07
2.11EВӯ05
7.93EВӯ04
0
0
0
Pelagic
longline
mainland
2.98EВӯ01
0
5.41E+01
0
0
0
0
0
0
Pelagic
longline
foreign
1.74EВӯ01
0
4.74E+01
0
0
0
0
0
0
PF: Planktivorous fishНҫ DF: Demersal fishНҫ MF: Migratory fishНҫ FSB: Filter/ Deposit feedВӯ
ing BenthosНҫ CSB: Carnivore/ Scavenger BenthosНҫ CZ: Carnivorous ZooplanktonНҫ SB:
SeabirdsНҫ CT: CetaceansНҫ KP: Macrophytes.
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
65
==PAGE:73==
B
Resuts
B.1
Model Inputs
Figure B.1: Annual average temperature driving data for the CNRM and GFDL model and
the two climate scenarios.
Figure B.2: Annul average vertical diffusivity for the CNRM and GFDL model and the two
climate scenarios.
66 Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
==PAGE:74==
Modelling and analysing drivers of change in the North Atlantic marine ecosystem for present state and
future scenarios
67
==PAGE:75==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
