==PAGE:1==
 
 
1 
 
Development of base editing systems 
for Corynebacterium glutamicum using 
engineered, CRISPR RNA-guided 
adenine deaminase and cytosine 
deaminase 
 
 
 
Elizabeth Robinson 
s230001 
 
 
 
MSc Thesis 
February 2025 
 
 
 
Department of Biotechnology 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
2 
 
Abstract 
The CRISPR/Cas system has been a tremendous boon to the genetic engineering 
community, but it relies on the introduction of double-stranded breaks into the genome 
and inefficient homologous recombination. Conversely, CRISPR/Cas-nucleobase 
fusions to cytidine or adenine deaminases, called base editors, can modify individual 
nucleotides with great efficiency and without harmful double-stranded breaks. Such 
base editors have already been successfully implemented in Gram-negative bacteria. 
Corynebacterium glutamicum is an industrially important strain for amino acid 
production. Cytidine base editors have already been shown to work in C. glutamicum, 
and the Nikel group at the Technical University of Denmark has designed plasmids 
(dubbed pAblo and pCasso) for Pseudomonas alloputida which contain base editing 
machinery and guide RNA dropouts. Previous research has also identified nadA, which 
produces quinolinate synthase in the NAD biosynthesis pathway, as a conditionally 
essential gene in this strain. This study aimed to use the pAblo/pCasso plasmids to 
knock out (and later restore) nadA synthesis in P. alloputida to test out the Nikel group’s 
system; generate and test a temperature-sensitive, C. glutamicum-compatible origin of 
replication for these plasmids to both enable replication in C. glutamicum and speed 
the plasmid curing process; and finally knock out (and later restore) nadA synthesis in 
C. glutamicum to establish the system’s effectiveness in an important Gram-positive 
bacterium. I successfully constructed pAblo and pCasso plasmids with five custom 
protospacers in E. coli and successfully introduced four of these plasmids into P. 
alloputida. However, base editing was unsuccessful, likely due to a lack of supplement 
in the media. I introduced a mutation into the Rep protein of C. glutamicum’s origin of 
replication to make it temperature-sensitive. Future studies should repeat the base 
editing protocol with supplement added to the media and verify construction of the 
temperature-sensitive plasmids. This study forms the groundwork for implementing a 
fast and efficient method of gene knockout in a valuable bioproduction strain.  
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
3 
 
Introduction 
CRISPR/Cas9 as a tool for guided recombination in cell factory 
engineering 
The CRISPR/Cas system (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic 
Repeats) is a bacterial defense mechanism originally evolved to target viruses. 
Researchers can manipulate this system to target, knock out, modify, or replace 
specific locations in a genome by pairing Cas endonuclease restriction enzymes with 
guide RNAs (gRNAs) designed to complement the target (Razzaq & Masood, 2018). 
These gRNAs are created from protospacer sequences and provided to the cells via 
plasmid transformation (Kozaeva et al., 2024). The Cas9 enzyme creates a double-
stranded break (DSB) at the target locus. Since most bacteria do not have the non-
homologous end joining DSB repair pathway present in eukaryotes, bacteria cells repair 
these DSBs with homologous recombination (HR) using a template provided by 
researchers (Wang et al., 2021). This template is comprised of homologous ends and 
may include a gene of interest (or simply a sequence excluding the original target) in 
order to create a knockout. There is a small chance that the cells will use this template 
to repair the DSB and thus incorporate the desired genetic edit (Wang et al., 2021). 
CRISPR/Cas targeting requires the presence of a PAM (Protospacer Adjacent Motif) 
site. While all restriction enzymes require recognition sites, Cas9 is famous for having a 
PAM recognition sequence that is only three bases long (5’-NGG-3')(Razzaq & Masood, 
2018). This is still somewhat restrictive when designing a target, but recently, a Cas 
enzyme from Streptococcus pyogenes, SpRY, that is nearly PAM-less (with a PAM of 
NRN or NYN, where 5’-NRN-3’ is preferentially detected over 5’-NYN-3’) has been 
isolated (Kozaeva et al., 2024). SpRY can target virtually anywhere in the genome with 
the same editing efficiency as the canonical PAM sequence from Cas9 (Kozaeva et al., 
2024). 
However, both CRISPR/Cas-enhanced HR and HR template transformation have low 
efficiencies, and unrepaired DSBs lead to cell death (Wang et al., 2021). Additionally, if 
a gene is fully deleted through homologous recombination, there is no easy way to 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
4 
 
restore function, as a second recombination event is required to insert the deleted gene 
again. 
 
CRISPR/Cas-nucleobase deaminase fusions for single-nucleotide 
base editing 
A potential alternative to lethal DSBs and inefficient HR is to use CRISPR/Cas-
nucleobase deaminase fusions for single-nucleotide base editing. Cytidine base 
editors (CBEs) use cytidine deaminases to change cytidine (C) into thymidine (T), and 
adenine base editors (ABEs) use evolved adenine deaminases to change adenine (A) 
into guanine (G) (Kozaeva et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2021).  
This exchange can modify individual nucleotides in a sequence. A CBE changing a C 
to a T can introduce a stop codon into an open reading frame—as 5’-CAA-3’, 5’-CAG-3’, 
and 5’-CGA-3’ can become 5’-UAA-3’, 5’-UAG-3’, and 5’-UGA-3’ (Kozaeva et al., 2024). 
ABEs changing an A to a G may not be able to introduce stop codons (as an A -> G 
substitution cannot create the required 5’-UAA-3’, 5’-UAG-3’, and 5’-UGA-3’ from other 
amino acids), but an enzyme’s catalytic residue(s) may still be modified in order to 
deactivate or reduce gene expression (Basbous et al., 2021). Base editing is more 
efficient than HR (Wang et al., 2021). Additionally, these two base editors can reverse 
each other’s introduced modifications (Kozaeva et al., 2024) (which may be useful for 
confirming that these point mutations were introduced by researchers and not at 
random): a C to T transition on the forward strand becomes an AT pair, and this T’s 
complementary A changed back into a G by an ABE, reverting this complementary pair 
back to a CG pair. 
ABE and CBE base editors often edit other As or Cs (respectively) near the target 
nucleotide, meaning that these base editors operate less by targeting a single base and 
more by targeting a small window of bases. The editing windows of the ABE and CBE are 
represented as a probability distribution across anywhere from four to 14 bp 
surrounding the central target, editing nucleotides with higher efficiency the closer they 
are to the center of the editing window (Gaudelli et al., 2020; Volke et al., 2022). 
However, the editing window's size depends on the identity of the nucleotides nearest 
the target base. Larger nucleotides (ex: G) will block other nearby edits, but smaller 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
5 
 
nucleotides will allow for a larger editing window (Gaudelli et al., 2020; Volke et al., 
2022). 
This system has already successfully improved prokaryotic production of a variety of 
products, such as amino acids (Wang et al., 2021), which may make it a good match for 
the amino acid production strain Corynebacterium glutamicum. Base editor function 
has already been established in relevant, Gram-negative research strains such as E. 
coli and Pseudomonas alloputida (Kozaeva et al., 2024), and CBE function has already 
been established in C. glutamicum (Liu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2018, 2022; Yang et al., 
2021). Because the pAblo/pCasso system has already been shown to work successfully 
in Pseudomonas alloputida KT2440, a well characterized strain (Kozaeva et al., 2024), 
this thesis aimed to first implement the pAblo/pCasso system on a novel target in P. 
alloputida KT2440 before attempting to knockout the same target in C. glutamicum. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
6 
 
 
Figure 1. Annotated pCasso and pAblo plasmid maps. The pCasso (top) and pAblo 
(bottom) plasmids were annotated using the online tool pLannotate (McGuffie & 
Barrick, 2021). These plasmids (Fig. 1) contain two origins of replication: ColE1 (ori), 
which is a commonly used narrow-host range origin allowing replication in E. coli; and 
pRO1600 oriV, which is an origin of replication for Pseudomonas strains (Kozaeva et al., 
2024). 
PEM7 is a constitutive promoter for spectinomycin and streptomycin (Str) resistance and 
the creation of the gRNA. The gRNA drop-out site is flanked by BsaI golden gate 
restriction enzyme recognition sites. 3-methylbenzoate (3-mBz) induces the 
transcription factor XylS, which activates the replication machinery for pRO1600 and 
cognate promoter Pm, which transcribes the Cas/SpRY and base editor (ABE or CBE) 
machinery. The monomeric superfolder green fluorescent protein (msfGFP) is under 
constitutive control of the promoter P14b, and therefore cells containing the plasmid will 
fluoresce under blue light regardless of the presence of 3-mBz, whereas cells without 
this plasmid will not fluoresce. The only difference between the pCasso and pAblo 
plasmids is the presence of either a CBE or an ABE base editor, which are each 
controlled by the Pm promoter (Kozaeva et al., 2024). The gRNA dropout region to be 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
7 
 
replaced by the oligos in Figure 2A is depicted in blue. Genetic parts relevant to 
transformation into E. coli are depicted in green (Figure 2C). Genetic parts involved in 
transformation into P. alloputida are depicted in yellow (Figure 2D). Genetic parts 
relevant to base editing (Figure 2E) are depicted in shades of red, with regulatory 
elements represented in darker shades. All other genetic parts are depicted in black. 
 
Because the origin of replication for the pCasso and pAblo plasmids (Figure 1) is 
inducible only by the presence of 3-mBz, these plasmids can be easily cured from P. 
alloputida cell lines in order to halt base editing simply by growing the cells in media 
lacking 3-mBz (Kozaeva et al., 2024). A diagram of the full base editing workflow is 
provided in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2. Workflow of steps to introduce base edits into P. alloputida. A) DNA 
oligonucleotides ordered as primers are annealed together in order to create 
protospacer duplexes. B) Protospacer duplexes are integrated into the pAblo or pCasso 
vectors. C) The resulting plasmids are transformed into E. coli using a heat shock 
protocol to create stocks. Successful transformants are selected with streptomycin. 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
8 
 
Transformed colonies also fluoresce green under blue light due to GFP encoded by the 
plasmids, and fluorescent colonies capable of growing on LB + Str plates are picked 
and stocked. D) Isolated plasmids from the E. coli stocks are transformed into P. 
alloputida via electroporation. E) Successful P. alloputida transformants incubate in the 
presence of 3-mBz to activate base editing. F) Base edited P. alloputida cells are 
incubated on plain LB agar plates with no antibiotic or 3-mBz to allow plasmid curing. 
 
However, as the curing process takes several days, a faster method of plasmid 
curing was desired. When designing a modified version of the pAblo and pCasso 
plasmids containing an origin for replication in the Gram-positive C. glutamicum 
(isolated from plasmid pEKEx2 (Figure 3)), I included a point mutation (P47S) to make 
the origin’s Rep protein temperature-sensitive for faster plasmid curing (Nakamura et 
al., 2006). 
 
Figure 3: Annotated map of the pEKEx2 plasmid. This plasmid was annotated using the 
online tool pLannotate (McGuffie & Barrick, 2021). The pEKEx2 plasmid contains an 
origin with a replicase (Rep) that is capable of replicating the plasmid in 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
9 
 
Corynebacterium glutamicum (Nakamura et al., 2006), as well as the ColE1 origin for E. 
coli replication. While this plasmid contains several features, features in shades of 
yellow are most relevant to cloning (kanamycin resistance and ColE1 in light yellow for 
maintenance in E. coli). The origin's replicase (dark yellow) is of primary interest, as it 
can become sensitive to high temperatures if the Pro-47 mutation is introduced 
(Nakamura et al., 2006).  
 
Corynebacterium engineering and industrial uses 
Corynebacterium glutamicum is a commonly used and well-characterized 
nonpathogenic, Gram-positive bacterium that is often used in both research and 
industrial production of pharmaceutically relevant short chain alcohols (Ly & Longo, 
2004), plant natural products, organic acids, important food preservatives 
(Khanashyam et al., 2023), biofuels (Heider & Wendisch, 2015), and phenolics, which 
are important both for creating therapeutics and providing antioxidants in food (Kumar 
& Goel, 2019). A number of synthetic biology techniques have been implemented in C. 
glutamicum to improve its value as a bioproduction strain, from base editing and to 
polymerase-based site-directed mutagenesis to the use of the traditional CRISPR/Cas9 
system. Site-directed mutagenesis has been previously implemented in C. glutamicum 
via DNA polymerases to improve bioproduction (Z. Wang et al., 2011), efficient 
metabolic engineering of the strain has been established with CRISPR/Cas9 (Cho et al., 
2017), and cytidine base editors have already been previously used for genome-wide 
loss-of-function screenings in C. glutamicum (Liu 2022). This workhorse strain has been 
improved as a robust bioproduction cell factory for over 50 years, including the 
introduction of metabolic pathways to use alternative carbon sources (Heider & 
Wendisch, 2015). Converseley, C. glutamicum’s genome has been reduced to create a 
chassis strain, particularly through removal of prophage DNA, transposable elements, 
and genes of unknown function from its genome. These modifications both reflect the 
sheer prominence of C. glutamicum while also increasing its appeal as a safe and 
efficient strain for both academic and commercial use. Both the successful 
establishment of CBEs and detailed genetic characterization of C. glutamicum make it 
ideal for the purposes of this study. 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
10 
 
 
Site directed mutagenesis can be tested for the conditionally essential 
gene nadA. 
It would be difficult to test for knockout of an essential gene, as the intense selective 
pressure against the mutation would make it difficult to prove absence of colonies with 
the mutation and impossible to isolate them, either to continue their cell lines or for 
sequencing. Additionally, stable mutations are ideal for industrial purposes, because 
stability would allow the addition of more edits into a cell line and ensure that 
mutations are not lost during the many generations that pass during industrial scale-up. 
The more selective pressure is present against a mutation, the less stable the mutation 
will be.  
However, certain metabolic genes can be removed from a strain if the necessary 
metabolites are supplied in the media, allowing researchers to isolate mutants with 
stop codons introduced into these conditionally essential genes.  
 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 4: The NAD de novo biosynthesis pathway. This shows the de novo 
biosynthesis pathway for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+), adapted from 
Teramoto et al., 2010: “l-Aspartate is converted to nicotinate mononucleotide through 
the three reactions catalyzed by l-aspartate oxidase, encoded by nadB, quinolinate 
synthetase, encoded by nadA, and quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase, encoded by 
nadC. Nicotinate mononucleotide, which is also generated from nicotinate, is 
subsequently converted to NAD. PRPP, 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate; PPi, 
inorganic pyrophosphate.” 
 
One such conditionally essential pathway is the biosynthesis pathway for 
nicotinamide mononucleotide, a precursor of NAD+ (Fig. 4), where a number of 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
12 
 
intermediate metabolites can be provided as a supplement in a strain’s media. The de 
novo biosynthesis pathway includes several enzymes, denoted as nadABCDE. Studies 
in the past have shown that nadA is conditionally essential in P. alloputida KT2440 and 
C. glutamicum, with the cells unable to grow (or, in the case of C. glutamicum, barely 
growing) in minimal media without the addition of nicotinic acid (Molina‐Henares et al., 
2010; Teramoto et al., 2010). nadB has also been shown to be conditionally essential in 
Pseudomonas alloputida, but an ortholog has not been identified in C. glutamicum 
(Teramoto et al., 2010). An enzyme that exists across both P. alloputida and C. 
glutamicum is ideal for this study, making nadA the logical choice. NadA (also known as 
quinolinate synthase (Volbeda & Fontecilla-Camps, 2020) produces quinolinic acid. 
Either quinolinate or nicotinic acid can be supplied in P. alloputida’s media in order to 
maintain nadA mutant strains (Molina‐Henares et al., 2010). A mutant with a non-
functional quinolinate synthase could have low selection pressure against reversion of 
the mutation when provided with nicotinic acid, yet high selection pressure for 
mutation reversion (if desired) when grown in media without nicotinic acid. 
 
NadA activity is dependent upon catalytic residue Y107 
Introduced stop codons with CBEs must ideally not be too far upstream in the nadA 
sequence (in case there is an alternative start codon downstream) and not too far 
downstream in the sequence (in case a truncated protein may be formed with 
functional or partly functional active sites before the premature stop codon) (Howard, 
2004). Therefore, the ideal target site for a CBE-introduced nonsense mutation is 
between catalytic residues mid-sequence, ensuring that at least some catalytic 
residues are excluded from the final translation. ABEs cannot introduce stop codons, 
but rather can only change residues from one residue to another, so they can 
theoretically only decrease or knockout expression by targeting catalytic residues 
directly.  
A catalytic triad, along with a potential fourth catalytic residue, in NadA has been 
reported in Thermotoga maritima (Tm) and Pyrococcus horikoshi (Ph) (Volbeda & 
Fontecilla-Camps, 2020). A Y21F substitution targeting the potential fourth catalytic 
residue in Tm reduced catalytic expression by a factor of more than 20 (Volbeda et al., 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
13 
 
2016). Another study suggests a second active site may contribute to the enzyme’s 
catalytic activity (Basbous et al., 2021). To ensure deactivation of NadA's activity, and 
thus to ensure nicotinate auxotrophy, these codons provided optimal targets for this 
study.  
One study found that creating an S124A substitution (within the second catalytic 
cavity) in Tm caused an 85% loss in activity by replacing a hydroxylic amino acid with an 
aliphatic amino acid (Basbous et al., 2021). Another study found that NadA's catalytic 
expression was completely eliminated when the Y107F substitution was made in Tm 
(Y139F in E. coli) (Volbeda et al., 2016) --interesting, considering that this location is not 
a part of either catalytic cavity.  
 
 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
14 
 
Purpose of Study 
The goals of this study were: 
 
1. Verifying that the base editing system is functional in Pseudomonas species, by 
knocking out and restoring NAD synthesis in P. alloputida 
 
Because the pAblo and pCasso plasmid system has already been shown to work in 
P. alloputida, I aimed to initially test CBE and ABE functionality in eliminating or 
drastically reducing the conditionally essential gene, nadA, in P. alloputida as a model 
organism before applying this system to C. glutamicum. I chose a conditionally 
essential gene to reduce selective pressure against the mutation compared to targeting 
an essential gene, provide genetic stability, and better enable isolation of mutants. I 
also wanted to prove that I could revert these mutations back to their original forms to 
prove that these point mutations were not random. 
 
2. 
Knocking out and restoring NAD synthesis in C. glutamicum 
 
I aimed to confirm CBE and prove ABE functionality against nadA in the Gram-
positive C. glutamicum, while still maintaining as much base editing efficiency for the 
non-canonical SpRY Cas9 enzyme as its canonical counterpart.   
 
3. 
Generating and confirming a temperature-sensitive version of the pAblo 
and pCasso plasmids that are capable of reproduction in C. glutamicum 
 
To accomplish this, the pAblo and pCasso plasmids needed to be modified to 
contain an origin allowing them to replicate in C. glutamicum, obtained from another 
plasmid, pEKEx2. To speed the plasmid curing process designed by the Nikel group 
(Kozaeva et al., 2024), I also aimed to make the origin of replication temperature-
sensitive by inserting a mutation into its replicase. 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
15 
 
This project will interest researchers looking to understand gene function in C. 
glutamicum and companies involved in industrial processes, because it could 
drastically simplify the engineering process for this important industrial strain. 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
16 
 
Materials & Methods 
nadA target sites 
I ran a Clustal Omega Benchling alignment between the NadA UniProt sequences of 
Thermotoga maritima Tma100 (Accession: Q9X1X7), Pyrococcus horikoshi OT3 
(Accession: O57767), Pseudomonas alloputida KT2440 (Accession: Q88NH8), and 
Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032 (Accession: Q8NRI0). Empirically confirmed 
locations of catalytic residues in T. maritima and P. horikoshi were annotated in the 
NadA Benchling files. Two alignments were run using either P. alloputida or C. 
glutamicum’s NadA amino acid sequence as the reference and both Tm and Ph’s NadA 
as comparisons. These alignments were then visually analyzed to confirm the 
alignment of catalytic residues between all strains with confirmed residues, and their 
alignments with P. alloputida and C. glutamicum’s sequences were then analyzed to 
determine their catalytic residues.  
nadA nucleotide sequences were retrieved from NCBI for P. alloputida KT2440 (NCBI 
Reference Sequence: NC_002947) and C. glutamicum (NCBI Reference Sequence: 
NZ_AP017557). Amino acid translations were created in Benchling and annotated with 
predicted catalytic residue sites. 
 
Protospacer design 
Loci between stop codons were chosen as pCasso target sites, prioritizing 
protospacers that would have the least number of off-target effects while still targeting 
the middle portion of the nadA sequence. pAblo target sites were assessed based on 
previous empirical studies that found amino acid substitutions that knocked out or 
substantially reduced catalytic activity in NadA (Basbous et al., 2021; Volbeda et al., 
2016). To avoid alternative start codons as well as truncated enzymatic products, 
targets among the catalytic residues and in the middle of the nadA sequence were 
prioritized.  
 
Protospacers with canonical PAM sequences  
==PAGE:17==
 
 
17 
 
Because Cas9 traditionally targets the PAM sequence 5’-NGG-3', but the Nikel group 
reported that the Cas9 SpRY variant can target any PAM sequence with efficiency equal 
to the canonical Cas9 PAM, sites with both the canonical PAM sequence and non-
canonical PAM sequences were targeted to confirm this result. Protospacers targeting 
sites adjacent to canonical PAM sequences could be detected with the online software 
known as CRISPy-web (Blin et al., 2020). 
After locating appropriate protospacers, full guide RNA oligos were designed 
following the protocol outlined by the Nikel group (Kozaeva et al., 2024).  
 
Protospacers with non-canonical PAM sequences 
For C->T substitutions, the NadA sequence was analyzed for glutamines, arginines, 
and tryptophans as potential targets. For A->G substitutions, catalytic and potentially 
catalytic residues were targeted based on the Benchling alignments and previous 
literature. 
Because Gs block CBE activity when they immediately precede Cs, effectively 
truncating the editing window (Volke et al., 2022), Cs immediately following a G were 
unlikely to become substituted. The same effect is observed for Cs blocking ABE 
activity when preceding As (Gaudelli et al., 2020). The core editing windows were 
assumed to be around five bp in length for both the ABE and CBE, located at positions 
three to eight (with position 20 being the PAM sequence location) (Domínguez & Volke, 
2024). 
I preferably chose CBE editing windows that included Cs only in the target residue (or 
As in the case of ABEs). Therefore, 5’-GC-3' and 5’-CA-3' combinations were not 
avoided when selecting editing windows. Off-target substitutions were tolerated when 
causing silent mutations in neighboring amino acids. Off-target substitutions in 
neighboring amino acids were cautiously accepted in a few cases, when no preferable 
target residues were available. 
After determining target windows, when possible, PAM sequences with the motif 5′-
NRN-3′ were chosen over PAM sequences with the motif 5′-NYN-3′, as recommended 
by the Nikel group (Kozaeva et al., 2024). 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
18 
 
Preliminary P. alloputida growth experiment 
Modified minimal media 9 (MM9) was created using a protocol described in Tiwari et 
al. 2024 (Tiwari et al., 2024).  
P. alloputida cells were originally grown overnight in 5 mL of LB shaking at 30°C and 
150-200 rpm. Cells were then passaged across three days in 50 mL of modified MM9 in 
500 mL shake flasks at initial optical densities (OD) of 0.2. These flasks were left to 
shake at 150-200 rpm at 30°C overnight. OD was checked using an optical density 
spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 600 nm (OD600) every three to four hours. 
 
Constructing and curing pCasso/pAblo plasmids in P. alloputida 
pCasso and pAblo plasmids were constructed using the protocol outlined by the 
Nikel group (Kozaeva et al., 2024). 2x Phusion Hot Start II High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix 
was used for cloning steps, and Ampliqon Taq DNA Polymerase 2x Master Mix RED was 
used for analytical and sequencing steps. Primers were ordered from Integrated DNA 
Technologies. All agarose gel electrophoresis steps were conducted with 1% agarose. 
Plasmid minipreps were conducted with the Sigma Aldrich GenElute Plasmid Miniprep 
Kit. Sanger sequencing was conducted through EuroFins using the Mix2Seq kit, and 
nucleotide alignments were run in Benchling using the MAFFT alignment program. 
Verification of protospacer insertion was conducted using Ins_F with the reverse primer 
corresponding to each plasmid and nadA target (Appendix I). 
Plasmids were transformed into chemically competent DH5α E. coli cells using the 
heat shock protocol outlined by Sambrook and Green (Sambrook & Green, 2012). The 
heat shock step was conducted for 60 seconds. After washing, supernatant was 
discarded by upending the tube, and pellets were resuspended using the remaining 
liquid in the tube. All liquid was plated onto agar media containing the appropriate 
antibiotics.  
To cure cells of plasmid, plasmid-containing cells were grown in plain, liquid LB 
media overnight at 30 °C and 150-200 rpm to allow multiple generations of plasmid 
loss. Afterwards, cells were streaked onto individual plates of plain LB agar and allowed 
to grow overnight at 30 °C. Cured cells were imaged using a Vilber Fusion FX imager and 
a 440 nm wavelength to measure fluorescence. Images were recorded with both the 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
19 
 
default two-dimensional (2D) and 3D Dynamic Viewer (3D) visualization settings, and 
fluorescence was quantified in relative light units. 
 
Constructing the temperature-sensitive C. glutamicum origin 
Two amplicons were amplified off of the base plasmid pEKEx2 using the primers 
P1_TS_fw, P2_TS_rev, P3_TS_for, and P4_TS_rev (Appendix I), introducing the desired 
mutations. These two amplicons were then isolated via gel purification, diluted by 1:100 
and 1:1000, and combined in an overlap extension PCR, using DMSO and 2x Phusion 
Hot Start II High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix with the following specifications: 
a. 
10 cycles with the two amplicons at 72°C 
b. 
30 cycles after addition of P1_TS_fw and P4_TS_rev at 65°C 
This combined product was then isolated using a gel purification. The overlap 
product as well as the plasmid vector was digested with NEB enzymes NdeI & NaeI 
according to specifications from NEBcloner version 1.14.0. 
Both products were gel purified and then combined in a reaction using 1 µL of T4 
DNA ligase and 2 µL of buffer. In one set of reactions, 4 µL of vector backbone was 
added to 6 µL of the insert, with nuclease-free water comprising the rest of the reaction; 
in another, the maximum amount of vector backbone was added to the reaction (13 µL). 
The reaction was run for two hours using NEB specifications (Ligation Protocol with T4 
DNA Ligase (M0202), 2024). 
 
Competent cells and media 
P. alloputida competent cells 
Pseudomonas alloputida competent cells were created and transformed according 
to the protocol used by the Pankratz group (Pankratz et al., 2023). However, cells were 
recovered for one hour instead of four and were plated on LB agar petri dishes overnight 
instead of in liquid cultures.  
Supplement choice and 3-mBz recipe 
Previously literature has shown that nadA negative mutants can survive when 
supplemented with nicotinic acid (Molina‐Henares et al., 2010). Nicotinic acid was 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
20 
 
chosen as a supplement to nadA negative mutants instead of quinolinic acid due to 
safety concerns (La Cruz et al., 2012). 
500 mM 3-methylbenzoate was created using a protocol adapted from the Volke 
group (Volke et al., 2021). 
Antibiotics 
For maintenance of the pAblo and pCasso plasmids, 100 μg/mL of streptomycin was 
used for liquid media and plates containing E. coli and 200 μg/mL of streptomycin was 
used for liquid media and plates containing P. alloputida. For maintenance of the 
pEKEx2 plasmid, 50 μg/mL of kanamycin was used for both liquid media and plates. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
21 
 
Results 
Protospacers to knockout NadA function must target precise regions of the nadA 
gene. For a knockout, protospacers utilizing pAblo’s adenine base editor to implement 
A->G mutations must target catalytic residues, while protospacers utilizing pCasso’s 
adenine base editor to implement C->T mutations must target between catalytic 
residues. Thus, accurate identification of catalytic residues is vital to this project’s 
success. The catalytic residues in the NadA of P. alloputida and C. glutamicum have 
not been identified, but they have been documented in other strains. Creating 
alignments between well-characterized NadA sequences and uncharacterized NadA 
sequences will enable identification of the catalytic residues, and thus protospacer 
design for nadA base editing.  
 
Identification of catalytic residues in NadA of P. alloputida and C. 
glutamicum 
The NadA UniProt sequences for Thermotoga maritima (Tm) and Pyrococcus 
horikoshi (Ph) were aligned to those of either P. alloputida (Figure 5) or C. glutamicum 
(Figure 6) using the Clustal Omega algorithm in Benchling in an attempt to identify 
potential catalytic sites in order to determine base editor targets. 
 
Figure 5: NadA amino acid sequence alignments for Pseudomonas alloputida KT2440. 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
22 
 
NadA Benchling Clustal Omega alignments for NadA UniProt amino acid sequences of 
P. alloputida (top), Ph (middle), and Tm (bottom). Two segments of NadA (A and B) 
containing catalytic residues are shown, with each row representing a strain. The 
leftmost column details strain name. Deletions are highlighted in red. The yellow 
annotations mark the location of the confirmed catalytic residues in Ph and Tm. 
 
Figure 6: NadA amino acid sequence alignments for Corynebacterium glutamicum. 
NadA Benchling Omega Cluster alignments for NadA UniProt amino acid sequences of 
C. glutamicum (top), Ph (middle), and Tm (bottom).  Two segments of NadA (A and B) 
containing catalytic residues are shown, with each row representing a strain. The 
leftmost column details strain name. Deletions are highlighted in red. The yellow 
annotations mark the location of the confirmed catalytic residues in Ph and Tm. 
 
All catalytic residues (Figures 5 and 6) aligned with each other flawlessly and all had 
the same amino acid identities as in the confirmed strain(s): tyrosine, serine, histidine, 
glutamate, and threonine. This indicates that the aligned locations in P. alloputida and 
C. glutamicum are highly likely to be involved in NadA function, making these residues 
ideal targets. The potential catalytic residues in P. alloputida and C. glutamicum (and 
the corresponding confirmed catalytic residues in Tm and Ph) are summarized in Table 
1. P. alloputida’s aligned codons are Y50, Y140, S157, H204, E229, and T263.  
 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
23 
 
Table 1: Probable NadA catalytic residues in P. alloputida and C. glutamicum. Each row 
represents a different strain, and each column represents a different confirmed 
catalytic residue. Residues in bold represent those empirically confirmed in past 
literature, whereas residues in italics represent putative catalytic residues based on 
UniProt alignments. 
Strain 
Fourth 
Site 
Unspecified 
Cavity 
II 
Catalytic 
Triad #1 
Catalytic 
Triad #2 
Catalytic 
Triad #3 
P. horikoshi 
Y23 
 
 
H173 
E198 
T230 
T. maritima 
Y21 
Y107 
S124 
H171 
E195 
T229 
P. 
alloputida 
Y50 
Y140 
S157 
H204 
E229 
T263 
C. 
glutamicum 
Y93 
Y187 
S208 
H280 
E305 
T340 
 
C. glutamicum’s UniProt sequence is substantially shorter than its amino acid 
translation from the full nadA gene from NCBI (Figure 7). The UniProt sequence begins 
at M35, indicating an alternate start codon in the gene. For example, in the UniProt 
sequence, a catalytic residue is labeled as position Y59, while the same residue is Y93 
in the full protein sequence. In Table 1, the numbering from the full nadA sequence is 
used. Therefore, C. glutamicum’s potential catalytic residues are Y93, Y187, S208, 
H280, E305, and T340. These identified catalytic residues will inform protospacer 
design by indicating ideal target locations to ensure knockout of NadA activity. 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
24 
 
Figure 7. Full nadA DNA and NadA amino acid sequence in C. glutamicum. Potential 
catalytic residues are in yellow, and the alternate start codon is in pink. 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
25 
 
P. alloputida can grow in modified MM9. 
To test for successful knockout of quinolinate synthase function, growth 
experiments to compare the viability of wildtype versus mutant strains is necessary. 
Because nadA negative mutants theoretically will not be able to produce enough 
quinolinate for survival, the effects of a successful knockout will only be observable in 
minimal media without additional quinolinate or nicotinate (Molina‐Henares et al., 
2010). To ensure that a nadA mutation is responsible for reducing or eliminating cell 
growth, the wildtype Pseudomonas alloputida KT2440 strain would need to be capable 
of thriving in minimal media, to serve as a comparison.   
P. alloputida cells were passaged for two nights in modified MM9 to exclude the 
possibility that they possessed enough stored energy from the rich LB media for a few 
divisions in minimal media they would otherwise be unable to grow in. If the cells can 
truly grow in this media, then they should be able to grow for more than a few 
generations. 
 
Table 2: OD600 values for growth experiment in modified MM9. Each column represents 
a different time point across three days. 
Time 
Morn-
ing  
#1 
Mid-
day  
#1 
After-
noon  
#1 
Morn-
ing  
#2 
Mid-
day  
#2 
After-
noon  
#2 
Morn-
ing  
#3 
Mid-
day  
#3 
OD600 
6.56 
7.16 
7.08 
6.16 
7.09 
6.7 
8.59 
7.9 
 
Table 2 shows the OD600 values over time of P. alloputida cells passaged in LB (Day 
0) and modified MM9 (Days 1-3). From these high and stagnating OD values, it is clear 
that these wildtype cells grow fine in modified MM9 without supplements, base edits, or 
plasmids. Therefore, modified MM9 can serve as a medium for comparing growth 
patterns between wildtype and base edited P. alloputida cells. 
 
Protospacer design for nadA in P. alloputida and C. glutamicum 
Protospacers to guide the dCas9/deaminase fusions must be targeted to precise loci 
to ensure nadA knockout with minimal potential for off-target effects. Because removal 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
26 
 
of catalytic residues is vital to the knockout of NadA function, targets for pAblo and 
pCasso protospacers were carefully chosen using CRISPy-web software and manual 
analysis in Benchling. The final pCasso protospacers were chosen to introduce stop 
codons at Q41 (PAM: TGG), Q187 (PAM: CGG), W197 (PAM: CGG), Q211 (non-canonical 
PAM), and Q252 (non-canonical PAM)--some among the catalytic triad, some between 
the catalytic triad and cavity II, and one closer to the beginning of the sequence to 
introduce a stop codon after the first potentially catalytic residue (Figure 8A).  
 
Table 3: Truncated CRISPy-web results of pAblo and pCasso protospacers with 
canonical PAM sequences. Each row represents one of the three chosen protospacers, 
including its location, strand, amino acid change, and potential predicted off-target 
matches. The top three results are pCasso protospacers, and the bottom two results 
are pAblo protospacers. 
Start 
End 
Strand 
Mutation(s) 
Off-target 
hits with 
mismatches 
of 0 bp 
Off-target 
hits with 
mismatches 
of 1 bp 
Off-target 
hits with 
mismatches 
of 2 bp 
549 
572 
1 
Q187* 
0 
0 
6 
574 
597 
-1 
W197*, 
D198N 
0 
4 
46 
113 
136 
1 
A40V, Q41* 
0 
5 
36 
451 
474 
-1 
S157P 
1 
1 
27 
146 
169 
1 
D52G 
0 
5 
73 
 
Off-target modifications are likely to disrupt result interpretation or cause 
unintended effects on target organisms, so CRISPy-web software was used to locate 
potential protospacer targets with less potential for off-target effects. Fortunately, of 
the protospacers with canonical PAM sequences, none except S157 are predicted to 
match off-target locations entirely (Table 3), creating little potential for off-target 
effects. The protospacer targeting Q187 also has no off-targets matches that differ only 
by 1 bp, but does have a few off-target matches that differ by only 2 bp. The 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
27 
 
protospacers targeting W197, Q41, and D52 also have few predicted off-target effects 
on areas that mismatch by only 1 bp, though they unfortunately have substantially more 
potential off-target effects for sequences that match by 2 bp. Therefore, off-target 
effects from plasmids equipped with most of these protospacers is unlikely but not 
impossible, but an off-target effect from the protospacer targeting S157 may be quite 
likely. 
Canonical protospacers were chosen to have as few potential off-target matches as 
possible. Most of the chosen canonical protospacers are predicted to have no exact 
off-target matches and few off-target matches that differ only by a couple of bases, 
decreasing the likelihood of off-target effects throughout the genome. 
I created two pAblo protospacers targeting the catalytic triad (Y50C with a non-
canonical CAC PAM sequence, D52G with a canonical AGG PAM sequence), one 
targeting cavity II (S157P), and one targeting another location that was empirically 
shown to cause loss of activity when mutated (Y140H) (Figure 8B) (Volbeda et al., 2016). 
This array of targets should provide a number of opportunities to achieve nadA 
knockout by replacing various potential catalytic residues throughout the nadA gene. 
After protospacer targets were chosen for pAblo and pCasso, protospacers were 
created for ligation into the vector backbones.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
28 
 
A) 
 
B) 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
29 
 
Figure 8: Full nadA DNA and NadA amino acid sequences with predicted 
implemented base edits in P. alloputida. Annotations: codon changes are in green, 
potential catalytic residues are in yellow, protospacers are in blue (and labeled with 
their number and whether they are canonical/non-canonical), and PAMs are in red. A) 
pCasso edits and protospacers B) pAblo edits and protospacers. 
 
Construction of pAblo and pCasso variants targeting P. alloputida 
nadA  
To create the DNA sequences for the canonical and non-canonical protospacers, 
DNA primers (Appendix I) were combined into oligonucleotide duplexes. pAblo and 
pCasso plasmids were miniprepped and digested using BsaI, so that protospacers 
could be ligated into the vector backbone. After primers were combined into 
oligonucleotide duplexes to create the canonical and non-canonical protospacers, the 
pAblo and pCasso vector backbones were digested with the restriction enzyme BsaI so 
that protospacers could be incorporated into the gRNA section of the plasmids. 
 
Figure 9. BsaI digestion of pCasso and pAblo plasmids. 1% agarose gel electrophoresis 
(shown under blue light) for pCasso and pAblo plasmids digestion using BsaI restriction 
enzymes. Wells from left to right: NEB 1 KB ladder, 1) pCasso, 2) pAblo.   
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
30 
 
The gel electrophoresis for the BsaI digestion of pCasso and pAblo (Figure 9) showed 
bands of the correct intended sizes (12 kb and 11.5 kb, respectively), which are larger 
than the largest band of the 1 KB ladder. The digested length of the plasmids is the 
same length as the original plasmids. While this may or may not indicate successful 
digestion of the plasmids, it does suggest successful presence of DNA of the correct 
size, which was then used in later steps. 
Once the digested pAblo and pCasso vector backbones were ligated to all nine 
protospacers, the resulting plasmid constructs were transformed into E. coli cells via 
heat shock and plated onto selective plates. Colonies were then picked from these 
plates and grown in selective liquid media overnight and checked for both growth and 
fluorescence. 
To create stocks of the plasmid constructs in E. coli, picked colonies were 
inoculated into 5 mL of LB + 100 μg/mL streptomycin and incubated overnight.   
 
A)
B) 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
31 
 
Figure 10. Overnight cultures of E. coli DH5α cells containing the pAblo and pCasso 
plasmids with protospacers. All tubes contain 5 mL of LB + 100 μg/mL of streptomycin. 
Protospacers from left to right:  
A) 1-3) pCasso canonical plasmid #1, colonies 1-3; 4) pCasso canonical plasmid #2, 
colony 1; 5-7) pCasso canonical plasmid #3, colonies 1-3; 8-10) pAblo canonical 
plasmid #1, colonies 1-3.  
B) 1-3) pAblo canonical plasmid #2, colonies 1-3; 4-6) pCasso non-canonical 
plasmid #2, colonies 1-3; 7-9) pAblo non-canonical plasmid #2, colonies 1-3; 10) 
negative control (no cells). 
 
After E. coli cells were transformed with the full pAblo and pCasso plasmid 
constructs, their liquid cultures became opaque and greenish overnight, indicating that 
they were fully capable of growing in solid (not shown) and liquid media (Figure 10) that 
contained streptomycin. They also fluoresced green under blue light (not shown). This 
indicates that these cells possessed the pAblo or pCasso plasmids, as they otherwise 
would have been unable to survive antibiotic exposure and would not produce the GFP 
needed for fluorescence. The negative control, which contained no cells (but rather the 
same type of sterile toothpick used to pick colonies) had fully transparent media that 
did not fluoresce under blue light-- indicating that there were no cells capable of 
growing in this media, confirming that only cells with the intended plasmid with 
streptomycin resistance could grow in these tubes, as opposed to contamination from 
another strain. 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
32 
 
Up to three colonies were picked per condition. Due to low transformation 
efficiency, not every plasmid construct produced three colonies on the solid agar 
plates. However, every plasmid construct had at least one colony that could be isolated 
from solid plates and grown overnight in liquid culture (Figure 10). All picked colonies 
except for colony #2 from pCasso canonical plasmid #1 successfully grew. 
These DH5α colonies transformed with the pAblo and pCasso plasmids were 
miniprepped. PCR was conducted on these minipreps using primers targeting the gRNA 
dropout site on the plasmids to investigate if protospacers were successfully inserted 
into plasmids. These PCRs (Figure 11) used the Ins_F primer as the forward primer, as 
well as the reverse primer corresponding to each plasmid and nadA target (Appendix I). 
 
Figure 11. Protospacer insertion PCR results. 1% agarose gel electrophoresis 
confirming protospacer insertion in pAblo and pCasso constructs in E. coli. A NEB 100 
bp ladder was used in the center of both gel A (left) and gel B (right). Lanes (from left to 
right):  
Gel A: 1) positive control (Ins_F + Ins_R), 2) negative control, and PCRs from the 
second round of transformations: 3) pCasso canonical Plasmid #1 Colony #1; 4) 
pCasso canonical Plasmid #1 Colony #3; 5) pCasso canonical Plasmid #2; 6) pCasso 
canonical Plasmid #3 Colony #1; 7) pCasso canonical Plasmid #3 Colony #2; 8) pCasso 
canonical Plasmid #3 Colony #3; 9) pAblo Canonical Plasmid #1 Colony #1; 10) pAblo 
Canonical Plasmid #1 Colony #2; 11) pAblo Canonical Plasmid #1 Colony #3; 12) 100 
bp ladder; 13) pAblo Canonical Plasmid #2 Colony #1; 14) pAblo Canonical Plasmid #2 
Colony #2; 15) pAblo Canonical Plasmid #2 Colony #3; 16) pCasso non-canonical 
Plasmid #2 Colony #1; 17) pCasso non-canonical Plasmid #2 Colony #2; 18) pCasso 
non-canonical Plasmid #2 Colony #3; 19) pAblo non-canonical Plasmid #2 Colony #1; 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
33 
 
20) pAblo non-canonical Plasmid #2 Colony #2; 21) pAblo non-canonical Plasmid #2 
Colony #3; 22) empty well; 23) empty well; 24) empty well. 
Gel B: 1) Empty well, 2) empty well, and PCRs from the first round of transformations: 
3) pCasso canonical Plasmid #1 Colony #1; 4) pCasso canonical Plasmid #1 Colony #2; 
5) pCasso canonical Plasmid #1 Colony #3; 6) pAblo non-canonical Plasmid #1, Plate 
#1 Colony #1; 7) 100 bp ladder; 8) pAblo non-canonical Plasmid #1 Plate #1 Colony #2; 
9) pAblo non-canonical Plasmid #1 Plate #1 Colony #3; 10) pAblo non-canonical 
Plasmid #1, Plate #2 Colony #1; 11) pAblo non-canonical Plasmid #1 Plate #2 Colony 
#2; 12) pAblo non-canonical Plasmid #1 Plate #2 Colony #3.  
 
All bands (Figure 11) were the desired length of ~200 bp, excepting the last three 
samples (the pAblo non-canonical Plasmid #1 samples from Plate #2). Without 
insertion of protospacers, the gRNA dropout site would be substantially shorter than 
200 bp. Additionally, since the reverse primers were customized to bind the end of each 
protospacer, amplification of any DNA would be highly unlikely if the protospacers had 
not been integrated into the pAblo and pCasso backbones. Therefore, due to the 
presence of bands, especially bands of the correct intended size, it is fairly certain that 
the protospacers were successfully integrated into the plasmids. However, sequencing 
would further add to this level of confidence.  
To further verify protospacer insertions, all samples with successful PCRs were 
Sanger sequenced through EuroFins, and the results were aligned with both the 
unmodified parent plasmid as well as the protospacer that was intended to be 
integrated into the vector. 
 
A) 
B) 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
34 
 
C) 
 
D) 
E) 
Figure 12. Alignments verifying protospacer identity in pAblo and pCasso plasmids. 
Each row represents a different nucleotide sequence: the Sanger sequencing result 
from a colony, acting as reference sequence (top); the original plasmid (middle); and 
the intended protospacer sequence (bottom). The leftmost column denotes sequence 
names. Red nucleotides designate mismatches with the reference sequence. Gray 
rectangles in the top row indicate the quality of sequencing at each base. Gray dashes 
in the bottom row represent bases missing due to the fact that the protospacers are 
shorter than the reference sequence. A) pCasso canonical plasmid #1 colony #1, B) 
pCasso canonical plasmid #3 colony #1, C) pCasso non-canonical plasmid #2 colony 
#1, D) pAblo non-canonical plasmid #1 colony #1, E) pAblo non-canonical plasmid #2 
colony #1 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
35 
 
 
Figure 12 shows alignments for the sequencing results that were successfully 
matched to intended protospacers. Because there are multiple mismatches with the 
second row in each sample, it can be concluded that genetic modifications have been 
successfully made to the original parent plasmids. The lack of mismatches in the third 
row of each sample shows that this genetic modification was with the intended 
protospacer insert. In summary, integration of the intended protospacers into the pAblo 
and pCasso plasmids were successful for these five samples, though not for any of the 
other picked colonies (not shown). 
I designed four conditions in total, with two nadA targets (and corresponding 
protospacers) per condition (accepting the pCasso canonical condition, which has 
three targets). These five successful plasmid constructs only represent three of those 
conditions: the canonical pCasso condition, the non-canonical pCasso condition, and 
the non-canonical pAblo condition, but missing both canonical pAblo spacers. Base 
editing of P. alloputida with the five plasmid constructs was then attempted.  
 
Targeting of nadA in P. alloputida by base editing 
To initiate base editing (and nadA knockout), P. alloputida cells were transformed 
with the five verified plasmid constructs via electroporation and left to grow on LB + 
streptomycin agar plates overnight. The transformed P. alloputida cells were observed 
under blue light (Figure 13).   
  
 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
36 
 
 
Figure 13. Florescence of transformed P. alloputida colonies under blue light. All 
plates are LB + streptomycin and contain 3-mBz unless otherwise indicated. Plates 
from left to right, top to bottom: negative control (P. alloputida cells with no plasmid), 
negative control (no cells), positive control (pCasso with 3-mBz), positive control 
(pCasso without 3-mBz), positive control (pAblo with 3-mBz), positive control (pAblo 
without 3-mBz), pCasso canonical plasmid #1 colony #1, pCasso canonical plasmid #3 
colony #1, pCasso non-canonical plasmid #2 colony #1, pAblo non-canonical plasmid 
#1 plate #1 colony #1, pAblo non-canonical plasmid #2 colony #1.  
 
As depicted in Figure 13, for all transformants, including controls, the expected 
results were observed. For P. alloputida transformed with pAblo and pCasso variants, 
green fluorescent colonies were detected. No colonies were observed when no plasmid 
was added to the cells. All experimental conditions, except for pAblo non-canonical 
plasmid #2 colony #1, grew at least two glowing colonies. The pAblo non-canonical 
plasmid #2 colony #1 condition still grew colonies, but they did not fluoresce under 
blue light. When colonies from all conditions were picked and allowed to grow 
overnight in selective liquid media, fluorescing colonies grew but colonies without 
fluorescence did not grow. It is possible that the colonies growing on the plate for pAblo 
non-canonical plasmid #2 colony #1 were a type of contamination, though it is not clear 
why they grew on selective plates but not in selective liquid media. Because these 
colonies did not fluoresce or grow in selective liquid media, it can be concluded that 
the transformation of the pAblo non-canonical plasmid #2 colony #1 plasmid was 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
37 
 
unsuccessful. All other colonies grew in selective media and continued to fluoresce 
under blue light, so it is likely that these other transformations were successful. 
The P. alloputida strains carrying the pAblo and pCasso plasmids for base editing of 
nadA were then cultured in the presence of 3-methylbenzoate. 3-mBz induces 
expression of the adenine and cytidine base editors, which can then make edits to the 
intended targets.  
 
P. alloputida cells can be cured of protospacer plasmids using non-
selective media.  
To see if the Nikel group’s ability to cure strains of the pAblo and pCasso plasmids 
could be replicated, I grew these colonies in non-selective LB media overnight and then 
streaked out isolation plates on non-selective LB. After incubating overnight, the 
amount of fluorescence on these plates was imaged using both 2D and 3D settings in a 
Vilber Fusion FX.  
  
A) 
B) 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
38 
 
C) 
D) 
Figure 14. Loss of GFP fluorescence in P. alloputida. 2D and 3D images of P. alloputida 
cell fluorescence were taken under 440 nm-light post-curing. 2D images are in the left-
hand panels, showing images of plates and colonies when exposed to 440 nm. In the 
right-hand panels are 3D, quantitative renditions of the fluorescence of plates from the 
left panels. In the lower left-hand corner of each 3D image, a small legend indicates the 
direction of each axis: green for the Y-axis, red for the X-axis, and blue for the Z-axis. 2D 
images are comprised of the X- and Z-axis, whereas 3D images have the additional Y-
==PAGE:39==
 
 
39 
 
axis. Increased amounts of fluorescence are represented as higher peaks emerging out 
of the plates on the Y-axis--as well as being given hotter coloration, closer to red and 
further from blue. 3D images also quantify fluorescence (in relative light units) in a blue 
grid that surrounds the plates on the three sides, with higher numbers representing 
higher amounts of fluorescence and therefore higher peaks on the Y-axis. Each image 
uses the P. alloputida positive control (wildtype, no plasmid, no GFP fluorescence) in 
the upper left-hand corner for reference. In each image, plates hold colonies subjected 
to the following conditions (counterclockwise starting from the top left): 
A) P. alloputida positive control (wildtype, no plasmid, no GFP fluorescence), pCasso 
canonical plasmid #1 colony #1, pCasso canonical plasmid #1 colony #2, and pCasso 
canonical plasmid #1 colony #3;  
B) P. alloputida positive control (wildtype, no plasmid, no GFP fluorescence), pCasso 
canonical plasmid #3 colony #1, pCasso canonical plasmid #3 colony #2, pCasso 
canonical plasmid #3 colony #3; 
C) P. alloputida positive control (wildtype, no plasmid, no GFP fluorescence), 
pCasso non-canonical plasmid #2 colony #1, pCasso non-canonical plasmid #2 colony 
#2, pCasso non-canonical plasmid #2 colony #3; 
D) P. alloputida positive control (wildtype, no plasmid, no GFP fluorescence), pAblo 
non-canonical plasmid #1 colony #1, pAblo non-canonical plasmid #1 colony #2, 
negative control (no cells) 
 
Colonies are just barely visible in each 2D image (Figure 14). Additionally, in the 3D 
images, most fluorescence peaks in experimental conditions are the same height as 
those from the positive control plate, which contained the wildtype P. alloputida strain. 
Only colonies from the pCasso canonical plasmid #3 colony #2 and pAblo non-
canonical plasmid #1 colony #2 conditions had more fluorescence than the positive 
control. The wildtype P. alloputida does not contain any plasmids and therefore cannot 
have GFP, and all fluorescence from the wild type colonies is natural auto-fluorescence 
from the cells themselves. The matching (sometimes near-matching) peak heights in 
3D plates and lack of strong visibility in 2D plates indicate that almost all fluorescence 
was lost in experimental conditions. This suggests that many P. alloputida colonies 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
40 
 
were successfully cured of their plasmids, as they would then be unable to fluoresce 
under blue or ultraviolet light. 
After inducing base editing using 3-mBz, the samples’ nadA gene was isolated and 
amplified via PCR and sent in for Sanger sequencing to verify the presence of base edits 
on nadA in P. alloputida (Figure 15).  
 
A) 
B)  
C) 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
41 
 
D)  
Figure 15. Lack of base edits in nadA. Benchling alignments showing base edit results of 
nadA in P. alloputida. Each row shows the nucleotide sequence of a segment of nadA 
from either theoretical sequences or empirical samples. Theoretical sequences also 
display an amino acid translation beneath the nucleotide sequence. The leftmost 
column labels the reference sequence and samples used in the alignment: (from top to 
bottom) the wildtype nadA sequence in P. alloputida, the predicted nadA 
nucleotide/NadA amino acid sequence after base editing, and sequences obtained 
empirically after allowing time for base edits (replicates #1, #2, and, when available, 
#3). Nucleotides highlighted in red indicate mismatches to the original nadA sequence. 
Targeted amino acids are highlighted in gray. A-D show different target locations in 
nadA: A) pCasso canonical target #1, B) pCasso canonical target #3, C) pCasso non-
canonical target #2, D) pAblo non-canonical target #1. 
 
Mismatches between alignments of the wild-type reference sequence and empirical 
samples (Figure 15) would indicate successfully introduced mutations, but all 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
42 
 
empirical samples match the reference exactly at intended target sites. Therefore, not a 
single one of the target mutations was introduced for any of the eleven samples.  
 
Constructing the temperature-sensitive C. glutamicum origin 
The pAblo and pCasso plasmids needed to possess an origin of replication capable 
of maintaining themselves inside the Gram-positive Corynebacterium glutamicum. 
Additionally, to speed the plasmid curing process after base editing, I attempted to 
modify the the origin of replication with a mutation to introduce heat sensitivity before 
cloning into pAblo and pCasso.  
To introduce the mutation and begin cloning, I amplified two overlapping fragments 
of the origin from the pEKEx2 plasmid using primers that would introduce the 
temperature-sensitive mutation (Appendix I). 
 
 
Figure 16. PCRs for inserting mutation into the Rep origin. 1% agarose gel 
electrophoresis (shown under blue light) for amplification of fragments #1 and #2 of the 
temperature-sensitive C. glutamicum origin. Lanes from left to right: 100 BP ladder, 1) 
fragment #1, 2) fragment #2, 3) negative control  
 
The PCRs for both fragment #1 and fragment #2 (Figure 165 obtained bands with the 
appropriate sizes (384 bp and 625 bp, respectively). This shows that the PCR was 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
43 
 
successful, and it is highly likely that the primers introduced the intended mutations 
into the replicase.  
Then, the two fragments of the replicase needed to be combined into one genetic 
part for integration into the vector plasmids. Fragments #1 and #2 were purified from 
the agarose gel, diluted at a 1:100 ratio and 1:1000 ratio, and then used as templates in 
an overlap PCR. 
 
 
Figure 17. Rep origin overlap PCRs. 1% agarose gel electrophoresis (shown under 
blue light) for overlap PCR of temperature-sensitive origin fragments. Lanes from left to 
right: NEB 100 bp ladder, 1) 1:100 dilution, 2) 1:1000 dilution, negative control. 
 
Although they are faint, the bands align with the 1000 bp mark of the ladder when the 
overlap PCR results are run in a gel electrophoresis (Figure 17). These fragments were 
successfully annealed together during the overlap PCR—the origin is in one piece and 
can now be integrated into the pAblo and pCasso vector plasmids. 
In order to ligate the origin into the pAblo and pCasso plasmids, I digested both the 
insert and vector with NdeI and NaeI restriction enzymes and then ligated them 
together using T4 DNA ligase.  
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
44 
 
Discussion 
P. alloputida Growth 
Confirming the ability of Pseudomonas alloputida KT2440 to grow in modified MM9 is 
important, because it will be necessary to grow these cells in future experiments. 
Previous literature indicates that NadA-deficient P. alloputida is still capable of growing 
in rich LB media without supplementation, but the goal of this project is to create a 
conditionally essential mutant—and, in order to confirm this mutation, the mutants 
must not be able to grow without supplementation. Therefore, the wildtype strain must 
be capable of growing in a minimal medium that does not contain nicotinic acid or 
quinolinic acid.  
Additionally, this project requires understanding of what typical P. alloputida growth 
looks like in modified MM9, because modifying the NAD pathway should hinder growth 
substantially, if not eliminating it entirely (Molina‐Henares et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 
2010). Observing typical P. alloputida growth patterns in this medium can act as a 
reference point for future experiments.  
The results in Table 2 show strong growth across multiple days, indicating this 
strain’s ability to grow in modified MM9. The optical density of the culture does not 
appear to change much throughout the day, indicating that the culture reaches 
stationary phase after each night of growth. This result gives us an idea of the maximum 
optical density that can be reached by P. alloputida cells in this medium, as well as the 
amount of time that it takes for these cells to reach this optical density.  
Overall, this experiment indicates that modified MM9 is a good medium for future 
experiments on the effects of nadA mutations on P. alloputida growth. 
 
Protospacer Design 
Finding NadA’s catalytic residues is important, because their location informs target 
site selection for nadA knockout. Catalytic residues were identified by reading past 
literature describing the location of NadA's catalytic residues in two species, 
Thermotoga maritima and Pyrococcus horikoshi (Volbeda & Fontecilla-Camps, 2020), 
and then running a Clustal Omega sequence alignment to find the equivalent locations 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
45 
 
in P. alloputida and C. glutamicum. The likely catalytic residues in P. alloputida are Y50, 
Y140, S157, H204, E229, and T263 (Y93, Y187, S208, H280, E305, and T340 in C. 
glutamicum, respectively).  
As biochemical properties of sidechains are what contributes to function in catalytic 
residues, the identities of amino acids are often conserved across strains in order for 
function to be preserved (Ribeiro et al., 2020). In the NadA alignments (Figures 5 and 6), 
the amino acid identities of the catalytic residues are conserved across strains (Table 
1): P. alloputida’s Y50 and C. glutamicum’s Y93 correspond to other tyrosines in Tm 
(Y21) and Ph (Y23), P. alloputida’s H204 and C. glutamicum’s H280 correspond to other 
histidines in Tm (H171) and Ph (H173), and so on. This supports the finding that these 
residues may contribute to enzymatic activity, because conserved sequences are often 
vital to functionality. 
Position Y107 in Tm is interesting, because it is not listed as a catalytic residue in 
other literature (Basbous et al., 2021; Volbeda & Fontecilla-Camps, 2020), yet it has 
been shown to completely eliminate quinolinate synthase catalytic function when 
mutated (Volbeda et al., 2016). In the alignments, all strains possessed a perfectly 
aligned tyrosine at this location—Y140 in P. alloputida and Y187 in C. glutamicum. 
Volbeda et al., 2016 were able to eliminate NadA enzymatic function with a Y107F 
mutation. It is not possible to change a tyrosine into a phenylalanine using an ABE, but I 
aimed to change this target into a histidine. Both phenylalanine and tyrosine are 
aromatic amino acids with non-polar, uncharged, hydrophobic sidechains and 
therefore possess similar biochemical properties, so it is interesting that this mutation 
was so effective at reducing catalytic activity. Future continuation of this project should 
consider quantitatively measuring NadA enzymatic function to see if perhaps changing 
this tyrosine into a histidine (a basic, positively charged amino acid) may also eliminate 
activity entirely, since a change into an amino acid with different biochemical 
properties will likely hinder enzymatic function. 
I designed the pAblo plasmids to mutate P. alloputida catalytic residues S157, Y140, 
and Y50; and I designed pCasso plasmids to introduce stop codons between various 
catalytic residues. A map of the catalytic residues in the nadA sequence and 
protospacer targets, is shown in figures 18 and 19. Codons encoding catalytic residues 
were spread quite evenly throughout the nadA sequence. This was helpful for designing 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
46 
 
stop codon targets, because my goal was to target the middle of the sequence to 
ensure that at least some catalytic residues are left out of nadA’s transcription 
attempts: targeting too early in the sequence and stopping the nadA transcription 
prematurely may not eliminate expression if there is an alternative start codon, which 
was indeed found in C. glutamicum (Figures 7 and 19); targeting too late in the 
sequence may allow enough catalytic residues to become transcribed and translated 
for the gene to retain some functionality (Howard, 2004). Therefore P. alloputida pAblo 
and pCasso plasmids were targeted to locations closer to the middle of the sequence, 
with the pAblo spacers targeting catalytic residues specifically (since ABEs cannot 
introduce stop codons like CBEs).  
pAblo protospacer design was more constrained, as the protospacers would need to 
introduce missense mutations directly into the specific catalytic residues. While all 
protospacers were designed to have as little potential for off-target effects as possible, 
the chosen canonical pAblo protospacers have greater off-target potential than 
canonical pCasso protospacers, as seen by the S157P protospacer (Table 3), which has 
one identical off-target match elsewhere in the genome. However, the S157P mutation 
was chosen to closely mimic the S124A mutation conducted in Basbous et al., 2021, 
which was shown to drastically reduce NadA catalytic activity by 85% (Basbous et al., 
2021). ABEs cannot change a serine into an alanine, but proline is structurally similar to 
alanine, since both amino acids are nonpolar and hydrophobic. Therefore, it is likely 
that the S157P mutation will eliminate activity just as much as the S157A mutation has. 
It is currently unclear how or to what extent off-target effects will impact this project, as 
base editing is not yet successful.  
One additional residue was targeted by the pAblo canonical #2 protospacer: D52. It 
is unlikely that D52 is catalytic, due to aspartate having a different amino acid identity 
from the tyrosine that is catalytic at this location in Tm and Ph. While the UniProt 
Clustal Omega alignments do not suggest that D52 is a catalytic residue in P. 
alloputida, nucleotide MAFFT alignments (which were conducted by accident before 
the UniProt Clustal Omega alignments were conducted) suggested that it may be. 
Protospacers were designed according to the initial MAFFT alignment, and therefore 
protospacers were ordered according to these alignments. This mistake was later 
realized after the UniProt Clustal Omega alignments, but, by then, most of the plasmids 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
47 
 
had already been constructed. However, this plasmid was not successfully 
constructed in E. coli (Table 4) and therefore was not included in later experiments.  
An overview of all intended base edit locations, as well as potential catalytic 
residues, is given in figures 18 and 19.  
 
A) 
B) 
 
Figure 18. Full nadA map in P. alloputida. The linear map of nadA in P. alloputida was 
made in and annotated using Benchling. Base position is numbered above the 
annotation ”nadA CDS”, and sequence annotations are below. Annotations: codon 
changes are in green, potential catalytic residues are in yellow, protospacers are in 
blue, and PAMs are in red. A) pCasso protospacers. B) pAblo protospacers. 
 
P. alloputida Experiments 
I attempted to introduce base edits to knockout NadA function in order to test the 
pAblo/pCasso base editing system in an organism, where it is proven to be functional, 
before attempting to target the same gene in a new organism. To knockout nadA, I 
created pAblo and pCasso plasmids in E. coli with customized gRNAs targeting 
different areas of the gene, transformed them into P. alloputida cells, and then allowed 
time for these plasmids to implement their base edits. A summary of the progress made 
introducing each target mutation is given in Table 4. 
 
Table 4. Summary of progress introducing target mutations into P. alloputida. Each 
row represents a different target, and each column describes a different step in the 
cloning and base editing process. Successful steps are marked with an X and 
unsuccessful steps are left blank. 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
48 
 
Target 
Plasmid 
constructed in  
E. coli? 
Plasmid 
transformed into 
P. alloputida? 
Base edits 
implemented in P. 
alloputida? 
pCasso canonical 
#1 
x 
x 
 
pCasso canonical 
#2 
 
 
 
pCasso canonical 
#3 
x 
x 
 
pCasso non-
canonical #1 
 
 
 
pCasso non-
canonical #2 
x 
x 
 
pAblo Canonical 
#1 
 
 
 
pAblo Canonical 
#2 
 
 
 
pAblo non-
canonical #1 
x 
x 
 
pAblo non-
canonical #2 
x 
 
 
 
I successfully constructed plasmids for five of the nine intended targets (pCasso 
canonical #1 and #3, pCasso non-canonical #2, and pAblo non-canonical #1 and #2) 
and successfully transformed four of these five (missing pAblo non-canonical #2) into 
P. alloputida cells. However, none of these plasmids were successful at introducing 
their base edits. This data suggests that I have made a mistake in experimental design 
or target selection, as the pAblo/pCasso plasmid system should theoretically work 
according to previous literature (Kozaeva et al., 2024). There are three possibilities: 
base edits were not implemented in any cells after transformation; base edits were 
implemented in some of the cells, but not the colonies that were picked; or base editing 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
49 
 
was implemented in the cells, but there was not an adequate amount of nicotinic acid 
in the LB media to keep the mutants alive, and they were therefore selected against. 
The cells were given an adequate amount of time for the base edits to be implemented, 
so it is unlikely that they simply needed to incubate for longer. According to the Nikel 
group's results, genomic base editing efficiency or targets was typically around 100%, 
though could be as low as 67% (Kozaeva et al., 2024) -- therefore, it is unlikely that the 
picked cells were coincidentally not edited.  
It is worth exploring the possibility that mutants were simply selected against due to 
a lack of supplementation in the media. The Nikel lab targeted multiple genes in P. 
alloputida (Kozaeva et al., 2024), so this system should theoretically be applicable to 
any gene in the genome. The main difference between nadA and the genes their group 
targeted is that nadA is a conditionally essential gene, whereas they were targeting 
introduced genes that would not hinder cell growth if removed, such as mCherry and 
nicX--excepting  aphA, for which only some copies were knocked out (Kozaeva et al., 
2024). In my final base editing experiment, I did not add nicotinic acid to the media, 
because a previous article reported that P. alloputida cells lacking a functional nadA 
gene capable of growing in LB without supplementation--and only needed the addition 
of quinolinate when using minimal media (Molina‐Henares et al., 2010). But this 
previous knockout was conducted via transposon, which may not have completely 
inactivated the gene, allowing for cultivation in LB. Plasmid transformation and base 
editing should be conducted again, this time with the addition of nicotinic acid, to see if 
this aids mutant survival capacity. 
There was some amount of variation in fluorescence loss among colonies after 
plasmid curing. pCasso canonical plasmid #3 colony #2 and pAblo non-canonical 
plasmid #1 colony #2 still retained some amount of fluorescence, and therefore 
plasmid. This is not far from the results of the Nikel group, which still observed many 
fluorescent colonies after 16 hours of incubation on plain LB (Kozaeva et al., 2024). This 
is likely due to the time-consuming nature of plasmid loss through lack of selection, 
and it is quite possible that another day or two of incubation in LB without antibiotic 
selection would have seen the fluorescence of these two conditions continue to drop.  
Future studies continuing this project should attempt to construct at least one 
plasmid containing a canonical pAblo protospacer, so that this experimental condition 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
50 
 
can be monitored in experiments. While previous literature has shown that the SpRY 
Cas protein can be just as efficient at targeting non-canonical PAM sequences as 
canonical PAM sequences (with both base editing efficiencies often approaching 100%) 
(Kozaeva et al., 2024), it would be prudent to experimentally verify this for 
Corynebacterium glutamicum, in case the enzyme’s functionality differs in a Gram-
positive organism. 
As a functional test to see if NadA activity is successfully eliminated, future studies 
can conduct growth experiments to see if mutant strains exhibit altered growth curves 
compared to the wildtype when grown in minimal media. It is possible that knocking out 
individual catalytic residues or introducing premature stop codons could still produce a 
version of quinolinate synthase that is partly functional, so mutants may be able to 
survive (but not thrive) without the addition of nicotinic acid. Such a growth test should 
be conducted using a growth profiler, ideally in triplicate for each condition—edited 
and unedited alike strains should also be exposed to conditions both with and without 
nicotinic acid to compare their growth.  
In order to confirm that NadA activity is indeed eliminated, in addition to growth 
experiments, future research should also verify absence of the enzyme itself in cells. 
While this would normally be conducted with an enzymatic activity assessment, 
NadA’s FeS cluster is particularly difficult to purify, making activity assessment difficult 
(Vallières et al., 2024). Because of this, an antibody isolation experiment can verify the 
absence of NadA in mutants with a western blot test. 
 
Temperature-sensitive origin 
There is a distinct possibility that the transformation of the pAblo and pCasso 
plasmids with the temperature-sensitive origin into E. coli DH5A cells was 
unsuccessful because of a problem with the plates themselves (e.g. quality of 
antibiotic) or the quality of the competent cells—as the positive control condition using 
unmodified pAblo and pCasso plasmids also did not experience any colony growth. 
Once these plasmids are successfully constructed and verified in E. coli, the 
verification of temperature sensitivity can begin.  
 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
51 
 
Perspectives: Implementation in Corynebacterium glutamicum 
The final aim of this project was to test base editing implementation in 
Corynebacterium glutamicum, and the results so far have made substantial progress 
toward this goal. However, several challenges still remain before nadA can be 
successfully knocked out in this strain.  
Primers and protospacers still need to be designed in order to program the pAblo 
and pCasso plasmids to knock out NadA function in C. glutamicum. There are several 
glutamines and tryptophans among the likely catalytic residues in C. glutamicum, 
which could make fine targets for pCasso-induced introduction of stop codons. 
Additionally, each catalytic residue in C. glutamicum has the same amino acid identity 
as the catalytic residues in P. alloputida, meaning that pAblo plasmid protospacers 
could be programmed to make the same changes in the identity of these amino acids 
(for example, Y187H or S208P). 
 
Figure 19. Full nadA map in C. glutamicum. The linear map of nadA in C. glutamicum 
was made in and annotated using Benchling. Base position is numbered above the 
annotation ”nadA CDS”, and sequence annotations are below. Annotations: Potential 
catalytic residues are in yellow, and the alternate start codon is in pink.  
 
The alternate start codon (Figures 7 and 19) in the nadA sequence of 
Corynebacterium glutamicum is interesting, because the NCBI nucleotide sequence 
appears to suggest that the gene starts transcription at M1, yet the UniProt amino acid 
sequence reveals that residues are only included after M35: therefore, the cells are 
using the alternate start codon. It may be interesting to see if changing the identity of 
this methionine with a base editor would block transcription entirely, or if cells would 
instead simply use M1 as the start codon. Despite not being a catalytic residue, M35 
could be an extremely effective target site for nadA knockout, similar to the start 
codons previously targeted for base editing in past literature (Chen et al., 2020; 
Kozaeva et al., 2024; X. Wang et al., 2020).  
==PAGE:52==
 
 
52 
 
It may be equally interesting to introduce a stop codon upstream of M35 to see if this 
affects nadA transcription, or if the cells will simply continue using M35 as a start 
codon. The exclusion of the first few dozen residues in the UniProt sequence implies 
that these amino acids are excluded sometime after transcription. If this is a post-
transcriptional modification, then introducing an early stop codon upstream of M35 
may not affect protein expression at all, as ribosomes would simply restart translation 
at M35; or introducing an early mutation may perhaps interfere with some signal 
embedded in the first hundred or so nucleotides. If the exclusion of the first few dozen 
residues is a post-translational modification, then a mutation upstream of M35 may not 
affect protein function, unless it is involved in protein folding. 
In order to confirm that C. glutamicum can be cured out of the pAblo and pCasso 
plasmids via heat, future studies should conduct a heat sensitivity test: observing how 
many generations are necessary before colonies lose all plasmid and fluorescence 
under high temperature conditions in non-selective media. 
However, it should be noted that there is a possibility for the base editing system to 
be non-functional in C. glutamicum due to the Pm promoter’s Xyls activator. Xyls as an 
activator has not successfully led to protein production in C. glutamicum (Johnsgaard, 
2018), though it has been shown to work in the closely related Mycobacterium 
smegmatis and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Dragset et al., 2015). Whether or not the 
pAblo and pCasso plasmids may work in C. glutamicum will be an interesting question 
for future investigators. 
 
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
53 
 
References 
Basbous, H., Volbeda, A., Amara, P., Rohac, R., Martin, L., Ollagnier de Choudens, S., & 
Fontecilla-Camps, J. C. (2021). Transient Formation of a Second Active Site Cavity 
during Quinolinic Acid Synthesis by NadA. ACS Chemical Biology, 16(11), 2423–
2433. https://doi.org/10.1021/acschembio.1c00541 
Blin, K., Shaw, S., Tong, Y., & Weber, T. (2020). Designing sgRNAs for CRISPR-BEST base 
editing applications with CRISPy-web 2.0. Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology, 
5(2), 99–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2020.05.005 
Castro-Portuguez, R., & Sutphin, G. L. (2020). Kynurenine pathway, NAD+ synthesis, 
and mitochondrial function: Targeting tryptophan metabolism to promote longevity 
and healthspan. Experimental Gerontology, 132, 110841. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exger.2020.110841 
Dragset, M. S., Barczak, A. K., Kannan, N., Mærk, M., Flo, T. H., Valla, S., Rubin, E. J., & 
Steigedal, M. (2015). Benzoic Acid-Inducible Gene Expression in Mycobacteria. 
PLOS ONE, 10(9), e0134544. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0134544 
Gaudelli, N. M., Lam, D. K., Rees, H. A., Solá-Esteves, N. M., Barrera, L. A., Born, D. A., 
Edwards, A., Gehrke, J. M., Lee, S.-J., Liquori, A. J., Murray, R., Packer, M. S., 
Rinaldi, C., Slaymaker, I. M., Yen, J., Young, L. E., & Ciaramella, G. (2020). Directed 
evolution of adenine base editors with increased activity and therapeutic 
application. Nature Biotechnology, 38(7), 892–900. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0491-6 
Johnsgaard, M. (2018). Evaluation of the XylS/Pm Expression Cassette in 
Corynebacterium glutamicum. Norwegian University of Science and Technology. 
Khanashyam, A. C., Shanker, M. A., Thomas, P. E., Babu, K. S., & Nirmal, N. P. (2023). 
Phytochemicals in biofilm inhibition. In Recent Frontiers of Phytochemicals (pp. 
397–412). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-19143-5.00018-9 
Kozaeva, E., Nielsen, Z. S., Nieto-Domínguez, M., & Nikel, P. I. (2024). The pAblo · 
pCasso self-curing vector toolset for unconstrained cytidine and adenine base 
editing in Gram-negative bacteria. Nucleic Acids Research, 52(4), e19–e19. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad1236 
Kumar, N., & Goel, N. (2019). Phenolic acids: Natural versatile molecules with 
promising therapeutic applications. Biotechnology Reports, 24, e00370. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2019.e00370 
La Cruz, V. P.-D., Carrillo-Mora, P., & Santamaría, A. (2012). Quinolinic Acid, an 
Endogenous Molecule Combining Excitotoxicity, Oxidative Stress and Other Toxic 
Mechanisms. International Journal of Tryptophan Research, 5. 
https://doi.org/10.4137/IJTR.S8158 
Liu, Y., Wang, R., Liu, J., Lu, H., Li, H., Wang, Y., Ni, X., Li, J., Guo, Y., Ma, H., Liao, X., & 
Wang, M. (2022). Base editor enables rational genome-scale functional screening 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
54 
 
for enhanced industrial phenotypes in Corynebacterium glutamicum. Science 
Advances, 8(35). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abq2157 
Luo, S., Zhao, J., Zheng, Y., Chen, T., & Wang, Z. (2023). Biosynthesis of Nicotinamide 
Mononucleotide: Current Metabolic Engineering Strategies, Challenges, and 
Prospects. Fermentation, 9(7), 594. https://doi.org/10.3390/fermentation9070594 
Ly, H. V., & Longo, M. L. (2004). The Influence of Short-Chain Alcohols on Interfacial 
Tension, Mechanical Properties, Area/Molecule, and Permeability of Fluid Lipid 
Bilayers. Biophysical Journal, 87(2), 1013–1033. 
https://doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.103.034280 
McGuffie, M. J., & Barrick, J. E. (2021). pLannotate: engineered plasmid annotation. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 49(W1), W516–W522. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab374 
Molina‐Henares, M. A., De La Torre, J., García‐Salamanca, A., Molina‐Henares, A. J., 
Herrera, M. C., Ramos, J. L., & Duque, E. (2010). Identification of conditionally 
essential genes for growth of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 on minimal medium 
through the screening of a genome‐wide mutant library. Environmental 
Microbiology, 12(6), 1468–1485. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02166.x 
Nakamura, J., Kanno, S., Kimura, E., Matsui, K., Nakamatsu, T., & Wachi, M. (2006). 
Temperature-sensitive cloning vector for Corynebacterium glutamicum. Plasmid, 
56(3), 179–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plasmid.2006.05.003 
Pankratz, D., Gomez, N. O., Nielsen, A., Mustafayeva, A., Gür, M., Arce-Rodriguez, F., 
Nikel, P. I., Häussler, S., & Arce-Rodriguez, A. (2023). An expanded CRISPR–Cas9-
assisted recombineering toolkit for engineering genetically intractable 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates. Nature Protocols, 18(11), 3253–3288. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-023-00882-z 
Razzaq, A., & Masood, A. (2018). CRISPR/Cas9 System: A Breakthrough in Genome 
Editing. Molecular Biology, 07(02). https://doi.org/10.4172/2168-9547.100021 
Ribeiro, A. J. M., Tyzack, J. D., Borkakoti, N., Holliday, G. L., & Thornton, J. M. (2020). A 
global analysis of function and conservation of catalytic residues in enzymes. 
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 295(2), 314–324. 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.REV119.006289 
Robles, J., & Doers, M. (1994). Promega Notes 45. In pGEM®-T and pGEM®-T Easy Vector 
Systems (pp. 19–20). Promega. 
Sambrook, J., & Green, M. R. (2012). Molecular cloning. A Laboratory Manual (4th ed., p. 
448). Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. 
Teramoto, H., Suda, M., Inui, M., & Yukawa, H. (2010). Regulation of the Expression of 
Genes Involved in NAD De Novo Biosynthesis in Corynebacterium glutamicum. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 76(16), 5488–5495. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00906-10 
Tiwari, R., Sathesh-Prabu, C., Kim, Y., & Kuk Lee, S. (2024). Simultaneous utilization of 
glucose and xylose by metabolically engineered Pseudomonas putida for the 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
55 
 
production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid. Bioresource Technology, 395, 130389. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2024.130389 
Vallières, C., Benoit, O., Guittet, O., Huang, M.-E., Lepoivre, M., Golinelli-Cohen, M.-P., 
& Vernis, L. (2024). Iron-sulfur protein odyssey: exploring their cluster functional 
versatility and challenging identification. Metallomics, 16(5). 
https://doi.org/10.1093/mtomcs/mfae025 
Volbeda, A., Darnault, C., Renoux, O., Reichmann, D., Amara, P., Ollagnier de 
Choudens, S., & Fontecilla-Camps, J. C. (2016). Crystal Structures of Quinolinate 
Synthase in Complex with a Substrate Analogue, the Condensation Intermediate, 
and Substrate-Derived Product [Supplemental material]. Journal of the American 
Chemical Society, 138(36), 11802–11809. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.6b05884 
Volbeda, A., & Fontecilla-Camps, J. C. (2020). Structural basis for the catalytic activities 
of the multifunctional enzyme quinolinate synthase. Coordination Chemistry 
Reviews, 417, 213370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2020.213370 
Volke, D. C., Martino, R. A., Kozaeva, E., Smania, A. M., & Nikel, P. I. (2022). Modular 
(de)construction of complex bacterial phenotypes by CRISPR/nCas9-assisted, 
multiplex cytidine base editing. Nature Communications, 13(1), 3026. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30780-z 
Volke, D. C., Wirth, N. T., & Nikel, P. (2021). Rapid Genome Engineering of 
Pseudomonas Assisted by Fluorescent Markers and Tractable Curing of Plasmids. 
BIO-PROTOCOL, 11(4). https://doi.org/10.21769/BioProtoc.3917 
Wang, Y., Liu, Y., Liu, J., Guo, Y., Fan, L., Ni, X., Zheng, X., Wang, M., Zheng, P., Sun, J., & 
Ma, Y. (2018). MACBETH: Multiplex automated Corynebacterium glutamicum base 
editing method. Metabolic Engineering, 47, 200–210. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2018.02.016 
Wang, Y., Liu, Y., Zheng, P., Sun, J., & Wang, M. (2021). Microbial Base Editing: A 
Powerful Emerging Technology for Microbial Genome Engineering. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 39(2), 165–180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2020.06.010 
Wang, Y., Zhao, D., Sun, L., Wang, J., Fan, L., Cheng, G., Zhang, Z., Ni, X., Feng, J., Wang, 
M., Zheng, P., Bi, C., Zhang, X., & Sun, J. (2022). Engineering of the Translesion DNA 
Synthesis Pathway Enables Controllable C-to-G and C-to-A Base Editing in 
Corynebacterium glutamicum. ACS Synthetic Biology, 11(10), 3368–3378. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.2c00265 
Yang, Y., Mao, Y., Liu, Y., Wang, R., Lu, H., Li, H., Luo, J., Wang, M., Liao, X., & Ma, H. 
(2021). GEDpm-cg: Genome Editing Automated Design Platform for Point Mutation 
Construction in Corynebacterium glutamicum. Frontiers in Bioengineering and 
Biotechnology, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2021.768289 
Zhang, Z., Selariu, A., Warden, C., Huang, G., Huang, Y., Zaccheus, O., Cheng, T., Xia, 
N., & Zhu, H. (2010). Genome-Wide Mutagenesis Reveals That ORF7 Is a Novel VZV 
Skin-Tropic Factor. PLoS Pathogens, 6(7), e1000971. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1000971 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
56 
 
Zhou, M.-Y., & Gomez-Sanchez, C. E. (2000). Universal TA Cloning. Current Issues in 
Molecular Biology, 2(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.21775/cimb.002.001 
  
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
57 
 
Appendices 
Appendix I: Table of all primers. Primers are organized into pairs, with names listed in 
the leftmost column, primer purpose/target loci listed in the middle column, and 
forward/reverse sequences listed in the rightmost column. Protospacers are bolded. 
Name 
Target 
Sequence 
F: Ins_F 
R: Ins_R 
pAblo and pCasso 
dropout/insert site  
F: TTTGTTCAGAACGCTCGG 
R: TGCGTTCGGTCAAGGTTCAT 
F: nadAPP_F 
R: nadAPP_R 
 
P. alloputida 
KT2440 nadA 
F: AAGGGGCCCGCACAAGCAC 
R: GTAACTTCCCGCTGGCCTCACA 
F: P1_TS_fw 
R: P2_TS_rev 
 
 
pEKEx2 Origin 
Fragment #1 
(P47S) 
F:  
CGAGCTACCAACTCATATGCACG 
R: 
CAATTCAGCCAGAGATGACCCCCAGCGA
GAGTGAGAG 
F: P3_TS_for 
R: P4_TS_rev 
 
pEKEx2 Origin 
Fragment #2 
(P47S) 
F: 
CTGCAAAACTCTCACTCTCGCTGGGGGTC
ATCTCTGGCTGAATTGGAAGTC 
R:  
CGTCCATATCCTCGCCGG 
F: pCas_can1_F 
R: pCas_can1_R 
 
pCasso canonical 
Target #1  
(Q187*) 
F: GCGCGCGTTACATCCAGAAGCAAAC 
R: AAACGTTTGCTTCTGGATGTAACGC 
F: pCas_can2_F 
R: pCas_can2_R 
 
pCasso canonical 
Target #2  
(W197*, D198N) 
F: GCGCGACCGTCCCACAGCAGCATGT 
R: AAACACATGCTGCTGTGGGACGGTC 
F: pCas_can3_F 
R: pCas_can3_R 
 
pCasso canonical 
Target #3  
(A40V, Q41*) 
F: GCGCGCAAAGCCCAGAATGCCGTGC 
R: AAACGCACGGCATTCTGGGCTTTGC 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
58 
 
F: pCas_nc1_F 
R: pCas_nc1_R 
 
pCasso non-
canonical Target #1  
(Q211*) 
F: GCGCGCGCCAGTTGGCTGACATGAA 
R: AAACTTCATGTCAGCCAACTGGCGC 
F: pCas_nc2_F 
R: pCas_nc2_R 
 
pCasso non-
canonical Target #2  
(Q252*) 
F: GCGCGCTGCCCAGACCCTGCCGAAC 
R: AAACGTTCGGCAGGGTCTGGGCAGC 
F: pAb_can1_F 
R: pAb_can1_R 
 
pAblo Canonical 
Target #1  
(S157P) 
F: GCGCGGCTCGAAGTCACCACCCAGT 
R: AAACACTGGGTGGTGACTTCGAGCC 
F: pAb_can2_F 
R: pAb_can2_R 
 
pAblo Canonical 
Target #2  
(D52G) 
F: GCGCGCTACTGCGACCCGGTCATCC 
R: AAACGGATGACCGGGTCGCAGTAGC 
F: pAb_nc1_F 
R: pAb_nc1_R 
 
pAblo non-
canonical Target #1  
(Y140H, V139A) 
F: GCGCGTGGCGTAGACCACCACGGTG 
R: AAACCACCGTGGTGGTCTACGCCAC 
F: pAb_nc2_F 
R: pAb_nc2_R 
 
pAblo non-
canonical Target #2 
(Y49H, Y50H, 
C51R) 
F: GCGCGCAGTAGTAATGGGCAACCAG 
R: AAACCTGGTTGCCCATTACTACTGC 
 
