==PAGE:1==
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and
their Potential for Allergenicity
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
Master Thesis
26th January, 2025
By
Jade Jaiyeola Norton
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Bioinformatics, De­
partment of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, MSc
Eng.
Jade Jaiyeola Norton ­ s222785
Signature
Date
ii
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Camel milk has gained attention as a potential alternative for individuals with cow’s milk
allergy (CMA) due to its distinct protein composition and reported hypoallergenic proper­
ties. However, the molecular basis of its allergenicity and potential cross­reactivity with
other milk proteins remains insufficiently understood. This study aims to characterise
camel milk proteins comprehensively by utilising experimental epitope data from publicly
available databases.
A key aspect of this research is the development and application of bioinformatic predic­
tive models to assess cross­reactivity in protein epitopes. These models leverage existing
physicochemical properties of epitopes to identify conserved motifs and predict potential
reactivity between them. Existing models incorporate sequence alignment, and machine
learning­based immunoinformatic tools to detect immunogenic regions, but this combi­
nation has had not yet been applied to camel milk epitopes. By implementing such a
computational model, this study seeks to identify key features of cross­reactivity within
protein epitopes, offering insights into structural and sequence similarities that may influ­
ence immune recognition.
Models often distinguish allergen from non allergen by sequence similarity but often the
determinants are from areas within an allergen that is conserved and not the target of
the immune system. This method uses validated experimental epitopes to predict po­
tential properties of epitopes within cross reactive allergens. This method combines an
alignment method for selection of potential cross reactive epitopes and alignment­free
methods for kmer counting.
Proteolytic processing can significantly alter the allergenicity of proteins. Using mass
spectrometry (MS/MS), we examine changes in peptide profiles after hydrolysis to de­
termine whether enzymatic digestion modulates immunogenic regions and potentially re­
duces allergenicity. Furthermore, we investigate post­translational modifications (PTMs),
including glycosylation and phosphorylation, that may alter antigenic properties and inhibit
the binding of IgE antibodies.
The evolutionary distance between camels and other species may contribute to a lower
likelihood of cross­reactivity due to protein sequence divergence. To explore this, we
conduct a phylogenetic study comparing camel milk proteins with homologous allergens
from goats, sheep, cows, and humans.
By integrating computational modelling, proteomic analysis, and phylogenetic approaches,
this research offers a comprehensive evaluation of the allergenic potential of camel milk
proteins. The findings contribute to a better understanding of its suitability as a dietary
alternative for individuals with a cow’s milk allergy (CMA).
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Thanks
iv
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Allergenicity in cow’s milk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Cross­reactivity in Milk Allergens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Identifying B cell epitopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Bioinformatics Approaches for Predicting B­Cell Epitopes . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Panallergens and Allergens in Bovine and Camel Milk . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Prediction of Cross­Reactivity Using Amino Acid Characteristics
. . . . . .
6
1.7
Databases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.8
Machine Learning Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.9
Predictive features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.10 Epitope mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.11 Characterizing Camel Milk Proteins Through Post­Translational Modifica­
tions and Hydrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Methods
10
2.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2
Feature Vector Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3
Model Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
Model Training and Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
Predicting characteristics of epitopes using predictive models . . . . . . . . 16
2.6
Disrupting Epitope Mapping through Post­translational modification and hy­
drolysing conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Results
18
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2
Machine Learning Models to Predict Cross­Reactive Epitopes . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Feature Engineering and Predictive Analysis of Cross­Reactive Pairs
. . . 22
3.4
Computational B­cell Epitope Mapping using BepiPred . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.5
Sequence Similarity Analysis of Casein and Whey proteins in Camel’s Milk
and Cow’s Milk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.6
Human and allergen similarity using BLASTP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.7
Alignment of Milk Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.8
Classifying Unknown Data using Random Forest Model . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.9
Evolutionary changes between milk proteins from different animal species . 32
3.10 Hydrolysis Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.11 Post translational Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.12 Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.13 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Allergenicity in cow’s milk
Camels have been domesticated for over a millennium and have been used in agricul­
ture and as a source of food. They belong to the Artiodactyla family of hoofed animals,
which includes domesticated species such as cows, goats, and sheep. A common char­
acteristic among these animals is that their milk can be safely consumed by humans and
has historically been used, to varying degrees, as a replacement for human milk in wean­
ing infants. Serological tests using enzyme­linked immunosorbent assays have found a
high degree of cross­reactivity between cow, goat, and sheep milk proteins [Caira2012].
However, camel milk proteins exhibit distinct immunological reactivity compared to their
bovine counterparts[El­Agamy2009]
Cow’s milk is the most common replacement for human milk and has been suggested
that the initial ingestion of cow’s milk coincides with the first source of foreign antigens in
children. However, due to the immature nature of the infant intestinal system, its ingestion
can trigger an immunological response. The presentation of a cow’s milk allergy (CMA)
appears with an inflammation response and oral tolerance can only be achieved after
complete elimination of milk from the diet, and after this, milk can be reintroduced and
can be tolerated [ahorst].
Sensitization to food antigens occurs after ingestion, in the gastrointestinal tract, oral cav­
ity, and skin and occasionally in the respiratory tract. The food is digested by gastric
acid and digestive enzymes before being transported from the intestinal lumen to the mu­
cosa through gut epithelial cells. Additionally, mucosal dendritic cells can directly sample
ingested protein pieces known as antigens.[Sampson2018] These antigens then move
from the mucosa to the lymph nodes where they are presented to naïve T cells via MHC
class II molecules, initiating an immune response.
Food allergies are adverse reactions to non­toxic foods and can be classified as either
immune­mediated (hypersensitivity) or non­immune­mediated (intolerance). Hypersensi­
tivities can be further divided into immunoglobulin (Ig) E antibodies­mediated or non­IgE
mediated reactions. Ig is symmetrical protein containing a variable region capable of bind­
ing antigens and they define the specificity of the antibody for a unique antigen. The IgE
isotype is determined by the constant region if the Ig antibody which mediates the effector
functions of the antibody. The non­IgE mediated pathways include the formation of Ig­
G/antigen complexes that can activate effector cells such as neutrophils, macrophages,
and monocytes[cheron]. IgE­mediated reactions, also known as Type I hypersensitivity,
are an allergy that involves a multivalent allergen­induced aggregation of IgE bound to
mast cells or basophils [Sharma2024]. The Type 1 allergic response is initiated by allergy
antigen binding to specific IgE antibodies that bind to high affinity Fc receptors (FceR1) on
mast cells. This response induces an influx of both protein­specific Th2 helper cells. The
activated Th2 lymphocytes secrete cytokines which induce IgE class switch recombination
in B­cells and their differentiation into IgE­secreting plasma cells. In sensitised individu­
als B­cells specific for the antigen derived epitopes elicit an IgE response by cross­linking
IgE. Cross­linking of IgE receptors leads to the release of mediators, such as cytokines
like interleukin 4 and histamine, that cause the symptoms of allergy [Caira2012]. These
symptoms include local skin rashes and gastrointestinal and respiratory tract manifesta­
tions.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: The Type 1 allergy response showing the purple high affinity Fc receptors
present on mast cells that bind the yellow/white IgE antibodies. The yellow constant region
allows the IgE antibody to bind to the mast cell and the white variable region binds the
antigen which activates the cell to perform its effector function. Here the mast cell releases
mediators than can lead to anaphylaxis.
Type I reactions are the most common immune responses to cow’s milk proteins. Their
high prevalence may partially be an artifact of the relative ease of diagnosis to other al­
lergic mechanisms. The diagnosis of CMA is primarily based on the history of symptoms
and a physical examination [Sharma2024]. This study focuses on pre­existing CMA indi­
viduals who have already developed IgE antibodies, which have been primed from cow’s
milk proteins. IgE cross­reactivity typically only occurs between proteins within the same
allergen family due to their structural and sequential similarities.
The area within an allergen that binds to IgE is known as an epitope and this region
can be separated into two types, linear or conformational.
Linear epitopes are com­
posed of continuous amino acids and are recognized by their primary structure, while
the conformational epitope consists of amino acids that are spatially distant in the linear
sequence but brought into proximity through protein folding which is related to the three­
dimensional structure of the protein [Zhou2021]. Approximately 90 percent of B cells
epitopes are conformational [Clifford2022]. The allergenicity of a protein is dependent
on its sequence but also its structure. Current databases are limited in the information that
they hold on to conformational epitopes and analysis of two­dimensional sequence data
is often used instead. However, a protein’s physicochemical properties can also provide
structural insights that help compensate for the lack of structural data. Additionally, the
three­dimensional structure of the epitopes can be altered or destroyed after digestion in
the gastrointestinal tract, further impacting allergenicity.
1.2
Cross­reactivity in Milk Allergens
Cross­reactivity describes a situation where an individual has produced antibodies against
a particular allergenic protein, but said antibodies fail to discriminate between the original
sensitizer and other similar proteins that typically belong to the same family [chruszcz2018robust].
Nearly identical proteins can elicit a cross­reactive allergic response due to IgE binding
to a structurally related protein.
The potential for immunological cross­reactivity between cow and other milk proteins is
linked to the close biochemical similarity associated with organisms of the same phy­
logenetic lineage. Studies analysing the sequence, structure, and IgE epitopes of al­
2
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:11==
lergens find that allergenic proteins from very different sources can have nearly identi­
cal sequences and structures, and that this similarity can account for clinically observed
cross­reactivity [Herman2019].
A unique aspect of allergens is the phenomenon of clinically relevant cross­reactivity,
where allergic responses occur when IgE antibodies that are responsible for triggering
the allergic cascade, recognize proteins beyond the original sensitizing allergen due to
shared structural features. Most allergens belong to a limited number of structural protein
families and structural similarities at both the primary (amino acid sequence) and tertiary
(folding) levels confer cross­reactivity among proteins from diverse sources. While cross­
reactive proteins share tertiary structures, not all proteins with shared tertiary structures
necessarily cross­react. Changes to the primary structure through amino acid substitu­
tions may not affect protein folding but can completely disrupt the antibody binding epi­
tope. Generally, proteins with at least 25 percent amino acid sequence identity may share
similar folding, but clinically relevant cross­reactivity is rare below 50 percent identity and
often sequence identities are greater than 70 percent identity [Aalberse2001].
In addition to biological tests on potential allergens, two decision criteria were proposed in
2001 by the World Health Organization (WHO) for the assessment of allergenic potential,
that specify that protein may cross­react with another allergen if it shares at least 35 per­
cent sequence identity over a frame of 80 amino acids or contains an exact match of any
peptide of 6–8 amino acids in length with another allergen. This metric was gathered from
a limited dataset of allergens and may produce a high rate of false positives when used
in isolation. This approach also fails to distinguish between sequence similarity matches
in regions that are related to allergenicity such as the IgE epitopes, and those in regions
that are commonly found in both allergens and non­allergens [Dang2014].
Sequence­based search algorithms are commonly used for evaluating food allergy risks
in proteins. The FASTA bioinformatics tool is widely used to find local alignments of se­
quences within a database [Herman2019]. One such database, AllergenOnline, employs
the BLOSUM50 substitution matrix, which prioritizes identical amino acid matches that
significantly impact protein structure while assigning lower weights to “similar” substitu­
tions that are unlikely to affect structural integrity [Goodman2016].
1.3
Identifying B cell epitopes
Identifying B­cell epitopes is often an expensive and labour­intensive process that relies
on available tests that focus on sequence similarity to elucidate the cross­reactive poten­
tial between epitopes. However, most IgE cross­reactions that have been found thus far
have shared features on both a primary and tertiary structure level. While cross­reactive
proteins may share similar folds, the reverse is not true: proteins with a similar fold are
not necessarily cross­reactive [Aalberse2000] but this also brings the conundrum of who
to identify which epitopes are cross reactive within these allergens.
1.3.1
Traditional methods of identification of B­cell epitopes
Traditional methods of functional epitope mapping are divided into four main groups: com­
petition methods, antigen fragmentation methods,modification methods, and methods us­
ing synthetic peptides or peptide libraries. Most of the functional methods are based on
the ability to detect binding of antibody to antigen fragments, synthetic peptides, or re­
combinant antigens.
Peptide microarray technology is binding assay method that uses protein fragments to
selectively bind to an introduced immunoglobulin. This technique is widely available and
does not require prior knowledge of epitope locations within a protein. It can happen that
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
3
==PAGE:12==
high­affinity antibody methods and immunoassays can contradict each other regarding
the most relevant epitope regions that increase the workload and need for further epitope
validation.
Peptide scanning technology has been used to identify cross reactive peptides by using
overlapping peptides to determine their binding affinity [rouge]. However, this approach
is limited to a maximum peptide length of 15 amino acids and is a time­consuming pro­
cess. Other advanced techniques for structural epitope mapping such as nuclear mag­
netic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and X­ray diffraction analysis provide precise and
accurate allergen identification but are costly and require extensive time and expertise
[Potocnakova2016].
1.4
Bioinformatics Approaches for Predicting B­Cell
Epitopes
Improvements in allergenicity predictions has come from computational approaches which
have been developed to guide experimental assays and enhance precision, by selecting
regions with a high probability of being effective epitopes. Few epitope­based analyses
have been carried out thus far and predictive modelling may lead to increases accuracy
when compared to approaches that use full­sequence as model inputs. Predictive mod­
elling utilises the knowledge of allergens from well­characterized protein families that have
conserved structural and biochemical features. There are two types of bioinformatics­
based allergen prediction, and both are based on linear coded properties. The first ap­
proach follows FAO/WHO Codex guidelines for sequence similarity whilst the second ap­
proach identifies conserved allergenicity­related physical­chemical properties (PCP).
Computational approaches can help to guide experimental assays and improve precision
by selecting specific regions with high probability of being effective epitopes. Predictive
learning has been touted as a tool for use in allergenicity as the structure of many allergens
fall into similar and specific allergen families. Allergens emanate from relatively few fam­
ilies that translate to a small fraction of identified protein families. A protein family classi­
fies proteins based on shared evolutionary origins and similar biochemical characteristics,
making sequence similarity comparisons a valuable tool for predicting cross­reactivity.
1.4.1
Alignment­Free Prediction Using k­mer Counts
Supervised machine learning­based approaches have been employed by multiple stud­
ies to predict allergenicity based on existing categorised data. AllerHybrid is a prediction
tool based on Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithm that utilises a database of aller­
gens and non­allergens to assess and predict allergenicity based on 8­physicochemical
properties and the frequency of k­mers(k = 6) across all sequences [Islam2021]. These
properties are a combination of z­scores derived from a principal components analysis of
a matrix of 29 physicochemical variables [Hellberg1987] and the expanded E­descriptors
that were determined by multidimensional scaling of 237 physio–chemical properties of
amino acids. The five amino acid descriptors E1–E5, derived by Venkatarajan and Braun
[Venkatarajan2001]include the components E1 (hydrophobicity), E2 (size), E3 (helix­
forming propensity), E4 (relative abundance) and E5 (strand forming).
1.4.2
Hydrolysis Simulations
The tool AllerTOP developed an alignment­independent model for allergen recognition
based on the main PCPs of amino acid sequences. Their method developed further the
machine learning methods and added auto and cross covariance transformations to un­
derstand the interaction between the different PCPs in sequences. Other researchers
4
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:13==
have used AllerTOP to predict allergenicity and solubility. They further simulated hydroly­
sis in silico of milk caseins in cow milk using Expasy PeptideCutter [Zhao2023] The PCPs
of the aligned milk proteins can also be inferred through bioinformatic tool and PortParam
is an extension of Expasy that computes composition and other physical and chemical
parameters directly from each amino acid and not as based on historical component anal­
ysis.
1.4.3
A Non­Alignment­Based Machine Learning Approach
Allerhunter is another alignment­independent method that uses a Support Vector Machine
(SVM) to assess allergenicity and cross­reactivity [Muh2009]. Their work uses pairwise
similarity scores from BLASTP to construct a protein feature vector. The query allergen is
given a Smith­Waterman alignment score against all the allergens in the training dataset.
The results of this method had high accuracy, and the system capable of discriminating
allergens from both allergen­like sequences. The feature vectors of the machine learning
method aim to overcome the fallacy of tools that are effective for high similarity allergen
sequences, but less effective when the overall similarity is low.
1.4.4
Combining Alignment­Based and Alignment­Free Methods
Various allergen prediction tools exist, utilizing either alignment­based or alignment­free
approaches. However, few integrate both methodologies. AllerCatPro is currently the
only available tool that combines both approaches. It uses a k­mer hit criterion [maurer2019allercatpro]w
matches 6­mers in the query protein with 6­mers from a database comprising of a total of
4180 unique allergenic protein sequences derived from the union of the major databases
Food Allergy Research and Resource Program (FAARP)[Goodman2016], Comprehen­
sive Protein Allergen Resource (COMPARE) [compare], WHO/International Union of Im­
munological Societies (WHO/IUIS), UniProtKB [Consortium2025] and Allergome. To en­
hance its predictive accuracy, AllerCatPro supplements sequence alignment with cluster­
ing algorithms that combine online homology tools BLAST, HHPred and PD. These tools
facilitate homology modelling by predicting the allergenic potential of proteins based on
the similarity of their 3D protein structures, from a dataset of known protein allergens.
1.5
Panallergens and Allergens in Bovine and Camel Milk
Widely distributed cross­reactive allergens, known as panallergens, share highly con­
served protein sequences, structures, and functions across different species[Sharma2024].
These panallergens families include profilins (pollen, plant food), polcalcins (pollen), cy­
clophilins (fungi, pollen, plant food), and tropomyosin (from molluscs and arthropods to
fish).
Among allergens of bovine origin, WHO /IUIS has identified eleven allergens, including
two airway allergens—lipocalin and S100 calcium­binding protein A7. Table 1 shows the
major and minor bovine food allergies food from WHO/IUIS. The myosin light chain pro­
tein is also identified as a food allergen but has thus far only been found in bovine meat
products. Cow’s milk contains more than 20 protein fractions, and the significant aller­
gens belong to casein protein (alpha­s1­, alpha­s2­, beta­, and kappa­casein) and whey
proteins (alpha­lactalbumin and beta­lactoglobulin) [Edwards2023].
1.1 introduces the protein content of camel’s and cow’s milk. The content varies between
them but both have caseins; alpha­s1, alpha­s2, beta, and kappa­casein, and whey pro­
teins which differ between species. Cow’s milk contains 30 to 35 g/L of protein (3̃%), of
which approximately 80% are caseins, and 20% whey proteins whereas in camel milk
protein levels are generally lower with between (2.3%­3.85%) protein content. In camel
caseins represent about 62–89% of total proteins, while whey proteins contribute 20–
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
5
==PAGE:14==
Table 1.1
Protein
Family
Allergen
Name
Size
(kDa)
LengthAccession
Protein
content
in
milk(mg/ml)
Impact in cows milk
alpha­s1 casein
(cow)
alpha­casein
family
Bos d
9
23.6
214
NP_851372.1
9.5
major
alpha­s1 casein
(camel)
alpha­casein
family.
Cam
d 9
24
230
CAA10077.1
5.3
alpha­s2 casein
(cow)
alpha­casein
family
Bos d
10
25.2
222
NP_776953.1
2.5
minor
alpha­s2 casein
(camel)
alpha­casein
family.
Cam
d 10
21,9
193
CAA10078.1
2.3
Beta casein
(cow)
beta­casein
family
Bos d
11
24
224
AAA30431.1
9.5
major
Beta casein
(camel)
beta­casein
family.
Cam
d 11
24,9
232
CAA10079.1
15.6
Kappa casein
(cow)
kappa­
casein
family
Bos d
12
19
190
NP_776719.1
3.6
minor
Kappa casein
(camel)
kappa­
casein
family
Cam
d 12
20,4
182
CAA71171.1
0.8
Alpha
lactalbumin
(cow)
glycosyl
hydrolase 22
family
Bos d
4
14.2
142
AAA30615.1
1.2
minor
Alpha
lactalbumin
(camel)
glycosyl
hydrolase 22
family
Cam
d 4
14,4
123
A00865
2.01
Beta
lactoglobulin
(cow)
­
Bos d
5
18.3
178
CAA32835.1
3.0
major
25% . There were fourteen milk proteins identified in camel milk [soeria] from a search
on UniProt.
1.6
Prediction of Cross­Reactivity Using Amino Acid
Characteristics
The FAO/WHO allergenicity guidelines [joint2001evaluation] provide a baseline metric
for identifying allergenic proteins by analysing the entire allergen sequence. However,
there are many structurally or functionally similar domains in allergens that are not ex­
plicitly identified as an epitope and are similar due to the folding or structural qualities of
the protein. Machine learning classification techniques, as discussed in previous section
have been employed to identify allergenic peptides more efficiently. Expanding on these
approaches, this research aims to predict cross­reactivity directly from pairs of experi­
mentally validated cross­reactive peptides that appear in allergens.
6
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:15==
1.7
Databases
Our research uses publicly available data from IEDB of experimentally validated epitopes
of cross­reactive allergens and non­cross­reactive allergens. The COMPARE database
is publicly accessible allergen sequence resource containing 2748 allergens, each sup­
ported by at least one scientific publication [compare]. COMPARE integrates data from
the FARRP AllergenOnline database and curates it into an easily accessible and down­
loadable dataset.
1.8
Machine Learning Models
The tools available include a great variety of prediction methods and due to the newness
of this method and based on the variety of other tool three machine learning models are
evaluated in this study.
1. Logistic regression model separates binary labelled data by fitting data to a logit
function and predicts the probability of occurrence of an event. We will employ
this method as it is highly tunable but due to its nature it does not handle complex
relationships as well.
2. SVMs have been used in many allergenic predictive tools for its general increased
accuracy in dealing with data with a lot of features. SMVs work by transforming
the training dataset into a higher dimension, which is then inspected for the optimal
separation boundary, or boundaries, between classes.
3. Random forest model is another method of ensemble prediction that combines mul­
tiple decision trees using subsets of the training data and averages their predictions.
Feature importance can be extracted from this method and this method improves
predictive accuracy and controls overfitting.
Epitopes are typically found in solvent­exposed regions of antigens. However, PCPs such
as hydrophobicity, secondary structure propension, protrusion indexes„and local amino
acid composition, have been shown to affect the likelihood of epitopes and potentially
influential in predictive models. Other relevant features include similarity to both human
and other allergen sequences [Ho2022].
1.9
Predictive features
Classification of epitopes with the inclusion of k­mer rules aim to reduced false positives
rates [Kozlova2018] The k­mer counting is an alternative method that expands on the
single amino acid similarity by identifying short, recurring sequence motifs within aller­
genic proteins. Since each allergen belongs to a protein family, certain motifs are more
likely to trigger allergic reactions. This method identifies the common motifs between
cross­reacting epitopes while also identifying which motifs do not cross­react despite high
percentage identity.
The likelihood of amino acid substitution is quantified using the BLOSUM matrix, a sub­
stitution matrix commonly used for protein sequence alignment and substitution quantifi­
cation. Generally proteins are considered cross­reactive if they have sequence identity is
>70 percent while those with <50 percent identity are unlikely to be cross­reactive. The
sequence homology to known allergens was defined using BlastP. Sequence homology
to known allergens was assessed using BLASTP, as it is more effective than FASTA for
comparing short sequences where the sequence match has an E­score <0.01.
The structural properties of a protein are closely linked to its PCP characteristics. To quan­
tify these properties, the sequence of amino acids is expressed through five E­descriptor
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
7
==PAGE:16==
of amino acids properties which is based off the PD score [Ivanciuc2009]. This method
creates a value for cross reactivity by comparing the amino acid content of each epitope
pair. By comparing the amino acid composition of epitope pairs, this method extends
sequence­based analysis to include physicochemical properties. Machine learning algo­
rithms applied to these descriptors predict whether a protein is cross­reactive. Despite
advancements in allergenicity prediction, research on camel milk proteins remains lim­
ited with the structure of camel milk is only through computational predictions modelled
using AlphaFold. A tool which predicts a proteins 3D structure based on its amino acid
sequence.
1.10
Epitope mapping
Currently, no publicly available databases contain epitope data for camel milk proteins.
Studies examining IgE antibodies from children allergic to cow’s milk have been used
to check recognition with milk proteins from other species and no cross­recognition was
found to recognize camel ‘s milk proteins [Restani1999]. However, cow and camel milk
contain areas of similarity due to their evolutionary relationship. If a known epitope in
cow’s milk aligns with a structurally similar region in camel milk, cross­reactivity could still
be possible. Epitope mapping is used to identify such potentially cross­reactive regions.
Bepipred is a web server that predicts potential B­cell epitopes from protein sequences
using neural networks and protein language embeddings [Clifford2022]. This increases
the epitope pool by using machine learning to predict epitopes that are not found by direct
sequence mapping.
1.11
Characterizing Camel Milk Proteins Through
Post­Translational Modifications and Hydrolysis
Mass spectrometry assays are commonly used to identify proteins and other compounds
found within animal products. To complement computational predictions, this study uti­
lizes mass spectrometry data from previous analyses of camel milk powder to determine
which proteins and peptides are present in camel milk after processing. In hypoallergenic
formulas of cow milk, proteins are hydrolysed to break down the peptides and reduce
the potential epitopes. Since many B­cell epitopes are conformational in nature, protein
denaturation can disrupt antigen­antibody interactions and reduce allergenicity.
Enzymatic hydrolysis is a widely used method for reducing proteins allergenicity, as it
cleaves peptide bonds in proteins and disrupts epitope structure. If hydrolysis success­
fully breaks down allergenic epitopes, it further supports camel milk’s potential as a al­
ternative to cow’s milk. Inspired by previous hydrolysis studies, the effect of hydrolysis
on allergenicity is examined by comparing peptide profiles between hydrolysed and un­
treated camel milk sample using LC­MS/MS [Xiong2023].
Post translational modifications (PTMs) can affect cross­reactivity by altering interactions
between epitopes and paratopes (the binding sites on antibodies). Research in PTMs in
milk proteins is still developing and in cow’s milk phosphorylation of the α­ and β­caseins
and glycosylation of κ­casein most well­characterised modifications [Holland2008]. Other
modifications occur in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), particularly glycosylation of as­
paragine, serine, and threonine residues. Since, PTMs modify peptide mass, MaxQuant
can be used to detect these modifications in camel milk proteins and expand the existing
knowledge of PTMs in camels’ milk, building on previous research.
8
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:17==
1.11.1
Implications for Milk Allergy and Nutritional Substitutes
This research contributes to efforts to define allergenic and non­allergenic characteris­
tics quantitatively. Milk provides essential nutrients for early childhood development, and
identifying a suitable alternative to cow’s milk is crucial for the well­being of individuals with
CMA. We propose that a cross­reactivity prediction system that integrates the FAO/WHO
allergenicity evaluation framework with supervised machine learning methods based on
PCPs will improve allergen prediction and dietary recommendations. This improvement
in our understanding of cross­reactivity in allergenic proteins, can better predict future
allergenic potential and assess the suitability of camel milk as a dietary alternative.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
9
==PAGE:18==
2
Methods
2.1
Data Collection
Figure 2.1: The flowchart dat collection and its subsequent use in the epitope labelling
predictive model.
Data was collected from three different sources, with all epitopes obtained from IEDB fil­
tered on the same criteria of linear IgE­specific B­cell epitopes. The original dataset of al­
lergen epitopes consisted of 3697 allergen epitopes matching 53 cross­reactive epitopes.
Experimental cross­reactive allergens were identified from literature reviews [Sharma2024]
of cross­reactive allergens and from manual identification from IEDB using “cross reactive”
as a search term. The corresponding epitopes were found for each allergen, allergens
with no epitopes present in IEDB were excluded. The review also documented aller­
gens that were not cross­reactive, and these epitopes were also included in the dataset.
AllercatPro was used to add additional data to the non­reactive category by filtering the
allergen with the lowest sequence similarity to all known allergens. All cow milk epitopes
were downloaded with the same criteria for human hosts and no camel milk epitopes are
present in IEDB.
10
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:19==
The base features for our data were obtained through different sources, which could be
incorporated into a collected download from UniProt. Reviewed entries were used to ob­
tain sequences for camel, cow, sheep, human, and goat milk proteins. Experimental data
was also collected from the UniProt protein database. We collected eighty­six allergens
with experimental evidence of their cross reactivity. A detailed version of all cross­reactive
data and their sources can be found in the Appendix.
The 2024 COMPARE allergen dataset, containing 2,749 allergens, was downloaded. This
included 2,125 full­length and 623 partial allergen sequences. Custom databases for
the human proteome and allergen sequences were created using the filtered COMPARE
database. After data cleaning 862 unique allergens were left in the final dataset.
2.1.1
Data Preprocessing
Table 2.1: The total allergens used in this analysis before epitope processing
Cross Reactive
Allergens
Allergens with epitope data
No
12(23%)
10
Yes
41 (77%)
16
53
28
The data was sourced manually by identifying epitopes from IEDB using “cross reactive”
as a search term and compiled from literature reviews of cross­reactive allergens. The 53
allergens gathered were searched in IEDB for all experimental B cell. This search yielded
3697 epitopes.
To ensure data quality and reliability, several filtering and preprocessing steps were ap­
plied. The allergen database was filtered to remove duplicate values, allergens with partial
sequences and sequences pulled directly from the literature and are not represented in
any public protein database that had a unique “COMPARE ID number”.
The experimental dataset was refined to include only results with a confirmed positive or
negative cross­reaction as determined by serum­specific Ige (serological IgE tests) and
skin prick tests and both sensitizations’ assays and allergic reactions were included in this
term. Further filtering was applied to remove low evidence assays, T­cell assays, non­
specific assays, prospective assays, affinity­only assays, IgG only assays and predictive
assays.
This epitope dataset was restricted to only include positive assays and linear epitopes
with source names standardised to the WHO definitions. Since the exact cross­reacting
epitopes were not explicitly listed in the database, an assumption is made that completely
dissimilar epitopes are unlikely to cross react. To assess similarity, the two epitopes were
aligned and scored using the BLOSUM50 matrix with default parameters, with scores
normalised by the length of the shortest sequence. A final filter removed all epitopes
with a percentage identity below 30% and an alignment score lower than ­10. These
values are based on WHO definitions of >35% similarity is cross reactive and a negative
BLOSUM score indicating dissimilarity, accounting for length discrepancies with a larger
margin The epitope dataset was also filtered to restrict epitope lengths between 15­30
amino acids, based on evidence that epitopes within this frame had the best reactivity
with antibodies and reduces the likelihood of false positives caused by weak antibody
binding [Rahman2016].
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
11
==PAGE:20==
2.1.2
Epitope Preprocessing and Feature Vector creation
The epitope dataset underwent preprocessing before input into the models. The 3,687
epitopes were categorized into two classes—Reactive and Not Reactive—based on their
cross­reactive status in the experimental dataset (see Appendix). Allergen pairs without
available epitope data were removed, along with duplicate entries.
Each allergen has a pool of associated epitopes that were downloaded from IEDB and a
corresponding cross­reactive allergen. Missing data and epitopes falling outside the 15–
30 amino acid length range were excluded. The remaining epitope pool were merged so
epitope had a potential matching cross­reactive epitope. Based on our assumption that a
cross­reactive epitope is likely to be similar to each other for cross reactivity to happen and
to remove redundant data that may have appear with the many­to­many merging process
as seen in Figure, epitope pairs were aligned using CLUSTAL pairwise alignment with
a BLOSUM50 substitution matrix.. Epitope pairs that were below a percentage identity
if 30% or an alignment score lower than ­10 were filtered out, as they were unlikely to
exhibit meaningful cross­reactivity
2.2
Feature Vector Properties
The matched epitope pairs were decomposed into a feature vector with the features de­
scribed below.
2.2.1
Physical­Chemical Property (PCP) Descriptors (E1­E5)
To extract the E1­E5 descriptors from aligned epitope pairs, a derived PD index [Ivanciuc2009]
was employed. Equation 1 illustrates the PD index from SDAP, which is used to compute
the difference between the summation of E1­E5 descriptors for each input sequence. The
resulting weighted Euclidean distance between each amino acid outputs a global score
for the sequence with the lowest PD index. Consideration for cross­reactive pairs with dif­
fering length was taken into consideration by enacting a sliding window across epitopes
and collected the lowest PD value 2.1 and using this index to extract the matching protein
sequence.
This window is necessary for the training data from the IEDB which are not identical
in length as well as for validation using the cow and camel data as the camel pseudo­
epitopes are mapped from the cow­camel protein alignment that has gaps removed for
feature vector processing.
The Physical­Chemical Property Distance (PCPD) 2.2 is calculated for each PCP de­
scriptor across each cross­reactive epitope pair. Research has shown [Ivanciuc2009]
that peptides with conservative substitutions of a few amino acids typically show have
a small PD value, in the range of 0 to 3 whilst peptides with a recognizable similarity in
their physical chemical properties tend to have PD values lower than 10, while unrelated
peptides have PD values that are much higher. The PD index was used to choose the
sequence with the lowest PD value and extract its PCP values as levels shown for the PD
value may not correspond to the PCPD index values.
PD(A, B) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
v
u
u
t
N
X
j=1
λj (Ej(Ai) −Ej(Bi))2
(2.1)
PCPD(A, B) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
q
λj (Ej(Ai) −Ej(Bi))2
(2.2)
12
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:21==
2.2.2
Kmer Frequency between Epitope Pairs
The epitope pairs were split into k­mers using the bioseq package in R. A sliding window
was set over the length of the longest epitope and the normalised frequency of matching
kmers across the length of each sequence was found. This method was repeated for
k­mers of size 3,4,5 and 6.
2.2.3
Amino Acid Composition Characteristics
The amino acid composition of the epitopes pairs was done using the Peptides package in
R. This function calculates the number of amino acids of a particular class and classified
as: Tiny, Small, Aliphatic, Aromatic, Non­polar, Polar, Charged, Basic and Acidic based on
their size and R­groups. The percentage of amino acids of a particular class was extract
for the feature vector of each epitope pair. The default groupings were Tiny (A + C + G +
S + T), Small (A + B + C + D + G + N + P + S + T + V), Aliphatic (A + I + L + V), Aromatic
(F + H + W + Y), Non­polar (A + C + F + G + I + L + M + P + V + W + Y), Polar (D + E +
H + K + N + Q + R + S + T + Z), Charged (B + D + E + H + K + R + Z), Basic (H + K + R),
Acidic (B + D + E + Z).
2.2.4
Local Similarity to the Human Proteome and Allergen Database
Using BLASTP
A local reference database was constructed by extracting all accession numbers of known
allergens from COMPARE Database (a curated, non­redundant version gives 862 aller­
gens). These allergen names were mapped to IDs retrieved from Entrez, forming a local
BLASTP database. The results were filtered to exclude identical proteins and those with
the same accession number. The same procedure was used to create a local human pro­
teome reference database. The reviewed human proteome was download from UniProt
containing 40,812 proteins.
Each cross­reactive epitope pair was searched against each database and the top hits
was displayed in the feature vector. Filtering was applied to retain only matches with a
percentage identity greater than 50 percent, ensuring that only distinct, non­identical hit
proteins and their associated percentage identities were included.
All results were filtered to include results with an E­value <0.01 which corresponded to
the number of expected hits of similar scores that could be found by chance within the
database and was thus a measurement of the biological validity of the similarity [maddden].
2.2.5
BLOSUM Substitution Scoring
A sliding window approach was used to compute the substitution score between each
amino acid in the cross­reactive pair, retaining the window with the highest BLOSUM62
score as the feature vector. If the sequences were of unequal length, the window was
adjusted to match the length of the shorter sequence, and the sum of the scores within
each window was calculated. The highest­scoring window was then selected as the fi­
nal predicted value. Additionally, the BLOSUM62 scores were normalized based on the
maximum observed value.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
13
==PAGE:22==
2.3
Model Development
Table 2.2: The parameters for the hyperparameters tuning of the predictive models. The
optimal parameters were found during the cross­validation folds. The tuning range was
set from the default range of each parameter
Model
ParameterTuning range
Description
Random forest
Mtry
2:10
How many of the input features a
decision tree has available to
consider at any given point in time
(controls the randomness of
features)
Random forest
node.size 1,3,5
sets the depth of your trees.
Support Vector
Machine
sigma
0:1 , steps=0.1
Controls the spread of the
Gaussian function, Influencing how
much influence a single training
example has
Support Vector
Machine
C
0.5:8, steps =0.5
Trades off correct classification of
training examples against
maximization of the decision
function’s margin.
Logistic regression
­
­
­
The data was cleaned to increase performance of the model by removing unwanted or
redundant observations, fixing structural errors, managing unwanted outliers and to han­
dling missing data.
We used a supervised classification machine learning approach on numerical data for
our predictive modelling of cross­reactive epitopes. Our three choose models Logistic re­
gression, Support Vector Machines (SVMs), and Random Forest algorithms were applied
to the dataset from the glm, ranger and svmRadial methods in the caret package in R
[Kuhn2008]. To ensure the optimal performance of our models, we utilized a grid search
approach to tune the hyperparameters of the algorithm which are listed in Table2.2
14
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:23==
2.4
Model Training and Evaluation
Figure 2.2: The predictive label encompasses multiple stages showcased here. The data
is partitioned into ten portions and split into testing (30%) and training (70%). The cross­
validation process is used each combination of hyperparameters to train a new model and
this cycle is repeated 3 times for each model.
After processing of the epitopes into epitopes feature vectors, the dataset was separated
into training and test sets using a 70:30 split, ensuring that a larger portion of the data was
available for model training while reserving the smaller subset for testing. Each model
was trained with five­fold cross validation, where the dataset was divided into five equal
partitions. four partitions were used for training, while the remaining partition served as
the validation set for model evaluation.
Hyperparameter tuning was carried out after the initial validation of the trained models.
Within each fold each model was trained using multiple parameter combinations and the
model with the highest accuracy, as determined by its ROC score, was selected. ?? illus­
trates the five­fold cross­validation protocol that is applied for each of the three models.
Performance metrics, including accuracy levels, optimal tuning parameters and variable
importance for each model was extracted. A comparative analysis of these metrics was
then conducted to determine the most effective final model for cross­reactivity prediction.
2.4.1
Evaluation Metrics
The predictive performance of the models was assessed using sensitivity, specificity and
accuracy, and the area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC and
ROC). The ROC curve summarized the model’s performance by evaluating the trade­offs
between true sensitivity and false positive rate (1­ specificity). The Area Under the Curve
(AUC) was calculated and used to define the accuracy of each model. Both sensitivity
and specificity of the models were extracted from confusion matrix and used to calculated
accuracy. These metrics provided a comprehensive assessment of model performance,
ensuring that both predictive accuracy and classification reliability were considered.
The metrics include the following definitions: TP (true positives) which stands for known
cross­reactivity and TN (true negatives) for non­ cross­reactive protein sequences. FN
(false negatives) denotes known cross reactive pairs predicted as non­ cross­reactive,
and FP (false positives) represents cross reactive pairs predicted as cross reactive.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
15
==PAGE:24==
2.5
Predicting characteristics of epitopes using predictive
models
2.5.1
Principal Component Analysis
A multivariate PCA Principal components analysis (PCA) was performed to visually iden­
tify clusters of closely related data points from the features of the predictive model. This
technique reduces the dimensionality of the dataset and removes the classification labels
to perform unsupervised machine learning on the data. The main principal components,
which are linear combinations of the original predictors, were examined to determine the
extent of variance that they explain, providing insights into the underlying structure of the
dataset.
2.5.2
Feature Importance and Reduced Models
The most important features were selected for further analysis of camel milk proteins
by evaluating the feature importance of the best­performing model after cross­validation.
The thresholds that cause camel milk to cross reactive to cow’s milk for each features was
then determined for camel milk.
The best­performing model was then re­trained on a reduced feature­set, determined from
the variable importance metrics of the model. Data corresponding to these features was
extracted to build an additional model. These features were used to subset the initial
predictive model, creating a new model trained on a significantly reduced feature set,
based on the same framework in figure
2.5.3
Prediction and Epitope Mapping of Linear B­Cell Epitopes in Camel
Milk Proteins
The linear B­cell epitopes of camel milk proteins were predicted using the BepiPred 2.0
web server. The proteins used were reviewed UniProt proteins alpha s1, alpha s3, kappa
casein, alpha lactalbumin, serum albumin and beta casein. The top epitope percent­
age cutoff was set at 20 %and the classification threshold was left at the default 0.1512.
The sequences containing potential epitopes was extracted for the output file. These
sequences were then filtered to identify continuous stretches of capitalized amino acids,
indicating the presence of epitopes, with a threshold of at least 5 amino acids in length.
We performed epitope mapping on the cow and camel proteins by aligning and grouping
by protein type and performing a multiple sequence alignment using CLUSTAL. Pseudo
camel epitopes were created by aligning the cow epitope to the aligned camel protein
sequence using the given Epitope – Starting Position and Epitope – Ending Position. Any
gaps introduced during this alignment process were removed before the dataset was used
in the trained predictive model.
2.5.4
Search Algorithm and Hit Extraction Predictions using WHO
guidelines
The FASTA35 program was used to search for >35 %identity over 80 amino acids be­
tween the camel milk protein query (whole sequence) and known allergens in the FAARP
database accessed on allergenonline.org with default search parameters (Matrix = BLO­
SUM50, E­value = 10­15). The number of hits for each protein and the hits in an 8mer
exact match were recorded. This search is based on the FAO/WHO guidelines for aller­
genicity a query protein is potentially allergenic if it either has an identity of at least eight
contiguous amino acids or more than 35 %sequence similarity over a window of 80 amino
acids when compared with a known allergen. Any query protein is labelled as allergenic,
if either of the two criteria were fulfilled after searching the database.
16
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:25==
2.5.5
Phylogenetic Analysis
It has been established that phylogenetically related species often have similar proteins,
and this similarity can implicate IgE cross­reactivity[soeria]. We aligned the dataset con­
taining caseins and whey proteins from sheep, cow, camel, human, and goat using CLUSTAL
multiple sequence alignment. A PhyML maximum­likelihood phylogenetic tree was cre­
ated in Seaview [Gouy2010] for each reviewed milk protein. The maximum likelihood
trees used the BLOSUM62 substitution model as an evolutionary model.
2.6
Disrupting Epitope Mapping through Post­translational
modification and hydrolysing conditions
Post­translational modification (PTM) information was gathered from Uniprot in GFF for­
mat, as well as from the phospho.txt MaxQuant output, and was mapped onto the camel
epitope
The raw files from the mass spectrometry analysis were processed using the MaxQuant
1.5.5.1, software and searched against a curated list of identified reviewed milk proteins in
camel and cow gathered from the Uniprot database. Protein FDR and peptide FDR were
set to ≤0.01 based on the target­decoy strategy to confirm the amino acid composition of
the peptides
The samples used in the MS/MS experiments were
• Samples 1 and 2: Hydrolyzed using Alcalase and de­glycosylated (repeat experi­
ments).
• Samples 5 and 6: Control experiments, de­glycosylated and without hydrolysis treat­
ment (repeat experiments).
All samples were treated with trypsin, cysteine reduced and amidated. These four raw
file samples were used as input into MaxQuant,
Variable modifications in the MaxQuant analysis we set to protein N­terminal acetylation
and oxidation of methionine. Trypsin was used as proteolytic enzyme. Additional param­
eters included variable modifications of phosphorylation on serine and threonine with an
unspecific digest and the inclusion of peptides ranging from 4 to 45 amino acids in length.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
17
==PAGE:26==
3
Results
3.1
Data Collection
We initiated this research by collecting the cross­reactive dataset containing epitopes and
protein sequences. We identified fifty­three cross­reactive allergens from the experimen­
tal data sources on cross­reactivity and after removing allergens without associated ex­
perimental IgE B­cell epitopes, we were left with a final dataset of twenty­eight allergens.
This dataset contained allergens from the animal, plant and singularly from the fungi king­
dom and due to the small pool of allergens identified; data from all kingdoms were used
in the predictive model. Each allergen had a varying number of associated epitopes,
leading to an unequal distribution, however, further processing of epitopes changes the
proportion of epitopes per allergens. The collected data set was also imbalanced with
six non­reactive allergens to twenty reactive allergens. The input data for the predictive
model consisted of seventeen distinct allergens. This was reduced from twenty after epi­
tope filtering based on similarity criteria.
3.1.1
Feature Vector Creation
Figure 3.1: Length distribution of unique linear B­cell epitopes in 693 epitopes from the
twenty­eight allergens used as input into the predictive model. The epitope span from
3­53 amino acids in length
We used the filtered dataset of 693 unique epitopes from twenty­eight allergens as input
into the many­to­many merging process. The initial dataset of over 31,000 epitopes con­
tained duplicate entries and redundancies. We reduced this and restricted the dataset
to epitopes that we thought could be cross­reactive based on the sequence similarity on
the FAO/WHO guidelines of a protein stating that allergens with a similarity > 35% are
likely to be cross­reactive. The other metric stating that all epitopes are likely greater than
50% was also tried as a filtering method but this reduced the dataset considerably and
would have potentially led to less accurate predictions. The addition of a filter on only
epitopes with an alignment score greater than ­10 aimed to filter out epitope pairs with
unlikely or detrimental substitutions. The data was then labelled as cross reactive based
18
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:27==
on the source experimental evidence for each allergen from the experimental dataset (see
Appendix).
The final validation set would use epitopes from camel milk and due to the lack of epi­
topes for camel milk found in on IEDB, all epitopes were predicted. Epitope mapping was
performed using an initial dataset of 265 positive linear B­cell epitopes for bovine pro­
teins from a human host. After removing duplicates from the results of multiple assays
which resulted in the same epitope, there was a final dataset of 213 unique B­cell bovine
epitopes for milk allergy.
3.1.2
Baseline Allergenicity using WHO Guidelines
Table 3.1: The results of the FASTA35 and 8mer match searching algorithm from Al­
lergenOnline. The camel milk allergens all produced results for at least one match from
the database of allergens that the algorithm searched against. The number of unique se­
quence sources for the similarity searching are list by protein name [species] and some
proteins had multiple versions that account for the multiple sequence hits with a reduced
unique name list
Name
Sequence
hits
Unique name of sequence
hits
Highest %ID
Sequences
with
at
least
one
8mer
match
Alpha­S1­casein
7
alpha S1 casein [Bos taurus]
53.72%
2
Alpha­S2­casein
1
alpha­S2­casein
precursor
[Bos taurus]
63.79%
1
beta­casein
22
Beta­casein
[Bos
tau­
rus];omega/beta/alpha gliadin
[Triticum aestivum]
77.50%;
39.50%
9
Kappa­casein
2
kappa­casein precursor [Bos
taurus]
70.01%
2
Alpha­
lactalbumin
6
alpha­lactalbumin [Bos taurus];
lysozyme C, milk[Equus asi­
nus]; Lysozyme C, milk [Equus
caballus]; Lysozyme C precur­
sor [Gallus gallus]
77.52%;
46.3%;
45.2%;
38.8%
2
Serum Albumin
10
albumin [Bos taurus]; |albumin,
partial [Sus scrofa]; preproal­
bumin [Equus caballus]; albu­
min precursor [Felis catus]; al­
bumin [Canis familiaris] pre­
proalbumin
(serum
albumin)
[Gallus gallus]
92.50%
;88.70%;
88.70%;
87.50%:
83.80%;
55.00%
10
We defined the baseline of allergenicity using the WHO Guidelines using the AllergenOn­
line tools for identification. We queried all casein and whey camel milk protein sequences
against the AllergenOnline database using their FASTA35 sliding window and 8mer match
to create a baseline of allergenicity based on the WHO/FAO guidelines. Table 3.1 shows
that every camel milk protein was predicted to cross react with a milk protein from cow’s
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
19
==PAGE:28==
milk protein >35% and with at least one 8mer match.
All camel milk proteins were predicted to be allergenic based on this primitive sequence
similarity approach. It is notable that Bos taurus is the species that appears the most
in the similarity search. Despite the high percentage id in the caseins the 8mer match
sequences are low, especially for the alpha caseins.
3.2
Machine Learning Models to Predict Cross­Reactive
Epitopes
Figure 3.2: The ROC score, sensitivity and Specifcity of each model random forest (RF),
support vector machine (SVM) and logistic regression model (glm). These values were
computed for each cross­validation fold. Each scale is from 0­1 which 1 representing the
highest accuracy or equivalent metric. The error bars show range of values that were
collected for each cross­validation fold. The final model was taken from a combination of
these metrics that resulted in the highest accuracy.
We determined the most optimal model as seen in Figure 3.2.The hyperparameters were
optimised at each fold over three random resampling repetitions. The most accurate
model was found to be the random forest model. The accuracy of this model after training
was measured using on the out of bag (OOB) error which was 0.005779 for the best tree.
The SVM model was the second best model with a high accuracy giving a training error
of 0.00279. The kappa statistic for the SVM was 0.8116 suggesting a slightly reduced
accuracy for the imbalanced dataset. Figure 3.2 shows the range of performance values
for each model validated using the test set. The random forest model was selected as
the best model as it the most accurate final model from the cross validation combining the
highest accuracy, sensitivity and high specificity. The high specificity in all models is due
to the imbalanced dataset which favours the positive predictor of reactive.
20
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:29==
3.2.1
Hyperparameter tuning in random forests
Figure 3.3: The probability of reactivity per labelled class for each model. The reactive
class was clearly identified in each model and almost 100% of the testing data was la­
belled as reactive. Across all models the non­reactive data had a wider distribution of
probabilities.
The accuracy of the Random Forest model at different node sizes, highlighting the mod­
els performance increasing as the number of random selected predictors increases. The
difference in metrics has a marginal difference to the accuracy. The final optimized model
was selected based on its superior performance metrics, demonstrated the highest predic­
tive accuracy among all models tested. The random forest model was chosen for further
predictions due to its ability to distinguish between reactive and non­reactive epitopes with
minimal over­fitting and highest specificity.
Figure 3.3 shows the probability of each prediction label. The probability of the epitope
pair being classed as reactive or non­reactive was found for each model. The non reactive
sequences had a wider range of probabilities indicating separating the non­reactive se­
quences from each other was more difficult than the reactive due to more variable features
found for predicting a non­reactive epitope pair
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
21
==PAGE:30==
3.3
Feature Engineering and Predictive Analysis of
Cross­Reactive Pairs
3.3.1
Model Accuracy using ROC Curve Analysis
The next step of our research focused on constructing features derived from PCPs and
k­mer counts of the cross­reactive epitope pairs. These features were then used in pre­
dictive models to evaluate their discriminatory power in classifying cross­reactivity.
Figure 3.4: The k­mer count frequency, amino acid composition and the E1­E5 descriptors
were seperated into ROC curves and the AUC calculated for theh random forest model
on the test data. The purple line (predict) is the overall accuracy of the random forest
model. The curve shows the false positive rate vs the true positive rate
To determine which features were the most important in identifying an epitope as cross­
reactive multiple algorithms were tested to find their accuracy in predicting cross reactivity
based on the identified novel experimental data.
The ROV curves (shown in the figure) illustrate the predictive performance of the different
22
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:31==
feature vector groups, helping to assess their individual contributions. The Area Under
the Curve (AUC) values provide a quantitative measure of each feature’s effectiveness in
distinguishing reactive from non­reactive epitopes.
The Area Under the Curve (AUC) values demonstrated that E1­E5 descriptors had low
predictive power, indicating minimal impact on classification accuracy. In contrast, amino
acid composition features exhibited AUC values ranging from 0.583 to 0.847, suggesting
a more significant role in distinguishing cross­reactive epitopes.
3.3.2
Random forest Feature Importance
Figure 3.5: The random forest trees. This is an example of one of the trees trained on
a reduced model. The splitting used the gini index and shows that mutiple features are
required to predict cross­reactivity but there are may options to get there and not a clear
pathway
To further evaluate feature importance, the Gini Index of the random forest model is mea­
sured and shows each feature’s contribution to reducing impurity in decision trees. Fea­
tures with higher Gini importance are likely to play a crucial role in classification, while
those with lower values had minimal impact. The results reflect the understanding gained
from observing the roc curves as the amino acid composition rate a lot higher importance
when compared to the E descriptors. The kmer values were not ranked as important for
splitting the nodes of the trees. Additionally, amino acid composition features, showed
higher importance.
We used a predictive model to find features that were most important for discriminating
cross­reactive epitopes. The features can be loosely grouped into categories of physic­
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
23
==PAGE:32==
ochemical properties (E1­E5 descriptors, aliphatic index, peptide properties), motif prop­
erties (k­mer counting), similarity properties(blast) and substitution properties (BLOSUM)
The below graph shows the feature importance of from the most accurate random forests
model.
The most important feature in determining the cross­reactivity in the random forest model
is the percentage of aliphatic residues, followed by the percentage of a tiny and aromatic
residues present in the same
3.3.3
Principal Component Analysis of Epitope Features
Figure 3.6: Principal Component Analysis of the feature vector for predictive learning. The
top two principal component are shown with the arrows indicating the vector direction. The
red circle shows the data labelled as reactive and the blue circle is that data labelled as
non­reactive
A principal component analysis was done to show which group of features had the highest
impact on predictive accuracy. Figure 3.6 shows the overlapping data points from the two
labelled classes. There is not a clear separation of the data points but it could be said
that there non­reactive points have more influence from the E1­E5 descriptors as the
surrounding ellipse is skewing left but non of the directionality is significant. The non­
reactive epitopes appear as a sub group of the reactive epitopes suggesting an over lap
in feature similarity. The reactive epitopes have a broad spectrum of weights across the
two highest PCA groups. The direction of the variance is split by the PCP groups so that
the amino acid composition and E1­E5 descriptors are influencing the same directionality
and suggest some correlation between these features and similar magnitudes of scores
that have not been standardised.
24
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:33==
3.3.4
Predictive Models Reduced Features
Figure 3.7: A confusion matrix showing the sensitivity and specificity of the model on the
evaluation data. The size of each quadrant is proportional to the size of the prediction
rate from the test set.
The predictive power of the model was measured with respect to its correct classification
of reactivity based on the actual values. Prediction on the test set has an accuracy of
0.9873 with a high Kappa value of 0.8458. The kappa statistic measures the agreement
between predicted and actual classifications while accounting for chance agreement and
the high value suggests that the predictions are reliable. The No Information rate is 0.9577
which is the baseline accuracy if the model only predicted on the majority class.
The top features were analysed from the results of PCA and the feature importance met­
rics. A reduced model was then trained on this data to measure the importance of the
top features in the accuracy of the model . In the optimized model, we removed features
such as k­mer counts, which had minimal impact on predictive accuracy, as well as align­
ment scores and the BLOSUM scores. The normalized BLOSUM scores were found to
offer the same predictive value, leading to their exclusion in the reduced feature set. The
model was trained using hyperparameters identified during tuning, specifically a mtry of
10 and a nodesize of 5.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
25
==PAGE:34==
3.4
Computational B­cell Epitope Mapping using BepiPred
Table 3.2: Epitopes predicted by Bepipred. These sequences are filtered from smaller
areas within the proteins that are predicted as epitopes but where not contiguous or had
a length smaller than 5 amino acids which is unlikely to be a B­cell epitope as the average
length is between
Start
Sequence
End
alpha­s1­casein
53
QFRQENIDELKDTRNEPTEDHIMEDTERKESG
84
alpha­s2­casein
30
NVSQQKFKQVKKVAIHPS
47
144
TELTEEEKD
152
kappa­casein
104
PPTVERRPRPRPSFIAIPPKKTQDKT
128
139
TVEPPVIPT
147
alpha­lactalbumin
60
VVSNNGNR
67
85
NLQSRNI
91
116
DKEGIDYWLA
125
beta­casein
38
ITHINKQKIEKFKIEEQQQTEDEQQ
62
109
MDVPKTKETIIPKRKEMPL
127
The results of the Bepipred prediction outputted the top 20% predicted epitopes. There
were areas within the sequences that Bepipred predicted as potential epitopes these ar­
eas were a single amino acid, or they were small groupings amino that were too small to
be consider an epitopes (<5 amino acids). These single amino acid predictions could be
part of a conformational epitope but analysis of this is beyond the scope of this research.
A total of 108 camel milk epitopes were predicted. There were ten epitopes using Bepipred
after processing and ninety­eight pseudo camel epitopes mapped from the bovine protein
alignments.
Three epitopes were predicted for alpha­lactalbumin, with the epitope NLQSRNI being the
only epitope that does not overlap with any existing epitope region. For alpha­s1­casein,
the predicted epitope overlaps three other epitopes between positions 53­84. Similarly,
the predicted epitope in beta­casein overlaps a pseudo­epitope between positions 120­
127. Both predicted epitopes in alpha­lactalbumin overlap with a pseudo­epitope, show­
ing a 2­amino acid overlap. Kappa­casein has two overlapping predicted epitopes at the
C­terminus, one between positions 123­128 and the other between positions 139­144.
These findings suggest that camel milk may contain fewer distinct epitopes compared to
cow’s milk, possibly due to more overlap between predicted and existing epitopes, includ­
ing pseudo­epitopes.
26
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:35==
3.4.1
Predicted and Pseudo­Epitopes in Camel Milk Proteins
Figure 3.8: The 108 predicted and pseudo­epitopes of camel milk for each of the camel
milk caseins and whey proteins. The red IEDB label indicates the pseudo­epitopes and
the blue BepiPred label indicates the predicted epitopes.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
27
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Sequence Similarity Analysis of Casein and Whey
proteins in Camel’s Milk and Cow’s Milk
Table 3.3: The similarity of each camel protein to cow protein was found using Blast and
sequence alignment with the proportions found from literature
Bovine Protein
(accession no.)
Camel protein
(accession no.)
Percentage
identity
Positive
Identity
β­casein
(P02666)
β­
casein(Q9TVD0)
69%
76%
αs1­casein
(P02662)
αs1­
casein(O97943)
46%
58%
αs2­casein
(P04655)
αs2­
casein(O97944)
58%
69%
ĸ­casein
(P02668)
ĸ­
casein(L0P3Z7)
58%
66%
β­
lactoglobulin
(P02754)
­
­
­
α­
lactalbumin
(P00711)
α­lactalbumin
(P00710)
71%
82%
A similarity search was run using BLAST to and the alignment results. The most homol­
ogous protein was found for each and this shows that the ¾ of the major allergens in
cows milk had high sequence identity to one another. Crucially the the major allergen
beta­lactoglobulin was not found present in camel milk nor was there a similar protein
[maryniak2018comparison]
3.5.1
Caseins
The camel casein components are homologous to the bovine caseins: alpha­s1, alpha­
s2, beta, and kappa­caseins range from 46­69% similarity. The concentrations of each
protein in a milk suspension differ with camel milk having a higher similarity to human
milk in its concentrations than cow’s milk. Notably, alpha­s1­casein which has the highest
abundance in cow’s milk and is a major allergen has a reduced protein content in camels
and has the lowest similarity of all the allergens.
3.5.2
Whey Proteins
Camel whey proteins primarily comprise alpha­lactalbumin, serum albumin, immunoglob­
ulins, lactophorin (also called GlyCAM­1), whey acidic protein, peptidoglycan recognition
protein­1 (PGRP­1) and lactoferrin. Alpha ­lactalbumin has the highest identity its their
bovine counterparts at 71% and only alpha­lactalbumin has a classifaction as an allergen
on Allergome.
In both camels and humans beta­lactoglobulin is absent and does not have a highly
similar counterpart in milk proteins. A similarity search using BLAST found a lipocalin
­epididymal­specific lipocalin­9­ in camels that has the highest similarity at 30.4% percent­
age identity and in humans another lipocalin protein­glycodelin isoform 1­ has a similarity
of 44% percentage identity to BLG, but neither protein is known to be associated with
milk.
28
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:37==
3.6
Human and allergen similarity using BLASTP
The custom databases for the human proteome and allergen sequences were created
using the filtered COMPARE database. The removal of duplicate values, sequences la­
belled with the database identifier,” COMPARE”, and partial sequences left 862 unique
allergens in the final dataset. The BLASTP database for humans revealed that there were
28 unique human proteins were matches for the camel milk epitope dataset and 1% of
these epitopes were predicted to be non­reactive epitopes.
The allergen BLAST database successfully identified matches between camel epitopes
and other allergens. However, both the high E­value and high bit score suggested that
these matches were not statistically significant.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
29
==PAGE:38==
3.7
Alignment of Milk Proteins
Figure 3.9: The alignment using Clustal of the milk proteins in cow and camel’s milk.
The alignment is annotated by the different amino acid classes polar(green), non­
polar/hydrophobic(blue), basic(red), aromatic (turquoise), acidic(pink), Cyclic (yellow),
small(orange).
30
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:39==
3.8
Classifying Unknown Data using Random Forest Model
Protein Name
Sequence
Beta­casein
LHLPLPLLQS, LHLPLPLLQSLMYQI
Alpha­s1­casein
LRYPEVFQNEPDSIE,
VFQNEPDSIEEVLNK, KDILKEDMPSQR,
DSIEEVLNKRKILELAVVSP,
TEQKDILKEDMPSQRYL
Kappa­casein
RYPSYGINYYQHRLAVPINN,
VPINNQFIPYPNYAKPVAIR
alpha­lactalbumin
GLFQINNKIWCRDNE,
LDDDLTDDKMCAKKI,
CAKKILDKEGIDYWL,
LDKEGIDYWLAHKPL
Table 3.4: The epitopes identified as non­reactive from the random forest model.
The random forest model was used to predict which of the predicted and pseudo camel
milk proteins were classed as cross reactive to their cow milk pairs. The model classed
14 of 108 epitopes as non­reactive. These epitopes were found in alpha­s1­casein (21­
35,26­40, 32­51,101­115, 98­117) covering 37% of the sequence, beta­casein (150­159,
150­164) covering 11% of the protein sequence, kappa­casein (55­74,70:89) covering
22% of the sequence and alpha­lactalbumin (70­84,100­114, 110­124,115­129) covering
49% of the sequence. There were no epitopes predicted as non­reactive for alpha­s2­
casein.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
31
==PAGE:40==
3.9
Evolutionary changes between milk proteins from
different animal species
Figure 3.10: The phylogeny of each milk protein in sheep, cow, goat, human and camel
The evolutionary structure of milk proteins was evaluated using animals in the same ar­
tiodactyl group and humans. We created maximum likelihood trees using the Blosum62
evolutionary model for each of the milk proteins using Seaview. These trees show that the
camel milk proteins are out of the clade of the sheep, bovine and goat group for each of the
milk proteins. The Figure shows the evolutionary distance between each of the species
for each milk protein and indicates that camel milk proteins are in a different clade to the
bovine, goat and sheep milk proteins.
The out­group in these trees is the human sequences. There is a large evolutionary
32
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:41==
distance between humans and all other species in these trees and a grouping on human
and camel milk would not be expected. It can be seen that camel milk is an out­group to
the bovine grouping and this evolutionary distance reflects what is seen in the sequence
alignment. On an evolutionary level camel milk proteins are much further from bovine milk
proteins than from others in the Artiodactyla group. Human milk has quite an evolutionary
distance from most milk proteins.
3.10
Hydrolysis Analysis
The MaxQuant output of the MS/MS run confirmed the presence of casein and whey
proteins found in milk and detailed in Table 1. The results of the MS/MS identified the pro­
teins found in camel milk. It also shows that there are areas of high similarity between the
two milk and camel proteins as there were protein matches from both species. The pro­
teins identified in the milk were A0A5N4EFP0(albumin camel), Alpha­S1­casein (CASA1),
Peptidoglycan recognition protein 1 (PGRP1), Glutamate–cysteine ligase catalytic sub­
unit (GLCM1), Whey acidic protein (WAP), Lactotransferrin (TRFL), A0A5N4DFK4(Alpha­
lactalbumin CAMDR), Alpha­S2­casein (CASA2), Beta­casein (CASB), Kappa­casein (CASK)
Allergenic peptides must contain complete IgE binding epitopes to interact with specific
IgE antibodies and trigger allergic reactions. We identified the amino acid sequences of
the peptides in the hydrolysates to verify whether they contained residual IgE epitopes.
There was a total of 3485 peptides identified across the 9 camel proteins and 8 bovine
proteins identified. A total of 67 peptides across all experiments contained IgE linear epi­
topes from our predicted and pseudo camel milk allergen epitopes. The peptides without
IgE epitopes accounted for 98.07% of the total number of peptides in all samples.
The similar protein to BLG, epididymis lipocalin 9 found from the BLAST search was not
found in any of the samples confirming its absence in milk proteins. There was also a
peptide found from myosin light chain 3 which is an allergen primarily found in bovine
meat but may have some crosslinking in milk. There were no epitopes from IEDB present
in this myosin light chain allergen, but the results of MaxQuant showed multiple peptides
that match .
3.11
Post translational Modifications
Figure 3.11: The pink is the signal peptide. The underlined and bold are phosphorylations
and the one squared are glycosylations from Uniprot. The PTMs found from MS/MS are
included in green. These show that there are extra ptms to be found in camel milk that
have not been found in experimental literature thus far.
The locations of PTMs are not found on the same sequences camel milk proteins and in
cow milk proteins. There are phosphorylation’s on the C­terminus of alpha­s1 casein that
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
33
==PAGE:42==
are not seen in cow milk, beta casein also has some additional phosphorylation sites on
serine and threonine
The glycosylation show on kappa casein are from literature as it is a known highly glyco­
sylated protein, the MS/MS protein samples were treated with a de­glycosylation enzyme
which removed any glycosylation’s from this protein and any others that may be present
within the samples. There are more phosphorylation found from the raw sample analysis
than there are in literature.
The above figure shows the locations of the PTMs found experimentally and through
MS/MS in camel milk proteins. Only the casein were found to have PTMS and none
were found in alpha­lactalbumin.
34
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:43==
3.12
Discussion
To further our understanding of the nature of cross­reactivity we looked to the epitopes
of cross­reactive allergens. We used a predictive model to look at the motifs present in
epitopes and understand which PCPs could be used as identifiers. The model input was
essential for creating the feature vector and the epitopes that we used as input came
from a variety of sources, and kingdoms, which provided diversity of input but could have
been a confounding variable. However, in an effort to nullify this difference, a value was
extracted from the feature processing of the the epitope pairs rather than using the content
of the two epitopes directly as features.
The many­to­many approach to labelling of epitopes was based on the cross reactivity of
the whole allergen and may have widened the pool of potential reactions larger than it was
in reality. This approach used the similarity alignment scores to filter epitopes that were
unlikely to be a match and this was preferred to using the entire dataset. The cut­off for the
value of percentage identity between the epitope pair was used on both the reactive and
non­reactive epitope pairs and may have removed some epitopes that had a low similarity
and still were cross reactive. The addition of the BLOSUM50 score as a substitution
matrix in the alignment aimed to reduce this reliance on identity and use the amino acid
differences as metric. However, it is unlikely that an epitope would be cross­reactive and
have no similarity as a cross­reactive allergic reaction generally occurs between proteins
with at least 25% amino acid sequence identity that share similar folding. And clinically
relevant cross­reactivity is rare below 50% identity and often requires greater than 70%
identity [Aalberse2001]. This assumption for epitope processing was essential to the
validity of the model.
The creation of pseudo epitopes also relied on alignment and the epitopes sourced from
IEDB. A fallacy in this collection was that many of the epitopes did not include the RF (re­
sponse frequency) of the epitopes due to sporadic marking of responses. Many epitopes
were discovered through assays that used selected length synthetic peptides and mea­
sured their response to IgE antibodies. The response frequency was calculated from the
response of individual to the epitope out of a pool of individuals and as 70.5 of epitopes
had no recorded value, all epitopes were consider with increase the false positive value
in our model.
The predicitive epitopes were created using BepiPred which uses a neural network trained
on available epitope data. This dataset does not include camel milk proteins but it does
include cow milk. There are many other features that this model employs to predict B­cell
epitope but there is a possibility that the predicted epitopes may be based on the bovine
proteins. This does not discount the epitopes that we predicted but does potentially add a
bias to epitope mapping only from cow milk as there may be other epitopes within camel
milk that cause allergenicity in humans that are not related to cows and there is a further
need for more experimental validation of specific camel milk epitopes without reference
to bovine proteins.
Within feature creation we used motifs from previously existing tools as a staring point.
The predictive model used an adapted version of the PD Index which used the Euclidean
distance to find the differences in E descriptors between each of the amino acids in each of
the sequences. A future adaptation of this calculation could use the Mahalanobis distance
instead as the E descriptors to encompass a component of the 236 amino acids as this
metric introduces the possibility of covariance between the amino acids.
The k­mer counting method aimed to identify the number of matching k­mers between
sequences that would have an influence on cross­reactivity. This method took influence
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
35
==PAGE:44==
from AllerHybrid and AllerCatPro which use k­mer hits to identify PCPs in epitopes and de­
fines allergenicity through matching hits. The expansion of our method to include smaller
k­mer counts 3­6 did not work as a predictive feature. The k­mer counts were highly corre­
lated and even a combined accuracy did not reflect any significant predictive potential on
cross­reactivity. This method is an alignment­free method and is useful for identifying an
epitope within a pre­existing allergen with low similarity and no repeats but its identification
potential masked when used as a feature of count frequency in our feature vector.
The k­mer feature had another route of creation as a k­mer database, which could have
been created based our COMPARE dataset. This method trialed during this research
but was found to be computationally expensive and yielded similar identification results
to the BLASTP COMPARE database which is why epitopes were used instead of k­mers
as input data to the model. Computational B­cell epitopes have been identified using
decomposed k­mers [Kozlova2018]. This method transformed identified epitopes into
frame­shifted k­mers (3 to 15 amino acid residues long) and created a matrix of k­mers
based on their biochemical attributes and used this to train a decision tree classifier. This
could be potential for improving the components of the model.
The results indicated that Amino acid compositions descriptors alone were insufficient
for epitope prediction, but their contribution improved when combined with sequence­
based features such E1­E5 descriptors. The aliphatic index could be seen as the singular
most important variable for predicting cross reactivity. This could be inferred as the hy­
drophobicity of the amino acid reflects its ability to bind to antibodies as its accessibility
is hindered. Further research could look at the specific aliphatic index between validated
epitopes.
The similarity metric created by using BLASTP as feature for both human and allergy
databases allowed novel matches with human proteins to be observed. The results were
not significant due to the short length of the input epitope which was evident in the high e­
values from the BLAST results. The human database matching was employed to find out
if a matching BLASTP score to the human proteome would influence cross­reactivity but
based on these results it was not significant. Sequence alignment and similarity searching
using BLASTP is useful in identifying areas of similarity between whole allergens but is
limited as a feature in predictive learning. The reduction of redundancy by only using
epitopes is not a benefit for similarity searching.
The predictive model had a high accuracy of 98% but the low specificity within the non­
reactive category could be further improve. A combinatorial predictor that uses the com­
bined features of both cross­reactive features could be improved by separating the input
epitopes. Research on COV­2 virus [Shrock2020] have used this triple model approach
to predict the features of each epitope in two distinct model and use the output of these
models to train a third model. This approach is more computationally expensive and be­
yond the scope of this research but could be used to further improve the model. The
combination of the epitope pairs may have masked features found in a single epitope and
the labelling of the epitopes based on their parent allergen status adds a large amount of
variability to the dataset.
The predictive model was able to identify fourteen epitopes as non­reactive from the to­
tal pool of camel milk epitopes. The baseline model using the FAO/WHO guidelines had
categorised all the milk proteins as allergens due to the fact that each protein had a simi­
larity greater than 35% to an existing allergen and that there were multiple sections with
a 8­mer matching peptide sections. The predictive model was able to categorises almost
50% of alpha­lactalbumin as non­reactive and 37% of alpha­s1­casein. This reduces the
36
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:45==
potential of allergenicity in camels milk further than the baseline model. The proportion
of non­reactive sequences in beta and alpha­s2 casein was low to non­existent whilst
kappa­casein had almost a quarter predicted as non­reactive.
These results are supplemented by the additional post translational modifications present
on the casein from the results of the MaxQuant analysis. The modifications serve as
a potential barrier for IgE binding and these modifications are found in areas with and
without predicted or pseudo­epitopes. The lack of information on the glycosylation of the
casein in milk proteins from this analysis is a limiting factor to the research. Glycosylation
will hinder the binding on IgE in the same way as a phosphorylation and often builds on
the modification due to their overlapping preference for amino acids.
We were able to identify the areas in camel milk that were disrupted by hydrolysis and the
total number of peptides without IgE epitopes accounted for 98.07% of the total number
of peptides in all samples, which showed that the hydrolysis method effectively destroyed
the allergen epitopes in whey protein. The presence of the myosin light chain from the
MS/MS results is indicative that there may be another potential allergy from meat products
that links with milk allergen. Research has shown that 20% of children that are allergic to
cow’s milk are also allergic to bovine meat [roman2023bos] which expands the potential
for research.
The results did not focus on the individual substitutions in the epitopes but rather focussed
on looking at motifs within the epitopes that give rise to cross­reactivity. The final outlook
on the research is that predictive modelling has potential for using epitopes as input but a
link to the surrounding allergen sequence may be useful for expanding the structural view
of IgE binding to epitopes.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
==PAGE:47==
3.13
Conclusion
The research aimed to characterise the characteristics of camel milk proteins and show
areas of allergenicity within them. The consensus is that camel milk and cow milk proteins
have high levels of similarities but amino acid motif differences and post translation modi­
fications within camel milk proteins have the potential to hinder the similarity. When these
results are combined with hydrolysis of the proteins there seems to be a low predicted
likelihood that the proteins would cross react. with milk proteins.
The amino acid composition of the epitopes was found to be the most descriptive of
the PCP features in describing cross­reactivity between allergens. Homologies in amino
acidic composition between proteins from cow and camel’s milk could justify the majority
of epitopes begin classed as cross­reactive from the predictive model, however, the rela­
tively small number of epitopes represented a comparably large region of alpha­s1 casein
and alpha­lactalbumin. These proteins are classed as major allergens in cows milk and a
reduction in their potential to cross­react would be highly beneficial for their use as a cow
milk substitute.
This novel method of predicting cross­reactivity using feature vectors of epitopes explored
one of the may avenues for predicting cross­reactivity and other expansions to this work
could further explore individual amino acid structure effects. Further experimental work to
qualify the exact locations of cross reactivity could use the results of this predictive model
to narrow the scope of their experiments.
Characterisation of Camel Milk Proteins and their Potential for Allergenicity
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
