==PAGE:1==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Experimental & Translational Immunology
Unveiling Cross-Reactivity: A Multi-Omics Cluster-
ing Approach for Predicting TCR-pMHC Interactions
Master’s Thesis in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
Author:
Anne Kargaard Gjelstrup (s194530)
Supervisors:
Sine Reker Hadrup, Professor
Birkir Reynisson, PhD
February 2nd 2025
==PAGE:2==
1
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The work for this thesis has been conducted over a period of 5 months from 02.09.2024 to 02.02.2025.
The workload of this Master’s thesis is 30 ECTS points and represents the final part of the degree
Master of Science in Engineering in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology. It has been carried out in
the section of Experimental and Translational Immunology in the Department of Health Technology
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to Professor Sine Reker Hadrup for giving me the opportunity
to become a part of your research group and conduct research in such an inspiring and dynamic
environment.
A special appreciation goes to my supervisor, Birkir Reynisson, for your excellent guidance, encour-
agement, and insightful feedback throughout this project. It has been a pleasure working with you,
and I am grateful for your dedication to help and support me all the way to the finish line. Your
expertise has been instrumental in shaping this thesis, and I am truly thankful for the opportunity to
learn under your supervision.
Lastly, I want to extend my deepest thanks to my friends and family for their endless support, patience,
and belief in me. Whether through motivating words, distractions when needed, or simply being there,
you have played an essential role in this process, and for that, I am grateful.
2
==PAGE:4==
3
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
T cell receptors (TCRs) play a crucial role in the immune system by recognizing peptides bound to
Major Histocompatibility Complex (pMHC) molecules. This recognition is characterized by a high
degree of cross-reactivity, enabling TCRs to respond to a vast array of foreign peptides. However,
accurately predicting TCR-pMHC interactions remains a significant challenge.
This thesis explores the application of sequence similarity and graph-based clustering to identify novel
TCR-pMHC interactions, based on the assumption that peptides with similar sequence features are
cross-reactive. Two sequence similarity measures, the Hamming Distance (HD) and the Kernel Se-
quence Similarity (KSS), were employed to independently cluster pMHCs and TCRs. Experimentally
validated TCR-pMHC interactions were then used to establish links between these clusters, enabling
the extrapolation of known interactions to a broader set of potentially novel TCR-pMHC interactions.
The results demonstrated that the KSS method provided more biologically meaningful clustering than
the HD method, as it better captured subtle sequence similarities and distinguished between viral and
self peptides. Using this framework, pMHC clusters were successfully linked to corresponding TCR
clusters, effectively expanding single validated interactions into larger networks of potential cross-
reactive interactions. While the results highlight the potential of this framework, they also underscore
the need for experimental validation to establish confidence in predictions. In particular, determining
the optimal threshold at which a similarity score reliably indicates functional similarity is crucial for
maximizing the predictive accuracy of the framework.
This project demonstrates the value in using a multi-omics framework to investigate TCR-pMHC
interactions through sequence similarity clustering assumptions. Further refinements of the framework
could pave the way for applications in vaccine design, precision medicine, and the broader study of
immune interactions.
4
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
APC
BA
BKPyV
CDRs
CMV
DENV-1
DP
EL
EBV
HD
HCV
HAdV
HHV
HIV-1
HLA
HPV
IAV
KSS
MHC
OR
PAMPs
PRRs
pMHC
PTLV-1
SARS-CoV-2
SARSr-CoV
SP
TCR
Th cells
VDJ
VARV
VRPs
Antigen-presenting cells
Binding affinity
BK polyomavirus
Complementarity-determining regions
Cytomegalovirus
Dengue virus 1
Double-positive
Eluted-ligand
Epstein-Barr virus
Hamming Distance
Hepatitis C virus
Human adenovirus
Human herpesvirus
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
Human leukocyte antigen
Human papillomavirus
Influenza A virus
Kernel sequence similarity
Major Histocompatibility Complex
Odds Ratio
Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns
Pattern Recognition Receptors
Peptide-MHC
Primate T-lymphotropic virus 1
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
Severe acute respiratory syndrome–related coronavirus
Single-positive
T cell receptor
T-helper cells
Variable, Diversity, Joining
Variola virus
Viral reference peptides
5
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1
Introduction
8
1.1
The Immune System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.1.1
MHC molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.1.2
T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2
Peptide Similarity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.2.1
Hamming Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.2.2
Kernel sequence similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.3
Graph-based clustering techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Methodology
17
2.1
Clustering pMHCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.1
Human and Viral Proteomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.2
Viral reference peptides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.3
Prediction of peptides binding to MHC molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.4
Computing peptide similarity scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.5
Designing peptide similarity graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2
Clustering TCRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.1
TCR repertoires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.2
CDR3 sequence similarity and TCR graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Connecting pMHC and TCR clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Results
23
3.1
Data presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Data for pMHC graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Viral reference peptides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.3
TCR repertoire data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Peptide similarity graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1
pMHC clustering graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.2
TCR clustering graph
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Exploring TCR-pMHC interactions between graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.1
Connecting A0201-bound peptides to TCRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.2
Examining known cross-reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
Discussion
42
4.1
Comparison of sequence similarity measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Establishing confidence in TCR-pMHC predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Improvements and future applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
==PAGE:8==
5
Conclusion
45
References
46
Appendix A Viral proteomes
49
Appendix B Viral reference proteomes
56
7
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
1
Introduction
To serve a protective function, the immune system must recognize and respond to pathogens and
abnormal cells [1]. This process is driven by the interaction between T cell receptors (TCRs) and pep-
tide bound Major Histocompatibility Complexes (peptide-MHCs, pMHCs) presented on the surface of
antigen-presenting cells. Understanding the mechanisms underlying the TCR-pMHC interaction is key
for improving and developing precision medicine towards infectious diseases, cancer and autoimmune
disorders. TCRs are extremely diverse due to genomic recombination of V(D)J genes, allowing them
to recognize a vast selection of potential pMHCs [1]. However, the diversity of TCRs within a TCR
repertoire remains limited compared to the enormous number of foreign peptides that has to be recog-
nized. Therefore, for a limited TCR repertoire to reach complete coverage of the foreign peptide space,
TCRs must be cross-reactive, meaning that one TCR can recognize multiple pMHCs. The mechanisms
of TCR-pMHC interactions and T cell cross-reactivity is still a debated subject and the development
of in silico tools to accurately predict cross-reactive pMHC complexes is an emerging area of research.
However, current prediction tools suffer from poor prediction accuracy and are limited by the lack of
experimental data available [2].
The aim of this project is to introduce a multi-omics clustering approach to study TCR-pMHC by
applying the concept of TCR cross-reactivity to expand existing data. The analysis is focused on
independently clustering TCRs as well as human and viral pMHCs based on sequence features to
group those with shared target affinities. This approach is based on the assumption that peptides with
similar sequences are more likely to bind the same TCR, and conversely, TCRs with similar sequence
features are likely to recognize the same peptide [3, 4]. The framework results in two clusterings, one
for TCR and one for pMHC. The analysis is carried out through graph-based clustering methods to
finally connect TCR and pMHC clusters using known TCR-pMHC interactions from existing databases
as references. Through the framework of this project, two clusters (one pMHC and one TCR) linked
by a single experimentally validated TCR-pMHC interaction could be extrapolated to link all TCRs
and pMHCs within those clusters, unveiling numerous potential new interactions. Additionally, the
project aims to explore how simple versus complex measures of sequence similarity captures biolog-
ically meaningful relationships when clustering peptides. This approach is designed to improve the
prediction power of TCR-pMHC interactions and ultimately enhance our understanding of immune
recognition by expanding current data on TCR recognition. A deeper understanding of TCR-pMHC
interactions and potentially the ability to predict novel interactions would be a significant step towards
new developments within precision medicine and immunotherapy.
1.1
The Immune System
The immune system functions to protect the body against infectious pathogens such as bacteria or
viruses, or against mutated cells such as cancer cells [5]. It is classified into two lines of defense: innate
and adaptive immunity. The innate immune system is the first defense against an intruding pathogen
and is a type of natural immunity facilitated by an immediate, non-specific response [6]. It is activated
when Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs) on innate immune cells recognize Pathogen Associated
Molecular Patterns (PAMPs) which are present on nearly all pathogens. Upon recognition, cells of
the innate immune system such as granulocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and natural killer cells
Page 8 of 58
==PAGE:10==
1 Introduction
1.1 The Immune System
are rapidly recruited to the site of infection. Here, they play different roles in fighting the pathogen
directly through the production of inflammatory cytokines or by phagocytosis [5]. Additionally, some
of the cells, known as antigen-presenting cells (APCs), act as a bridge between the innate and adaptive
immune system. They present small fragments of the pathogen, referred to as antigens, bound to MHC
molecules on their cell surface to activate the adaptive immune response [5].
The adaptive immune system is a delayed, antigen-specific response capable of forming immunological
memory to deter against re-exposure to the same pathogen [6]. Adaptive immunity is divided into
humoral immunity facilitated by B cells, and cell-mediated immunity which is driven by T cells.
Activated B cells differentiate into plasma cells, or effector B cells, which are short-lived cells secreting
large amounts of antibodies into the circulation to fight infectious agents. T cells classify into CD4+
T cells and CD8+ T cells.
CD4+ cells, also known as T helper cells, contribute to the cytokine
response which regulates both humoral and cell-mediated immunity [7]. CD8+ T cells are cytotoxic
T cells which secrete cytotoxic granules to penetrate pathogen-infected cells and induce apoptosis.
When infection is cleared, a subset of both B- and T cells are retained as long-living memory cells to
potentially provide a quick and effective response to subsequent infection [5].
1.1.1
MHC molecules
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) molecules are critical components in the activation of the
adaptive immune system, responsible for presenting peptide fragments of pathogens to T cells in a
peptide-MHC (pMHC) complex [8]. T cell activation require recognition of both the peptide and the
MHC molecule, highlighting the significance of this complex in inducing an immune response. The
human MHC molecule is also known as the human leukocyte antigen (HLA), and it is encoded by the
highly polymorphic HLA locus [9]. This polymorphism allow variability in amino acid sequences of
HLA molecules giving rise to thousands of allelic variants, each with different peptide-binding affinities
[10]. HLA molecules are divided into two major classes: HLA class I (MHC class I) and HLA class
II (MHC class II). HLA class I molecules are specialized in presenting antigens derived from intracel-
lular pathogens such as viruses or neo-antigens derived from cancerous mutations, while HLA class
II molecules are responsible for displaying antigens from extracellular pathogens such as bacteria [9].
Since this project focuses on viral peptides, only details on HLA class I will be described here.
HLA class I molecules
HLA class I molecules play an essential role in the immune response against viral infections by pre-
senting viral antigens to CD8+ T cells. They are encoded by the HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C locus
and are expressed on the surface of nearly all nucleated cells. HLA class I molecules are made of two
polypeptide chains: a heavy α chain and a lighter β2-microglobulin chain for stability. The α chain
has three extracellular domains (α1, α2, α3), a transmembrane region, and a C-terminal tail in the cell
cytosol (Figure 1A). The peptide-binding groove is formed in the folding of the α1 and α2 domains
and most of the HLA polymorphism is found here.
Page 9 of 58
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
1.1 The Immune System
Figure 1: HLA class I molecules are specialized in binding intracellular pathogens. (A) Schematic presentation of the
structure of HLA class I molecules. (B) Visualization of a peptide bound to the peptide-binding groove of an HLA class
I molecule. The binding groove is constructed by the α1 and α2 chains and has six pockets labeled A to F in which
the peptide is anchored. (C) Presentation of the anchor positions in the peptide-binding groove for a 9-mer peptide.
Created with BioRender.com.
The peptide-binding groove consists of six major pockets, labeled A to F, which anchor the peptide
to the MHC [11] (Figure 1B). Each pocket has its own preference for amino acid side chains of the
binding peptide, however, pocket B and F are particularly important for the peptide-MHC interaction.
Different binding preferences of HLA alleles is driven by polymorphism in these pockets. Pocket B
usually holds the second residue of the peptide, while pocket F interacts with the side chain of the
C-terminal residue. These positions in the peptide are called anchor positions and they significantly
influence the binding capacity of an HLA molecule. HLA class I molecules bind peptides with a length
of 8-11 amino acids, with a majority of the binding peptides being 9 amino acids long [12]. Therefore,
the anchor positions of an HLA class I binding peptide are usually known to be at position 2 and 9
(Figure 1C). Residues located in the center of the peptide bind more weakly to the other pockets of
the MHC and are less important for the recognition strength. However, they influence the conformation
of the peptide in the MHC binding groove and in some cases they protrude from the surface of the
MHC molecule and can potentially interact with T cell receptors [11].
Predicting peptide-MHC binding
The binding between MHC molecules and antigenic peptides is the most selective step in the antigen
presentation pathway [13]. Because of this selectivity and the importance of the event, several in silico
predictors exist to predict MHC binding, using a wide range of strategies (structure based, sequence
based, physico-chemical based) and algorithms. One example of a sequence based predictor, and the
one used in this work is NetMHCpan-4.1 [13]. Prediction tools such as NetMHCpan-4.1 have been
developed to predict whether a specific peptide will bind to a specific MHC molecule. NetMHCpan-
4.1 uses artificial neural networks to predict binding of peptides to any MHC molecule of known
sequence. The prediction model has been trained on two types of data: binding affinity (BA) data and
Page 10 of 58
==PAGE:12==
1 Introduction
1.1 The Immune System
eluted-ligand (EL) data. BA data relies on experiments on peptide-MHC binding strength reflecting
the binding event, while neglecting other factors in the antigen presentation pathway.
EL data is
retrieved through mass-spectrometry where peptides are identified as being naturally presented by
MHC molecules.
By integrating both BA and EL data, the model captures information on both
the peptide-MHC binding event and the prior steps in the biological process of antigen presentation.
In natural cases, EL data comes from cells expressing multiple MHC alleles (Multi Allelic, or MA,
data), meaning that peptides can bind to several MHC molecules.
NetMHCpan-4.1 handles this
data ambiguity through the NNAlign_MA algorithm, which clusters peptides with multiple allelic
assignments into single-allele specificities during training by using a pseudo-labeling strategy [13]. It
should be noted that MHC binding alone is a necessary but not a sufficient criteria for T cell recognition.
There are many examples of peptide-MHC interactions that bind with high affinity, but does not lead
to T cell activation [10]. Such examples are false positives when these predictors are used as proxies
for immunogenicity prediction.
HLA supertypes and frequencies
To date, thousands of different HLA class I alleles have been reported and the number is constantly
increasing [14].
Despite the large variability in HLA molecules, allelic variations have often been
clustered into groups, known as supertypes, which share largely overlapping peptide binding specificity.
Supertypes are mainly defined by the specificity of their anchor positions and their classification are
often useful in research and analyses within immunology. For instance, HLA alleles of the A2-supertype
include HLA-A*02:01 and HLA-A*02:02 which share specificity for peptides with aliphatic hydrophobic
residues in position 2 and at the C-terminus [10]. Classifying HLA alleles into supertypes is useful in
immunological research, as it can narrow the scope of an analysis from which results can potentially
later be extrapolated across supertypes.
Due to the genetic polymorphism of HLA molecules, each individual express their own unique set
of HLA molecules contributing to genetic diversity in immunity and differences in susceptibility to
diseases among genetically distinct groups [14]. However, some HLA alleles are more prevalent across
the global population which have made them more highly studied in research. Particularly, the HLA-
A*02:01 allele is known to be frequently expressed across populations and this project focuses mainly
on this allele [14].
1.1.2
T cells
T cells are a crucial part of eliminating viral infections due to their ability to destroy intracellular
pathogens by activation of other immune cells or through direct killing [6]. The precursors of T cells
are lymphoid progenitors originating from stems cells in the bone marrow, which later migrate to the
thymus where they mature into naive CD4+ or CD8+ T cells. After their development in the thymus,
they are transferred to secondary lymphoid organs such as the lymph nodes and the spleen, at which
they await activation by APCs [8].
During maturation in the thymus, T cells develop their T cell receptor (TCR), which is the unique
receptor responsible for specific binding to antigens presented by MHC molecules on APCs [8]. The
TCR is antigen-specific and it is generated through a coordinated series of genomic rearrangements,
known as V(D)J recombination (Figure 2A). This recombination generates a diverse array of TCRs,
Page 11 of 58
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
1.1 The Immune System
each with unique antigen-binding specificity, forming a T cell repertoire capable of recognizing a wide
range of antigens. The majority of TCRs consist of an α chain and a β chain while a small subset
of TCRs consist of γ and δ chains [15].
Both the α and β chains have a variable domain and a
constant domain (Figure 2B). The variable domain determines antigen-specificity and is encoded
by the variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J) gene segments for the β chain, and the V and J
segments for the α chain. During recombination, one V, one D (for β chains), and one J segment is
randomly spliced together in a process mediated by the RAG1 and RAG2 proteins. This is referred to
as combinatorial diversity. Additional diversity of TCRs, known as junctional diversity, refers to the
random nucleotide additions and deletion at the junction where the V, (D), and J segments are joined
[8, 15].
Figure 2: Assembly of the T cell receptor. (A) V(DJ) recombination of the alpha and beta chains in the TCR. V, D,
and J segments are progressively rearranged, ensuring diversity in the T cell repertoire regarding antigen recognition.
(B) Structure of the TCR. The TCR is composed by the alpha and beta chains consisting of three different regions.
Created with BioRender.com.
Each TCR chain has three complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) made up by the joined V(D)J
segments. The CDR3 sequence is encoded by the V(D)J junction and is the most variable of the three
regions. The CDR3 sequence is central for antigen-recognition as it is the part of the TCR that directly
binds antigens presented by MHC molecules [15]. Studies have shown that particularly the CDR3 se-
quence from the TCR β chain (CDR3β), is an essential contributor to TCR recognition [16].
T cell maturation
Once the TCR is established in the thymus, the T cells have entered the stage known as double-positive
(DP), in which the cells express a complete TCR on the cell surface as well as the two receptors: CD4
and CD8 [8]. These are co-receptors to the TCR and they stabilize interaction with a pMHC complex
by binding MHC class II and MHC class I, respectively. DPs then undergo a selection process, in which
positive selection ensures that the TCR on T cells can recognize self-MHCs, while negative selection
eliminates T cells with TCRs that bind too strongly to self-antigens, preventing autoimmunity. DPs
that pass both positive and negative selection differentiate into single-positive (SP) cells, which are
Page 12 of 58
==PAGE:14==
1 Introduction
1.1 The Immune System
mature T cells expressing either the CD4 or CD8 co-receptor based on whether they were selected
on MHC class II or MHC class I, respectively [8]. The CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are also referred to
as naive T cells, as they have not yet been activated by antigen interaction. They migrate from the
thymus to circulate the secondary lymphoid organs ready to be activated.
T cell activation
As previously mentioned, T cells require the interaction with a pMHC complex carried by an APC to
become activated. The interaction between the T cell and the APC is referred to as the immunological
synapse and it requires three primary signals as illustrated in Figure 3 [7]. The first signal involves
the recognition and binding of the TCR on the T cells to the peptide-MHC complex on the APCs. The
CDR1 and CDR2 regions of the TCR binds the nonpolymorphic region of the MHC, while the CDR3 re-
gion binds the antigen. The interaction is stabilized by the CD4/CD8 co-receptors on the T cell [17, 8].
The second signal is co-stimulatory and involves engagement of CD28 on T cells and B7 on the APCs.
Figure 3: CD8+ T cell activation requires three pri-
mary signals: (1) TCR-pMHC binding enhanced by
CD8, (2) co-stimulatory signal from B7-CD28 binding,
and (3) cytokine environment.
This signal prevents T cell anergy and promotes full
activation. The third signal is the cytokine environ-
ment surrounding the immunological synapse, which
facilitates the differentiation of T cells to become ac-
tive cells capable of exerting immune functions. CD8+
T cells become active cytotoxic cells circulating the pe-
riphery searching for their target antigen presented by
MHC class I molecules on infected cells. The cytotoxic
T cells bind their target and release cytolytic granules
that induce apoptosis of the target cell [7]. CD4+ T
cells become T-helper (Th) cells releasing cytokines
to direct other immune cells to perform their effector
functions [5]. The work in this project focuses on viral epitopes, and consequently, on HLA class I and
CD8+ T cells which orchestrate immune responses against viral infections.
Cross-reactivity
The diversity induced by the V(D)J recombination ensures approximately 5 x 106 possible combinations
of TCR gene fragments. Of these, around 108-1010 unique TCRs survive clonal selection and form the
mature T cell repertoire [18]. However, this number is considerably lower than the possible array of
peptides that can be presented by MHC molecules. Thus, TCRs must be cross-reactive, meaning that
one TCR can bind a wide range of peptides, and research has in fact revealed that a single TCR can
recognize between 104 and 107 different MHC-bound peptides [17]. Despite their broad potential for
binding, it has also been shown that once a TCR binds to a specific pMHC complex, the likelihood of
it reacting with another randomly chosen peptide reduces to 10−4. Hence, TCR recognition is both
cross-reactive and highly specific at the same time [17]. Furthermore, studies have shown that not
only can individual TCRs recognize multiple pMHC complexes, but multiple distinct TCRs can also
recognize and respond to the same pMHC complex, suggesting binding degeneracy [4].
A deeper understanding of TCR-pMHC interactions and cross-reactivity is crucial for both immuno-
logical research and clinical applications. While immune tolerance mechanisms generally prevent self-
reactive T cells from triggering autoimmunity, cross-recognition of pathogenic peptides can lead to
Page 13 of 58
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
1.2 Peptide Similarity
the activation of self-reactive T cells, resulting in the breakdown of tolerance [17]. From a clinical
perspective, the unpredictability of TCR cross-reactivity presents a major challenge for T cell-based
immunotherapies. For instance, in a trial involving adoptive T cell transfer for melanoma treatment,
patients experienced severe cardiac toxicity due to unintended recognition of a self-peptide expressed
in healthy cardiac cells [17]. These off-target toxicities had fatal consequences, highlighting the critical
need for the ability to predict cross-reactivity.
Advances in experimental and computational screening of peptide antigens and TCR repertoires have
greatly improved our understanding of the TCR-pMHC interaction.
However, it is currently not
possible to accurately predict TCR cross-reactivity, and establishing a consensus on cross-reactive
recognition patterns continues to be a challenge [3]. Some research has concluded that TCRs recognize
a surprisingly large number of peptides without obvious similarities. However, most studies on cross-
reactivity have illustrated that cross-reactive peptides either have mostly identical amino acid sequences
or at least share similarities, such as size, charge, or hydrophobicity at certain positions [19]. Likewise,
several studies have suggested that TCRs that bind the same pMHC complex also share similarities in
their sequences [4].
1.2
Peptide Similarity
In recent years, several methods have been applied and developed for measuring peptide similarity in
relation to predicting TCR cross-reactivity. Some studies have used structure-based approaches, where
peptide structures or TCR-pMHC complex structures have been compared and used in machine learn-
ing models [20]. However, these methods have for long been constrained by the limited availability of
structural data in existing databases, and cost of reaching proteome level cross-reactivity computation.
Due to these limitations, sequence-based approaches are a viable alternative, offering a more scalable
and data-driven way to asses peptide similarity [3].
1.2.1
Hamming Distance
A simplistic approach of defining peptide similarity can be achieved through the Hamming Distance
(HD) method [21]. Given two peptides which are both 9 amino acids long, p = (p1, p2, ..., p9) and q =
(q1, q2, ..., q9), the Hamming Distance, HD(p, q), can be defined by counting the number of positions
in which the amino acids pi and pq (i = 1..9) differ, as explained by equation (1).
HD(p, q) =
X9
i=1B(i),
B(i) =
(
1
pi ̸= qi
0
pi = qi
(1)
Hamming distance has been widely used as a method for sequence comparison, commonly applied when
aligning two sequences [22]. However, this method assigns equal weight to substitutions between any
to amino acids at any given position. This does not reflect the evolutionary and chemical properties
of amino acids, where certain amino acids are considerably more similar to one another than others.
To account for this, other studies have used scoring/BLOSUM matrix-based alignment to capture
similarity between peptides [3]. Scoring/BLOSUM matrices, also known as substitutions matrices,
provide a score for all possible substitutions of one amino acid for another based on how often they
Page 14 of 58
==PAGE:16==
1 Introduction
1.2 Peptide Similarity
are observed to replace each other in nature [23]. Such models have been used to predict T cell cross-
reactivity by assessing peptide similarity, and has revealed that seemingly distinct peptides, i.e., ones
with low sequence identity, exhibit greater biochemical similarity than expected [3]. The deficit of
these models is their uniform weighing of all positions, which fails to account for the fact that certain
positions in a peptide are more critical for pMHC binding and TCR recognition than others [3]. Hence,
a natural extension to such models would be to add position dependence, which is implemented by the
kernel method described in the following section.
1.2.2
Kernel sequence similarity
The kernel sequence similarity (KSS) method uses a type of k-mer based alignment and the BLOSUM62
matrix to compare two peptide sequences [24]. The algorithm progresses through three kernels (K1,
K2, and K3) to eventually provide a similarity score for two compared sequences. The score is between
0 and 1, where a score of 1 represents two completely identical sequences.
The first kernel function, K1, scores similarity for any two amino acids, x and y, where x, y ∈A and
A is a set of the 20 canonical amino acids. K1 can be described by the following equation (2).
K1(x, y) =
 Q(x, y)
p(x) · p(y)
β
(2)
Here, β is a pre-defined small positive number, Q(x, y) represents the substitution score between x
and y derived from the BLOSUM62 matrix, and p(x) and p(y) are the overall probabilities of the two
amino acids appearing in nature as explained by equation (3).
p(x) =
X
y∈A
Q(x, y),
p(y) =
X
z∈A
Q(y, z)
(3)
Hence, the central part of the equation,
Q(x,y)
p(x)·p(y), is actually a normalization of the BLOSUM62 matrix,
which ensures that more rare amino acids do not get unfairly penalized just because they are uncommon
in nature. The β parameter is often chosen to be a small value used to control the sensitivity of the
kernel.
The second kernel function, K2, is an extension of K1 to now compare entire sequences or k-mers of
the same length. In K2, similarity between two sequences are calculated by multiplying the similarity
scores of corresponding amino acids given by K1 to produce an overall similarity score for the entire
sequence comparison. If u and v are two sequences of the same length k (k-mers), u = (u1, ..., uk) and
v = (v1, ..., vk), then K2 can be described by equation (4).
K2(u, v) =
k
Y
i=1
K1(ui, vi)
(4)
The third kernel function, K3, is built upon K2 and allows for the comparison between sequences of
different lengths. Two sequences are split into sets of k-mers, starting with k = 1 and progressively
increasing by 1 until reaching the length of the sequences, or the length of the shorter sequence if they
differ in length. Each k-mer pair is compared using K2 and the resulting scores are summed across all
Page 15 of 58
==PAGE:17==
1 Introduction
1.3 Graph-based clustering techniques
possible k-mer pairs to yield an overall similarity score of the two sequences. Hence, if U is an amino
acid sequence where every possible k-mer can be defined by u = (u1, ..., uk) and V is a sequence where
every k-mer is described by v = (v1, ..., vk), then K3 is defined by equation (5).
K3(U, V ) =
X
u⊂U
v⊂V
K2(u, v)
(5)
Here, u and v are required to have the same length, however, U and V can differ in length. Finally,
the kernel is normalized to keep similarity scores on a consistent scale for all sequence comparisons
independent of sequence lengths.
The KSS method inherently places more weight on the central part of the peptide, which makes it an
ideal approach for investigating potential cross-reactive peptides, as these central positions are crucial
in the interaction with TCRs [25].
1.3
Graph-based clustering techniques
In the context of multi-omics analyses and handling large amounts of peptide similarity data, graph-
based clustering is a powerful tool for analyzing and visualizing groups of peptides with similar prop-
erties. In this framework, similarity data is presented as a graph where nodes correspond to entities,
either pMHCs or TCRs, and edges represent similarities between them. In such graphs, clusters are
commonly defined by the grouping of nodes in a way that results in many edges within each cluster
and relatively few edges between clusters [26]. Clusters can be detected using various methods, the
simplest being based on connected components. In this approach a cluster is defined by a group of
nodes where every node is connected to at least one other node within the group, and there are no
connections made to any other clusters [26]. A graph-driven approach can be used to identify key
peptides of interest through graph centrality measures such as node degree, closest neighbors, and the
distinction of peptides from different organisms.
Page 16 of 58
==PAGE:18==
2 Methodology
2
Methodology
This section describes the methods used to obtain the results for this thesis. The methodology consisted
of two primary pipelines where pMHCs and TCRs were clustered separately, with the purpose of finally
making connections between the two as visualized by the flowchart in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Flowchart of the complete methodology illustrating the two pipelines of independently clustering pMHCs
and TCRs to eventually connect clusters. Created with BioRender.com.
2.1
Clustering pMHCs
The following sections describe how human and viral, MHC-bound, peptides were clustered, based on
two different similarity measures, to group pMHCs with shared target affinities.
Page 17 of 58
==PAGE:19==
2 Methodology
2.1 Clustering pMHCs
2.1.1
Human and Viral Proteomes
The human (Homo Sapiens) proteome was retrieved from the UniProt database [27] using Proteome
ID: UP000005640. From this proteome, 20,420 Swiss-Prot reviewed protein sequences were downloaded
and saved in a FASTA file. Additionally, FASTA files of 334 viral proteomes were collected from the
UniProt site.
The proteomes cover 169 different viral species, as some species are represented by
proteomes from different strains. A complete list of the viral proteomes can be found in Appendix
A. Since the analysis in this project focuses on peptides binding to MHC class I molecules, which
most commonly bind peptides that are 9 amino acids long, python scripts were designed to extract all
unique 9-mer peptides from the human and viral proteomes. Peptides containing non-standard amino
acids (i.e., different from the 20 canonical ones) were excluded from the data [28]. This process resulted
in two initial peptide sets:
• SELF (N = 10,403,562): unique 9-mers from the human proteome.
• VIR (N = 1,078,106): unique 9-mers from the viral proteomes.
Peptides shared between the human and viral sets were excluded from the two sets and stored in a
separate set:
• SHARED (N = 1,344): 9-mers found in both the human and viral proteomes.
Metadata were prepared to allow for the trace back of any 9-mer to the protein and organism of origin.
2.1.2
Viral reference peptides
To support the analysis, a set of viral reference peptides (VRPs) was compiled consisting of peptides
that have been experimentally validated to be highly immunogenic. The peptides were retrieved from
the IEDB site [29] following the criteria of being 9 amino acids long and having a strong combination
of a high number of positive assays for MHC binding and/or TCR response, along with extensive
supportive references. This set of reference peptides, referred to as REF, only include peptides that
are also part of the VIR set. A complete list of the VRPs in REF can be found in Appendix B. The
VRPs originate from a wide range of different viruses and are used as reference points in the analysis
of peptide similarity clusters.
2.1.3
Prediction of peptides binding to MHC molecules
The software NetMHCpan-4.1 [13] was used to predict MHC class I binding probabilities for the
peptides in SELF, VIR, and SHARED. Predictions were performed for five common HLA alleles
displayed in Table 1.
HLA allele
Supertypes
A*01:01
A01
A*02:01
A02
B*07:02
B07
B*15:01
B62
C*07:01
C1
Table 1: HLA alleles used for peptide-binding predictions along with their respective supertype class.
Page 18 of 58
==PAGE:20==
2 Methodology
2.1 Clustering pMHCs
These HLAs represent some of the most frequent HLA alleles in the global population from each of
the three HLA class I locuses: A, B, and C [14]. Furthermore, they each represent their own HLA
supertype, and hence differ in their peptide binding preferences, meaning they will bind different
subsets of the peptide datasets [30]. Figure 5 illustrates the sequence motif for each of the five HLA
alleles, obtained from the netMHCpan-4.1 site, representing their binding preferences.
Figure 5: Sequence motifs retrieved from the netMHCpan-4.1 site for the five HLA alleles considered in this project.
For each peptide, netMHCpan-4.1 predicts a binding score where peptides with a score of ≤2 are
commonly referred to as weak binders, and peptides with a score of ≤0.5 are strong binders. To
maximize data availability, both strong and weak binding peptides were considered in further analyses.
NetMHCpan-4.1 was run locally with an average runtime of 5 hours for the SELF dataset, which is
the largest of the three sets. For each of the five HLA-alleles (h) three datasets were constructed, each
containing only peptides (p) predicted to bind the respective HLA. As mentioned, binding peptides
are defined as having a binding score (B(p,h)) equal to or less than 2:
S(h) = {p ϵ SELF | (B(p,h) ≤2) }
V(h) = {p ϵ VIR | (B(p,h) ≤2) }
SH(h) = {p ϵ SHARED | (B(p,h) ≤2) }
Although these datasets consist exclusively of 9-mer peptide sequences, they are also referred to as
pMHC datasets because each set contains 9-mer peptides predicted to bind one specific HLA allele.
On average, approximately 4% of the unique 9-mers in the initial peptide sets were predicted to be
binders.
2.1.4
Computing peptide similarity scores
Several Python scripts were designed for the process of computing similarity scores for the binding
peptides of each considered HLA allele. For each HLA, h, all peptides were compared across the three
sets, S(h), V(h), and SH(h), computing a similarity score for every pair. Similarity was measured
using two different methods, the Hamming Distance (HD) method and the Kernel Sequence Similarity
(KSS) method, generating two similarity datasets for each HLA allele.
Hamming Distance
A simple Python script was created to compute the hamming distance (the number of mismatched
amino acids) between every pair of peptides in the datasets. Peptide pairs with a hamming distance
of three or less were written to an output file consisting of three columns. The first two columns each
contained a peptide sequence and the third column indicated their hamming distance, represented
Page 19 of 58
==PAGE:21==
2 Methodology
2.2 Clustering TCRs
by the numbers 1-3. In this method, the hamming distance represents the similarity score between
peptides. The inclusion of peptides with a hamming distance up to three, allows for more flexibil-
ity/experimentation in later analysis of peptide similarity.
Kernel Sequence Similarity
The similarity comparison of peptides using the KSS method is more complex than the HD approach,
making it considerably more computationally heavy.
A Python script containing a DTU in-house
implementation of the KSS algorithm was employed for these calculations. To decrease the compu-
tational load, the script was optimized using vectorization and Cython to allow efficient handling of
large datasets. Similar to the HD method, the script generated an output file containing a peptide
pair and their similarity score in each row. To reduce the size of the output file, only peptide pairs
with a similarity score ≥0.9 were saved to the file.
Scripts for both the KSS and HD method were executed on the Danish National Life Science Su-
percomputing Center, Computerome.
To reduce runtime and memory issues, large datasets were
divided into 1000-1500 subsets to allow parallel runs of the similarity algorithms, and the results were
then merged in the end. Using this approach, the total runtime for completing a peptide similarity
analysis across all three datasets for one HLA allele was up to 12 hours for the HD method and up to
24 hours for the KSS method.
2.1.5
Designing peptide similarity graphs
Graph-based clustering was implemented using the igraph package (version 2.0.3) in R [31]. For each
considered HLA allele, HD graphs and KSS graphs were designed based on the computed similarity
scores. The nodes in the graphs represent peptides from the three sets S(h), V(h), and SH(h) and an
edge between two nodes is placed if they are deemed similar to a certain predefined threshold. The HD
graphs are undirected and unweighted, with three possible thresholds THD = {1, 2, 3}. For example,
in an HD graph with THD = 2, an edge between two peptides indicate a hamming distance of 2 or
less. The KSS graphs are also undirected and unweighted, and the threshold for similarity, TKSS, was
adjusted dynamically depending on the context of the analysis. To allow comparisons between KSS
graphs and HD graphs, the threshold was set so that the graphs would contain approximately the same
number of edges, ensuring comparable levels of overall connectivity.
To support the analysis, graphs statistics were computed for each graph using functions from the igraph
package. Statistics included the number of nodes and edges, average degree, and distribution of cluster
sizes. In all graphs, clusters were defined as connected components. The presence and placement of
viral reference peptides were noted for each graph, as well as the number of viral-only clusters, which
are clusters where all nodes are viral. Sequence logos were generated using the Seq2Logo-2.0 software
[32] and used to illustrate sequence motifs of clusters and subgraphs.
2.2
Clustering TCRs
The following sections describe how TCRs from different TCR repertoires were clustered based on
similarities in their CDR3 sequences.
Page 20 of 58
==PAGE:22==
2 Methodology
2.2 Clustering TCRs
2.2.1
TCR repertoires
TCR repertoires were selected based on two main criteria: (1) they should be associated with a viral
infection from one of the viruses included in the 334 viral proteomes, and (2) they should contain at
least one CDR3 sequence that have been experimentally validated to interact with one of the VRPs
in REF. These criteria were established to enable later connections between pMHC and TCR clusters.
This selection was achieved by using the VDJdb site [33] to find validated epitope-CDR3 interactions
based on the VRPs in REF. Each VRP in REF served as a query to search for matching CDR3β
sequences in VDJdb. Only CDR3β sequences were selected as these are essential contributors to TCR
recognition [16]. Furthermore, only interactions with a confidence score of 3 were considered, ensuring
that only highly reliable sequences were included in the selection and in subsequent analysis. The
resulting CDR3β sequences were compiled into a list, each paired with its matching VRP. This list was
referred to as TCRREF and used as a reference set for later connections of pMHC and TCR clusters,
as it contains validated TCR-pMHC interactions.
Next, TCR repertoires were retrieved from TCRdb-2.0 site [34], a database containing human TCR
sequences derived from various experimental studies. Each project in the database is associated with
a disease and includes multiple samples of TCR repertories. All TCR repertoires from projects related
to infections by the viruses studied in this thesis were downloaded and searched against the list of
identified CDR3 sequences in TCRREF . Depending on the sample size, one or more TCR repertoires
were selected for each available viral condition, provided they contained at least one of the CDR3
sequences from the list. All CDR3 sequences from each selected TCR repertoire were combined into
one dataset referred to as the TCR dataset.
TCRdb-2.0 contains TCR repertoires for only a limited number of conditions, therefore only repertoires
associated with six viral conditions were retrieved: cytomegalovirus (CMV), severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1), hepatitis C virus
(HCV), and influenza A virus (IAV). A manual literature search was performed to include a TCR
repertoire associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), as this condition is highly represented by VRPs
in REF, hence maximizing the available data. The sample size of TCR repertoires were a crucial
consideration during selection, as very large repertoires would be too computationally heavy for sub-
sequent sequence similarity calculations. The aim was to not exceed 200,000 CDR3 sequences in the
combined TCR dataset.
2.2.2
CDR3 sequence similarity and TCR graphs
Similarity scores for the CDR3 sequences in the TCR dataset were computed using the KSS method,
similar as for the pMHC clustering. A file was constructed containing CDR3 sequence pairs along with
their similarity score between 0.9 and 1. Undirected and unweighted TCR graphs were constructed
in R using the igraph package [31] with nodes representing CDR3 sequences and edges representing
similarity to a certain threshold. The threshold was selected based on the similarity scores between
CDR3 sequences in TCRREF set that are known to interaction with the same epitope. Clusters were
defined by the connected component method.
Page 21 of 58
==PAGE:23==
2 Methodology
2.3 Connecting pMHC and TCR clusters
2.3
Connecting pMHC and TCR clusters
A main objective of this project was to make valuable connections between pMHC clusters and TCR
clusters. These connections were based on the experimentally validated interactions between epitopes
and CDR3 sequences retrieved from VDJdb and stored in the TCRREF set. The positions of VRPs in
the generated pMHC graphs were identified, along with their closes neighbors, which represent the pep-
tides most similar to each VRP. Similarly, CDR3 sequences from TCRREF that where experimentally
validated to interact with these VRPs were located in the TCR graph, along with their closest neigh-
bors. By leveraging these relationshops, entire clusters of pMHC and TCRs could be linked through
a single validated TCR-pMHC interaction. To further analyze these connections, sequence logos were
generated for peptides within linked pMHC clusters, allowing visualization of potential sequence motifs
preferred by the associated TCRs.
Page 22 of 58
==PAGE:24==
3 Results
3
Results
The primary aim of this project was to study TCR-pMHC interactions through the concept of cross-
reactivity. This was achieved by applying a multi-omics approach to independently cluster pMHCs
as well as TCRs based on sequence features, and then interlink clusters under the assumption that
similar peptides are likely to be cross-reactive. This section presents the results attained through the
presented methodology, structured to reflect the computational workflow through a data presentation,
comparison of peptide similarity measures, and a biological analysis of TCR-pMHC interactions.
3.1
Data presentation
3.1.1
Data for pMHC graphs
The human proteome and 334 viral proteomes were retrieved from the UniProt database [27] with
the purpose of creating three datasets (SELF, VIR, and SHARED) constituting a broad array of 9-
mer peptides. The considered viral proteomes represent 169 different viral species, with some species
represented by proteomes from multiple strains. A list of the proteomes, including their protein and
amino acid counts, is provided in Appendix A. Unique 9-mer peptides were extracted from the viral
proteomes to form the VIR peptide set, containing 1,078,106 viral peptides. Due to the inclusion
of multiple strains for certain species and variations in proteome sizes, some viral species are over-
represented in VIR. The percentage distribution of the 20 most represented viral species in VIR is
illustrated in Figure 6. These species account for approximately 53% of the 9-mers in VIR, while the
remaining 149 species contribute the other 47% maintaining diversity within the dataset. This uneven
representation of viral peptides reflects the variability of proteome sizes as well as the uneven number
of proteomes across species.
Figure 6: The peptide set VIR consists of 1,078,106 9-mer peptides from 169 viral species. The plot illustrates the
percentage distribution of the 20 most represented species as well as the combined dsitribution of the remaining 149 viral
species.
Page 23 of 58
==PAGE:25==
3 Results
3.1 Data presentation
With 20 out of 169 species accounting for more than half of the dataset, a bias is introduced toward
these species, potentially influencing subsequent predictions and clustering analyses. However, these
species are very well studied in the context of immunogenicity, offering a valuable advantage, as their
over-representation provides a strong basis for identifying experimentally validated reference points for
pMHC-TCR interactions.
The human proteome, retrieved from UniProt, consists of 20,406 proteins from which 10,403,564 unique
9-mers were extracted to form the SELF peptide set. As the human proteome is significantly larger
than any viral proteome, the SELF set is around 10 times larger than the VIR set, despite the latter
representing 334 proteomes. Hence, the presence of self peptides would dominate downstream analyses.
Shared peptides
The SHARED set contained 1,344 9-mer peptides shared between the human and viral proteomes.
The peptides in this set represent 97 different viral species, with the variola virus (17.5%), Ebstein-
Barr virus (12.5%), and cytomegalovirus (11%) as the most prevalent species.
These viruses are
among the most common human viruses, and they have co-evolved with the human immune system
for a long time, which may explain the sharing of peptides between proteomes. Other studies have
confirmed a substantial overlap between human and viral proteomes and this molecular mimicry have
been investigated in relation to autoimmune diseases. Shared peptides may lead to cross-reactivity
causing the human immune system to target normal human cells carrying this peptide. In fact, EBV
have been studied to potentially contribute to initiation of the autoimmune disorder known as systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) due to cross-reactivity between EBV antigens and SLE antigens [35].
Predicted pMHC binding
The software NetMHCpan-4.1 was used on the SELF, VIR, and SHARED sets to predict binding of
peptides to five different HLA class I alleles. Figure 7 illustrates the percentage of peptides from each
initial peptide sets predicted to bind each HLA allele.
Figure 7: The NetMHCpan-4.1 software was utilized to predict binding of peptides from the SELF, VIR, and SHARED
datasets to five HLA class I alleles. The bar plot displays the percentage of predicted binders for each HLA allele.
On average, around 4% of the peptides were predicted to form pMHC complexes. It can be seen
Page 24 of 58
==PAGE:26==
3 Results
3.1 Data presentation
that the HLA-C*07:01 allele was predicted to bind considerably more peptides compared to other
alleles. This contradicts with the fact that studies have shown that HLA-C alleles have a more limited
peptide-binding repertoire than HLA-A and -B alleles [36].
As expected, the representational distribution of viral species among the predicted binders generally
mirrors the trend observed in the VIR dataset across all five HLA-alleles. The 10 most represented
species in VIR were also the same viral species with the highest number of predicted binders for each
allele, although in different orders, as depicted in Figure 8. The HLA-allele with the most distinct
preference for viral species was the HLA-B*07:02 allele, which showed a higher affinity for peptides
derived from EBV, HHV-1, and HHV-2 compared to the other alleles.
Figure 8: Heatmap of the 10 most represented viral species among the predicted binders to each of the considered HLA
alleles. The numbers in the plot represent the number of peptides predicted to bind for each species.
3.1.2
Viral reference peptides
Figure 9:
The distribution of represented viral
species among the peptides in the REF set.
The REF peptide set was designed to contain viral
peptides that have been experimentally validated to be
highly immunogenic with the purpose of using them as
reference points in peptide similarity graphs. The REF
set contains 76 peptides from 16 different viral species
derived from the IEDB site [29]. A complete list of
the considered viral reference peptides can be found
in Appendix B, and the distribution of species in the
set is illustrated in Figure 9.
These peptides have
been thoroughly studied and shown to be presented
in pMHC complexes and elicit an immune response
through interaction with TCRs. Therefore, in a graph
defined by peptide similarity, clusters containing pep-
tides from REF are particularly interesting, as other
peptides within these clusters might cross-react with the reference peptides.
The peptides in the REF set were also used to validate peptide similarity measures by investigating
their presence and positioning in similarity graphs. As these peptides are known to elicit immune
Page 25 of 58
==PAGE:27==
3 Results
3.1 Data presentation
responses, it would be expected that they are dissimilar from peptides derived from the human pro-
teome, reflecting their potential to be recognized as foreign. This dissimilarity should be evident in
the graphs by distinct clustering of reference peptides and self-derived peptides, thereby highlighting
the performance of the similarity measures in capturing biologically relevant distinctions.
3.1.3
TCR repertoire data
Sequenced TCR repertoires were obtained from online databases under the criterion that they contained
one or more CDR3 sequences known to interact with a viral peptide in REF. The aim was to ensure
the repertoire data included experimentally validated TCR-pMHC interactions.
Virus
Project ID
Project description
No. of unique
CDR3
se-
quences
CMV
PRJNA427746
Demonstration of the use of molecular identifiers in immune
repertoire sequencing to enable accurate clonality discovery
and clone size quantification. A sub-aim of the project was
to evaluate T cell clonal expansion in CMV-infected pa-
tients.
MIDCIRS TCR-seq was applied to examine T cell
clonal expansion of CMVpp65-specific effector CD8+ T cells
from CMV-infected patients. One sample was used from this
project to represent a TCR repertoire for CMV.
65,125
SARS-CoV-2
PRJNA718557
Characterization of early T cell proliferation in non-severe
SARS-CoV-2 infection. T cell receptor sequencing was per-
formed in a cohort of healthcare workers who experienced
non-severe SARS-CoV-2 infection during the first epidemic
wave in London. One sample was used from this project to
represent a TCR repertoire for SARS-CoV-2.
64,347
HIV-1
PRJNA544470
T cell repertoire diversity, clonotype distribution, and antigen
specificity were analyzed in children with HIV-1, following an-
tiretroviral therapy. One sample was used from this project
to represent a TCR repertoire for HIV-1.
47,339
HCV
ImmunoSEQ98
Analysis of the CD8+ TCR repertoire during acute HCV in-
fection in humans progressing to either spontaneous resolu-
tion or chronic infection. Three samples were used from this
project to constitute a TCR repertoire for HCV infection.
6,376
EBV
PMID: 32184241
Characterization of both CD8 T cell TCRα and TCRβ reper-
toires in individuals with persistent EBV infection to deter-
mine if asymptomatically infected individuals develop a dif-
ferent TCR repertoire compared to those that develop acute
infectious mononucleosis. One sample containing TCRβ se-
quences have been obtained from this project.
2,003
IAV
PRJNA318421
Characterization of TCR repertoires of CD8+ T cells against
the CMV pp65 495-503 NLV and the influenza virus A M1
58-66 GIL antigen peptides. Five samples of TCR repertoires
against the IAV antigen have been obtained from this project
to represent a TCR repertoire for IAV.
6,046
Table 2: Presentation of the experimental projects that provided the TCR repertoires included in the TCR dataset. The
TCR repertoires are associated with six different viruses: Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), Human immmunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1), Hepatitis C virus (HCV), Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV), and Influenza A virus (IAV).
Matching pairs of reference peptides and CDR3 sequences were found in VDJdb, and based on these,
TCR repertoires were retrieved from TCRdb-2.0. Out of 76 peptides in the REF set, 32 peptides had
one or more matching CDR3 sequences with a confidence score of 3 in VDJdb. These 32 peptides
Page 26 of 58
==PAGE:28==
3 Results
3.2 Peptide similarity graphs
covered 7 different viral species: CMV (3 peptides), EBV (8 peptides), HCV (3 peptides), HIV-1
(4 peptides), IAV (1 peptide), PTLV-1 (Primate T-lymphotropic virus 1) (2 peptides), and SARSr-
CoV (severe acute respiratory syndrome–related coronavirus) (11 peptides). Despite Hepatitis B virus
(HBV) being the most highly represented viral species in REF, none of the HBV epitopes had available
CDR3 sequences in VDJdb with a confidence score of 3. TCR repertoires containing one or more of
the matching CDR3 sequences were retrieved from TCRdb-2.0 for the following five conditions: CMV,
HCV, HIV-1, IAV, and SARS-CoV-2. As EBV had 8 reference peptides with matching CDR3 sequences
in VDJdb, an effort was made to retrieve a TCR repertoire for this condition from ImmuneACCESS
to maximize data. An overview of the selected TCR repertoires is provided in Table 2.
The projects from which the repertoires were obtained are independent of each other, each with dif-
ferent experimental purpose and methodology, which introduces some ambiguity to the TCR data.
To compensate for small sample sizes of TCR repertoires from HCV, EBV, and IAV, multiple sam-
ples from these projects were combined to create one representative TCR repertoire for the given
viral condition. However, the significant variability in sample sizes across the six projects still causes
over-representation of particularly CMV, HIV-2, and SARS-CoV-2 in the TCR data. The six TCR
repertoires were combined into one dataset, which was then filtered to only include unique CDR3
sequences resulting in a total of 186,505 sequences.
3.2
Peptide similarity graphs
Peptide similarity scores were computed for the binding peptides of each considered HLA allele with the
purpose of identifying pMHCs with shared target affinities for TCR interaction. Likewise, similarity
scores were determined for the CDR3 sequences representing the TCR data to group TCRs with
shared affinity for pMHC binding. These similarity scores were subsequently used to generate peptide
similarity graphs for pMHCs and TCRs, independently.
3.2.1
pMHC clustering graphs
Peptide similarity graphs were constructed for each of the five considered HLA class I alleles. These
graphs were based on similarity scores calculated using two different methods: the Hamming Distance
(HD) method and the Kernel Sequence Similarity (KSS) method.
The purpose of a dual method
approach was to compare how a simple similarity measure (HD) versus a more complex method (KSS)
captures biologically meaningful similarities among peptides, providing insights into their respective
strengths in grouping peptides with shared sequence features.
Since the two methods operate on
different threshold scales to determine similarity, a consensus threshold was required for meaningful
comparisons between the methods. For each HLA allele, an HD graph was constructed using a threshold
of two or fewer mismatches. Thresholds for the KSS method were selected based on the resulting HD
graphs to allow proper alignment between the two methods.
Two KSS graphs were generated for
each HLA allele: one where the number of nodes approximately matched the corresponding HD graph
and another where the number of edges approximately matched the HD graph.
This resulted in
slightly differing KSS thresholds for each allele. This approach ensured a fair basis for comparing the
performance and characteristic of the two methods. Table 3 summarizes key graph properties for HD
and KSS graphs.
Page 27 of 58
==PAGE:29==
3 Results
3.2 Peptide similarity graphs
HLA allele
Similarity
measure
Threshold
Nodes
Edges
Avg. node
degree
Mapped
VRPs
HLA-A*01:01
HD
2
143,680
169,703
2.362
1
KSS
0.941
136,255
224,355
3.293
1
0.944
117,338
165,169
2.815
1
HLA-A*02:01
HD
2
268,311
432,088
3.221
33
KSS
0.9425
266,258
1,564,386
11.750
27
0.953
165,794
412,351
4.974
20
HLA-B*07:02
HD
2
284,119
644,718
4.538
4
KSS
0.938
282,299
1,329,459
9.419
4
0.945
213,602
615,067
5.759
4
HLA-B*15:01
HD
2
203,426
299,914
2.949
5
KSS
0.942
195,925
414,783
4.234
6
0.945
169,280
298,631
3.528
6
HLA-C*07:01
HD
2
353,695
477,174
2.698
18
KSS
0.924
353,967
3,740,555
21.14
7
0.941
205,241
464,127
4.523
6
Table 3: Overview of graph properties for Hamming Distance (HD) graphs and Kernel Sequence Similarity (KSS)
graphs across the five considered HLA alleles, detailing the threshold used, node and edge counts, average node degree,
and the number of viral reference peptides (VRPs) present in each graph.
Across all HLA alleles, the KSS method consistently produced denser graphs than the HD method. For
the approximately same number of nodes, the KSS graphs have a higher number of edges and average
degree, and even for the same number of edges, the graphs still has higher average node degrees. For
example, in the HLA-C*07:01 graphs, the KSS threshold of 0.942 resulted in over 3.7 million edges
and an average degree of 21.14, which is considerably more than the 477,174 edges and average degree
of 2.698 in the HD graph. This trend highlights that KSS graphs result in greater connectivity than
HD graphs. It is evident that the choice of threshold for the KSS graphs considerably affects the graph
density, suggesting that optimization of this variable is important for specific applications of the KSS
method. The KSS threshold that matches the number of edges in the HD graph, despite having fewer
nodes, aligns the overall graph structures more closely than the threshold that matches node counts.
This allows for a more meaningful and fair comparison between the two methods, focusing on the
strength of edges between clusters. Therefore, KSS graphs with thresholds set to match number of
edges are considered for subsequent analysis.
Notably, the HLA-A*02:01 graphs had the highest number of mapped viral reference peptides (VRPs),
making the graphs for this allele particularly valuable for further analysis. Complete peptide similarity
graphs generated for peptides predicted to bind this allele are shown in Figure 10, in which nodes
are colored according to whether they represent a self-, viral-, or shared peptide. Since the shared
peptides make up only a small fraction of the total number of peptides, these are not visible in the
graphs. From these graphs it also appears that the KSS graphs are denser than the HD graph.
Page 28 of 58
==PAGE:30==
3 Results
3.2 Peptide similarity graphs
Figure 10: Complete peptide similarity graphs for peptides predicted to bind the HLA-A*02:01 allele. The Hamming
Distance (HD) graph was generated using a threshold for similarity of two or less mismatches. The Kernel Similarity
Sequence (KSS) graphs are produced for two different thresholds: one matching the number of nodes to the HD graph
(T = 0.9425) and one matching the number of edges in the HD graph (T = 0.953).
Figure 11: Separate illustration of the 13 largest clusters from the Hamming Distance (HD) graph and the Kernel
Sequence Similarity (KSS) graph (using the 0.953 threshold) for peptides predicted to bind the HLA-A*02:01 allele.
Page 29 of 58
==PAGE:31==
3 Results
3.2 Peptide similarity graphs
Clusters in these graphs are defined by the connected component concept, where each cluster represents
a connected subgraph that is completely isolated from any other clusters. Across all HLAs, graphs
resulted in one very large cluster containing the majority of the nodes, along with a wide range of
smaller clusters. This is exemplified in Figure 11, where the 13 largest clusters from the HD graph
and the KSS graph (T = 0.953) for the HLA-A*02:01 allele are visualized. The complete HD graph
consists of 36,852 clusters, which is similar to the 34,966 clusters in the KSS (T = 0.953) graph.
However, as seen in Figure 11, the largest cluster in the HD graph contains more than twice as many
nodes as the largest cluster in the KSS graph. This causes the average cluster size in the KSS graph
to be larger than in the HD graph. This aligns with the trend observed in pMHC graphs across all
HLAs, where the KSS method tends to result in larger and more distinct clusters.
Cluster purity and viral-only clusters
When comparing the two peptide similarity measures, HD and KSS, their ability to distinguish between
self and viral peptides serves as a key indicator of performance. This can be evaluated by examining
overall cluster purity and the number and size of viral-only clusters in the graphs. Viral-only clusters
are simply defined by being composed of purely viral peptides. To asses this, the HD graph and KSS
(T = 0.953) graph for the HLA-A*02:01 allele were compared.
Figure 12: The odds ratio (OR) shows the likelihood
of viral-only clusters compared to other clusters for
each method. The dashed red line represents an OR
of 1, with values below indicating a lower likelihood.
The 95% confidence intervals (CIs) are also displayed.
The KSS method produced 2,959 viral-only clusters,
which is significantly more than the 1871 clusters in
the HD graph. A Fisher’s exact test confirmed this
difference, with a p-value of 2.2e-16 for both methods,
indicating non-random distributions of viral-only clus-
ters versus other clusters.
As illustrated in Figure
12, both methods had odds ratios (OR) less than 1,
suggesting viral-only clusters are less likely to occur
relative to mixed or non-viral clusters [37]. However,
the KSS method (OR = 0.0760) had a slightly higher
probability of generating viral-only clusters compared
to the HD method (OR = 0.0468).
Figure 13A illustrates the sizes of the 10 largest viral-
only clusters in both graphs. It is seen that the KSS
method generates larger viral-only clusters, with the
largest cluster containing 35 nodes, compared to the
17 nodes for the largest viral-only cluster in the HD graph. It should be noted that the KSS graph
contains 165,794 nodes, while the HD graph contains 268,258 nodes. Hence, despite having fewer nodes,
the KSS method produces both more and larger viral-only, indicating that this method is better at
differentiating self and viral peptides.
Page 30 of 58
==PAGE:32==
3 Results
3.2 Peptide similarity graphs
Figure 13: Comparison of the ability of the HD and KSS methods to differentiate self and viral peptides in graphs for
the HLA-A*02:01 allele. (A) Dot plot illustrating the sizes of the 10 largest viral only clusters in the graphs for the
two methods. (B) Dot plot depicting the average cluster purity of all clusters, 1000 largest clusters, and the 100 largest
clusters in the two graphs.
Further supporting this, Figure 13B compares the average cluster purity between the two methods.
This comparison includes the overall average purity, as well as the average purities for the 1,000 largest
clusters and the 100 largest clusters. The purity of a cluster is defined as the percentage of peptides
that belong to the most frequent type (self, viral, shared) within that cluster. The overall peptide
distribution for the considered HD graph is: self (89.77%), viral (10.22%), and shared (0.01%), and
for the KSS graph: self (88.35%), viral (11.64%), and shared (0.01%). Given the over-representation
of self peptides, a random clustering would result in an average purity almost equal to the propor-
tion of self peptides in the distribution, which is approximately 0.8977 for the nodes in the HD graph
and 0.8835 for the KSS graph. Both methods, however, result in clustering where the overall average
purity is slightly higher than random clustering, 0.9196 for the HD graph and 0.9363 for the KSS
graph. This indicates that both similarity measures produce clusters that distinguish between self and
viral peptides better than random. Notably, the overall trend reveals that the KSS method achieves
a slightly higher average cluster purity than the HD method, with a 5.6% improvement over random
clustering, compared to only a 2.38% improvement for the HD method. This further supports that the
KSS method is more effective in distinguishing between self and viral peptides.
Viral reference peptides in A0201 graphs
While cluster purity offers insights into how well self and viral peptides are distinguished overall,
the exact positioning of viral reference peptides provides a more targeted evaluation of how well
the two similarity metrics, HD and KSS, group biologically relevant peptides.
The viral reference
peptides in the REF set are known to be highly immunogenic, which means that peptides in prox-
imity to these share similar sequence features and might be cross-reactive.
It would be expected
that such immunogenic peptides would cluster closer to other viral peptides rather than self peptides.
Among the five considered HLA alleles, the HLA-A*02:01 graphs had the highest presence of viral
reference peptides (VRPs), with 32 VRPs in the HD graph and 27 VRPs in the KSS (T = 0.953)
graph. In the HD graph, 21 VRPs were located within the largest cluster (size = 167,999), while
the remaining were distributed across clusters of size 8 or smaller. In the KSS graph, the largest
Page 31 of 58
==PAGE:33==
3 Results
3.2 Peptide similarity graphs
cluster (size = 72,845) contained 8 VRPs, 7 of which overlapped with those in the largest cluster of
the HD graph. The remaining VRPs in the KSS graph were found in clusters of size 5 or smaller.
Figure 14: Comparison of the number of viral pep-
tides within the 100 closest neighbors of 7 viral ref-
erence peptides in the HD and KSS graphs for the
HLA-A*02:01 allele.
The 7 VRPs shared between the largest clusters of
the two graphs are particularly interesting to in-
vestigate, as their placement in such highly popu-
lated clusters could provide insights into the per-
formance of the similarity metrics.
These 7 VRPs
are illustrated in Figure 14 along with the num-
ber of viral peptides among their 100 closest neigh-
bors in the two graphs.
Overall the VRPs in
the KSS graph have more viral peptides in close
proximity compared to the VRPs in the HD graph
with only one exception.
Particularly, the ALL-
GLTLGV peptide highlights this difference,
with
21
viral
peptides
within
the
100
closest
neigh-
bors for the KSS graph and only 2 for the HD
graph.
Furthermore, Figure 15 displays corresponding subgraphs of the 100 closest neighbors for four VRPs:
the HIV-1 SLYNTVATL peptide, the HPV-6 LLLGTLNIV peptide, the HPV-1 ALLGLTLGV peptide,
and the HBV FLLSLGIHL peptide. These subgraphs further demonstrate that the KSS method is
to some extent better at capturing similarities between reference peptides and other viral peptides.
Additionally, sequence logos representing the peptide sequences contained in each subgraph reveal
the ability of the KSS method to place more weight on the central positions of the peptide. The
sequence logos for the SLYNTVATL peptide particularly highlights this difference. In the HD graph,
the logo mainly shows high information content at the MHC anchor positions, 2 and 9, as expected
for a group of peptides predicted to bind the same HLA allele, reflecting similarity at these positions.
In contrast, the KSS graph also shows high information content at the central positions, which are
important for TCR interaction. Thus, similarities in these central positions are more indicative of
potential cross-reactivity.
Page 32 of 58
==PAGE:34==
3 Results
3.2 Peptide similarity graphs
Figure 15: Subgraphs illustrating the 100 closest neighbors to four viral reference peptides for HD and KSS graphs,
along with sequence logos representing the peptides within each subgraph. The four presented peptides are SLYNTVATL
from HIV-1, LLLGTLNIV from HPV-6, ALLGLTLGV from, and FLLSLGIHL from HBV.
3.2.2
TCR clustering graph
Similarly as for the pMHCs, a peptide similarity graph was constructed from the TCR data based on
similarity scores calculated between CDR3 sequences. These similarity scores were computed using
the KSS method and a threshold was set for the scores to ensure the construction of biologically
meaningful and interpretable clusters in the graph. The chosen threshold was based on the average
of 1410 similarity scores between reference CDR3 sequences in TCRREF known to interact with the
same viral peptide from REF. Figure 16A presents a box plot of the distribution of these scores, in
which the average is shown to be approximately 0.93. By setting the threshold at this similarity score,
the graph only included sequence similarities stronger than the average of CDR3 sequences known to
Page 33 of 58
==PAGE:35==
3 Results
3.2 Peptide similarity graphs
interact with the same peptide, thereby prioritizing the formation of meaningful clusters. The density
of the similarity scores (≥0.9) for the entire CDR3 dataset is illustrated in Figure 16B, where the
threshold at 0.93 roughly corresponds to the top 10% of the data with the highest similarity scores.
Figure 16:
Statistics generated for TCR graph threshold selection.
(A) Distribution of similarity scores between
reference CDR3 sequences known to interaction with the same epitope. (B) Density plot of similarity scores between
CDR3 sequences in the entire TCR dataset.
A complete peptide similarity graph generated for the TCR data using a threshold of 0.93 for the
similarity scores is presented in Figure 17. The graph consists of 104,853 nodes with an average degree
of 9.497, and the nodes are colored based on whether originate from a TCR repertoire associated with
infection by one of the following viruses: CMV, SARS-CoV-2, HIV-1, HCV, IAV, or EBV. Clusters are
defined as connected components, and at the chosen threshold, the graph consisted of one large cluster
containing around 80% of the nodes. The remaining nodes were distributed across smaller clusters of
size 130 or less, with the majority consisting of only two nodes.
Figure 17: Complete peptide similarity graph computed based on KSS similarity scores between CDR3 sequences from
the TCR data. Nodes are colored based on which viral infection the corresponding CDR3 sequence is associated with.
Key graph properties are provided along with the number of nodes assoiciated with each virus.
Page 34 of 58
==PAGE:36==
3 Results
3.2 Peptide similarity graphs
The 13 largest clusters of the TCR graph are visualized in Figure 18. Here, it is seen that smaller
clusters mainly consist of CDR3 sequences associated with HCV or EBV, which are well separated
into distinct clusters. At a glance, the largest cluster, although fully connected, appears to contain
distinguishable subgroups, with certain areas showing a higher density of sequences linked to specific
viruses. However, an investigation of subgraphs within this cluster containing reference CDR3s revealed
that CDR3 sequences associated with different viruses are not separated into distinct groups with
statistical significance. Figure 19 highlights subgraphs containing the 100 closest neighbors to six
reference CDR3 sequences from TCRREF , one associated with each virus. Due to the significant over-
representation of CMV, SARS-CoV-2 and HIV-1 associated CDR3 sequences, a Fisher’s exact test was
performed on each of the subgraphs, adjusted with FDR correction for multiple testing, to determine
whether the distribution of a particular virus within the subgraphs differ from that in the entire graph
with statistical significance. The adjusted p-values from the Fisher’s exact test corresponding to each
subgraph are displayed in Figure 16, revealing no particular pattern in over-representation of any of
the associated viruses in the subgraphs.
Figure 18: Separate illustration of the 13 largest clusters from generated TCR graph using a threshold of 0.93. Nodes
are colored based on the associated virus.
Notably, in this case, a clear separation of CDR3 sequences associated with different viruses is not
a crucial indicator of effective clustering.
As previously mentioned, the TCR repertories used to
construct the TCR data for this graph originate from independent experimental projects, contributing
to ambiguity in the resulting TCR dataset. The CMV, HCV, EBV, and IAV associated TCR repertoires
were derived from projects that performed targeted sequencing of clonal expanded, epitope-specific T
cells. In contrast, the repertoires for SARS-CoV-2 and HIV-1 represent the complete TCR collection
from individuals infected with the respective viruses. Consequently, these complete repertoires also
include TCRs unrelated to the specific infection, which may be present due to prior exposures to other
pathogens or the naive selection of T cells that have not yet been activated. This ambiguity in the
TCR data limits the ability to achieve clear separation of virus-associated CDR3 sequences. Thus, the
Page 35 of 58
==PAGE:37==
3 Results
3.3 Exploring TCR-pMHC interactions between graphs
absence of distinct viral clusters does not necessarily relect poor clustering but rather the experimental
diversity of the data.
Figure 19: Subgraphs illustrating the 100 closest neighbors to six reference CDR3 sequences from TCRREF associated
with each of the six considered viruses: CMV, SARS-CoV-2, HIV-1, HCV, EBV, and IAV. Furthermore, a Fisher’s exact
test was performed on each subgraph to investigate the representation of viruses compared to the complete graph. The
adjusted p-values for each virus from the Fisher’s exact test are illustrated as red bars in the provided bar plots.
3.3
Exploring TCR-pMHC interactions between graphs
After producing pMHC and TCR graphs, the overall aim of this project was to finally connect clusters
between these graphs, to potentially reveal novel TCR-pMHC interactions. The approach involved
using individual experimentally validated TCR-pMHC interactions and extend these links to ultimately
Page 36 of 58
==PAGE:38==
3 Results
3.3 Exploring TCR-pMHC interactions between graphs
connect entire clusters. Clusters are defined by sequence similarity and by applying the concept of
cross-reactivity, one TCR known to interact with a specific peptide, could potentially cross-react with
all peptides within the same cluster.
Based on data retrieved from VDJdb, the TCRREF set was established containing 395 experimen-
tally validated interactions between the complete TCR dataset and the REF set containing highly
immunogenic peptides. This involved the 21 viral reference peptides provided in Table 4 along with
the HLA-allele they bind and the corresponding number of validated interacting CDR3 sequences
contained in the TCR data.
Virus
Epitope
HLA-allele
No. of CDR3 matches in TCR data
CMV
NLVPMVATV
HLA-A*02
113
CRVLCCYVL
HLA-C*07
1
VLEETSVML
HLA-A*02
1
SARS-CoV-2
YLQPRTFLL
HLA-A*02
24
SPRWYFYYL
HLA-B*07
14
NYNYLYRLF
HLA-A*24
9
FTSDYYQLY
HLA-A*01
5
LLYDANYFL
HLA-A*02
4
KTFPPTEPK
HLA-A*03
3
LLLDRLNQL
HLA-A*02
1
FLLNKEMYL
HLA-A*02
1
HIV-1
ISPRTLNAW
HLA-B*57
1
QASQEVKNW
HLA-B*57
1
SLFNTVATL
HLA-A*02
1
SLYNTVATL
HLA-A*02
1
HCV
CINGVCWTV
HLA-A*02
9
GPRLGVRAT
HLA-B*07
1
EBV
YVLDHLIVV
HLA-A*02
4
GLCTLVAML
HLA-A*02
2
IVTDFSVIK
HLA-A*11
1
IAV
GILGFVFTL
HLA-A*02
198
Table 4:
Overview of the TCRREF set, which includes 21 viral reference peptides (epitopes) from REF. For each
epitope, the table presents the number of CDR3 sequences in the TCR dataset that have been experimentally validated
to interact with. Additionally, it specifies the originating virus and the corresponding HLA allele each epitope is known
to bind.
3.3.1
Connecting A0201-bound peptides to TCRs
A pMHC graph was generated for human and viral peptides predicted to bind the HLA-A*02:01
allele using a threshold of 0.93 for the similarity scores. This threshold was chosen to include more
viral reference peptides in the graph, as well as to match the threshold for the TCR graph.
The
resulting pMHC graph contained 10 of the VRPs in Table 4, including the CMV epitope NLVPMVATV
(NLVP), the HIV-1 epitope SLYNTVATL (SLYN), and the IAV-epitope GILGFVFTL (GILG). All
three epitopes were placed in the largest cluster of the graph consisting of 331,425 nodes. The 20
closest neighbors to each epitope were identified and three subgraphs were defined.
Three CDR3
sequences experimentally validated to interact with each epitope was identified in the TCR graph (T
= 0.93) along with their 20 closest neighbors. Figure 20 depicts the three pMHC subgraphs of the 20
closest neighbors to the three epitopes along with three TCR subgraphs containing corresponding CDR3
sequences. The validated interaction between epitope and matching CDR3 sequence is highlighted in
Page 37 of 58
==PAGE:39==
3 Results
3.3 Exploring TCR-pMHC interactions between graphs
the figure, serving as a bridge to link the clusters. It should be noted that the concept of closest
neighbors in a subgraph does not imply that all nodes within the subgraph are directly connected to
the node being examined. Rather, it refers to the nodes that are in the nearest proximity based on
graph connectivity. For example, if a node has 7 direct edges, those 7 connected nodes are its closest
neighbors. However, identifying the 8th or further closest neighbors includes considering nodes that
are indirectly connected through intermediate nodes that are closer to the central node. The degree of
the three VRPs considered in Figure 20 is 14 for both the NLVP and SLYN epitopes and 13 for the
GILG epitope. This means that the presented subgraphs in the figure include peptides that are not
directly linked to the central epitopes, however, they are in close proximity.
Figure 20: Visualization of three pMHC subgraphs, each representing the 20 closest neighbors to the CMV epitope
NLVPMVATV, the HIV-1 epitope SLYNTVATL, and the IAV epitope GILGFVFTL within the HLA-A*02:01 KSS graph
(T = 0.93). The pMHC clusters are linked to TCR clusters within the TCR graph (T = 0.93) corresponding to the 20
closest neighbors of CDR3 sequences experimentally validated to interact with these epitopes. Sequence logos depicting
the 21 peptides in each pMHC subgraph are also included.
Page 38 of 58
==PAGE:40==
3 Results
3.3 Exploring TCR-pMHC interactions between graphs
The pMHC subgraphs include both human and viral peptides, and the average similarity scores within
the three subgraphs were 0.9386 (NLVP graph), 0.9432 (SLYN graph), and 0.9372 (GILG graph).
The corresponding TCR subgraphs exhibited average similarity scores of 0.95, 0.9463, and 0.9516,
respectively. Additionally, Figure 20 includes sequence logos that represent the peptide sequences in
each pMHC subgraph, displaying a degree of conservation in the central positions of the peptide. For
example, the sequence logo for the SLYN subgraph reveals conservation of asparagine (N), serine (S),
and threonine (T) in the central positions. These amino acids all have polar uncharged side chains,
suggesting potential structural or functional similarities among the peptides in the SLYN subgraph.
This conservation could indicate a preference by the corresponding CDR3 sequence in the TCR graph
for interacting with peptides with such properties.
By applying the concept of cross-reactivity, the three validated TCR-pMHC interactions highlighted in
Figure 20 could be extended to link all peptides within the pMHC subgraphs to their corresponding
single CDR3 sequence. This approach would extrapolate the three known TCR-pMHC interactions
to 3x20 potentially novel interactions. Furthermore, assuming that CDR3 sequence similarity reflect
the ability of different TCRs to interact with the same epitope, the validated interactions could be
further extended to cross-link every peptide in the pMHC subgraphs with every CDR3 sequence in the
TCR subgraphs. Consequently, this would extrapolate the three known TCR-pMHC interactions to
3x20x20 = 1200 novel interactions.
A major challenge lies in establishing a level of confidence in the value of these predictions. Experimen-
tal validation is crucial to confirm whether this framework can accurately predict novel TCR-pMHC
interactions in relation to cross-reactivity. If experiments can confirm that a significant proportion of
the predicted interactions within the subgraphs of 20 closest neighbors to a VRP are in fact cross-
reactive, it would greatly increase the confidence in these predictions. Such validation would enhance
the value in exploring clusters containing other VRPs and expanding the scope of closest neighbors.
Figure 21: Visualization of a subgraph comprising the 50 closest neighbors to the HIV-1 epitope SLYNTVATL within
the HLA-A*02:01 KSS graph (T = 0.93). These pMHC nodes are linked to the 50 closest neighbors of a TCR cluster
within the TCR graph (T = 0.93), which contains a known interacting CDR3 sequence, along with the 50 closest
neighbors of this sequence.
Page 39 of 58
==PAGE:41==
3 Results
3.3 Exploring TCR-pMHC interactions between graphs
Figure 21 illustrates the potential of connecting a subgraph containing the 50 closest neighbors to the
SLYN epitope with the 50 closest neighbors of a corresponding CDR3 sequence. Connecting subgraphs
of such size could effectively extend a single validated TCR-pMHC interaction to 2500 potentially novel
interactions, highlighting the powerful predictive capabilities of this framework.
3.3.2
Examining known cross-reactivity
These linked pMHC and TCR subgraphs illustrates the value in applying the concept of cross-reactivity
to peptides that are closely connected, as these peptides often share similar sequence features. However,
studies have revealed unpredictable cases of cross-reactivity between peptides that are highly dissimilar,
where even complex similarity measures like the KSS method may not predict cross-reactivity. However,
the strength of cluster-based techniques lies in the ability to create and discover valuable paths between
peptides that are not directly linked. According to data retrieved from VDJdb, the NLVPMVATV
epitope and the GILGFVFTL epitope have both been experimentally validated to interact with TCRs
bearing the CDR3 sequence, CASSLGDTEAFF. These are epitopes with very low sequence identity,
only sharing the same amino acid in position 6 an 8. However, they are similar in their sequence
features, as they both mainly consist of amino acids with hydrophobic side chains in their central
positions.
These epitopes serve as an appropriate example of cross-reactivity that would most likely not be
predicted by simply considering sequence identity. Computing their similarity score using the KSS
method resulted in a score of approximately 0.83, which is relatively low compared to the different
similarity thresholds applied in this project. Due to this low score, there is no direct link between
the two epitopes in the previously illustrated KSS graph (T = 0.93) for peptides predicted to bind
the HLA-A*02:01 allele. However, examining the shortest path between the nodes representing these
epitopes reveals a distance of only 5.
Figure 22: Pruned subgraph within the HLA-A*02:01 KSS graph (T = 0.93) illustrating the shortest path between the
NLVPMVATV and GILGFVFTL epitopes along with a subset of the closest neighbors to the two epitopes.
Page 40 of 58
==PAGE:42==
3 Results
3.3 Exploring TCR-pMHC interactions between graphs
As shown in Figure 22, the shortest path crosses four self peptides connected through five edges.
Hence, while the epitopes are not directly linked, they are still in fairly close proximity. Notably, this
level of proximity is considerably higher than what would be observed using the HD method, where a
Hamming distance of 7 would classify them as highly dissimilar, and no connecting path would exist
in the HD graph (T = 2) for the HLA-A*02:01 allele.
This example along with the previously shown linkage of pMHC and TCR subgraphs, highlights the
potential of a multi-omics clustering approach to discover novel TCR-pMHC interactions. The results
demonstrate not only the value of examining peptides in direct proximity within the graph but also
the importance of exploring paths between peptides that, while seemingly dissimilar based on sequence
identity, are linked by just a few edges in the network. Although the need for experimental validation,
this approach provides a potentially powerful framework for identifying cross-reactivity and expanding
data on TCR-pMHC interactions.
Page 41 of 58
==PAGE:43==
4 Discussion
4
Discussion
A deeper understanding of TCR-pMHC interactions and the ability to predict novel interactions and
cross-reactivity would be a significant breakthrough in immunological science providing a greatly im-
proved foundation for advancements within precision medicine and immunotherapy. This master’s
thesis project investigated the application of sequence similarity algorithms to cluster peptides with
shared sequence features beyond sequence identity. By leveraging cross-reactivity and similarity-based
clustering, single TCR-pMHC interactions were extended to cluster-wide interactions, revealing nu-
merous potentially novel interactions. The results will be discussed below, highlighting the level of
confidence in TCR-pMHC predictions through the framework of this project in relation to improve-
ments and future applications.
4.1
Comparison of sequence similarity measures
T cell receptors are highly specific while still capable of binding a wide range of peptides through cross-
reactivity, indicating an undiscovered pattern to the array of peptides that each TCR binds. Studies
have concluded that cross-reactive peptides can be predicted to a certain extent based on sequence
similarity. In relation to this, several measures of sequence similarity have been described, including
the Hamming Distance (HD) method and the Kernel Sequence Similarity (KSS) method applied in
this project. The HD method is relatively simplistic, defining similarity based on sequence identity,
while the KSS method is more complex taking account for position dependence and scoring of amino
acid substitutions.
Comparison of the two methods through clustering graphs revealed that the KSS method was slightly
better at producing biologically meaningful clusters than the HD method. This conclusion was based
on the ability of the KSS to better differentiate between human and viral peptides, both in relation
to overall cluster purity as well as in the proximity of viral reference peptides known to be highly im-
munogenic. However, a fair comparison of the two methods was dependent on selecting an appropriate
threshold for KSS similarity scores to generate graphs comparable to the HD graphs. The threshold
was selected based on the graphs having around the same number of edges, which seemed to reflect
the difference in overall connectivity of the graphs. Although, the threshold could have been selected
based on the graphs having the same number of nodes or the same level of average degree, resulting
in a different foundation for the comparison.
The HD method is simple and computationally efficient, with potential to capture cross-reactivity to
a certain degree. However, as demonstrated in the analysis of the cross-reactive NLVP and GILG
epitopes, the HD method is inferior when predicting cross-reactivity between highly dissimilar pep-
tides. In this context, the KSS method combined with graph-based clustering proved to be a closer
adaptation to capturing the complexity of cross-reactivity. Alternative similarity measures could have
been considered for the framework of this project. For example, the analytical tool TCRdist could
have been used to cluster TCRs instead of the KSS method. Unlike KSS, TCRdist has been specifi-
cally developed to identify sequence similarity of TCRs by utilizing a weighted Hamming Distance to
compare all three CDR regions [38]. This specialized approach could have resulted in different TCR
graphs, and a comparison between TCRdist and the more general KSS method might have offered
valuable insights into the relative strengths and weaknesses of each technique.
Page 42 of 58
==PAGE:44==
4 Discussion
4.2 Establishing confidence in TCR-pMHC predictions
4.2
Establishing confidence in TCR-pMHC predictions
Establishing confidence in the resulting suggestions of novel TCR-pMHC interactions predicted through
sequence similarity-based clustering is a principal challenge in this project. In the lack of currently
available experimental data, further experimental validation is essential for strengthening confidence in
the predictions, for example by confirming cross-reactivity of predicted interactions within presented
subgraphs. If experiments confirm that a significant proportion of these predicted interactions are
indeed cross-reactive, it would increase the reliability in the predictive accuracy of the framework and
support its application to other and larger subgraphs.
The clustering of the NLVP and GILG epitopes demonstrated that peptides with low sequence identity
can be placed in close proximity using similarity-based clustering, highlighting the potential of this
approach to uncover novel cross-reactive relationships. However, a streamlined definition of how close
two peptides must be in a graph to predict cross-reactivity is necessary to uncover new interactions.
This relates to the importance of selecting an appropriate threshold for sequence similarity in relation
to establishing confidence in TCR-pMHC interaction predictions. The threshold defines the level of
similarity required for peptides to be connected in the graph, directly influencing the clustering patterns
and resulting predictions. Hence, if the threshold is too high it could exclude relevant interactions,
while setting it too low could include false positives. Furthermore, the threshold should be considered as
dynamic, as its optimal value may vary depending on the context, e.g. which HLA-allele is considered.
Thus, finding the optimal threshold that balances sensitivity and specificity is key to the predictive
accuracy of the framework. The threshold selection can be refined through experimental validation by
testing the accuracy of prediction at various threshold levels, to eventually identify the threshold that
maximizes biological relevant clusters.
4.3
Improvements and future applications
Beyond optimizing the threshold for similarity and validating predictions through experiments, several
improvements could increase the performance and applicability of the framework presented in this
project. Particularly, the quality of the data plays a crucial role in the reliability and potential uses of
the framework. Expanding the dataset to include more experimentally validated TCR-pMHC interac-
tions could support the strengthening of confidence in predictions. Furthermore, extending the analysis
to perform sequence similarity comparisons across multiple MHC alleles could uncover more instances
of cross-reactivity. Reducing ambiguity in the TCR data by including only TCR repertoires expanded
toward specific viral epitopes would also improve the framework. This refinement would provide a
more solid foundation for assessing the ability of sequence similarity measures to differentiate TCRs
associated with distinct viral infections.
In terms of future applications, the graph-based clustering of pMHCs and TCRs through sequence
similarity demonstrated in this project could be used to identify novel epitopes for vaccine design
by identifying conserved sequence motifs in clusters of immunogenic peptides. Additionally, it could
support the development of precision immunotherapies by predicting cross-reactivity between foreign
antigens, neoantigens and self peptides, reducing the risk of off-target effects or autoimmunity.
In summary, multi-omics clustering based on sequence similarity holds the potential to connect pMHC
and TCR clusters and leverage the concept of cross-reactivity, to suggest novel TCR-pMHC interactions
Page 43 of 58
==PAGE:45==
4 Discussion
4.3 Improvements and future applications
and expand on existing data. However, to exploit the framework fully, it is important to increase
confidence in predictions through experimental validation, high data quality and optimized threshold
selection. Despite these challenges, this project highlights the immense promise of extrapolating single
TCR-pMHC interactions into hundreds using similarity-based clustering.
Such advancements can
provide a deeper understanding of TCR-pMHC interactions to support developments within precision
medicine and immunotherapy.
Page 44 of 58
==PAGE:46==
5 Conclusion
5
Conclusion
This thesis explored the use of sequence similarity measures and graph-based clustering to predict novel
TCR-pMHC interactions, under the assumption that shared sequence features is an essential indicator
of cross-reactivity. By employing and comparing the Hamming Distance and Kernel Sequence Similar-
ity methods, the project demonstrated the potential of clustering frameworks to uncover potentially
cross-reactive peptides, even in cases of seemingly dissimilar peptides. The results showcased how the
more complex Kernel Sequence Similarity method is better adapted to capture more nuanced sequence
features, beyond sequence identity.
The findings highlights the importance of selecting appropriate thresholds for similarity scores to
generate meaningful clusters reflecting cross-reactivity, as well as the essential need for experimental
validation to establish confidence in predictions. Revising the data to incorporate additional experi-
mentally validated TCR-pMHC interactions or known cross-reactive peptides, would support threshold
selection and validation of the framework to enhance the predictive power.
This project demonstrates a substantial promise in advancing our understanding of TCR-pMHC in-
teractions through sequence similarity clustering assumptions. It provides a foundation for expanding
existing data to predict novel cross-reactive peptides, which have broad applications for vaccine devel-
opment, precision medicine, and immunotherapy. By refining and expanding this framework, future
research could help unveil cross-reactivity and the complexity of TCR-pMHC interactions, offering
valuable contributions to the management of infectious diseases, cancer, and autoimmune disorders.
Page 45 of 58
==PAGE:47==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
References
[1]
Christopher Szeto et al. “TCR Recognition of Peptide-MHC-I: Rule Makers and Breakers”. In:
International Journal of Molecular Sciences 68.1 (2020). doi: 10.3390/ijms22010068.
[2]
Lihua Deng et al. “Performance comparison of TCR-pMHC prediction tools reveals a strong
data dependency”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 14.April (2023), pp. 1–9. issn: 16643224. doi:
10.3389/fimmu.2023.1128326.
[3]
Sune Frankild et al. “Amino acid similarity accounts for T cell cross-reactivity and for "holes" in
the T cell repertoire”. In: PLoS ONE 3.3 (2008). issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0001831.
[4]
Darcy B. Wilson et al. “Specificity and degeneracy of T cells”. In: Molecular Immunology 40.14-15
(2004), pp. 1047–1055. issn: 01615890. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2003.11.022.
[5]
Jean S. Marshall et al. “An introduction to immunology and immunopathology”. In: Allergy,
Asthma and Clinical Immunology 14.s2 (2018), pp. 1–10. issn: 17101492. doi: 10.1186/s13223-
018-0278-1.
[6]
Massoud Mahmoudi. “Allergy and asthma: Practical diagnosis and management: Second edition”.
In: Allergy and Asthma: Practical Diagnosis and Management: Second Edition (2016), pp. 1–689.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-30835-7.
[7]
Scott McComb et al. “Introduction to the Immune System”. In: Immunoproteomics: Methods and
Protocols. Ed. by Kelly M Fulton and Susan M Twine. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2019,
pp. 1–24. isbn: 978-1-4939-9597-4. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9597-4_1.
[8]
Francisco A. Bonilla and Hans C. Oettgen. “Adaptive immunity”. In: Journal of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology 125.2 SUPPL. 2 (2010), S33–S40. issn: 00916749. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.
2009.09.017.
[9]
Sadeep Medhasi and Narisara Chantratita. “Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) System: Genetics
and Association with Bacterial and Viral Infections”. In: Journal of Immunology Research 2022
(2022). issn: 23147156. doi: 10.1155/2022/9710376.
[10]
John Sidney et al. “HLA class I supertypes: A revised and updated classification”. In: BMC
Immunology 9 (2008). issn: 14712172. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-9-1.
[11]
Marta A S Perez et al. “Structural Prediction of Peptide–MHC Binding Modes”. In: Compu-
tational Peptide Science: Methods and Protocols. Ed. by Thomas Simonson. New York, NY:
Springer US, 2022, pp. 245–282. isbn: 978-1-0716-1855-4. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1855-
4_13.
[12]
Thomas Trolle et al. “The Length Distribution of Class I–Restricted T Cell Epitopes Is Deter-
mined by Both Peptide Supply and MHC Allele–Specific Binding Preference”. In: The Journal
of Immunology 196.4 (Feb. 2016), pp. 1480–1487. issn: 0022-1767. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.
1501721.
[13]
B. Reynisson et al. “NetMHCpan-4.1 and NetMHCIIpan-4.0: improved predictions of MHC anti-
gen presentation by concurrent motif deconvolution and integration of MS MHC eluted ligand
data”. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 48 (2020).
Page 46 of 58
==PAGE:48==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
[14]
Alicia Sanchez-Mazas et al. “The most frequent HLA alleles around the world: A fundamental
synopsis”. In: Best Practice and Research Clinical Haematology 37.2 (2024). issn: 1521-6926. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2024.101559.
[15]
Marco De Simone, Grazisa Rossetti, and Massimiliano Pagani. “Single cell T cell receptor se-
quencing: Techniques and future challenges”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 9.JUL (2018), pp. 1–7.
issn: 16643224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01638.
[16]
Ido Springer, Nili Tickotsky, and Yoram Louzoun. “Contribution of T Cell Receptor Alpha and
Beta CDR3, MHC Typing, V and J Genes to Peptide Binding Prediction”. In: Frontiers in
Immunology 12 (Apr. 2021), p. 664514. issn: 16643224. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.2021.664514/
BIBTEX.
[17]
Chloe H Lee et al. “Predicting Cross-Reactivity and Antigen Specificity of T Cell Receptors”. In:
Frontiers in Immunology 11 (2020). issn: 1664-3224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.565096.
[18]
Daniela Latorre et al. “Editorial: T cell specificity and cross-reactivity - implications in physiology
and pathology”. In: Frontiers in immunology 15 (2024). issn: 1664-3224. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.
2024.1385415.
[19]
M. Regner. “Cross-reactivity in T-cell antigen recognition”. In: Immunology and Cell Biology 79.2
(Apr. 2001), pp. 91–100. issn: 1440-1711. doi: 10.1046/J.1440-1711.2001.00994.X.
[20]
Philip Bradley. “Structure-based prediction of T cell receptor:peptide-MHC interactions”. In:
eLife 12 (Jan. 2023). issn: 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/ELIFE.82813.
[21]
Daniele Santoni. “Peptide Hamming Graphs: A network representation of peptides presented
through specific HLAs to identify potential epitope clusters”. In: Journal of Immunological Meth-
ods 517 (June 2023), p. 113474. issn: 0022-1759. doi: 10.1016/J.JIM.2023.113474.
[22]
Shiyuan Wang et al. “Bilateral similarity function: A novel and universal method for similarity
analysis of biological sequences”. In: Journal of Theoretical Biology 265.2 (2010), pp. 194–201.
issn: 0022-5193. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2010.04.013.
[23]
Steven Henikoff and Jorja G. Henikoff. “Amino acid substitution matrices from protein blocks”.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 89.22 (1992),
p. 10915. issn: 00278424. doi: 10.1073/PNAS.89.22.10915.
[24]
Wen-Jun Shen et al. Towards a Mathematical Foundation of Immunology and Amino Acid Chains.
2012. arXiv: 1205.6031 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1205.6031.
[25]
Anne Mette Bjerregaard et al. “An analysis of natural T cell responses to predicted tumor
neoepitopes”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 8.NOV (Nov. 2017), p. 304925. issn: 16643224. doi:
10.3389/FIMMU.2017.01566/BIBTEX.
[26]
Satu Elisa Schaeffer. “Graph clustering”. In: Computer Science Review 1.1 (2007), pp. 27–64.
issn: 1574-0137. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2007.05.001.
[27]
The UniProt Consortium. “UniProt: the Universal Protein Knowledgebase in 2025 The UniProt
Consortium”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 53 (2025), pp. 609–617. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae1010.
[28]
Andreas Kirschning. “On the Evolutionary History of the Twenty Encoded Amino Acids”. In:
Chemistry (Weinheim an Der Bergstrasse, Germany) 28.55 (Oct. 2022), e202201419. issn: 15213765.
doi: 10.1002/CHEM.202201419.
Page 47 of 58
==PAGE:49==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
[29]
Randi Vita et al. “The Immune Epitope Database (IEDB): 2018 update”. In: Nucleic acids
research 47.D1 (2019), pp. D339–D343. issn: 1362-4962. doi: 10.1093/NAR/GKY1006.
[30]
Yue Shen, Jerry M. Parks, and Jeremy C. Smith. “HLA Class I Supertype Classification Based
on Structural Similarity”. In: The Journal of Immunology 210.1 (Jan. 2023), pp. 103–114. issn:
0022-1767. doi: 10.4049/JIMMUNOL.2200685.
[31]
Gabor Csardi and Tamas Nepusz. “The Igraph Software Package for Complex Network Research”.
In: InterJournal Complex Systems (Nov. 2005), p. 1695.
[32]
Martin Christen Frolund Thomsen and Morten Nielsen. “Seq2Logo: a method for construction
and visualization of amino acid binding motifs and sequence profiles including sequence weighting,
pseudo counts and two-sided representation of amino acid enrichment and depletion”. In: Nucleic
Acids Research 40.W1 (July 2012), W281–W287. issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/NAR/GKS469.
[33]
Mikhail Shugay et al. “VDJdb: a curated database of T-cell receptor sequences with known
antigen specificity”. In: Nucleic acids research 46.D1 (Jan. 2018), pp. D419–D427. issn: 1362-
4962. doi: 10.1093/NAR/GKX760.
[34]
Si Yi Chen et al. “TCRdb: a comprehensive database for T-cell receptor sequences with powerful
search function”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 49.D1 (Jan. 2021), pp. D468–D474. issn: 0305-1048.
doi: 10.1093/NAR/GKAA796.
[35]
Neelakshi R Jog and Judith A James. “Epstein Barr Virus and Autoimmune Responses in Sys-
temic Lupus Erythematosus”. In: Front. Immunol 11 (2020). doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.623944.
[36]
Michael Rasmussen et al. “Uncovering the Peptide-Binding Specificities of HLA-C: A Gen-
eral Strategy To Determine the Specificity of Any MHC Class I Molecule”. In: The Journal
of Immunology 193.10 (Nov. 2014), pp. 4790–4802. issn: 0022-1767. doi: 10.4049/JIMMUNOL.
1401689/-/DCSUPPLEMENTAL.
[37]
Hae-Young Kim. “Statistical notes for clinical researchers: Chi-squared test and Fisher’s exact
test”. In: Restorative Dentistry Endodontics 42.2 (2017), p. 152. issn: 2234-7658. doi: 10.5395/
RDE.2017.42.2.152.
[38]
Pradyot Dash et al. “Quantifiable predictive features define epitope-specific T cell receptor reper-
toires”. In: Nature 547.7661 (2017), pp. 89–93. issn: 14764687. doi: 10.1038/nature22383.
Page 48 of 58
==PAGE:50==
A Viral proteomes
Appendix
A
Viral proteomes
Table 5: Text for table
Species (taxonomy ID)
UniProt ID of
proteomes
Protein count
AA count
Aichi virus (72149)
UP000119554
1
2432
Alphapapillomavirus 1 (337048)
UP000009117
6
2261
UP000009122
9
2680
Alphapapillomavirus 2 (337039)
UP000009105
7
2795
UP000009115
8
2560
UP000214780
8
2891
Alphapapillomavirus 3 (333767)
UP000007670
7
2344
UP000111499
7
2359
UP000128556
8
2404
UP000136351
7
2465
UP000156002
7
2370
UP000162335
7
2516
UP000247192
8
2894
Alphapapillomavirus 4 (337043)
UP000007710
7
2370
UP000120955
7
2451
UP000175562
7
2483
Alphapapillomavirus 5 (337044)
UP000007674
8
2430
UP000009125
9
2560
UP000145193
8
2386
Alphapapillomavirus 6 (337050)
UP000007666
5
1568
UP000007673
7
2400
UP000009155
6
2238
UP000167180
7
2391
Alphapapillomavirus 7 (337042)
UP000009109
9
2647
UP000100280
7
2325
UP000107392
6
2274
UP000125839
8
2441
Alphapapillomavirus 8 (333757)
UP000008226
6
2247
Alphapapillomavirus 9 (337041)
UP000008692
6
2257
UP000009116
9
2585
UP000009118
9
2526
UP000009251
9
2600
Alphapapillomavirus 10 (333754)
UP000008222
10
2652
UP000009107
9
2614
UP000009123
7
2371
UP000104379
9
2496
Alphapapillomavirus 11 (337049)
UP000107742
8
2375
UP000132751
7
2285
Alphapapillomavirus 13 (333766)
UP000096688
7
2370
Alphapapillomavirus 14 (931244)
UP000099266
7
2358
UP000114279
7
2451
UP000142218
7
2346
Continued on next page
Page 49 of 58
==PAGE:51==
A Viral proteomes
Table 5 – Continued from previous page
Species (taxonomy ID)
UniProt ID of
proteomes
Protein count
AA count
Alphapolyomavirus nonihominis (2955297)
UP000163738
5
1825
Alphatorquevirus homin3 (3048428)
UP000008257
6
1750
Alphatorquevirus homin6 (3048431)
UP000008258
3
1258
Betacoronavirus 1 (694003)
UP000007552
10
14611
Betapapillomavirus 1 (337051)
UP000009108
4
2125
UP000009165
7
2739
UP000009252
9
3145
UP000110538
7
2638
UP000158064
7
2568
Betapapillomavirus 2 (333924)
UP000008232
6
2258
UP000009104
6
2347
UP000009111
7
2536
UP000009112
7
2559
UP000115655
7
2472
UP000133475
7
2550
Betapapillomavirus 3 (334207)
UP000246733
7
2580
Betapapillomavirus 5 (334209)
UP000127867
7
2553
UP000163734
7
2645
BK polyomavirus (1891762)
UP000145981
5
1183
Bocaparvovirus primate1 (3052040)
UP000140113
3
1671
Brisavirus (2732654)
UP000501165
2
866
Chapare mammarenavirus (3052302)
UP000008449
4
3352
Chikungunya virus (37124)
UP000000569
3
4546
Circovirus eniyan (3052121)
UP000107193
2
528
Cosavirus A (1330491)
UP000029753
1
2124
Cyclovirus humana (3047957)
UP000113390
2
515
Cyclovirus maanav (3047956)
UP000146794
2
499
Cyclovirus nhanloai (3047966)
UP000152981
2
514
Cytomegalovirus humanbeta5 (HHV-5, CMV) (3050295)
UP000008991
190
65574
UP000008992
148
59989
UP000110038
164
62914
UP000000938
168
63460
Deltapolyomavirus decihominis (1208309)
UP000125591
5
1787
Deltapolyomavirus sextihominis (2955746)
UP000119412
5
1797
Enterovirus A (138948)
UP000095905
1
2193
Erbovirus A (312185)
UP000000405
1
2589
Erythroparvovirus primate1 (3052189)
UP000006624
5
1701
Gammapapillomavirus 1 (333926)
UP000009253
8
2651
UP000153748
6
2274
Gammapapillomavirus 2 (333928)
UP000112710
7
2372
UP000140763
6
2247
Gammapapillomavirus 3 (333929)
UP000168289
7
2396
Gammapapillomavirus 4 (333930)
UP000120507
7
2492
Gammapapillomavirus 5 (333931)
UP000113513
7
2472
Gammapapillomavirus 6 (1175848)
UP000130331
5
2145
Gammapapillomavirus 7 (1175849)
UP000101375
7
2448
UP000108288
6
2300
UP000119411
7
2459
Continued on next page
Page 50 of 58
==PAGE:52==
A Viral proteomes
Table 5 – Continued from previous page
Species (taxonomy ID)
UniProt ID of
proteomes
Protein count
AA count
UP000121690
7
2426
UP000131008
7
2437
Gammapapillomavirus 8 (1175850)
UP000113556
7
2404
UP000118929
7
2443
Gammapapillomavirus 9 (1175851)
UP000103806
7
2423
UP000118929
7
2396
Gammapapillomavirus 10 (1175852)
UP000167318
7
2411
Gammapapillomavirus 11 (1513256)
UP000103855
7
2439
UP000134915
7
2390
UP000146577
7
2408
UP000148647
7
2408
Gammapapillomavirus 12 (1513257)
UP000097513
7
2389
UP000103885
7
2368
UP000153518
6
2248
UP000154097
6
2222
UP000167269
6
2248
UP000169932
6
2258
Gammapapillomavirus 13 (1513258)
UP000129753
7
2410
UP000171862
7
2421
Gammapapillomavirus 14 (1513259)
UP000096661
7
2447
Gammapapillomavirus 15 (1513260)
UP000099010
6
2257
UP000144657
7
2412
Gammapapillomavirus 16 (1513261)
UP000117015
7
2411
Gammapapillomavirus 17 (1513262)
UP000156843
7
2404
Gammapapillomavirus 19 (1513264)
UP000109002
6
2253
UP000114531
6
2252
Gammapapillomavirus 20 (1513265)
UP000170379
6
2277
Gammapapillomavirus 21 (1961678)
UP000141459
6
2259
Gammapapillomavirus 22 (1961679)
UP000108008
7
2448
Gammapapillomavirus 24 (1961681)
UP000104554
7
2445
Gammapapillomavirus 25 (1961682)
UP000157251
6
2293
Gammapapillomavirus 26 (1961683)
UP000244836
6
2273
Gammapapillomavirus 27 (2169902)
UP000140463
7
2471
Gemykibivirus humas1 (2844581)
UP000158549
3
829
Gemykibivirus humas4 (2844584)
UP000119980
3
744
Gemyvongvirus humas1 (2844646)
UP000126444
3
917
Guanarito mammarenavirus (3052307)
UP000147629
4
3332
Gyrovirus galga1 (2844800)
UP000141521
3
820
Hepacivirus hominis (hepatitis C virus) (3052230)
UP000000518
2
3173
UP000095959
1
3016
UP000095967
1
3010
UP000096077
1
3010
UP000097015
1
3033
UP000097155
1
3034
UP000097304
1
3022
UP000098034
1
3033
UP000099059
1
3015
Hepatitis B virus (10407)
UP000007921
5
1618
Continued on next page
Page 51 of 58
==PAGE:53==
A Viral proteomes
Table 5 – Continued from previous page
Species (taxonomy ID)
UniProt ID of
proteomes
Protein count
AA count
UP000008591
5
1792
Hepatitis E virus (1678143)
UP000006705
3
2467
Hepatovirus A (12092)
UP000006724
1
2227
Human adenovirus (1907210)
UP000316483
27
8516
Human associated huchismacovirus 2 (2169935)
UP000240896
2
573
Human associated huchismacovirus 3 (2169936)
UP000241568
2
574
Human associated porprismacovirus 2 (2170114)
UP000203255
2
629
Human circovirus VS6600022 (1525173)
UP000125118
4
1250
Human circular dsDNA virus associated with alcoholic cir-
rhosis (749224)
UP000246405
1
199
Human coronavirus 229E (11137)
UP000006716
8
12928
Human coronavirus HKU1 (290028)
UP000001985
9
14349
UP000134743
8
9958
Human coronavirus NL63 (277944)
UP000008573
7
13050
UP000125140
7
13050
Human cyclovirus (1455626)
UP000163346
2
515
Human endogenous retrovirus (11827)
UP000147721
3
2388
Human fecal virus Jorvi2 (2017081)
UP000204153
5
938
Human fecal virus Jorvi3 (2017082)
UP000204351
2
542
Human fecal virus Jorvi4 (2017083)
UP000204118
2
632
Human feces pecovirus (1820160)
UP000273533
2
709
Human feces-associated smacovirus (1914415)
UP000275254
2
623
Human gokushovirus (1986030)
UP000225385
4
1291
Human gut gokushovirus (1986031)
UP000240438
5
1434
Human gut microviridae SH-CHD12 (1986032)
UP000223848
4
1703
Human gut microviridae SH-CHD8 (1986033)
UP000225915
4
1677
Human immunodeficiency virus (12721)
UP000134713
9
3149
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (11676)
UP000157732
9
2542
UP000007698
9
3623
UP000007689
9
3599
UP000007420
9
3590
UP000007714
9
3571
UP000007685
9
3569
UP000007418
9
3544
UP000007687
9
3560
UP000007693
9
3580
UP000007694
9
3524
UP000007686
9
3571
UP000007699
9
3597
UP000007697
9
3597
UP000007695
9
3593
UP000002241
9
3569
UP000007692
9
3597
UP000107234
9
3574
UP000007688
9
3591
UP000007696
9
3586
UP000122295
4
1757
UP000160754
9
3134
Human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (11709)
UP000007428
9
3780
Continued on next page
Page 52 of 58
==PAGE:54==
A Viral proteomes
Table 5 – Continued from previous page
Species (taxonomy ID)
UniProt ID of
proteomes
Protein count
AA count
UP000007426
9
3762
UP000007424
9
3644
UP000002242
9
3836
Human mastadenovirus A (129875)
UP000150644
36
11207
UP000319239
35
11079
Human mastadenovirus B (108098)
UP000502365
39
11671
UP000097688
32
10502
UP000108010
44
12438
UP000127436
48
12841
UP000115299
32
10042
Human mastadenovirus C (129951)
UP000008167
45
12874
UP000395748
22
6517
Human mastadenovirus D (130310)
UP000120055
36
11222
UP000118238
36
11001
UP000099345
8
3971
UP000119444
37
11273
UP000151521
15
7049
UP000119254
36
11231
Human mastadenovirus E (130308)
UP000121695
38
11904
UP000316797
38
11653
UP000316977
46
12879
Human mastadenovirus F (130309)
UP000167793
32
10856
Human mastadenovirus G (536079)
UP000109192
36
11272
Human papillomavirus (10566)
UP000126093
6
2309
Human papillomavirus KC5 (1647924)
UP000131287
7
2364
Human papillomavirus type 190 (1851215)
UP000247041
6
2286
Human papillomavirus type 194 (1851219)
UP000246833
6
2276
Human papillomavirus type 203 (2093789)
UP000289628
7
2370
Human polyomavirus 12 (1303334)
UP000158017
5
1764
Human smacovirus 1 (1595998)
UP000203284
2
565
Influenza A virus (2955291)
UP000009255
13
5298
UP000109975
10
3742
UP000115210
10
4454
UP000120748
11
4555
UP000123282
10
5159
Influenza B virus
UP000008158
11
4718
La Crosse orthobunyavirus (3052409)
UP000008768
4
4031
Lymphocryptovirus humangamma4 (3050299)
UP000103223
16
3755
UP000116168
43
18408
UP000153037
84
42252
UP000007639
79
39801
Lyssavirus hamburg (2951618)
UP000007206
5
3601
Mamastrovirus 1 (1239565)
UP000008629
3
3120
UP000008628
3
3119
UP000009176
3
3106
UP000001650
3
3157
Metapneumovirus hominis (3048148)
UP000001398
9
4142
Continued on next page
Page 53 of 58
==PAGE:55==
A Viral proteomes
Table 5 – Continued from previous page
Species (taxonomy ID)
UniProt ID of
proteomes
Protein count
AA count
Middle
East
respiratory
syndrome-related
coronavirus
(1335626)
UP000139997
10
14216
Morbillivirus hominis (measles virus) (3052345)
UP000114734
8
5202
UP000168060
8
5202
UP000096924
6
4717
UP000104748
8
5202
UP000104116
6
4717
UP000008699
8
5202
Mupapillomavirus 1 (334203)
UP000006372
8
2407
Mupapillomavirus 2 (334204)
UP000007671
8
2580
Mupapillomavirus 3 (1961783)
UP000110985
7
2373
Norwalk virus (11983)
UP000000826
3
2531
UP000125824
3
2506
Nupapillomavirus 1 (334205)
UP000006367
11
2765
Orthoebolavirus sudanense (3052460)
UP000000277
9
5509
Orthoflavivirus denguei (3052464)
UP000096731
1
3387
UP000095814
1
3390
UP000095876
1
3391
UP000002500
1
3392
Orthoflavivirus flavi (3046277)
UP000008603
1
3411
UP000000360
1
3411
UP000002486
1
3412
UP000007532
1
3411
UP000008604
1
3412
UP000008607
1
3412
Orthoflavivirus zikaense (3048459)
UP000054557
1
3419
UP000112691
1
3423
UP000157401
1
3423
Orthopicobirnavirus hominis (2956252)
UP000007252
3
1310
Orthopneumovirus hominis (3049954)
UP000002472
11
4540
UP000134464
12
4611
UP000181262
12
4611
Orthorubulavirus hominis (3052556)
UP000136985
7
4957
Orthorubulavirus laryngotracheitidis (3052557)
UP000000472
7
4923
Orthorubulavirus parotitidis (3052560)
UP000002331
8
4977
Parechovirus A (1803956)
UP000000670
1
2179
Pegivirus columbiaense (3052606)
UP000100494
1
3057
Pegivirus hominis (3052608)
UP000103038
1
2842
Pegivirus platyrrhini (3052610)
UP000096684
1
2842
Porprismacovirus humas1 (2845897)
UP000241097
2
647
Porprismacovirus humas3 (2845899)
UP000274987
2
623
Primate T-lymphotropic virus 1 (194440)
UP000115060
6
3068
UP000007683
9
4121
UP000001061
9
4121
Primate T-lymphotropic virus 2 (194441)
UP000009254
6
3483
Primate T-lymphotropic virus 3 (194443)
UP000008029
6
3469
Respirovirus muris (3052731)
UP000096504
2
180
Respirovirus pneumoniae (3049953)
UP000172444
8
5386
Continued on next page
Page 54 of 58
==PAGE:56==
A Viral proteomes
Table 5 – Continued from previous page
Species (taxonomy ID)
UniProt ID of
proteomes
Protein count
AA count
Rhadinovirus humangamma8 (3050300)
UP000000942
85
38454
Rhinovirus A (147711)
UP000098170
1
2153
UP000099496
1
2160
UP000105302
1
2156
UP000096163
1
2166
UP000098910
1
2156
UP000101512
1
2156
UP000102087
1
2157
UP000097737
1
2159
UP000100706
1
2161
UP000097078
1
2160
UP000007070
1
2164
Rhinovirus B (147712)
UP000097083
1
2177
UP000097117
1
2177
UP000100800
1
2177
Rhinovirus C (463676)
UP000099416
1
2143
Rosavirus A (1511805)
UP000029743
1
2468
Roseolovirus humanbeta6a (3050296)
UP000009295
99
44594
Roseolovirus humanbeta6b (3050297)
UP000006930
98
43792
Roseolovirus humanbeta7 (3050298)
UP000009246
102
41690
Rotavirus A (28875)
UP000225550
11
3302
UP000223618
11
3728
UP000225874
11
3728
UP000221896
10
2900
Rotavirus B (28876)
UP000114294
12
5712
UP000125922
12
5641
Rotavirus C (36427)
UP000007664
11
5608
Rotavirus H (1348384)
UP000007663
11
5679
Rubivirus rubellae (2846071)
UP000000571
2
3179
Salivirus A (1330524)
UP000029742
1
2374
Sapporo virus (95342)
UP000007049
3
2606
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (694009)
UP000464024
17
14439
UP000000354
15
14377
Simian foamy virus (11642)
UP000138352
6
3722
Simian immunodeficiency virus (11723)
UP000260611
5
2616
UP000146425
8
3183
Simplexvirus humanalpha1 (3050292)
UP000009294
73
38405
UP000272538
59
35676
Simplexvirus humanalpha2 (3050293)
UP000001874
74
39568
UP000270953
53
32602
Sindbis virus (11034)
UP000006710
3
4579
Torque teno virus (68887)
UP000008256
4
1496
UP000008259
2
1016
UP000008260
4
1411
Torque teno virus 27 (687366)
UP000007551
4
1450
Varicellovirus humanalpha3 (3050294)
UP000008507
1
221
UP000002602
69
35782
UP000162445
70
36015
Continued on next page
Page 55 of 58
==PAGE:57==
B Viral reference proteomes
Table 5 – Continued from previous page
Species (taxonomy ID)
UniProt ID of
proteomes
Protein count
AA count
Variola virus (small pox virus) (10255)
UP000002060
198
54086
Vientovirus (2732655)
UP000593704
3
1077
UP000501876
3
1079
UP000593947
3
1077
UP000593762
3
1092
UP000593855
3
1079
B
Viral reference proteomes
Table 6: Text for table
IEDB ID
Epitope
Antigen (UniProt ID)
Organism
6435
CINGVCWTV
Genome polyprotein (P27958)
Hepatitis C virus
37257
LLFGYPVYV
Protein Tax-1 (P03409)
Primate T-lymphotropic virus 1
1309147
YLQPRTFLL
Spike glycoprotein (P0DTC2)
SARS-CoV-2
44920
NLVPMVATV
65 kDa phosphoprotein (Q6SW59)
Human
herpesvirus
5
(Human
cy-
tomegalovirus)
20788
GLCTLVAML
mRNA export factor ICP27 homolog
(Q04360)
Human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein Barr virus)
16755
FLLTRILTI
Large envelope protein (P03138)
Hepatitis B virus
60242
SPRWYFYYL
Nucleoprotein (P0DTC9)
SARS-CoV-2
72794
WLSLLVPFV
Large envelope protein (P03138)
Hepatitis B virus
37473
LLLDRLNQL
Nucleoprotein (P0DTC9)
SARS-CoV-2
1309115
FTSDYYQLY
ORF3a protein (P0DTC3)
SARS-CoV-2
1310756
QYIKWPWYI
Spike glycoprotein (P0DTC2)
SARS-CoV-2
9203
DLMGYIPLV
Genome polyprotein (P27958)
Hepatitis C virus
21079
GLQDCTMLV
Genome polyprotein (P27958)
Hepatitis C virus
33667
KTFPPTEPK
Nucleoprotein (P0DTC9)
SARS-CoV-2
21757
GPRLGVRAT
Genome polyprotein (P27958)
Hepatitis C virus
24762
HSKKKCDEL
Genome polyprotein (P27958)
Hepatitis C virus
59613
SLYNTVATL
Gag polyprotein (P04591)
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
1311180
LLYDANYFL
ORF3a protein (P0DTC3)
SARS-CoV-2
16751
FLLSLGIHL
Protein P (P03156)
Hepatitis B virus
21145
GLSRYVARL
Protein P (P03156)
Hepatitis B virus
20354
GILGFVFTL
Matrix protein 1 (P03485)
Influenza A virus
4197
ARMILMTHF
Genome polyprotein (P27958)
Hepatitis C virus
76333
YVLDHLIVV
Replication and transcription activa-
tor (P03209)
Human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein Barr virus)
1313269
NYNYLYRLF
Spike glycoprotein (P0DTC2)
SARS-CoV-2
21347
GMSRIGMEV
Nucleoprotein (P0DTC9)
SARS-CoV-2
24479
HPNIEEVAL
Genome polyprotein (P27958)
Hepatitis C virus
32240
KLWAQCVQL
Replicase polyprotein 1a (P0DTC1)
SARS-CoV-2
15061
EYLVSFGVW
Capsid protein (P03146)
Hepatitis B virus
34616
KYTSFPWLL
Other Hepatitis B virus protein
Hepatitis B virus
6568
CLGGLLTMV
Latent membrane protein 2 (P13285)
Human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein Barr virus)
Continued on next page
Page 56 of 58
==PAGE:58==
B Viral reference proteomes
Table 6 – Continued from previous page
IEDB ID
Epitope
Antigen (UniProt ID)
Organism
16737
FLLNKEMYL
Replicase polyprotein 1a (P0DTC1)
SARS-CoV-2
59585
SLYADSPSV
Protein P (P03156)
Hepatitis B virus
55252
RPPIFIRRL
Epstein-Barr
nuclear
antigen
3
(P12977)
Human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein Barr virus)
57790
SFHSLHLLF
Protein Tax-1 (P03409)
Primate T-lymphotropic virus 1
69452
VLEETSVML
Immediate
early
protein
IE1
(F5HCM1)
Human
herpesvirus
5
(Human
cy-
tomegalovirus)
69524
VLHKRTLGL
Protein X (P03165)
Hepatitis B virus
75074
YMLDLQPET
Protein E7 (P03129)
Alphapapillomavirus 9
131070
SLFNTVATL
Gag polyprotein (P04591)
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
6556
CLFKDWEEL
Other Hepatitis B virus protein
Hepatitis B virus
37120
LLCLIFLLV
Large envelope protein (P03138)
Hepatitis B virus
37573
LLMGTLGIV
Protein E7 (P03129)
Alphapapillomavirus 9
38701
LPSDFFPSV
Capsid protein (P03146)
Hepatitis B virus
50298
QAKWRLQTL
Epstein-Barr
nuclear
antigen
3
(P12977)
Human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein Barr virus)
2998
ALWEIQQVV
Replicase polyprotein 1a (P0C6U8)
SARS-CoV-1
6954
CRVLCCYVL
Immediate
early
protein
IE1
(P13202)
Human
herpesvirus
5
(Human
cy-
tomegalovirus)
101990
QASQEVKNW
Gag polyprotein (P04591)
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
108277
ALWALPHAA
Major viral transcription factor ICP4
homolog (P09310)
Human
herpesvirus
3
(Varicella-zoster
virus)
538625
ALHTALATV
Tegument protein UL47 (P10231)
Human herpesvirus 1
20786
GLCPHCINV
Initiator protein NS1 (Q9PZT1)
Erythroparvovirus primate 1
33856
KTSERSQPR
Genome polyprotein (P27958)
Hepatitis C virus
37181
LLDTASALY
Capsid protein (Q76R61)
Hepatitis B virus
37590
LLMWEAVTV
Capsid protein VP1 (Q069E3)
Betapolyomavirus
hominis
(BK
poly-
omavirus)
54507
RLDKVEAEV
Spike glycoprotein (P0DTC2)
SARS-CoV-2
59612
SLYNTIAVL
Gag polyprotein (P04591)
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
74886
YLQQNWWTL
Latent membrane protein 1 (P03230)
Human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein Barr virus)
24327
HLYSHPIIL
Protein P (Q69028)
Hepatitis B virus
29352
IVLPEKDSW
Gag-Pol polyprotein (P04585)
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
29466
IVTDFSVIK
Epstein-Barr
nuclear
antigen
4
(P03203)
Human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein Barr virus)
31747
KLAEAIFKL
Genome polyprotein (P17763)
Dengue virus
33105
KQYNVTQAF
Nucleoprotein (P59595)
SARS-CoV-1
64830
TLHEYMLDL
Protein E7 (P03129)
Alphapapillomavirus 9
74774
YLLEMLWRL
Latent membrane protein 1 (P03230)
Human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein Barr virus)
110323
LLLGTLNIV
Protein E7 (P04020)
Alphapapillomavirus 10 (Human papillo-
mavirus - 6)
194567
YLANGGFLI
Envelope glycoprotein B (P10211)
Human herpesvirus 1
832761
FIPQYLSAV
Capsid vertex component 2 (P10209)
Human herpesvirus 1
21656
GPHETITAL
Capsid scaffolding protein (P89449)
Human herpesvirus 2
28657
ISPRTLNAW
Gag polyprotein (P04591)
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
31898
KLHLYSHPI
Protein P (Q69028)
Hepatitis B virus
37104
LLAQFTSAI
Protein P (Q69028)
Hepatitis B virus
51346
QLFTFSPRR
Genome polyprotein (P27958)
Hepatitis C virus
60867
SRYWAIRTR
Nucleoprotein (P03466)
Influenza A virus
Continued on next page
Page 57 of 58
==PAGE:59==
B Viral reference proteomes
Table 6 – Continued from previous page
IEDB ID
Epitope
Antigen (UniProt ID)
Organism
65997
TRATKMQVI
65 kDa phosphoprotein (P06725)
Human
herpesvirus
5
(Human
cy-
tomegalovirus)
67349
TYGPVFMCL
Latent membrane protein 2 (P13285)
Human herpesvirus 4 (Epstein Barr virus)
193665
ALLGLTLGV
Envelope glycoprotein B (P10211)
Human herpesvirus 1
2004520
AFRDLCIVY
Protein E6 (P03126)
Alphapapillomavirus 9
2758
ALMPLYACI
Protein P (UniProt:Q69028)
Hepatitis B virus
Page 58 of 58
