==PAGE:1==
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction
of NRF2­related toxicity
Master Thesis
DTU Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
January, 2025
By
Ruben Damkjær Canger
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads 345C, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the National Food Institute, at the Tech­
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Ruben Damkjær Canger ­ s160603
Signature
Date
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Oxidative stress is linked to numerous harmful diseases, including cancer and liver steato­
sis. One of the key mechanisms through which oxidative stress is induced in humans is
chemical exposure, making it critical to identify which chemicals trigger oxidative stress
upon contact.
The ARE­bla assay is an in vitro method used to indirectly measure oxidative stress induc­
tion by chemicals. In this assay, human HepG2 liver cells are exposed to a chemical, and
a signal is generated upon activation of the transcription factor Nrf2. Nrf2 is activated in
the presence of reactive oxygen species, then translocates to the nucleus, and regulates
the transcription of genes associated with antioxidant response elements (AREs). The
Nrf2­ARE pathway primarily serves a cytoprotective function by upregulating the produc­
tion of antioxidant enzymes and various other protective proteins.
A large number of chemicals have already been tested in high­throughput ARE­bla as­
say through the Tox21 program, a U.S. federal initiative focused on developing toxicity
assessments.
Using data from the Tox21 ARE­bla assay, two quantitative structure­activity relationship
(QSAR) models were developed. The models were validated using external­ and cross­
validation, which both showed good predictive performance. Additionally, the top positive
and negative structural alerts were developed and analyzed.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Learning objectives
• Explain the conditions under which Nrf2 is activated and how those conditions may
lead to toxicity
• Explain the theory behind QSAR models, as well as the current state­of­the­art in
terms of techniques and best practices.
• Develop a number of QSAR models using different advanced partial logistic regres­
sion algorithms.
• Measure the accuracy and robustness of the QSAR model using cross­validation.
• Measure the accuracy of the QSAR model using an external validation set.
• Analyse the top positive and negative structural alerts.
• Present the results in both written and oral formats.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ruben Damkjær Canger, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
[Ana C.V.E Nissen], [supervisor]
.
[Nikolai G. Nikolov], [supervisor]
.
[Eva B. Wedebye], [supervisor]
.
I would like to thank my supervisors for their guidance and support during this project.
Special thanks to Ana for guiding me through the jungle of QSAR modeling and related
software as well as useful help regarding my thesis.
I am also very grateful for Eva and Nikolai for their great feedback on the thesis, and for
helping me form the project at its early stages.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Learning objectives
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
2
Introduction
1
3
oxidative stress
2
3.1
Nrf2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4
Regulatory toxicology
6
4.1
Tox21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5
QSAR models
8
5.1
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.2
Leadscope Predictive Data Miner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
6
Materials and methods
12
6.1
Cell Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
7
Data curation
14
7.1
Purity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
7.2
Classification of SIDs as active/inactive
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
7.3
Merging SIDs to CAS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
7.4
Merging of CASes to canonical structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
7.5
Sets of calculation structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
7.6
Sectioning of the data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
8
QSAR modeling and validation
17
8.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
8.2
Descriptor selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
8.3
Qsar model development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
8.4
Applicability domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
8.5
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
9
Results and discussion
19
9.1
Data curation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
9.2
Prediction data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
9.3
Positive and negative structural alerts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
9.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Bibliography
25
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
vi
==PAGE:8==
2
Introduction
The development of chemicals for industrial and medicinal applications is rapidly increas­
ing. To ensure public safety and environmental protection, it is crucial for both the chemical
industry and regulatory institutions to stay updated on these advancements. Continuous
assessment of the potential toxicity associated with exposure to these substances is a
critical aspect of this process. However, traditional toxicology testing methods, such as in
vivo studies, are often prohibitively expensive, creating barriers to comprehensive safety
assessments and leaving significant gaps in available toxicity data [1]. Similarly, the de­
velopment of many pharmaceuticals is frequently abandoned during later testing stages
due to unforeseen toxicological issues [2].
Conventional toxicology methods, such as in vivo animal testing and clinical trials, are not
only economically costly but also pose ethical and health risks to test subjects. Addition­
ally, unrecognized toxic effects of environmental chemicals can have unintended negative
consequences for both human and animal health.
To address these challenges, initiatives such as the Tox21 program were established to
develop cost­effective toxicity testing by alternative methods such as cell­based assays
that enhance data coverage for chemicals currently in use [3]. This project aims to build
on the work of the Tox21 program by creating QSAR models capable of predicting the
activities of compounds beyond those tested within the program. These models can gen­
erate valuable predictions about the properties of untested or novel chemical compounds,
enabling informed decision­making. For instance, compounds predicted to exhibit toxic
activities could prompt increased vigilance or necessitate further testing to confirm their
safety.
Specifically, the QSAR models developed in this project were based on the Tox21 ARE­
bla assay. This assay measures the activation of the ARE­Nrf2 pathway, a cytoprotective
response that is induced in response to oxidative stress [4].
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
1
==PAGE:9==
3
oxidative stress
Oxidative stress is a widely used term, first introduced in 1956 [5]. In 1970, the phrase
”Cells were subjected to oxidative stress” was used to describe the addition of hydrogen
peroxide to erythrocytes [6]. Since then, in the 1985 book titled Oxidative Stress, it was
defined as ”a disturbance in the prooxidant­antioxidant balance in favor of the former
[7].” Over time, oxidative stress as a concept has gained significant attention among re­
searchers, and as a result, the term has been applied in a broad variety of contexts, with
different implications. This called for an update of the concept, leading to the definition
of oxidative stress as “an imbalance between oxidants and antioxidants in favor of the
oxidants, leading to a disruption of redox signaling and control and/or molecular damage”
[8] [9].
The presence of hydrogen peroxide, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and other reactive
species within cells is not inherently harmful, as these molecules play critical roles in cel­
lular signaling and essential biochemical reactions. However, it is important to recognize
that reactive chemical species act as a double­edged sword: they are integral to normal
cellular function, but at higher concentrations, they can cause damage within cells and
even outside of them. It is therefore important to distinguish between normal physiologi­
cal roles and pathological states when considering the concept of oxidative stress [9].
3.0.1
Causes of oxidative stress
Excess amounts of ROS can be produced in the body as a part of an immune response
or due to lack of sufficient anti­oxidant capacity within cells. Oxidative stress is also asso­
ciated with a large number of lifestyle factors, such as obesity, and age. Other common
lifestyle factors which induce oxidative stress are sun exposure, cigarette smoking, and
consumption of alcohol or drugs. Importantly for this paper, oxidative stress is also of­
ten seen as a consequence of medicines and environmental pollutants, such as strong
oxidizing agents, heavy metal ions, herbicides and pesticides.
3.0.2
Negative effects of oxidative stress
Oxidative stress is associated with a large range of diseases as summarized in the figure
3.1 from the review Oxidative Stress and Human Health by Hepel and Andreescu [10].
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
2
==PAGE:10==
Figure 3.1: Various diseases in which ROS involvement has been found[10]
The degree to which these diseases are a direct consequence of oxidative stress and not
simply correlated with it is often hard to ascertain.
Since this paper focuses on damage incurred from contact with organic compounds, an
obvious disease area to note is that of the liver, since many organic compounds will get
processed by the liver before excretion. Furthermore, the high throughput assay used for
the production of data used in this paper is based on human HepG2 liver cells.
One common pathway which is activated under conditions of oxidative stress is the Nrf2­
ARE pathway.
3.1
Nrf2
Nuclear factor erythroid 2–related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a transcription factor primarily located
in the cytosol under basal conditions. Upon activation, Nrf2 promotes the expression of
a wide array of genes, many of which have cytoprotective functions, including protection
against oxidative stress.
3.1.1
Conditions for activation of Nrf2
Under normal conditions, Nrf2 is sequestered in the cytosol by forming a complex with its
inhibitor, Keap1. Keap1 facilitates the interaction of Nrf2 with Cul3/Rbx1, leading to Nrf2
ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. This interaction can be disrupted by ROS,
electrophiles, or certain exogenous compounds such as phytochemicals, tocopherols,
and antioxidants [11].
The most common mechanism for disrupting the interaction between Nrf2 and Keap1
involves the modification of Keap1. Keap1 contains multiple reactive cysteine residues
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
3
==PAGE:11==
that can undergo covalent modification by reactive oxygen species ROS and RNS. These
modifications are thought to weaken the Nrf2­Keap1­Cul3 complex, thereby inhibiting the
ubiquitination of Nrf2 and preventing its proteasomal degradation [12].
Once the Nrf2­Keap1 complex is disrupted, Nrf2 translocates to the nucleus, where it
binds to antioxidant response elements (AREs) in the promoter regions of target genes.
Within the nucleus, Nrf2 competes with the negative regulator Bach1 for binding to these
transcription sites. Additionally, Nrf2 activity is regulated by nuclear export, mediated by
the negative regulator Fyn.
Interestingly, the activation of Nrf2 is accompanied by a ”pre­induction response,” during
which negative regulators such as Keap1, Cul3/Rbx1, Fyn, and Bach1 are exported from
the nucleus. This nuclear clearance enables Nrf2 to interact with AREs without obstruc­
tion, facilitating gene transcription. Notably, Nrf2 also induces the expression of its nega­
tive regulators, including Keap1 and Cul3/Rbx1, establishing an autoregulatory feedback
loop [11].
Figure 3.2: Overview of the processes surrounding activation of Nrf2. Figure by Niture et
al. 2014[11]
3.1.2
Downstream effects of Nrf2 activation
NRF2 regulates a wide array of enzymes that neutralize reactive oxygen species (ROS),
underscoring the central role of enzymatic antioxidants in mitigating oxidative stress. Many
of these enzymes rely on glutathione (GSH), a tripeptide composed of glutamate, cysteine,
and glycine, as a co­substrate in their reactions. For instance, glutathione peroxidases
(GPXs) use GSH to reduce peroxides to water, while glutathione S­transferases (GSTs)
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
4
==PAGE:12==
catalyze the conjugation of GSH with electrophilic compounds, facilitating their detoxifica­
tion. During these processes, GSH is oxidized to form glutathione disulfide (GSSG). The
oxidized GSSG is subsequently regenerated into GSH by glutathione reductase (GSR),
an enzyme that depends on NADPH as a cofactor, ensuring a continuous supply of re­
duced GSH.[13]
NRF2 not only governs the expression of these antioxidant enzymes but also regulates
the production of both GSH and NADPH. This coordination ensures that intracellular GSH
levels are restored to basal levels during oxidative stress, maintaining redox homeostasis
and reducing cytosolic ROS levels.
Another protective mechanism employed by Nrf2 is the reduction of labile (redox­active,
accessible) iron within the cytosol. The amount of labile iron is a risk factor especially
in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, as the iron can generate highly reactive hydroxyl
radicals via the Fenton reaction
Fe2+ + H2O2 →Fe3+ + ·OH + OH−
To prevent this, Nrf2 upregulates the production of ferritin, a protein which sequesters iron
atoms into its core, thereby preventing the iron from participating in Fenton reactions [14].
Beyond oxidative damage prevention, NRF2 also promotes the repair of existing dam­
age through the activation of enzymes such as thioredoxin, which play a critical role in
maintaining protein function under oxidative stress. Oxidative stress can modify protein
cysteine residues, forming disulfide bonds or sulfinic acid modifications, which can alter
protein structure and function. Thioredoxin catalyzes the reduction of oxidized cysteine
residues and cleavage of disulfide bonds, thereby restoring protein function.[13] [15]
3.1.3
Interpretation of Nrf2 activation
The Nrf2­ARE pathway is widely regarded as cytoprotective, and many studies describe
chemical activators of this pathway as having protective effects. Indeed, compounds that
activate Nrf2 are being explored as therapeutic agents for mitigating oxidative stress as­
sociated with various diseases [16].
However, for chemicals not explicitly designed as Nrf2 activators, such activity warrants
caution, as it is generally indicative of oxidative stress. In such cases, Nrf2 activation
serves as a marker of potential toxicity, necessitating careful consideration. Furthermore,
it is important to monitor the dosage of Nrf2­activating chemicals, as they may provide
beneficial stress responses at low doses but induce toxicity at higher doses.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
5
==PAGE:13==
4
Regulatory toxicology
Regulation of commercial chemicals is essential due to their potential negative effects on
human health, animal health, and the environment. Current regulatory institutions and the
rules they enforce are, in part, a response to past tragedies caused by toxic chemicals,
which prompted tighter regulations. However, such tragedies are not the only catalyst for
reform in regulatory practices [17].
In 2007 the report Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century: A Vision and a Strategy was pub­
lished by the U.S. National Research Council, which highlighted significant shortcomings
in traditional regulatory toxicity approaches and called for a paradigm shift [18]. This vision
emphasized the adoption of modern methods for toxicity testing to address pressing chal­
lenges that were inadequately met by traditional approaches. The updated 2010 version
of this report, identified several critical requirements for regulatory agencies:
• Test large numbers of existing chemicals, many of which lack basic toxicity data.
• Test the large number of new chemicals and novel materials, such as nanomaterials,
introduced into commerce each year.
• Minimize animal use.
• Reduce the cost and time required for chemical safety evaluation.
Traditional toxicity testing, which relied heavily on in vivo mammalian studies, fell short
of meeting these demands. For example, minimizing animal use was inherently incom­
patible with in vivo approaches, while the substantial cost and time associated with these
tests made large­scale evaluations impractical [17].
To address these challenges, efforts were made to develop programs based on innovative
technologies. High­throughput in vitro testing and non­testing models, such as QSAR
models, emerged as promising alternatives. One prominent initiative driving this paradigm
shift was the Tox21 program, which sought to modernize toxicity testing methods and align
regulatory practices with advancements in science and technology.
4.1
Tox21
Tox21 is a U.S. federal research collaboration involving the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), the National Toxicology Program (NTP), the National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences (NCATS), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Since its
inception in 2008, the program has developed and validated more than 70 in vitro cell­
based high­throughput screening (HTS) assays [3].
What sets Tox21 apart from similar programs, such as ToxCast, is not the number of
assays it employs but the sheer volume of substances tested per assay. This extensive
testing provides a wealth of data that is particularly well­suited for training QSAR models.
4.1.1
Tox21 Data
The Tox21 program is currently screening a collection of approximately 10,000 compounds,
comprising environmental chemicals and approved drugs. These compounds are tested
in 15­dose titrations, with the resulting data fit to a four­parameter Hill equation to describe
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
6
==PAGE:14==
their biological activity relative to concentration.
To improve assay reliability, counter­
screens are employed to identify compounds that interfere through autofluorescence or
cytotoxicity [19].
The Hill curve, which describes the activity of a substance relative to concentration, is
categorized into various ”curve classes” based on parameters such as efficacy and curve
shape (e.g., flat, sigmoidal, or incomplete sigmoidal). Substances are subsequently clas­
sified by the Tox21 program as actives, inactives, or inconclusive based on these curve
classes [19].
To ensure the use of robust data for QSAR modeling, only actives and inactives were
selected according to the procedure outlined in the data curation section of this paper
[20]. The specific Tox21 assay utilized in this study was the ARE­bla assay.
4.1.2
ARE­bla assay
The ARE assay is a FRET­based (Förster Resonance Energy Transfer) assay designed to
measure NRF2 activation. In this assay, a fluorescent compound is added to the cells—in
this case, the membrane­permeable ester CCF4­AM. Once inside the cytosol, CCF4­AM
is cleaved by intracellular esterases, producing the fluorescent molecule CCF4. The neg­
atively charged structure of CCF4 prevents it from leaving the cytosol, effectively trapping
it within the cell.
CCF4 contains two fluorophores: Coumarin and Fluorescein, along with a β­lactamase
cleavage site. When the CCF4 molecule remains intact, Coumarin absorbs light at 409
nm, and energy transfer to Fluorescein facilitates the emission of green light at 518 nm
due to their close proximity. However, when CCF4 is cleaved by β­lactamase, the energy
transfer is disrupted, and Coumarin absorbs light at 409 nm and emits blue light at 447
nm instead.
The activity of β­lactamase in cells can therefore be assessed by measuring the ratio of
light emitted at 447 nm to light emitted at 518 nm when excited with light at 409 nm.
The assay uses the HEPG2 cell line, which contains a stable β­lactamase gene under ARE
control. This ensures that when NRF2 is activated and ARE is expressed, β­lactamase
is also expressed. The resulting change in fluorescence provides a measurable signal
proportional to NRF2 activation.[21] [22]
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
7
==PAGE:15==
5
QSAR models
Quantitative structure­activity relationship (QSAR) models are mathematical models de­
signed to predict the activity of a compound based on its chemical structure. In addition
to predicting activity, QSAR models can be used to make predictions about various prop­
erties of substances, such as their solubility and bioavailability. From the chemical struc­
ture, various molecular descriptors are derived, which serve as the foundation for model
development. These molecular descriptors may be continuous descriptors such as the
molecular weight or LogP of the molecule, but can also be binary descriptors such as the
presence of a certain functional group or substructure.
The term ”quantitative” in QSAR reflects the quantitative nature of the parameters used
in the model, not necessarily the model’s output. The output can be either continuous or
categorical, with categorical predictions often classified as positive or negative.
QSAR models, along with other non­testing models, rely on the fundamental assump­
tion that compounds with similar structures exhibit similar biophysical properties. Conse­
quently, such compounds are expected to display similar activities when interacting with
a specific target. This concept is referred to as the similarity principle. [23].
To assess the performance of QSAR models, various validation strategies can be em­
ployed.
5.1
Validation
Model validation is essential to assess how reliably a predictive model performs. It is
done to prevent overfitting, assess generalizability, and evaluate robustness under real­
istic conditions. This is necessary for users of the model to gauge how much confidence
can be placed in its predictions and how the results should be interpreted. When validat­
ing a model, multiple approaches can be applied, and when possible, it is recommended
to use both internal and external forms of validation.
5.1.1
External validation
External validation refers to the method of using a set of substances that have not been
part of the model’s development as a test set for validating the model. In practice, exter­
nal validation is often achieved by splitting the full dataset into a training set (for model
development) and a smaller test set. The model developed from the training set is then
applied to the validation set to test its predictive performance [23].
5.1.2
Internal validation
Internal validation involves methods which make use of the data, which is also used to
create the model [24].
One widely used method of internal validation is cross­validation (in this work, we use
the so­called k­fold cross validation). K­fold cross­validation is the process of splitting
the whole dataset into K groups of roughly* equal size, where K is a whole number, for
instance 10. A holdout test set of size n/K (where n is the total number of structures) is
then validated by a model trained on the remaining structures. This process is repeated
K times, such that each group is used once as a validation set.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
8
==PAGE:16==
For additional accuracy, this procedure can be repeated R times, with different splits into
K groups each time. The final step of cross­validation is to average the results from the
K or R × K validations to obtain the overall performance statistics of the model. [25].
5.1.3
Evaluation of model quality
Evaluating the quality of predictive models, particularly classification models, often in­
volves assessing true positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN), and false
negatives (FN). These metrics can be organized into a confusion matrix, which visually
represents their meanings and relationships.
experimental
value
Prediction outcome
p
n
p′
True
Positive
False
Negative
n′
False
Positive
True
Negative
Table 5.1: Confusion matrix showcasing the meaning of TN, TP, FN, and FP
From these fundamental metrics, a variety of derived values can be calculated depending
on which aspects of prediction accuracy are most important. Two commonly used perfor­
mance measures are sensitivity (also known as the true positive rate) and specificity (also
known as the true negative rate). Sensitivity represents the probability that a compound
is predicted positive and is indeed positive, while specificity signifies the probability that a
compound is predicted negative and is indeed negative [26]. Statistics derived from the
confusion matrix values, like the specificity and sensitivity are commonly referred to as
Cooper statistics.
Sensitivity =
TP
TP + FN
Specificity =
TN
TN + FP
Balanced Accuracy = Sensitivity + Specificity
2
Additional performance metrics can be computed based on the purpose of the model. One
commonly used metric is the balanced accuracy (BA), defined as the arithmetic mean
of the sensitivity and specificity. Balanced accuracy is particularly useful for comparing
models, as it provides a simple and interpretable single metric. Depending on the purpose
of the model, different emphasis may be placed on sensitivity, specificity, or other metrics,
depending on the importance and tolerance of false positives and false negatives.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
9
==PAGE:17==
5.2
Leadscope Predictive Data Miner
Leadscope Predictive Data Miner (LPDM) is a software program used to generate QSAR
models. It includes a built­in library of 27,000 small molecular fragments or substructures,
which are commonly utilized by synthetic chemists. These substructures can be combined
to represent the majority of chemically synthesized molecules [27].
5.2.1
Descriptors
LPDM uses three classes of descriptors when creating a QSAR model. The first two
classes, structural features, include small molecular fragments from the LPDM library
and larger structures referred to as ”scaffolds.” Scaffolds are created by combining two or
more small molecular fragments. The third class of descriptors consists of continuous or
discrete molecular features. LPDM incorporates eight such features: the octanol/water
partition coefficient (alogP), the number of hydrogen bond acceptors (HBA), the number of
hydrogen bond donors (HBD), the Lipinski score, atom count, parent substance molecular
weight, polar surface area (PSA), and the number of rotatable bonds.
Before generating a QSAR model, binary descriptors, such as structural features, are eval­
uated using a chi­squared (χ²) test to assess their statistical association with the output
variable. The top 30% of these descriptors are retained for model development. Continu­
ous descriptors, such as alogP, and discrete descriptors, such as the number of hydrogen
bond acceptors, are evaluated using a t­test. From these, the top and bottom 15% are
selected based on their statistical significance or ranking.
During model construction, LPDM treats continuous and discrete descriptors as ordinal
categorical data. This means the numerical values of these descriptors are grouped into
an ordered set of categories. LPDM performs this categorization automatically; however,
users can customize the process by defining the cutoffs and the number of categories for
each continuous descriptor [28].
5.2.2
Model building and validation
After selection of the descriptors, the QSAR model is created using either partial least
squares (PLS) regression if the response variable is continuous, or in our case principal
component regression (PCR) if the response variable is binary. LPDM automatically per­
forms cross­validation when building a model, but for this purpose, it keeps the initial de­
scriptors selected for the full model, instead of generating new ones for each CV­training
set. This can lead to overly optimistic cross­validation results, since information has been
used from the CV­validation set [29]. For the purposes of this paper, a more labour­
intensive approach was used, where CV­training models were generated separately in
order to obtain more accurate cross validations.
5.2.3
Composite models
Many datasets used for training QSAR models are imbalanced, with a large proportion
of negative structures compared to actives. To address this, LPDM offers the option of
building composite models. These models consist of multiple submodels, where the full
set of actives is used, but only a fraction of the inactives is selected. The fraction of
inactives used is adjusted to match the size of the active set. In composite models, the
positive prediction probability — a value between 0 and 1 that indicates the likelihood that
a structure is positive — is calculated by averaging the positive prediction probabilities of
all the submodels that have the structure in question within their applicability domain [30].
This approach contrasts with single models, where the entire dataset is used to create
one model that incorporates all actives and inactives [30].
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
10
==PAGE:18==
Composite models aim to balance specificity and sensitivity, while single models often
exhibit higher specificity at the expense of sensitivity, particularly when trained on imbal­
anced datasets (with a high ratio of negatives to positives). Previous work by Rosenberg
et al. demonstrated that merging a composite model with a single model to form a so­
called cocktail model increases specificity, though with a slight sensitivity tradeoff [30]
[20]. For this reason, cocktail models are a highly effective choice and were selected as
the model type for the present study.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
11
==PAGE:19==
6
Materials and methods
6.1
Cell Culture
The HepG2 cell line, derived from human hepatocellular carcinoma, was used for the
assay. The media used for cell growth, thawing, and assay preparation are summarized
in the table below.
Table 6.1: Cell media used
Component
Growth Medium
Assay Medium
Thaw Medium
DMEM with GlutaMAX
90%
99%
90%
Dialyzed FBS
10%
1%
10%
NEAA
0.1 mM
0.1 mM
0.1 mM
HEPES (pH 7.3)
25 mM
25 mM
25 mM
Penicillin/Streptomycin
100U/mL/100µg/mL
100U/mL/100µg/mL
100U/mL/100µg/mL
Blasticidin (antibiotic)
5 µg/mL
­
­
After media preparation, the following protocol was implemented by the conductors of the
assay.[21]
6.1.1
Thawing method
14 mL of pre­warmed thaw medium was placed into a T75 flask. A vial of cells was
then removed from liquid nitrogen and thawed rapidly by placing in a 37 °C water bath
with gentle agitation for 1­2 minutes (without fully submersing the vial). The vial was
then decontaminated by wiping with 70% ethanol before being opened in a biological
safety cabinet. The contents of the vial were then transfered drop­wise into 10mL of
Thaw Medium in a sterile 15­mL conical tub. The cells were then centrifuged at 900 rpm
for 4 minutes and resuspended in the thaw medium. Following this, the contents were
transferred into the T75 tissue culture flask containing Thaw Medium, and this flask was
placed in a humidified 37°C/5% CO2 incubator. Finally, the growth medium was switched
at first passage as described in the next section.
6.1.2
Propagation method
The medium was aspirated and the flask was rinsed once in DPBS, then 0.25% Trypsin/EDTA
was added, and swirled to coat the cells evenly. An equal volume of Growth Medium was
then added to inactivate the Trypsin after 2­3 minutes of incubation at 37°C. The cells
were then centrifuged at 900 rpm for 4 minutes and resuspended in the growth medium.
The cells were passaged at least twice a week.
6.1.3
Assay Protocol
The cells were harvested from culture in growth medium, and resuspended in assay
medium. 2000 cells / 5µL / well was then dispensed into 1536­well tissue treated black/­
clear bottom plates using a BioRAPTR dispenser. After the cells were incubated at 37°C
for 5 hours, 23nL of positive controls or compounds were transferred to the assay plate
by a PinTool resulting in a 217­fold dilution. The final compound concentration in the 5µL
assay volume ranged from 1.2 nM to 92 µM in 15 concentrations. The plates were then in­
cubated for 16 hours at 37°C. Following this, 1µL of 6X LiveBLAzer­FRET B/G (CCF4­AM)
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
12
==PAGE:20==
substrate mixture was added to each well using a BioRAPTR dispenser and the plates
were incubated at room temperature for 2 hours. Finally, fluorescence intensity was mea­
sured at 460 and 530 nm emission, and 405 nm excitation by an Envision detector. The
data gathered was expressed as the ratio of 460nm/530nm emissions.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
13
==PAGE:21==
7
Data curation
The raw data was curated such that in the end we would have a set of chemical structures
of robust actives and inactives, meaning that a series of strict requirements were used to
filter the initial data. This final set would be a binary set of actives and inactives, meaning
that there would be no description of potency and efficacy for the individual structures.
The final product of this data curation would be three sets of so­called calculation struc­
tures, one with structures active at 10 μM, one with structures active at any concentration,
and a set of inactive structures, which would be used for both models.
7.1
Purity
For the purpose of creating a high­quality QSAR model, only SIDs from purity group A of
the Tox21 program were included. The purity group A contains only substances with a
purity above 90%, and were chosen such that the model is less impacted by impurities
that may be present in the substances. In this work, the data curation was performed
following the method described in (Nikolov et al. 2023 [20])
7.2
Classification of SIDs as active/inactive
For each SID, a number of assays were run for a concentration series, usually 15 con­
centrations run in triplicate, and sometimes in more replicates. The assays run were: an
Nrf2 activity assay (CRS­MA), a cytotoxicity assay (CRS­CV), and two assay technology
interference assays (CRS­I), one in chemico and one in vitro with the HepG2 cells used
for the other assays. The results from all these runs were used to classify all SIDs into
the following categories: Active, Inactive, and Inconclusive.
7.2.1
Actives
SIDs were classified as active if they fulfilled the following requirements: 2/3 of the CRS­
MA replicates needed to have a curve class type of either 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, in other
words, the activity curves needed to have an efficacy of more than 3 standard deviations
of controls, and the hill­curve fit of the data needed a p­value lower than 0.05. These 2/3
CRS­MAs also needed an efficacy above the chosen magnitude of absolute activity for this
project chosen to be 25% activity (either at 10µM or No Upper Limit (NUL) ). Furthermore,
the lowest tested concentration over IC­25 (C­E) of these 2/3 CRS­MAs needed to be
lower than the highest non­cytotoxic concentration for the SID (C­1) and lower than 1/3
times the highest concentration not showing possible signal interference (C­2).
7.2.2
Inactives
SIDs were classified as inactives if all of their corresponding CRS­MAs had a curve class
of 4 (inactive), or if 2/3 of the CRS­MAs had a curve class of 4, while the third had a curve
class of 3 (single point activity). Furthermore, there needed to be no signs of assay inter­
ference or cytotoxicity at any points in the CRS­Is and CRS­CVs, defined as no activity in
the CRS­Is equal to or above 25% of total activation, and no points reaching a cytotoxicity
of 20% within the CRS­CV assays.
7.2.3
Inconclusives
The remaining SIDs were classified as Inconclusive.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
14
==PAGE:22==
A subset of inconclusives, were later used to discard unclear actives, when merging mul­
tiple SIDs to a single CAS. For the purposes of this paper, they were called presumed
inactives, since these were not robust inactives, which would be used later on.
Presumed inactives were classified following the same requirements as for the inactives
except regarding the cytotoxicity. For this category of SIDs, the requirement for cytotoxi­
city was set at C­1 > 10µM.
7.3
Merging SIDs to CAS
CASes for a given chemical were classified as either active or inactive, whereas others
were discarded.
7.3.1
Inactive
If a CAS had multiple SIDs, of which one was classified as inactive, then the CAS would
be classified as inactive given that the remaining SIDs were inactive, presumed inactive,
or inconclusive. If the set of SIDs, however, included both an inactive and an active, then
the CAS was classified as inconclusive.
7.3.2
Active
If a CAS had multiple SIDs of which one, was classified as active, then the CAS would be
classified as active given that the remaining SIDs were active or inconclusive. If the set
of SIDs, however, included inactives or presumed inactives, then the CAS was classified
as inconclusive.
Figure 7.1: Decision tree for merging SIDs into a single CAS.
7.4
Merging of CASes to canonical structures
All filtered CASes and their chemical structures were then imported into OASIS Database
Manager 1.7.3 [31], where they would be processed further. First, any ionic groups were
stripped from the CAS structures, and replaced with a hydrogen. This was only done in
cases where the ions present were Li, B, C, N, O, F, Na, Mg, Si, P, S, Cl, K, Ca, Br or
I. CASes with any other types of ions were removed from the dataset. Following this,
all structures remaining in the dataset were transformed, such that all tautomers were
represented uniformly. The chemical structures resulting from previous steps were the
ones ultimately used for QSAR modelling. We call these the calculation structures.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
15
==PAGE:23==
Duplicate calculation structures were merged following the standardization of tautomers.
If there was any inconsistency in classification of a calculation structure (e.g., conflicting
activity labels), it was removed from the dataset.
7.5
Sets of calculation structures
From these curation steps, we were left with three sets of calculation structures:
• A set of structures which were active at 10 μM or lower
• A set of structures which were active at any concentration
• A set of inactive structures
The 10 μM actives and the inactives would form the the dataset used for training the 10
μM QSAR models.
The NUL actives and inactives would form the NUL QSAR models.
7.6
Sectioning of the data set
The final step in terms of data curation consisted of splitting the two data sets into a training
set and an external validation set. 20% of the active structures and 20% of the inactive
structures were separated into an external dataset while the remaining structures made
up the training set.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
16
==PAGE:24==
8
QSAR modeling and validation
8.1
Overview
After the splitting of datasets into training and validation sets, models wer built using the
training sets and subsequently tested on the external validation sets. Additionally, full
models were developed using the full (non­split) datasets, with the expectation that these
models would perform better due to the larger dataset from the same source.
The resulting models, trained on these four datasets would therefore be known as:
• The 10 μM initial model
• The 10 μM final model
• The NUL initial model
• The NUL final model
Cross­validation was performed on both the initial (training) models and the final (full) mod­
els. Although cross­validation statistics provide a more reliable representation of speci­
ficity and sensitivity, metrics from both cross­validation and external validation were used
to comprehensively evaluate the models.
8.2
Descriptor selection
The models were developed using the commercial QSAR modeling software Leadscope
Predictive Data Miner (LPDM). The structures were first loaded into LPDM, along with
their binary classifications as either active or inactive. Upon import, molecular descriptors
were calculated for all structures. Following this, the descriptors −including molecular
descriptors, structural features, and scaffolds­ underwent culling, retaining the top 30%
based on the Yates χ2­test.
8.3
Qsar model development
Single models were first created, followed by the generation of composite models after
scaffolds were developed for each individual model. Subsequently, the single and com­
posite models were combined to form so­called cocktail models, which served as the final
models for validation and general use.
8.4
Applicability domain
The applicability domain was defined and applied for both the final models as well as in
the external and cross­validations. Two criteria were used to assess whether the test
structures were within the applicability domain.
1. Structural Similarity: Test structures needed to be structurally similar to at least
one of the training structures. Specifically, they were required to contain at least one
structural feature included in the model, and their Jaccard structural similarity index
with any training structure had to be at least 0.3.
2. Prediction Probability: Test structures were also required to have a positive pre­
diction probability below or equal to 0.3 or above or equal to 0.7. Structures with
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
17
==PAGE:25==
prediction probabilities between 0.3 and 0.7 were considered outside the applica­
bility domain due to classification uncertainty regarding their status as positives or
negatives.
8.5
Model Validation
The models were validated using both cross­validation and external validation. The same
cross validation protocol was used for the initial models and the final models.
8.5.1
External validation
After generating a model based on the training set, validation was performed on the ex­
ternal datasets. From the results, sensitivity, specificity, and balanced accuracy were
calculated, along with confidence intervals to quantify uncertainty. Additionally, the num­
ber of structures in the external dataset that fell outside the applicability domains was
recorded.
8.5.2
Cross­validation
Cross­validation was conducted in multiple iterations using the following steps:
1. The dataset was randomly divided into five equal­sized sets, ensuring the same
ratio of active to inactive substances in each set.
2. Four of the five sets were combined to train a cross­validation sub­model.
3. The sub­model was then used to predict the activities of the substances in the re­
maining fifth set.
Steps 2 and 3 were repeated five times so that each set served as the validation set once.
In order to minimize the bias introduced by random splits, this entire process was repeated
ten times, with new random splits into five equal­sized sets for each iteration.
After completing these steps, data from all predictions were aggregated. average values
for specificity, sensitivity, and balanced accuracy were calculated across all sub­models,
along with their standard deviations. Additionally, the average percentage of substances
within the applicability domain of the test sets was calculated.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
18
==PAGE:26==
9
Results and discussion
9.1
Data curation
Two pairs of models were trained: one pair of ”10 μM models,” which included only high­
potency actives that showed activity at a concentration of 10 μM, and one pair of ”NUL
models,” which included actives that showed activity at any tested concentration. For both
model types, the same set of inactives was used — namely, compounds that did not show
activity at any tested concentration.
The models referred to here are the initial models, which were suitable for external valida­
tion, and the final models, which were 25% larger. The final models are recommended for
further use due to their broader applicability domain and presumably superior predictive
performance.
NRF2 Activation
Actives 10
μM
Actives
NUL
Inactives
Initial substances (SIDs)
9315
SIDs with at least 90% purity
6283
SIDs with DTU interpretations of actives and
inactives
350
956
3576
SIDs after cytotoxicity filter
311
685
3554
SIDs after excluding assay interference
300
661
3553
CAS’es after first duplicate removal, and
excluding SIDs with conflicting data
258
558
2226
CAS’es with QSAR­acceptable structures
(organic mono­constituent etc.)
233
520
2157
Structures after removal of duplicates within
calculation structures
221
495
2062
Structures random split 80% (training set) :
20% (ext. validation set)
177:44
396:99
1650:412
Table 9.1: Summary of data processing for Nrf2 10uM activity.
The data curation process is summarized in Table 9.1, which outlines the number of struc­
tures filtered at each step. As shown in the table, 9315 substances were tested by the
Tox21 program, which served as the data source for this study. The final dataset included
2062 inactive structures, 221 actives for the final 10 μM model, and 495 actives for the
final NUL model—approximately 2.2 times as many as the former.
For the initial models, the final dataset contained 177:44, 396:99, and 1650:412 structures
for model development and validation, respectively.
During the step labeled SIDs with DTU interpretations of actives and inactives, stringent
criteria were applied to select actives and inactives, ensuring the high quality of data used
in the QSAR model. The so­called DTU interpretations were based on stricter criteria than
the initial classifications provided by Tox21 [20].
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
19
==PAGE:27==
Notably, 11% of substances active at 10 μM were excluded due to cytotoxicity at or below
this concentration, compared to only 0.6% of inactives removed for the same reason. This
discrepancy may be attributed to erratic cell behavior during cell death, which can lead
to false­positive results. The exclusion of these substances was therefore particularly
important for improving the reliability of the dataset’s active classifications.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
20
==PAGE:28==
Model validation
Sens (%)
Spec (%)
BA (%)
TP
TN
FP
FN
Coverage (%)
10 μM
Initial model CV
78.0 ± 9.0
92.0 ± 1.7
85.0 ± 4.6
744
10749
933
211
69.2 ± 2.8
Initial model external validation
69.0 (49.2 ­ 84.7)
92.5 (88.9 ­ 95.2)
80.7
20
271
22
9
70.6
Final model CV
78.2 ± 8.2
92.2 ± 1.9
85.2 ± 3.8
978
13354
1125
273
68.9 ± 3.0
NUL
Initial model CV
80.1 ± 6.0
90.9 ± 1.7
85.5 ± 3.1
1853
10697
1072
460
68.8 ± 2.6
Initial model external validation
78.0 (65.3 ­ 87.7)
92.3 (88.7 ­ 95.0)
85.1
46
286
24
13
72.2
Final model CV
80.5 ± 5.6
91.1 ± 1.8
85.8 ± 2.9
2444
13900
1352
593
71.5 ± 2.6
Table 9.2: Cooper statistics of the cross validation and external validation of four models.
9.2
Prediction data
The predictive power of all the models was consistently high, with the
balanced accuracy of the final 10 μM model at 85% and the final NUL
model at 86%.
From the cross­validation results, it is evident that the average sensi­
tivities and specificities for the final models were higher than those for
the initial models. While this is expected, the differences are relatively
small in all cases. A clear advantage of the final models, compared
to the initial models, lies in their incorporation of additional training
structures, which expands their applicability domain.
Overall, the sensitivity and specificity values were similar across mod­
els, with one notable exception: the sensitivity of the external valida­
tion for the 10 μM initial model. However, even in this case, the sen­
sitivity values predicted by cross­validation fell within the confidence
interval of the external validation (49.2–84.7). Nonetheless, the util­
ity of the external validations is limited due to the wide confidence
intervals.
Interesting that the NUL model is actually performing just as good as
the 10 micro­M one, of course even with smaller SDs because it is
bigger. So it seems that even without the concentration requirement
the actives are just as clear to distinguish from the inactives.
Finally, the sensitivity of the 10 μM models was lower than that of the
NUL models, while their specificity was higher. This outcome is con­
sistent with the contribution of the so­called single model within the
composite model. The single model tends to favor higher specificity
at the expense of sensitivity, particularly when there is a greater im­
balance in the ratio of negatives to positives. For the 10 μM models,
this higher ratio results in elevated specificity and reduced sensitivity.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
21
==PAGE:29==
9.3
Positive and negative structural alerts
From the many structural descriptors, which went into the models, the structural descrip­
tors, which were most predictive of either a positive or negative result, were ranked. The
top ten positive alerts were then taken from the 10 μM final model, and the top ten negative
alerts were taken from the NUL final model. This was done such that more potent actives
would be favoured for the positive structural alerts, since the less potent actives were not
present in the 10 μM model. Conversely, the additional number of positives within the
NUL final model would make for more robust negative structural alerts, since this would
be based on a larger set of structures.
Figure 9.1: The top 10 positive structural alerts from the single 10uM model. The numbers
below the structures indicate the amount of negative and positive structures containing
the particular substructure.
Among the top positive structural alerts, four distinct substructures can be identified: quinones,
imidazoliums, amines with long alkyl chains, and the lone structure 2­chloro­N­phenylacetamide.
Notably, quinones are well­documented as a class of Pan Assay Interference Compounds
(PAINs)[32].
PAINs are defined by Baell et al. as ”classes of compounds defined by a common sub­
structural motif that increases the chance of any member registering as a hit in any given
assay, independent of platform technology.[33]” In essence, these are promiscuous com­
pounds with a higher likelihood of acting as false positives in assays. Quinones, in par­
ticular, are classified as PAINs due to their high propensity for redox activity, which can
damage biomolecules and interfere with assay results.
Despite this classification, the redox activity of quinones aligns with the behavior of redox­
active compounds sought for Nrf2 activation. Since the same activity linked to assay
interference is expected to trigger Nrf2 activation, quinones are unlikely to represent false
positives in this context, despite their designation as PAINs.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 9.2: Top 10 negative structural alerts from the single NUL model. The numbers
below the structures indicate the amount of negative and positive structures containing
the particular substructure.
The top negative features generally include acyclic alkyl chains with oxygen atoms in
the form of alcohols, ethers, aldehydes, or carboxylic acids. It is important to note that
these are substructures, meaning that structures featuring the substructure referred to as
”Butanoic acid” may contain it in the form of an ester group rather than a carboxylic acid.
The same applies to structures described as alcohols, where the ’alcohol’ group may be
part of an ether or ester instead.
Additionally, it should be noted that the dataset contains more negative than positive struc­
tures, meaning that a substructure with no correlation to either positive or negative activity
would be expected to appear in approximately 4.2 negative structures for every 1 positive
structure. Since the positive structural alerts were based on the 10 μM final model, this
expected ratio would be approximately 9.3 negatives for every 1 positive.
9.4
Conclusion
In conclusion, data from the high­throughput ARE­bla assays was obtained from the Tox21
database and curated using in­house tools and procedures to generate chemical struc­
tures classified with high certainty as either active or inactive. These curated datasets
were used to train four QSAR models. Two were initial models trained on 80% of the data,
allowing for external validation using the remaining 20%, while the other two were final
models trained on the entire dataset.
The first pair of models, the 10 μM models, were trained on high­potency actives that
exhibited activity at or below a concentration of 10 μM. The second pair, the NUL models,
were trained on actives that demonstrated activity at any tested concentration. All four
models underwent validation through cross­validation, and their predictive performance
was evaluated by comparing Cooper statistics from both cross­validation and external
validation.
The results from all models were consistent, with no incongruent findings observed. The
models demonstrated good predictive performance, with the final 10 μM model achiev­
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
23
==PAGE:31==
ing an expected balanced accuracy of 85.2% and the final NUL model achieving 85.8%.
Cross­validation indicated a coverage of 68.9% for the 10 μM model and 71.5% for the
NUL model. These coverage values are reasonable, as some structures fell outside the
applicability domain due to uncertainty in classification by the cross­validation training
models.
Finally, the top positive and negative structural alerts were identified, compiled, and an­
alyzed. The positive alerts highlighted the strong correlation between quinones—known
for their redox activity—and the induction of the ARE­Nrf2 pathway.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
24
==PAGE:32==
Bibliography
[1]
EDF. Chemical Testing in the 21st Century: A Primer. Technical Report. Environ­
mental Defense Fund (EDF), 2012.
[2]
Scott Boyer, Clive Brealey, and Andrew M Davis. “Attrition in drug discovery and
development”. In: Attrition in the Pharmaceutical Industry: Reasons, Implications,
and Pathways Forward (2015), pp. 5–45.
[3]
Tox21 Consortium. About Tox21. https://tox21.gov/overview/about- tox21/. [Ac­
cessed: 2025­01­26].
[4]
Sunita J Shukla et al. “Profiling environmental chemicals for activity in the antiox­
idant response element signaling pathway using a high throughput screening ap­
proach”. In: Environmental health perspectives 120.8 (2012), pp. 1150–1156.
[5]
Svein Ore. “Oxidative stress relaxation of natural rubber vulcanized with Di­tertiary­
butyl peroxide”. In: Rubber Chemistry and Technology 29.3 (1956), pp. 1043–1046.
[6]
NV Paniker, SK Srivastava, and Ernest Beutler. “Glutathione metabolism of the
red cells effect of glutathione reductase deficiency on the stimulation of hexose
monophosphate shunt under oxidative stress”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
(BBA)­General Subjects 215.3 (1970), pp. 456–460.
[7]
H Sies. “Oxidative stress: Introductory remarks.(Sies H, Ed.)” In: Oxidative stress
(1985), pp. 1–8.
[8]
H Sies and D Jones. Oxidative stress. 2nd. 2007.
[9]
Helmut Sies, Carsten Berndt, and Dean P Jones. “Oxidative stress”. In: Annual
review of biochemistry 86.1 (2017), pp. 715–748.
[10]
Maria Hepel and Silvana Andreescu. “Oxidative stress and human health”. In: Ox­
idative Stress: Diagnostics, Prevention, and Therapy Volume 2. ACS Publications,
2015, pp. 1–33.
[11]
Suryakant K Niture, Raju Khatri, and Anil K Jaiswal. “Regulation of Nrf2—an update”.
In: Free Radical Biology and Medicine 66 (2014), pp. 36–44.
[12]
Qiang Ma. “Role of nrf2 in oxidative stress and toxicity”. In: Annual review of phar­
macology and toxicology 53.1 (2013), pp. 401–426.
[13]
Claudia Tonelli, Iok In Christine Chio, and David A Tuveson. “Transcriptional regu­
lation by Nrf2”. In: Antioxidants & redox signaling 29.17 (2018), pp. 1727–1745.
[14]
Michael John Kerins and Aikseng Ooi. “The roles of NRF2 in modulating cellular
iron homeostasis”. In: Antioxidants & redox signaling 29.17 (2018), pp. 1756–1773.
[15]
Samuel Lee, Soo Min Kim, and Richard T Lee. “Thioredoxin and thioredoxin target
proteins: from molecular mechanisms to functional significance”. In: Antioxidants &
redox signaling 18.10 (2013), pp. 1165–1207.
[16]
Enrique Crisman et al. “KEAP1­NRF2 protein–protein interaction inhibitors: Design,
pharmacological properties and therapeutic potential”. In: Medicinal research re­
views 43.1 (2023), pp. 237–287.
[17]
Daniel Krewski et al. “Toxicity testing in the 21st century: a vision and a strategy”. In:
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part B 13.2­4 (2010), pp. 51–138.
[18]
National Research Council et al. Toxicity testing in the 21st century: a vision and a
strategy. National Academies Press, 2007.
[19]
Ruili Huang. “A quantitative high­throughput screening data analysis pipeline for ac­
tivity profiling”. In: High­throughput screening assays in toxicology (2016), pp. 111–
122.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
25
==PAGE:33==
[20]
Nikolai G Nikolov, Ana CVE Nissen, and Eva B Wedebye. “A method for in vitro data
and structure curation to optimize for QSAR modelling of minimum absolute potency
levels and a comparative use case”. In: Environmental Toxicology and Pharmacol­
ogy 98 (2023), p. 104069.
[21]
Tox21. Tox21 Public Data, tox21­are­bla­p1. 2024. URL: https://tripod.nih.gov/
pubdata/ (visited on 11/30/2024).
[22]
Thermo Fischer. LiveBLAzer™FRET­B/G Loading Kit with CCF4­AM. 2024. URL:
https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/K1095 (visited on 12/07/2024).
[23]
ECA ECHA. “Guidance on information requirements and chemical safety assess­
ment: Chapter R. 6: QSARs and grouping of chemicals”. In: Helsinki, Finland (2008).
[24]
Ravichandran Veerasamy et al. “Validation of QSAR models­strategies and impor­
tance”. In: Int. J. Drug Des. Discov 3 (2011), pp. 511–519.
[25]
Jessica J Kraker et al. “Quantitative Structure–Activity Relationship (QSAR) model­
ing of juvenile hormone activity: comparison of validation procedures”. In: Chemo­
metrics and intelligent laboratory systems 87.1 (2007), pp. 33–42.
[26]
Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development. Guidance document
on the validation of (quantitative) structure­activity relationship [(Q) SAR] models.
Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development, 2014.
[27]
Gulsevin Roberts et al. “LeadScope: software for exploring large sets of screen­
ing data”. In: Journal of chemical information and computer sciences 40.6 (2000),
pp. 1302–1314.
[28]
Luis G Valerio Jr et al. “A structural feature­based computational approach for toxi­
cology predictions”. In: Expert opinion on drug metabolism & toxicology 6.4 (2010),
pp. 505–518.
[29]
Eva Bay Wedebye, Nikolai Georgiev Nikolov, and Ana Caroline Vasconcelos Mar­
tins. “Leadscope Enterprise model for in vitro human constitutive androstane recep­
tor (hCAR) inhibition at concentrations up to 20 µM.” In: (2020).
[30]
Sine Abildgaard Rosenberg et al. “QSAR models for thyroperoxidase inhibition and
screening of US and EU chemical inventories”. In: Computational Toxicology 4
(2017), pp. 11–21.
[31]
Nikolai Nikolov et al. “Representation of chemical information in OASIS centralized
3D database for existing chemicals”. In: Journal of chemical information and mod­
eling 46.6 (2006), pp. 2537–2551.
[32]
Jonathan B Baell. “Feeling nature’s PAINS: natural products, natural product drugs,
and pan assay interference compounds (PAINS)”. In: Journal of natural products
79.3 (2016), pp. 616–628.
[33]
Jonathan B Baell and J Willem M Nissink. “Seven Year Itch: Pan­Assay Interference
Compounds (PAINS) in 2017￿Utility and Limitations”. In: ACS chemical biology
13.1 (2018), pp. 36–44.
Developing a QSAR model for the prediction of NRF2­related toxicity
26
==PAGE:34==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
