==PAGE:1==
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­
Copenhagen
Master Thesis
Hafthor Runar Gudmundsson
DTU Management
Candidate Special in fulfilment of the Transport and Logistics degree
Produced and Supervised at DTU Engineering Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Hafthor Runar Gudmundsson
January, 2025
By
Hafthor Runar Gudmundsson
Supervisor: Steven Seth Harrod (DTU)
ECTS:30
Cover photo: Metroselskabet, retrieved 2025
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Cycling has been an essential means of transport in Copenhagen for many years, making
it a well­known city for cyclists. The municipality of Copenhagen views cycling as a
significant mode of transport and aims to make at least 50% of all trips to and from work
or school in the city by bicycle.
This study investigates the impact of new metro line expansions on bicycle usage. It analy­
ses traffic count data before and after the M3 and M4 metro lines, interviews stakeholders,
reviews published documents, and evaluates bicycle unit prices in Cost­Benefit Analyses
(CBAs) by examining the TERESA model.
Results show a decrease in bicycle trips after the opening of the new metro lines, with a
reduction of 6% in 2022 and 11% in 2023. The study highlights that bicycles are often
underrepresented in CBAs compared to other modes of transport. It was found that Den­
mark is leading in distinguishing different unit prices used in CBA calculations related
to bicycles, compared to other neighbouring countries that were examined, such as hav­
ing electric and regular bicycles separate. Unit prices in TERSA have increased with the
increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
The study confirms that changes in health valuation in recent years have made cycling
infrastructure projects much more profitable, justifying an increased emphasis on such
projects promoting more significant bicycle usage.
The study recommends more use of traffic models that can simulate multimodal trips be­
tween different modes of transportation and establish a target for minimising the decrease
in bicycle usage after a new metro line is opened. Future research must study the long­
term effect of a new metro line opening on bicycle usage, possibly in cooperation with
major stakeholders.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
iii
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis: Learning Objectives 
 
Study number 
S230209 
Name 
Hafthor Runar Gudmundsson 
Title 
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage - Copenhagen 
 
 
Learning Objectives (General): 
 
An MSc from DTU: 
• 
can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction between the 
various components of an issue 
• 
can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at international 
level to develop ideas and solve problem 
• 
masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity take a holistic 
view of and delimit a complex, open issue, put it into a broader academic and societal perspective 
and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions 
• 
can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for solving 
technological problem 
• 
can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing 
• 
is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her specialist area 
• 
can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and specialization. 
• 
masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the capacity to 
work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of timetables, design, 
solution and documentation. 
Learning Objectives (Project Specific): 
 
The student conducting the project is able to: 
● Describe and discuss key concepts related to the integration of cycling and metro 
systems, emphasising on the M3 and M4 lines in Copenhagen. 
● Examine and compare the impacts of metro expansions on cycling behaviour using 
empirical data from Copenhagen. 
● Investigate how bicycles are interpreted on Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) models, 
focusing on the TERESA model. 
● Overview of previous studies that have analysed similar topics. 
● Design and conduct interviews with urban planners, transport professionals, and local 
authorities to understand the planning and policy implications of integrating metro 
systems with cycling networks. 
● Analyse collected interview data to understand the planning and policy implications of 
integrating metro systems with cycling networks. 
● Identify factors that contribute to changes in bicycle usage when new metro 
systems are implemented. 
● Evaluate the impact of new metro systems on bicycle usage based on data from the 
municipality of Copenhagen. 
● Assess strategies used by cities to maintain bicycle usage despite new metro implementations 
● Propose solutions based on best practices identified during the research to support cycling 
alongside new metro services 
● Write a technical report and perform an oral presentation of the thesis. 
 
iv
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Steven Seth Harrod, for guidance
and advice.
Special thanks to Daniel Gorud Ahrendt Ocariz and Mette Aagaard Knudsen from Met­
roselskabet for their time and for sharing their knowledge on the operational transport
model (OTM) and its application to metro system planning.
Special thanks to Åse Boss Henrichsen from the ”Københavns Kommune Teknik­ og
Miljøforvaltningen Mobilitet, Klimatilpasning og Byvedligehold” for kindly providing
me with the traffic count data that served as a foundation for my analysis.
I would also like to thank Henrik Køster from COWI for his valuable insights into the
traffic chapter in the Environmental Impact Reports and for pointing me to the right people
to contact in the field of the thesis subject.
Many thanks to Tobias Løvenholdt Tørresø from the Municipality of Copenhagen for his
answers and for providing the municipality’s perspective on the role of cycling within
Copenhagen’s broader mobility strategy.
I would like to thank my family and friends for their unwavering support.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
The Role of Integrated Public Transport Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Copenhagen’s traffic counts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Political Motivations Behind Metro Expansions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Cost­benefit analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Gaps in Current Research.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Research Methodology
7
3.1
Document and Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Bicycle Counting Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
CBA Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Data Analysis
9
4.1
Bicycles in Cost­Benefit Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Traffic Counts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Integration of Bicycle and Metro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Discussion
43
5.1
Bicycles in Cost­Benefit Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Traffic Counts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
Integration of Bicycle and Metro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
53
A.I
Central Copenhagen (Inner City) Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.II Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) ­ Northwest Side Data
. . . . . . . . .
55
A.III Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) ­ Northwest Side Data, with weather
correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.IV Weather in Copenhagen, 2016–2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.V Overview of counting days, weather conditions and comments from count­
ing data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
vii
==PAGE:10==
A.VI Bicycle traffic (AWT) in the northwest side section of Søsnittet compared
to GDP in the period 2010 ­ 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
viii
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Copenhagen is well known as a cyclist­friendly city, and it has adopted strategies to pro­
mote cycling as a central mode of urban mobility. As a result, cycling has grown signif­
icantly in popularity, with the number of bicycle trips more than doubling between the
1980s and the 2010s [1]. Today, cycling accounts for 27% of all trips in the city by 2023,
already surpassing the municipal target of 25% set for 2025. The goal for trips to work
and schools is that 50% of trips will be made by bicycle by 2025; this was five percentage
points away from being achieved and was 45% in 2023 [2]. However, this achievement
shows the city’s commitment to promoting cycling as an essential part of its urban mobil­
ity strategy, giving Copenhagen its reputation as a global leader in sustainable transport
planning [2].
While cycling plays a big part in transportation in some people’s daily lives, so do the
metro systems. A system that can operate at high capacity and is a reliable and affordable
option for many people to travel long distances quickly. Furthermore, it reduces traffic
congestion and lowers environmental pollution, helping cities to become more sustainable
[3].
There are four metro lines in Copenhagen, M1 through M4. The M1, connecting Vanløse
to Vestamager, was the first line to be constructed and fully completed by 2004. The
M2 line, extending from Vanløse to Copenhagen’s airport, was completed in 2007 [4].
Construction on the M3 line, a circular loop, began in 2011 and was opened in 2019.
The M4 line, from south of Copenhagen to Orientkaj, was opened in two phases and was
designed to serve Copenhagen’s southern and northern areas. The first phase opened in
2020, and the second opened in 2024 [5]. In addition to the previously mentioned metro
lines, there is an upcoming new metro line called M5. The first phase of that line will
connect Lynetteholme Island and Refshaleøen to the rest of the city. Construction of the
line is expected to start in 2025 [6].
New metro lines lead to changes in transportation patterns, including bicycle usage. The
projections of the upcoming M5 line suggest that it would decrease bicycle trips [6], show­
ing the delicate balance between expanding public transport and maintaining high levels
of cycling in a city. This study explores these shifts, focusing on the impacts of the Copen­
hagen Metro, particularly the M3 and M4 lines, on bicycle usage patterns.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature Review
Metro systems have been part of many human societies for a long time, and bicycles much
longer. This report’s literature review examines how introducing new metro systems af­
fects bicycle usage, researching it as a primary mode of transport and as part of multimodal
commuting in Copenhagen.
2.1
The Role of Integrated Public Transport Systems
Integrating public transportation has many benefits, and it is vital to encourage people to
use transportation other than motorised vehicles [7]. Copenhagen is an excellent example
of a well­integrated public transport system. One of the city’s goals to reach the KBH25
Climate Plan is to make 75% of all trips by walking, cycling, and public transit by 2025.
For 2023, the total was 71%, not far off 75%. An essential part of the plan is integrating
cycling with public transport and, therefore, the metro. The city encourages the first­
and last­mile solution by adding 1,140 new bicycle parking spaces near a metro station
in 2023. Furthermore, 60 parking spaces for bigger bikes will be provided, such as cargo
bikes, near metro and bus stations [2].
2.2
Copenhagen’s traffic counts
The city conducts traffic counts and analyses panel data to understand better the effects
of significant developments in Copenhagen’s transportation system, such as metro expan­
sions. Copenhagen performs bicycle counting using a combination of traffic count data
with panel survey insights. However, there are some difficulties in capturing accurate
data with manual bicycle counting. Not only does the effect of weather play a big part,
but the countings are usually done only once or twice per year on weekdays from 7:00 to
19:00[8].
2.3
Political Motivations Behind Metro Expansions
The Danish Parliament approved the Ørestad Act in 1992, starting the process for new
railway infrastructure in Copenhagen [8]. Many political motivations exist for construct­
ing new metro systems, but these can change over time. In the case of M1 and M2, there
was a combination of many motivations. One of them was the need to reduce car traf­
fic and congestion, which had become problematic with the rise of car ownership in the
1970s. Another motivation for the metro expansion was to increase urban development in
the city.
With the construction of the M1 and M2 lines, many areas became more attractive to
businesses and residents, such as Ørestad [9]. The motivations have shifted from one of
the primary goals of reducing car traffic since data has shown that the metro decreases
usage less than was thought before [10]. However, the motivation has shifted even more
to urban development, as demonstrated by the construction of the M4 line, with one of the
goals to increase the development of the area of Nordhavn [11].
A political majority in the Danish Parliament and Copenhagen’s City Council has aimed to
develop the new metro line M5 to support sustainable development in the eastern harbour
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
3
==PAGE:14==
areas, including Kløverparken, Refshaleøen, and Lynetteholm [6]. The line aims to con­
nect new and existing city areas. It will strengthen the network and create a more robust
public transportation system [6].
Cycling offers numerous benefits, including improved health, reduced mortality and de­
creased traffic congestion. Investments in cycling infrastructure can boost retail revenue,
create jobs, and improve public spending efficiency. Additionally, cycling reduces en­
vironmental impacts like noise and congestion, lowers car parking costs, and positively
impacts the local economy [12]. The value of cycling infrastructure is tied to its connec­
tivity with other modes of transport. For instance, bike­and­ride programs enhance the
catchment area of train stations, making them more accessible and valuable to a broader
range of people [13].
2.4
Cost­benefit analysis
TERESA is a spreadsheet model used in Denmark to calculate the costs and benefits of
traffic infrastructure projects. It was first released in 2006, updated in 2010 and then
every three years after that. Bicycles were first introduced to it in 2013, and then different
unit prices related to bicycles were introduced [14]. Electric bicycles were introduced to
TERESA in 2021; there was no difference made between regular and electric bicycles
[15].
In 2009, COWI (engineering consultancy) released a report to provide foundational method­
ology and prices for putting bicycles into Danish CBA [16]. This report was, for example,
used in the TEREAS 2013 update. Furthermore, in 2020, COWI released another report
introducing calculations and methods for incorporating electric bicycles into CBA [17].
In this report, the Swedish ASEK 8.0 model is used as a reference to the TERESA model,
and the unit prices from 2024 for the TERESA and the ASEK models are compared since
it is the latest update for both models. The ASEK model gives unit prices, methods and
recognitions for conducting CBA in Sweden [18].
2.5
Gaps in Current Research.
This report examines the impact of metro systems on bicycle usage. Previous research on
this topic is limited. Two research studies that touch upon this topic are ”Transport Impacts
of the Copenhagen Metro” [8] and ”The Impact of New Metro on Travel Behaviour: Panel
Analysis Using Mobile Phone Data” [19]. Booth’s studies give insight into the effect of
metro expansion on various transport modes, using different techniques to get results.
However, they do not solely focus on bicycles as this study does.
The latter mentioned study, which uses mobile phone data in panel analysis, was based in
China, a different type of society than Denmark. However, its findings and methods give
insight into the effects of a new metro system on travel behaviour [19]. The study of the
Copenhagen Metro examines the impacts of the M1 and M2 metro in Copenhagen. It uses
a counting method and panel and postcard data to measure the effects on traffic patterns.
The counting is performed for vehicles, bicycles, and other modes of transport [8]. The
study gives valuable information but does not specify a focus on the effects of bicycles,
as this study aims to do.
A 2006 study covering the impacts of the M1 and M2 metro lines on transport, including
4
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:15==
bicycles, released over 18 years ago gives insight into previous research on the thesis topic.
One finding of this study was a shift in the travel behaviour of cyclists by up to 9% in the
specific corridors that switch to the metro from bicycle [8]. Although the study findings
give a good understanding of the effects of a new metro line on bicycle usage, it is over 18
years old. Copenhagen’s landscape and transport infrastructure have changed since then.
More metro lines, such as the M3 and M4, have been added, and neighbourhoods, such as
Nordhavn, have been built. Therefore, it justifies the need for new research on the topic.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
5
==PAGE:16==
6
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:17==
3
Research Methodology
This study uses different methods to understand the effects of Copenhagen’s metro expan­
sion on bicycle usage. The main methods are reviewing existing studies and documents,
interviews with professionals, analysis of bicycle counting data, and a review of Cost­
Benefit Analysis (CBA) reports.
3.1
Document and Literature Review
At the beginning of this research, a thorough review of reports, studies, and documents
was performed to establish a solid foundation of previous research on the research topic,
patterns and relevant information. Some key documents are Environmental Impact Re­
ports and academic literature.
3.2
Interviews
Two interviews were performed with professionals involved in Copenhagen’s metro de­
velopment, each in their way respectfully. The interviews gave a better understanding of
the simulations used in metro development and the processes in place for bicycles and
metro. Plus, one interview with a city official to get the city’s perspective.
3.2.1
Henrik Køster, COWI
An interview with Henrik Køster, a transportation expert from COWI, was performed.
Henrik is the author of the traffic chapter in the Environmental Impact Report (Miljøkon­
sekvensrapport) for the M5 metro line. The main focus of the interview was the process for
the chapter, understanding methodologies, and getting contacts that could provide further
insight.
3.2.2
Daniel Gorud Ahrendt Ocariz and Mette Aagaard Knudsen, Metroselskabet
The interview’s focus was to understand some of Metroselskabet’s processes and meth­
ods, specifically the OTM model, a simulation model the company uses to evaluate metro
stages and their interplay with other transport modes. The OTM model gives insight into
public transport behaviour. However, it has limitations regarding the combination of travel
methods on one trip, for example, cycling to the metro station and then taking the metro
to the destination. A more comprehensive dataset and model called Compass, owned and
used by the city of Copenhagen, was mentioned.
3.2.3
Municipality of Copenhagen ­ question list
The interview with Tobias aimed to hear the Municipalities’ opinions on bicycles and
metro lines. Unlike the other interviews during the thesis’s preparation, this interview
was not in person but via email.
3.3
Bicycle Counting Data
Access was obtained to basic counting data for car, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic for most
counting locations in Copenhagen for the period 2015 ­ 2023. However, most counting
sites did not have continuous counts over all the years. The data were from the Tech­
nical and Environmental Administration (Teknik og Miljøforvaltningen) in Copenhagen
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
7
==PAGE:18==
and were in Excel format. Counting data from earlier years was limited, but the most
comprehensive data were from 2010 ­ 2014, obtained from published reports in PDF form
[20][21].
Other counting data were inaccessible at the time of this report’s preparation, and conti­
nuity in counts between years was limited to a few locations within Copenhagen rather
than throughout the city. The data help assess the impact of a new metro line on bicycle
usage by comparing bicycle usage before and after the introduction of a new metro line.
Several considerations should be kept in mind when examining these data; for example,
COVID­19 affected society during 2020 ­ 2021 and possibly longer, which also applies to
bicycle usage.
3.4
CBA Reports
The analysis uses the TERESA model to compare unit costs/values over the years. The
Danish Ministry of Transport implemented it in 2004 and made it mandatory for socioeco­
nomic evaluations of transport projects from September 2006. This methodology analyses
the transport economic unit prices related to bicycles. It examines changes in these unit
prices over the years, with a secondary focus on whether they are reasonable and, if not,
why. Notable inconsistencies or shifts in the unit prices will be discussed.
8
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:19==
4
Data Analysis
This chapter investigates how bicycles are integrated into Cost­Benefit Analyses (CBA)
in transportation projects in Denmark. It examines the evolution of unit prices related
to bicycles in CBA, especially the TERESA model. Results from interviews with key
professionals involved with developing Copenhagen’s metro system, both from COWI and
Metroselskabet, and an interview with a city official from the Municipality of Copenhagen
are shown. Traffic count data from Copenhagen is analysed to see if there is an impact
before and after the opening of the M3 and M4 metro lines.
4.1
Bicycles in Cost­Benefit Analysis
Not many years have passed since bicycles were largely overlooked in Cost­Benefit Anal­
yses (CBAs) projects in Denmark. The CBA for the first metro lines in Copenhagen, M1
and M2, barely accounts for the project’s impact on cycling [22]. It is essential to see
how bicycles are evaluated in CBAs to understand better the effects of new metro lines on
bicycles.
CBA is a structural approach to assessing a project’s cost and benefits. It can measure vari­
ables such as health benefits from physical activity and reduced cycling emissions. Under­
standing how these variables are weighted and described in CBAs and how these effects
are accurately captured in project evaluations will provide insight into this methodology.
Furthermore, quantifying benefits, trade­offs, and changes in usage patterns is essential
when assessing the reduction in cycling caused by a new metro system. This analysis fo­
cuses on variables and values in a CBA in Denmark, particularly in Copenhagen, where
the metro lines are located.
4.1.1
TERESA
In 2004, the Danish Ministry of Transport implemented a TERESA spreadsheet model
to calculate the costs and benefits of traffic infrastructure projects. The model incorpo­
rates unit values for travel time, vehicle operating costs, and external traffic costs. Over
time, TERESA has been continuously updated to incorporate more precise parameters for
valuing these unit costs, and was last updated in 2024. Since late 2006, carrying out
socio­economic assessments with TERESA for the Ministry of Transport projects has
been mandatory. DTU manages unit price maintenance and updates in agreement with
the Ministry of Transport. Usually updated every two years, the changes incorporate new
projections for price trends, GDP, population growth, and fuel costs. Bicycles were first
added to TERESA in 2013 (TERESA 3.0), with light rail the same year [14].
Adding bicycles to TERESA introduced a new approach to evaluating an infrastructure,
denoting bicycles as individual transport modes. Similar to the calculation of car users,
the spreadsheet uses ”net km” and ”net time.” In addition, in Table 4.1 are some attributes
that are included for the bicycles:
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
9
==PAGE:20==
Table 4.1: Overview of TERESA 3.0 variables for cycling infrastructure projects from being in­
troduced in 2013
Category
Description
User Benefits
Time savings
Accounts for reduced travel time for cyclists, categorized by trip
purpose (e.g., work, leisure) and time type (e.g., free travel vs.
delays).
Distance changes
Shows changes in the distance cyclists travel because of the
project.
Disruptions due to Construction
Considers the time and distance inconveniences faced by cyclists
during the construction phase.
Cycling Costs
Operating costs
Expenses like bike devaluation, tyre wear, and repairs are calcu­
lated per kilometre.
Health benefits
Internal health improvements from cycling are treated as negative
costs for their economic advantage.
Infrastructure Costs
Maintenance
Covers the yearly costs of operating and maintaining cycle paths.
External Costs
Road safety impacts
Evaluates changes in the number of fatalities, serious injuries, and
minor injuries caused by the project.
External health effects
Includes public health savings resulting from changes in kilome­
tres cycled.
However, the document does not distinguish between e­bikes and standard bicycles [14].
In 2020, the Danish Ministry of Transport released a report with updated CBA analysis
guidelines for bicycles and units. These updates included a distinction between e­bikes
and regular bikes. The report also included accident costs for underreported incidents
and more detailed calculations compared to previous guidelines [17]. Building on these
updates, TERESA 6.0 was released in 2021, marking a significant advancement in bicycle
modelling. This version introduced e­bicycles, and bicycles are now represented as an
average of traditional and electric bikes [15]. Consequently, cycling is no longer assumed
to produce zero emissions.
One way to understand the evolving perspective on bicycles is to examine the change
in unit prices over recent years. Table 4.2 gives an overview of the change in unit prices
related to bicycles in TERESA, where unit prices are from Transport Economic Unit Prices
2.1 (TEUP­2.1) from the Ministry of Transport´s [23]. It shows the costs and benefits of
both traditional and electric bicycles. Note that the unit prices for electric bicycles before
2021 are estimated by projecting costs backwards since electric bikes were introduced into
TERESA in 2021.
10
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:21==
Table 4.2: Changes in unit prices in different categories in TERESA related to bicycles (DKK).
All prices are in 2024 prices from TEUP­2.1.
Category
Subcategory
2013
2015
2019
2021
2024
Travel Time (DKK/hour)
Commuting
100
102
109
115
119
Business
409
418
449
470
489
Other private purposes
100
102
109
115
119
Average prices
109
111
120
125
131
Delays (DKK/hour)
Commuting
149
153
161
172
179
Business
613
626
674
706
734
Other private purposes
149
153
164
172
179
Average prices
164
167
180
188
196
Driving Costs for Bicycles (DKK/km)
Excluding tax
0,45
0,45
0,45
0,45
0,45
Including tax
0,56
0,56
0,56
0,56
0,56
Health Effects for Bicycles (DKK/km) Ordinary bicycle
­8,97
­9,17
­9,86
­10,32
­10,74
E­bike
­7,18
­7,33
­7,89
­8,26
­8,59
Bicycle Accident Costs (DKK/person)
Death
42.333.349 43.105.229 45.872.130 47.720.773 49.375.224
Seriously injured
7.623.307
7.762.306
8.260.564
8.593.464
8.891.394
Lightly injured
859.417
875.087
931.258
968.788
1.002.375
Average
4.278.000
4.356.002
4.635.612
4.822.426
4.989.617
Marginal External Costs (DKK/km)
Type: Ordinary
Total low CO2 price
­7,07
­7,13
­7,33
­7,47
­7,60
Accidents
1,73
1,76
1,88
1,95
2,02
Health
­8,80
­8,89
­9,21
­9,43
­9,62
Type: Electricity
Total low CO2 price
­4,48
­4,51
­4,59
­4,65
­4,71
Accidents
2,56
2,61
2,77
2,89
2,18
Health
­7,04
­7,11
­7,37
­7,54
­7,69
Average (Ordinary and Electricity)
Total low CO2 price
­6,63
­6,69
­6,87
­7,00
­7,11
Accidents
1,87
1,91
2,03
2,11
2,18
Health
­8,50
­8,59
­8,90
­9,11
­9,29
All unit prices are shown at 2024 prices, as they appeared in the TERESA­6.1 model
with the current price bank TEUP­2.1. The prices exclude tax unless otherwise stated.
Comparing their development is more manageable if all prices are at 2024 prices.
Price changes between years are then explained by increased prosperity and value creation
in society above inflation. Previous analyses of TEUP show that people’s willingness to
pay increases roughly the same amount as society’s income per capita development. This
corresponds to the fact that the greater your wealth, the more your time becomes worth, for
example. Therefore, the value of delay and travel time increases with positive economic
growth in society. Other versions would have to be compared to see the impact of changes
in methodology, factors or something similar when calculating prices in different versions
of TEUP and TERESA.
In some cases, unit prices are calculated using unit prices from later years. For exam­
ple, unit prices related to electric bicycles. Although e­bikes were introduced in 2021 in
TERESA, the current version calculates the cost based on unit prices from the previous
year. The value of travel time has increased by 20% over the years, from 109 DKK/hour
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
11
==PAGE:22==
to 131 DKK/hour.
The health effects of ordinary and electric bikes have risen over the years; however, not
equally. The health effects of ordinary bikes grew from ­8,97 DKK/km in 2013 to ­10,74
DKK/km (20%) in 2024, and during the same time, ­7,18 DKK/km to ­8,59 DKK/km
(20%) for electric bicycles. One reason for this is the growing knowledge of the positive
health benefits of cycling, resulting in lower healthcare costs [12].
Due to this, there has been a significant change in the methodology for valuing health in
TERESA related to cycling from 2019 to 2024. In TERESA 5,09 (2020), the health cost
increased from ­3,56 to ­7,84 DKK/km (2020 prices) for regular bicycles, an increase of
approximately 220% [24]. From 2019 to 2024, this item has risen by 235% above price
changes and is now at ­9,62 DKK/km in 2024, according to Table 4.2. This change has
resulted in much higher net present value internal rates of return for cost­benefit analyses
of cycling infrastructure projects than before 2020 and even significantly better results
than those generally observed in other transport projects. In the case study by Rich et al.,
2021, an analysis of superhighway infrastructure shows an internal rate of return increase
of about 20% after the value increases in 2020 [25].
Road safety awareness, especially for bicycles, has risen in recent years. For example, in
Denmark, the promotion of using bicycle helmets through awareness campaigns [26]. It
can explain the rise in bicycle accident costs. Furthermore, medical treatments, legal fees,
and insurance premiums could also increase the costs.
The Danish government has focused on decreasing CO2 emissions and meeting the ”Paris
Agreement” [27]. This focus explains the increase in CO2 prices over the years, as seen
in Table 4.2. In a CBA, these negative values indicate that the societal cost of cycling,
including emissions, is low, and a higher negative value means a better overall outcome
for the project. The most significant change in unit prices is the introduction of electric
bicycles in 2021 as a distinct category. Before that, electric bicycles were overlooked and
grouped with regular bicycles and, therefore, did not incorporate some expectations such
as electricity consumption and battery production.
Figure 4.1 gives an overview of the relative price change from 2013 to 2024 compared to
GDP. It shows that prices have evolved mostly linearly, excluding the COVID­19 period
around 2020, with always an increase. During this period, GDP has increased by 7% more
than the unit prices for travel and delay time and by 10% above accident costs.
12
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.1: Relative change in Bicycle Accident Costs and Travel Time/Delays Prices with GDP
2013 to 2024.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
13
==PAGE:24==
Table 4.3: Comparison of Costs and Health Effects for Bicycles in Denmark, Sweden, and Great
Britain (DKK) in 2024 prices.
Category
Subcategory
Denmark
Sweden
Great Britain
Travel Time (DKK/hour)
Commuting
119
Business
489
Other private purposes
119
Average prices
131
161
169
Delays (DKK/hour)
Commuting
179
Business
734
Other private purposes
179
Average prices
196
281
Driving Costs for Bicycles (DKK/km)
Excluding tax
0,45
Including tax
0,56
0,73
Health Effects for Bicycles (DKK/km) Ordinary bicycle
­10,74
E­bike
­8,59
Bicycle Accident Costs (DKK/person)
Death
49.375.224 45.324.334
29.150.588
Seriously injured
8.891.394
3.182.018
Injured
3.839.770
Lightly injured
1.002.375
244.464
Average
4.989.617
3.839.770
1.066.848
Marginal External Costs (DKK/km)
Ordinary
Total low CO2 price
­7,60
Accidents
2,02
Health
­9,62
Electricity
Total low CO2 price
­4,71
Accidents
2,18
Health
­7,69
Average (Ordinary and Electricity)
Total low CO2 price
­7,11
Accidents
2,18
Health
­9,29
Prices from Sweden and Britain were selected to compare the Danish unit prices with those
from other countries. The prices from Sweden are taken from the ASEK model, and the
British prices were from the TAG model. Not as many unit prices regarding bicycles were
in ASEK and TAG as in TERESA. However, available unit prices were compared with
the TERESA unit prices. At first, the unit prices from the ASEK and TEG were converted
to Danish kroner using the marking rate of 1 Swedish kroner to 0,65 Danish kroner and
1 British pound to 9,00 Danish kroner. The converted prices are called ”original prices”.
Prices for Sweden and Britain were adjusted with the cost­of­living indicator. This was
done to make a fairer comparison since the prices are made with that specific country’s
14
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:25==
living expenses in mind. The following formula was used to adjust the prices:
Adjusted Price = Original Price ×
( Cost of Living Index for Denmark
Cost of Living Index for the country
)
This formula adjusts the ”original prices” (converted directly from the local currencies to
DKK) to reflect the relative purchasing power of the countries. The cost of living indices
are essential because they help us understand how much more or less expensive it is to
live in one country compared to another. The adjusted prices allow for a more accurate
comparison by accounting for these differences in the standard of living.
The cost of living indices used in this calculation are:
• Denmark: 75,2
• Sweden: 62,2
• Great Britain: 63,7
The indicators are from a database called Numbeo [28], a database that compares the cost
of living for all countries.
By using the unit prices from Table 4.3, the total benefit/value per cycled kilometre can
be calculated. Assume that a cyclist rides 4 km every working day. According to traffic
analyses, the average cycling speed in Copenhagen was about 16,5 km/hour in 2024 [2].
Adding 2 minutes for delay time on these 4 km to account for deviations reduces the
average speed to 14,5 km/hour.
The subcategory ”Health” in ”Marginal External Costs” represents health, not ”Health
Effects for Bicycles.” This distinction is made because ”Health Effects for Bicycles” does
not consider all external cycling effects, such as pollution exposure. Therefore, ”Health”
from ”Marginal External Costs” provides a better representation.
Table 4.4: Calculation on net benefits of riding an ordinary bicycle.
Description
Unit price
Unit
Quantity
Unit
Price (DKK)
Travel Time
131
DKK/hour
0,242
hour
31,8
Delays
196
DKK/hour
0,033
hour
6,5
Driving Costs
0,45
DKK/km
4,0
km
1,8
Marginal External Costs
CO2
­7,6
DKK/km
4,0
km
­30,4
Accidents
2,02
DKK/km
4,0
km
8,1
Health
­9,62
DKK/km
4,0
km
­38,5
Total
­20,7
Total DKK/km
­5,2
The total benefit of this 4 km trip is calculated to be 20,7 DKK or 5,2 DKK/km. If calcu­
lated for each working day in a year (240 days), this amounts to 4.970 DKK (665 EUR)
per cyclist per year. For 100.000 cyclists, this would result in nearly 500 million DKK
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
15
==PAGE:26==
annually.
If the average speed were assumed to be 16,5 km/h as per traffic analyses [2] and no
additional delays were included, the benefit would be 6,8 DKK/km for regular bicycles.
In that case, the benefit for 100.000 users cycling 4 km per working day would rise to
approximately 650 million DKK annually.
During the research on TERESA, a model software tool called CBA­DK, which was cre­
ated by the Danish Road Directorate and the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
was discovered. The CBA­DK combines traditional cost­benefit analysis and risk analy­
sis through Monte Carlo Simulation. It appears that CBA­DK has had little use since it
appears to be last used in a study in the 2010s; therefore, it was decided not to research
CBA­DK.
4.1.2
Guidelines for The Ministry of Transport by COWI ­ CBA Units ­ Denmark
2009
From 2006 to 2010, the Municipality of Copenhagen invested 185 million DKK in cy­
cling projects, aiming to become one of the leading cities in cycling [16]. One thing
needed to meet this goal was standardized methods and valuables in bicycle CBA, as the
Ministry of Transport guidelines manual did not include bicycles. In response, the city
commissioned a project to establish procedures to assess the cycling variables into CBA
to calculate cycling per km costs. The project details the objectives; one is to carry out
two socio­economic case evaluations (Bryggebroen and the intersection at Gyldenløvs­
gade) using unit values and methodology found in the project [16]. Table 4.5 shows the
factors examined in the 2009 project.
16
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:27==
Table 4.5: Factors Examined in the 2009 Report on Cycling’s Socio­economic unit prices.
Factor
Details
Time Costs
Significant benefits from time savings for cyclists, with
higher value assigned to unexpected delay time.
Unit values derived from the Danish Ministry of Trans­
port’s ”Transportøkonomiske Enhedspriser”.
Driving Costs
Operating and maintenance costs, varying by bicycle type
and lifespan.
Unit costs are calculated per kilometre cycled.
Health Benefits
Reduced risk of lifestyle diseases (e.g., cardiovascular dis­
eases, diabetes) and extended lifespan.
Direct cost savings (e.g., healthcare expenditures) and pro­
ductivity gains (e.g., reduced sick leave).
Improved personal welfare due to better health and
longevity.
Accident Costs
Costs vary by severity (e.g., fatal, serious injury) and are
adjusted for underreporting of cycling accidents.
The Danish Ministry of Transport provides unit costs.
Air Pollution Costs
Cycling reduces pollution from other transport modes when
substituted for motorized trips.
Benefits are calculated using unit costs for pollution from
cars, buses, and trains.
Feelings of Insecurity Costs
Costs are related to perceived traffic dangers.
It is difficult to quantify due to the lack of an established
methodology.
Recreational Value
Enjoyment and leisure benefits derived from recreational
cycling.
Suggested estimation through route choice analysis com­
paring perceived costs and benefits.
Branding Value
Positive image of cycling­friendly cities and its impact on
tourism and economic development.
Estimated by the number of tourists attracted and associated
economic benefits.
Discomfort Costs
Costs due to weather conditions, limited carrying capacity,
and physical exertion.
Potential estimation via surveys or stated preference stud­
ies.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
17
==PAGE:28==
Table 4.5 shows various factors and unit prices for assessing bicycle­related CBA. The
values were based on existing data and methodologies available at the time. According to
the report on new factors like health impacts, some assumptions were made due to limited
data. This study was the base for more detailed analysis. Furthermore, the unit prices
help establish a baseline understanding of introducing a metro system’s impact on cycling
in a project’s benefits, such as time value and health cost. For example, a metro project
may improve safety and commuting time, but health costs could rise for the projects since
fewer people travel via bicycle and therefore, less physical activity.
4.1.3
Guidelines for The Ministry of Transport by COWI ­ CBA Units ­ Denmark
2020
The Danish Ministry of Transport has updated the guidelines for socio­economic analy­
ses since 2009. In 2020, the ministry released updated guidelines, such as distinguishing
e­bikes from regular bikes. The guidelines also included accident costs for underreported
incidents and more detailed calculations than previous guidelines [17]. The 2020 report
contains more calculations and updated methodologies that significantly expand the scope
of unit prices in CBA and provide more precise unit prices. Expert workshops and liter­
ature reviews were used to provide greater depth on evaluating unit prices (e.g., health
effects).
18
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:29==
Table 4.6: Attributes Considered in the Study.
Category
Details
Health Effects
Positive health outcomes, including impacts on diseases
such as ischemic heart disease, diabetes, and cancer.
Analysis included expert workshops, literature reviews,
and data analysis based on cycling behaviour and health
risks.
Key finding: Cycling does not displace other physical ac­
tivity, maximizing health benefits.
Accident Costs
Analysis of accident severities (minor, serious, fatal) for
regular and electric bicycles.
Cost types include treatment, care, production loss, welfare
loss, and police/rescue services.
Climate Impacts
Focused on e­bikes, considering electricity consumption
(10 Wh/km) and emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O.
Calculations based on Danish Energy Agency’s socio­
economic carbon pricing.
Attributes Not Analysed
Vehicle costs: Purchasing, maintaining, and operating bi­
cycles and e­bikes.
Air pollution: Cycling’s impact on urban air quality.
Noise: Comparison of noise levels with motorized vehi­
cles.
Congestion: Role in reducing urban traffic congestion.
Infrastructure costs: Costs for building and maintaining cy­
cle paths.
Key points
• The report analyses several health conditions related to cycling’s health benefits,
such as type 2 diabetes, breast cancer, and colon cancer. Results show that cy­
cling reduces the risk of ischemic heart disease by 0,0044% per km, colon cancer by
0,0055%, and type 2 diabetes by 0,0180%.
• Accidents have now been categorized by injuries in greater detail. The mode of
transport (regular or electric bicycles) and the severity of accidents (minor, serious,
and fatal) are used to assess the economic effect of an accident. Furthermore, costs
were also calculated for medical expenses, care and economic impact.
As mentioned above, the 2020 report introduces electrical bicycles (e­bikes) to be used
in calculating CBA projects. Some factors are different for regular bicycles and electric
bicycles. According to the report, e­bikes do 80% of exercises compared to regular bikes
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
19
==PAGE:30==
since the electric motor assists in physical activity. The risk factor for e­bikes is around
0,37 compared to 0,22 for regular bicycles. Therefore, the accident cost per km for e­bikes
is 1,68 higher than for regular bicycles. The lack of sufficient data causes it to be assumed
that treatment and production loss costs for e­bikes are the same as for regular bicycle
accidents. The report bases greenhouse gas emissions for e­bikes on prices forecast by the
Danish Energy Agency and sets it at 10 Wh per km.
4.1.4
The Difference Between the Guidelines from 2009 and 2020
The main difference between the reports is that 2020 introduced e­bikes. In addition, it
goes into more detail about the health effects of cycling and how it decreases the likelihood
of diseases using expert workshops and literature that were not used in the 2009 report.
The 2009 report uses more straightforward methods, for example, finding the accident
costs, while the 2020 report uses score­matching. The 2009 report focuses on more broad
factors, such as vehicle costs, time costs and air pollution, while the 2020 report focuses
on more health, accident and climate costs. Table 4.7 gives an overview of the differences
between the two reports.
20
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:31==
Table 4.7: Attributes Unique to Each Document on Cycling Unit Prices.
Attribute
Description
Cycling Costs
2009 Document: Includes purchase price, expected lifes­
pan, scrap value, risk of theft, and replacement costs for
components.
2020 Document: Does not address cycling costs.
Subjective Factors
2009 Document: Considers perceived safety, sense of
place, urban space contributions, branding, tourism, and
discomfort factors.
2020 Document: Does not include subjective factors.
Waiting Time Analysis
2009 Document:
Differentiates between regular travel
time and unexpected delay time, assigning higher costs to
delays.
2020 Document: Does not include a detailed analysis of
waiting time.
E­bike­Specific Analysis
2009 Document:
Not addressed, as e­bikes were less
prevalent.
2020 Document: Focuses on health differences, climate
change costs from electricity use, and higher accident risk
for e­bikes.
Statistical Techniques
2009 Document: Relies on simpler methods for accident
cost estimation.
2020 Document: Uses propensity score matching to iso­
late cycling accident costs more accurately.
Input and Review
2009 Document: Limited reliance on expert workshops or
broad literature reviews.
2020 Document: Incorporates insights from expert work­
shops and a detailed review of scientific literature on health
benefits.
4.2
Interviews
Two interviews were conducted with professionals involved with developing Copenhagen’s
metro system, focusing on integrating cycling with metro transport. Interviews purpose
was to explore and understand the model’s challenges and capabilities. One interview was
conducted with a city official to get the city’s perspective.
The interviewees were chosen because they were believed to contribute valuable insight
into the study’s focus. Henrik Køster from COWI was selected as an interviewee since
he wrote the traffic chapter in the M5 Environmental report and was, therefore, viewed
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
21
==PAGE:32==
as a great first interviewee. Furthermore, after the interview, Henrik provided valuable
contacts that would give more insight and information. Daniel Gorud Ahrendt Ocariz and
Mette Aagaard Knudsen from Metroselskabet were selected as interviewees after Hen­
rik recommended contacting them since they would know more about the OTM model
and how simulations on cycling trips are conducted. Lastly, Tobias Løvenholdt Tørresø
gave answers from the municipality after an email to the municipality’s general contact
email with questions on the city’s perspective and actions on cycling and public transport
integration.
4.2.1
Interview with Henrik Køster, COWI
An interview with Henrik Køster, a transportation expert at COWI, was performed. Hen­
rik has played a role in developing the traffic chapter in the Environmental Impact Reports
(EIR) for both the M3 and M5 metro lines in Copenhagen for the Metroselskabet (Copen­
hagens Metro company). The key takeaway from the interview was the contacts Henrik
provided, including Daniel Gorud Ahrendt Ocariz and Mette Aagaard Knudsen from Met­
roselskabet; an interview was also performed with them.
The first topic discussed was the definition of a cyclist used in the Environmental Impact
Report, which refers to a person who cycles the entire distance between points A and
B without switching to other transport modes. For example, a person who previously
cycled a longer distance from point A to C is not rated the same as if he cycled a shorter
distance to a metro station, from point A to B and then took the metro from point B to C.
Another definition shared by Henrik was that the effective walking radius around metro
stations means the longest distance most commuters are willing to walk to access the
metro, which is approximately 600 meters. It is important to understand this radius, which
could influence cycling around metro stations.
Regarding the urban planning strategy, the M1 and M4 lines were planned to increase the
attractiveness of areas being developed, and according to Henrik, the same goes for the
M5 line. In addition, Henrik stressed the importance of placing bicycle parking spaces
around metro stations. Since the optimal location of bicycle parking spaces could encour­
age cycling and metro integration.
The last topic discussed was the OTM traffic model, which was initially created while
planning the first metro line, M1. The Metroselskabet still uses this model to forecast
traffic patterns. Metroselskabet provides all the necessary data and forecasts data from
the OTM to companies that are making analyses commissioned by Metroselskabet, such
as COWI.
4.2.2
Interview with Daniel Gorud Ahrendt Ocariz and Mette Aagaard Knudsen
from Metroselskabet.
An interview with Daniel Gorud Ahrendt Ocariz and Mette Aagaard Knudsen from Met­
roselskabet was performed. The main topics discussed were the OTM (Operational Trans­
port Model) model, its use to simulate traffic behaviour and its use in simulating metro
passenger and cyclist integration.
One key point from the interview is the limitations of the OTM model. Although the model
is helpful for understanding and simulating general traffic and passenger behaviour, it does
not include mapping combined trips. The Compass model, however, is a more advanced
22
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:33==
tool used by the municipality of Copenhagen. It can simulate multimodal journeys, such
as bicycles and metro. Nevertheless, Compass has some limitations; for example, because
of its complexity and detailed simulations, it takes a few days to complete a run.
During the meeting, a key topic became known: how little cycling often plays in a project’s
CBA. For example, a CBA for the coming M5 line shows that bicycles have a minimal
economic impact compared to other modes. A good example is that the time cyclists
save is minimal compared to the overall benefits of a project [29]. This shows how little
bicycles affect overall CBA projects.
Below are the answers to the specific questions posed during the interview.
Q1: How large is an area (radius) from a new Metro station estimated to see a noticeable
change in cycling use?
• The Compass model provides this estimation. It includes existing metro stations and
averages the distance for bike trips where the metro is part of the journey. Most bike
trips are around only 500 meters in radius from the stations.
Q2: Can it be considered from the OTM model that any decrease in cycling trips counts
as an increase in Metro trips?
• The OTM model calculates transportation behaviour changes by comparing a sce­
nario with and without a new metro line. It shows that improvements in the metro
system generally take passengers from biking and walking to public transportation,
with little shift from cars.
Q3: Are there any criteria Metro looks at that are considered an acceptable reduction in
the number of cyclists with the opening of Metro systems?
• No specific targets are set for cycling reductions with the metro’s opening. The
municipality has overall targets for cycling but not specifically related to metro lines.
Q4: How long after the Metro’s opening has its main effects on cycling become apparent?
• The effects of the metro on cycling are challenging to measure immediately, espe­
cially with external factors like weather or other infrastructure developments. It is
challenging to isolate the impact of the metro from other changes, such as increases
in walking distance.
Q5: Are any countermeasures being taken to prevent an excessive decrease in the number
of cycling trips?
• No specific countermeasures have been implemented to prevent a decrease in cycling
trips due to the metro system. However, there is an overall concern in Copenhagen
about reducing cycling numbers.
Q6: How high is a cyclist rated in a CBA report in monetary value? Are all cyclists rated
equal?
• The cost­benefit analysis (CBA) uses standardized models where cycling is valued
in terms of travel time, health benefits, and maintenance costs. Cyclists are generally
valued equally, though the purpose of the trip (e.g., work or leisure) may affect the
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
23
==PAGE:34==
economic valuation.
Q7: Is cycled km estimated in the model, does it decrease with the opening of Metros in
the same proportion as the number of trips?
• The OTM model estimates the number of cycling trips but does not directly calculate
the number of cycling kilometres in relation to metro usage. The number of cycling
trips may decrease, but the average trip length may increase as metro journeys re­
place short trips.
Q8: Will the number of short cycling trips in the model increase after the opening of the
Metro?
• The OTM model does not consider short cycling trips, as it only tracks complete
trips. The metro opening may reduce short cycling trips to the station, but this is not
captured in the OTM model.
Q9: How is the decrease in the number of cyclists estimated?
• The model estimates the decrease by comparing the number of cycling trips before
and after the introduction of the metro, but it does not account for the combination
of cycling and metro trips. This is a key limitation of the OTM model.
Q10: Have the calculations of cyclists changing behaviour before and after the opening
of older Metro systems held up?
• The general trend shows a decrease in cycling, but it is difficult to isolate the im­
pact of the metro due to other factors like COVID or the availability of alternative
transport modes.
Q11: Does the OTM transport model calculate the number of trips or the number of km
for pedestrians?
• The OTM model calculates trips but not the kilometres for pedestrians. It does not
include detailed pedestrian analysis or the network of pedestrian paths.
Q12: Were any targets set for cycling in M1/M2/M3/M4?
• No specific targets for cycling were set for the metro lines. The focus was on overall
transportation planning and the integration of different transport modes.
Q13: What aspects of cycling in M1/M2/M3/M4, did not work, if any? Could Metro have
done better in some respects?
• One notable issue was the underground bicycle parking, which remains largely un­
used. Better visibility and clearer signage for bike parking would have improved
usage.
Q14: Have you looked at whether the different quality of bike parking attracts more cy­
cling users to your Metro stations?
• This question was not addressed directly. However, other people in Metroselskabet
are focusing on this aspect, particularly in relation to the new M5 stations.
24
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:35==
4.2.3
Replies from the municipality of Copenhagen ­ Tobias Løvenholdt Tørresø
Tobias Løvenholdt Tørresø, a member of the Mobility Team in the Center for Urban De­
velopment, represented the municipality of Copenhagen and answered several questions
related to the study. The goal was to gain the municipality’s perspective on some matters.
The municipality of Copenhagen views cycling as a key part of its sustainable transport
system. Its political goal is to increase public transport use, including the Metro. The mu­
nicipality does not have specific criteria to minimise cycling reductions when a new metro
line opens. While the municipality recognises introducing new metro lines may decrease
cycling, it does not view this as a negative outcome as long as at least 25% of all trips are
made by bike and 25% by public transport. The main focus is to create a well­integrated
transportation system that supports public transport and cycling, enhancing overall acces­
sibility and contributing to sustainable urban development.
Besides placing bicycle parking spaces, it seems the city does not take any significant
countermeasures to prevent an excessive decrease in cycling trips with the opening of
new metro lines. Nevertheless, according to the city, a few things could have been done
better, such as making people more aware of the new metro lines, M3 and M4. Since they
are trying to raise awareness, fewer passengers could use these metro lines than expected.
Below are the responses to the key questions:
Q1: Are there any criteria the municipality looks at that is considered an acceptable re­
duction in cyclists with the opening of Metro systems?
• The municipality views cycling as a cornerstone of Copenhagen’s sustainable trans­
port system. Politically, the goal has been to increase public transport use, with
Metro development as a key initiative since 2001. This has attracted both car users
and some who might otherwise cycle, resulting in shifts in transport habits.
• We have no specific criteria for reductions in cycling as long as at least 25% of trips
are made by bike and 25% by public transport. While Metro expansion can impact
cycling, it also complements it by improving overall mobility.
Q2: Are any countermeasures being taken to prevent an excessive decrease in cycling
trips when opening new Metro systems?
• As part of planning for new Metro lines, efforts are made to create additional bike
parking spaces and adjust bus routes and other transport modes to integrate with the
high­quality Metro system in Copenhagen. We strive to ensure the best possible
connectivity, both for individual transport modes and in combination.
Q3: Have the calculations of cyclists’ changing behaviour before and after the opening of
older Metro systems held up?
• We do not specifically conduct a counting of cyclists’ behaviour before and after
the opening of Metro systems. However, in the VVM report, there are projections
indicating expected shifts in travel behaviour, including the number of trips that may
shift from cycling to Metro use because of the new infrastructure. These expectations
are based on forecasts rather than direct observations of cyclist behaviour before and
after Metro openings.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
25
==PAGE:36==
Q4: What is the municipality’s opinion on the decrease in cycling trips caused by the
Metro?
• The municipality supports both public transport and cycling. It is not surprising that
when public transport, such as the Metro, is significantly improved, some people
shift their transport habits. The goal is to promote a combination of transport options,
and changes in behaviour due to improved Metro or Bus systems are seen as a natural
outcome of offering more alternatives for mobility.
Q5: What is the primary goal of the municipality for opening a new Metro system?
• The primary goal of the municipality in opening a new Metro system is to support
new urban development, improve public transport, reduce congestion and connect
new and old neighbourhoods together to create better connectivity and mobility. The
Metro is seen as a key tool for enhancing mobility, making it easier for people to
travel across the city while also helping to manage growth. This aligns with the
broader goals of creating a more sustainable and efficient transportation system in
Copenhagen.
Q6a: What has been the municipality’s main political opinion on the development of the
Metro systems?
• The municipality’s opinion on the development of the Metro systems has been to use
it as a strategic tool to support new urban development, improve public transport,
and reduce congestion. The Metro is viewed as a component for enhancing mobility
across the city, making it easier for residents to travel while managing the growth
of the city. This development aligns with broader goals of creating a sustainable,
efficient, and well­integrated transport system that encourages greater use of public
transit while supporting Copenhagen’s urban growth.
Q6b: Is there anything that could have been done better?
• Metroselskabet is working on initiatives to improve the Metro system, including
raising awareness of the M3/M4 lines so more people can discover them as efficient
shortcuts through the city. We are collaborating with Metroselskabet and Movia to
analyse the combined bus and Metro services, as we believe there are still passengers
using other forms of public transport who could benefit from switching to the Metro
to save time. Since the Metro’s opening in 2002, it has become an important transport
mode, with over 119 million passengers in 2023.
Q7: What conditions does the municipality set for Metro? Does it have any conditions/­
goals when it comes to cycling?
• The goal is to integrate the Metro into the city’s broader mobility system, enhanc­
ing overall accessibility and ensuring the Metro contributes to sustainable urban de­
velopment. When it comes to cycling, the municipality seeks to ensure both public
transport and cycling improvements. The aim is to support cycling infrastructure and
maintain a strong cycling culture while improving public transport options, which
can complement cycling for many travellers. Bicycles and the metro complement
each other, and in this context, it is noted that 45% of Copenhageners cycle to/from
work or studies every day.
26
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:37==
4.3
Traffic Counts
Introducing metro systems in cities reduces bicycle users, as some individuals switch to
using the metro for their commutes to and from work or school. For the Copenhagen
metro, this was discussed in the Environmental Impact Assessment 2024 for M5 [6] and
M4 in the metro to Sydhavn VVM­redegørelse 2015 [30]. Additionally, these impacts
have been addressed for metro lines M1, M2a, and M2b in the article ”Transport Impacts
of the Copenhagen Metro” [8].
To evaluate the Metro’s impact on bicycle users, all traffic counts that Copenhagen Munic­
ipality (CM) had conducted from 2015 to 2023 for each counting location in Copenhagen
were obtained. These are results from manual counts conducted twice a year. This data
derived figures for Average Daily Traffic (ADT) and Average Weekday Traffic (AWT)
for each year and each counting location concerning bicycle users. For bicycle usage data
from 2010 to 2014, traffic counts were obtained from the publication ”Trafikken I Køben­
havn, Trafiktal 2010 ­ 2014,” [20] which provides an overview and summary of counts for
those years. Data from earlier years (2000 to 2010) were not of the same quality; much
of it consisted of unconfirmed summary figures (”Færdselstællinger og andre trafikunder­
søgelser 2001–2005”) without access to the original counting data. Therefore, this thesis
focuses on count data from 2010 to 2023.
Each traffic count was in a separate Excel file containing several sheets. The files ranged
from 100 to 225 per year for all of Copenhagen, most for 2023. Power Query in Excel
was used to process the counts from each year; it can handle data from multiple files
with multiple sheets. This way, one Excel file was created for each year that contained a
compilation of traffic counts (ADU and AWT), and each mode of transportation (bikes,
pedestrians, and cars) had its own sheet. Then, a main Excel file was created by reading
numerical information from each year’s file. In this way, an overview of all bicycle counts
in Copenhagen for all years is on one sheet in the main file.
Bicycle counts in Copenhagen can be unreliable due to seasonal variations and weather
conditions. The reported figures reflect bicycle numbers on typical days in spring and
autumn when regular counts are conducted. The traffic count results include calculated
average annual daily traffic (ADT) for bicycles and mopeds, representing average daily
traffic throughout the year, including weekends and public holidays. The counting period
is from 7:00 to 19:00.
It should also be noted that Vuk et al. [8] studied the impact of metro M1 and M2 on traffic
growth, induced traffic, and choice of mode and destination. That study examined metro
effects on cycling for 2003 and 2004 based on traffic counts (1998 to 2004) and panel
surveys (2002 and 2003) at two corridors in Copenhagen: one called Harbour Corridor
between the islands of Sjælland and Amager and another corridor through Frederiksberg.
According to this research, up to 4% of cyclists switched to metro use in 2003 and up to
9% in 2004 at these two corridors.
Copenhagen’s Inner City is a well­defined area where the municipality most frequently
conducts traffic counts. This area is enclosed in Copenhagen City’s traffic counts using
what is called ”Søsnittet”, shown in Figure 4.2.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.2: The Inner City and Søsnittet, along with counting locations for bicycles (Base map of
CM’s cartographic web viewer).
Manual counts (Excel files) received from the municipality were compared to those recorded
on the CM map website. The website should contain the most recent counts for each lo­
cation. When the data were reviewed, no discrepancies were found.
All counting locations in this area were identified through data processing obtained from
CM’s cartographic web viewer. The ArcGIS software was used to obtain the location of
counting sites in an AutoCAD file and all data attributes for each counting site in a CSV
data file. Of these counting sites in the city centre, 77 have been counted for two or more
years since 2010.
Only a portion of these counting sites had been counted for more than 10 to 11 years.
Appendix 1 provides an overview of locations with more than two years of counting data.
The areas with the most counts lie within the Søsnittet profile, as seen in Figure 4.2.
The City of Copenhagen has automatic bicycle counting stations at various locations, in­
cluding along Søsnittet. A request was made to the city to obtain data from these auto­
matic bicycle counting stations in Søsnittet for 2016 to 2023; however, the city unfortu­
nately could not provide this data. The city’s cartographic web viewer includes numerical
information from automatic counters for 2005 to 2014, but that is all car traffic counts.
Therefore, it was not possible to use figures from automatic counters in this analysis of
28
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:39==
bicycle usage.
Metro lines M1 and M2 opened between 2002 and 2007; thus, their impact on cycling was
mainly apparent before 2010. Line M3 opened on October 29, 2019; M4 opened in March
2020; and the extension of M4 to the Sydhavn district opened in June 2024. Lines M3 and
M4 cross Søsnittet at two points and continue within the Inner­City area (see Figure 4.3).
To assess the impact of metro lines M3 and M4 on the area, traffic count data from the
northern and western sides of Søsnittet was analysed before and after the lines’ opening.
This area is hereafter referred to as the northwest side.
Figure 4.3: The layout of the current metro lines M1 to M4. The side of Søsnittet under consider­
ation is marked with a black dotted line.
The analysis is based on Average Weekday Traffic (AWT), where converting Average
Daily Traffic (ADT) for cycling into AWT is calculated as AWT = 1,19 x ADT, as done
by Copenhagen City [20].
From March 2020 to February 2021, Copenhagen experienced restrictions due to COVID­
19, which affected transportation and traffic count results conducted in 2020 and 2021.
All traffic counts in Søsnittet are performed annually in September. Thus, counts were
completed in September 2019 before metro M3 opened on September 29.
Traffic counts are divided into two periods: before and after the metro’s M3/M4 opening,
2010 to 2019, and 2020 to 2023. Table 4­8 shows the counts for the first period.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
29
==PAGE:40==
Table 4.8: Søsnittet ­ Northwest side 2010 to 2019. Bicycle Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) is
the sum of both directions.
Note: Fields marked in blue, in table above, indicate that no traffic count was conducted at that lo­
cation during the specified year. Fields marked in green show where count numbers were adjusted
(increased) due to construction work on the street on the counting day. These values were estimated
using differences in adjacent counts and ratios between years at other counting locations.
As mentioned, bicycle traffic counts can significantly deviate due to weather or other
factors. The traffic figures in Table 4.8 for each site are presented in a line chart in Figure
4.4 to provide a clearer picture of traffic count trends from 2010 to 2019 at each counting
location.
It shows that there can be substantial deviations in traffic numbers between years. One of
the most notable deviations is at counting site No. 5 (Dronning Louses Bro) between 2016
and 2017. At this site, counts were taken on September 15, 2016, when the temperature
was around 25 degrees Celsius and sunny; it had also been pleasant weather in the pre­
ceding days. In contrast, on September 14, 2017, when counts were taken at this location,
the temperature was about 14 degrees Celsius, with heavy rain later in the day; it had also
heavily rained the previous day. There is no record of construction work affecting traffic
on September 14, but such activities nearby cannot be ruled out. Therefore, everything
suggests that this difference is due to weather conditions.
September 2016 was very sunny in Copenhagen, with pleasant temperatures for most of
the month. It was different from September 2017, which was much colder and had more
frequent rain (Appendix 4 and 5). Similar effects can be seen at several other counting
locations in Figure 4­3, such as sites 6, 19, 69, 72, 122, and 603. According to the count
data for those years, temperatures were generally between 15­17 degrees Celsius with
cloudy skies and showers. The count data from 2017 also indicate road construction near
counting sites 122, 602 and 603.
30
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: Bicycle traffic (AWT) in each counting place’s northwest side of Søsnittet from 2010
to 2019.
Although some correlation between counting sites can be observed in Figure 4.4, there
are generally considerable deviations between them. To better examine the correlation
between these locations, a Pearson correlation analysis was conducted by calculating the
Pearson correlation coefficient (r), measuring the linear association between two variables.
It has a value between ­1 and 1, where ­1 indicates a perfectly negative linear correlation
between two variables, 0 means no linear correlation between two variables, and 1 indi­
cates a perfectly positive linear correlation between two variables.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
31
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.9: Pearson correlation matrix for counting places on the northwest side of Søsnittet. Note:
A colour scale is used to indicate better different values: blue=1, white=0 and red=­1
In transportation studies, the strength of the relationship between two variables based on
the Pearson correlation coefficient (r) is typically interpreted according to general statis­
tical guidelines. The following ranges are commonly used:
The absolute value of r and the corresponding strength of the relationship:
• r < 0.2:
Little to no relationship
• 0.2 ≤r < 0.4:
Weak relationship
• 0.4 ≤r < 0.6:
Moderate relationship
• 0.6 ≤r < 0.8:
Strong relationship
• r ≥0.8:
Powerful relationship
Generally, in Table 4.9, the correlation coefficient (r) ranges between 0,4 and 0,8 among
counting locations, indicating a moderate to strong relationship. However, in some loca­
tions, the correlation is lower or higher. Counting site 602 most often has a correlation
coefficient of <0,2, while counting site 72 usually has a correlation coefficient of >0,8.
According to this, there appears to be a good correlation among counting sites from 2010
to 2019, although deviations likely due to different weather conditions on counting days
exist.
32
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.5: Location of counting sites Søsnittet ­ Northwest side
Given that the correlation coefficient between counting sites generally ranges from 0,4 to
0,8 (moderate to strong relationship), the total traffic volume of all the above­mentioned
counting sites is further analysed to assess the extent of bicycle usage from 2010 to 2019,
which is before metro lines M3 and M4 began operations.
Since COVID­19 skewed the traffic count data for 2020 and 2021, a linear trendline was
calculated from 2010 to 2019. This trendline was then used to estimate traffic counts for
2020 to 2023 without the influence of COVID­19 and Metro. These estimated values were
then compared with measured values to assess the impact of metro lines M3/M4 for 2022
and 2023, i.e., after COVID­19 restrictions were lifted.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.6: Total Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) for the northwest side of Søsnittet, including
the trendline equation for 2010­2019.
The coefficient of determination (R2) measures how well a statistical model predicts an
outcome. The model’s dependent variable represents the outcome. The lowest possible
value of R2 is zero, and the highest is 1. Although the value of R2 for the trendline in Figure
4.6 is just below 0,5, it provides a moderate accuracy. While useful for some insights and
trends, relying solely on this trendline for precise forecasting could lead to significant
errors or uncertainties. This indicates that other important factors influence traffic counts,
and adding more relevant variables (e.g., weather conditions) would improve the model’s
explanatory power.
In Figure 4.6, counts for 2016 to 2019 show significant deviations from the trendline,
and weather conditions in September, when the counting is performed, may have had an
impact, as mentioned above. Therefore, weather conditions at Copenhagen Airport were
examined since precise weather information is available there. In Appendix 4 are tables for
temperature and precipitation at the airport that were used to assess the impact of weather
on cycling. Furthermore, information on recorded weather conditions from counting data
was also used as a reference (Appendix 5). The period from 2016 to 2019 was chosen
to study weather impacts as significant deviations appeared between the counting years.
The period 2010 to 2013, which also had noticeable deviations, was not included as raw
counting data with weather information was unavailable. Moreover, the quality of bicycles
and bicycle paths has increased since more than 10 years ago, which could distort the
comparison.
To assess the correlation of bicycle traffic counts with weather conditions, the difference
in total AWT traffic in each survey year was found with the trendline for 2010 to 2019
(Figure 4.6). These difference values are called Delta AWT. Then, correlations between
temperature and precipitation with these Delta AWT differences were assessed. A better
correlation was obtained with temperature, which was used in calculations. The focus
was on weekdays, where temperatures ranged between 18­24 °C or higher and lasted four
hours or more.
34
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:45==
Table 4.10: Number of working days with comfortable heat in September for relevant years.
Table 4.11: Delta AWT and days of comfortable heat from September 2016 to 2019.
Figure 4.7: Relationship between Delta AWT and weather conditions for the years 2016 to 2019.
For the years 2020 to 2023, based on the trendline equation in Figure 4.7, the number of
days with comfortable heat in September (as shown in Table 4.10) was used to determine
Delta AWT values for each year. A value of 0.97 for R2, in Figure 4.7, indicates that
trendline fit explains variations in the data, suggesting a robust relationship between the
variables analysed. However, as this is only based on four data points, one should be
careful not to overinterpret the result.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
35
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.12: Estimated Delta AWT and days of comfortable heat in September 2020 to 2023.
By adding these Delta AWT values to the projected total AWT values according to the
trendline in Figure 4.6, we obtain the estimated AWT values for each year from 2020 ­
2023, based on the results from 2016 ­ 2019, supplemented with estimated weather con­
ditions but excluding COVID­19 and the introduction of metro M3 and M4.
By comparing these estimated values with actual traffic counts, calculations show that
AWT bicycle traffic was approximately 6% lower in 2022 than would be expected based
on traffic counts from years prior to 2020. That was before metro lines M3 and M4 began
operations. For 2023, however, this reduction is close to 12%.
This percentage might be too high for 2023 as the estimated weather effects could be
overstated for September 2023. When the number of days with comfortable temperatures
is almost all weekdays in September, it may not be sure that the last few days add as
many cyclists proportionally as the first part of the days. Considering thirteen days with
comfortable heat instead of fifteen, the reduction is approximately 11%, about 1% lower.
This summary can be seen at the bottom of Table 4.13, and Figure 4.8 compares these
values in a line chart. According to this, it can be estimated that the introduction of metro
lines M3 and M4 in 2019 and 2020 led to a reduction in weekday bicycle trips by ap­
proximately 6% and 11% for the years 2022 and 2023, respectively, to Inner City through
Søsnittet’s northwest side. As mentioned, this is based on relatively inaccurate data but
still indicates the impact.
36
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.13: Søsnittet ­ Northwest side 2016 ­ 2023. Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) as a sum of
both directions together with an estimate for 2020 to 2023 without COVID­19 and metro M3 and
M4.
Figure 4.8: Comparison of AWT for bicycles according to counts for 2010 to 2023 and estimates
for 2020 to 2023 without COVID­19 and without metro M3 and M4.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
37
==PAGE:48==
A Pearson correlation analysis was conducted for 2020 to 2023, i.e., after metro lines
M3/M4 began operations. However, this analysis is not considered significant as the first
two years were affected by the COVID­19 pandemic and because the number of data
points (years) is too few to use this analysis reliably. To perform a meaningful Pearson
correlation analysis, 5­10 data points are recommended for the initial exploratory analysis.
The Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) for bicycles was compared with the Danish Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) trend, as traffic trends are generally linked to economic develop­
ment in society. As shown in Figure 4.9, and Appendix 6, the trendline for bicycle traffic
from 2010 to 2019 follows GDP growth up until 2019. After that, there is faster growth in
GDP except for a downturn during COVID­19. It suggests that if COVID­19 and metro
M3/M4 had not occurred, there might have been more significant growth in bicycle traffic
from 2020 to 2023 than on average from 2010 to 2019. Increased GDP growth from 2021
and traffic counts indicate that some post­COVID­19 traffic shifted to modes of transport
other than cycling, likely to the M3/M4 metro lines, which were added to public transport
in previous years.
Figure 4.9: Comparison of AWT for bicycles with GDP 2010 to 2023 in the northwest side of
Søsnittet.
The study conducted in 2005­2006 on the impact of metro lines M1/M2 on traffic [8]
indicated that up to 4% and 9% of cyclists had switched to using the metro in 2003 and
2004, respectively. The analysis was conducted using two cross­sectional studies, one in
the southeastern part of Søsnittet (Harbour corridor) and the other through Frederiksberg.
metro lines M1/M2 run together through the southeast section of Søsnittet. In contrast,
in this study, metro lines M3/M4 pass through Søsnittet at two points on its northwestern
side, then through the Inner City and roughly parallel outside it, as illustrated in Figure
4.10.
38
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.10: Alignment of metro lines M1/M2 and M3/M4 in relation to the Inner City and Søs­
nittet.
Considering the alignment of these metro lines, M1/M2 and M3/M4, to the Inner City and
Søsnittet, it can be inferred that the introduction of M3/M4 attracted more cyclists than
M1/M2. It aligns with the findings.
4.4
Integration of Bicycle and Metro
In interviews with Metroselskabet and the Copenhagen municipality, it was revealed that
they are increasingly focusing on integrating cycling with the metro system and how to
reduce the decrease in bicycle usage associated with new metro systems. The focus was
mainly on metro M5 and whether it could increase cycling’s share within the existing
metro system. The aim is to boost both cycling and metro ridership. Here is a summary
of these points from the interviews and some from other articles and studies for a broader
perspective on the issue.
Despite Copenhagen’s reputation as a cycling city, integrating cycling with the subway
presents challenges. One key focus of Copenhagen’s transport strategy is creating a seam­
less and sustainable multimodal network where subways offer efficient public transport.
At the same time, bicycles play a crucial role in first­and­last­mile connectivity and overall
mobility.
Numerous articles have been written about bike parking solutions at metro stations in
Copenhagen over recent years [31]. Future bike parking designs at M5 build on this expe­
rience. However, there is a lack of research regarding bike parking at residential buildings
where bikes are stored for extended periods [13].
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
39
==PAGE:50==
Rambøll (engineering consultancy) conducted an interview survey in Denmark in 2023
[32]; 377 interviews were conducted in Copenhagen with individuals travelling to and
from work or school, combining cycling and public transportation. The study aimed to
identify areas for improvement and increase the number of combined trips. It also com­
pared arrangements in Denmark with successful solutions in the Netherlands. Key find­
ings indicated that access to secure and well­located bike parking at train stations is critical.
This finding aligns with discussions by three experts in Traffic and Veje 2023 [33], sug­
gesting that improved conditions for combined bike­and­metro trips could boost metro
ridership and cycling rates. Attractive bike parking is crucial, so examining how such
facilities can better facilitate switching between these travel modes is necessary.
Dutch experiences show that coordinated efforts across multiple factors contribute to their
combined biking and train travel success. In 2023, around 47% of train station users biked
to the station, compared to 16,7% in Denmark [33]. Accessibility remains key; however,
sufficient secure bike parking must be simple and quick.
Data and calculations in the traffic model COMPASS show that about 6­7% of all metro
passengers arrive by bicycle and 9­11% of local passengers, i.e. from the immediate vicin­
ity of the stations and not from the train or bus [31]. Cycling rates vary significantly across
stations: smaller stations see 1%, transfer stations see 5%, terminal stations see 12%, and
more extensive interchanges between metro and rail see up to 22%. The number ranges
from 50 cyclists at small local stops to around 1000­2000 at larger hubs. According to
calculations from the COMPASS model, the average cycling distance for those who com­
bine cycling and metro is about 1,2 km [31]. Bicycles are primarily used to reach stations
for distances up to 4 km [33].
Although daytime bike parking generally meets metro station users’ regular needs, under­
ground facilities are underutilized due to poor design elements like visibility issues, steep
ramps, and lack of security. Bicycle racks often occupy a large portion of public space,
limiting their use for other users. Bicycle clutter at metro stations frequently causes sig­
nificant traffic flow challenges [31] [34].
Experience from the Netherlands
The integration of bicycles and trains is a key focus in the Netherlands, where many trav­
ellers use bicycles to get to train stations. However, this integration has many challenges,
especially regarding bike rental schemes and bike­parking structures.
Investments in bicycle parking infrastructure have significantly increased due to com­
plexities such as integrating cycling facilities into areas with competing public and com­
mercial uses. For instance, Utrecht Central Station’s parking facilities cost over €30 mil­
lion (€2,400 per space) and total investments around €50 million. These costs are shared
among stakeholders like ProRail, the city of Utrecht, the Ministry of Infrastructure and
Water Management, NS, and the European Union. Allocating these costs remains a con­
cern [33] [25].
The Dutch invest 60­70 million euros annually in bicycle parking. This continuous invest­
ment results from the constantly increasing demand for such facilities in the Netherlands
[33]. Studies of Dutch cyclists’ travel habits show that they prefer to cycle further to a
larger station with many train connections and good bicycle parking rather than a nearby
40
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:51==
smaller station. This creates increased pressure on bicycle parking at the larger stations
[33].
“Secondary bikes,” used for last­mile trips, take up to 80% of bike parking at some stations
but only account for 12% of total trips. This issue makes it difficult to manage bike park­
ing effectively. In addition, “wild bikes” parked outside designated areas cause further
problems. To address this, monitored parking is free for the first 24 hours with a small
fee thereafter ­ this improved efficiency, increased occupancy, and reduced abandoned
bicycles. Although users appreciated these measures, cycling campaigners criticized the
no­tolerance policy towards on­street parking that often accompanies new facilities [25].
The OV­Fiets program, run by Dutch railways (NS), started with 800 bicycles in 2004 and
has grown to about 22,000 bicycles at 300 locations with 500,000 regular users. Mem­
bership is free; daily rentals cost €4,45 (33 DK) for the first 24 hours and €9,45 after 72
hours. Despite this growth, demand for rental bikes exceeds supply, limiting the increase
in last­mile trips by bicycle [25]. Bicycle theft is more common in the Netherlands than in
Denmark, which may explain why the willingness to pay for supervised parking is more
significant than in Denmark [33].
The key to the OV­Fiets success lies in, among other things:
• The integration with the public transport system is good.
• Easy to rent – people can rent the bike with his/her “OV­chipcard” (Travel Card) by
simply holding it to the bike’s sensor.
• Affordable prices and bike accessible from the bike parking at almost all train sta­
tions in the Netherlands.
• Stable bikes that do not break and are pleasant to ride.
• Automated rental, where users can pick up and return the bike.
While bike rental schemes and parking infrastructure are crucial for successful bike­train
systems in the Netherlands, challenges remain in meeting demand and managing logistics
efficiently.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
41
==PAGE:52==
42
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:53==
5
Discussion
5.1
Bicycles in Cost­Benefit Analysis
By understanding the evolution of CBA unit prices regarding bicycles and the distinction
between electric and regular bicycles, it is apparent that bicycles in CBA have come a long
way. Compared to some other countries, Denmark is ahead when it comes to defining unit
prices for bicycles in CBA. Leading this change proves the willingness of Denmark’s gov­
ernment and society to be the leading country when it comes to bicycles. Other countries
could use Denmark’s unit prices as a reference for their prices and share if they discover
anything new.
With the introduction of bicycles to TERESA in 2013, a more systematic and accurate
way to calculate their value in CBA was established. Although updates have been made
to make the unit prices and methodology more accurate, bicycles have a minimal effect on
the entire CBA framework compared to other transport modes, as seen in the cost­benefit
analysis of Lynetteholm for the M5 project [29]. Their weight in an overall analysis is
minimal, even though cycling improves health and reduces emissions compared to motor­
ized transport. If bicycles are to play more of a key role in the transport infrastructure in
the future, more focus and weight need to be put on them in future CBAs.
In the making of this study, Metroselskabet did not give access to the CBA calculations for
previous and ongoing metro projects, such as the M5. Not having access to the calculations
limited the depth and possibilities for this study to explore and comment on how the unit
prices are used in calculations, especially concerning bicycles in metro projects.
The study focuses on the TERESA model since it gives the unit prices used in the CBA
project by the Danish Ministry of Transport. Other models exist, such as the CBA­DK.
However, TERESA is believed to be the most relevant to this study. Furthermore, the
variables examined in the TERESA model are all connected to bicycles in some way; it is
therefore believed that all relevant variables were examined.
Table 4.3 shows a noticeable difference between Britain and the other countries in the
”Bicycle Accident Costs” average. There is more than a 2500­kroner difference between
them. However, Britain has the highest ”travel time” price of the three countries. This
suggests that the Britons value their time more than Sweden and Denmark. The difference
between accident costs and travel time prices shows Britain’s priorities. Another key take
from Table 4.3 is that Denmark is the only one of these three countries that distinguishes
electric bicycles from regular bicycles. This not only suggests that electric bicycles are
becoming so common that there is a need to have them in CBA but also that Denmark
wants to ensure that their unique characteristics, such as battery production and electrical
consumption, show their actual impacts on the CBA.
Changes in health valuation in recent years have made cycling infrastructure projects much
more profitable, justifying an increased emphasis on such projects promoting more sig­
nificant bicycle usage. The calculated benefit of regular cycling, using unit prices in
TERESA­6.1, ranges from 5­7 DKK per kilometre depending on average travel speed.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
43
==PAGE:54==
This is estimated to result in approximately 500­650 million DKK in annual benefits for
100,000 cyclists who bike 4 kilometres every working day throughout the year. Invest­
ment in cycling projects is an investment in community development. It is often worth­
while since investments in cycling can lead to substantial public savings through reduced
healthcare costs, lower pollution levels, and improved productivity. This was demon­
strated, among other things, in a Cost­Benefit Analysis case study on cycle superhighways
[24].
5.2
Interviews
The interviews resulted in several findings, from challenges regarding modelling how
traffic will react to a new metro to results of previous metro projects regarding bicycles.
According to Daniel and Mette, Metroselskabet has used the OTM since planning the first
metro line (M1). Although the OTM has received numerous updates, as mentioned by
Daniel, it has its limitations. It can forecast shifts in transport modes, simulate passenger
movements, and calculate transportation behaviour changes by comparing a scenario with
and without a new metro line. However, it cannot model combined trips, such as a person
who uses the metro and bicycle to get to their destination. Not having that capability does
not give the best predictions since a person’s trip can be made using different types of
transportation.
The Compass model, used by and owned by the municipality, is more advanced as it
considers multimodal journeys. It can give information about the average distance for
bike trips that connect to the metro and how cycling infrastructure, such as bicycle parking,
influences cyclists. Another key difference is the time it takes to run a simulation. Since
the Compass model goes into much more detail than the OTM, it takes much longer to
run a simulation. The OTM can take two to four days compared to the Compass, which
can take much longer. Metroselskabet gets results from the municipality but would want
to get access to Compass or a simpler model in the future.
Tobias from the municipality mentioned that the city has not set any limitations or targets
regarding the reduction of bicycle trips after the opening of a new metro line. Although
the city wants to maintain or even increase bicycle usage, it agrees that bicycle trips de­
crease after opening a new metro line. The municipality does not, however, view it as a
negative outcome as long as at least 25% of all trips are made by bike and 25% by public
transport. Setting a target for the cycling shift to metro after opening would allow for a
better overview of changes in bicycle usage. It could help adjust project plans and policies.
5.3
Traffic Counts
The analysis in Chapter 4.3 provides a good insight into the impact of the M3/M4 metro
expansion in Copenhagen on bicycle usage. However, considerable uncertainties should
be considered when evaluating the results.
The analysis uses a large dataset from manual bicycle traffic counts collected by the
Copenhagen Municipality (CM) from 2010 to 2023. It provides a good overview of every­
day bicycle traffic trends over 13 years. However, the analysis was limited by relatively
few counting locations with data for all years. Additionally, access to automatic bicycle
44
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:55==
counting data was unavailable, which could have provided a good comparison to the man­
ual counts. This limitation restricted the scope of the analysis. Basing the bicycle AWT
on manual counts for individual days can be unreliable, as environmental factors such as
weather can affect data accuracy.
A conversation with CM revealed that they used 2010 results from automatic counting
stations to determine a coefficient for multiplying the results of twelve­hour manual counts
to obtain ADT and AWT traffic figures. They examined how large a part of a twelve­hour
weekday count was of an average day for the entire year and weekdays. They still use this
ratio in their calculations.
By focusing the analysis on the northwestern profile of Søsnittet, where most annual
counts occur, it was possible to limit the analysis to a well­defined area intersected by
metro M3/M4 lines. Results for northwestern Søsnittet cannot be generalized to the entire
city but provide indications of changes in bicycle usage within this specific profile.
Additionally, this analysis of bicycle usage can be considered comparable to a 2006 study
[8] that assessed likely changes in bicycle usage in specific profiles, i.e. in the southeastern
part of Snøsnittet and a profile at Frederiksberg with the introduction of M1/M2. However,
that study had access to much more detailed data.
The analysis uses a best­fit line equation for 2010­2019 to estimate traffic volumes for
2020­2023, aiming to isolate the effects of COVID­19 and the introduction of metro
M3/M4. COVID­19 impacted transportation primarily in 2020­2021, but isolating all its
effects and assessing their duration is difficult, which may affect the model’s accuracy.
The trendline used to estimate traffic volume has a coefficient of determination (R2) just
below 0,5, indicating medium accuracy. Thus, it helps estimate trends from 2020­2023 but
is not necessarily precise. It suggests that other variables influencing bicycle user numbers
are not included in the model, with weather conditions being deemed most likely.
The analysis shows that weather conditions can significantly impact the number of cyclists
and, thus, the reliability of manual counts. To assess the impact of weather on cycling use,
weather data from Copenhagen Airport were used to correct for variations in traffic figures.
Temperature data on weekdays showed a strong correlation with the number of cyclists,
with an R2 coefficient value of 0,97, indicating a strong relationship between these factors
and improving the accuracy of the study. However, the values only covered four years.
Weather effects may be overestimated when almost all weekdays in one month are good
weather days, as in September 2023; thus, assuming a linear relationship throughout the
entire month may not be accurate. Therefore, an adjustment was made to reduce the num­
ber of good weather days for that month. Other weather factors not covered by this study,
such as precipitation and wind, likely also affect bicycle usage and would be interesting
to explore further.
The study performed a Pearson correlation analysis to measure linear relationships be­
tween different counting locations before COVID­19 and the introduction of M3/M4,
which is important for identifying relationships and consistency. The analysis generally
showed a good correlation between counting sites despite occasional deviations likely due
to varying weather conditions on count days.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
45
==PAGE:56==
Pearson correlation analysis for counting locations after opening M3/M4 is not consid­
ered significant due to COVID­19 impacts and insufficient data points (years) for reliable
analysis. Therefore, this limits the assessment of correlations between sites post­M3/M4
opening.
Based on the comparison of bicycle traffic AWT with Danish GDP, it is estimated that
with increased economic growth from 2021, some post­COVID­19 traffic likely shifted
to other modes of transport than cycling, probably to the metro as M3/M4 had been added
to the public transportation system.
This traffic count study provides insight into the impact of introducing the M3/M4 metro
lines on bicycle use in Copenhagen. The study concludes that in the northwestern part of
Søsnitt, there was about 6% less bicycle traffic (AWT) in 2022 and 11% less in 2023 than
expected based on the development in previous years. It indicates a measurable reduction
in bicycle use due to the new metro lines.
A 2006 study on the impact of M1/M2 on traffic indicated that up to 4% and 9% of cy­
clists had shifted to the metro in 2003 and 2004, respectively. Metro lines (M1/M2) go
through Søsnittet at one location, whereas this study involves metro lines of M3/M4 pass­
ing through Søsnittet at two locations. Therefore, it is concluded that the introduction of
M3/M4 had a more significant impact on bicycle traffic through Søsnittet than M1/M2 did
at its time.
This study shows about a 2% greater decrease in cyclist numbers than the 2006 study,
which is considered a logical outcome, considering previously mentioned assumptions
[8].
5.4
Integration of Bicycle and Metro
Integrating bicycles with the Copenhagen metro system is essential to the city’s sustainable
transport strategy. The goal is to create an effective system where public transportation
and cycling mutually reinforce each other—even with Copenhagen’s strong cycling cul­
ture, integrating bicycles with new metro lines such as the metro M5 poses challenges,
including ensuring that cycling is an adaptive alternative for users for first—and last­mile
connections. Despite its cycling culture, Copenhagen faces difficulties in integrating bikes
with the metro. One of the key issues is providing secure and conveniently located bike
parking at stations to encourage combined trips. The current underground parking facili­
ties are underused due to poor design, and bike clutter contributes to traffic flow issues.
The Netherlands demonstrates a higher cycling rate to train stations than Denmark. This
is attributed to factors such as accessible and secure parking, and the successful OV­Fiets
program. This program makes bike rental easy and affordable for train users. However,
the Dutch experience also highlights challenges in managing parking efficiently, especially
with the issue of ’second bikes’ taking up much of the parking spaces.
The Dutch have made significant financial investments in bike parking and manage it
through methods like monitored parking with a free period and a small fee after 24 hours.
However, having bicycle infrastructure is not enough. Seamless integration, user­friendly
bike­parking, and efficient resource management are crucial for enhancing both cycling
and metro ridership.
46
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:57==
The Dutch example shows that a comprehensive approach, including rental programs and
parking management, is necessary for effective integration. However, policy questions
related to cost and parking equity remain to be resolve.
The Copenhagen municipality can focus on several key areas to increase the integration of
bicycles and the metro. Bicycle accessibility needs to be prioritized and ensured to be as
convenient as pedestrian accessibility. Moreover, this includes increasing secure spaces
for all types of bicycles, including electric and cargo bikes, and ensuring these facilities
are well­lit, clearly marked, and easily accessible, including underground options. Service
facilities such as air pumps, charging stations, and repair tools must be available [31] [34].
Clear bicycling parking areas and guidance are essential for managing bike parking around
station entrances and preventing obstructions. Increased enforcement and resources to
remove illegally parked bikes can also help [31]. At the same time, it is vital to consider
how enforcement may affect cycling [35] [34]. Improving wayfinding with signage for
bike parking and providing capacity information is essential.
Exploring capacity solutions like underground bike parking can reduce surface congestion,
especially at major transfer stations [31]. Processes for regular evaluation and resources
to adjust designs based on usage patterns will also improve the system over time. New
travel behaviour surveys, including the M3/M4 lines, must also be conducted to have the
latest information when updating relevant design guidelines. Finally, continued collabo­
ration between the municipality and Metroselskabet, along with cooperation at different
administrative levels, is essential to achieving set goals [34].
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
47
==PAGE:58==
48
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion
This study explored how the new metro system impacts bicycles, focusing on Copen­
hagen. It used data analysis, interviews and relevant literature. Danish unit prices and
bicycle counting in Copenhagen were researched. Some key findings were made, and
recommendations were given to improve bicycle and metro integration in Copenhagen.
When a new metro line opens, some cyclists change their travel habits and switch to the
metro, as a new metro significantly improves the public transportation system.
Findings showed a decrease in bicycle traffic of 6% in 2022 and 11% in 2023 after the M3
and M4 lines opened; these findings are based on relatively inaccurate data, as automated
counts were not available, but still indicate the impact. Similar results were found in a
study conducted after the M1 and M2 lines had opened, up to 4 and 9% for two consecutive
years after opening.
The study assesses and gives an overview of Danish unit prices used in bicycle­related
CBAs and expresses the position that bicycles are not still evaluated enough in projects.
The TERESA model gives detailed bicycle unit prices based on a unit price bank. It is
regularly updated, and it is possible to view past and estimated future prices. The study
compared unit prices from Sweden and Britain, where sufficient information was available
and comparability was possible. The analysis showed the minimal effect of bicycles on
the entire CBA framework compared to other transport modes. It can, for example, be
seen from the documents for metro M3 and M4 expansion.
The study estimates that if 100,000 bicycle users cycle 4 km per working day in a year,
society will benefit approximately 500 million DKK annually. Increased emphasis and
understanding of health benefits and CO2 requirements make cycling projects much more
profitable than they were a few years ago. Therefore, focusing more on various measures
and projects that stimulate cycling is reasonable.
The results of the interviews gave insight into key stakeholders related to the metro. Met­
roselskabet uses the OTM model to predict transportation behaviour. However, the model
has limitations, such as the inability to simulate multimodal journeys or similar complex
simulations. Therefore, it cannot simulate combined journeys by bicycle and metro. The
Municipality of Copenhagen, another key stakeholder, has no specific targets or counter­
measures to minimise the reduced cycling caused by the new metro lines or to increase
the weight of combined trips to metro stations. However, the municipality runs and owns
the Compass model, which is more advanced than OTM. The Compass can simulate mul­
timodal journeys and gives vital insight into how cycling and metro can work better to­
gether, which is one of the key elements to achieve better integration of cycling and metro.
Despite its strong cycling culture, Copenhagen faces challenges integrating bikes with the
metro system. One of the main issues is ensuring secure and conveniently located bike
parking at stations to promote combined trips. The existing underground parking facilities
are underutilised due to poor design and bike clutter disrupts traffic flow. This needs to
be researched and implemented in more detail in collaboration with the municipality and
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
49
==PAGE:60==
Metro, emphasising the largest stations first. In addition, this must be given more attention
in the upcoming metro line M5. The Copenhagen municipality aims to make 50% of all
trips to and from work or school by bicycle. However, this ambitious goal still needs to
be achieved, with about 5% remaining. To achieve better synergy between cycling and
the metro, it is recommended that the municipality sets goals for cycling habits based on
traffic models, surveys and action plans, for example, before the opening of the new M5.
These guidelines would increase the likelihood of achieving better results and facilitate
adjustments if initial plans fail.
It is recommended that further study be done on how new metro lines affect bicycle usage
in the future, using more detailed data, such as automatic counting systems. As years pass
since the opening of metro lines M3 and M4, a more precise overview of the effects of the
openings of lines on bicycle usage will be possible. Cooperative research on the subject
with the municipality and Metroselskabet would be beneficial since those stakeholders
can access most of the data needed.
50
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Martin Emanuel. ”Making a bicycle city: Infrastructure and cycling in Copenhagen since
1880”. Cambridge University Press. Nov. 2018. DOI: 10.1017/S0963926818000573.
[2]
Teknik­ og Miljøforvaltningen. ”Mobilitetsredegørelse 2024”. Københavns Kommune. June
2024.
[3]
Dong Lin et al. ”Metro systems: Construction, operation and impacts”. TU Delft. Jan. 2024.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tust.2023.105373.
[4]
Benjamin Love. ”Copenhagen Metro History and Design”. Feb. 2023. URL: https://www.
railize.nz/blog-post/copenhagen-metro-history-and-design.
[5]
Jonathan De Vriendt. “Copenhagen’s new M4 metro extension celebrated by the King of
Denmark”. In: EU Urban Mobility Observatory (July 2024). URL: https://urban-mobility-
observatory.transport.ec.europa.eu/news-events/news/copenhagens-new-m4-metro-
extension-celebrated-king-denmark-2024-07-11_en.
[6]
COWI­ARUP JV and Rambøll. ”Miljøkonsekvens­rapport for M5”. Metroselskabet I/S.
May 2024.
[7]
Pavla Kopecká and Jelenko Švetak. ”The Integrated Public Transport System”. POMORSTVO.
May 2013.
[8]
Jane Ildensborg­Hansen and Goran Vuk. ”Transport Impacts of the Copenhagen Metro”.
TetraPlan A/S and Danish Transport Research Institute. 2006.
[9]
Goran Vuk. ”Transport impacts of the Copenhagen Metro”. Danish Transport Research
Institute. Sept. 2005. DOI: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2004.10.005.
[10]
Martin Walthers Schmidt and Thorbjørn Egelund Jørgensen. ”Sustainable Mobility in Copen­
hagen”. Aalborg University. June 2016. URL: https://projekter.aau.dk/projekter/files/
239461822/Report_Sustainable_Mobility_in_Copenhagen.pdf.
[11]
Metroselskabet. ”Teknisk udredningsrapport om en forlaengelse af M4 til Ydre Nordhavn”.
Metroselskabet. 2023.
[12]
Fiona Rajé and Andrew Saffrey. ”The Value of Cycling”. University of Birmingham and
Phil Jones Associates.
[13]
Eva Heinen and Ralph Buehler. ”Bicycle parking: a systematic review of scientific litera­
ture on parking behaviour, parking preferences, and their influence on cycling and travel
behaviour”. University of Leeds. Sept. 2019. DOI: 10.1080/01441647.2019.1590477.
[14]
Claus Bjørn Galbo­Jørgensen and Thomas Odgaard. ”TERESA 3.0”. Ministry of Transport.
Nov. 2013.
[15]
Patrick Friis Espensen and Thomas Odgaard. ”TERESA 6.0”. Ministry of Transport. Oct.
2021.
[16]
COWI. ”Samfundsøkonomiske analyser af cykeltiltag­metode og cases Rapport”. Køben­
havns Kommune. Jan. 2009.
[17]
COWI. ”Transportøkonomiske Enhedspriser for Cycling 2”. Ministry of Transport. Sept.
2020.
[18]
Helene Bratt Wettergren and Thomas Broberg. ”Analysmetod och samhällsekonomiska kalkylvär­
den för transportsektorn”. Trafikverket. Apr. 2024.
[19]
Yiling Deng and Pengjun Zhao. “The impact of new metro on travel behaviour: Panel anal­
ysis using mobile phone data”. In: Elsevier Ltd 162 (Aug. 2022). Elsevier Ltd, pp. 46–57.
ISSN: 09658564. DOI: 10.1016/j.tra.2022.05.013.
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
51
==PAGE:62==
[20]
Åse Boss Henrichsen. ”Trafikken i København. Trafiktal 2010­2014”. Københavns Kom­
mune. Teknik og Miljøforvaltningen. 2017.
[21]
Åse Boss Henrichsen and Marie Louise Brandt. ”Trafiktal og andre faerdselsundersøgelser.
2005­2009”. Københavns Kommune. Teknik og Miljøforvaltningen. 2010.
[22]
Thomas Odgaard (Incentive) Christoffer Larsen and Henrik Paag (MOE|Tetraplan) Kristian
Kolstrup. ”Ex post socio­economic analysis of the existing metro (M1/M2)”. Metroselskabet
and Ministry of Transport and Housing. Dec. 2019.
[23]
DTU Management. ”TERESA og Transportøkonomiske Enhedspriser”. DTU Management.
URL: https://www.man.dtu.dk/myndighedsbetjening/teresa-og-transportoekonomiske-
enhedspriser.
[24]
Jeppe Rich et al. “Cost­benefit of bicycle infrastructure with e­bikes and cycle superhigh­
ways”. In: Elsevier Ltd 9 (2 June 2021), pp. 608–615. ISSN: 22136258. DOI: 10.1016/j.
cstp.2021.02.015.
[25]
Javier Caletrío. “The combined use of bicycles and trains in the Netherlands: a promising
mode of transport in a suitable environment”. In: Mobile Lives Forum Vies Mobiles (2024).
URL: https://forumviesmobiles.org/en/project/16047/combined-use-bicycles-and-
trains-netherlands-promising-mode-transport-suitable-environment.
[26]
Marjolein Boele­Vos. ”European Road Safety Observatory Road Safety Thematic Report­
Cyclists”. Road Safety Research. June 2022.
[27]
Danish Ministry of Climate. ”Climate Programme 2020 Denmark”. Danish Ministry of
Climate, Energy and Utilities. Dec. 2020.
[28]
NUMBEO. ”Northern Europe: Cost of Living Index by Country 2024”. 2024. URL: https:
//www.numbeo.com/cost-of-living/rankings_by_country.jsp?title=2024&region=154.
[29]
COWI. ”Samfundsøkonomisk analyse af metrobetjening af Lynetteholm­MKV­beregninger”.
Metroselskabet. Nov. 2024.
[30]
Økonomiforvaltningen. ”Metro til Sydhavnen”. Københavns Kommune. Aug. 2015. URL:
https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/agenda/a4a8251c-bf9e-4920-8fba-61391157d364/
cedfbe72-e7f1-4893-8f27-1b3cd8a25e73-bilag-4_0.pdf.
[31]
Leon Legeland et al. ”Cykelparkering ved fremtidige metrostationer­principper og anbe­
falinger”. For Teknik­ og Miljøforvaltningen, Københavns Kommune. Oct. 2022.
[32]
Ramboll. ”Pendleres kombinationsrejser Cykel og kollektiv transport”. Det Nationale Vi­
denscenter for Cykelfremme. Aug. 2024.
[33]
Ramboll. ”Kombinationsrejser Erfaringsopsamling fra Nederlandene, Belgien og Sverige”.
Det Nationale Videnscenter for Cykelfremme. 2024.
[34]
Oskar Jager, Cecilie Breinholm, and Christensen Lill Bjerregaard. “Cykel og metro – po­
tentialet for den gode kombinationsrejse”. In: CYKELTRAFIK (Apr. 2023).
[35]
Daniel Veryard and Stephen Perkins. ”Integrating Urban Public Transport Systems and
Cycling Summary and Conclusions of the ITF Roundtable on Integrated and Sustainable
Urban Transport”. OECD/ITF. 2018.
52
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.I
Central Copenhagen (Inner City) Data
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
53
==PAGE:64==
Appendix 1
Central Copenhagen (Inner City) - Bicycles, Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) as sum of both directions 2010 - 2023
Year
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Number
Street name
Søsnittet - Northwest side
5
Dronning Louises Bro
36.200
40.300
36.200
41.800
42.800
42.800
48.400
32.900
41.900
42.600
38.700
42.600
37.000
41.600
6
Kampmannsgade
7.300
7.700
8.300
10.100
9.900
8.900
10.800
10.100
11.700
10.000
9.400
10.400
10.700
11.100
19
Gyldenl/vesgade
27.300
28.600
27.100
31.100
32.000
32.500
30.400
34.300
30.500
33.700
28.700
29.700
32.900
25
Kalvebod Brygge
3.100
3.500
3.600
3.500
3.000
3.300
4.500
3.300
3.500
4.100
5.700
5.000
6.400
8.100
42
STRANDBOULEVARDEN
3.600
3.500
2.900
4.300
3.500
3.600
4.000
3.700
3.800
3.400
3.700
3.100
2.800
3.600
57
 ØSTBANEGADE (ensrettet)
700
1.200
1.000
1.900
1.500
1.800
2.700
2.200
2.700
2.900
2.600
1.900
2.700
3.200
59
 ØSTERBROGADE
18.000
22.400
24.900
25.200
21.300
25.300
22.000
22.800
19.400
24.900
25.400
69
Fredensbro
14.400
21.300
20.200
20.300
21.800
22.700
20.900
21.800
19.500
22.900
22.200
21.300
21.100
72
Ingerslevsgade
3.300
3.900
3.800
4.300
4.500
4.900
5.500
3.700
5.400
5.100
3.000
4.700
4.400
4.900
122
Gammel Kongevej
14.600
17.500
16.100
18.700
16.100
17.500
18.800
17.600
17.800
18.100
18.900
17.300
18.300
18.700
602
Istedgade
6.400
7.100
6.800
5.500
7.100
7.400
7.500
7.300
6.800
7.100
6.500
6.300
6.100
603
Vesterbrogade
13.000
13.700
14.300
15.800
14.000
15.900
16.300
11.200
15.300
15.300
15.300
15.100
16.300
16.400
717
KALKBRÆNDERIHAVNSGADE
3.500
5.500
4.000
6.100
5.500
5.800
5.200
6.000
7.900
6.400
5.300
6.500
7.400
7.900
Søsnittet - Southeast side
26
Knippelsbro
35.600
37.000
40.800
44.600
41.700
43.600
38.600
32.200
34.100
26.200
26.300
24.700
26.200
25.900
29
Langebro
30.200
30.700
30.300
33.600
34.200
40.400
33.700
39.800
22.400
29.200
27.000
23.700
29.800
129
BRYGGEBROEN
9.000
11.700
11.200
14.500
16.900
23.800
20.200
24.300
22.100
25.400
22.000
23.300
23.300
9871
Inderhavnsbroen
17.300
15.300
18.700
14.800
15.600
15.200
18.300
21.600
10166
Lille Langebro
10.800
17.500
17.300
18.300
19.800
Innside Søsnittet (Inner City)
1
H.C. Andersens Boulevard
21.400
15.600
18.900
23.300
24.900
22.600
26.400
19.100
3
Bredgade
6.700
7.500
7.100
7.300
5.200
5.800
7.600
6.400
6.100
6.900
9.200
4
Christian d. IV's Bro
2.600
2.100
4.000
3.700
2.700
2.900
5.500
8.600
8.400
11.900
9
Farvergade
2.900
0
0
0
0
3.300
2.900
11
Frederiksborggade, hus nr. 10
0
700
700
0
0
1.300
12
Frederiksborggade, hus nr. 50
0
20.500
18.600
20.300
19.900
20.700
20.800
21.000
19.900
21.500
17
Gothersgade
8.100
8.200
10.400
13.400
15.200
13.400
14.900
14.900
27
Kristen Bernikows Gade
8.300
9.000
8.300
15.100
0
18.100
19.200
16.100
17.400
33
N,rregade
12.700
11.700
13.100
12.400
0
11.100
12.900
12.700
34
N,rre Voldgade
10.400
8.100
9.600
10.500
0
10.600
9.600
11.600
41
St. Kongensgade
8.800
7.600
8.200
9.600
5.700
8.400
9.700
7.700
7.300
8.100
11.100
44
Sølvgade
6.700
7.500
8.200
7.500
8.400
8.400
8.500
7.100
52
Vesterbrogade
10.000
8.900
0
10.700
11.200
11.600
10.000
12.000
11.900
53
Vester Farimagsgade
6.700
6.800
0
7.900
7.400
7.000
8.300
60
ØSTER SØGADE
10.200
0
9.200
12.700
11.900
11.500
64
Amaliegade
0
0
0
0
3.900
3.900
65
Dag Hammerskjelds All.
0
0
0
0
14.400
76
Kronprinsessegade
5.400
0
0
0
0
5.200
8.800
83
Stlvgade
0
0
0
0
9.800
10.700
84
S,lvgade
13.800
0
0
0
0
16.100
14.600
90
 ØSTER FARIMAGSGADE
12.000
0
0
14.800
14.000
13.200
91
 ØSTER VOLDGADE
8.300
0
0
0
0
8.800
8.900
113
Frederiksberggade
0
400
0
0
0
400
127
Gothersgade
7.100
0
0
7.400
0
15.100
14.000
136
Holmens kanal
13.700
0
0
0
0
13.000
11.800
8.800
10.500
157
Nyhavnsbroen
0
0
0
0
3.700
5.400
170
Ntrre Skgade
0
11.800
0
17.600
15.800
13.400
0
13.700
12.900
12.400
191
Stormgade
8.900
9.000
0
0
0
10.300
10.700
8.800
8.500
9.900
202
Tietgensbro
0
0
0
11.500
0
10.600
10.300
8.100
9.500
217
Vestergade
0
0
0
4.600
0
7.400
9.500
218
Vester Voldgade
4.600
0
0
0
0
7.200
270
Gothersgade
0
0
0
22.300
0
23.100
276
Hammerichsgade
0
0
0
6.900
0
8.100
7.800
300
L,ngangsstrsde
1.200
0
0
0
0
1.500
2.000
332
Studiestrkde
5.100
0
0
0
0
3.700
2.900
377
Fiolstr/de
0
2.100
2.500
0
0
1.200
491
Webersgade
4.500
6.000
6.200
6.700
5.600
6.600
8.100
6.800
525
H,jbro
3.800
0
0
0
0
5.700
4.500
3.500
3.400
3.400
4.500
542
Landem/rket
3.100
0
0
0
0
4.100
3.600
576
Kronprinsessegade
0
0
0
0
3.700
3.200
3.500
577
N,rre Farimagsgade
0
0
0
9.800
0
10.000
10.000
601
Halmtorvet
600
624
Gr5nningen
0
0
0
0
7.000
625
St. Kongens Gade
0
0
0
0
6.200
631
Ntrre Voldgade
0
0
0
0
0
8.300
12.500
650
Hovedvagtsgade
800
0
0
0
0
500
500
652
Grtnnegade
3.500
0
0
0
0
2.400
653
Store Regnegade
1.700
0
0
0
0
1.800
697
Bernstorffgade
0
0
0
1.800
0
2.900
4.600
702
Sankt Annk Plads
0
0
0
0
1.300
2.500
724
Gyldenlkvesgade
24.900
0
0
0
0
25.500
726
Bernstorffgade
0
0
0
6.200
0
5.700
731
 ØSTER VOLDGADE
4.800
0
0
0
0
7.300
804
Gasv
8.000
9.200
805
Gasv:rksvej
7.500
9.300
806
Vestergade
7.500
844
Sttorvet
5.100
4.300
4.800
883
H.C. Andersens Boulevard
30.900
36.000
22.600
24.600
26.000
26.300
25.700
31.100
10200
Slotsholmsgade
1.800
2.600
54
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:65==
A.II
Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) ­ Northwest Side Data
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
55
==PAGE:66==
Appendix 2
SØSNITTET, Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) as sum of both directions 2010 - 2023
Counting place
Number
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
DRONNING LOUISES BRO
5
36.200
40.300
36.200
41.800
42.800
42.800
48.400
32.900
41.900
42.600
38.700
42.600
37.000
41.600
KAMPMANNSGADE
6
7.300
7.700
8.300
10.100
9.900
8.900
10.800
10.100
11.700
10.000
9.400
10.400
10.700
11.100
GYLDENLØVESGADE
19
27.300
28.600
27.100
31.100
32.000
32.000
32.500
30.400
34.300
30.500
33.700
28.700
29.700
32.900
KALVEBOD BRYGGE
25
3.100
3.500
3.600
3.500
3.000
3.300
4.500
3.300
3.500
4.100
5.700
5.000
6.400
8.100
INGERSLEVSGADE
72
3.300
3.900
3.800
4.300
4.500
4.900
5.500
3.700
5.400
5.100
4.200
4.700
4.400
4.900
GAMMEL KONGEVEJ
122
14.600
17.500
16.100
18.700
16.100
17.500
18.800
17.600
17.800
18.100
18.900
17.300
18.300
18.700
ISTEDGADE
602
6.400
7.100
6.800
7.000
5.500
7.100
7.400
7.500
7.300
6.800
7.100
6.500
6.300
6.100
VESTERBROGADE
603
13.000
13.700
14.300
15.800
14.000
15.900
16.300
14.000
15.300
15.300
15.300
15.100
16.300
16.400
STRANDBOULEVARDEN
42
3.600
3.500
2.900
4.300
3.500
3.600
4.000
3.700
3.800
3.400
3.700
3.100
2.800
3.600
ØSTBANEGADE (ensrettet)
57
700
1.200
1.000
1.900
1.500
1.800
2.700
2.200
2.700
2.900
2.600
1.900
2.700
3.200
ØSTERBROGADE
59
18.000
22.400
22.000
24.900
25.200
21.300
23.000
22.000
25.300
22.000
22.800
19.400
24.900
25.400
FREDENSBRO
69
14.400
21.300
20.000
20.200
20.300
21.800
22.700
20.900
21.800
19.500
22.900
22.200
21.300
21.100
KALKBRÆNDERIHAVNSGADE
717
3.500
5.500
4.000
6.100
5.500
5.800
5.200
6.000
7.900
6.400
5.300
6.500
7.400
7.900
Total Northwest side section
151.400
176.200
166.100
189.700
183.800
186.700
201.800
174.300
198.700
186.700
190.300
183.400
188.200
201.000
Southeast side
KNIPPELSBRO
26
35.600
37.000
40.800
44.600
41.700
43.600
38.600
32.200
34.100
26.200
26.300
24.700
26.200
25.900
LANGEBRO
29
30.200
30.700
30.300
32.000
33.600
34.200
40.400
33.700
39.800
22.400
29.200
27.000
23.700
29.800
BRYGGEBROEN
129
9.000
11.700
11.200
12.900
14.500
16.900
23.800
20.200
24.300
22.100
25.400
22.000
23.300
23.300
Inderhavnsbroen
9871
17.300
15.300
18.700
14.800
15.600
15.200
18.300
21.600
Lille Langebro
10166
10.800
17.500
17.300
18.300
19.800
Total Southeast side section
74.800
79.400
82.300
89.500
89.800
94.700
120.100
101.400
116.900
96.300
114.000
106.200
109.800
120.400
Total Søsnittet
226.200
255.600
248.400
279.200
273.600
281.400
321.900
275.700
315.600
283.000
304.300
289.600
298.000
321.400
Note:  Differences in adjacent counts and ratios between years at other counting locations were used to estimate these values.
Covid - 19
Note:  Where fields are blue, no traffic count was done that year at that location. Where fields are green, count numbers were adjusted (increased) due to construction work on the street on count 
day. 
56
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:67==
A.III
Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) ­ Northwest Side Data, with
weather correction
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
57
==PAGE:68==
Appendix 3
SØSNITTET, Average Weekday Traffic (AWT) as sum of both directions 2010 - 2023, with weather correction
Counting place
Number
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
DRONNING LOUISES BRO
5
36.200
40.300
36.200
41.800
42.800
42.800
48.400
32.900
41.900
42.600
38.700
42.600
37.000
41.600
KAMPMANNSGADE
6
7.300
7.700
8.300
10.100
9.900
8.900
10.800
10.100
11.700
10.000
9.400
10.400
10.700
11.100
GYLDENLØVESGADE
19
27.300
28.600
27.100
31.100
32.000
32.000
32.500
30.400
34.300
30.500
33.700
28.700
29.700
32.900
KALVEBOD BRYGGE
25
3.100
3.500
3.600
3.500
3.000
3.300
4.500
3.300
3.500
4.100
5.700
5.000
6.400
8.100
INGERSLEVSGADE
72
3.300
3.900
3.800
4.300
4.500
4.900
5.500
3.700
5.400
5.100
4.200
4.700
4.400
4.900
GAMMEL KONGEVEJ
122
14.600
17.500
16.100
18.700
16.100
17.500
18.800
17.600
17.800
18.100
18.900
17.300
18.300
18.700
ISTEDGADE
602
6.400
7.100
6.800
7.000
5.500
7.100
7.400
7.500
7.300
6.800
7.100
6.500
6.300
6.100
VESTERBROGADE
603
13.000
13.700
14.300
15.800
14.000
15.900
16.300
14.000
15.300
15.300
15.300
15.100
16.300
16.400
STRANDBOULEVARDEN
42
3.600
3.500
2.900
4.300
3.500
3.600
4.000
3.700
3.800
3.400
3.700
3.100
2.800
3.600
ØSTBANEGADE (ensrettet)
57
700
1.200
1.000
1.900
1.500
1.800
2.700
2.200
2.700
2.900
2.600
1.900
2.700
3.200
ØSTERBROGADE
59
18.000
22.400
22.000
24.900
25.200
21.300
23.000
22.000
25.300
22.000
22.800
19.400
24.900
25.400
FREDENSBRO
69
14.400
21.300
20.000
20.200
20.300
21.800
22.700
20.900
21.800
19.500
22.900
22.200
21.300
21.100
KALKBRÆNDERIHAVNSGADE
717
3.500
5.500
4.000
6.100
5.500
5.800
5.200
6.000
7.900
6.400
5.300
6.500
7.400
7.900
Total Northwest side section
151.400
176.200
166.100
189.700
183.800
186.700
201.800
174.300
198.700
186.700
190.300
183.400
188.200
201.000
Sum AWT, Søsnittet  northwest side
151.400
176.200
166.100
189.700
183.800
186.700
201.800
174.300
198.700
186.700
190.300
183.400
188.200
201.000
Calculated value based on trendline 2010-2019
163.000
166.400
169.800
173.100
176.500
179.900
183.200
186.600
190.000
193.300
196.700
200.100
203.400
206.800
18.600
-12.300
-8.700
-6.600
7.300
2.700
-1.900
21.000
186.700
204.000
202.800
201.500
227.800
Difference between count and estimated values  without Covid and Metro
13.700
19.400
13.300
26.800
Decrease in AWT bicycle traffic
6,7%
9,6%
6,6%
11,8%
Note:  Differences in adjacent counts and ratios between years at other counting locations were used to estimate these values.
Covid - 19
Delta AWT - Weather correction, (due to 
number of working days with comfortable heat 
18-24°C)
Sum AWT, Søsnittet northwest side, based on trendline 2010-2019 + weather correction
Note:  Where fields are blue, no traffic count was done that year at that location. Where fields are green, count numbers were adjusted (increased) due to construction work on the street on count 
day. 
0
50.000
100.000
150.000
200.000
250.000
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Average Weekday Traffic (AWT)
Year
Søsnittet - northwest side.  Bicycle - Average Weekday Traffic (AWT)
AWT Count
Estimaded values based on trendline for 2010 - 2019
58
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:69==
A.IV
Weather in Copenhagen, 2016–2023
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
59
==PAGE:70==
Appendix 4:      Data from: Weather Spark.com - Taken from the website 30.11.2024 
 
 
 
Year 2016 
Year 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weather History at Copenhagen Airport - Hour 7-19
https://weatherspark.com/
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Number of working days with comfortable heat (18-24 °C) equal or more than 4 hours.
13
0
11
3
9
7
5
15
Number of days with comfortable heat (18-24 °C) equal or more than 4 hours
17
0
13
4
10
9
6
20
Number of working days with rain equal or more than 4 hours
1
5
3
7
1
5
2
3
Number of days with rain equal or more than 4 hours
2
6
3
8
2
5
2
3
Year
60
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:71==
Appendix 4:      Data from: Weather Spark.com - Taken from the website 30.11.2024 
 
 
 
Year 2018 
Year 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
61
==PAGE:72==
Appendix 4:      Data from: Weather Spark.com - Taken from the website 30.11.2024 
 
 
 
Year 2020 
Year 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:73==
Appendix 4:      Data from: Weather Spark.com - Taken from the website 30.11.2024 
 
 
 
Year 2022 
Year 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
63
==PAGE:74==
A.V
Overview of counting days, weather conditions and comments
from counting data
64
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:75==
Appendix 5
Søsnittet - Northwest side.  Overview of counting days, weather conditions and comments from counting data
2015
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
10.sep
16 grader, tørt og nogen sol
6
22.sep
14 grader, skyet med byger
19
25
17.sep
17 grader, mest skyet og enkelte byger
72
2.sep
18 grader, nogen sol
122
24.sep
16 grader, nogen sol og lidt byger
Busser omlagt mod Frederiksberg
602
2.sep
18 grader, nogen sol
603
2.sep
18 grader, nogen sol
42
15.sep
16 grader, let skyet, kl. 18 skybrud
57
15.sep
16 grader, let skyet, kl. 18 skybrud
59
15.sep
16 grader, let skyet, kl. 18 skybrud
69
8.sep
16 grader, tørt og nogen sol
717
17.sep
17 grader, mest skyet og enkelte byger
2016
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
15.sep
25 grader, tørt og solrigt
6
6.sep
21 grader, tørt og solrigt
19
21.sep
19 grader, tørt og nogen sol
25
27.sep
18 grader, tørt og skyet
72
13.sep
25 grader, tørt og solrigt
122
6.sep
21 grader, tørt og solrigt
602
6.sep
21 grader, tørt og solrigt
603
6.sep
21 grader, tørt og solrigt
42
20.sep
19 grader, tørt og nogen sol
57
22.sep
17 grader, tørt og en del sol
59
69
20.sep
19 grader, tørt og nogen sol
717
22.sep
17 grader, tørt og en del sol
2017
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
14.sep
14 grader, først skyet, lidt sol så kraftig regn efter kl. 16
6
26.sep
17 grader, nogen sol og enkelte byger
19
21.sep
16 grader, mest skyet og lidt sol
25
7.sep
13 grader, regn
72
7.sep
16 grader, regn
122
26.sep
17 grader, nogen sol og enkelte byger
Vesterbrogade ensrettet mod øst pga. vejarbejde
602
26.sep
17 grader, nogen sol og enkelte byger
Vesterbrogade ensrettet mod øst pga. vejarbejde
603
20.sep
15 grader, mest skyet og byger
Vejarbejde, ensrettet undtagen for cykler
42
19.sep
15 grader, skyet med byger
57
6.sep
13 grader, regn
59
69
20.sep
15 grader, mest skyet og byger
717
19.sep
15 grader, skyet med byger
2018
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
13.sep
16 grader, en del sol
6
4.sep
20 grader, skyet og en del sol
19
5.sep
20 grader, først skyet så sol
25
12.sep
15 grader, mest skyet og lidt regn
72
4.sep
20 grader, skyet og en del sol
122
4.sep
20 grader, skyet og en del sol
602
4.sep
20 grader, skyet og en del sol
603
4.sep
20 grader, skyet og en del sol
42
6.sep
20 grader, tørt med nogen sol
57
6.sep
20 grader, tørt med nogen sol
59
6.sep
20 grader, tørt med nogen sol
69
6.sep
20 grader, tørt med nogen sol
717
11.sep
21 grader, tørt og solrigt
Nordhavnsvejen er åbnet
2019
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
12.sep
18 grader, tørt og lidt sol
6
4.sep
16 grader, skyet og lidt regn
19
25.sep
16 grader, overskyet
25
11.sep
17 grader, tørt med nogen sol
72
4.sep
16 grader, skyet og lidt regn
122
4.sep
16 grader, skyet og lidt regn
602
4.sep
16 grader, skyet og lidt regn
603
4.sep
16 grader, skyet og lidt regn
42
5.sep
16 grader, lidt sol og kraftige byger
57
5.sep
16 grader, lidt sol og kraftige byger
59
5.sep
16 grader, lidt sol og kraftige byger
69
5.sep
16 grader, lidt sol og kraftige byger
717
11.sep
17 grader, tørt med nogen sol
Page 1 of 2
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
65
==PAGE:76==
Søsnittet - Northwest side.  Overview of counting days, weather conditions and comments from counting data
2020
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
23.sep
20 grader, først tæt tåge, så tørt med en del sol
Corona. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
6
2.sep
19 grader, en del sol og blæst, senere overskyet og byger efter kl. 17.30
Corona. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
19
2.sep
19 grader, en del sol og blæst, senere overskyet og byger efter kl. 17.30
Corona. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
25
3.sep
19 grader, en del sol
Corona. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
72
7.okt
13, byger og lidt sol
Corona. Vejen har været lukket i månedsvis pga. vejarbejde og er kun lige 
åbnet igen. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
122
1.sep
18 grader, tørt og solrigt
Corona
602
1.sep
18 grader, tørt og solrigt
Corona. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
603
1.sep
18 grader, tørt og solrigt
Corona. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
42
2.sep
19 grader, en del sol og blæst, senere overskyet og byger efter kl. 17.30
Corona. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
57
24.sep
17 grader, først skyet, en kort overgang regn, så nogen sol
Corona. Spærret indkørsel fra Oslo Plads
59
24.sep
17 grader, først skyet, en kort overgang regn, så nogen sol
Corona. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
69
2.sep
19 grader, en del sol og blæst, senere overskyet og byger efter kl. 17.30
Corona. Metrocityringen åbnet nov. 2019
717
24.sep
17 grader, først skyet, en kort overgang regn, så nogen sol
Corona med bl.a. anbefalet hjemmearbejde
2021
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
9.sep
23 grader, tørt og solrigt
Corona
6
7.sep
19 grader, tørt med en del sol
Corona
19
28.sep
16 grader, mest tørt med nogen sol
Corona
25
16.sep
18 grader, skyet og enkelte byger
Corona
72
2.sep
21 grader, tørt og en del sol
Corona
122
7.sep
19 grader, tørt med en del sol
Corona
602
7.sep
19 grader, tørt med en del sol
Corona
603
7.sep
19 grader, tørt med en del sol
Corona
42
16.sep
18 grader, skyet og enkelte byger
Corona. Østerbrogade spærret for køretøjer mod syd pga. vejarbejde
57
23.sep
15 grader, først lidt sol, så regn og hård blæst
Corona. Østerbrogade spærret for køretøjer mod nord fra Classensgade til 
Trianglen pga. vejarbejder
59
16.sep
18 grader, skyet og enkelte byger
Corona. Ensrettet mod syd pga. vejarbejde, undtagen for cykler
69
14.sep
19 grader, skyet og mest tørt
Corona. Østerbrogade ensrettet mod syd pga. vejarbejde
717
16.sep
18 grader, skyet og enkelte byger
Corona. Østerbrogade ensrettet mod syd pga. vejarbejde
2022
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
15.sep
15 grader, overskyet med enkelte byger og lidt sol ind imellem
6
6.sep
19 grader, tørt og nogen sol
19
7.sep
19 grader, nogen sol
25
13.sep
17 grader, overskyet med lidt sol ind i mellem
72
13.sep
17 grader, overskyet med lidt sol ind i mellem
122
6.sep
19 grader, tørt og nogen sol
Vejarbejde og Vordroffsvej spærret mod nord
602
6.sep
19 grader, tørt og nogen sol
603
6.sep
19 grader, tørt og nogen sol
42
7.sep
19 grader, nogen sol
57
8.sep
20 grader, en del sol og meget blæsende
59
7.sep
19 grader, nogen sol
Nrd. Frihavnsgade er ensrettet
69
7.sep
19 grader, nogen sol
717
14.sep
15 grader, overskyet og meget blæsende med lidt sol
Flere krystogtskibe anløb havnen, derfor så mange turistbusser
2023
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
6.sep
24 grader, sol
6
5.sep
24 grader, sol
19
5.sep
24 grader, sol
25
26.sep
19 grader, tørt med nogen sol
Vejarbejde på Bernstorffsgade
72
13.sep
18 grader, overskyet med småregn
122
5.sep
24 grader, sol
Vejarbejde og Vordroffsvej spærret mod nord
602
5.sep
24 grader, sol
603
5.sep
24 grader, sol
42
7.sep
23 grader, sol
57
13.sep
18 grader, overskyet med småregn
59
7.sep
23 grader, sol
69
7.sep
23 grader, sol
717
13.sep
18 grader, overskyet med småregn
2010 - 2014
Number
Day
Weather
Comment
5
2011: Vejarbejde, fra 2012: Vejarbejde ved Nørreport Station
6
2012: Buslinje omlagt
19
25
2012: Omfattende vejarbejde på Bernstorffsgade og Tietgensgade
72
122
Fra 2013: Buslinjer nedlagt
602
2014: Vejarbejde efter Gasværksvej, venstresving midlertidig forbudt
603
42
57
2012: Spærret ved Oslo Plads
59
2013: Metroarbejde ved Øster Søgade, retning mod nord ved Fredensgade 
spærret. 2010 og 2011: Vejarbejde ved Trianglen
69
717
Page 2 of 2
66
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:77==
A.VI
Bicycle traffic (AWT) in the northwest side section of Søsnittet
compared to GDP in the period 2010 ­ 2023
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
67
==PAGE:78==
Appendix 6
Bicycle traffic (AWT) in the northwest side section of Søsnittet compared to GDP in the period 2010 - 2023
Year
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Avearge 
per year
Gross domestic product  (GDP) - 2020-prices, chained values, (bill, 
DKK,)
2.026
2.053
2.053
2.082
2.108
2.152
2.219
2.286
2.329
2.369
2.327
2.498
2.537
2.600
Increase between years in %
1,3%
0,0%
1,4%
1,3%
2,1%
3,1%
3,1%
1,9%
1,7%
-1,8%
7,4%
1,5%
2,5%
2,0%
Index 100 = year 2010
100
101
101
103
104
106
109
113
115
117
115
123
125
128
Countet bicycle traffic 2010 - 2023.
151.400
176.200
166.100
189.700
183.800
186.700
201.800
174.300
198.700
186.700
190.300
183.400
188.200
201.000
Countet bicycle traffic 2010 - 2019 with estimated traffic 2020 - 2023.
151.400
176.200
166.100
189.700
183.800
186.700
201.800
174.300
198.700
186.700
204.000
202.800
201.500
227.800
Traffic trendline 2010 - 2019.
163.000
166.400
169.800
173.100
176.500
179.900
183.200
186.600
190.000
193.300
196.700
200.100
203.400
206.800
Counted bicycle traffic 2010 - 2019.  Increase between years in %.
16,4%
-5,7%
14,2%
-3,1%
1,6%
8,1%
-13,6%
14,0%
-6,0%
2,9%
Counted bicycle traffic 2010 - 2023.  Increase between years in %.
16,4%
-5,7%
14,2%
-3,1%
1,6%
8,1%
-13,6%
14,0%
-6,0%
1,9%
-3,6%
2,6%
6,8%
2,6%
Counted bicycle traffic 2010 - 2019 with estimated traffic 2020 - 2023.  
Increase between years in %.
16,4%
-5,7%
14,2%
-3,1%
1,6%
8,1%
-13,6%
14,0%
-6,0%
9,3%
-0,6%
-0,6%
13,1%
3,6%
Counted bicycle traffic 2010 - 2023.  Index 100 = year 2010
100
116
110
125
121
123
133
115
131
123
126
121
124
133
Estimated traffic 2020 - 2023 based on trendline for 2010 - 2019. 
Index 100 = year 2010.
123
135
134
133
150
Traffic trendline 2010 - 2019.  Index 108 = year 2010.
108
110
112
114
116
118
120
122
125
127
129
131
133
135
GDP:  Statistics Denmark:  https://www.dst.dk/en
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Index (index 100 = year 2010)
Year
Bicycle traffic (AWT) in northwest side section of Søsnittet compared to GDP in the period 2010 to 2023
GDP
Counted traffic 2010 - 2023
Estimated traffic 2020 - 2023 based on trendline 2010 - 2019
Traffic trendline 2010 - 2019
68
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
==PAGE:79==
Analysis of How New Metro Systems Impact Bicycle Usage ­ Copenhagen
69
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Lautrupvang 15, 2750 Ballerup
2750 Ballerup
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
