==PAGE:1==
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heat­
waves and coastal ocean conditions
A case study of Madeira Island, Portugal
==PAGE:2==
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
A case study of Madeira Island, Portugal
January, 2025
By
Mette Nygaard Hansen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this study in whole or in part must include the customary biblio­
graphic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Faial, Madeira Island. Image source: Madeira Best, 2022.
Institutions:
DTU, Technical University of Denmark, National Institute of Aquatic Resources,
Henrik Dams Allé, Building 202, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.aqua.dtu.dk
OOM, Oceanic Observatory of Madeira (ARDITI), Madeira Tecnopolo Building,
Ground Floor, Caminho da Penteada, 9020­105 Funchal, Portugal
https:oom.arditi.pt
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This MSc thesis has been prepared over five months, from August 2024 to January 2025, at the
Oceanic Observatory of Madeira (ARDITI), Portugal, in partial fulfillment of the Master’s de­
gree in Ocean Engineering, with a specialization in Oceanography, at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU).
Mette Nygaard Hansen ­ s191245
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
28/1-2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This study explores the linkages between an atmospheric heatwave (AHW) and coastal ocean con­
ditions of Madeira Island, Portugal.
A combination of ERA5 model data, in­situ meteorological station data and oceanographic mea­
surements carried out on the southwest coast, and COAWST (Coupled Ocean­Atmosphere­Wave­
Sediment Transport) model outputs, constitutes the basis for this exploration.
An AHW persisting for three consecutive days were detected from July 24­26, 2022. During this
period, meteorological data revealed air temperatures exceeding 30°C, reduced sea/land breezes
and longshore wind velocities and increased fluctuations in humidity levels. Combined meteoro­
logical data and oceanographic APB5 CTD data, demonstrates a higher correlation between air
temperature and SST during the AHW, than after. This suggests a higher sensitivity in the SST
to air temperature changes during the AHW, and that other dominant factors, including winds and
currents, influence the SST after the AHW.
The evidence presented in this study suggests, that decreased wind velocities, enhanced shortwave
radiation due to cloudless conditions, and a reduced width of the upper ocean mixed layer, enabling
enhanced ocean surface heating, during the AHW are believed to be underlying processes driving
this higher sensitivity observed in the SST during the AHW.
ADCP data expose potential upwelling occurring after the AHW with the indication of offshore
upper current flows being replaced by onshore deeper current flows. This upwelling process could
possibly contribute to the cooler ocean surface observed after the AHW, and the associated weak
correlations between the air temperature and SST.
COAWST model outputs of SST and surface currents uncover substantial oceanic eddy dynam­
ics in the sheltered wake region of the island. Warmer water is observed to accumulate along
the southwest coast during the AHW, which aligns with the in­situ observations. It is unknown
whether these oceanic eddy dynamics contribute to the observed changes in coastal ocean condi­
tions and circulation during the AHW.
An expansion and intensification of the Azores High during winter, combined with continuously
anthropogenic warming, are believed to lead to an increased frequency, intensity and duration of
AHWs in Madeira Island in the future. Considering the evidence presented in this study, such
an increase, would possibly impact the coastal ocean conditions of Madeira Island, resulting in
stronger thermally stratified waters and higher SSTs experienced during these AHW events.
Key points
The Problem
• The frequency, intensity,
and duration of AHWs
have
increased
since
pre­industrial times (1850­
1900)
due
to
human­
induced
greenhouse
gas
emissions
• Climate change are ex­
pected to continuously in­
crease the frequency, in­
tensity,
and duration of
AHW events in the future
The Impact
Meteorological conditions
• Elevated air temperatures
• Reduced wind velocities
• Higher fluctuations in humidity levels
Coastal ocean conditions
• Increase in sea surface temperatures (SSTs)
• Intensified thermal stratification
• Reduced mixed layer depth (MLD)
• Instability in vertical salinity distribution
Coastal circulation
• Consistent, synchronous onshore and westward
flow of currents
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Mette Nygaard Hansen, MSc Ocean Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Author of this thesis.
[Caroline C. Ferreira], [Researcher], [Dom Luiz Institute and Oceanic Observatory of Madeira
(ARDITI)]
[Supervisor]
[Jesus Reis], [Research Technician], [Oceanic Observatory of Madeira (ARDITI)]
[Supervisor]
[Andre Visser], [Professor], [Technical University of Denmark]
[Supervisor]
[Colin Stedmon], [Professor], [Technical University of Denmark]
[Supervisor]
Thank you to all my four supervisors for supporting this work and study, and for making it possible
to carry out this work as a collaboration between the Oceanic Observatory of Madeira (ARDITI)
and the Technical University of Denmark.
Thank you to Caroline and Jesus for your immensely support and encouragement through the
whole process. Your enthusiasm, insights and professional proficiency are extraordinary. The
learning environment you have created have made it possible for me to learn so much in a short
amount of time. Your sincerity is truly appreciated.
Thank you to Andy and Colin for being the anchor of the study, to encourage me and provid­
ing invaluable moral support on a steep learning curve. Thank you for keeping me on track with
the bigger picture and learning objectives.
Thank you to Cátia C. Azevedo for always being available for questions and help. Thank you
for sharing your knowledge, pictures and technical guidance on the OOM Campaign (2022), from
which the oceanographic measurements originate. Thank you for your patience and assistance in
Ocean Data View.
Thank you to Rui Caldeira for your great encouragement and engagement in the work and col­
laboration. Thank you for providing an environment where knowledge, experiences and ideas
continuously can be shared, and to support the expansion of my competences.
Thank you to Rui Vieira for sharing your expertise and insights in Python, and for allocating the
COAWST model data, used for visualization of COAWST model outputs.
Thank you to the whole team at the Oceanic Observatory of Madeira for welcoming me, and for
being available for questions, whether it be programming and technical related or more philosoph­
ical. Thank you to the Communication Office at ARDITI for enriching my daily life with your
kindness and contagious humor.
Thank you to Helmholtz­Zentrum Hereon, Germany, for providing ADCP equipment for the OOM
Campaign (2022), which made the exploration of the linkages between an atmospheric heatwave
and coastal current dynamics possible.
Thank you to my friends and family for giving me time for reflection and mental breaks during the
process, bringing perspectives on life outside the thesis work.
iv
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1.1
Intensity of extreme high temperature events with different climatic projections (1°
C, 1.5° C, 2° C, 3° C and 4° C) (Calvin et al., 2023). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.1
Characteristic physical drivers of AHWs on different temporal (x­axis) and spatial
(y­axis) scales (Barriopedro et al., 2023).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Ekman transport as a driver of coastal upwelling (Dronkers, 2024; Pinet, 2014). .
8
2.3
A: Sea breeze. B: Land breeze (Inouye, 2025). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Oceanic eddies in the Northern Hemisphere, and the effects of cyclonic and anti­
cyclonic winds on the ocean surface (Tomczak and Godfrey, 1994). . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
Madeira Island representation, from larger to smaller scale. . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Climate normal values for air temperature in the archipelago of Madeira (1971­
2000). TA: Average maximum temperature. TI: Average minimum temperature
(Chazarra et al., 2015). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Mean hourly surface winds (m s−1) simulated with the COAWST model (July 1
at 00:00 to August 31 at 23:00 UTC, 2017) (Alves et al., 2020). . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
NASA satellite image, August 21, 2010. Significant wake event is visible with
cloud patterns expanding thousands of kilometers downwind (southwest) of Madeira
Island (Grubišic et al., 2015). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Azores High (NOAA, 2006).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
SST (° C) simulations by the COAWST model (August 16­17, 2017) (Azevedo
et al., 2020). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7
Azores Current (AC) and Canary Current (CC) (Németh and Kern, 2018). . . . .
17
3.8
Tidal forecast from Calheta, Madeira Island, using the COAWST model (spatial
resolution of 1 km) from January 15­17, 2025 (OOM, 2025). . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1
Data extraction point of ERA5 air temperature data. Mean air temperature (1961­
1990). Location of data point: 32.25°N, 17.25°W. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Black dot: Municipality of Calheta (32.7332°N, 17.1928°W). Red cross mark:
Meteorological Station (32.6811°N, 17.0900°W). Black cross mark: ADCP and
APB5 CTD station (32.6992°N, 17.1738°W). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
APB5 set­up, visualized from the surface to the bottom of the sea. . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Signature 1000 ADCP from Nortek (Nortek, 2025). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1
Index 1 (Cardós et al., 2007; Sanz et al., 2007). Air temperature as a function
of time. Green line: 95th percentile of air temperature (reference period from
1961­1900). Black solid line: Mean air temperatures (ERA5). Dashed grey line:
Mean air temperatures (in­situ data from meteorological station). Red fill: AHW
detection. Data source: ERA5 and meteorological station.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Index 2 (Aboelkhair et al., 2023). Air temperature as a function of time. Green line:
90th percentile of air temperature (reference period from 1982­2021). Black solid
line: Mean air temperatures (ERA5). Dashed grey line: Mean air temperatures
(in­situ data from meteorological station). Red fill: AHW detection. Data source:
ERA5 and meteorological station.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
v
==PAGE:7==
5.3
Index 3 (Copernicus Climate Change Service, 2024). Air temperature as a func­
tion of time. Green line: 95th percentile of air temperature (reference period from
1991­2020). Red solid line: Maximum air temperatures (ERA5). Blue solid line:
Minimum air temperatures (ERA5). Dashed red line: Maximum air temperatures
(in­situ data from meteorological station). Dashed blue line: Minimum air temper­
atures (in­situ data from meteorological station). Red fill: AHW detection. Data
source: ERA5 and meteorological station. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Wind, humidity and air temperature as a function of time. Plots from top to bottom:
v­component of wind, u­component of wind, humidity and air temperature. Grey
shaded area: Detected AHW period. Red dashed vertical lines: Daytime (12:00
UTC) vertical CTD profiles during (2022­07­26) and after (2022­08­02) AHW.
Blue dashed vertical lines: Nighttime (00:00 UTC) vertical CTD profiles during
(2022­07­27) and after (2022­08­03) AHW. Data source: Meteorological station.
37
5.5
Air temperature (red graph) and SST (blue graph) as a function of time. Grey
shaded area: Detected AHW period. Data sources: Meteorological station (air
temperature) and APB5 CTD (SST). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.6
Hovmöller diagrams showing (a) seawater temperature and (b) salinity. Data source:
APB5 CTD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.7
Vertical profiles of seawater temperature, salinity, and potential density during and
after the AHW. Profiles in red represent daytime observations (12:00 UTC) (2022­
07­26 and 2022­08­02). Profiles in blue represent nighttime observations (00:00
UTC) (2022­07­27 and 2022­08­03). Data source: APB5 CTD. . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.8
Spatial and temporal evolution of cross­shore currents. a) Current velocity time
series. Flow at two different depths. Dashed line: Flow at 27 m. Solid line: Flow at
47 m. Red graphs: Northward direction. Blue graphs: Southward direction. Grey
shaded area: Detected AHW period. b) Hovmöller diagram of northward current
velocity. Red shades: Northward direction. Blue shades: Southward direction.
Black dashed line: Flow at 27 m. Black solid line: Flow at 47 m. Data source:
ADCP. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.9
Spatial and temporal evolution of longshore currents. a) Current velocity time
series. Flow at two different depths. Dashed line: Flow at 27 m. Solid line: Flow
at 47 m. Red graphs: Eastward direction. Blue graphs: Westward direction. Grey
shaded area: Detected AHW period. b) Hovmöller diagram of eastward current
velocity. Red shades: Eastward direction. Blue shades: Westward direction. Black
dashed line: Flow at 27 m. Black solid line: Flow at 47 m. Data source: ADCP. .
46
5.10 Daily sea surface temperatures at noon from July 22­August 4. Data source: COAWST
model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.11 Daily surface currents at noon from July 22­August 4. Data source: COAWST
model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
vi
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
4.1
Overview of data sources, associated variables/measurements, corresponding time
periods, and purpose of the data use. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Summary of applied AHW indices. Temperature metrics are daily mean air tem­
perature (Tmean), daily minimum air temperature (Tmin) and daily maximum air
temperature (Tmax). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Calculated variables, name of operators, associated calculations and Linux com­
mands (Schulzweida, 2023).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1
Results of correlation analysis. Time periods Pearson correlation coefficient (r),
coefficient of determination (R2) and average time lags (hours).
. . . . . . . . .
39
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
vii
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations
AC
Azores Current
ADCP
Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler
AHW
Atmospheric Heatwave
ARDITI
Regional Agency for the Development of Research, Technology and Innovation
(Agência Regional para o Desenvolvimento da Investigação, Tecnologia e Inovação)
C3S
Copernicus Climate Change Service
CC
Canary Current
CDO
Climate Data Operators
COAWST
Coupled Ocean­Atmosphere­Wave­Sediment Transport
ECMWF
European Centre for Medium­Range Weather Forecasts
ECV
Essential Climate Variable
HZH
Helmholtz­Zentrum Hereon
IPMA
Portuguese Institute for Sea and Atmosphere (Instituto Português do Mar e da At­
mosfera)
MHW
Marine Heatwave
MLD
Mixed Layer Depth
NH
Northern Hemisphere
ODV
Ocean Data View
OOM
Oceanic Observatory of Madeira (Observatório Oceânico da Madeira)
PCC
Pearson Correlation Coefficient
ROMS
Regional Ocean Modelling System
SST
Sea surface temperature
SWAN
Simulating Waves Nearshore
WMO
World Meteorological Organization
WRF
Weather Research and Forecasting
WW3
Wave Watch III
viii
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research motivation and objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical foundations
4
2.1
Atmospheric heatwaves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Meteo­oceanographic linkages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Case study
11
3.1
Geographic setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Atmospheric setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Oceanographic setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Methods
19
4.1
ERA5 data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Meteo­oceanographic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
COAWST model output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results
33
5.1
Atmospheric heatwave detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Meteo­oceanographic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
COAWST model output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Discussion
51
6.1
Meteo­oceanographic linkages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Future outlook on AHWs and coastal ocean conditions of Madeira Island
. . . .
54
6.3
Methodological considerations and future recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Conclusion
58
References
62
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
ix
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Research context
Atmospheric heatwaves (AHWs) are among the most critical and relevant climatic extremes, due
to their increasingly societal, environmental and economic impacts. They are strongly related to
health­related illnesses and fatalities, and impose significantly challenges for thermally sensitive
and non­motile species. Additionally, rising surface temperatures are associated with shifts in other
extreme weather events, such as droughts, storms, and floods (Calvin et al., 2023; Lorenzo et al.,
2021).
Anthropogenic climate change is characterized as the main driver of AHWs.
Since pre­industrial times (1850­1900), and in the recent decades, both the frequency, duration and
intensity of AHWs have increased globally due to human­induced greenhouse gas emissions. In
Europe, including Southern Europe where Madeira is located, this increase is very likely expected
to continue in the future, regardless of the climatic projections of 1.5° C, 2° C and 4° C above
pre­industrial temperature levels. The same pattern applies to extreme high temperature events
(10­year of 50­year events). The intensity of extreme high temperature events are expected to in­
crease directly with the magnitude of 1° C, 1.5° C, 2° C, 3° C and 4° C global temperature levels
compared to the pre­industrial baseline (Figure 1.1) (Calvin et al., 2023). These future projections
highlight the significance of AHWs and the continuously relevance of studying these phenomena.
Figure 1.1: Intensity of extreme high temperature events with different climatic projections (1° C,
1.5° C, 2° C, 3° C and 4° C) (Calvin et al., 2023).
1.2
Research motivation and objectives
The studies of AHWs are to a large extent focused on continental environments, with a dominat­
ing emphasis on human­centered impacts (Barriopedro et al., 2023; Lorenzo et al., 2021; Parente
et al., 2018; Perkins, 2015; Perkins and Alexander, 2013; Raei et al., 2018; Seneviratne, 2023; You
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
1
==PAGE:12==
et al., 2017).
Immense pressures are imposed on the global oceans and the ecological marine environment due
to climate change, including ocean heating, ocean acidification and oxygen depletion. Approxi­
mately 25 % of the worlds population live in the near­coastal zone, within 50 km from the coastline.
These coastal communities critically relies on the ecosystem services and resources provided by
the oceans (Calvin et al., 2023; Cosby et al., 2024).
In order to more accurately predict and model future coastal climates and environments, the air­sea
coupling and associated processes in the coastal zone need to be comprehensively understood.
Climatic extremes, including AHWs, potentially impose additional pressures to the coastal com­
munities and ecosystems, why it is considered relevant to investigate these atmosphere­ocean link­
ages and underlying processes.
Co­occurrences of atmospheric and oceanic heatwaves have been observed in a study conducted
in the Eastern Mediterranean, where more than 50 % of the studied marine heatwaves (MHW)
co­occurred with AHWs. The most intense MHW was characterized by higher positive anoma­
lies in sea surface temperature (SST) and surface air temperature, a decrease in the wind speed
anomaly, and co­occurred with an AHW. These extremes, especially when co­occuring, imposes
significantly pressure to terrestrial and marine ecosystems, resulting in both environmentally and
economic challenges. As a consequence, these extreme events have raised significant concerns in
climate research (Aboelkhair et al., 2023).
However, a knowledge gap still exists in the exploration of these atmosphere­ocean linkages during
AHW climatic extreme events. It is with this motivation as a driver, and the objective of offering
a humble, but meaningful contribution to the existing knowledge gap, that the present case study,
was conducted.
1.2.1
Objectives
In this study, the linkages between an AHW and coastal ocean conditions and circulation on the
southwest coast of the portuguese island, Madeira, are explored.
Specifically, potential links between atmospheric conditions, comprising air temperature, winds
and humidity, and oceanographic conditions, including seawater temperature, salinity, potential
density and coastal currents, are investigated and compared to evaluate their relative contribution
to the changing coastal ocean dynamics present during an AHW episode.
The regional coastal circulation is explored with the generation of COWAST (Coupled Ocean­
Atmosphere­Wave­Sediment Transport) model outputs of SST and surface currents, to bring a
broader spatial perspective on the potential coastal processes and dynamics at play during an AHW,
and to compare with in­situ observations.
The relative importance of underlying processes driving changes in the coastal ocean conditions
and circulation are evaluated by the combined interpretation of in­situ meteo­oceanografhic mea­
surements and COWAST model outputs.
Furthermore, future projections of AHWs and associated coastal ocean conditions of Madeira Is­
land are attempted to be established, considering the case­specific geographic, atmospheric and
oceanographic settings.
1.3
Research structure
The study is organized into seven main sections.
Section 1 comprises the current section, the Introduction. Section 2 constitutes the Theoretical
Foundations, serving as the foundation for the Discussion. Section 3 composes an overview of
the relevant geographic, atmospheric and oceanographic settings of Madeira Island, with the study
2
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:13==
being carried out as a Case Study. The Methods are described in Section 4, and the Results are
presented in Section 5. Section 6 serves as the Discussion, where the insights from the Results,
Methods, case­specific settings and Theoretical Foundations converge and ultimately form Section
7, the Conclusion of the study.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
3
==PAGE:14==
2
Theoretical foundations
2.1
Atmospheric heatwaves
2.1.1
Concept of an atmospheric heatwave
A general definition of an AHW is defined by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) as
a prolonged period of higher­than­average temperatures in a specific region, lasting from days to
weeks (McGregor et al., 2015; Parente et al., 2018).
AHWs often occur as a result of high­pressure systems, known as anticyclones, which prevent air
to disperse by forcing it to sink and compress, and thus trap the warm heat at the surface. The high
pressure similarly suppresses cloud formation, which intensifies the solar radiation reached at the
surface. A so­called ”heat dorm” can form with positive feedback mechanisms amplifying these
high thermal conditions (Barriopedro et al., 2023; Calvin et al., 2023).
Atmospheric blocking patterns (blocking highs), arising from disruptions in jet streams, can ad­
ditionally cause these high­pressure systems to stagnate and as a result prolong the atmospheric
heatwave conditions (Barriopedro et al., 2023; Calvin et al., 2023).
Four dimensions can characterize AHW extreme events
• Frequency: How often do the AHWs occur?
• Duration: How long time do the AHWs occur?
• Intensity/magnitude: How severe are the AHWs?
• Spatial extent: How wide/large are the AHWs in terms of geographical coverage?
Not all dimensions have clear definitions, such as the intensity of the event, as this depends on the
specific definition of an AHW (Section 4.1.1) (Lorenzo et al., 2021; Raei et al., 2018).
2.1.2
Role of climate change as a driver of atmospheric heatwaves
The physical drivers of AHWs are diverse and intricately interconnected. While AHWs occur as
localized intraseasonal events, they originate from the complex interaction between small­scale
and large­scale processes, operating across varying temporal and spatial scales (Figure 2.1) (Bar­
riopedro et al., 2023).
On a temporal scale, the drivers of AHWs may vary from multiannual to multiday scales, and on
a spatial scale, they may vary from planetary to local scales. Various drivers of AHWs may in­
teract and influence one another. It is essentisal to emphasize, however, that the characteristics of
AHWs and the schematic interactions across different scales represent a simplification of complex
real­world dynamics (Barriopedro et al., 2023; Calvin et al., 2023).
On a planetary (spatial) and multiannual (temporal) scale, human­induced greenhouse gas forc­
ing is recognized as the main driver of atmospheric heatwaves (Barriopedro et al., 2023; Calvin
et al., 2023).
Anthropogenic warming raises the baseline temperatures which increase both the intensity of AHWs
and the likelihood of them to occur. Altered meteorological features similarly increase the fre­
quency, duration and intensity of AHWs. Due to the warming of the polar regions, especially the
Arctic, the temperature gradient between the poles and the tropics decreases, which can lead to a
weakening of the jet streams and give rise to atmospheric blocking that prolongs the AHWs. Ad­
ditionally, shifts in high­pressure systems, more specifically increases in persistent high­pressure
4
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:15==
systems that trap heat in the atmosphere, is also a result of climate change that increases the like­
lihood of AHWs to occur (Barriopedro et al., 2023; Calvin et al., 2023).
Furthermore, evaporation rates are are disrupted, due to higher temperatures increasing the rates,
leading to drier conditions in some areas of the globe. As a consequence, the soil moisture is
reduced which limits the cooling effect from evaporation, giving rise to an even higher surface
temperature in these areas (Barriopedro et al., 2023; Calvin et al., 2023).
Increasing global warming levels moreover amplifies oceanic heatwaves and initiate compound
events of atmospheric and marine heatwaves (Aboelkhair et al., 2023). These combined atmo­
spheric and oceanic phenomena can similarly trigger positive feedback mechanisms due to the
coupling between the atmosphere and ocean. The interactions between atmospheric and oceanic
heatwaves are not yet fully understood. However, it is generally observed that anthropogenic cli­
mate change triggers various positive feedback loops at smaller and larger scales, amplifying the
favorable conditions for AHWs, thereby increasing their frequency, intensity, and duration (Bar­
riopedro et al., 2023; Calvin et al., 2023).
At regional and local scales, changes in AHWs are strongly influenced by regional and local feed­
back mechanisms (Calvin et al., 2023; Seneviratne, 2023).
Figure 2.1: Characteristic physical drivers of AHWs on different temporal (x­axis) and spatial
(y­axis) scales (Barriopedro et al., 2023).
2.2
Meteo­oceanographic linkages
The atmosphere and ocean are inherently linked with one another. The ocean acts as a key regulator
of global climate by taking up >90 % of the excess heat produced by anthropogenic warming and
∼25 % of the excess CO2 emitted into the atmosphere. In essence, the ocean acts as a buffer for
excess CO2 emitted and heat produced in the atmosphere, mitigating the ongoing changes caused
by greenhouse gas forcing. Without the oceans ability to counteract climate change, the observed
global surface temperature would be significantly higher, and associated impacts more intense
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
5
==PAGE:16==
(Calvin et al., 2023).
On a regional and local scale, in coastal environments, the atmosphere and ocean interact and
impact each other through different processes and feedback mechanisms, shaping the physical
landscape and site­specific conditions (Calvin et al., 2023).
2.2.1
Air­sea heat fluxes
Sea surface temperature (SST) is recognized by WMO as one of the essential climate variables
(ECVs), which are variables that are fundamental to understand and characterize Earth’s climate
(Pastor, 2021).
Heat is generally transferred to the ocean by shortwave radiation and removed by longwave radi­
ation, latent and sensible heat fluxes (Azevedo et al., 2020).
Sensible heat flux is the transfer of energy between the atmosphere and the Earth’s surface through
conduction, i.e. direct heat exchange, without any phase change. The temperature difference be­
tween the atmosphere and the ocean influences sensible heat exchange, and depending on weather
conditions, energy can be removed or added to the oceans surface (Marshall and Plumb, 2008).
Latent heat flux is exchange of heat involving a phase change. When water evaporates from the
ocean surface, heat is used for this evaporation process, resulting in a ocean cooling. As this water
vapor condenses in cloud formation, the heat used for the evaporation process at the ocean surface
is then released to warm the atmosphere (Praveen et al., 2017).
Mixed layer depth
The mixed layer depth (MLD) represents the deepest layer impacted by turbulent mixing, and thus
the upper ocean width that is interacting with the atmosphere (Borja et al., 2019). The sea water
temperature, salinity and other physical properties are often relatively homogeneous in this layer
due to the water continuously being mixed by turbulent wind, wave and current motion (Marshall
and Plumb, 2008).
The MLD is of great importance in the air­sea heat exchange. The MLD determines the ocean’s
resistance (inertia) to change in temperature and motion, in the upper layer of the ocean that is in
direct contact with the atmosphere. Thus, it impacts the oceanic response to atmospheric changes,
and its variability is therefore crucial in order to understand air­sea interactions and interpret the
processes linked to its evolution (Yan and Okubo, 1992; Zheng et al., 2018).
Seasonal variations of the MLD occur. In the summer, the MLD is generally observed at a shal­
lower depth due to high shortwave radiation reached at the surface, and is normally equal to the
thermocline, which is the transition layer between warmer well­mixed surface water and deeper,
cooler water. In the winter, the MLD tends to deepen due to increased turbulent mixing caused by
storms and intensified wind stress and wave motion at the surface. Thus, the width of the upper
ocean is generally narrower in the summer than in the winter (Marshall and Plumb, 2008).
2.2.2
Coastal currents
Coastal currents are driven by different processes, including winds, tides and density differences
(temperature/salinity). Variation in bathymetry, the topography of the sea bed, can impose location
specific coastal current dynamics (Marshall and Plumb, 2008; Pinet, 2014).
The fall and rise of tides create tidal currents, that are strongest near the shoreline. Density dif­
ferences affect ocean currents on a global scale, with the thermocline circulation acting as a large
conveyor belt distributing the heat on the globe. The surface currents of this circulation can impact
currents on a regional scale (Marshall and Plumb, 2008; Pinet, 2014).
6
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:17==
Wind as a driver of coastal currents
Wind at the ocean’s surface is both relevant in regulating heat fluxes at the boundary between the
atmosphere and ocean (Csanady and Gibson, 2001), in controlling the MLD (Thorpe, 2005), in
wave generation (Young and Reeve, 1999) and in particular in driving surface currents (Alves et al.,
2025; McWilliams, 1996).
In coastal regions, winds tend to be a driver of currents on a local scale and can contribute to
processes like coastal upwelling. Upwelling is a phenomenon that brings deeper, colder, nutrient­
rich waters to the surface (Pinet, 2014).
Ekman transport and the Coriolis effect (caused by the Earth’s rotation) are largely responsible for
coastal upwelling (Figure 2.2).
As the wind blows at the surface of the ocean, the surface currents gets deflected approximately
45° toward the right in the Northern Hemisphere (NH), due to the Coriolis effect (Figure 2.2a). The
effect of the wind stress at the surface decreases with depth, impacting the water layers gradually,
and with the net water transport flowing in approximately a 90° angle from the surface wind. The
net water transport is known as the Ekman transport, and the water affected by the wind is known
as the Ekman layer (Marshall and Plumb, 2008; Pinet, 2014).
When the wind is blowing parallel to the coastline (on its left in the NH), the Ekman transport will
flow in an offshore direction (Figure 2.2b). This offshore mass transport is balanced by an onshore
deeper current replacing the water at the surface, creating Ekman pumping with deeper, cooler
waters continuously replacing the warmer surface waters. This phenomenon is called upwelling,
or Ekman divergence (Marshall and Plumb, 2008; Pinet, 2014).
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
7
==PAGE:18==
(a) Ekman spiral in the Northern Hemisphere (Pinet, 2014).
(b) Coastal upwelling (Dronkers, 2024).
Figure 2.2: Ekman transport as a driver of coastal upwelling (Dronkers, 2024; Pinet, 2014).
8
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:19==
2.2.3
Coastal breezes
Due to different specific heat capacities of water and land, winds at the coast change direction from
day to night and vice versa. These coastal winds are known as sea breezes and land breezes (Figure
2.3) (Pinet, 2014).
Sea breeze
Water has a higher heat capacity than land, hence the ocean has a better ”memory” and looses heat
at a slower rate than the land. During the day, the land is generally warmer than the ocean, i.e.
there is a temperature gradient, as well as pressure gradient, between the ocean and land. Warm air
rises over land, creating an area with lower pressure, compared to the sea. The warm air is replaced
by cooler air from the sea, triggering onshore winds, and the formation of heat transfer through
convection. This flow of cooler air from the sea is referred to as the see breeze (Pinet, 2014).
Land breeze
At night, the process is reversed. Due to the higher specific heat capacity of water, the ocean pre­
serves the heat received from shortwave radiation during the day more efficiently than the land.
This leads to a rise of warmer air over the sea which is replaced by cooler air from the land, i.e.
resulting in offshore winds. This convection process ultimately leads to the formation of the land
breeze, where cooler air from the land flows towards the sea (Pinet, 2014).
Sea and land breezes are ultimately led by temperature and pressure gradients between ocean and
land. Changes in these gradients, either an increase or decrease, can thus impact the strength of
these coastal breezes (Pinet, 2014).
Figure 2.3: A: Sea breeze. B: Land breeze (Inouye, 2025).
2.2.4
Oceanic eddies
Oceanic eddies are circular currents of water, and can significantly influence the upper ocean (Mar­
shall and Plumb, 2008).
They are primarily divided into two categories, depending on their rotation; cyclonic eddies and
anticyclonic eddies (Figure 2.4) (Marshall and Plumb, 2008; Tomczak and Godfrey, 1994).
In the Northern Hemisphere, the cyclonic eddies rotate anticlockwise, due to the Coriolis effect,
caused by the Earth’s rotation (left side of Figure 2.4). In cyclonic eddies, water is brought to rise
at the center of the eddy, creating upwelling of cooler water at the core of the eddy, and surface
divergence with water being depressed at the center. Due to upwelling of water from beneath, the
thermocline is brought closer the to the surface of the ocean (Marshall and Plumb, 2008; Tomczak
and Godfrey, 1994).
Anticyclonic eddies rotate clockwise (right side of Figure 2.4). Water is sinking at the center of the
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
9
==PAGE:20==
eddy, thus creating downwelling of water, leading to a warmer eddy core and surface convergence,
that pushes the surface of the sea upwards, and ultimately depresses the thermocline (Marshall and
Plumb, 2008; Tomczak and Godfrey, 1994).
Due to the nature of oceanic eddies, significantly moving water masses around, and thus creat­
ing temperature and salinity differences, they are of great importance to the physical environment
in the ocean, which marine ecosystems heavily relies on (Pinet, 2014).
Figure 2.4: Oceanic eddies in the Northern Hemisphere, and the effects of cyclonic and anticy­
clonic winds on the ocean surface (Tomczak and Godfrey, 1994).
10
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:21==
3
Case study
The exploration of the linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions of
Madeira Island is conducted as a case study.
The specific geographic, atmospheric, and oceanographic settings of this location, potentially in­
fluencing these connections, makes it important to understand the general scope of these location­
specific processes and conditions. It is crucial to understand how the atmosphere and ocean interact
in this region and how this interaction influences the creation of these conditions.
3.1
Geographic setting
Madeira Island is a deep­sea island located in the northeast Atlantic (32.7° N; 17° W), approx­
imately 700 km off the western coast of Morocco and 900 km southwest of mainland Portugal
(Figure 3.1).
The location is in the region of Macaronesia, a volcanic originated collection comprising four
archipelagos in the northeast Atlantic: Madeira, Azores, Canary Islands and Cape Verde (Alves
et al., 2020).
Madeira Island is the main island of the Madeira archipelago consisting of two islands (Madeira
and Porto Santo) and two island groups (Desertas and Selvagens) (Figure 3.1b). Madeira Island is
the largest island in the archipelago with a length of 55 km and a maximum width of 22 km (Figure
3.1c) (Pullen et al., 2017).
Madeira features a steep orography with significant elevation changes over short distances, in­
cluding steep cliffs, slopes, and a northwest­southeast oriented mountain ridge extending centrally
on the island, reaching 1.862 m at its highest point (Pico Ruivo). The pronounced orography
gives rise to diverse microclimates, ranging from subtropical rainforest to alpine climate along the
mountain slopes. The steep terrain influences the movement of air masses, affecting local weather
patterns and resulting in increased rainfall in certain areas, especially in the mountain regions and
on the north side of the island (Espinosa et al., 2019; Pullen et al., 2017).
Located in the subtropics, the region experiences a mild climate with warm temperatures through­
out the year. More specifically, it is classified as a temperate climate with hot, dry summers (type
Csa in accordance with Köppen classification) (Chazarra et al., 2015).
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
11
==PAGE:22==
(a) Madeira Island geographic position. Data Source: Google Earth.
(b) Madeira archipelago comprising of Madeira Island (32.8° N; 17.0° W),
Porto Santo Island (33.1° N; 16.3° W), Desertas Islands (32.5° N; 16.5° W)
and Selvagens Islands (30.0° N; 15.9° W). Data Source: Google Earth.
(c) Madeira Island. Data Source: June 27, 2023, European Union, Coperni­
cus Sentinel­2 imagery (Copernicus, 2023).
Figure 3.1: Madeira Island representation, from larger to smaller scale.
12
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:23==
3.2
Atmospheric setting
3.2.1
Air temperature
The air temperature on the island experiences seasonal variation, with the highest temperatures
typically occurring during the months of August and September (Figure 3.2) (Chazarra et al.,
2015).
Figure 3.2: Climate normal values for air temperature in the archipelago of Madeira (1971­2000).
TA: Average maximum temperature. TI: Average minimum temperature (Chazarra et al., 2015).
3.2.2
Winds
Northeasterly trade winds dominate the island region, resulting in the northern side of the island
being exposed to these prevailing wind patterns (Figure 3.3) (Alves et al., 2020).
Due to the island’s mountainous terrain, the winds are often diverged, forcing them toward the
flanks of the island, creating tip­jets, i.e. stronger winds on the eastern and western side of the is­
land, with the flows peaking around 200 m above the ocean surface. The atmospheric stratification
also influences this behavior when the thermal stratification is below the height of the mountain
peaks, the winds are forced to flow to the eastern/western sides of the island (Alves et al., 2020).
The jets significantly impact the atmospheric forcing at the ocean­atmosphere interface, leading
to intensified mixing in the upper ocean, deepening the MLD. Oceanic eddies are common in the
eastern jet region, where anticyclones are frequently shed (Alves et al., 2020). In future climate
change scenarios, these tip­jets are predicted to intensify during the summer (Alves et al., 2025).
Weaker winds are observed on the southern and leeward side of the island. This is primarily due
to a wind shadow effect where the island topography, with the steep and rugged terrain, acts as a
natural barrier, obstructing and slowing down the incoming wind flow. As a result, reduced wind
speeds and calmer conditions prevail on this sheltered side of the island compared to the north
(Alves et al., 2020).
The flow instability with swirling patterns, visible downstream in the turbulent wake region, are
formed when the wind flows and deflects around the island, acting as an obstacle. This vortex shed­
ding with alternating vortices are characteristics of von Kármán vortex streets, which is known at­
mospheric features of Madeira Island (Figure 3.4) (Alves et al., 2020; Azevedo et al., 2020; Caldeira
and Tomé, 2013; Caldeira and Sangrà, 2012; Gao et al., 2023; Grubišic et al., 2015).
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
13
==PAGE:24==
(a) Mean 10 m wind speed and streamlines (3 km
grid)
(b) Mean 10 m wind speed and streamlines (1 km
grid).
Figure 3.3: Mean hourly surface winds (m s−1) simulated with the COAWST model (July 1 at
00:00 to August 31 at 23:00 UTC, 2017) (Alves et al., 2020).
Figure 3.4: NASA satellite image, August 21, 2010. Significant wake event is visible with cloud
patterns expanding thousands of kilometers downwind (southwest) of Madeira Island (Grubišic
et al., 2015).
14
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:25==
3.2.3
Azores High
The Azores High is a persistent large subtropical high­pressure system (anticyclone), and is formed
due to atmospheric circulation and the subsidence of the Hadley cell. It is typically centered south
of the Azores archipelago, thus west of the Madeira region, in the northeastern Atlantic (Figure
3.5) (Cresswell­Clay et al., 2022).
Winds are blowing in the clockwise direction from the center, with subsidence occurring, forcing
dry cool air from the lower troposphere to sink and warm up at the surface. This descending air
reduces cloud formation and gives rise to stable, calm, warm weather conditions with weaker winds
and clear skies.
The strength, extension and location of the Azores High fluctuates throughout the year. During
winter and spring months the center is typically situated near the Azores, and during the summer
and fall months it often gets displaced westwards towards Bermuda, here known as the Bermuda
High.
Since high­pressure systems are drivers of AHWs (Section 2.1.2), it is highly relevant to understand
the extension of the Azores High and the associated atmospheric and oceanic processes (Cresswell­
Clay et al., 2022).
Figure 3.5: Azores High (NOAA, 2006).
3.3
Oceanographic setting
3.3.1
Sea water temperature
The atmospheric conditions, characterized by reduced wind speeds and calmer weather on the lee­
ward southern side of the island, are reflected in the SST. As a result of the calm conditions, less
cloud formation occurs on the sheltered side, allowing greater solar radiation to reach the sur­
face and warm the ocean. Due to these atmospheric­ocean interactions and feedback mechanisms,
higher SSTs are observed on the southern side of the island compared to the northern, wind­exposed
side (Figure 3.6) (Azevedo et al., 2020; Pullen et al., 2017).
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.6: SST (° C) simulations by the COAWST model (August 16­17, 2017) (Azevedo et al.,
2020).
3.3.2
Currents
The coastal currents of Madeira form a complex system influenced by the interaction between mul­
tiple forces.
Drivers on a regional scale
On a regional scale, both the Canary Current (CC) and Azores Current (AC) serve as a driver,
influencing the currents around Madeira (Figure 3.7) (Németh and Kern, 2018).
The Canary Current is a cooler, slow­moving current flowing southward along the northwestern
coast of Africa. It is an eastern boundary current that branches south from the North Atlantic Cur­
rent and is a part of the North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre. Madeira lies west of the main flow of
the Canary Current. Although the island’s distance from the main current path reduces its direct
influence, the CC can still contribute to the transport of cooler waters to the region. Additionally,
eddies and boundary flows extending from the CC can impact Madeira’s coastal waters.
The Azores Current is a warmer current that branches of the Gulf Stream, as it splits into two, with
the northern branch becoming the North Atlantic Current, and the southern branch becoming the
Azores Current flowing eastward over the Atlantic. The Azores Current flows north of Madeira
and south of the Azores archipelago, bringing more saline, warmer waters to the region. By in­
teracting with the CC, the AC helps balance the cooler water influences of the CC, impacting the
thermal and salinity properties around Madeira. The dynamics and interactions between the CC
and AC contribute to the complex oceanographic conditions around Madeira, including tempera­
ture variations and eddy formation. Seasonal and climatic changes contribute to variations of these
impacts (Mason et al., 2011; Németh and Kern, 2018).
16
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.7: Azores Current (AC) and Canary Current (CC) (Németh and Kern, 2018).
Drivers on a local scale
On a local scale, both winds and tides play a role in shaping the currents around Madeira. The north­
easterly trade winds, in particular, influence surface currents, while seasonal variations contribute
to changes in current patterns. During the summer months, weaker winds and more stratified sur­
face waters result in reduced current variability. In contrast, winter months influenced by storms
drive greater variability and mixing in the currents. Specific thermohaline conditions around the
island can also impact circulation patterns on a local scale with variation in temperature and salin­
ity affecting density­driven water movement, as well as forming temperature gradients, and thus
give rise to sharp thermoclines (Azevedo et al., 2020).
Additionally, oceanic eddy activity is a known phenomenon in the region of Madeira Island.
Oceanic eddies have especially been studied in the wake region of the island. In the summer,
the double tip­jets on the flanks of the island, especially the eastern jet, often has a relevant impact
on the ocean and contribute to the formation of oceanic eddies in the lee­side of the island. This
process is driven by several factors, including the angle of the incoming flow (northeastern trades),
the Coriolis effect, the island’s topography, and the observation that the eastern jet is nearly per­
pendicular to the island, in contrast to the western jet, which is almost parallel (Alves et al., 2020).
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
17
==PAGE:28==
3.3.3
Tides
The tidal landscape of the island is dominated by the semidiurnal lunar (M2) tidal cycle, char­
acterized by two high tides and two low tides each day (Figure 3.8) (OOM, 2025; Rosa et al.,
2022).
Figure 3.8: Tidal forecast from Calheta, Madeira Island, using the COAWST model (spatial reso­
lution of 1 km) from January 15­17, 2025 (OOM, 2025).
Summarizing the geographic, atmospheric and oceanographic settings of Madeira Island, it is
apparent that these conditions are interconnected, with atmosphere­ocean feedback mechanisms
shaping this dynamic and complex meteo­oceanographic landscape around the island.
18
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:29==
4
Methods
The data employed in this study include ERA5 re­analysis data, in­situ data from a meteorological
station and oceanographic measurements, and model output from the COAWST (Coupled Ocean
Atmosphere Wave Sediment Transport) model.
ERA5 re­analysis data are utilized for AHW detection, the meteorological and oceanographic data
are combined as meteo­oceanographic data and applied for exploration of the potential linkages
between an AHW and the coastal ocean conditions of Madeira Island. The COAWST model output
is employed to compare these simulations with the in­situ meteo­oceanographic data, and to gain a
broader perspective on the evolving oceanographic conditions throughout the study period (Table
4.1).
Table 4.1: Overview of data sources, associated variables/measurements, corresponding time pe­
riods, and purpose of the data use.
Data Source
Variables/Measurements
Time Periods
Purpose
ERA5 data
(Section 4.1)
­ Air temperature
July + August, 2022
Reference periods
­ 1961­1990
­ 1982­2021
­ 1991­2020
Atmospheric
heat­
wave detection
Meteorological
station data
(Section 4.2.1)
­ Wind speed
­ Wind direction
­ Humidity
­ Air temperature
July 22 ­ August 4, 2022
Assess
local
atmo­
spheric
conditions
to
compare
with
oceanographic
mea­
surements and explore
meteo­oceanographic
linkages
Oceanographic
measurements
(Section 4.2.2)
APB5 CTD
­ Seawater temperature
­ Salinity
­ Potential density
ADCP
­ Current velocity
July 22 ­ August 4, 2022
Detect oceanographic
properties and current
dynamics to explore
meteo­oceanographic
linkages
via
com­
parison
with
mete­
orological
station
data
COAWST
model output
(Section 4.3)
­ SST
­ V­component of surface
current
­ U­component of surface
current
July 22 ­ August 4, 2022
Interpretation of sim­
ulations
of
surface
ocean features to link
and
compare
with
meteo­oceanographic
in­situ data
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
19
==PAGE:30==
4.1
ERA5 data
The air temperature data utilized for AHW detection is ERA5 hourly data, specifically the 2m
temperature variable, given in units Kelvin. This variable is the air temperature at 2 m above the
surface of sea, inland waters and land, and is calculated, taking into account the atmospheric condi­
tions, by interpolating the lowest level of the model and the Earth’s surface (Hersbach et al., 2023).
ERA5 is the fifth generation of reanalysis data from the European Centre for Medium­Range
Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), a part of the Copernicus Climate Change Services, replacing the
ERA­Interim reanalysis, increasing the spatial resolution from 79 km to 31 km (Hersbach et al.,
2020).
Reanalysis is a systematic approach, that via data assimilation and the laws of physics, combines
numerical model data and observational data to produce consistent and globally complete datasets
of various variables relevant in climate monitoring and research. Observational data include satel­
lites, radiosondes, buoys, aircraft, ship reports and other relevant measurements.
The analysis is performed when a previous forecast is combined with the latest observational data
to produce a better new estimate. These analyses are performed repeatedly, thus called re­analysis,
and this method ensures a continuously improvement of the forecasts and datasets (Hersbach et al.,
2020).
As is the case for all model data, reanalysis data should be handled with care, as the data is not
immune to model and observational biases. Especially variables relating to the hydrological cycle
should be used with extreme caution, as the physical processes related to these variables, such as
boundary layer processes, convection, and precipitation, occur on smaller scales than the grid res­
olution of the model. A way of dealing with this problem of insufficient spatial resolution of the
model is parametrization where the effect of these small scale processes is translated to a larger
scale, by making some assumptions of these small scale physical processes. This is a necessary
procedure as some of these physical processes, for example the ones related to Navier­Stokes equa­
tions, still remain unresolved (Bauer et al., 2015).
4.1.1
Defining atmospheric heatwaves
Numerous definitions of AHWs are identified in the scientific literature (Aboelkhair et al., 2023;
Barriopedro et al., 2023; Lorenzo et al., 2021; Parente et al., 2018; Perkins, 2015; Perkins and
Alexander, 2013; Raei et al., 2018; Sanz et al., 2007; Seneviratne, 2023; You et al., 2017).
The plethora of indices is possibly due to both the complexity of impacts and properties of AHWs
(Barriopedro et al., 2023).
A general definition from the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) states that an AHW is a
”period of abnormally hot weather that can last from a few days to months where the maximum and
minimum temperatures are unusually high to a location” (WMO, 2025). Specific definitions are
diverse, with some methodologies identifying an AHW based on selecting a certain temperature
threshold for a minimum number of consecutive days, and other methodologies include additional
variables such as apparent temperature (heat index) which combines maximum temperature with
relative humidity (Parente et al., 2018).
The group of methodologies based on temperature thresholds considers at least one type of tem­
perature (daily minimum, maximum and/or mean temperatures) and are distinguished between
absolute and relative thresholds. Absolute thresholds are based on a fixed daily maximum value
depending on the location, such as 40°C, and are often employed in studies investigating the di­
rect impacts of AHWs in relation to human health and ecosystem functioning which acquires a
certain temperature range to thrive. Relative thresholds is based on percentiles that capture the
upper tail of the distribution, e.g. the 90th percentile of daily maximum temperatures compared to
the mean maximum temperature for a given reference period. This methodology, utilizing relative
thresholds, is most widely used in the climate community as this threshold allows for comparison
20
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:31==
between regions, in contrast to the absolute threshold that is specific to the location at which the
study is carried out (Dunn et al., 2022; Seneviratne, 2023).
Applied atmospheric heatwave indices
After thoroughly exploration and contemplation of suitable indices through literature review and
contact to relevant organizations/scientists in the field (including Copernicus, Portuguese Institute
for Sea and Atmosphere (IPMA) and National Weather Service/Honolulu Weather Forecasting
Office), three different definitions of AHWs, all considering relative thresholds, have been recog­
nized relevant for this study. The decision­making process have included considerations on both
the percentile rank (threshold), minimum number of consecutive days, choice of reference period,
and most importantly is based on previous studies exploring AHWs in Europe, deep sea islands
and linkages between AHWs and ocean conditions (Table 4.2).
Index 1 is from a AHW study carried out in the Canary Islands (Sanz et al., 2007). Since Madeira is
a deep sea island, as is true for the Canary Islands, and local and regional forcings can be stronger
in these locations compared to the mainland, it is considered particularly relevant to utilize an index
from such a study. Studies exploring AHWs in deep sea islands are generally extremely limited,
emphasizing the importance of the usage of an AHW index from a deep sea island study.
Index 2 is derived from a study on the co­occurence of atmospheric and oceanic heatwaves (Aboelkhair
et al., 2023). Even though the study is conducted in the Mediterranean sea, an enclosed sea, com­
pared to the open ocean surrounding Madeira Island, it is considered relevant in terms of exploring
the linkages between AHWs and ocean conditions.
Index 3 is the official AHW index from Copernicus, detecting AHWs in Europe (Copernicus Cli­
mate Change Service, 2024). The air temperature data utilized for AHW detection is ERA5 data,
produced by Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) at ECMWF, thus it is deemed appropriate
to additionally utilize this index for the AHW detection.
Table 4.2: Summary of applied AHW indices. Temperature metrics are daily mean air temperature
(Tmean), daily minimum air temperature (Tmin) and daily maximum air temperature (Tmax).
Index
Reference
Period
Threshold
Temperature
Metric
Description
Study
Index 1
1961­1990
95th
Tmean
A period of at least three consecutive
days when the daily mean surface air
temperature is higher than the highest
5 % of values for the day in question
during the 1961­1990 reference period
Sanz et al. (2007)
Index 2
1982­2021
90th
Tmean
A period of at least three consecutive
days when the daily mean surface air
temperature is higher than the highest
10 % of values for the day in question
during the 1982­2021 reference period
Aboelkhair et al.
(2023)
Index 3
1991­2020
95th
Tminimum
Tmaximum
A period of at least three consecutive
days when both the daily surface air
temperature minima and maxima are
higher than the highest 5 % of values
for the day in question during the 1991–
2020 reference period
Copernicus
Cli­
mate Change Ser­
vice (2024)
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
21
==PAGE:32==
4.1.2
ERA5 data processing
The ERA5 air temperature data were derived southwest of Madeira Island (Figure 4.1).
This grid cell location southwest of the island, further away from the in­situ measurements, were
consciously chosen, since the resolution of the ERA5 data is too low to account for the small­scale
processes occurring near the coast, as elaborated in Section 4.1. Thus, a point where the processes
are homogeneous, were chosen for extraction of the ERA5 data. The netCDF files were initially
inspected with ncview in Linux to choose a grid cell that were unaffected by small­scale processes
along the coastline.
Figure 4.1: Data extraction point of ERA5 air temperature data. Mean air temperature (1961­1990).
Location of data point: 32.25°N, 17.25°W.
Climate Data Operators
Climate Data Operators (CDO) were applied in the operating system, Linux, to perform relevant
calculations of the ERA5 hourly air temperature data. CDO is a collection of more than 600 com­
mand line operators, all managed in Linux, utilized to analyse and manipulate climate and model
data (Schulzweida, 2023).
The ERA5 data were extracted as netCDF files of the following data periods
• July and August, 2022 (AHW detection period)
• 1961­1990 (reference period of Index 1)
• 1982­2021 (reference period of Index 2)
22
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:33==
• 1991­2020 (reference period of Index 3)
Mean, minimum and maximum daily air temperatures were calculated for the AHW detection
period of July and August, 2022. Minimum and maximum daily air temperatures, along with
daily percentile values (95th or 90th), were calculated for the three specific reference periods. All
calculations were obtained utilizing relevant CDOs in Linux (Table 4.3).
These calculations enables a comparison of the specific percentiles for each AHW index, and
the mean air temperature for July and August, 2022, ultimately allowing for an AHW detection
(Section 5.1).
Table 4.3: Calculated variables, name of operators, associated calculations and Linux commands
(Schulzweida, 2023).
Variables
Operators
Calculations
Commands
Daily mean temperatures
daymean
Daily mean:
For every adjacent sequence t1, ..., tn
of timesteps of the same day it is:
o(t, x) = mean{i(t′, x), t1 < t′≤tn}
cdo daymean infile outfile
Daily minimum temperatures
daymin
Daily minimum:
For every adjacent sequence t1, ..., tn
of timesteps of the same day it is:
o(t, x) = min{i(t′, x), t1 < t′≤tn}
cdo daymin infile minfile
Daily maximum temperatures
daymax
Daily maximum:
For every adjacent sequence t1, ..., tn
of timesteps of the same day it is:
o(t, x) = max{i(t′, x), t1 < t′≤tn}
cdo daymax infile maxfile
Daily percentile values
daypctl
For every adjacent sequence t1, ..., tn
of timesteps of the same day it is:
o(t, x) = pth percentile{i(t′, x), t1 <
t′≤tn}
cdo daypctl,95 infile minfile maxfile outfile
4.2
Meteo­oceanographic data
4.2.1
Meteorological station data
Wind speed and direction, humidity and air temperature are extracted from a meteorological sta­
tion/weather station located in Lugar de Baixo ∼8.2 km from the ADCP and APB5 CTD mea­
surements (Figure 4.2).
Data from this meteorological station is chosen due to having the closest proximity to the ADCP
and APB5 CTD measurements, compared to other meteorological stations on the island.
The meteorological station data are extracted for the time period from 2022­07­22 to 2022­08­04
(including July 22, excluding August 4).
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.2: Black dot: Municipality of Calheta (32.7332°N, 17.1928°W). Red cross mark: Me­
teorological Station (32.6811°N, 17.0900°W). Black cross mark: ADCP and APB5 CTD station
(32.6992°N, 17.1738°W).
4.2.2
Oceanographic measurements
From June to August 2022, OOM conducted an oceanographic research campaign to study oceano­
graphic conditions off the south coast of Madeira Island. The campaign was carried out onboard the
vessel, Marismar, and conducted in collaboration with the German research institution, Helmholtz­
Zentrum Hereon (HZH).
The equipment deployed included an ADCP and an APB5 buoy with a multi­parameter CTD probe.
The ADCP and APB5 CTD were deployed ∼2 km south of Madeira Island (Figure 4.2).
Sea water temperature, salinity and potential density were measured by the CTD attached to the
APB5 buoy, and current velocities were measured with the ADCP moored at the sea bed.
A continuous period of successful APB5 CTD measurements was achieved from 2022­07­22 to
2022­08­04; thus this time period is used as the investigation period for all meteo­oceanographic
data to, in a comparable manner, explore the potential linkages between atmospheric and coastal
ocean conditions.
Instruments
APB5 CTD
The APB5 (Automatic Profiling Buoy version 5) is an Automatic CTD Profiling System. It com­
prises a remotely operated floating buoy powered by solar panels, and is equipped with a winch­
controlled CTD (conductivity, temperature and depth/pressure) probe for profiling (SAIV, 2024)
(Figure 4.3).
The APB5 system consists of the buoy itself and four supportive anchor buoys attached to four
24
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:35==
anchor stones at the bottom. This system provides a high degree of stability by limiting excessive
influence from waves and currents, keeping the buoy in a consistent position as possible.
The CTD contains sensors measuring three key parameters; conductivity, temperature and pres­
sure, to understand the physical properties of the seawater in relation to depth. The electrical
conductivity in the seawater is directly related to its salinity, as ions in seawater conduct electric­
ity. By measuring the conductivity, the conductivity sensor thus determines how saline the water
is. Temperature measurements allows for density calculations, as the density is highly depended
on the temperature, as well as salinity. The pressure sensor determines the depth by measuring
hydrostatic pressure. Since pressure increases with depth, this reading allows for precise depth
profiling Xiao et al. (2023).
The winch­operated CTD probe performs continuous vertical profiling by systematically descend­
ing and ascending to ∼40 m depth. One ascend/descend cycle takes ∼20 minutes (10 minutes
descending/10 minutes ascending) with ∼10 measurements/second SAIV (2024).
The APB5 system allows for a continuously monitoring of the ocean conditions, and for this study
allowed the creation of both temporal depth profiles of seawater temperature and salinity (Section
5.2.3) and vertical profiles of seawater temperature, salinity and potential density (Section 5.2.4).
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
25
==PAGE:36==
(a) Sketch of APB5 anchor system seen from
above.Yellow hexagon: APB5 buoy.
Red dots:
Supportive buoys.
Image source:
Cátia C.
Azevedo.
(b) APB5 in operation.
Image source: Cátia C.
Azevedo.
(c) APB5 anchor system (SAIV, 2024).
(d) Dimensions of one of the four anchor stones.
Image source: Cátia C. Azevedo.
Figure 4.3: APB5 set­up, visualized from the surface to the bottom of the sea.
26
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:37==
ADCP
The Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) uses underwater acoustic technology to measure
the velocity (speed and direction) of ocean currents (Figure 4.4).
It is an indirect measurement since the ADCP in reality are measuring the velocity at which water
particles are moving, assuming that the particles move at the same velocity as the water surround­
ing them. These particles can be suspended sediment, zoo­ or phytoplankton, or other particles.
(Nortek, 2024).
The principles behind the technology are the Doppler effect and sound waves. The concept is
that the frequency of sound waves increases (decreases) as the source and receiver of the sound
waves moves towards (away from) each other (Nortek, 2024).
Specifically, the ADCP has acoustic transducers facing in different directions, from which it con­
sistently emits high­frequency sound waves, or beams, into the water. These sound waves are
reflected back when encountering water particles and are received by the transducers at a different
frequency. If the water particles are moving towards (away from) the transducer, the frequency
received by the transducer will be higher (lower). This frequency difference of the sound waves
emitted and received by the transducer is known as the Doppler shift and indicates the direction
of the current. The ADCP uses this shift, together with the time it takes for the sound waves to
be deflected by the particles, to calculate the velocity of the moving particles and the surrounding
water, i.e. the current velocity. Sound waves deflected close by the transducer takes shorter time
to return, than sound waves deflected by water particles further away (Nortek, 2024).
The ADCP can be installed on a stationary or moving object, such as a mooring bouy or a ve­
hicle, respectively. If the ADCP is installed on a stationary object, the instrument can either be
installed up­looking, directly mounted at the sea bed, or down­looking, installed at moorings in
the water column. In both cases, and along with the chosen processing settings, the quality of the
velocity data at the surface will not be reliable enough for the first few meters, leaving a blanking
zone in the upper part of the water column. When installed looking­up, the ADCP will typically
have difficulty measuring the reflections of the sound waves at the surface, due to the interaction
with air bubbles and white waters (Nortek, 2024).
ADCPs are accessible in different frequencies, with higher frequencies (such as 250 kHz) offering
high­resolution measurements to a depth range of approximately 70 meters, and lower frequencies
(such as 38 kHz) providing data to depth ranges of up to 1,300 meters but with a lower resolution.
The resolution provides information about at what frequency the beams are sent out, i.e. how far
the beams, thus measurements, are from each other in the water column. This beam size can vary
from a few centimeters (high­resolution) up to a few meters (low­resolution). As a rule of thumb,
the beam size should have maximum half the size of the desired phenomenon measured (for ex­
ample an oceanic eddy) (Nortek, 2024).
The current velocity data derived for this study are from an up­looking Signature 1000 ADCP,
with a maximum frequency of 16 kHz (Nortek, 2025), moored at the sea bed at approximately 100
m depth.
The derived and processed ADCP data facilitated an insight into the temporal evolution of the
coastal currents with depth, alongside with an exploration of a potential disparity between two
flows at different depths in the water column (Section 5.2.5).
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
27
==PAGE:38==
(a) Signature 1000 ADCP with five beams (Nortek,
2025).
(b) Signature 1000 ADCP moored at the sea bed
(Nortek, 2025).
Figure 4.4: Signature 1000 ADCP from Nortek (Nortek, 2025).
4.2.3
Meteo­oceanographic data processing
The in­situ data from the APB5 CTD and ADCP was processed, analysed and visualized using
different software. Generally, Python was used for most data processing and visualization, utiliz­
ing the Spyder software. Ocean Data View (ODV) were used to visualize the time­depth profile of
seawater temperature and salinity (Section 5.2.3, along with the generation of the station map (Fig­
ure 4.2). Google Earth Pro served to produce maps of Madeira Island, and to measure distances
between the in­situ measurements (Figure 3.1a and 3.1b).
Due to an unknown instrumental disruption, there were not performed any measurements with
the APB5 CTD on July 31, thus this day is represented as a blank in the data visualizations involv­
ing seawater temperature and salinity.
Variation in wind, humidity and air temperature
Meteorological station data of wind direction and wind speed served to calculate the meridional v­
component (north/south direction) and zonal u­component (east/west direction) of the wind (Equa­
tion 4.2).
V = −Vspeed · cos(θ)
(meridional, north/south component)
(4.1)
U = −Vspeed · sin(θ)
(zonal, east/west component)
(4.2)
Where
• Vspeed is the wind speed (magnitude of the wind vector)
• θ is the wind direction in radians, measured clockwise from north
Conversion of wind direction from degrees to radians
θ = Degrees × π
180
(4.3)
The v­component and u­component of the wind, together with the humidity and air temperature
were plotted using Python (Figure 5.4).
28
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:39==
The north/southward direction of the wind is approximately perpendicular to the shoreline at the
south coast, where the in­situ measurements are conducted, thus the meridional v­component is
accepted to represent the cross­shore wind. Similarly, the u­component of the wind is considered
to represent the longshore winds, as the zonal wind flows approximately parallel to the coastline.
Correlation analysis of air temperature and SST
Air temperature (meteorological station data) and SST (APB5 CTD) is combined to analyse the
relationship between the two variables during and after the AHW (Figure 5.5).
The meteorological station data is hourly data, whereas the SST data is ∼10 measurements/sec­
ond. Thus, the SST data are converted into hourly means assigning the values to the nearest hour,
in Python, to allow for a sensible comparison. SST are accepted as measurements < 1 m from the
surface.
A correlation analysis was additionally performed in Python on the pre­AHW period, AHW period
and post­AHW period (Table 5.1)
• Pre­AHW period (July 22­23) (two days)
• AHW period (July 24­26) (three days)
• Post­AHW period (July 27­August 4) (seven days)
The Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) is calculated by applying Equation 4.4
r = Cov(X, Y )
σX · σY
(4.4)
Where
• Cov(X, Y ) is the covariance between the two variables X (air temperature) and Y (SST)
• σX and σY are the standard deviations of X and Y , respectively
Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) indicate the relationship between the air temperature and SST,
whereas the coefficient of determination (R2) represents the percentage of which the variation in
SST can be explained by the variation in air temperature.
Additionally, the average time lag of the ocean response to the air temperature change was cal­
culated using cross­correlation given by
cross­corr(τ) =
∑
i
(Xi −µX)(Yi+τ −µY )
(4.5)
Where
• Xi and Yi are the values of the two time series (air temperature and SST) at time i
• µX and µY are the means of the series X and Y
• τ represents the time lag
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
29
==PAGE:40==
Hovmöller diagrams of seawater temperature and salinity
Hovmöller diagrams representing time­depth profiles of seawater temperature and salinity were
conducted by employing the following approach
1. Combining 516 netCDF files in Python, containing CTD measurements of seawater temper­
ature, salinity, time and depth
2. Creating a txt file output in Python with columns of seawater temperature, salinity, time and
depth
3. Importing the txt file in ODV and plotting the seawater temperature and salinity in a section
plot
Vertical profiles of seawater temperature, salinity and potential density
Single vertical profiles extracted from the CTD measurements were exploited to conduct depth
profiles of the seawater temperature, salinity and potential density by day and night, during and
after the AHW (Figure 5.7a, 5.7b and 5.7c).
The warmest temperature during the AHW were reached on July 26 at ∼12:00 UTC. The following
time slots and days are applied as day/night times during and after the AHW
Daytime is at 12:00 UTC
• July 26 (during AHW)
• August 2 (after AHW)
Nighttime is at 00:00 UTC
• July 27 (during AHW)
• August 3 (after AHW)
The day/night profiles of seawater temperature, salinity and potential density were plotted in Python,
where the mixed layer depth (MLD) in addition were calculated (and plotted).
The MLD were calculated based on the seawater temperature profile where the difference in sea­
water temperature from the surface exceeds an absolute threshold of 0.2°C (de Boyer Montégut
et al., 2004). The MLD is calculated by iterating through the time­depth profile and identifying
the first depth where the temperature difference exceeds the threshold value of 0.2°C. Simplified,
calculating the MLD were carried out by the following approach
• Calculate the temperature difference (∆Ti) at each depth
∆Ti = Tdepthi −SST
where Tdepthi is the temperature at depth i and SST is the sea surface temperature
• A threshold temperature difference, denoted by ∆Tthreshold, is used to define the MLD; in
this case, the threshold is set to 0.2°C
• Detect the MLD, which is the depth at which the temperature difference first exceeds the
threshold of 0.2°C
MLD = Depthi
where
∆Ti > ∆Tthreshold
30
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:41==
Currents
The Nortek ADCP processing software, Ocean Contour, was used to process the ADCP data. The
average cell size (beam size) were set to 1 m, and the average window/intervals at which it pro­
cessed the measurements, were set to 5 minutes, corresponding to 125 samples. The maximum
correlation were set to 50 %, meaning a mask were created of the measurements that were below
this data quality threshold value. The output files were netCDF files.
Hovmöller diagrams of the coastal currents, both northward (cross­shore) and eastward (long­
shore) direction, were conducted and illustrated using Python (Figure 5.8a and 5.9b).
The two flow plots inspecting the synchronicity between the upper and deeper flows of the coast
is similarly conducted in Python. The two flows are a 6 m average at ∼27 m (24­30 m) and ∼47
m (44­50 m) (Figure 5.8a and 5.9a).
A smoothing of the data were necessary to obtain a meaningful data visualization. The smoothing
were performed with a Savitzky­Golay filter with a window length of 7. This size of the filter
window defines how many points are used to fit the polynomial for smoothing, i.e. for each data
point being smoothed, the filter considers the three data points before and after it, plus its own data
point. The choice of window length can impact the data. A larger size of the window will lead
to smoother trends, but might risk oversimplifying the data, and a smaller window length might
maintain a higher degree of details but may not reduce the noise in the data effectively (Gallagher,
2020; Savitzky and Marcel, 1964).
The polyorder, the degree of the polynomial used for fitting within each window, is set to 1. With
this polyorder, the general trend is aimed to be conserved, while minimizing the noise in the highly
detailed raw ADCP data (Gallagher, 2020; Savitzky and Marcel, 1964).
Furthermore, the original time series is downsampled before smoothing by selecting every 10th
point. This decreases the data density, simplifying the application of effective smoothing, ulti­
mately enhancing the visualization of the trends (Gallagher, 2020; Savitzky and Marcel, 1964).
As is the case for the wind components, the currents that flow in the north/southward direction
are considered cross­shore currents, and currents that flow in the east/westward direction are con­
sidered longshore currents.
4.3
COAWST model output
The COAWST model is a ’Coupled Ocean­Atmosphere­Wave­Sediment Transport’ model, and
has a spatial resolution of 1 km. It is a two­way coupled framework, allowing feedback between
its components, and numerical model that integrates three open­source numerical models to study
the interactions between the ocean, atmosphere and waves (Alves et al., 2020)
• Regional Ocean Modelling System (ROMS)
• Atmospheric Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
• Wave models, Simulating Waves Nearshore (SWAN) and/or Wave Watch III (WW3)
The Regional Ocean Modelling System (ROMS) simulates temperature, salinity, ocean currents,
and circulation patterns, providing insights into important oceanic processes like mixing and up­
welling. The Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model allows for capturing atmospheric
dynamics, including wind, precipitation and pressure, emphasizing the dynamic atmospheric and
ocean interactions. Wave dynamics are addressed through Simulating Waves Nearshore (SWAN),
which are focused on wave processes nearshore, and Wave Watch III (WW3) that models open
ocean wave propagation. Combined, in the COAWST model, this two­way framework is a pow­
erful numerical tool to enhance the understanding of the complex climate and coastal systems of
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
31
==PAGE:42==
Madeira Island (Alves et al., 2020; OOM, 2025).
4.3.1
COAWST model data processing and visualization
The SST and the magnitude of the surface currents are visualized using simulations with the
COAWST model (Figure 5.10 and 5.11).
All outputs are processed in Python utilizing netCDF files for each day (at 12:00 UTC) in the study
period. July 31 is left out for simplicity as this date is not represented in the APB5 CTD data.
Before being plotted in Python, the relevant variables from the netCDF files were inspected using
ncview in Linux, to get an overview of how and which variables that should be utilized to obtain
the model outputs in Python.
The magnitude of the surface currents are estimated applying the v­component and u­component
of the surface currents
M =
√
u2 + v2
(4.6)
Where
• M is the magnitude of the surface current (m/s)
• v is the meridional component of the current (m/s)
• u is the zonal component of the current (m/s)
32
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:43==
5
Results
5.1
Atmospheric heatwave detection
The three AHW detection indices (Table 4.2) were applied, and an AHW was identified within one
of the indices.
5.1.1
Index 1
The results from the AHW detection carried out using Index 1 show that an AHW, with mean air
temperatures being above the 95th percentile threshold (reference period from 1961­1990), which
persisted for three consecutive days, was detected from July 24­26, 2022 (Figure 5.1).
A difference in the peak mean air temperature is observed between the ERA5 mean air temperature
data (black solid line) and the in­situ mean air temperature measured at the meteorological station
(dashed grey line). The highest ERA5 mean air temperature is detected on July 25, at approximately
23.8°C. The highest mean air temperature measured in­situ at the meteorological station is 25.5°C,
measured on July 26.
Figure 5.1: Index 1 (Cardós et al., 2007; Sanz et al., 2007). Air temperature as a function of time.
Green line: 95th percentile of air temperature (reference period from 1961­1900). Black solid
line: Mean air temperatures (ERA5). Dashed grey line: Mean air temperatures (in­situ data from
meteorological station). Red fill: AHW detection. Data source: ERA5 and meteorological station.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
33
==PAGE:44==
5.1.2
Index 2
With the application of Index 2, only two consecutive days (July 25­26) with mean air tempera­
ture values above the 90th percentile (reference period from 1982­2021) are detected. However,
three consecutive days are needed for an AHW to be detected with this index, i.e. an AHW is not
detected with Index 2 (Figure 5.2). The same difference between the ERA5 and in­situ mean air
temperatures is found with Index 2 as with Index 1, with the in­situ mean air temperature measured
being higher than the mean air temperature from ERA5. Inspecting the in­situ mean air temper­
atures, values exceeding the 90th percentile value are observed on four consecutive days (July
24­27). An AHW is not detected with Index 2, but it is observed from the in­situ measurements,
that it was indeed very hot on the AHW detected days (July 24­26) from Index 1.
Figure 5.2: Index 2 (Aboelkhair et al., 2023). Air temperature as a function of time. Green line:
90th percentile of air temperature (reference period from 1982­2021). Black solid line: Mean air
temperatures (ERA5). Dashed grey line: Mean air temperatures (in­situ data from meteorological
station). Red fill: AHW detection. Data source: ERA5 and meteorological station.
5.1.3
Index 3
Applying Index 3, only one day (July 24) has maximum air temperature values exceeding the 95th
percentile (reference period from 1991­2020), i.e. no AHW is detected with this index (Figure
5.3).
The in­situ maximum air temperatures are above the 95th percentile value throughout the whole
period of July and August, with the highest temperature reached on July 26 with approximately
34
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:45==
30.2°C. The maximum in­situ measurements indicate that high air temperatures were reached even
though an AHW is not detected with the application of Index 3.
Figure 5.3: Index 3 (Copernicus Climate Change Service, 2024). Air temperature as a function of
time. Green line: 95th percentile of air temperature (reference period from 1991­2020). Red solid
line: Maximum air temperatures (ERA5). Blue solid line: Minimum air temperatures (ERA5).
Dashed red line: Maximum air temperatures (in­situ data from meteorological station). Dashed
blue line: Minimum air temperatures (in­situ data from meteorological station). Red fill: AHW
detection. Data source: ERA5 and meteorological station.
The detection of an AHW with Index 1, from July 24­26, despite its absence in Index 2 and Index
3, will serve as the basis for subsequent analysis. This assumption will be further examined in
Section ??.
5.2
Meteo­oceanographic data
5.2.1
Variability in wind, humidity, and air temperature
Cross­shore and longshore wind components
The cross­shore wind (meridian component), represented by the v­component, shows a general
pattern of onshore wind (sea breeze) during the day, and offshore wind (land breeze) during the
night (top plot, Figure 5.4). The sea breezes predominate over land breezes throughout the study
period, with breezes being a thermal wind.
Variation in the strength of the wind velocity is observed during the detected AHW, compared to
before and after the AHW period. During the AHW, the sea breeze is 1 m/s on July 24 and 25
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
35
==PAGE:46==
at its maximum, and 2.5 m/s on July 26. Before and after the AHW, the sea breezes are reaching
maximum values of 2.25­4.25 m/s.
A similar pattern in the land breezes is observed. A decrease in the intensity of the land breezes is
observed during the AHW (maximum values of 0.5­0.8 m/s), compared to before/after the AHW
(maximum values of 1­5 m/s).
The longshore wind (zonal component) similarly vary in strength during the AHW, compared to
before and after the AHW (top­mid plot, Figure 5.4). In general, the eastward flowing wind experi­
ences higher velocities (maximum values of 7 m/s) than the wind flowing in the westward direction
(maximum values of 3.2 m/s). During the AHW, the eastward winds reach maximum velocities
between 2­4 m/s, compared to before/after the AHW with maximum values ranging from 4­7 m/s.
In the westward direction, maximum wind velocities during the AHW is registered at 0.2­1 m/s,
compared to before/after the AHW with velocities peaking between 0.8­3.2 m/s.
Humidity
The humidity levels vary during day and night, with lower levels experienced during daytime than
nighttime (bottom­mid plot, Figure 5.4).
The humidity levels experience significant fluctuations during the AHW, compared to after the
AHW. During daytime, the humidity is 52 % on July 24 and 25, and 42 % on July 26. During
nighttime, the humidity levels range between 77­90 %. After the AHW, the humidity levels are
relatively stable, ranging from approximately 60 % during daytime to 80 % during nighttime.
Air temperature
During the AHW, the air temperatures measure >29.3°C (bottom plot, Figure 5.4). Maximum
were reached on July 26 with 30.2°C. During nighttime, minimum air temperatures range from
21.0­22.7°C.
Before/after the detected AHW, maximum air temperatures reach 25.8­26.6°C, and minimum air
temperatures measure between 19.1­21.3°C.
It is observed that the difference between day/night air temperatures are greater during the AHW
than before/after the AHW. The difference in day/night air temperatures are 6.6­9.2°C during the
AHW, and 4.5­7.5°C before/after the AHW.
36
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.4: Wind, humidity and air temperature as a function of time. Plots from top to bottom:
v­component of wind, u­component of wind, humidity and air temperature. Grey shaded area:
Detected AHW period. Red dashed vertical lines: Daytime (12:00 UTC) vertical CTD profiles
during (2022­07­26) and after (2022­08­02) AHW. Blue dashed vertical lines: Nighttime (00:00
UTC) vertical CTD profiles during (2022­07­27) and after (2022­08­03) AHW. Data source: Me­
teorological station.
5.2.2
Comparison of air temperature and SST
Similar to the air temperature, the SST exhibits fluctuations throughout the study period (Figure
5.5). However, the SST appears to undergo more pronounced and adverse fluctuations than the air
temperature.
A rise in maximum SST temperatures, during daytime, are observed before and in the beginning
of the AHW (23.4°C on July 22, 23.8°C on July 23 and 24.9°C on July 24). A drop is experienced
on July 25 with 23.9°C, followed by a temperature peak of the study period measured on July 26 at
25.0°C. From July 27­28 another temperature drop in maximum SSTs is experienced with 23.4°C,
followed by a SST increase with 24.5°C measured on July 29. On July 30 the SST drops again and
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
37
==PAGE:48==
becomes stable from August 1­4 with maximum SSTs of 22.9°C.
The elevated air temperatures observed during the AHW co­occurs with the general pattern of
higher SSTs in the same period. From July 29­August 4 where the air temperatures are stabilized,
the SSTs does not follow this stabilization. Fluctuations in the SSTs are experienced in this period,
with an elevation in the SST observed on July 29, followed by a decrease in SST from July 30­
August 4, in the same period as the air temperatures experiences stability.
Figure 5.5: Air temperature (red graph) and SST (blue graph) as a function of time. Grey shaded
area: Detected AHW period. Data sources: Meteorological station (air temperature) and APB5
CTD (SST).
Correlation analysis results
The relationship between the air temperature and SST are explored before, during and after the
AHW (Table 5.1).
The Pearson correlation coefficient, r, in the pre­AHW period is 0.75, indicating a positive, rea­
sonably strong relationship between the air temperature and SST. A negative lag indicates that the
air temperature changes precede SST changes, suggesting that the air temperature influences the
SST. The time lag of 1 hour thus indicates that the SST has a response time of 1 hour to changes
in the air temperature. The coefficient of determination, R2, is 0.56, denoting that 56 % of the
variation in the SST (dependent variable) can be explained by the variation in the air temperature
(independent variable).
During the AHW, the values of r and R2, are 0.68 and 46, respectively. This implies that 46 %
of the variation in SST is explained by air temperature. The time lag is 1 hour, similar to the pre­
AHW period.
The values from the post­AHW period show a much weaker correlation between the air temper­
ature and SST, compared to the pre­AHW period and AHW period. The r­value and R2­value
is 0.38 and 0.14, respectively, indicating that 14 % of the variation in SST can be explained by
the variation in air temperature. The time lag is ­3 hours. These values suggest a slower, less pre­
dictable and more complicated thermal response in the SST after the AHW, compared to a stronger
and more direct impact on the SST before and during the AHW.
38
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:49==
Table 5.1: Results of correlation analysis. Time periods Pearson correlation coefficient (r), coeffi­
cient of determination (R2) and average time lags (hours).
Time Period
Pearson Correlation Coefficient
Coefficient of Determination
Average Time Lag
(r)
(R2)
(hours)
Pre­AHW period (July 22­23)
0.75
0.56
­1.00
AHW Period (July 24­26)
0.68
0.46
­1.00
Post­AHW Period (July 27­August 3)
0.38
0.14
­3.00
5.2.3
Temporal and depth variations of seawater temperature and salinity
Temporal and depth variations of seawater temperature display higher maximum surface tempera­
tures during the AHW (24.9°C on July 24 and 25.0°C on July 26), and on July 29 (24.5°C), followed
by a gradual cooling and a stabilization from August 1­4 at 22.8°C (Figure 5.6a).
Colder water intrusions from the bottom seem to become more prominent after the AHW, with
more distinct intrusions occurring on July 29 (18.8°C).
Before the AHW, lower salinity values of 36.8 are observed both at the surface and down through
the entire depth profile (Figure 5.6b).
Higher salinity values are measured at the surface during the AHW (37.1), and to a lesser extent
from July 29­30. During the AHW, these higher­salinity water masses with values equal to those
recognized at the surface (37.1) are observed to extend down in the water column, until 20 m, with
some intrusions extending further down, below 30 m. A high instability in the salinity values is
observed in the water column during this period, at an equal time high seawater temperatures are
detected.
In the period after the AHW, from August 1­4, a gradual return to lower salinity values are noticed
at the surface, with values at 36.9.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
39
==PAGE:50==
(a) Seawater temperature
(b) Salinity
Figure 5.6: Hovmöller diagrams showing (a) seawater temperature and (b) salinity. Data source:
APB5 CTD.
5.2.4
Vertical distribution of seawater temperature, salinity, and potential density
Examining the vertical structure of seawater temperature during daytime (Figure 5.7a), a steep
temperature gradient is observed within the upper 2.5 m during the AHW. The seawater tempera­
ture range from 25°C at the surface to 23° C at 2.5 m depth. A temperature drop of 0.8°C for every
meter in depth is detected in the upper layer of the ocean. The MLD is detected at 1.5 m, revealing
a thin upper mixed layer.
During nighttime the temperature gradient decreases in strength in comparison with daytime with
a decrease in seawater temperature from 23.25°C at the surface to 22.45°C at 7.5 m depth. This
corresponds to a temperature decrease of 0.1°C for every meter in depth. The MLD extends to 3.5
m, compared to 1.5 m during the day.
After the AHW, during daytime, the sea water temperature measures a stable 22.3°C in the upper 5
40
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:51==
m, before initiating a decrease with depth. The MLD is identified at 9.5 m, revealing a difference
of 8 m in the MLD in daytime during the AHW, compared to after the AHW.
During nighttime the MLD is 8.5 m. Compared to the MLD during the AHW (3.5 m), a difference
of 5 m in MLDs at night is detected. Hence, the difference in upper mixed layer thickness is less
pronounced during the night than during the day.
During the AHW fluctuations in the salinity profiles (Figure 5.7b) are observed, especially in the
upper 5 m of the water column, during both day­ and nighttime. During the day, higher salinity
values are observed both in the upper 5 m and at 15­20 depth. After the AHW, the salinity profiles
appear to be virtually stable throughout the water column.
Potential density profiles (Figure 5.7c) are similar in appearance to the ones of seawater temper­
ature. This indicates that the temperature is the dominant factor influencing the density. Steeper
density gradients in the upper layer are observed during the AHW than after the AHW, in partic­
ular during the day. After the AHW, the density profiles appear more stable throughout the water
column.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
41
==PAGE:52==
(a) Seawater temperature profiles and computed MLD.
(b) Salinity profiles.
(c) Potential density profiles.
Figure 5.7: Vertical profiles of seawater temperature, salinity, and potential density during and after
the AHW. Profiles in red represent daytime observations (12:00 UTC) (2022­07­26 and 2022­08­
02). Profiles in blue represent nighttime observations (00:00 UTC) (2022­07­27 and 2022­08­03).
Data source: APB5 CTD.
42
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:53==
5.2.5
Characterizing currents across depth and time
Cross­shore currents
Before and during the AHW, the currents are flowing onshore 5.8b). The two flows, both the up­
per flow at 27 m and the deeper flow at 47 m, are approximately synchronized. They are acting as
one big flow, flowing in the same onshore direction. The deeper flow tends to experience slightly
higher current velocities than the upper flow.
In the transition between the AHW period and post­AHW period, between July 27­28, an asyn­
chrony between the two flows occurs. The upper flow shifts to flowing in a slightly offshore
direction (0.03 m/s), while the deeper flow continues to flow, and even intensifies slightly (0.22
m/s), in an onshore direction.
After the AHW, when this shift has occurred, the currents experiences offshore/onshore fluctua­
tions with continuously reoccurrence of upper offshore flow and deeper onshore flow.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
43
==PAGE:54==
(a) Time series
(b) Hovmöller diagram
Figure 5.8: Spatial and temporal evolution of cross­shore currents. a) Current velocity time series.
Flow at two different depths. Dashed line: Flow at 27 m. Solid line: Flow at 47 m. Red graphs:
Northward direction. Blue graphs: Southward direction. Grey shaded area: Detected AHW period.
b) Hovmöller diagram of northward current velocity. Red shades: Northward direction. Blue
shades: Southward direction. Black dashed line: Flow at 27 m. Black solid line: Flow at 47 m.
Data source: ADCP.
44
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:55==
Longshore currents
A dominance of westward flowing currents are prominent before, during and in the first days fol­
lowing the AHW, from July 22­29, with the two flows acting as one flow (Figure 5.9). The deeper
flow at 47 m generally experiences slightly stronger current velocities than the upper flow at 27
m. During the AHW, the two flows are in particular aligned, with both flows undergoing minor
changes in the current velocities.
In the transition period right after the AHW, from July 27­28 the difference in current velocities
between the upper and deeper current flow intensifies, with the upper flow experiencing decreas­
ing current velocities at 0.02 m/s at its weakest and the deeper flow measuring stronger current
velocities at 0.30 m/s at its maximum.
After the AHW, on July 29 and from July 31­August 4, eastward current flows start to occur (0.07
m/s), i.e. the currents experiences slightly fluctuations between westward and eastward flows, but
with the westward still being the dominant flow direction.
From July 29­30 the deeper flow at 47 m encounter multiple increases in the current velocity vary­
ing from 0.05 m/s to 0.3 m/s.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
45
==PAGE:56==
(a) Time series
(b) Hovmöller diagram
Figure 5.9: Spatial and temporal evolution of longshore currents. a) Current velocity time series.
Flow at two different depths. Dashed line: Flow at 27 m. Solid line: Flow at 47 m. Red graphs:
Eastward direction. Blue graphs: Westward direction. Grey shaded area: Detected AHW period.
b) Hovmöller diagram of eastward current velocity. Red shades: Eastward direction. Blue shades:
Westward direction. Black dashed line: Flow at 27 m. Black solid line: Flow at 47 m. Data source:
ADCP.
46
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:57==
5.3
COAWST model output
5.3.1
Sea surface temperature
Dynamic oceanic eddy evolution and change in SST are noted on the lee­side of the island during
the whole study period (Figure 5.10).
Before and during the AHW, two cyclonic eddies are apparent in the wake region, south of the
island. The southwestern cyclonic eddy is increasing in intensity, becoming cooler and cooler,
whereas the southeastern cyclonic eddy is becoming weaker and weaker, i.e. increasing in SST.
During the AHW, warmer water is piling up along the southern coastline, with highest SSTs noted
on July 26, at the same location (Calheta) as higher in­situ SSTs have been observed. Higher SSTs
are similarly observed at the northeast coast of the island during the AHW.
In the post­AHW period, from July 29­30, a change in the southeastern eddy region is observed.
An anticyclonic eddy slowly arises in the area, replacing the cyclonic eddy. Warmer water is piled
up along the southern coastline again, but with less intensity compared to during the AHW. In the
same period, the southwestern cyclonic eddy continues to intensify and expands in size. From
August 1­3, the southeastern cyclonic eddy is now completely replaced by an anticyclonic eddy
that continuously increases in strength.
It is noteworthy, that the SST along the southern coastline varies throughout the study period.
Before and during the AHW, the SST and spatial coverage of warmer water piling up along the
southern coastline are increased, with a peak in spatial coverage and heat intensity experienced
on July 26. Right after the AHW, from July 27­28, a decrease in the SST and spatial coverage of
warmer water is observed, followed by another slightly increase from July 29­30. From August
1­3 this signature of warmer water along the southern coast is steadily lost, observed as a decrease
in the SST and spatial coverage of warmer water.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.10: Daily sea surface temperatures at noon from July 22­August 4.
Data source:
COAWST model.
48
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:59==
5.3.2
Surface currents
The dynamic evolution in the oceanic eddies observed in the wake region of the island from the
COAWST model output of SST (Figure 5.10), is supported by the COAWST model output of the
surface currents (Figure 5.11).
A similar dynamic of two cyclonic eddies, with cold, slow moving currents at the center of the
eddies, is present in the pre­AHW period. During and in the period right after the AHW, from July
25­29, the eastern cyclonic eddy slowly, but steadily is replaced by an anticyclonic eddy. From
July 30­August 3, in the post­AHW period, the wake region has become a system of a western
cyclonic eddy and an eastern anticyclonic, steadily increasing in strength, with visually stronger
currents in the boundaries of the oceanic eddies.
The western cyclonic eddy forms a westward flow of surface currents along the southwest coast
of the island, where the oceanographic measurements originate.
It is noted that when a system consisting of a western cyclonic eddy and an eastern anticyclonic
eddy is formed, there is a stronger current flow of water towards the southern coastline. This is
in comparison with the cyclonic system observed before the AHW, consisting of two cyclonic
eddies, where it is noted that a strong combined flow towards the south coast of Madeira Island is
not observed.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.11: Daily surface currents at noon from July 22­August 4. Data source: COAWST model.
50
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:61==
6
Discussion
6.1
Meteo­oceanographic linkages
An AHW persisting for three consecutive days from July 24­26 was detected with Index 1.
Results from the exploration of meteo­oceanographic data at the southwest coast of Madeira Island
indicate potential linkages between the detected AHW and observed coastal ocean conditions and
circulation.
6.1.1
Stronger relationship between air temperature and SST during AHW
The comparison between the SST and air temperature shows a general trend of a stronger relation­
ship between the variables during the AHW than after (Figure 5.5). The SST is higher during the
AHW as is the case for the air temperature, compared to after the AHW, where more fluctuations
in the SST, not following the air temperature trend, seem to occur.
Results from the correlation analysis between the SST and air temperature shows that 46 % (56
%) of the variation in SST can be explained by variation in the air temperature during (before) the
AHW period (Figure 5.1). In the post­AHW period this percentage drops to 14 %, indicating that
only 14 % of the variation in the SST can be explained by the variation in the air temperature after
the AHW.
The SST responds to the change in air temperature with some delay due to the ocean’s higher ther­
mal inertia. Before and during the AHW, the oceanic response time (average time lag) is shorter
(1 hour), than after the AHW (3 hours).
These results indicate that the SST undergoes a more pronounced impact from the air tempera­
ture before and during the AHW than after the AHW. Before and during the AHW, the SST is
more sensitive to changes in the air temperature with the air temperature accounting for approxi­
mately half of the variation of the SST. This could indicate higher sensible heat fluxes before and
during the AHW than after, with direct heat exchange between the ocean and atmosphere. After
the AHW, the correlations are significantly weaker with longer average time lags. This suggests
a slower and more complex thermal response, possibly due to changes in the atmospheric and
oceanic conditions and heat exchange dynamics. The SST is likely influenced by other dominant
factors than air temperature during this time, such as winds, currents and increased cloud cover.
6.1.2
Reduced sea/land breezes and longshore wind during AHW
The meteorological station data reveals that the velocities of the wind decreases, almost ceases,
during the AHW (Figure 5.4). This is observed both for the meridional and zonal winds.
On a subseasonal and multiday temporal scale, AHWs generally occur as a result of high­pressure
systems, and atmospheric blocking patterns can prolong the duration of the AHWs. These con­
ditions are associated with calmer conditions, including weaker winds and less cloud formation.
The observed decrease in wind velocities aligns with the expected atmopsheric conditions during
an AHW.
Weaker onshore/offshore winds during the AHW indicate a change and decrease in the land/sea
breezes. The increased SST during the AHW, resulting in a slightly decrease in the temperature
gradient between ocean and land, can possibly support these reduced sea/land breeze wind veloc­
ities.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
51
==PAGE:62==
Before/after the AHW a pattern of onshore/northward winds during the day, and offshore/south­
ward winds during the night, is evident, indicating the occurrence of sea and land breezes, respec­
tively.
6.1.3
Higher fluctuations in humidity levels during AHW
Lower humidity levels during the day are observed during the AHW, compared to before/after the
AHW (Figure 5.4). Warm air can store more water than cold air, which can explain the decrease
in humidity levels during the day. The humidity levels during nighttime, during the AHW, are
significantly higher, due to the cooling of the air at night, and the lowered capacity of cold air to
hold water than warm air. The difference in day/night air temperatures during the AHW is greater
than after the AHW, which could lead to these increased fluctuations in humidity levels.
Heat fluxes between the atmosphere and ocean could also play a role in these changes in day/night
humidity levels, i.e. latent heat fluxes including evaporation processes, but a lack of boundary
ocean­atmosphere heat fluxes makes it difficult to address these possible interrelated mechanisms.
6.1.4
Increased ocean surface heating and instability in salinity distribution
during AHW
Increased ocean surface heating is recognized during the AHW (Figure 5.6a).
The AHW conditions, with subsidence of air, prevents air to rise and thus condensation and cloud
formation to occur.
The assumed reduced cloud formation during the AHW, despite an absence of satellite images to
support this claim, could lead to a higher amount of shortwave radiation reaching the oceans sur­
face, increasing the ocean heat uptake and supporting the observed higher SST during this time.
The process of salt fingering seems to be present during the AHW, with warmer, saltier, and thus
denser, water sinking down in the water column, below cooler, less salty water, potentially inter­
rupting the stratification of the water masses (Figure 5.6b). The process creating these salt fingers
is known as salt fingering and is caused by double­diffusive instability. The instability occurs when
the temperature and salinity, having different properties and diffusion rates, create unstable mixing
patterns due to the density stratification of the water being unstable (Kunze, 2003). Possibly higher
evaporation rates at the surface during the AHW, could lead to higher salt content of the surface
waters, and the sinking of this warm, salty water.
6.1.5
Reduced MLD during AHW enhances surface ocean heating
During the AHW a strong thermal stratification of the water column is observed (Figure 5.7a). An
intense thermal gradient occurs in the upper ∼2.5 m with a temperature drop of ∼0.8°C/m.
The MLD is reduced by approximately 5­8 m (night/day), initiating a thinner upper layer of the
ocean, during the AHW, compared to after the AHW. This reduction of the upper ocean layer
width enables the atmosphere to more effectively heat up the ocean’s surface, as the mass of water
that is subject to thermal transfer is simply reduced. This can explain the stronger relationship and
higher correlation between the SST and air temperature during the AHW than after. In essence,
the narrower upper ocean layer width (shallower MLD), the easier it is for the air temperature to
heat up the SST. During the night, the mixed layer is stretched, forming a weaker stratification as
the ocean surface cools.
The double­diffusive instability likely observed during the AHW period (July 24­26) accounts
for the general higher instability of the salinity profile during the AHW than after (Figure 5.7b).
A spike in higher salinity levels is observed at approximately 2 m depth during daytime, during
the AHW, whereas the salinity profiles after the AHW appears smoother, i.e. representing more
52
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:63==
stable salinity conditions.
6.1.6
Inconsistent current flows lead potential upwelling after AHW
During the AHW a pattern dominated by onshore/northward and westward currents is observed
(Figure 5.8 and 5.9). The current flows, both onshore/offshore and longshore currents, appear
consistent and stable during the AHW, acting as a single synchronous flow throughout the water
column. This stability is possibly due to the generally calmer atmospheric conditions, compared
to after the AHW.
After the AHW, the stable current conditions are disrupted, leading to fluctuations in the on­
shore/offshore currents, and to fluctuations in the strength of the westward currents with slight
reversions in the eastward direction.
It is notable that between July 27­28 the upper (∼27 m depth) and deeper (∼47 m depth) current
flows is subject to a asynchronous behavior and a phase mismatch. The upper current flows in a
slightly offshore direction, while the deeper current flows in an intensified onshore direction. This
asynchronous behavior in the two current flows reoccurs in the post­AHW period, both on July
31, August 2 and 3. This behavior of the upper ocean layer transporting water offshore from the
coastline, and the deeper layer transporting water onshore, could indicate a coastal upwelling pro­
cess. This phenomena, occurring in the transition phase between the AHW period and post­AHW
period, and continuously after the AHW, brings cooler waters to the surface, and thus could lead to
a cooling of the sea surface after the AHW. This could be a potential process shaping the weakened
relationship between the SST and air temperature after the AHW, as the SST is less predictable
in this period, experiencing more fluctuations independent from the variation in the air temperature.
6.1.7
Modelled oceanic eddy dynamics in wake region potentially impacting
observed coastal ocean conditions
Significant oceanic eddy activity is observed in the sheltered wake region, from the COAWST
model outputs of SST and surface currents.
During the AHW, an accumulation of warm water along the southern coastline is noted, aligning
with the in­situ oceanographic measurements similarly experiencing higher SSTs during the AHW.
In a parallel manner, higher SSTs are observed on the northeast coast of the island during the AHW.
Since, the in­situ measurements and COAWST model outputs align (indicating a validation of the
model), it is suggested that the northeast coast similarly experience surface ocean heating during
the AHW event (Figure 5.10).
The consistent western cyclonic eddy ensures a consistent westward flow of surface currents in the
southwest side of the island, where the ADCP measurements of the currents originate. This model
observation aligns with the in­situ observations of a dominant westward current flow during the
study period.
The magnitude of the surface currents reveals an evolution of an eastern anticyclonic (warm core)
eddy in the wake region, alongside with a consistent cyclonic (cold core) eddy (Figure 5.11). The
combined onshore flow of surface currents as a result of the eddy formation could potentially con­
tribute to the warm water accumulation at the south coast of Madeira Island.
Whether the dynamic oceanic activity is a contributor to the coastal ocean conditions observed
before, during and after the AHW remains unknown. It is intriguing that the increasingly stronger
eddy formation detected after the AHW does not seem to lead an accumulation of warmer warmers
at the south coast, as observed during the AHW. This suggests that, during AHW conditions, lo­
calized meteo­oceanographic linkages, explored in this study, might have a greater impact on the
changes in coastal ocean conditions, than regional oceanic eddy dynamics.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
53
==PAGE:64==
6.1.8
Complex system of meteo­oceanographic linkages shapes coastal ocean
conditions
The observed changes in coastal ocean conditions and suggested potential mechanisms contribut­
ing to the evolution of these conditions, constitute a complex and diverse ocean­atmospheric sys­
tem with feedback mechanisms continuously impacting each other. It is clear, that various mech­
anisms are at play in the formation of these coastal ocean conditions.
AHWs are associated with warmer, calmer atmospheric conditions due to the nature of high­
pressure systems associated with the occurrence of AHWs. A ”heat dome” occurs, acting like
a pacifying blanket over the land and ocean surface. These conditions explain the observed mete­
orological conditions with weaker winds, and higher fluctuations of humidity levels between day
and night, during the AHW.
A higher sensitivity in the SST variations to the air temperature variations is observed before and
during the AHW. Positive feedback mechanisms with increased shortwave radiation received at
the oceans surface, enhancing sensible heat fluxes at the interface of the ocean and atmosphere,
combined with a thin upper ocean layer, likely drives these high thermal, and closely interlinked,
conditions. Dynamic oceanic eddy mechanisms might contribute to the SST warming observed at
the in­situ location.
Suggested observed coastal upwelling processes likely contributes to the cooling of the SST ob­
served after the AHW. Increased wind velocities experienced at the ocean surface, leading to the
re­occurrence of sea and land breezes, are similarly assumed to contribute to a cooling of the sur­
face ocean after the AHW.
The described observations align with results from a convection and heat transfer study of the
wake region of Madeira Island, comparing the vertical structure of the upper ocean in the wake
region (south coast) with the exposed, non­wake region (north coast) (Azevedo et al., 2020).
In the study it is demonstrated that similar patterns of weaker winds, less cloud formation and in­
creased shortwave radiation reached at the surface, lead strongly thermally stratified waters, and
highly unstable salinity profiles with water parcels sinking/rising due to intense heat fluxes at the
ocean­atmosphere interface.
It seems that the observed oceanographic conditions in the sheltered wake region with weaker
winds, clearer skies and higher SSTs constitute, to a certain extent, parallel conditions to those
experienced during an AHW with correspondingly calmer, higher thermal conditions.
6.2
Future outlook on AHWs and coastal ocean conditions of
Madeira Island
An increased frequency, intensity and duration of AHWs are projected to transpire in the future as
a result of climate change (Calvin et al., 2023; Seneviratne, 2023).
Furthermore, the Azores High, a persistent high­pressure system influencing the Madeira region,
has over the past 100 years experienced an increase in the frequency of ”extreme” Azores High
events during winter, causing an expansion and increasing intensity (higher air pressure at sea
level) of the Azores High. A combination of observations, model simulations and palaeoclimate
data reveals that the observed expansion and increase in ”extreme” Azores High events during
winter are driven by increased atmospheric greenhouse gases in the industrial era, i.e. by anthro­
pogenic warming (Cresswell­Clay et al., 2022).
These combined projected conditions, along with changes in other atmospheric circulation pat­
terns and blocking highs, favors an increase in the frequency, intensity and duration of AHWs of
Madeira Island in the future. During winter and spring, the Azores High is generally situated near
the Azores, and thus Madeira Island, compared to the summer months were the high­pressure sys­
54
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:65==
tem typically migrates westward over the Atlantic to form the Bermuda High. With the observed
expansion of the Azores High during winter over the past 100 years, and thus believed continuation
in the future, it is highly probable that AHWs in Madeira Island will be impacted by this expansion,
experiencing more frequent, intense and longer AHWs as a response.
The combination of the observations from this study on linkages between AHWs and coastal ocean
conditions of Madeira Island, and the projected future atmospheric changes and linked increase in
frequency, intensity and duration of AHWs, suggests that the coastal regions of Madeira Island
will be impacted by these changes. Higher SSTs, stronger stratification of the water column and a
decreased MLD are believed impacts of these future projections of AHWs. These physical ocean
properties can inevitably impact the coastal marine ecosystems of the island, potentially exacer­
bating the pressures on ecosystems due to ongoing anthropogenic warming.
6.3
Methodological considerations and future recommendations
6.3.1
Specific AHW index recommended for coastal regions
One out of three applied indices for AHW detection, detected an AHW (Index 1, July 24­26). The
difference in AHW detection in the three variable indices can be explained from different perspec­
tives.
The choice of reference period can greatly impact the AHW detection. The reference period of In­
dex 1 was 1961­1990, i.e. the earliest of the three reference periods, compared to Index 2 and Index
3, which held the reference periods of 1982­2021 and 1991­2020, respectively. Global tempera­
tures has increasingly risen since pre­industrial levels (1850­1900) (Calvin et al., 2023), resulting
in lower percentile values in the early reference period of 1961­1990 compared to the later refer­
ence periods of 1982­2021 and 1991­2020. Lower percentile values enhances the chance of the
present mean average temperatures to exceed these values.
The percentile ranks can additionally influence the AHW detection. A lower percentile rank, 90th
(Index 2), compared to 95th (Index 1 and 3), increases the chance of detecting an AHW. Further­
more, the choice of temperature metric can affect the detection. In Index 1 and 2, solely the mean
air temperature must exceed the percentile, in comparison with Index 3 that requires both the min­
imum and maximum air temperature to exceed the threshold.
Index 1 was chosen due to the relation to the study of AHWs in a deep sea island (Sanz et al., 2007).
The vast majority of the scientific literature studies impacts of AHWs in continental regions. Since
the ocean play an important role in shaping and regulating the localized atmospheric­ocean condi­
tions, often imposing a dampening effect to the climate due to its higher heat capacity compared
to land, it is suggested that AHWs studied in coastal regions should apply a specific AHW index,
considering specific coastal heat fluxes, winds, currents and ocean dynamics.
6.3.2
General methodological improvements
Precaution in interpretation of two­flow current data
Precaution should be made in the interpretation of the two­flow current observations (Figure 5.8a
and 5.9a). A Savitzky­Golay filter is applied to the ADCP data to reduce the noise in the data.
However, even though the general trend is attempted to be kept, smoothing can lead to biases, and
should therefore be interpreted with caution.
ERA5 data
ERA5 data for AHW detection were extracted from one single grid cell southwest of Madeira Is­
land (Figure 4.1). For future similar studies, it is recommended to extract this data from multiple
grid cells over the specific region of interest, and then average this data. This approach will secure
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
55
==PAGE:66==
more accurately measures of percentiles, and thus more accurately detection of AHWs.
Spatial alignment of meteo­oceanographic measurements
The extraction of the meteo­oceanographic data, which is subject for comparison, is not entirely
spatially aligned (Figure 4.2). The meteorological station data (measuring atmospheric conditions)
originates from land and the oceanographic measurements (APB5 CTD and ADCP) from the sea
with a distance of ∼8.2 km between them. As the meteo­oceanographic data is subject for com­
parison, it would have been optimal if the meteorological conditions, including air temperature,
humidity, wind speed and direction, could have been obtained directly from the in­situ oceano­
graphic measurements, increasing the reliability of the comparison.
Increase spatial and temporal coverage of oceanographic data measurements
The present study is a case study at one specific oceanographic position of Madeira Island, with
the detection of one single AHW.
An increased spatial coverage, i.e. number of oceanographic measurement stations, together with
an expansion of the temporal coverage, would increase the quality and reliability of the study.
An increased number of ADCP measurements, along with an increased number of vertical pro­
files measuring the seawater properties, over the continental shelf would be interesting to gain a
broader and deeper understanding of the extent of the potential impacts of AHWs on the coastal
ocean conditions.
One can imagine a study consisting of the analysis of multiple AHW events, covering a larger area,
and combining the in­situ measurements with model simulations from the COAWST model. The
creation of such a digital twin (Chen et al., 2023), would allow for a more comprehensive picture
of AHW impacts on coastal environments, ultimately facilitating better mitigation and adaptation
measures and strategies in the areas impacted.
Develop general protocol for studies of linkages between AHWs and coastal ocean
conditions
Comprehensive studies of the linkages between AHWs and coastal ocean conditions and circula­
tion are recommended to robustly identify the underlying processes driving these changes. Sys­
tematic and consistent monitoring of meteorological and oceanographic conditions is crucial.
The development of a general protocol for the exploration of AHWs and coastal ocean conditions
would be highly valuable and useful in order to carry out future studies exploring AHWs impacts on
coastal communities, including marine ecosystems. Suggested content of such a protocol include
a homogeneous AHW index, specific oceanographic measures and metrics, securing a consistent
evaluation of meteo­oceanographic linkages and dynamics.
Such a protocol would allow for inter­spatial and temporal comparison of AHWs impacts on coastal
ocean conditions, providing insights between different coastal regions and previous and future
studies of these impacts. Ultimately, a general protocol could contribute to closing the knowledge
cap of the linkages between AHWs and coastal ocean conditions, allowing for the creation of a
sustainable road map for mitigating, and adapting to, these potential impacts.
6.3.3
Possible impacts of change in coastal ocean conditions during AHW
conditions
Possible impacts on the coastal marine environment (Ummenhofer and Meehl, 2017; West et al.,
2021) are expected as a result of the changes in coastal ocean conditions observed during an AHW
event. These impacts include, but is not limited to
• Increased probability of extreme events, including marine heatwaves (due to persistent sur­
face ocean heating during AHWs)
56
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:67==
• Shift in marine species population, and possibly cascading effects in higher trophic levels
(due to higher seawater temperatures, decrease in MLD and intensified thermal stratification
of the water column)
• Aggravation of harmful algal blooms (due to warmer ocean conditions)
• Increase in mortality events involving immobile species (due to higher seawater tempera­
tures)
• Decreased CO2 uptake, impacting the carbon cycle (due to reduced carbon solubility as a
consequence of higher seawater temperatures)
Even though being out of the scope of this study, these potential cascading impacts of the observed
changes in coastal ocean conditions during AHW conditions, are crucial to evaluate and consider
in order to implement proper mitigation and adaptation strategies. Thus, future studies on these
mechanisms and impacts are highly recommended.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
57
==PAGE:68==
7
Conclusion
An AHW persisting for three consecutive days from July 24­26, 2022, was detected with Index 1.
No AHW was detected with Index 2 and 3.
AHWs often occur as a result of high­pressure systems, where subsiding air traps heat at the Earth’s
surface, suppresses cloud formation, and hence increases shortwave radiation reached at the sur­
face, ultimately heating up the surface. On planetary, multiannual scales, climate change is rec­
ognized as the main driver of AHWs. Climate projections demonstrate an future increase in the
frequency, intensity and duration of AHWs.
Meteorological station data reveal higher air temperatures during the AHW, with air temperatures
reaching 30.2°C on July 26. During the AHW, sea/land breezes and longshore wind velocities
significantly decrease, and humidity levels experience higher fluctuations during day and night,
compared to after the AHW.
Higher R2­values, indicating a stronger correlation between air temperature and SST, are observed
before and during the AHW (56 % and 46 %), than after the AHW (14 %). Before and during the
AHW, 56 % and 46 %, respectively, of the SST variation can be explained by air temperature vari­
ation. Higher SST values are observed during the AHW, with 25°C reached on July 26. The weak
correlation between the air temperature and SST after the AHW suggests that the SST is influenced
by other dominant factors, including winds and currents, rather than air temperature.
Highly stratified surface waters are detected during the AHW with a strong thermocline and MLD
identified at 1.5 m on July 26 during daytime. This thin upper ocean layer width is believed to
be an underlying driver of the enhanced ocean surface heating, and stronger correlation between
the air temperature and SST, experienced during the AHW. The width of the upper mixed layer
increases after the AHW to a thickness of 9.5 m, exposing a width difference of 8 m during the
AHW, compared to after. Instability in salinity profiles, observed as distinct water parcels sinking
and rising, is recognized during the AHW.
Consistent onshore and westward flowing currents are identified during the AHW. After the AHW,
an increased fluctuation between onshore and offshore currents are recognized, and to a lesser ex­
tend between the east/westward flowing currents. Asynchronous flows are observed in the on­
shore/offshore currents after the AHW, with the upper current flow (27 m) flowing in an offshore
direction and the deeper current flow (47 m) flowing in an onshore direction. These asynchronous
flows suggest that warmer, upper offshore flowing currents are balanced and replaced by deeper,
cooler onshore flowing currents, i.e. indicating a coastal upwelling process. This process supports
the weak correlation observed between air temperature and SST after the AHW, as the suggested
upwelling process cools the upper ocean mixed layer.
COAWST model outputs of SST and surface currents reveal significant oceanic eddy dynamics
in the wake region of the island. An accumulation of warmer SST is observed along the southern
coastline during the AHW. This aligns with the in­situ measurements of SST. A heating of the
SSTs along the northeast coast of the island is simultaneously observed in the model output during
the AHW. Since, the in­situ measurements of higher SSTs during the AHW align with higher SSTs
in the model, it is suggested that the coastal ocean conditions in the northeast coast of the island
possibly are impacted during the AHW.
Human­induced greenhouse gas forcing is projected to expand and intensify the Azores High dur­
ing winter. This expansion and intensification of the Azores High, accompanied by climate change,
are believed to increase the frequency, intensity and duration of AHWs in Madeira Island in the
future. Given the evidence of the potential linkages between AHWs and coastal ocean conditions
presented in this study, this projected increase in AHW events, is expected to impact the coastal
ocean conditions, circulation and dynamics of Madeira Island in the future.
58
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:69==
References
Aboelkhair, H., B. Mohamed, M. Morsy, and H. Nagy, Co­occurrence of atmospheric and oceanic
heatwaves in the eastern mediterranean over the last four decades, Remote Sensing 2023, Vol.
15, Page 1841, 15, 1841, doi:10.3390/RS15071841, 2023.
Alves, J. M., R. M. Caldeira, and P. M. Miranda, Dynamics and oceanic response of the madeira
tip­jets, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 146, 3048–3063, doi:10.1002/
qj.3825, 2020.
Alves, J. M., P. M. Miranda, R. Tomé, and R. Caldeira, Evolution of the subtropical surface wind in
the north­east atlantic under climate change, Climate Dynamics, 63, 1–19, doi:10.1007/S00382­
024­07492­9/FIGURES/12, 2025.
Azevedo, C. C., C. M. L. Camargo, J. Alves, , Rui, and M. A. Caldeira, Convection and heat
transfer in island (warm) wakes, doi:10.1175/JPO­D­20­0103.s1, 2020.
Barriopedro, D., R. García­Herrera, C. Ordóñez, D. G. Miralles, and S. Salcedo­Sanz, Heat
waves: Physical understanding and scientific challenges, Reviews of Geophysics, 61, doi:
10.1029/2022RG000780, 2023.
Bauer, P., A. Thorpe, and G. Brunet, The quiet revolution of numerical weather prediction, Nature,
525, 47–55, doi:10.1038/NATURE14956, 2015.
Borja, A., D. Amouroux, P. Anschutz, M. Gómez­Gesteira, M. C. Uyarra, and L. Valdés, The bay
of biscay, World Seas: An Environmental Evaluation Volume I: Europe, the Americas and West
Africa, pp. 113–152, doi:10.1016/B978­0­12­805068­2.00006­1, 2019.
Caldeira, R. M., and R. Tomé, Wake response to an ocean­feedback mechanism: Madeira is­
land case study, Boundary­Layer Meteorology, 148, 419–436, doi:10.1007/s10546­013­9817­y,
2013.
Caldeira, R. M. A., and P. Sangrà, Complex geophysical wake flows madeira archipelago case
study, Ocean Dynamics, 62, 683–700, doi:10.1007/s10236­012­0528­6, 2012.
Calvin, K., et al., Ipcc, 2023: Climate change 2023: Synthesis report. contribution of working
groups i, ii and iii to the sixth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change
[core writing team, h. lee and j. romero (eds.)]. ipcc, geneva, switzerland., doi:10.59327/IPCC/
AR6­9789291691647, 2023.
Cardós, C., E. Barrera, and R. Sanz, Un estudio sobre episodios de temperaturas extremas en
canarias, 2007.
Chazarra, A., A. M. Barceló, V. Pires, S. Cunha, Álvaro Silva, J. Marques, F. Carvalho, M. Mendes,
and J. Neto, Climate atlas of the archipelagos of the canary islands, madeira and the azores air
temperature and precipitation (1971­2000), Institute of Meteorology, Portugal, 2015.
Chen, G., J. Yang, B. Huang, C. Ma, F. Tian, L. Ge, L. Xia, and J. Li, Toward digital twin of the
ocean: from digitalization to cloning, Intelligent Marine Technology and Systems 2023 1:1, 1,
1–12, doi:10.1007/S44295­023­00003­2, 2023.
Copernicus, Record temperatures in madeira, portugal | copernicus, 2023.
Copernicus Climate Change Service, C., European state of the climate 2023, 2024.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
59
==PAGE:70==
Cosby, A. G., V. Lebakula, C. N. Smith, D. W. Wanik, K. Bergene, A. N. Rose, D. Swanson, and
D. E. Bloom, Accelerating growth of human coastal populations at the global and continent
levels: 2000–2018, Scientific Reports 2024 14:1, 14, 1–10, doi:10.1038/s41598­024­73287­x,
2024.
Cresswell­Clay, N., C. C. Ummenhofer, D. L. Thatcher, A. D. Wanamaker, R. F. Denniston, Y. As­
merom, and V. J. Polyak, Twentieth­century azores high expansion unprecedented in the past
1,200 years, Nature Geoscience 2022 15:7, 15, 548–553, doi:10.1038/s41561­022­00971­w,
2022.
Csanady, G. T., and M. Gibson, Air­sea interaction:
Laws and mechanisms, doi:10.1017/
CBO9781139164672, 2001.
de Boyer Montégut, C., G. Madec, A. S. Fischer, A. Lazar, and D. Iudicone, Mixed layer depth
over the global ocean: An examination of profile data and a profile­based climatology, Journal
of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 109, 1–20, doi:10.1029/2004JC002378, 2004.
Dronkers, J., Ekman transport, 2024.
Dunn, R. J., M. G. Donat, and L. V. Alexander, Comparing extremes indices in recent observational
and reanalysis products, Frontiers in Climate, 4, 989,505, doi:10.3389/FCLIM.2022.989505/
BIBTEX, 2022.
Espinosa, L. A., M. M. Portela, and R. Rodrigues, Spatio­temporal variability of droughts over
past 80 years in madeira island, Journal of Hydrology: Regional Studies, 25, 100,623, doi:
10.1016/J.EJRH.2019.100623, 2019.
Gallagher, N. B., Savitzky­golay smoothing and differentiation filter, 2020.
Gao, Q., C. Zeman, J. Vergara­Temprado, D. C. Lima, P. Molnar, and C. Schär, Vortex streets
to the lee of madeira in a kilometre­resolution regional climate model, Weather and Climate
Dynamics, 4, 189–211, doi:10.5194/WCD­4­189­2023, 2023.
Grubišic, V., J. Sachsperger, and R. M. Caldeira, Atmospheric wake of madeira: First aerial ob­
servations and numerical simulations, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 72, 4755–4776,
doi:10.1175/JAS­D­14­0251.1, 2015.
Hersbach, H., et al., The era5 global reanalysis, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological
Society, 146, 1999–2049, doi:10.1002/QJ.3803, 2020.
Hersbach, H., et al., Era5 hourly data on single levels from 1940 to present, doi:DOI:10.24381/
cds.adbb2d47, 2023.
Inouye, B., Climate and atmosphere, 2025.
Kunze, E., A review of oceanic salt­fingering theory, Progress in Oceanography, 56, 399–417,
doi:10.1016/S0079­6611(03)00027­2, 2003.
Lorenzo, N., A. Díaz­Poso, and D. Royé, Heatwave intensity on the iberian peninsula: Future
climate projections, Atmospheric Research, 258, 105,655, doi:10.1016/J.ATMOSRES.2021.
105655, 2021.
Marshall, J., and R. A. Plumb, Atmosphere, ocean, and climate dynamics: An introductory text,
2008.
Mason, E., F. Colas, J. Molemaker, A. F. Shchepetkin, C. Troupin, J. C. McWilliams, and P. Sangrà,
Seasonal variability of the canary current: A numerical study, Journal of Geophysical Research:
Oceans, 116, doi:10.1029/2010JC006665, 2011.
60
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:71==
McGregor, G., P. Bessemoulin, K. Ebi, and B. Menne, Heatwaves and health: guidance on
warning­system development, 2015.
McWilliams, J. C., Modeling the oceanic general circulation, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics,
28, 215–248, doi:10.1146/ANNUREV.FL.28.010196.001243/CITE/REFWORKS, 1996.
NOAA, Azores high, 2006.
Nortek, Understanding adcps: a guide to measuring currents, waves turbulence with acoustic
sensors, 2024.
Nortek, High­performance mean currents and turbulence, wave height and direction, 2025.
Németh, A., and Z. Kern, Sclerochronological study of a glycymeris vangentsumi population from
the madeira islands, Frontiers in Earth Science, 6, doi:10.3389/FEART.2018.00076, 2018.
OOM, Oom ­ observatório oceânico da madeira, 2025.
Parente, J., M. G. Pereira, M. Amraoui, and E. M. Fischer, Heat waves in portugal: Current regime,
changes in future climate and impacts on extreme wildfires, Science of the Total Environment,
631­632, 534–549, doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.03.044, 2018.
Pastor, F., Sea surface temperature: From observation to applications, Journal of Marine Science
and Engineering 2021, Vol. 9, Page 1284, 9, 1284, doi:10.3390/JMSE9111284, 2021.
Perkins, S. E., A review on the scientific understanding of heatwaves­their measurement, driving
mechanisms, and changes at the global scale, doi:10.1016/j.atmosres.2015.05.014, 2015.
Perkins, S. E., and L. V. Alexander, On the measurement of heat waves, Journal of Climate, 26,
4500–4517, doi:10.1175/JCLI­D­12­00383.1, 2013.
Pinet, P. R., Invitation to Oceanography, 7th edition ed., 662 pp., Jones Bartlett Learning, 2014.
Praveen, K. B., M. F. Cronin, S. Joseph, M. Ravichandran, and N. Sureshkumar, Latent heat flux
sensitivity to sea surface temperature: Regional perspectives, Journal of Climate, 30, 129–143,
doi:10.1175/JCLI­D­16­0285.1, 2017.
Pullen, J., R. Caldeira, J. D. Doyle, P. May, and R. Tomé, Modeling the air­sea feedback system
of madeira island, Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 9, 1641–1664, doi:10.1002/
2016MS000861, 2017.
Raei, E., M. R. Nikoo, A. Aghakouchak, O. Mazdiyasni, and M. Sadegh, Ghwr, a multi­method
global heatwave and warm­spell record and toolbox, Scientific Data 2018 5:1, 5, 1–15, doi:
10.1038/sdata.2018.206, 2018.
Rosa, A., C. Cardoso, R. Vieira, R. Faria, A. R. Oliveira, G. Navarro, and R. M. Caldeira, Impact of
flash flood events on the coastal waters around madeira island: The “land mass effect”, Frontiers
in Marine Science, 8, 749,638, doi:10.3389/FMARS.2021.749638/BIBTEX, 2022.
SAIV, A. E. S. . S., Apb5 automatic profiling buoy, 2024.
Sanz, R., C. Cardós, and E. Barrera, Heat waves in the canary islands, 2007.
Savitzky, and J. E. G. A. Marcel, Smoothing and differentiation of data by simplified least squares
procedures, Am. Pharm. Assoc., Sci. Ed, 40, 1832, 1964.
Schulzweida, U., Cdo user guide, MPI for Meteorology, 2023.
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
61
==PAGE:72==
Seneviratne, X. Z. M. A. W. B. C. D. A. D. L. S. G. I. I. J. K. S. L. F. O. I. P. M. S. S. V.­S. M.
W. B. Z., S.I, Weather and Climate Extreme Events in a Changing Climate, pp. 1513–1766,
Cambridge University Press, doi:10.1017/9781009157896.013, 2023.
Thorpe, S. A., The turbulent ocean, The Turbulent Ocean, 9780521835435, 1–439, doi:10.1017/
CBO9780511819933, 2005.
Tomczak, M., and J. S. Godfrey, Regional oceanography: an introduction, Pergamon Press, doi:
10.1016/0278­4343(95)00021­6, 1994.
Ummenhofer, C. C., and G. A. Meehl, Extreme weather and climate events with ecological rele­
vance: a review, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 372,
doi:10.1098/RSTB.2016.0135, 2017.
West, J. J., L. Järnberg, E. Berdalet, and C. Cusack, Understanding and managing harmful algal
bloom risks in a changing climate: Lessons from the european coclime project, Frontiers in
Climate, 3, 636,723, doi:10.3389/FCLIM.2021.636723/BIBTEX, 2021.
WMO, W. M. O., Heatwave, 2025.
Xiao, S., M. Zhang, C. Liu, C. Jiang, X. Wang, and F. Yang, Ctd sensors for ocean investigation
including state of art and commercially available, Sensors, 23, doi:10.3390/S23020586, 2023.
Yan, X.­H., and A. Okubo, Three­dimensional analytical model for the mixed layer depth, Journal
of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 97, 20,201–20,226, doi:10.1029/92JC01833, 1992.
You, Q., Z. Jiang, L. Kong, Z. Wu, Y. Bao, S. Kang, and N. Pepin, A comparison of heat wave
climatologies and trends in china based on multiple definitions, Climate Dynamics, 48, 3975–
3989, doi:10.1007/S00382­016­3315­0/TABLES/5, 2017.
Young, I. R., and D. Reeve, Wind generated ocean waves, Engineering Structures, 22, 1225–1226,
doi:10.1016/S0141­0296(99)00068­1, 1999.
Zheng, Q., V. V. Klemas, and X. H. Yan, Volume 8 overview: progress in ocean remote sensing,
Comprehensive Remote Sensing, 1­9, 1–42, doi:10.1016/B978­0­12­409548­9.10517­2, 2018.
62
Exploring linkages between atmospheric heatwaves and coastal ocean conditions
==PAGE:73==
in the waters of the Atlantic
northwest of Africa
in the rough open ocean
with forces so strong
no man can ever tame
from deep below the ocean’s surface
in whirlpools of complexity
this beautiful island arises
the island of Madeira
the pearl of the Atlantic
that’s what they call it
where the mountains meet the sea
where the ocean is calling your name
so loud
that you have no other choice
than to surrender
surrender to its calling
Technical
University of
Denmark
Henrik Dams Allé, Building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.aqua.dtu.dk
