==PAGE:1==
Machine learning and cyber deception
Methods for combating fraudsters
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine learning and cyber deception
Methods for combating fraudsters
Master Thesis
January, 2025
By
Victor Rodrigues Andersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of cyber security and
computer networking.
Victor Rodrigues Andersen ­ s194577
Signature
Date
ii
Machine learning and cyber deception
25-01-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The increase in cyber threats in recent times calls for better and more proactive defense
strategies. The thesis explores a novel approach by focusing on cyber deception tech­
niques, particularly the use of honeytokens, to engage and gather intelligence from email­
based fraudsters. The project combines elements of cyber deception with the use of Large
Language Models (LLMs) as a tool to help automate and optimize the process, and facil­
itate realistic, deceptive dialogues with attackers.
The essence of this project is to develop and implement a deception framework that cre­
ates interactive engagements with scammers. These engagements are designed to be
indistinguishable from legitimate interactions, effectively building the scammer’s trust and
prolonging the interaction. The interaction culminates with the use of a honeytoken serv­
ing as a disguised trap that, when triggered, aims to provide valuable information about
the malicious party on the other end.
This project evaluates the success of these deceptive strategies based on the quality of
information secured via honeytokens, the level of sustained interaction with the fraudsters
and the effectiveness in obtaining information on the scammer. The expected outcome
is a robust framework and set of best practices for using cyber deception to actively com­
bat email scams. This approach is expected to contribute to the traditional cybersecurity
paradigms with more dynamic, interaction­based strategies, significantly enhancing the
effectiveness of cyber defenses against fraud.
Machine learning and cyber deception
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Dr. Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor, Supervisor
I would like to thank my supervisor, Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, whose guidance, knowl­
edge, and insights proved crucial to developing this thesis. His input greatly improved my
work, and I am truly grateful for all the help he provided.
Family
My heartfelt gratitude goes to my family for helping me keep on track and supporting me
every step of the way.
iv
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Scams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Scambaiting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Honeytokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Artificial Intelligence in Fraud Combat
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Design
12
3.1
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
System Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Gmail Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Scam Mail Attraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Large Language Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.6
Honeytoken Type and Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.7
Information Gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.8
Security Concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Implementation
22
4.1
Overall System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
External Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Conversation Handler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4
Gmail Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.5
OpenAI Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.6
Logging Service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.7
Honeytoken Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.8
Security Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Evaluation
33
5.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Automated Response Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.3
Honeytokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6
Conclusion and Future Work
46
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Bibliography
48
A Source code
52
B Receipt for email not delivered
53
Machine learning and cyber deception
v
==PAGE:8==
C Full conversation log
54
D Full nginx configuration file
58
vi
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Cybersecurity has become a critical aspect of the internet nowadays. With the develop­
ment of communication online, email messaging remains one of the most utilized yet very
vulnerable platforms for criminal activities such as phishing, fraud, and scams. In 2022,
it is estimated that 48% of emails sent worldwide were spam messages [1]. Email scams
have evolved into elaborate operations that take advantage of individuals and organiza­
tions, especially those less aware of these threats. The most recent IC3 report for 2023
[2] shows that over 12.5 Billion USD were lost to cybercrime, where phishing made up
the largest portion of crimes reported. While significant efforts have been made to com­
bat these threats, an increase in reports of cybercrime is still reported [2], showing issues
with current combat methods and highlighting the need for new techniques to combat ma­
licious activities.
Traditionally, the most developed method for combatting email spam is filtering. A vast
array of studies have been performed to optimize it and increase its efficiency [3, 4, 5,
6], though as statistics show [2], victims of email scam campaigns are still reporting huge
financial losses to these criminal organizations. Filtering spam mail presents a passive
solution to the problem. Recently, researchers have shifted focus towards active defense
techniques to combating cybercrime [7].
In the scope of active defense, lies the concept of cyber deception. Cyber deception
is an emerging proactive defense strategy that aims to confuse and mislead attackers by
introducing false information into systems [8]. Various techniques are employed to de­
ceive the adversary, and among those are honeypots and honeytokens. Honeytokens
present themselves as valuable information attractive to the adversary, and their value
lies in being attacked and compromised [9]. They are used to track actions performed by
malicious parties without compromising the system they are designed to defend.
Individuals have also taken action against the growing wave of scam mail threats, in the
form of scambaiting. Scambaiting, the act of engaging scammers to waste their time
and resources, has traditionally been performed manually by individuals as a form of ac­
tivism. However, recent advancements in artificial intelligence and automation provide
an opportunity to conduct these actions at a large scale. Existing research has con­
firmed the feasibility and effectiveness of automated scambaiting systems [10, 11, 12],
but these implementations often lack integration with widely used email platforms, limit­
ing their practicality and applicability. Furthermore, they focus on wasting the scammer’s
time and resources, while actions can be taken to fingerprint and identify the person on the
other end. This thesis improves previous iterations by presenting a scambaiting system
integrated with a widely used email service provider and that uses novel cyber deception
techniques to efficiently deceive scammers to obtain valuable information about them..
The ultimate goal of this thesis is to design and implement an automated email scam­
baiting system capable of gathering information through deception with honeytokens. By
using deceptive techniques such as honeytokens and taking advantage of developments
in Large Language Models (LLMs), this project seeks to present a system that efficiently
deceives fraudsters and gathers valuable information.
Machine learning and cyber deception
1
==PAGE:10==
This thesis is organized as follows:
• Chapter 2 reviews related works in the fields of scam research, scambaiting, hon­
eytokens, and AI in fraud combat. It also presents the contributions of this thesis.
• Chapter 3 discusses the system’s design, detailing the methods used to attract scam
emails, generate automated responses, gather information on scammers, ensure
the system’s security, and the various components of the scambaiting system.
• Chapter 4 details how the system is implemented, highlighting frameworks used and
the tasks of each component.
• Chapter 5 presents the experimentation and evaluation of the system, highlighting
its effectiveness and limitations. It also analyses the information gathered and eval­
uates its validity.
• Chapter 6 concludes the thesis, summarizing the contributions and suggesting ar­
eas of improvement for future research.
2
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
The following sections will delve deeper into typical scam schemes, scambaiting, and hon­
eytoken aspects of this study and examine the uses of AI and machine learning in fraud
combat, especially Large Language Models. By exploring existing literature on these top­
ics this chapter contextualizes this project, presents previous results, highlights research
areas yet to be explored, and identifies areas for improvement in similar projects
Since the dawn of civilization, humans have attempted to take advantage of one another
through scams, fraud, and deception. The first registered attempt of fraud dates back to
300 B.C., when a Greek sea merchant attempted to sink his ship to pocket all the money
he had loaned as insurance [13]. Since then, scams and fraudulent schemes have taken
many twists and turns as they evolve and adapt to our ever­changing society.
2.1
Scams
In this section, we will explore the types of scams that the internet has made possible and
how they have evolved into the landscape that we have today.
The arrival of the internet opened up new possibilities for scam criminals and fraudsters to
explore and develop new strategies as they now could communicate with a much larger
pool of victims in a much more efficient manner. The first email spam in history was sent
shortly after the invention of the email, while it was still exclusive to the ARPANET project
[14].
After email services were made public, the first fraud schemes started seeing daylight
as criminals migrated their strategies to this new tool, and new ones emerged. As ev­
erything was still very new, internet users were very naive and gullible, which meant that
fraud schemes did not need to be very elaborate, as only a few were aware of the pos­
sibility of emails being scams or had no knowledge of it before. This lack of awareness
meant many victims believed they were one of the lucky winners of an iTunes gift card or
that they would have 10 years of bad luck if they did not forward the message received.
Fraudsters often set up malicious websites and include links to them in their messages,
where they obtain personal information from victims or facilitate monetary transactions.
Scammers similarly migrated some old­known schemes while developing new strategies.
The Spanish Prisoner scam dates back to the early 19th century. In this scheme, the
fraudster corresponded using postal mail with their victims, claiming to be a wealthy per­
son who had been wrongfully imprisoned and needed urgent help [13]. They claimed
they needed money to secure their release and promised a much more significant sum in
return for the assistance provided, only for the victim to never hear from them again after
transferring the funds. This old scheme laid the groundwork for one of the most prominent
internet fraud methods: Advance Fee Fraud (AFF).
2.1.1
Advance Fee Fraud
Advance Fee Fraud involves, in most cases, misleading a person into making advance
payments either for non­existent merchandise or the advance payment is framed as inci­
dental costs (taxes, logistics costs, flights or insurances) [15], promising a larger sum or
Machine learning and cyber deception
3
==PAGE:12==
reward in return.
Perhaps one of the most widely known AFF schemes is the ”Nigerian Prince” scheme.
They are often known as 419 schemes, after the relevant section of the Nigerian criminal
code [16]. Actors would pass as members of the Nigerian royalty who needed financial
aid from a distant friend, the victim, to solve an urgent problem. Promising, once again,
a much larger sum in return for the favor. Seeing the potential in these schemes, scam­
mers developed them further, offering the victims a business or investment opportunity in
Nigeria, where the sender would seek to involve the recipient in a scheme to earn millions
of dollars through illegal acts. Targets who are sufficiently greedy and gullible to agree
will gradually be asked to make payments of thousands of dollars to cover fictitious local
taxes, spurious regulatory fees, or non­existent legal costs [16]. Victims often increase
their investments as a result of a psychological drive not to admit defeat or loss of the
money invested.
The infamous AFF scheme coming from Nigeria, and subsequently other Western African
countries such as Cameroon, Sierra Leone, and Ghana [15], has taken industrial scale
and is estimated that it costs the British economy 150 million GBP [16]. The scale of
these schemes has taken a toll on the direct victims and the countries of origin of this
scam. The 419 scheme has become mainstream and widely known among the general
public. This development has drastically hit Nigeria’s reputation overseas, as for many
individuals, these scam emails will be their first and maybe only exposure to Nigeria [16].
As a result, legitimate business partners and opportunities in these countries risk being
seen as criminals and fraudsters and have a much tougher time developing their business
overseas.
Precise and verified data on the origin of recent AFF messages are challenging to gather,
as nowadays actors hide behind either falsified personas from countries in Europe or the
United States or claim to be people in high­ranking positions at federal institutions, mainly
in the US.
2.1.2
Phishing Scams
Phishing scams involve online identity theft where attackers attempt to acquire sensitive
information, such as login credentials or financial details, by masquerading as trustworthy
entities in digital communications [17]. The term originated in the 1990s, drawing from
the idea of ”fishing” for victims with a digital lure [17].
Phishing attacks commonly involve deceptive emails or messages that direct victims to
counterfeit websites resembling legitimate platforms, such as banks or government agen­
cies. Fraudsters design these sites to extract sensitive data under the guise of routine
account maintenance or security verification [17]. Attackers also employ malware­based
phishing, which uses malicious software to exploit vulnerabilities on the victim’s device,
further broadening their reach [17].
The evolution of phishing techniques has rendered them more sophisticated and targeted.
Early phishing attempts relied on generic lures, but modern variants often leverage social
engineering, using publicly available data to craft contextually relevant messages. For
instance, ”spear phishing” attacks target specific individuals by referencing personal or
professional details to build credibility [18]. This personalization significantly increases
success rates, as studies show that phishing emails originating from known acquaintances
can deceive up to 72% of recipients [18].
4
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:13==
The economic and societal impact of phishing is profound. In addition to the direct finan­
cial losses—estimated to exceed $1.2 billion annually in the early 2000s [19]—the indirect
effects include eroding consumer trust in digital platforms [19]. Surveys reveal that fear
of phishing dissuades many users from engaging in e­commerce, underscoring its detri­
mental influence on global markets. Moreover, phishing announcements adversely affect
the market value of firms, with larger organizations experiencing an average loss of 6.1%
in stock value following such incidents [19].
Despite advances in anti­phishing technologies, such as browser­based detection tools,
user education remains a critical countermeasure. Understanding phishers’ psychological
and technical tactics is essential in mitigating their effectiveness. As phishing techniques
adapt, proactive measures will be crucial to safeguarding individuals and organizations
from these pervasive cyber threats [17].
2.1.3
Other Scams
Over the years, fraudsters have diversified their schemes to catch unsuspecting people
in new ways, often targeting areas that scammers have not yet exploited. Over time,
Romance Scams, Charity Scams, Loan Scams, Rental Scams, Conference Scams, and
many others began to appear. The rise of diverse social platforms enabled scam crim­
inals to develop their schemes further. Some examples include shifting rental scams to
platforms like Facebook and Airbnb and romance scams to newer messaging services
beyond email, which became much more popular.
As internet scamming grew to significant proportions, recovery scams emerged. These
involved contacting recent scam victims with promises to help them recover their lost
funds, only for the victims to fall prey to yet another scheme. This trend shows how in­
ternet criminals will take every opportunity to squeeze as much money as possible from
their victims and that there is still a lack of awareness among the population regarding
detecting a fraud scheme before falling victim to it.
2.2
Scambaiting
As scamming became a growing problem, organizations started to look for solutions to
prevent people from falling for the overwhelming amount of malicious schemes. Email
services started to provide spam filters to raise awareness of certain types of emails
within their users’ inboxes that they may not identify themselves. However, individuals
started having ideas about combatting the growing fraud problem. According to Zingerle
and Kronman, scambaiters are individuals in online information communities specializing
in identifying, documenting, and reporting actions [20]. These individuals also seek to
waste fraudsters’ time and resources on them instead of victims who may fall for their
schemes, as the scambaiters are aware of how to act towards the criminal and where the
limit lies in their schemes to not fall for them. Originally, scambaiters arose as an answer
to 419 scams, but quickly spread to other schemes and mediums, such as newer mes­
saging services and phone calls.
Scambaiters motivations vary and are mostly personal. A study by Tuovinen and Röning
[21] shows that the reasons can range from community service where the baiters seek to
protect potential victims, status elevation, especially within the scambaiting community,
and revenge if the baiter or someone close to them has fallen for a fraudulent scheme in
the past and now seeks retaliation.
A diversity of scambaiting forums have been created, though with time, they have taken
Machine learning and cyber deception
5
==PAGE:14==
different routes. Some, like Scamwarners [22], lean more into awareness and share the
different scam campaigns that are currently active. However, many still use the informa­
tion to contact scammers to scambait them. Threads on Scammer.info [23] share emails
and especially phone numbers so that individuals can contact them either through mes­
saging services or by calling them. Lastly, there is the Reddit forum r/scambait [24], where
users share conversations and interactions with scammers for praise and for other users’
amusement, as the users are discouraged from sharing any information on the fraudster
being interacted with, thus not enabling others to contact them.
2.2.1
Strategies
While some focus more on the entertainment and humiliation aspect of scambaiting, most
communities focus on tackling the problem as anti­fraud activism and develop strategies
for social engineering to make the process more convincing and increase the success rate
of scambaiting. A study conducted by Zingerle and Kronman [20] in 2013 on these strate­
gies divides scambaiter activities into seven categories: Scam Alerters, Trophy Hunters,
Website Reporters, Bank Guards, Romance Scam Seekers, Safari Agents, and Inbox
Drivers, all with their objectives and roles that attempt to encompass the various aspects
of the fraudulent schemes they face.
Tuovinen and Röning [21] also mention in their discussion that the anonymity the internet
provides goes both ways; it is just as easy for the scambaiter to assume a false identity as
it is for the scammer. The standard strategy among most scambaiters is to pretend to be
interested in the fraudulent scheme presented to them. When asked for money, the baiter
will stall the transaction as much as possible and sometimes present their own requests.
Tuovinen and Röning shed light on a common practice: scambaiters try to persuade the
fraudster to send a photograph of themselves, subsequently publishing it online.
2.2.2
Ethics
The phenomenon of internet vigilantism may seem like a good thing at first glance, but it
does not come without its moral conflicts. Like issues external to the internet, individuals
believe the resources allocated to combat them are insufficient and take matters into their
own hands. In a study on the hazards of cyber­vigilantism, Kosseff [25] presents cases
against this form of vigilantism practiced. Some of the larger issues discussed are the
motives, as individuals may sometimes use vigilantism as an excuse for a crime or an­
other bad act, sometimes seen with pedophile hunters, who, instead of handing the case
to the police, attack the lured men and blackmail them. The article also sheds light on the
rule of law, as vigilantism often undermines this principle that democracy is built on, since
it is not up to the individual to determine how to exercise constitutional rights.
Ethically and morally, scambaiting lies in a grey zone since baiting for money, which has
successfully been achieved before [26], is, in fact, illegal. However, it is also a valuable
tool in fighting various fraudulent schemes. The ethics page of 419eater.com, a popular
scambaiting forum focused on 419 scams, shows this ambiguity [27], as they address con­
cerns from citizens about the practice and answer genuine questions about the schemes
from an ethical standpoint, often with examples.
2.3
Honeytokens
2.3.1
Cyber Deception
As the cyber threat increased significantly with the evolution of the internet and digital
systems, so did the need for countermeasures to nullify attacks or mitigate them and
their impact. What we know today as more traditional measures of cybersecurity started
6
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:15==
emerging, such as encryption, firewalls, access control, intrusion detection systems, mul­
tifactor authentication, and many others. Most measures work more defensively to pre­
vent adversaries from gaining unauthorized access to sensitive or private data. Firewalls
determine which IPs and/or ports are allowed and blocked, access control ensures only
authorized personnel or systems perform the actions they are allowed to perform, and
multifactor authentication ensures only the account owner can log in.
Other cybersecurity measures take a more aggressive and active approach. As Evans
and Horsthemke describe, active defense includes a variety of automated and human­
directed activities that attempt to address the deficiencies of static defensive measures.
Many of the approaches attempt to thwart attacks by increasing the diversity, complexity,
or variability of the systems and networks. [28]. In recent years, research has shifted into
active defense strategies to complement the traditional static defensive measures that
are, with time, being overrun by more competent and adapting adversaries.
Active techniques are generally divided into proactive, reactive, and hybrid techniques
[28]. The concept of cyber deception is within the realm of hybrid proactive/reactive tech­
niques. It attempts to manipulate and mislead the adversary with false information shaped
in a way that, from an outside perspective, seems of interest to them. This information
can be released publicly or internally upon detected interaction of an adversary within
the system. It is essential to have some previous knowledge of possible adversaries and
their intentions with a given attack, as that supplies vital information to provide relevant
deceptive information that is more likely to be of interest to the attacker, increasing the
chance of manipulating them.
2.3.2
Honeypots and Honeytokens
The idea of deceptive systems paved the way for honeypots, which, in 2002, Lance
Spitzner defined as ”a security resource whose value lies in being probed, attacked or
compromised” [9]. By this definition, a honeypot is only useful once infiltrated by an ad­
versary, as it is a tool custom built to fit within an organization’s infrastructure to deceive
attackers and learn about their patterns and strategies. A honeypot may be a jailed and
controlled environment within the infrastructure, a system that emulates the production
services of the organization, or a collection of fake information, among other constel­
lations of deceptive systems. Spitzner also classifies honeypots into ”production” and
”research” honeypots [9]. The former are systems deployed to mitigate risks in an orga­
nization, while the latter are deployed to create a threat landscape and understand what
attacks are being performed by the blackhat community in order to prevent them or be
better prepared.
The collection of honeypots forms a honeynet, which aims to encapsulate all the different
ways attackers may attempt to exploit a vulnerability in the system, and one of the assets
contained in a honeypot is honeytokens. First mentioned by Augusto Paes de Barros
in 2003 [29], honeytokens are deceptive digital entries ranging from data files contain­
ing false information that may appear of interest to an attacker to fake database entries.
These honeytokens contain unique properties and embedded metadata that allow an or­
ganization to track how they are interacted with and enable information retrieval about the
adversary dealing with the fake entries.
Many studies have researched a wide spectrum of honeytokens and their efficiency in
Machine learning and cyber deception
7
==PAGE:16==
deceiving, preventing, and mitigating attacks, as well as attributing the attack to an ad­
versary. This spectrum matches the different types of legitimate entries organizations
have within their systems, meaning there is no simple objective way to classify which
honeytokens there are. Voris et al. [30] studied and classified different properties honey­
tokens should have in order to maximize their efficiency, these being Believability, Entic­
ingness, Conspicuousness, Detectability, Variability, Stealth, Non­interference, Differen­
tiability, and Shelf life.
In another study, White et al. [31] define that a honeytoken has three common properties
regardless of the digital object they are designed to mimic:
• They must appear real to the adversary.
• They must not interfere with the actual objects or use of the actual objects so as to
make the actual data objects unusable.
• They appear valuable to the adversary.
Juels [32] conducted a study on honey objects in the context of information security. The
focus on the honeytokens shifted towards ensuring indistinguishability and secrecy. Juels
and Rivest also study the concept of honeywords, which is a breakdown further than hon­
eytokens, that conceptualizes the use of decoy passwords to detect a breach of a pass­
word database. [33]
While Honeywords presents an adversary with decoy passwords among the actual pass­
word, Almeshekah et al. [34] present a system, ErsatzPasswords, that ”eliminates the
ability of an adversary to obtain the real password and seamlessly presents a fake pass­
word during an offline cracking process.”, by using machine­dependent functions at the
authentication server and a deception mechanism to alert any attempt of off­site password
discovery.
Araujo et al. [35] presented in 2014 a deceptive scheme, Honey­patch, that tricks ad­
versaries into thinking commonly known critical vulnerabilities, such as Heartbleed, are
not patched. This strategy makes the system attractive for an attack, ultimately leading
the attacker into a honeypot that tracks their actions and gathers information.
To make the process of generating deceptive entries more efficient, Bercovitch et al. [36]
developed an automated honeytokens generator, HoneyGen. It uses machine learning
algorithms alongside genuine database entries or login credentials to generate honeyto­
kens that are as convincing and indistinguishable as possible based on similarity to the
real tokens.
Nowadays, platforms like Canarytokens1 allow anyone to easily generate and track vari­
ous honeytokens, ranging from QR codes to PDF files.
As honeytokens started becoming a more commonly known countermeasure to adversary
attacks, the blackhat community started taking measures to detect when they were deal­
ing with honeypots or honeytokens. Honeytoken fingerprinting involves detecting whether
an entry is a honeytoken without triggering the alert. As soon as attackers identify a hon­
eytoken, they avoid it entirely, rendering it virtually useless and potentially exposing the
system as a honeypot.
1https://www.canarytokens.org/nest/
8
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:17==
In a recent study, Msaad et al. [37] analyzed fingerprinting techniques posed against
different honeytokens generated by Canarytokens and presented a proof of concept for
Honeysweeper, a tool for stealthy fingerprinting honeytokens based on the Canarytokens
implementation. The tool successfully fingerprinted 14 of the 20 honeytokens offered by
the Canarytokens open­source platform. These results show that it is possible to identify
a wide range of honeytokens, which can decrease the efficiency of the tokens.
Pilis [38] then studied how to improve the implementation of honeytokens to combat fin­
gerprinting, focusing on PDF files. The study revealed opportunities for improvement
in the metadata of the generated PDF files, the embedded URI actions that trigger the
alarms, the assignment of unique identifiers to each honeytoken, and the elimination of
similarities among Canarytoken’s system’s file outputs. When posed against the standard
Canarytoken implementation, the aforementioned Honeysweeper tool was deceived by
the improved implementation, giving the upper hand to the honeytoken PDF file gener­
ated. Similar work could be expanded into the other honeytoken types to improve their
quality and efficiency in deceiving attackers.
2.4
Artificial Intelligence in Fraud Combat
The sheer scale of fraudulent campaigns forced organizations to develop more sophisti­
cated solutions to combat the problem. Garcia et al. [3] present three different ways to
counter spammers in their analysis. Limit access to or block bulk mailers, incur a cost on
every email message sent, and apply filtering techniques to detect and remove all spam
when sent. Nowadays all mail services have some iteration of spam filtering, the first au­
tomated line of defense developed in the combat against scam mails.
Researchers have conducted other studies to identify fraudulent email messages, espe­
cially Advance Fee Fraud. Hamisu and Mansour [39] utilized Natural Language Process­
ing, specifically the Bag­of­Words model, to generate a word frequency count on 4500
fraudulent emails. Following the text mining, six different machine­learning algorithms
were used to classify the testing set, and half had an accuracy of 100%. In contrast, the
others kept an accuracy of at least 69%.
2.4.1
Combining Large Language Models with Scambaiting
Filtering takes a more passive and defensive stance against the threat of fraudulent emails.
Prior research has focused on studying automated answering systems for responding to
scam emails. The starting point is the research of Chen et al. [10], that developed the
first iteration of an automated scambaiting system. The study implemented a mail server
to handle conversation tasks. It operated independently on a unique domain, so it could
not spoof an email address or connect to an existing inbox. Chen et al. [10] implemented
three different response strategies, using the advancements of Natural Language Pro­
cessing (NLP) to use an AI natural language classifier with predefined template answers
and two text generators. The base model used for the generators was GPT­Neo [40],
an open­source pre­trained GPT variant. One of the generators was fine­tuned with pre­
processed scambaiting datasets from ScamLetters.info and from the work of Edwards et
al. [41], and the other first fine­tuned with the Enron dataset [42] and then the formerly
mentioned scambaiting datasets. The results of the experimentation phase showed that
the generator tuned with Enron and the scambaiting dataset performed better regarding
average replies and the ability to sustain more extended conversations, with an average
of 4 replies.
Machine learning and cyber deception
9
==PAGE:18==
The study of Bajaj and Edwards [11] extends the work of Chen et al. [10]. They utilize
the developed scambaiting mail server with OpenAI’s ChatGPT API to interact with their
GPT­3.5­Turbo model to generate the scambaiting responses to incoming emails. In Bajaj
and Edwards’ [11] work, two ChatGPT­based repliers were defined, the first with only pre­
defined instructions followed each time it answered an email and the second replier with a
small amount of vetted baiter­scammer interactions. Unexpectedly, the former performed
better than the one provided with reference conversations despite the model sometimes
ignoring the instructions given.
Similar work is also presented by Hewett and Leeke [12], who also developed an auto­
mated system to respond to fraudulent emails focusing on disrupting Advance Fee Fraud
schemes. Their study also presents research in prompt engineering techniques to cre­
ate replies more plausible to the scammers, conducive to the conversation, and steer
the scammer towards revealing more information. Prompt engineering is not an exact
science, as the output of prompts is not deterministic. However, Hewett and Leeke em­
ploy several techniques that lead the model to produce the desired output, such as Direct
Task Specification, Constraining Behaviour, and Metaprompt Engineering [12]. The re­
sults show a response rate of 70% of scammers contacted, greater than the rate shown
by the formerly mentioned studies [10, 11], while 14,8% of the fraudsters gave details of
bank accounts connected to the SWIFT network belonging to a range of banks.
The work of Chen et al. [10] and of Bajaj and Edwards [41] present a quantified analysis
of the results, providing tables and measurements of average replies and conversation
durations. At the same time, the latter also compares their results to the works of the
former, giving insightful information on how they stack against each other. The tables are
shown below:
(a) Analysis table by Bajaj and Edwards [11]
(b) Analysis table by Chen et al. [10]
Figure 2.1: Comparison of results of previous LLM performances
The tables show that the ChatGPT model used in ”Chat Replier 1” by Bajaj and Edwards
[11] outperforms both the open­source GPT­Neo used by Chen et al. [10] as well as their
”Classifier & Template” responder, which was the one used as Control for the works of
Bajaj and Edwards [11].
The study performed by Hewett and Leeke [12] does not provide the exact measure­
ments in quantitative analysis, as it was conducted over a 48­hour period, which does not
provide enough insight into the length of conversations the system can engage. However,
it showed a response rate of 70% and the longest email chain of 51 messages between
the automated victim and a fraudster.
2.4.2
Artificial Intelligence in Telecommunications Mediums
Virgin Media O2 in the UK recently presented a measure to combat fraud schemes per­
formed through phone calls. They have built an AI persona, Daisy, with the sole purpose
of keeping scammers occupied for as long as possible [43]. The system uses several
models that work together, listening to what scammers say and producing a response
10
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:19==
that plays on fraudsters’ biases about older people. Daisy has successfully kept several
scammers on calls for 40 minutes at a time [43]. The system is still unable to intercept
scammer calls to unsuspecting victims. However, users can report scam numbers to the
system, which can then be contacted by one of the many instances that can be active at
the same time [44].
2.5
Contributions
Based on research on previous studies related to this project, especially of similar sys­
tems, this project’s contributions are compared to the existing studies performed, and the
project fills gaps left by them and improves on the mentioned limitations.
Combination of scambaiting information gathering with honeytokens
As mentioned, researchers have conducted extensive studies on scambaiting and its
strategies [20, 21, 25], as well as deception techniques and honeytokens [28, 30, 32,
36]. This project contributes by combining all the aspects researched among the related
works into a single system, similar to automated scambaiting systems [10, 11, 12], with
the integration of improved honeytokens [38] for active information gathering about the
scammers in an automated manner.
Integration with personal inbox
The automated scambaiting systems studied [10, 11, 12] rely on custom implementations
of mail servers that cannot be connected to existing mailboxes or spoofing another email
address. This decision limits the research to restricted scenarios that do not study the fea­
sibility of usage by a more significant portion of the population. This project aims to bridge
that by integrating the system into a mock of a personal inbox managed through Gmail,
a standard emailing service provider, to show the feasibility of developing an automated
scambaiting system capable of integration with systems that the population already uses
daily.
Automated generation of improved honeytoken
The study on improving the honeytokens generated by Canarytokens proved successful
[38]. However, it requires much manual input from the user, making it unsuitable for
automated systems. This thesis project builds on that by slightly modifying the original
program. These changes allow it to generate improved honeytokens automatically. The
honeytokens contain text relevant to the email conversation they will accompany as an
LLM analyzes the email body and generates the content for the PDF file. This honeytoken
generator is to be integrated with the scambaiting conversation system to generate and
send the token to the scammer in a context relevant to the conversation in progress, to
appear genuine and valuable to the adversary [31].
Machine learning and cyber deception
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Design
This chapter outlines the overall system and its components. It will also discuss the eval­
uations and decisions and the techniques applied in the different aspects of the project.
3.1
Glossary
In this report, several terms and vocabulary are used in the context of the automated
scambaiting system this project presents. For easier understanding, below is a glossary
with the definitions of the terms frequently mentioned throughout this report:
• Conversation ­ Refers to all the messages exchanged between the automated scam­
baiting system and a single scammer.
• Honeytoken interaction ­ When the scammer clicks the link contained in the email
signature or opens the honeytoken PDF file, and their information is stored in the system
logs.
• Response ­ The message generated by the LLM to reply to an email received from a
scammer.
• Log ­ File containing information about the communication between the scambaiting
system and a scammer. It includes all the messages exchanged and the information
gathered from the honeytokens.
• Signature ­ Block of text at the end of an email that includes professional contact details
and company branding.
• Persona ­ Fake person impersonated to respond to the scam emails in this project.
First and last name as well as a Gmail account in their name.
3.2
System Outline
This section defines the scope of the overall system and its components, which will be
outlined in further detail in the following sections.
The project involves developing an automated scambaiting system. It uses AI through
Large Language Models (LLM) to generate the responses to the scammers’ messages.
The system automatically generates and sends honeytokens during the conversation to
gather information about the fraudster on the other end.
To initiate the process, a user has to manually send a scam email to the system to which
it should generate and send a reply. Although it is an automated system, it includes this
manual inspection and selection step to ensure any non­malicious email is not treated as
a scam message.
A component is responsible for conversation­related tasks and handles the message pro­
vided. It stores the email in the logs for that conversation and calls the LLM to generate a
response. For every new email arriving in the bait inbox, the system checks for an active
conversation with the sender’s email address; if there is one, the system will generate
a response automatically; otherwise, it does not handle the message. This process is
repeated indefinitely while the system receives responses, and conversation only stops if
12
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:21==
the scammer ceases to respond to the latest message sent by the scambaiter system.
The system does not answer the email immediately. Otherwise, the fraudsters on the
other end may suspect that the responses are automatically generated. The response
strategy involves replying after a specific interval, which has to vary between each reply
to avoid creating patterns in the response timings. A queue system keeps track of sched­
uled replies and ensures none are lost in case the system crashes or restarts.
The system also aims to deceive the scammers with honeytokens, sending them in a
context relevant to the email conversation. Two types of honeytokens will be discussed
and formalized in Section 3.6, one sent every email and the other when relevant to the
conversation with the scammer. NLP methods are employed to decide when to send a
honeytoken. When deemed relevant, the Conversation Handler calls upon the Honeyto­
ken Generator, which generates a honeytoken file. This file has content relevant to the
conversation since it also uses the LLM to produce content pertinent to the email received
for more efficient deception.
Every honeytoken has a unique token identifier bound to it and stored in the log files
for the scammer it is sent to. Keeping a unique token bound to a scammer email address
ensures the system knows who interacted with the honeytoken, enabling the attribution
of the information gathered to a conversation and email address
The system hosts three web services with a passive purpose. The first is the endpoint
that receives the interactions with the honeytokens sent, which is responsible for extract­
ing the information of the request upon arrival and storing it in the logs. The second is a
minimal website containing the bait email addresses, making them publicly available for
email harvesters to obtain them and provide scam mail for experimentation of the system.
The third is an interface to manually register an email the system will reply to and initiate
a conversation.
Overall, the scambaiting system is divided into the following components, followed by
a visualization of its outline in Figure 3.1:
• Email registration interface ­ Graphical interface to either reply to an existing un­
read email in the bait inbox or initialize a new conversation based on a scam mes­
sage provided by a third party (e.g., forums, colleagues)
• Email registration and monitoring ­ Endpoint for starting new conversations and
contains main threads of email monitoring and answering
• Conversation Handler ­ Responsible for managing the email conversations. The
central point of the system.
• Logging Service ­ Provides the framework to add messages and honeytokens,
along with their interactions, to conversation logs.
• Gmail Service ­ Provides the functions to interact with the Email API, to send and
reply to emails as well as query new unread emails.
• OpenAI LLM Service ­ Provides the framework to interact with the LLM API to
generate responses, PDF content, and PDF file names
• Honeytoken Generator ­ Responsible for generating a new and unique honeytoken
file or signature to be sent by email
Machine learning and cyber deception
13
==PAGE:22==
• Honeytoken Web Service ­ Web service that receives the request performed by
the sent honeytokens with a unique ID
• NLP ­ Natural Language Processing module providing functions to determine whether
a honeytoken should be sent or not
• Bait website ­ Not directly connected to the system. Its purpose is to make the bait
email addresses publicly available through a domain to email harvesters utilized by
scammers to obtain potential victims.
• Honeytoken and log files ­ The files created by the honeytoken generator are kept
for analysis, as well as the logs of the conversations.
Figure 3.1: Outline of automated scambaiting system
3.3
Gmail Service
Previous systems with the same objectives of making the scambaiting process automatic
relied on custom implementations of mail servers [10, 11, 12] tailored for the task at hand.
While they provide insight into the feasibility and efficiency of automated scambaiting sys­
tems, they present some limitations. The mail servers do not enable integration with an
existing personal email inbox, nor can they spoof existing email addresses to impersonate
consenting individuals. One of the aims and contributions of this project is to study the
possibility of developing a system with the same objective of automated scambaiting, but
with the integration to a personal inbox managed by a popular mailing service.
The population widely uses several emailing services that could be integrated with the
system, such as Apple, Gmail, Yahoo, Outlook, and Proton. Despite the Apple client hav­
ing the most significant market share [45] with 54%, its restrictions to the Apple environ­
ment, especially in terms of development, make it less suitable to study the feasibility of a
platform­independent system. Second to Apple in market share is Gmail with 28%; how­
14
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:23==
ever, since it is most commonly accessed through a browser or OS­independent mobile
application, it covers the vast majority of devices accessible to the population, configuring
the ideal email provider to study the feasibility of integrating an automated scambaiter
system.
The Gmail inbox account creation requires only a minimal setup including a name and
an email address. It is also included in the Google Cloud Platform, meaning that it is con­
tained in the Google API environment and has extensive documentation 1 on managing
a Gmail inbox programmatically. A Gmail library for several programming languages has
also been developed for easier integration, providing considerable flexibility to the system
regardless of the chosen implementation stack.
However, choosing Gmail for this purpose has a few drawbacks. It includes an efficient
spam filter, meaning that either some settings changes are required for the spam mail to
be visible in the common inbox, or the API has to allow to search for and reply to emails
in the spam inbox. Another consequence of an efficient spam filter is that scammers are
also now aware of this fact, and according to scambaiting forums [23, 24] posts, some
fraud email campaigns are blacklisting Gmail accounts not to waste their resources with
email addresses less likely to receive or fall for their scheme.
Overall, Gmail is still the best choice as it is prevalent among the population, requires
only a simple setup, and provides good support for developers of various backgrounds.
For the purpose of this project, a bait email address and inbox will be created using Gmail.
3.4
Scam Mail Attraction
A substantial amount of fresh scam mail is needed to guarantee a good sample size and
adequately analyze the system’s effectiveness. Previous studies of automated scambait­
ing systems [10, 11, 12] relied on pre­existing scam mail databases and internet scraping
techniques. While these solutions are effective at obtaining many scam emails to con­
tact along with their messages, the search should be limited to recent ones. Fraudsters
often change their falsified identity and email address when their scheme is not effective
anymore, or authorities catch them and have their email deactivated or blacklisted. This
process takes a relatively short amount of time, meaning that the majority of fraud emails
found in datasets and forum posts are likely not active anymore and could negatively influ­
ence the analysis of the system experimentation by contacting emails that are less likely
to respond, independent of the system design.
3.4.1
Reversing Scam Avoidance Techniques
Research on email scam avoidance techniques was only found on the organizational
level and restricted to spam filtering. Researchers have yet to conduct academic studies
on approaches the individual can take to avoid receiving scam messages in their inboxes.
This project seeks other methods to attract fraudulent email messages to analyze the sys­
tem’s strengths and weaknesses. Since fraudulent email schemes became widespread
on the internet, awareness has spread, and standard measures have been defined to
avoid receiving spam messages, both on an organizational level and as individuals. Tech
companies and magazines have written articles guiding users to avoid getting spam mes­
sages in their inbox, including Microsoft [46]. For the purpose of this project, since the
goal is to attract scam emails, the opposite of these scam avoidance techniques is done.
1https://developers.google.com/gmail/api/guides
Machine learning and cyber deception
15
==PAGE:24==
Forums and articles on the internet contain these anti­spam techniques [46, 47, 48, 49],
and many have one or more anti­spam techniques in common. The most common tech­
niques to avoid getting spam emails that are relevant to this project are:
• Don’t open scam emails
• Don’t reply to spam emails
• Don’t subscribe to newsletters, especially from untrustworthy websites
• Unsubscribe from email lists and newsletters
• Limit the places where you post your email address
The process of receiving spam emails in new legitimate email accounts is slow. Fraud­
sters obtain email addresses mainly from data breaches sold on the dark web, newsletters
selling subscriber information, and bots scraping websites for publicly available email ad­
dresses. Relying on a data breach containing the bait email address provides no guaran­
tee of scam email within the timeframe of this project. Similarly, newsletters of untrustwor­
thy websites also sell information about registered users. These lists of email addresses
circulate the scammer community. Once a person’s email gets into these lists, they start
receiving various spam messages, and answering them makes it more likely for future
target lists to include the email address.
Even though most fraud messages publicly available in forums and datasets are out­
dated, recent ones can still be used to initiate a conversation with the scammer respon­
sible for it. Usually, fraudsters send email fraud campaigns in bulk to emails contained
in the formerly mentioned lists containing hundreds of thousands of obtained email ad­
dresses. The large number of emails sent means the adversaries rarely keep track of the
messages sent, meaning that any answer they receive is seen as a potential victim and
will be enough for them to allocate their time and resources to handle it. Finding recent
and fresh scam messages users have posted in online forums provides scam messages
with a higher chance of response and kickstarts getting the bait email address in the lists
shared between the fraudsters.
Since older email addresses linked to real individuals are more likely to receive spam,
another form of obtaining more messages for system analysis is asking individuals to col­
laborate with the project by providing spam mail from their inboxes. However, this method
brings security concerns later discussed in Section 3.8, but that must be ensured not to
damage the online reputation of anybody not involved with the project.
The nature of this project already does the opposite of two of the listed items. It opens
received scam mail and replies to it. Since the project aims to generate conversation to
as many scam emails as possible during the experimentation, this has a self­sustaining
effect as responding to the scam mail initially received or found publicly increases the like­
lihood of receiving more, which will then, in turn, also be replied to, starting the process
again.
The remaining spam avoidance techniques are also reversed to maximize the receipt
of fresh spam messages. This involves subscribing to newsletters from dubious web­
sites and making the bait email address publicly available on the Internet to be scraped,
which is also known as Email Harvesting [50]. When deciding whether a website is un­
trustworthy or not, there are no set parameters that can help make an objective decision.
16
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:25==
Shady websites tend to make promises that are hard to achieve or provide deals that
are too good to be true, such as easy ways to earn money online and fast or providing
free prizes in exchange for simple tasks. Based on these assumptions, performing the
following searches in search engines yields promising results:
• ”How to make money online fast”
• ”Quick ways to earn money for free”
• ”Free prizes online”
• ”Free giftcards easy online”
Most websites found in the search provide guides or methods to achieve what their ti­
tle claims are possible. However, only a subset of about five contain newsletters users
can sign up for with their email. There is also uncertainty about whether and when the
organization behind the website will sell or share the data on users registered for their
newsletter.
3.4.2
Domain Name
The bait email address must be publicly available online to reverse the final scam avoid­
ance technique. A solution to this, which will later assist with other project components,
is to buy a domain to create emails for and host a website containing the bait email ad­
dresses publicly available for email harvesters to find.
Having email addresses linked to a domain or organization brings the advantage of be­
ing found in public DNS records. The DNS and WHOIS systems both require contact
information on the domain responsible [51], which adversaries can also harvest. Having
public records of domain names through DNS can also provide attackers with likely email
addresses, since they can use dictionary attacks to contact common email addresses a
domain or company might have, such as admin@domain­name.com or support@domain­
name.com. While these addresses are unlikely to be tied to an individual involved with the
domain, they can still provide the fraudster a foothold in the system through, for example,
phishing attacks.
With a domain name and a simple website, the bait email can be made public for web
crawlers. To further increase our chances of receiving scam emails, the domain contains
two email addresses with common words present in company domains: info and support,
and both are routed to forward all messages to the bait Gmail address. All three emails
are listed as contact information on the website for crawlers to harvest.
Further domain­related measures are taken to maximize scam email intake, including pro­
viding a catch­all email address in the domain. A catch­all email address is an address
that receives all emails sent to domain addresses that do not exist or are not defined in
the domain [52]. An email sent to random_name@domain­name.com is still received de­
spite the domain containing no email address with that name. Any email sent based on a
dictionary attack of common email words is caught by the system and received.
The techniques defined above were employed to gather a substantial amount of scam
emails to analyze the efficiency and feasibility of the automated scambaiting system this
project implements.
Machine learning and cyber deception
17
==PAGE:26==
3.5
Large Language Model
As seen in Section 2.4, different Large Language Models have been experimented with
for automatic scambaiting. Chen et al. [10] integrated the GPT­Neo [40] in their system
and trained it with datasets of scambaiting conversations [41] and the Enron dataset [42].
Hewett and Leeke [12] developed their system utilizing OpenAI’s GPT­3 Davinci model,
which was the largest language model publicly available at the time. Lastly, Bajaj and
Edwards [11] used the GPT­3.5­Turbo model provided by OpenAI’s ChatGPT API to gen­
erate their responses.
The conclusion drawn from previous studies is that models provided by OpenAI have
shown a satisfactory performance for this project through the use of different models made
available by the company. It is logical to continue utilizing LLMs provided by OpenAI, es­
pecially with the new improved models now available publicly through their API system.
At the time of this project’s design, the latest fully stable model release by OpenAI avail­
able on their ChatGPT platform was GPT­4o, the largest to date with an estimated number
of parameters well over one trillion [53]. Several variants of the GPT­4o model have been
introduced, such as the GPT­4o­mini for smaller, faster, and more lightweight tasks. This
project does not, however, require swift and optimized code execution, as emails do not
require a quick reply after they arrive in the inbox. For that reason, a larger but slower
model fits the project’s needs better, as it can provide more plausible answers that are
likely to deceive the fraudster.
For this project, the model used is GPT­4o. It is the current flagship model of OpenAI,
showing significant improvements compared to former versions in various tasks. It is the
largest model by OpenAI currently available. It is available through the OpenAI API, for
which libraries have been developed for several programming languages, providing flex­
ibility when choosing which stack to work with.
3.6
Honeytoken Type and Generation
This section discusses which types of honeytokens the project will use to deceive fraud­
sters and and their automatic generation. Research shows that honeytokens can take
many different shapes, usually within the domain of files and components an organization
deals with to make them blend with the rest of the system.
3.6.1
Portable Document Format (PDF)
The context has to be accounted for to decide which type of honeytokens to utilize in this
project. Since the token will be sent by email, it looks more convincing to the scammer
if the honeytoken type is commonly sent via email. For instance, HoneyGen [36] already
provides automatic generation of honeytokens based on database files, which are not
convincing or common in email conversations. Several file types are commonly sent by
email. However, they depend a lot on the context of the conversation. One file type typi­
cally used is Portable Document Format (PDF), which can be relevant in vastly different
contexts. Its capabilities of allowing embedded actions and Uniform Resource Identifier
(URI) [38] makes it a convincing and flexible option to utilize as honeytoken.
Services for generating honeytokens in PDF format already exist, with the previously
mentioned example of Canarytokens. However, studies have shown that fingerprinting
18
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:27==
of these tokens can be performed at an effective rate [37], which means that using their
service may compromise the honeytokens generated, rendering them less effective. Fol­
lowing this study, Pilis [38] researched techniques to improve the efficacy of PDF hon­
eytokens by performing changes to the metadata of the file and eliminating similarities
between subsequent generations of different files. It proved effective at bypassing the
formerly mentioned fingerprinting system, meaning the improvements are more likely to
deceive adversaries faced with the honeytoken.
The improved PDF honeytoken generator by Pilis [38] works on a base template of a
PDF file, seen below in Figure 3.2, and then adds content to the page, such as title, sub­
title, and body. Subsequently it adds the embedded actions possible in PDF files and
alters the metadata. It creates an action to open a URI when the file is opened, in this
case, a URL provided by the user. PDF readers such as Adobe perform the embedded
actions upon opening the file, meaning that a request will be made for the URL without the
knowledge of the individual opening the file, thus making it possible to acquire information
by performing a request to a service hosted by the scambaiting system.
Figure 3.2: PDF template by Pilis [38]
More complex PDF readers have mechanisms that prevent the direct execution of URI
actions due to security concerns. They warn the user of the attempt to perform a request
for a URL or IP address and ask for a decision to allow or block the request. Lightweight
readers like Sumatra and MuPDF look past these security risks to keep their platforms
bare­bones.
The main drawback of Pilis’ [38] system is that it requires manual input to be generated.
The user has to access a graphical interface and provide the content the PDF should
contain, including the title, subtitle, body, and URL to which the request will be performed.
This conflicts with the automated nature of this project, meaning changes are applied to it
to generate the PDF content automatically, and the URL is a constant value of a service
hosted within the system of this project.
Machine learning and cyber deception
19
==PAGE:28==
3.6.2
Uniform Resource Locator (URL)
Without a domain name attached to this project, URLs and system resources are ac­
cessed using the server’s IP hosting the system. This limitation can raise even further
suspicion in case the scammer gets a warning from their PDF reader that it is attempting
to perform a request to an IP and Port pair that is unknown to them. Utilizing the domain
name acquired for attracting spam mail can access these services through a web address
registered in the DNS records to point to this system. Not only will possible warnings to the
scammer show requests to a website with a name related to the persona created for this
project, but using the domain also opens up more possibilities of honeytokens included in
the email messages.
In a professional and formal setting, it is very common to end email messages with a sig­
nature containing the person’s name, company, position, and contact information. With
this context every email can be appended with a constant signature containing the name
of the persona of this project and an URL to a personal website. In reality, behind the URL
to the personal website with the obtained domain name is a request to the service cap­
turing honeytoken interactions, meaning that every time a scammer accesses the URL
contained in the signature, they are interacting with a honeytoken and information about
their system is obtained. Including this form of honeytoken increases the chances of
fingerprinting the fraudster and helps compare different types of honeytokens in email
conversations.
3.7
Information Gathering
One of the objectives of this project is to perform fingerprinting on scammers and analyze
how efficiently this is achieved over automated email conversations. Gathering informa­
tion on the scammer conversing with the scambaiting system is essential to achieve this
objective. With the options of PDF and URL honeytokens, and given that the honeytoken
generator developed by Pilis [38] also already gathers information through the embedded
URL request action, it is logical to use the same medium for information gathering for this
project.
In the current version 1.1 of the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP), it is common practice
for the HTTP requests to include a set of header lines to pass from the client to the server,
additional information about the request, and expectations on how the request should be
processed [54]. A machine’s IP address is considered a valuable piece of information in
fingerprinting, as it can reveal information such as location and ISP while also providing a
starting place for an possible investigation of the machine, both with good intentions and
malicious intentions. While the IP address of the sender of the request is not one of these
HTTP headers, it can still be obtained by analyzing the packet information in which the
request arrived. The set of HTTP headers does, however, include valuable information
to this project. The User­Agent header provides information about what application pro­
gram performed the request [54] (e.g., curl, Python), the browser used, if any, the user
operating system, and the user device type (e.g., Mobile, Desktop).
Alongside the contacted email, with an IP address, the location of the city and country
derived from it, and information about the fraudster machine, a profile can be created with
substantial information, showing the plausibility of an automated scambaiting system to
gather valuable information on scammers.
20
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:29==
3.8
Security Concerns
When dealing with adversaries in cybersecurity, in this case, email scammers, precau­
tions, and security measures have to be taken not to compromise private information
about the system or any individual involved in this project in any way. Once scammers
realize they are being deceived, the risk of retaliation increases, requiring preventive mea­
sures to avoid any damage to the system or people involved in it. Other than the threat of
scammer retaliation, passive attacks are also a threat, such as bots port scanning IP ad­
dresses and performing automated requests to gather information or files from the system
or server.
3.8.1
Email Anonymity
As mentioned previously, scam emails are acquired through the help of third parties re­
lated to people involved with this project. It is not uncommon for the scammer to include
the target’s name when sending their fraud campaign, meaning that a subset of the emails
gathered contains personal information that is not intended to be used in this project and
should not be part of any of the conversations automated by the scambaiting system. Ev­
ery email body, not initially received by the system, used to initiate a new conversation
must not contain any information related at all to the person or forum that provided us with
the scam message.
For further anonymity, the bait email inbox created does not contain any correlation to
anyone involved with the project. No recovery email or phone number is attributed to it.
Gmail does not require this information for account creation, as it only needs a name,
birthday, new email address, and personal preference and data sharing choices for the
account, which were also kept to a minimum. The same procedure is applied to the cre­
ation of other accounts for testing purposes.
3.8.2
System Security
The automated scambaiting system is further secured by implementing HTTPS and SSL
for requests and posts performed to the system. This preventive measure is aided by the
domain acquired, through which an SSL certificate is issued, enabling the service to run
through HTTPS. Restricting the service components to HTTPS deters naive automated
tools that scan only for unsecured services running through HTTP, while also ensuring
that all communication with the system components is encrypted and preventing inter­
ception of sensitive information during transit (e.g., man­in­the­middle attacks).
The system requires files and environment variables containing sensitive information,
such as API keys and token and credential files, to authenticate the Gmail inbox account.
These should be kept out of reach for any adversary that gains access to the system
since they could use that to impersonate the persona created for the bait email or abuse
any API key integrated with the system. Preventive measures surrounding accessing the
host server through SSH are taken. However, should any adversary still find access to it,
the sensitive files should only be accessible to the scambaiting system, using the built­in
Linux access control tools to ensure that.
A reverse proxy is used to increase the security of the system even further. It is a server
that lies between the client applications and the backend services of the system, acting as
a shield from direct access. The reverse proxy acts as a single entry point for all incoming
requests, allowing the enforcement of SSL encryption and distributing the requests to the
right system component without exposing the ports publicly, providing routing depending
on the URL used for the system domain.
Machine learning and cyber deception
21
==PAGE:30==
4
Implementation
This chapter outlines the practical aspects of the study, focusing on the implementation of
each component described in the previous chapter and the system overall. The chosen
development stack will be discussed, and its usage will be detailed. The source code can
be found at https://github.com/Chermas/FraudsterDeceptionSystem.
4.1
Overall System
The components of the system are all implemented in Python. Python presents already
implemented libraries for the tasks needed, simplifying the development process. Com­
putation time is not of the essence for this project, as it does not involve time­sensitive
tasks. Responding to scam emails must not be done quickly, not to arouse suspicion that
the individual on the other end is dealing with an automated response system, neither
does it need to be responded to at a specific time. This property leaves a flexible and
considerable computation time for response generation, message storage, and honeyto­
ken generation tasks. As this project aims to show its feasibility, it is not implemented
with scalability in mind, for that, a more appropriate and efficient programming language
should be considered.
A complete instance of the system consists of three processes, explained in detail in
Sections 4.1.1, 4.1.2, and 4.1.3, while the remaining components outlined in the Design
Chapter 3 provide functions and separation in the system for better and more understand­
able structuring. Each process runs as a Linux service with its corresponding .service
file. As a result, the scambaiting system’s output is stored in the operating system’s jour­
nal, which can be consulted at any point in case some unintended behavior appears.
Running them as services allows the system to initialize when the host server boots up
and attempt restarting the process if the scambaiting system crashes.
4.1.1
Email Registration Endpoint and Monitoring
This process is the main entry point of the scambaiting system. It serves as the endpoint
for the manual email reply registration to initiate a conversation, containing two options
for the API: registering an email present in the inbox to reply to or registering an external
email to initiate a new conversation with the scammer despite not receiving any message
from them. The first case requires the sender’s email address and the message’s sub­
ject, while the second requires the same information alongside the body of the message.
The process is implemented with the Flask1 library available for Python, which provides
a simple and stable web application framework.
Additionally, this process initiates two threads: one for monitoring incoming emails in the
inbox and another for initiating the reply process by monitoring the response queue, which
contains all the emails scheduled for a reply. The former queries all unread emails and
checks if a conversation with that email address exists in the logs. If it does, it calls the
Conversation Handler; otherwise, it does nothing. The latter checks whether the times­
tamp for the front of the response queue has passed. If it has, it calls the Conversation
Handler to start the reply process; otherwise, it does nothing. Both threads perform their
1https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/
22
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:31==
checks every 60 seconds since sending and registering replies on exact timestamps is
unnecessary.
4.1.2
Web Service to Receive Honeytoken Requests
This service is a simple endpoint, built using the Flask library, where the honeytokens
send requests to log the fraudster’s IP address and User­Agent field. It consists of the
root path ”/” followed by the unique ID attributed to each honeytoken sent to bind the
information to a log file through the Logging Service.
4.1.3
Email Registration Interface
The email registration interface provides a graphical interface to send to the system either
an existing email to reply to or an external email message to initialize a conversation with.
It involves minimal visualization and functionalities to send the necessary information to
the registration endpoint, utilizing simple input fields. A visualization of the interface can
be seen below in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Email registration interface
It performs the corresponding request to the Email Registration Endpoint with the provided
information. It receives a response status to confirm the process occurred as intended,
or there was an error.
4.2
External Setup
The system required some external implementation for this experimentation instance.
This involved scam mail attraction methods and creating a fake persona to experiment
with the scambaiting system instead of using a real person to answer the emails on be­
half of the system.
Fake persona
For the sake of anonymity of everyone involved with this project, a fake persona was
the bait for the scam emails. Statistics show that The United States was the country most
targeted by phishing emails in 2023 [55], which indicates that scammers spend more time
driving their fraud campaigns toward Americans as they believe they are more likely to fall
Machine learning and cyber deception
23
==PAGE:32==
for them. For that reason, the persona created is an American man with a generic name
and surname: James Dawson, utilizing the most common name in the US in the last 100
years [56]. The persona is based in Colorado, which is relevant to each email’s signature.
A generic stock image is added to their Gmail inbox profile for further believability, as bot
accounts rarely have profile pictures.
Domain acquisition
Acquiring a domain for this project serves various purposes already discussed throughout
Chapter 3. To deceive the scammers, the domain name has a relation to the persona’s
name, and since the person is based in the United States, utilizing the Top­Level Domain
(TLD) .com suits better, while also being more prone to being scraped by email harvesters
for begin the most common TLD. The final domain acquired is jdawsontech.com, which
indicates it belongs to a company owned by the fake persona of this project. The domain
was bought through Simply.com2 as they provide a cheap, stable, and simple domain
solution and easy management of DNS records and webmail.
4.3
Conversation Handler
The Conversation Handler is the central point of the system, as shown by the design dia­
gram in Figure 3.1. It contains functions responsible for email queueing and dequeueing,
starting email conversation, response generation, incoming email handling, and response
timestamp generation.
Response queue
As mentioned, this component is also responsible for keeping the queue of responses to
be generated. The queue is the order in which replies will be generated and sent, based
on a random timestamp generated at email message arrival. This random timestamp lies
between 3 and 8 hours after receiving the message since responding instantly to every
message may raise suspicion of automated answering. Furthermore, the timestamp must
be between 9 AM and 8 PM to avoid sending email replies during hours when people are
less likely to answer emails, such as in the middle of the night or early morning. Keeping
this answer interval adds further credibility that the scammers are conversing with a hu­
man being. If the generated timestamp is after 8 PM for a given day, it carries over to the
next morning to stay within the interval.
During program execution, the queue is stored in the program memory and saved in a
file on the server. This redundancy ensures that no scheduled reply is missed in case the
program or the server crashes. Otherwise, the system will not send the planned replies,
and the conversation will halt unless the scammer sends a follow­up email. Therefore,
every addition or removal from the queue updates the queue file. This file is loaded into
the program on system startup to ensure no reply is lost.
As mentioned, there is a thread for handling the incoming scam emails and another for
sending replies. Both of these perform actions on the queue and the queue file. One
adds a reply to the queue, while the other dequeues the first reply, respectively. This
means that a locking mechanism is necessary to ensure mutual exclusion of the queue
in memory and the queue file to avoid operations being performed in parallel on them.
Handling incoming messages
The thread handling incoming emails checks the inbox for unread emails every minute
and returns a list of unread emails. The system passes each email with a conversation
present in the logs to the Conversation Handler. It will, in turn, mark each email as read,
2https://www.simply.com/dk/
24
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:33==
add the message to its log file, and add it to the queue, generating a response timestamp
following the aforementioned logic.
Sending responses
The thread responsible for polling the queue checks the first timestamp value of the queue.
If it is past, it initializes the response procedure in the Conversation Handler. It retrieves
the email information and generates a unique ID for the URL honeytoken in the signature
of the email body. Then, the decision logic for PDF honeytoken generation is applied.
The system utilizes Natural Language Processing (NLP) to analyze the contents of the
email message body received and decide whether it provides the context to send a PDF
file with relevant information. The spaCy 3 library for Python is utilized for this purpose. A
set of base keywords is defined and can be seen in Listing 4.1, from which synonyms are
derived to include a broader spectrum of words the scammer may use in the message to
request information. These keywords represent the scammer’s request for information,
whether by text or document.
1
self.base_keywords = {
2
"document": ["doc", "file", "attachment", "paperwork"],
3
"proof": ["evidence", "verification"],
4
"contract": ["agreement", "deal"],
5
"send": ["deliver", "provide", "attach"]
6
}
Listing 4.1: Base keywords to derive synonyms from
The email body is tokenized and lemmatized to perform the analysis and decide whether
the email message prompts sending a PDF file. As explained by Akhmetov et al. [57],
lemmatization is an important data preparation step in many NLP tasks, such as Informa­
tion Extraction (IE) and Information Retrieval (IR). Lemmatization aims to determine the
base form of a word (lemma). The lemma for each token is then matched with the set
of expanded keywords generated with the derived synonyms. If contained in the set of
keywords, the decision is to send a PDF honeytoken file.
If a PDF file should not be sent, the OpenAI LLM Service generates a regular response,
and the Gmail Service sends it. After successfully sending the email, the message is
added to the conversation log and removed from the response queue.
Otherwise, if a PDF file should be sent, a response containing text referring to the at­
tached file is generated, detailed in Section 4.5, and a new honeytoken file is generated.
The honeytoken ID is appended to the conversation log, and the Gmail Service sends
the reply containing the honeytoken attachment. Similarly, when sent successfully, the
message is stored in the log and removed from the response queue.
4.4
Gmail Service
As mentioned in the Section 3.3, the chosen email provider is Gmail. In order to connect
to Google applications through their API, it is necessary to set up a project in their Google
Cloud Platform 4. Steps involve enabling the API and creating a credentials file to perform
authenticated actions on behalf of the bait Gmail inbox through the API containing an
OAuth client ID. Leiba [58] describes OAuth as a new protocol for establishing identity
management standards across services, providing an alternative to sharing usernames
and passwords. In this case, the scambaiting system is the OAuth client that contains the
3https://spacy.io/
4https://cloud.google.com/
Machine learning and cyber deception
25
==PAGE:34==
credentials for the bait Gmail account and an access token. The access token is a piece of
data the authorization server creates that lets the client request access from the resource
server [58] to perform and authorize actions on behalf of the account programmatically.
This protocol allows the scambaiting system to read the inbox, mark emails as read, and
send replies to the scammers.
The scambaiting system contains a Gmail Service, providing an interface to functions of­
fered by the Gmail API, such as reading the inbox and sending messages. On initialization
of the Gmail client in the scambaiting system, the user is authenticated with the OAuth
protocol, however, utilizing only the needed permissions for the operations required by
this system, defined in the Code Listing 4.2 below. With the credentials file and the token
provided by the authorization server, the Gmail Service is authenticated and contained as
an object in the Conversation Handler for conversation management.
1
# Define the OAuth 2.0 scopes
2
self.SCOPES = [
3
'https://www.googleapis.com/auth/gmail.send',
4
'https://www.googleapis.com/auth/gmail.readonly',
5
'https://www.googleapis.com/auth/gmail.modify'
6
]
7
self.service = self.authenticate()
Listing 4.2: OAuth scope of permissions required
The Gmail Service mainly comprises functions related to creating and sending messages
to scammers, among functions to retrieve email messages based on content, such as
sender and subject, or their unique ID. When replying to an email in the inbox, the service
receives the unique ID of the email to reply to, as well as the response generated by the
LLM. The signature containing the URL honeytoken is appended to the end of the mes­
sage, where the webpage the URL links to is different from the one shown in the email
body, seen in Figure 4.2. The formatted string is an HTML snippet appended to the email
body before sending it. The <a> tag contains a reference to https://server.jdawsontech.com/{token}
which is the URL for the web service that collects the scammer IP address and User­Agent
along with the token that was generated for that conversation. The text, however, shown
between the tag is the bait website, jdawsontech.com, set up to make the email addresses
publicly available for email harvesting and seem like a personal website or for a company
created and owned by the persona.
(a) Signature appended to
every email body
1
# Signature HTML
2
signature = f"""
3
<br><br>
4
--<br>
5
James R Dawson <br>
6
Colorado <br>
7
<a href="https://server.jdawsontech.com/{token}"
target="_blank">jdawsontech.com</a>
8
"""
Listing (4.3) HTML code embedded in the email body
Figure 4.2: Comparison of visualization of the signature and the code behind it
The message object is then constructed with the required headers and with a reply subject,
with the format ”Re: [original thread subject]”. The message must then be encoded in
26
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:35==
base64, as required by the Gmail library for Python5. In case the message has to include
an attachment, in this case, the PDF honeytoken, additional email headers are included,
and the attachment is also base64 encoded in the message.
To deceive the scammer more efficiently, the email has to appear replied using the client
service from the email provider, in this case, either a Gmail application or the Gmail web­
site in a browser. This requirement means that when answering a scam email, the mes­
sage is contained in the same thread the first email was initially sent to avoid sending a
new message in a new thread, which may raise suspicion.
4.5
OpenAI Service
Section 3.5 in the Design chapter details the choice of Large Language Model to be used
in this project, concluding that GPT­4o is the optimal choice provided by OpenAI. As men­
tioned, an OpenAI library for Python6 is available, and initialization in the code requires
solely the API key attributed to the OpenAI Platform7 account. In the scambaiting system,
the LLM is used for four different purposes, meaning that the implementation contains four
different prompts engineered for different tasks the LLM was required to assist the system.
Prompt engineering techniques, also utilized by Hewett and Mathew [12], are employed in
the definition process of the prompts for the LLM in the scambaiting system presented by
this project. Direct Task Specification, Zero­shot Prompting, and Constraining Behaviour
ensure the LLM follows the intended behavior.
Generating email answer
The first task and prompt in the LLM service is generating a response to a message from
the scammer, whether the first message or the continuation of a conversation. For the
prompt, it is necessary to include information on the persona created since not every email
received will include the first name in the greeting.
In initial testing, the model refused to generate responses that cooperated with the scam­
mer’s messages and called them out, which made it less likely for them to respond to the
generated message. For that, the prompt includes a section to generate a message that
makes the persona seem interested in the fraud scheme and to keep the conversation
going by adding questions that show enthusiasm for the opportunity presented.
The prompt is designed to ensure the model outputs only the message body of the email
response. This prevents the inclusion of a generated subject and areas to be filled man­
ually, such as [Your Name], which could raise suspicion of automated message genera­
tion.
Lastly, to avoid accidental mishaps of sharing legit information, another section is added
to the prompt to restrict giving personal information or banking details. This limitation pre­
vents the model from generating legitimate information about a citizen by chance while
keeping the scammers on the hook, asking for the last step of their scheme, which is the
information acquisition or funds tranfer. The full prompt can be seen in the Code Listing
4.4, where the email variable is the message of the scammer email to be replied to:
1
response = openai.chat.completions.create(
2
model="gpt-4o",
5https://developers.google.com/gmail/api/quickstart/python
6https://github.com/openai/openai­python
7https://platform.openai.com/docs/overview
Machine learning and cyber deception
27
==PAGE:36==
3
messages=[{"role": "user", "content": 'Your persona is James Dawson.
Answer the following scam email by outputting only the body text and
not the subject. If possible answer in the language the email is in.
Keep it short. Please go along with the scam and try to keep the
conversation going. Do not give any personal information or banking
details. The output will not be altered and has to be a finished piece
of text: \n' + email}]
4
)
Listing 4.4: Prompt for email answer generation
Generating email answer containing PDF
Generating the response text for an email containing the honeytoken PDF is similar to
the previous task. The difference is that the prompt provides context that the response
contains a PDF file attached, leading the model to add references when generating the
reply. This further adds believability to the response. The prompt for this task is found
below in Listing 4.5
1
response = openai.chat.completions.create(
2
model="gpt-4o",
3
messages=[{"role": "user", "content": 'Your persona is James Dawson.
Answer the following email by outputting only the body text and not
the subject. If possible answer in the language the email is in. Keep
it short. The output will not be altered and has to be a finished
piece of text. The answer will include a pdf file containing
information relevant to the email being answered: \n' + email}]
4
)
Listing 4.5: Prompt for email answer generation containing PDF honeytoken
PDF honeytoken content generation
The LLM is also tasked with generating relevant content to fill the honeytoken PDF file in­
stead of having a blank file or constant content that risks not being relevant to the context
of the conversation. The PDF contains text relevant to the latest email from the scammer,
increasing believability if the file is opened and read. The prompt then has instructions
on generating text for a PDF file in the context of the received email. It is instructed not
to give any personal information.
An issue found in initial testing was that the model was outputting several fields to be
filled, such as ”[*Insert information here*]”, which raises suspicion when the file is
opened and read by the scammer. A restricting instruction is included to avoid that.
1
response = openai.chat.completions.create(
2
model="gpt-4o",
3
messages=[{"role": "user", "content": 'Based on the following email,
please output text that is relevant in order to fill a pdf file to be
sent, and output only the text. Do not give any personal information
or banking details. Please leave no spaces to be filled. The output
will not be altered and has to be a finished piece of text: \n' +
email}],
4
)
Listing 4.6: Prompt for PDF content filling
PDF name generation
Lastly, the LLM also generates a name relevant to the conversation for the honeytoken
PDF file. Instead of having a constant file name such as information.pdf, the LLM is
prompted to generate a name for the file based on the latest email sent by the scammer
for a higher chance of deceiving the fraudster. Different names for each honeytoken file
28
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:37==
also allow the system to store every PDF generated, allowing further analysis of the files
generated in the experimentation phase. The following prompt is used for generating
names for the PDF files, where email is the message body of the email received from the
fraudster:
1
response = openai.chat.completions.create(
2
model="gpt-4o",
3
messages=[{"role": "user", "content": 'Based on the following email come
up with a name for a PDF file, without the .pdf extension , please only
output the name: \n' + email}],
4
)
Listing 4.7: Prompt for PDF name generation
4.6
Logging Service
Another component of the automated scambaiting system is the interface for storing and
logging conversations. It provides functions to create new log files for conversations, add
messages, add honeytokens to the conversations, and register when they are interacted
with along with the information gathered on the scammer.
The system stores each conversation log in a JSON file. JSON provides a simple im­
plementation for the purpose needed since this project does not deal with many conver­
sations. In that case, a more scalable option for conversation storage is recommended,
such as a SQL database.
Adding a message includes logging only a few pieces of information about the email re­
ceived: the message itself, the sender of the message (either the bait persona or the
scammer), and the message’s timestamp. The JSON structure keeps the conversation
in order by appending the message. The timestamps are relevant for the analysis of the
experimentation in terms of conversation duration and pose no implication in the function­
ing of the system.
The system generates the signature token to be embedded in the URL honeytoken when
sending the first response of a conversation. This token is unique to each conversation
and is used to identify which scammer accessed the honeytoken. When generated, its
value is stored in the logs of the conversation it is sent in, and an empty array of inter­
actions is initialized. For every subsequent reply sent to that scammer, the system will
use the same token when appending the signature to the end of the message. Every
interaction with the honeytoken adds the captured information to the array. The system is
instructed to log every interaction since the same scammer can interact with it at different
times from different machines, thus also having different IP addresses, which can provide
more valuable information about their system.
A similar procedure occurs when a PDF honeytoken is generated. A unique token, dif­
ferent than the signature token, is generated, and an array of interactions is initialized.
Similarly, it stores several interactions if there are multiple since the file can be opened
with different programs and machines. The arrays for PDF and signature honeytoken in­
teractions are kept separate to analyze the efficiency of each independently.
An example of an entire conversation log containing interactions with a honeytoken is
seen in Appendix C
Machine learning and cyber deception
29
==PAGE:38==
4.7
Honeytoken Generator
The honeytoken generation is slightly different, depending on whether it is a signature
URL or a PDF honeytoken. In both cases, however, a unique token identifier is gener­
ated to fingerprint which scammer interacted with the honeytoken and thus assigned the
gathered information to a stored conversation. The unique identifier for both honeyto­
kens is generated similarly by utilizing Universally Unique Identifiers (UUID). Universally
Unique Identifiers (UUIDs) are 128­bit identifiers designed to ensure uniqueness across
space and time [59]. Initially developed for the Apollo Network Computing System and
later adopted by various platforms, UUIDs have become standardized and widely used in
modern IT systems [59, 60]. This provides identifiers with a very low chance of collision,
with two different honeytokens having the same UUID. The base URL embedded into the
honeytokens is constant https://server.jdawsontech.com, and the only variable is the
unique identifier assigned to each honeytoken, appended at the end of the base URL
(/{unique-token}).
PDF honeytoken
The generation of the PDF honeytokens is performed by utilizing components of the im­
proved honeytoken generator system developed by Pilis [38]. Pilis’ system involves a
graphical interface to input the contents of the PDF file, an email address to notify of hon­
eytoken interaction, and the URL for redirection after performing the request to the system
server. It also includes the methods to alter the PDF metadata to avoid fingerprinting. It
utilizes a database to store information assigned to each honeytoken generated, such as
the email address and a unique token identifier.
For this project, only the PDF file generation component is utilized by including the gener­
atePDF.py file in the automated scambaiting system. The other aspects of Pilis’ system
are irrelevant to this project since all PDF content will be either constant or generated
automatically, there is no need for email notification upon honeytoken interaction, and the
Logging Service already performs the database tasks.
Despite the similar nature of the honeytoken generation, slight changes to the source
code8 of Pilis’ project are still necessary. The PDF content and name generation are
refactored to utilize the LLM Service of this project, and the UUID token logic is included
since it is passed as a parameter when calling the generate_pdf() function. The rest of
the PDF generation logic and metadata handling is the same since it proved to be effective
in Pilis’ study [38].
Signature honeytoken
Generating the signature honeytoken is more straightforward since it only generates a
UUID and then is appended to the base URL, which is embedded in HTML at the end of
every message. The code behind it and visualization can be seen in Figure 4.2, where
the actual reference of the external link is not shown in the text to create the illusion that
the scammer accesses a personal or company website related to the fake persona of the
scambaiting system.
4.8
Security Measures
This section refers to the measures mentioned in Section 3.8.2. An SSL certificate must
be issued for the project domain and not be self­signed to communicate using the HTTPS
protocol. After acquiring the domain, configuring the DNS record to point to the server IP,
and waiting for the new record to be applied, an SSL certificate was issued using nginx 9
8https://github.com/akosP/honeytoken_project/tree/master
9https://nginx.org/en/
30
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:39==
and Let’s Encrypt 10 as a Certificate Authority (CA) through their certbot Linux package
command.
A reverse proxy server using nginx is set up as a server between the client applications
and the system’s backend services, serving various purposes. It reroutes all HTTP traf­
fic from Port 80 to HTTPS by returning the same request host and URI in an HTTPS­
prepended URL and returning the HTTP code 301 for permanent redirecting. All nginx
reverse proxy configuration lies in a single file, available in Appendix D, and the snippet
for the HTTPS rerouting is found in Code Listing 4.8.
1
server {
2
listen 80;
3
server_name jdawsontech.com www.jdawsontech.com server.jdawsontech.com
interface.jdawsontech.com mainsystem.jdawsontech.com;
4
5
# Redirect HTTP to HTTPS
6
return 301 https://$host$request_uri;
7
}
Listing 4.8: Reverse proxy HTTPS rerouting
Furthermore, nginx contains a similar configuration entry for each hosted service: email
registration endpoint, interface, and information gathering server. It listens only to Port 443
SSL requests, meaning they are performed with the HTTPS protocol, specifies the SSL
certificate path, which local running port to route to for the root path (”/”), and adds relevant
proxy headers, especially X-Forwarded-For, to ensure the service logs the external IP
that performed the request. A configuration snippet for a single service is in Code Listing
4.9. Taking these measures and binding the services exclusively to localhost ensures
the services cannot be accessed utilizing the server IP address. This practice is valuable
against automated systems that perform port scanning, attempting to exploit vulnerable
and open services.
1
server {
2
listen 443 ssl;
3
server_name server.jdawsontech.com;
4
5
ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/fullchain.pem;
6
ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/privkey.pem;
7
8
location / {
9
proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:5000;
10
proxy_set_header Host $host;
11
proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
12
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded -For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
13
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded -Proto $scheme;
14
}
15
}
Listing 4.9: Configuration for information gathering server
To further increase the security of the system and the host server, all requests performed
to the ports the services are listening to are dropped. This measure is done using the
iptables11 Linux command that acts as an administration tool for IPv4 packet filtering.
The commands to achieve the mentioned goal can be seen in Listing 4.10
10https://letsencrypt.org/
11https://linux.die.net/man/8/iptables
Machine learning and cyber deception
31
==PAGE:40==
1
sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 5000 -s 0.0.0.0/0 -j DROP
2
sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 8005 -s 0.0.0.0/0 -j DROP
3
sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 8006 -s 0.0.0.0/0 -j DROP
4
sudo iptables -save > /etc/iptables/rules.v4
Listing 4.10: IPTables port restricting commands
Lastly, access control of the host server and sensitive scambaiting system files is config­
ured to avoid unauthorized access to information such as credentials and access token
files. The server only allows SSH access through RSA or ED25519 key algorithms, mean­
ing no password brute force can gain access to it. Furthermore, a user is created to own
and handle the scambaiting system files, and only it can access and view the sensitive
information and execute the system.
32
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:41==
5
Evaluation
This chapter outlines the system’s experimentation, defines the procedures followed, and
provides testing details. It gathers the system trial results, analyses them independently,
and compares them to similar systems previously implemented. Lastly, it discusses the
system’s strengths and weaknesses and considers what can be improved based on the
results of this automatic scambaiting system iteration.
5.1
Experimental Setup
Experimentation of the system consisted of applying the scam mail attraction methods
mentioned in Section 3.4 to gather a considerable amount of scam mail and feed them
continuously to the system as more is collected throughout the trial. Before system de­
ployment, measures were taken to attract scam mail: Subscribing to newsletters pro­
vided by dubious websites and posting the bait email publicly in online guestbooks such
as Mugu Guestbook1, a known place to publicize email addresses with the objective of
scambaiting. These methods yielded unsatisfactory results, only providing five usable
scam emails. Noticeable intake of fraud messages started occurring after the domain
setup, with the three mentioned email addresses publicly available on the main website
for email harvesting, one of them being a catch­all email.
The experimentation phase consisted of deploying the system for 20 days between De­
cember 4th, 2024, and December 24th, 2024. The inbox was checked periodically for new
spam mail. Each new unread email was manually checked and ensured it was spam mail;
in case it was deemed spam and should initiate a conversation, the necessary information
was input into the email registration, and the system would begin the conversation. This
checking process was done twice a day, at the beginning of the day and in the afternoon,
to ensure fresh spam would be replied to with not too long of a time interval, in case their
campaign was taken down and their email address deactivated.
System logs were also periodically checked to confirm that the system behaved as ex­
pected and had not encountered any bugs or crashes due to unforeseen circumstances.
To ensure the LLM was generating acceptable replies and not raising suspicion with obvi­
ous tells, ongoing conversations were periodically checked for quality and believability. If
not passed, the prompt would be adapted to guarantee the replies didn’t raise suspicion
of automated message generation.
Figure 5.1 displays a visualization of the experimentation of the automated scambaiting
system implemented by this project. It summarizes the steps taken before, during, and
after the system’s deployment.
1https://muguguestbook.com/
Machine learning and cyber deception
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.1: Visualitation of the experimental setup of the system
During the experimentation period, 89 conversations were initiated with scam or spam
email addresses; however, in 3 of those conversations, the initial email sent by the au­
tomated scambaiting system was not received by the address on the other side, either
because the address could not be found, or is unable to receive mail. This was con­
firmed by a receipt sent by the Mail Delivery Subsystem informing that the address was
not found, which is seen in Appendix B. Since there was never a chance of a response
from the scammer in these three conversations, they are disregarded in the analysis of the
results, therefore totaling 86 conversations. This helps provide insights into its efficiency,
quality, believability, and the information gathered by the system.
5.2
Automated Response Generation
The first aspect to measure from the system experiment is its efficiency at deceiving scam­
mers. This means how many conversations have more than two messages logged in their
file. This is because the first message added to a conversation log is the initial scam mail,
whether found in an online forum or received by the bait inbox, and the second message
is the first automated reply generated by the automated scambaiting system. Conversa­
tions containing subsequent messages are considered successfully initiated. Of all 86
conversations attempted, 33 had more than two messages and are considered success­
ful initiations, representing 38,37% of the total amount.
For comparison with previous implementations of automated scambaiting systems [10,
11], it is relevant to extract the same measurements from the iteration presented in this
project. This means retrieving the average number of replies received from scammers
per conversation, the average time duration of the conversations (from the first message
to the last), the longest conversation by the number of replies received from scammers,
and the longest conversation by time duration (from the first message to the last). Table
5.1 provides the mentioned data, considering all 86 conversations and the 33 initiated
34
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:43==
successfully for comparison.
Table 5.1: Results for successful and unsuccessful conversations
Study
Replies
Time
mean
max
mean
max
Total Conversations
2.79
23
1.84 days
17.21 days
Successful conversations
5.81
23
4.21 days
15.55 days
The analysis is limited to the duration of the experimentation phase of 20 days. After
checking the inbox after the system trial there are five conversation threads that the scam­
mer has sent follow­up emails since the system stopped responding. This engagement
shows that, if allowed more time, the system could yield a longer average conversation
duration, and the system convinces the scammers that they are dealing with a poten­
tial victim, which can lead to them committing more resources to a conversation that will
eventually lead to nothing, instead of human targets.
Upon further individual inspection of the conversations, two cases skew these measure­
ments slightly. The fraudster on the other end would send several equal emails in rapid
succession, indicating either an automated response system is used, or a human is send­
ing several pre­fabricated emails to victims who answered their initial message.
In three of the conversations, the scammer would reply to the same thread using another
email address; however, since the scambaiting system logs and tracks conversations
based on the sender’s email, the conversation was not conducted further, missing a po­
tential scambaiting opportunity.
Despite the restrictive measures added to the prompts, in one case, there were still signs
that may have raised suspicion on the scammer’s side. In a response containing the PDF
honeytoken, the email body referenced the attached file as information to be filled out.
Furthermore, the name of the file referenced differed from the one the other LLM prompt
generated, raising even more suspicion. Listing 5.1 displays the message.
1
Hello,
2
3
Thank you for providing more information. I've attached a PDF file with
4
relevant details regarding the procedure and the form you need to fill out.
5
Please let me know if there are any questions or additional information needed
.
6
7
Best regards ,
8
James Dawson
9
10
[Attachment: Online_Account_Form.pdf]
11
12
--
13
James R Dawson
14
Colorado
15
jdawsontech.com
Listing 5.1: Example of model leaving content to be filled
The response prompts included a section defining the answer to be in the same language
as the email received to accommodate the scammer further. In four this became relevant
Machine learning and cyber deception
35
==PAGE:44==
with receiving emails in Chinese, Russian, and Danish. However, an email written in En­
glish was mistakenly replied to by the scambaiting system in Spanish. This unintended
behavior did not bother the scammer as they continued the conversation in English and
another six messages were exchanged despite the mishap.
As prompted and expected, no personal information was generated or sent at any point.
The model would always hesitate when asked for private information and generate follow­
up questions to keep the conversation going despite not meeting the scammer’s requests
for information. Listing 5.2 is an example of such a response that is hesitant to provide
personal information but still attempts to keep the scammer engaged.
1
Hello Mr. Philip M Mobley,
2
3
Thank you for your patience and understanding. Before providing any personal
4
information , could you give me more details about the process? I am interested
5
to know what kind of documents these are, how they will be used and how long
6
the whole procedure would take. This will help me prepare for the next steps
7
properly. I hope these details are not too much to ask for.
8
9
Best,
10
James Dawson.
Listing 5.2: Example of personal information avoidance
The LLM prompts attempt to cover every aspect needed to successfully scambait without
raising suspicion. However, the experiment still contains cases unhandled in the prompt,
thus leaving some responses open for the LLM to decide. In one conversation, the initial
mail induces the receiver to contact or access a link to schedule a meeting with them.
Leaving that unhandled in the prompt led to the LLM generating responses that agreed to
the meeting, even defining dates when options were given, despite having no access to a
calendar. This was only noticed after receiving an email from the fraudster wondering why
nobody had attended the meeting. Listing 5.3 displays a message from that conversation,
where the model agrees to the meeting and responds with a preferred date.
1
Hi Prabhat ,
2
3
Thank you for reaching out to me. I would prefer the 23rd for the meeting ,
4
as it suits my schedule better. Please share the meeting invite link with me.
5
6
Looking forward to our conversation.
7
8
Best regards
9
James Dawson
Listing 5.3: Case of meeting scheduled with fraudster
It is common for scammers to send their fraud campaigns from disposable email ad­
dresses. The message prompts the victim to send their response to another email to
avoid getting their main address flagged for spam and then possibly deactivated. This
was the case for many emails either received by the bait inbox or found in online forums.
In the case of the first message prompting a response to another address, this require­
ment could be met. The scambaiting system requires manual email registration, enabling
the user to input another email address than the one received to generate the answer.
This was, however, also the case in the middle of conversations, meaning the email was
already registered. After some messages, the bait persona was asked to contact another
email address, which the system could not. An example showing this is in Listing 5.4
36
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:45==
1
Dear James Dawson
2
3
...
4
5
I am therefore directing you to the right and most reliable person who has not
6
only helped me but has also helped lots of beneficiaries receive their
7
unclaimed legitimate payments for a better life through
contact stated below.
8
9
...
10
11
Email: financialservices@globalsdfa.org
12
13
When you open communication with him, be honest to state your financial
14
transaction accordingly and be exact and specific on the source and Amount
15
you are expected to receive , with such information 's working on releasing
16
your funds will be lots easy and you will be happy financially.
17
18
...
Listing 5.4: Example of scammer asking to contact another email
Although many methods were employed to increase the believability of the system to de­
ceive the scammers successfully, some incidents may have raised suspicion if noticed.
Mainly answering the email in an entirely different language and including information to
be filled manually in the email body, as shown in the attachment example in Listing 5.1.
These highlight a few weaknesses shown by the LLM used for this project but also bring
to light the randomness and unpredictability of reply generation. Similar behavior was
observed in the system implemented by Bajaj and Edwards [11]. In their study, the model
would sometimes reveal itself as an AI language model when asked to perform tasks in
the real world. This did not occur during the deployment of this project, despite being
sometimes tasked with making a call or contacting another email address.
To better analyze how this system brought improvements to previous automated scam­
baiting implementations, the results are compared to those achieved by the best replier of
Bajaj and Edwards [11]. The comparison can be seen in Table 5.2 and shows the same
measurements for each system for better analysis.
Table 5.2: Comparison with Chat Replier 1 of Bajaj and Edwards [11]
Study
Replies
Time
mean
max
mean
max
This project
5.81
46
4.21 days
15.55 days
Chat Replier 1
5.38
36
2.8 days
27.5 days
This project shows a small improvement when comparing the average amount of replies
from scammers. The difference between the implementations is shown in the average
duration of the conversations. A 50.36% increase from 2.8 days to 4.21 days average
duration means the system implemented by this project is more successful at keeping
scammers engaged for longer periods, wasting more of their time and potentially dimin­
ishing the risk of contacting real human victims. The measurements of the longest con­
versation by duration and amount of replies are disregarded due to the different durations
of experimentation as Bajaj and Edwards [11] deployed their system for 28 days.
Machine learning and cyber deception
37
==PAGE:46==
5.2.1
Automated Response Generation Summary
These results show that overall, one of the strengths of the system, more specifically the
LLM, is to produce convincing answers that not only deceive the scammer into thinking
they are communicating with a human but also keep them engaged in the conversation,
expecting to obtain value out of it in the form of information or funds, which will not be
provided. The example in Listing 5.2 highlights this strength by delivering promises of
information at a future point in the conversation while still demonstrating interest in the
scheme and asking the scammer to explain their claims in more detail to be then re­
warded with the information or the funds requested.
However, the system depends on some ideal conditions to be met to successfully scam­
bait the fraudsters, which can pose some limitations. The scammer must use the same
sender email since it is used to identify active and initiated conversations. The fraud
scheme should not prompt the user to contact them through other means, such as instant
messaging services or phone calls, as the scambaiting system is built only to handle
email messages, although the combination with other AI scambaiting methods [43, 44]
could bridge that gap and make it even more effective.
5.3
Honeytokens
Distributed between PDF files and signature links, an extensive amount of honeytokens
were sent to several different scammers. A signature link was sent in each of the 86
conversations initiated and in total 29 PDF honeytoken files were sent. The system was
implemented to send only one PDF file per conversation, eliminating the risk of sending
a new file with every reply and raising suspicion, as this would be considered unusual
behavior. With a total of 86 conversations, 33,72% of them involved a PDF honeytoken,
while out of the 33 logs with more than 2 messages, 87,88% included a PDF honeytoken
in the email thread. This shows that most of the scammers who got more involved with
the bait persona and the scambaiting system received a PDF honeytoken at some point
in the conversation.
5.3.1
PDF Honeytokens
Despite sending a considerable amount of PDF honeytoken files, zero interactions with
them were registered in the logs. Some messages received indicate that the file was
opened and read, as shown in the example below, where the scammer claims to have
opened the file but found no usable information in it.
1
Dear Mr. Dawson
2
3
The attachment you sent does not provide enough information to suffice
4
your funding request. If you are talking about funding , we expect you
5
to have a business plan.
6
7
Kindly provide your business plan that comprises the following:
8
9
1. Introduction: Provide a detailed overview of your company structure and
10
background , or introduce the project owner/initiator.
11
2. Project Overview: Highlight the historical evaluation of the project if
12
it is an existing venture , or state if it is a new initiative.
13
3. Financial Analysis: Include a comprehensive financial structure and
14
analysis that supports your investment plan and value proposition.
15
4. Funding Requirements: Clearly define the total amount required in USD
16
or Euros, along with the proposed time frame for funding and execution.
17
18
Thank you
19
38
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:47==
20
Mr. Bilal
21
Chief Investment Officer
22
Al Arar Capital
23
www.alararcapital.com
Listing 5.5: Message showing the PDF file has been accessed
Obtaining zero interactions from PDF honeytokens is an unexpected result, which can
be attributed to various factors. Due to security concerns, popular PDF readers such as
Adobe Acrobat, Foxit Reader, and browsers have blocked URI requests and JavaScript
scripts embedded in PDF files. If they are not blocked, a warning is shown to the user
before the request is made, which raises suspicion, and will probably be blocked by the
scammer. In the context of scam campaigns, fraudsters are aware of the malicious poten­
tial files can have. Cautious scammers avoid opening or downloading files received as a
precautionary measure. Another factor is that the PDF may have been sent at a moment
not relevant enough in the conversation, which raises suspicion, leading to the scammer
avoiding the file fearing malicious intentions. It shows that the design and implementation
of system components surrounding the PDF honeytoken should have been different and
have room for improvement.
5.3.2
Signature URL Honeytoken
All the honeytoken interactions and information gathered can be attributed to the signature
URL honeytoken. These totaled 47 interactions across 20 conversations, gathering 30 IP
addresses throughout the experimentation phase. Of the 86 conversations, 23,25% pro­
vided at least one IP address and User­Agent pair, while these conversations comprised
60,6% of the successful conversations with more than two messages. In seven conver­
sations, the same honeytoken was interacted with from different IPs, but in another seven
cases, multiple interactions with the same URL honeytoken contained the same IP ad­
dress across them. The remaining 6 conversations only registered a single interaction.
IP address analysis
An IP location analysis using ip-api2 provides insight into the information attached to
each IP address gathered. Figure 5.2 below shows a map highlighting the countries from
where an IP address appears in the automated scambaiting system’s logs, and Figure
5.3 shows the distribution per country, including the total for each of them.
2https://ip­api.com/
Machine learning and cyber deception
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.2: Countries where IPs were gathered from
Figure 5.3: Distribution of IP addresses per country
However, the bundle of IP addresses gathered should be taken with a grain of salt. Nowa­
days, utilizing Virtual Private Network services is a widespread practice to increase the se­
curity and the anonymity of the individual user by routing all traffic through a VPN provider,
thus masking the true IP address of the user. Internet scammers also utilize this since it
40
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:49==
decreases the likelihood of identification, reducing the risks of their criminal schemes.
A deeper analysis is needed to uncover the validity and usability of the information gath­
ered by the system. Websites provide services that retrieve more information than just
location based on a given IP address, where users can also report them for abuse. In
this project, AbuseIPDB 3 was used to gain deeper insight into the IP addresses acquired
by the scambaiting system. AbuseIPDB provides more information than the estimated
location of the IP address. It contains the domain name the IP is bound to, the ISP, the
Usage Type of the IP, and a score for Confidence of Abuse, calculated based on user re­
ports, that indicates how certain the website is that the IP is malicious. Users can provide
detailed reports, categorizing them and providing a description that justifies their report
and what attack they experienced.
All the IP addresses gathered by the scambaiting system were analyzed in AbuseIPDB.
Ten were not present in their database, meaning no user has reported them yet as ma­
licious. They still contain the mentioned information except for the Confidence of Abuse
score. Despite having no reports, these IP addresses can still be malicious. Email users
receiving spam will report the email address rather than discovering and reporting the
origin IP address. The authenticity of the IP address cannot be concluded from the given
information since it could be an address provided by a VPN despite being bound to a
single individual.
AbuseIPDB classifies IP addresses into a Usage Type, providing information about the
type of internet connection or network usage associated with an IP address. Figure 5.4
shows the distribution of the Usage Types of the IPs gathered by the scambaiting system.
Fixed Line ISP is associated with a home or office environment. Mobile ISP is likely a mo­
bile device or hotspot. Data Center/Web Hosting/Transit is associated with servers and
hosting services. University/College/School is associated with educational institutions.
There are 12 different Usage Types for IP addresses [61], though only the four mentioned
were identified in this project.
3https://www.abuseipdb.com/
Machine learning and cyber deception
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.4: Distribution of Usage Types for IPs gathered by the system
The distribution shows a higher number of Mobile ISP and Fixed Line ISP types among
the IPs found, 13 and 10, respectively. Despite being the most prevalent type, these
IPs have a low Confidence of Abuse score; all addresses have a score of 0% with the
exception of two, which have 7% and 4%. This score indicates either a low number of
reports or that the reports are older since the Confidence of Abuse score decays over time.
The IP addresses categorized as Data Center/Web Hosting/Transit displayed higher Con­
fidence of Abuse scores, with an average of 24,83% among the six addresses. Two of
those have a score of 0%, meaning the other four have a relatively high score. These
have several reports tied to them, ranging from different types of attacks, such as DDoS,
excessive crawling, and brute force attacks. These attacks hint at the fact that they are
servers or untrustworthy hosting services tied to a larger organization that performs orga­
nized attacks at a larger scale than single individuals.
Advanced adversaries use Tor Browsers for complete traffic anonymity when executing
their attacks and performing their schemes. AbuseIPDB’s services provide information
on whether an IP is from the Tor network or not. Upon checking every IP gathered by the
system for presence in the Tor network, all returned negative. This is expected since Tor
is used for more advanced and malicious schemes than email fraud.
Interestingly, two different IP addresses from two different conversations conducted by
the system were found to be from the same city and have the same Autonomous System
Number (ASN), a unique identifier assigned to an Autonomous System (AS), which is a
collection of IP networks managed and operated by a single organization or entity (such
as an ISP, cloud provider, or large enterprise) under a common routing policy. They also
shared reports from the same users, meaning that the two scam campaigns received by
the scambaiting system are performed by the same organization, which can aid in identi­
fying a pattern that this group uses in their scam attacks.
42
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:51==
These email scams, especially Advance Fee Fraud schemes, typically originate from
Western African countries such as Nigeria, Cameroon, Sierra Leone, and Ghana [15];
however, in recent years, with technological advancements and the potential some fraud
schemes have, India has become one of the countries with the most significant amount of
scammers, typically performing schemes involving technical support. The United States
has also been shown to contain many fraudsters who see a big market for these fraud
campaigns in America. These tendencies are seen in the results obtained by the scam­
baiting system implemented in this project. Most IP addresses gathered are from India,
with 20, with the United States coming second, with five, and Western African countries
not far behind, with three. The tendencies mentioned have created stereotypes about
the countries with high concentrations of fraud schemes and brought a bad reputation to
them. However, scammers are aware of this reputation, which means that if the fraud­
sters configured VPN protection, they would likely use it to hide their country of origin to
increase their legitimacy further, especially when they claim to be from more reputable
countries than their own. This indicates a lower likelihood that the IPs gathered belong
to VPN providers or that the countries of origin are correct information on the scammers
whose information was acquired by the automated scambaiting system.
User­Agent analysis
Along with the IP address, the User­Agent HTTP header is also retrieved from the request
received from the honeytoken. For all 47 interactions with honeytokens registered by
the scambaiting system, information on the scammer’s device (Operating System and
browser) can provide more detail to build an extensive profile on the fraudster contacted.
Figure 5.5 shows the distribution of Operating Systems that accessed the honeytoken
URL along with their versions.
Figure 5.5: Distribution of Operating Systems that accessed honeytokens
Windows 10 stands out as the most prevalent Operating System that interacted with the
honeytoken received, with 36. This follows the trend of the current market share among
Machine learning and cyber deception
43
==PAGE:52==
Windows versions as it still retains the biggest market share (62,73%) as of December
2024[62] despite the release of Windows 11. Second is the Operating System for mobile
devices, Android 10, with seven. Android 10 was released in September 2019, meaning
scammers are utilizing older versions of Operating Systems, perhaps as older, cheaper
devices are used for their schemes to minimize costs. The same trend is seen with the
remaining two Operating Systems: Mac OS X 10.15.7, also released in 2019, and Win­
dows 7, released in 2009.
Another component of the User­Agent HTTP header is the browser that performed the
request. Figure 5.6 shows the distribution of browsers that interacted with the automated
scambaiting system by accessing the honeytoken URL.
Figure 5.6: Distribution of Browsers that accessed honeytokens
There is a big disparity between the most prevalent browser, Google Chrome, with 32, and
Chrome Mobile, with 7. Being versions of the same browser for different devices shows
that, similarly to the global market share, Chrome browsers are also the most popular
ones used in the email scammer community. The remaining accesses were registered
from Firefox and Microsoft Edge, common browsers among internet users. This further
reinforces the analysis that no Tor browser was used to access the honeytokens, as seen
on AbuseIPDB.
The User­Agent HTTP header can provide valuable insight into the fraudster’s system
and device. This shows the potential an automated scambaiting system has for combat­
ting email scam campaigns through information gathering, which can aid authorities in
tackling the problem at its roots instead of deactivating single email accounts.
5.4
Summary
As the results show, the system has both strengths and weaknesses. It showed the capa­
bility to keep scammers engaged in long conversations as long as they answered the first
44
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:53==
response from the scambaiting system. Once the fraudster interacts with the system, it
keeps its believability and baits the scammer into committing resources to the conversa­
tion, as can be seen from the high average amount of scammer replies and conversation
duration, as well as the several follow­up emails sent after the system was shut down. This
is under the assumption that the scammer engages with the system, which, as shown,
38,37% of them did. Many reasons can factor into this percentage not being higher de­
spite using fresh scam messages. The scammer may have abandoned the email address
if it was not yielding enough engagement, or the response may have raised suspicion of
automated message generation despite the system’s best efforts to avoid that. Another
reason is that their fraud campaign was never intended to receive responses if the only
intention was to click a link, download a file, or call a number. If the scammer is already
committing their time and resources to other victims who responded first to the fraud cam­
paign, they will likely miss new responses since they are busy.
The results evidently show a big difference between the PDF honeytokens and the URL
honeytokens in the signature. The URLs were considerably more efficient in gathering
information, while the PDF honeytokens did not register a single interaction. Overall, the
result of 60,6% of conversations longer than two messages yielding at least one IP ad­
dress is considered very efficient and shows the potential a system like the one presented
in this project has to combat email fraudsters with information acquisition.
A variety of factors contribute to this measured efficiency. The signature is sent with
every email instead of once per conversation, like the PDF honeytoken. It is common
practice for emails to contain a signature at the end and include more information when it
is business­related. In the case of the URL honeytoken, the domain acquired helped with
the believability of the honeytoken by containing a name related to the persona created,
which leads to believe it is for a business owned by them. Scammers see the opportunity
in a victim and try to gain as much information about them to leverage and use to their ad­
vantage. They see the personal website provided as a way of obtaining more information,
leading to more of them accessing it, thus providing more IP addresses to the system.
Machine learning and cyber deception
45
==PAGE:54==
6
Conclusion and Future Work
This thesis presents an automated email scambaiting system capable of gathering in­
formation through deception with honeytokens. By using deceptive techniques such as
honeytokens and taking advantage of developments in Large Language Models (LLMs),
this project presents a system that not only deceives fraudsters but also gathers valuable
information. This approach addresses the limitations of traditional passive defenses like
spam filters by actively interacting with scammers, wasting their time and resources.
Through a trial deployment of the scambaiting system, the efficiency and ability of the
system to generate convincing and deceiving responses were analyzed, along with the
information gathered through the honeytokens sent to scammers. The system showed
significant improvements compared to previous implementations of previous systems [11],
being capable of sustaining longer conversations in terms of time duration and smaller im­
provements in the number of replies received from scammers. The signature URL honey­
tokens were more effective than PDF honeytokens, which yielded unexpected inefficient
results amounting to no interactions. The possible reasons are discussed and show that
there is room for improvement, which can significantly increase the system’s efficiency at
gathering information. This shows the importance of designing deceptive tools for scam­
mers’ behavior and expectations.
By analyzing the IP addresses and User­Agents gathered information such as country
of origin, IP Usage Type, Operating System, and browser was compiled on the scam­
mers that interacted with the scambaiting system. Known trends in the cyber security
environment were confirmed in this project, showing that cyber threats are still pertinent
issues in our society. The analysis of the information gathered shows that extensive profil­
ing of the scammer and their infrastructure is possible, and automated systems combined
with machine learning advancements have the potential to become a valuable tool in the
combat against email fraud.
In conclusion, the automated scambaiting system implemented sheds light on the poten­
tial of active defense techniques through deception in a world with an increasing threat to
cyber security. By combining machine learning advancements in the form of LLMs and
novel deception techniques such as honeytokens, this project offers a powerful tool to
reduce the impact of cyber fraud, leading to a more secure digital world.
6.1
Future Work
Although the automated scambaiting system with honeytokens implemented by this project
proved efficient at deceiving, scambaiting, and gathering information on fraudsters, some
aspects still show room for improvement, either as a result of the experimentation phase
or due to the limited time and resources for implementation in this iteration.
Experiment with other types of honeytokens
As the results of this project show, the PDF honeytoken was not effective in gathering
information on the scammers.
This opens up the possibility for experimentation with
improvements on the honeytokens used by this project and developing other types of
honeytokens in the context of email conversations to analyze their efficiency at gather­
ing information when sent to an email fraudster. Other file types are commonly sent via
46
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:55==
email, such as images, .doc, .docx files, .zip files, and Spreadsheet files. These can
potentially serve as honeytokens and be more effective at gathering information.
Expand on information gathering
Along with new honeytoken types, improvements can be made to the information gath­
ered by them. This project retrieves an IP address and User­Agent header from each
interaction, though if more information is gathered on the scammer, an extensive profile
can be built for each. Scammers will often use fake personal information such as names,
addresses, and companies; however, when prompted to either call a number or transfer
funds to a bank account that is related to them, they will provide real information. Other­
wise, there is no point in the scam.
Connection to actual personal inbox
One of the improvements this project brings is the viability of utilizing a popular emailing
service provider and connecting to a personal inbox to perform the automated scambait­
ing. A baiting account with fake information was created for experimentation purposes for
anonymity. A further improvement could be to have the option to link any existing email
account and provide the permissions to perform the scambaiting instead of having the
system linked to one specific email account as implemented in this project.
Utilize LLM for supporting tasks
An LLM could also be used for tasks other than response generation and file content
filling. As shown in the results, not every response generated was ideal or followed all
the instructions given in the prompt. The system can be improved by running the initial
response generated through a quality control process, which another instance of the LLM
could perform to ensure the messages sent are as believable as possible and have no
flaws that can raise any suspicion from the scammer
In this project, responses are generated based only on the most recent email received
from the scammer. Another improvement involving an LLM is to keep a summary of each
conversation. With that, when generating a single response, the model can be provided
with a general context of the conversation since its beginning. As soon as a new email
arrives, an LLM can update this summary to keep it concise while not losing crucial in­
formation. This improvement can make the responses seem even more believable and
keep the scammers engaged for a longer time.
Improved response management
The email management in this project is relatively simple. As soon as a new email arrives,
it is scheduled for a single response, and upon sending it, no further action is taken until
the arrival of a new message. While this works in most cases, email responses are missed
by scammers, and sending a follow­up email could be the key to keeping the conversation
going and the scammer engaged. In the case of two emails received in quick succession
from the same sender, it is common for humans to gather the response into a single email,
attending to both messages received. This could be implemented in an improved version
of this system to make it seem more human and believable, instead of sending a separate
response to each email received.
Machine learning and cyber deception
47
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1]
Charles Griffiths. The Latest 2024 Phishing Statistics. 2024. URL: https://aag-
it.com/the-latest-phishing-statistics/ (visited on ).
[2]
Internet Crime Complaint Center. Internet Crime Report 2023. Tech. rep. 2023. URL:
https://www.ic3.gov/AnnualReport/Reports/2023_IC3Report.pdf.
[3]
Flavio D. Garcia, Jaap­Henk Hoepman, and Jeroen van Nieuwenhuizen. “Spam
Filter Analysis”. In: Security and Protection in Information Processing Systems. Ed.
by Yves Deswarte et al. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2004, pp. 395–410. ISBN: 978­
1­4020­8143­9.
[4]
Myeongsoo Kim et al. “Scam detection assistant: Automated protection from scam­
mers”. In: 2019 1st International Conference on Societal Automation, Sa 2019 (2019),
p. 8938036. DOI: 10.1109/SA47457.2019.8938036.
[5]
Thomas R Lynam and Gordon V Cormack. “On­line spam filter fusion”. In: Proceed­
ings of the Twenty­ninth Annual International Acm Sigir Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval 2006 (2006), pp. 123–130.
[6]
IEEE et al. “Traffic classification­based spam filter”. In: 2006 Ieee International Con­
ference on Communications, Vols 1­12 (2006), pp. 2130–2135. ISSN: 19381883,
15503607.
[7]
Matthew Canham and Juliet Tuthill. “Planting a Poison SEAD: Using Social Engi­
neering Active Defense (SEAD) to Counter Cybercriminals”. In: Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 13310 (2022). Ed. by Fidopiastis C M Schmorrow
DD, pp. 48–57. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-05457-0_4.
[8]
Zhuo Lu, Cliff Wang, and Shangqing Zhao. “Cyber Deception for Computer and
Network Security: Survey and Challenges”. In: (2020).
[9]
Lance Spitzner. Definitions and Value of Honeypots. 2002. URL: https : / / www .
eetimes.com/definitions-and-value-of-honeypots/ (visited on ).
[10]
Wentao Chen, Fuzhou Wang, and Matthew Edwards. “Active Countermeasures for
Email Fraud”. In: Proceedings ­ 8th Ieee European Symposium on Security and
Privacy, Euro S and P 2023 (2023), pp. 39–55. DOI: 10.1109/EuroSP57164.2023.
00012.
[11]
Piyush Bajaj and Matthew Edwards. “Automatic Scam­Baiting Using ChatGPT”.
In: Proceedings ­ 2023 Ieee 22nd International Conference on Trust, Security and
Privacy in Computing and Communications, Trustcom/bigdatase/cse/euc/isci 2023
(2023), pp. 1941–1946. ISSN: 23249013, 2324898x. DOI: 10.1109/TrustCom60117.
2023.00264.
[12]
Joe Hewett and Matthew Leeke. “Developing a GPT­3­Based Automated Victim for
Advance Fee Fraud Disruption”. In: Proceedings of Ieee Pacific Rim International
Symposium on Dependable Computing, Prdc 2022­ (2022), pp. 205–211. ISSN:
24733105, 1555094x, 15410110. DOI: 10.1109/PRDC55274.2022.00034.
[13]
Brittani Johnson. The Evolution of Scams: A Brief History. 2023. URL: https://www.
irisidentityprotection.com/blog/the-evolution-of-scams (visited on 09/24/2024).
[14]
No, Bill Gates won’t send you money: A history of email hoaxes. 2023. URL: https:
//www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365-life-hacks/privacy-and-safety/history-
email-hoaxes (visited on 09/24/2024).
48
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:57==
[15]
Alain Tambe Ebot. “Advance fee fraud scammers’ criminal expertise and deceptive
strategies: a qualitative case study”. In: Information and Computer Security 31.4
(2023), pp. 478–503. ISSN: 2056497x, 20564961. DOI: 10.1108/ICS-01-2022-0007.
[16]
Michael Peel. Nigeria­related financial crime and its links with Britain. Chatham
House London, 2006.
[17]
Minal Chawla and Siddarth Singh Chouhan. “A Survey of Phishing Attack Tech­
niques”. In: International Journal of Computer Applications 93.3 (2014), pp. 32–35.
ISSN: 09758887. DOI: 10.5120/16197-5460.
[18]
Tom N Jagatic et al. “Social phishing”. In: Communications of the Acm 50.10 (2007),
p. 1290968. ISSN: 15577317, 00010782. DOI: 10.1145/1290958.1290968.
[19]
Indranil Bose and Alvin C M Leung. “Assessment of phishing announcements on
market value of firms”. In: Proceedings ­ 11th International Conference on Informa­
tion Technology, Icit 2008 (2008). Ed. by Nayak A Panda BS, pp. 304–307. DOI:
10.1109/ICIT.2008.37.
[20]
Andreas Zingerle and Linda Kronman. “Humiliating entertainment or social activism?
Analyzing scambaiting strategies against online advance fee fraud”. In: Proceedings
­ 2013 International Conference on Cyberworlds, Cw 2013 (2013). Ed. by Hong L
Mao X, pp. 352–355. DOI: 10.1109/CW.2013.49.
[21]
Lauri Tuovinen and Juha Röning. “Baits and beatings: Vigilante justice in virtual
communities”. In: Proceedings of CEPE (2007), pp. 397–405.
[22]
Scamwarners. URL: https://www.scamwarners.com/forum/ (visited on ).
[23]
Scammer.info. URL: https://scammer.info/ (visited on ).
[24]
r/scambait. URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/scambait/ (visited on 10/17/2024).
[25]
Jeff Kosseff. “The hazards of cyber­vigilantism”. In: Computer Law and Security
Review 32.4 (2016), pp. 642–649. ISSN: 18736734, 02673649. DOI: 10.1016/j.clsr.
2016.05.008.
[26]
Dan Damon. Turning the tables on Nigeria’s e­mail conmen. 2004. URL: http://
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/3887493.stm (visited on ).
[27]
The Chesire Cat. 419 Eater. 2006. URL: https://www.419eater.com/html/ethics.htm
(visited on ).
[28]
Nathaniel Evans and William Horsthemke. “Active Defense Techniques”. In: Cyber
Resilience of Systems and Networks (2018). Ed. by Linkov Igor Kott Alexander,
pp. 221–246. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-77492-3_10.
[29]
Barros Augusto. DLP and honeytokens. 2007. URL: https://blog.securitybalance.
com/p/dlp-and-honeytokens (visited on 12/16/2024).
[30]
Jonathan Voris et al. “Bait and Snitch: Defending Computer Systems with Decoys”.
In: 2013. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16202875.
[31]
Jonathan White et al. “Social network attack simulation with honeytokens”. eng.
In: Social Network Analysis and Mining 4.1 (2014), pp. 1–14. ISSN: 18695469,
18695450. DOI: 10.1007/s13278-014-0221-5.
[32]
Ari Juels. “A bodyguard of lies: The use of honey objects in information security”.
In: Proceedings of Acm Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies,
Sacmat (2014), pp. 1–3. DOI: 10.1145/2613087.2613088.
[33]
Ari Juels and Ronald L Rivest. “Honeywords: Making password­cracking detectable”.
In: Proceedings of the Acm Conference on Computer and Communications Security
(2013), pp. 145–159. ISSN: 15437221. DOI: 10.1145/2508859.2516671.
[34]
Mohammed H Almeshekah et al. “Ersatzpasswords: Ending password cracking and
detecting password leakage”. In: Acm International Conference Proceeding Series
7­11­ (2015), pp. 311–320. DOI: 10.1145/2818000.2818015.
Machine learning and cyber deception
49
==PAGE:58==
[35]
Frederico Araujo et al. “From patches to honey­patches: Lightweight attacker mis­
direction, deception, and disinformation”. In: Proceedings of the Acm Conference
on Computer and Communications Security (2014), pp. 942–953. ISSN: 15437221.
DOI: 10.1145/2660267.2660329.
[36]
Maya Bercovitch et al. “HoneyGen: An automated honeytokens generator”. In: Pro­
ceedings of 2011 Ieee International Conference on Intelligence and Security Infor­
matics, Isi 2011 (2011), pp. 131–136. DOI: 10.1109/ISI.2011.5984063.
[37]
Mohammed Msaad et al. “Honeysweeper: Towards stealthy Honeytoken fingerprint­
ing techniques”. In: Proceedings of 27<sup>th</sup> Nordic Conference on Secure
It Systems 13700 (2022). Ed. by Kyas M Reiser HP, pp. 101–119. ISSN: 16113349,
03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-22295-5_6.
[38]
Akos Pilis. “Invisible Deception: Redesigning Honeytokens to Combat Fingerprint­
ing”. MA thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
[39]
Muhammad Hamisu and Ali Mansour. “Detecting advance fee fraud using NLP bag
of word model”. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Ieee 2nd International Conference on
Cyberspace, Cyber Nigeria 2020 (2021), pp. 94–97. DOI: 10.1109/CYBERNIGERIA51635.
2021.9428793.
[40]
Sid Black et al. “GPT­Neo: Large Scale Autoregressive Language Modeling with
Mesh­Tensorflow”. In: 2021. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:245758737.
[41]
Matthew Edwards et al. “Scamming the scammers: Towards automatic detection
of persuasion in advance fee frauds”. eng. In: 26th International World Wide Web
Conference 2017, Www 2017 Companion (2017), pp. 1291–1299. DOI: 10.1145/
3041021.3053889.
[42]
B Klimt and Y M Yang. “The Enron corpus: A new dataset for email classifica­
tion research”. In: Machine Learning: Ecml 2004, Proceedings 3201 (2004). Ed.
by Esposito F Giannoti F Pedreschi D Boulicaut JF, pp. 217–226. ISSN: 16113349,
03029743.
[43]
Pieter Arntz. AI Granny Daisy takes up scammers’ time so they can’t bother you.
2024. URL: https://www.malwarebytes.com/blog/news/2024/11/ai-granny-daisy-
takes-up-scammers-time-so-they-cant-bother-you (visited on 11/20/2024).
[44]
Virgin Media O2. AI Scambaiters: O2 creates AI Granny to waste scammers’ time.
2024. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RV_SdCfZ-0s.
[45]
Litmus. The State of Email Client Market Share. 2024. URL: https://www.litmus.
com/email-client-market-share (visited on 12/21/2024).
[46]
Microsoft. 10 tips on how to help reduce spam. URL: https://support.microsoft.
com/en-us/office/10-tips-on-how-to-help-reduce-spam-55f756e8-688b-41c3-a086-
8f68ccc592f6 (visited on ).
[47]
Malwarebytes. How to Stop Spam Emails. URL: https://www.malwarebytes.com/
cybersecurity/basics/how-to-stop-spam-emails (visited on ).
[48]
Cloudfare. How to stop spam emails. URL: https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/
email-security/how-to-stop-spam-emails/ (visited on ).
[49]
Domenic Molinaro. How to Stop Spam Emails From Filling Up Your Inbox. 2024.
URL: https://www.avast.com/c-how-to-stop-spam-emails (visited on ).
[50]
Shafiya Sheikh and Tariq Banday. “Mitigating BOT­based Methods for Email Ad­
dress Harvesting and Spamming”. In: Research Square (2022). DOI: 10.21203/rs.
3.rs-1954011/v1. URL: https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-1954011/v1.
[51]
Emily M Weitzenboeck. “Hybrid net: The regulatory framework of ICANN and the
DNS”. In: International Journal of Law and Information Technology 22.1 (2014),
pp. 49–73. ISSN: 14643693, 09670769. DOI: 10.1093/ijlit/eat016.
50
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:59==
[52]
Ziemek Bućko. The Ultimate Guide to Accept­all (Catch­all) Email Addresses. 2024.
URL: https://hunter.io/blog/ultimate-guide-accept-all-catch-all/ (visited on ).
[53]
Sakib Shahriar et al. “Putting GPT­4o to the Sword: A Comprehensive Evaluation of
Language, Vision, Speech, and Multimodal Proficiency”. In: Applied Sciences 14.17
(2024). ISSN: 2076­3417. DOI: 10.3390/app14177782. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
2076-3417/14/17/7782.
[54]
Thomas Bressoud and David White. “The HyperText Transfer Protocol”. eng. In:
Introduction To Data Systems (2020), pp. 609–648. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-54371-
6_20.
[55]
Statista. Countries with the highest number of phishing e­mails detected worldwide
in 2023. 2024. URL: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1491233/countries-targeted-
with-e-mail-threats-worldwide/ (visited on 01/10/2025).
[56]
Social Security Administration. Top Names Over the Last 100 Years. 2024. URL:
https://www.ssa.gov/OACT/babynames/decades/century.html (visited on ).
[57]
Iskander Akhmetov et al. “Highly language­independent word lemmatization using
a machine­learning classifier”. In: Computación y Sistemas 24.3 (2020), pp. 1353–
1364.
[58]
Barry Leiba. “OAuth web authorization protocol”. eng. In: Ieee Internet Computing
16.1 (2012), p. 6123701. ISSN: 10897801, 19410131. DOI: 10.1109/MIC.2012.11.
[59]
P Leach, M Mealling, and R Salz. RFC 4122: A Universally Unique IDentifier (UUID)
URN Namespace. USA, 2005.
[60]
Martin Schaffer, Peter Schartner, and Stefan Rass. “Universally unique identifiers:
How to ensure uniqueness while protecting the issuer’s privacy”. In: Proceedings of
the 2007 International Conference on Security and Management, Sam’07 (2007).
Ed. by Arabnia Hamid R Aissi Selim, pp. 198–204.
[61]
IPSHU. What are the use types of IP addresses? 2024. URL: https://en.ipshu.com/
ip_use_type (visited on ).
[62]
StatCounter. Desktop Windows Version Market Share Worldwide. 2024. URL: https:
//gs.statcounter.com/os-version-market-share/windows/desktop/worldwide (visited
on ).
Machine learning and cyber deception
51
==PAGE:60==
A
Source code
The source code for this thesis can be found in the following Git repository:
https://github.com/Chermas/FraudsterDeceptionSystem
52
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:61==
B
Receipt for email not delivered
Figure B.1: Response from Mail Delivery Subsystem for email not delivered
Machine learning and cyber deception
53
==PAGE:62==
C
Full conversation log
1
{
2
"conversation_id":"f95dfa2778d9",
3
"sender":"info@alraracapital.com",
4
"messages":[
5
{
6
"from":"info@alraracapital.com",
7
"message":"Greetings ,\r\n \r\nThank you for your interest in our
funding program. We are pleased to explore the opportunity to
collaborate with you on your project.\r\n \r\nAt Al Arar Capital ,
we are committed to funding viable projects across all sectors
and geographical regions. Our funding model is based on debt
financing with an annual interest rate of 2.5%, offering
flexibility and scalability for your project. We are particularly
interested in initiatives that demonstrate the potential for
robust growth and sustainability.\r\n \r\nCurrently , Al Arar
Capital is actively reinvesting through global project financing
and investment opportunities. While our operations extend beyond
the Middle East and GCC region , we prioritize projects capable of
generating a minimum return on investment (ROI) of 10% annually.
Our funding capacity ranges from $1 million to $5 billion USD,
catering to long-term investments with significant ROI potential
.\r\n \r\nTo move forward , we invite you to present your project
proposal or business plan. Your submission should cover the
following key areas to facilitate our review and consideration:\r
\n \r\n1. Introduction: Provide a detailed overview of your
company structure and background , or introduce the project owner/
initiator.\r\n2. Project Overview: Highlight the historical
evaluation of the project if it is an existing venture , or state
if it is a new initiative.\r\n3. Financial Analysis: Include a
comprehensive financial structure and analysis that supports your
investment plan and value proposition.\r\n4. Funding
Requirements: Clearly define the total amount required in USD or
Euros, along with the proposed time frame for funding and
execution.\r\n \r\nThis information will enable us to assess the
project\u2019s viability and alignment with our funding criteria.
If your project meets our requirements and falls within our
investment scope, we will be glad to proceed with a formal offer
on clear and mutually beneficial terms.\r\n \r\nWe look forward
to reviewing your proposal and potentially embarking on a
successful collaboration. Please do not hesitate to reach out if
you have any questions or need further guidance on preparing your
submission.\r\n \r\nSincere regards ,\r\n \r\nNasir Bilal\r\
nChief Investment Officer\r\nAl Arar Capital\r\nKing's Tower
Jeddah 23412 - 3675\r\nSaudi Arabia\r\nhttp://www.alararcapital.
com/\r\n \r\n \r\n \r\n \r\nOn Wednesday , December 11th, 2024 at
11:39 PM, james.r.dawson70@gmail.com <james.r.dawson70@gmail.com>
wrote:\r\n\r\n> Dear Karam Ghalib ,\r\n> \r\n> Thank you for
reaching out and for your interest in possible collaboration. I
do have several projects in mind that could potentially generate
a good ROI. Primarily , I am looking into the technology sector
with a focus on software development and data management
solutions.\r\n> \r\n> These projects are in the early stages and
could significantly benefit from your loan program. Although I
cannot guarantee the ROI at this point, I am optimistic about
their potential profitability based on preliminary market
research.\r\n> \r\n> Could you possibly provide more details
about the terms of your loan program? I am particularly
54
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:63==
interested in knowing the interest rates, repayment terms, and
any collateral requirements if applicable.\r\n> \r\n> In addition
, could you please inform me about the process to apply for
project consideration and review?\r\n> \r\n> Looking forward to
your prompt response.\r\n> \r\n> Best regards ,\r\n> James Dawson\
r\n> \r\n> --\r\n> James R Dawson\r\n> Colorado\r\n> jdawsontech.
com http://server.jdawsontech.com/
bac5a55ce2694ac98d0ce5e6f9d6c3bd\r\n> \r\n",
8
"timestamp":"2024-12-12 08:12:18 UTC"
9
},
10
{
11
"from":"me",
12
"message":"Dear Mr. Bilal ,\n\nThank you for your detailed breakdown
of Al Arar Capital 's funding model and the request for the
project proposal. I am encouraged by your commitment to fund
viable projects across sectors and regions.\n\nI am currently
preparing the required documents for your consideration. These
include details about my company structure and background , an
overview of my project , a comprehensive financial analysis , and
our funding requirements.\n\nAs I am still in the early stages ,
some of this data is still being finalized. However , I am
confident that the information provided will meet your investment
scope and funding criteria.\n\nI look forward to the opportunity
to collaborate with your esteemed institution. In the interim
period, if there are any specific format or norms that I should
stick to while creating my submission , please do let me know.\n\
nFinally , I also look forward to understanding more about the
terms and conditions associated with your loan program , as was
mentioned in my previous mail.\n\nThank you once again for
considering my application. I look forward to hearing from you
soon.\n\nBest regards ,\n\nJames Dawson",
13
"timestamp":"2024-12-12 12:54:21 "
14
},
15
{
16
"from":"info@alraracapital.com",
17
"message":"Dear Mr. Dawson ,\n \nThank you for your prompt response
and for providing an update on the preparation of your project
proposal. I appreciate your thorough approach and am pleased to
learn that you are aligning your submission with our funding
criteria.\n \nTo assist you in the preparation of your documents ,
please find below some key guidelines for your submission:\n \n1
. Company Overview: Include a concise but comprehensive profile
of your company or project ownership structure. Ensure it
highlights your industry experience and expertise.\n \n2. Project
Proposal: Provide a detailed description of your project ,
including its purpose , scope, and unique value proposition.
Emphasize how it meets market demands and its potential impact.\n
\n3. Financial Analysis: Submit a financial breakdown , including
projected cash flows, ROI estimates , and funding allocation.
This should illustrate the project 's viability and profitability
within the agreed timeframe.\n \n4. Funding Requirements: Specify
the total amount required , phased funding needs if applicable ,
and a detailed timeline for deployment.\n \nAs for the loan
program terms, here are some highlights to provide clarity:\n \n*
Interest Rate: Fixed at 2.5% annually.\n* Loan Duration:
Flexible , subject to the project 's funding and repayment schedule
.\n* Disbursement Process: Begins upon final approval and the
receipt of the due diligence report.\nShould you have specific
questions or require clarification while compiling your proposal ,
please do not hesitate to contact me. I am here to ensure a
smooth process and am eager to see your project progress.\n \nWe
value your initiative and look forward to reviewing your
Machine learning and cyber deception
55
==PAGE:64==
submission. Thank you for considering Al Arar Capital as your
funding partner.\n \nBest regards ,\n\nMr. Bilal\nAl Arar Capital\
n\n \n\n>",
18
"timestamp":"2024-12-12 17:20:05 UTC"
19
},
20
{
21
"from":"me",
22
"message":"Dear Mr. Bilal ,\n\nThank you for providing the detailed
guidelines and the loan program terms. They are very helpful in
refining our project proposal to align with your requirements. We
are finalizing the documents according to the outlined sections:
Company Overview , Project Proposal , Financial Analysis , and
Funding Requirements.\n\nPlease find attached the PDF file that
contains the comprehensive details of our submission. In case
there are any points that need further clarification or
elaboration , feel free to reach out. I appreciate your support
and am looking forward to your feedback.\n\nThank you once again
for considering our project.\n\nBest regards ,\n\nJames Dawson",
23
"timestamp":"2024-12-13 09:02:51 "
24
},
25
{
26
"from":"info@alraracapital.com",
27
"message":"Dear Mr. Dawson\n \nThe attachment you sent does not
provide enough information to suffice your funding request. If
you are talking about funding , we expect you to have a business
plan. \n \nKindly provide your business plan that comprises the
following:\n \n1. Introduction: Provide a detailed overview of
your company structure and background , or introduce the project
owner/initiator.\n2. Project Overview: Highlight the historical
evaluation of the project if it is an existing venture , or state
if it is a new initiative.\n3. Financial Analysis: Include a
comprehensive financial structure and analysis that supports your
investment plan and value proposition.\n4. Funding Requirements:
Clearly define the total amount required in USD or Euros, along
with the proposed time frame for funding and execution. \n \
nThank you\n \nMr. Bilal\nChief Investment Officer\nAl Arar
Capitalhttp://www.alararcapital.com\n \n\n>",
28
"timestamp":"2024-12-13 15:33:28 UTC"
29
},
30
{
31
"from":"me",
32
"message":"Dear Mr. Bilal ,\n\nThank you very much for getting back to
me. I appreciate your interest and your instructive feedback
regarding our funding request. I'm sorry for any misunderstood or
lack of information , I realize now that I should have included a
more comprehensive business plan with my initial approach.\n\
nThere is no denying that the points you make is important for a
successful and smooth cooperation. In fact, I am in the process
of finalizing an expansive business plan that encompasses all the
features you've mentioned.\n\nMore specifically , this document
will detail the company 's history and organizational structure ,
provide a comprehensive overview of the project , and justify our
financial predictions with a thorough analysis. We will also
highlight our funding needs and expected schedule in there.\n\
nPlease do allow me a few more days to get this important
document finalized for your review. I will make sure to be
explicit and clear with all necessary information as per your
constructive feedback.\n\nThank you again for considering my
proposal , and I look forward to providing you with the complete
details soon.\n\nKind regards ,\n\nJames Dawson",
33
"timestamp":"2024-12-14 09:00:31 "
34
}
56
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:65==
35
],
36
"signature_id":"743579c1e27b42d0a4eb3d0d0609f67c",
37
"interactions":[
38
{
39
"ip_address":"105.113.67.51",
40
"user_agent":"Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64) AppleWebKit
/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/131.0.0.0 Safari/537.36 Edg
/131.0.0.0",
41
"timestamp":"2024-12-13T14:46:42.922009"
42
}
43
],
44
"honeytoken_id":"5f2da4555d834a8f85eb1c6d891e9bf5",
45
"interaction":[
46
47
]
48
}
Listing C.1: Complete example of a conversation log
Machine learning and cyber deception
57
==PAGE:66==
D
Full nginx configuration file
1
server {
2
listen 80;
3
server_name jdawsontech.com www.jdawsontech.com server.jdawsontech.com
interface.jdawsontech.com mainsystem.jdawsontech.com;
4
5
# Redirect HTTP to HTTPS
6
return 301 https://$host$request_uri;
7
}
8
9
server {
10
listen 443 ssl;
11
server_name jdawsontech.com www.jdawsontech.com;
12
13
ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/fullchain.pem;
14
ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/privkey.pem;
15
16
root /var/www/html;
17
index index.html;
18
19
location / {
20
try_files $uri $uri/ =404;
21
}
22
}
23
24
server {
25
listen 443 ssl;
26
server_name server.jdawsontech.com;
27
28
ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/fullchain.pem;
29
ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/privkey.pem;
30
31
location / {
32
proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:5000;s
33
proxy_set_header Host $host;
34
proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
35
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded -For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
36
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded -Proto $scheme;
37
}
38
}
39
40
server {
41
listen 443 ssl;
42
server_name interface.jdawsontech.com;
43
44
ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/fullchain.pem;
45
ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/privkey.pem;
46
47
location / {
48
proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8006;
49
proxy_set_header Host $host;
50
proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
51
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded -For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
52
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded -Proto $scheme;
53
}
54
}
55
56
server {
58
Machine learning and cyber deception
==PAGE:67==
57
listen 443 ssl;
58
server_name mainsystem.jdawsontech.com;
59
60
ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/fullchain.pem;
61
ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/jdawsontech.com/privkey.pem;
62
63
location / {
64
proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8005;
65
proxy_set_header Host $host;
66
proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
67
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded -For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
68
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded -Proto $scheme;
69
}
70
}
Listing D.1: nginx configuration file
Machine learning and cyber deception
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
