==PAGE:1==
Multi­robot system for deep mining planning
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Multi­robot system for deep mining planning
Master Thesis
Feb, 2025
By
Kashish Verma
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Elektrovej,
Building 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Electro department at the Tech­
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the Master’s degree in Au­
tonomous Systems.
Kashish Verma ­ s230015
Signature
Date
ii
Multi­robot system for deep mining planning
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Matteo Fumagalli, for his
invaluable support and guidance during my master’s thesis project at the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark. His critical insights were instrumental in steering the direction of my
study. I also specially thank Victor Vigara Puche, Research Assistant at DTU, for technical
support.
iv
Multi­robot system for deep mining planning
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This research was initiated under the European Union­funded Persephone project (Grant
Agreement No. 101138451), initially titled Multi­Robot System for Deep Mining Planning.
This work aims to investigate multi­robot collaboration and behavioral design for deep
mining applications, focusing on simulation and deployment strategies for a fleet of mod­
ular and compact robots to enable sustainable mining through deep tunnels. As a project
requirement, the system should function without reliance on additional communication
infrastructure, ensuring robust deployment in confined and communication­restricted en­
vironments.
As the work evolved, it became evident that the developed methodologies could be ex­
tended to broader applications beyond mining. This paper presents the findings in IEEE
format, outlining the proposed decentralized framework for multi­robot collaboration and
its potential applicability to various domains.
Multi­robot system for deep mining planning
iii
==PAGE:6==
A Decentralized Multi-Robot Systems:
Behavior-Based Coordination and Self-Sufficient
Communication
Kashish Verma*
Matteo Fumagalli
Abstract—Robots are being built for specialized capabilities to
improve performance, precision, reduce design complexity, and
handle dynamic environments. Missions often require diverse
capabilities; therefore research interest in multirobot systems
has grown to address highly complex, large-scale, dynamic, and
multidisciplinary tasks. In recent years, contrary to Hierarchi-
cal Finite State Machines (HFSM), behavior trees have been
introduced for utilizing heterogeneous robot teams, which are
distributed approaches for dynamically assigning sub-trees to
individual robots and knowledge transfer. This paper presents a
decentralized approach to utilizing HFSMBTH (hybrid of HFSM
and BT) in multirobot systems. The presented HFSMBTH follows
a framework for inter-robot communication using our proposed
communication semantics and without additional communication
infrastructure, ensuring self-sufficient communication.. We val-
idated our system architecture through two mission scenarios,
each requiring distinct capabilities to evaluate our inter-robot
communication framework. Moreover, we introduced the sim-
ulation setup concept for testing modular behaviors to ensure
successful mission execution.
Index Terms—Decentralized Multi-Robot Systems, Hierarchi-
cal Finite State Machine (HFSM), Behavior Trees (BTs), HFSM-
BT Hybrid (HFSMBTH), Inter-Robot Communication, Multi-
Hop Wireless Networks, Ad-Hoc Networking in Robotics, Sim-
ulation for Multi-Robot Systems, Autonomous Team Behaviors
I. INTRODUCTION
With the increasing sophistication of robotic systems, it
has become evident that new approaches are required to
define high-level system behavior. These systems are being
designed for specialized tasks to enhance reliability, precision,
adaptability, cost-effectiveness, and performance. However, in
search and rescue, space exploration, environment monitoring,
subterranean missions, and such applications, an individual
robot cannot perform effectively. Therefore, a team of highly
sophisticated robots is essential and reasonable for addressing
large-scale, multidisciplinary, complex, and dynamic tasks.
Moreover, mission control systems must be both flexible and
scalable to accommodate increasing complexity.
In recent years, Behavior Trees (BTs) have gained a lot of
attention for their modularity, compactness [1], high-reactivity,
and reusability as well as safe and robust behaviors [2].
BTs were originally introduced for the advancement of AI
This project has received funding from Persephone under the European
Union’s Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Programme: the Grant
Agreement No.101138451
Fig. 1: An example of four robots deployed using our proposed
decentralized multirobot system architecture, where red dashed
lines shows the range of individual wireless interface, black
connecting lines shows single-hop communication, and blue
dashed lines show connection due to multi-hop communica-
tion.
in video games [3], [4], [5]. However, the control of non-
player characters (NPCs), a virtual agent, in video games is
usually in a known environment; whereas a robot is a physical
agent supposed to act in an unknown environment. With these
and more differences, some additions were introduced for the
implementation of behavior trees in robotics, such as new
states to BT nodes and deliberate entry and exit hooks for
enabling long-running tasks: introduced by Kl¨ockner [6]. Over
the past few years with increasing additions, several studies
have presented the overview of behavior trees in robotics
and AI [7] [8] [9] [10]. BTs have demonstrated efficacy
in Multi Robot Systems (MRS); Colledanchise et al. [11]
presented a methodology of constructing a distributed tree
comprising a global, local, and an assignment tree from a
local BT. However, these three trees need to be executed
in parallel. Jeong et al. [21] presented an approach with the
local and mission control BTs for navigating a team of robots.
Both strategies divide the overall mission into modular parts
in a predefined way that limits flexibility and adaptability.
To adaptively distribute parts of the BT among the team
of robots, an approach for a heterogeneous robot team was
==PAGE:7==
introduced [12]. They also presented a comparison of open-
source libraries on BT implementation. Prior to the introduc-
tion of BTs, Hierarchical Finite State Machines (HFSM) were
used to define the high-level behavior in many modern robot
systems [13]. Due to the benefits to BTs, they have been
implemented in various fields such as Unmanned Aerial Vehi-
cles [1] [6], Navigation (Nav2)1, Neural Network [14]- [15],
Manipulation [16], multirobot systems [17]- [18]. However,
certain additions have been developed for HFSMs because of
HFSM’s ease of development and looping behaviors. In the
DARPA Robotics Challenge (2012-15), team ViGIR extended
the popular SMACH (a package to define HFSM) with collab-
orative autonomy and developed the Flexible Behavior Engine
(FlexBE) [19]. Collaborative autonomy can also be used to
test robotic systems for ensuring reliability and robustness.
Recently, a hybrid of HFSM and BT was introduced with
the purpose of combining the benefits of both [20]. They
also compared the HFSM and BT to exploit the proper use
of the hybrid. However, so far there are no studies on the
use of HFSMBTH in multirobot systems. This paper shows
how to develop HFSMBTH to enable decentralized multirobot
systems, whether homogeneous or heterogeneous teams.
In addition, the essential factor in harnessing the capa-
bilities of multirobot systems is collaboration. Collaboration
requires seamless communication between robots involved,
for shared consensus [21]. Communication is one of the
primary challenges in multirobot systems. How do robots
communicate and interact? plays a crucial role in defining
the multirobot system’s behavior [22]. One of the seminal
works in the field of animal communication has influenced
the development of communication technologies [23]. Humans
and animals share certain communication modalities for co-
operation, characterized by semantics and arbitrariness. These
modalities are means of sharing information or knowledge.
Individuals primarily acquire knowledge unique to themselves
by synthesizing information from sensory data [24] [25].
Moreover, the knowledge can be extended through various
learning strategies such as visual learning [26], transfer learn-
ing [27], using machine learning, and through demonstration
[28] [29]. BTs have also been used in with learning capabilities
[30] [31]. In case of inter-robot communication, a query-
based framework for knowledge transfer through BTs has been
presented [32]. But this framework supports only on their self-
developed simulation environment due to the lack of software
compatibility that can provide dynamic updates of the BTs.
In general, inter-robot communication relies on a wireless
communication provided by a supporting infrastructure such as
a router. Although a router establishes a stable and high band-
width network, the operating area of the multirobot system
stays limited. This dependency of inter-robot communication
on a central point limits the deployment to indoor/confined
environments. Mostly, multirobot systems are designed with an
assumption of omnipresent connectivity via a central station.
This makes it increasingly challenging to deploy robots in real-
1https://github.com/ros-planning/navigation2
world scenarios. It is reasonable to develop robots that can
perform communication with other robots without additional
supporting infrastructure.
To address these gaps, we propose a system architecture for
deploying decentralized multi-robot systems with HFSMBTH,
that supports the development of communication behavior.
This paper’s primary contributions are outlined below.
• We presented an approach for utilizing HFSMBTH in
multirobot systems, which can enable users to develop
highly complex team behaviors.
• We presented a unified HFSMBTH framework for an in-
dividual robot, where a robot can perform both individual
and collaborative tasks wherever feasible.
• We presented a concept of building communication be-
havior for multirobot systems, inspired by social com-
munication. This behavior enables seamless coordination
without requiring centralized communication infrastruc-
ture, utilizing an ad-hoc multi-hop network wherever
feasible.
• We introduce a simulation setup for testing the proposed
multirobot system architecture, which can also be used to
test modular behaviors involving multirobot coordination.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First,
in Section II we present proposed system architecture. The
implementation of the system with the simulation setup for
testing the system is described in Section III. Section IV
evaluates the system in two different mission scenarios per-
taining weakly coupled and strongly coupled collaborative
tasks. Finally, section V provides a summary of this work
and presents the possibilities of future works.
II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The proposed architecture is composed of an HFSM-BT
hybrid system integrated with a communication architecture
of each member in the multirobot team. The communica-
tion architecture consists of internal communication (Local
Host), bridge communication, and wireless ad-hoc network,
see Fig.2.
Each member of the multi-robot team has its own HFSMBT
hybrid system. This system incorporates BTs into a reactive
HFSM which is termed a flexible behavior tree. The HFSMs
are easy to follow, to develop transitions and contingency plans
[20]. Moreover, their cyclic behaviors are natural and readily
apparent in terms of graphical representation. Thus, we choose
HFSMBTH over BT.
To equip a robot with multi-robot system capabilities, our
architecture integrates inter-robot communication features that
allow behaviors to initiate, transfer, and receive communica-
tion messages. A behavior or a state in a behavior is embedded
with the inter-robot communication feature, wherever the
coordination or collaboration is required in tasks. This imbibes
the benefits of reactive HFSM ’FlexBE’2 in the aspects of
inter-robot communication, i.e. two-way data flow from state
to state, cyclic behaviors and easy depiction for users to
2https://github.com/FlexBE
==PAGE:8==
Fig. 2: Architecture of a single robotic unit in a multirobot
system. The black pentagon box represents the applications
bounded locally on host. The white pentagon box represents
the wireless ad-hoc interface, with the bridge communication
protocol on top.
follow. Although users can develop communication behavior,
the design and development of communication behavior is
entangled with the execution behavior of tasks.
We introduce two concepts for developing communication
behavior. Both concepts impose different skills on the robot.
Definition 1: SyncAction State - This state implementation
evaluates the robot’s action (Ra) and inter-robot communi-
cation conditions simultaneously during each execution loop.
While the state is active, execution loop3 executes periodically.
The simultaneous evaluation helps to synchronize robot’s
action with other robot’s actions. Specifically in strongly
coupled actions, this state can synchronize them in a dynamic
environment.
Definition 2: Comms State - This state implementation eval-
uates only inter-robot communication conditions on execution
loop. These states are primarily used to activate or deactivate
sub-behaviors.
Upon transmitting (mt) or receiving (mr) communication
messages, the knowledge base (Kb) of communication can be
built. Moreover, this knowledge base is utilized to activate
or deactivate sub-behaviors. The communication messages are
categorized into two types: basic and task-specific. The basic
communication message consists of type, status, and task
name.
• Comms Type (Ct): contains information on the type of
task that needs to be executed. It is a boolean value and
the types are strongly coupled tasks (True) and weakly
coupled tasks (False).
• Comms Status (Cs): tracks the intermediaries of an
asynchronous collaborative task or a synchronous collab-
orative task, i.e. message received, sub-task completed,
and such intermediaries. This enables the robot to con-
serve minimalist overview of the team, exclusively on
3Refer FlexBe documentation
the team members interacted with. Furthermore, it can
be used for communication feedback.
• Comms Task (Cn): mentions the identification of the
next communication message which entails task-specific
information.
Based on the proposed states and communication messages
explained above, the pseudo-codes, Alg. 1 and Alg. 2, are pre-
sented for strongly coupled and weakly coupled collaborative
tasks respectively. It is important to note that the provided
pseudo-codes serve as basic templates for implementation.
Moreover, a state can have a n number of possible outcomes
O, Oi ∈{O1, O2, . . . , On}. These outcomes are mapped to
the evaluation (Ej) of the conditions. Evaluation (Ej) is based
on atleast three parameters i.e. Ra, Cs and Ni; where Nr is a
boolean parameter, True: if the rth robot is in communication
range, else False.
Algorithm 1 Pseudo code for strongly coupled collaborative
task: SyncAction State (S)
Arguments: Ra, Ct, Cs, Cn, O
on enter event
Execute Ra
while S is active do
if Ct = False then
return O0 ∼S = Deactivate
end if
Evaluate: Ra ∧Cs ∧Nr
output
−−−→Ei
if Ei = True then
Comms: mt ∨mr
Update: Kb
return Oi
end if
end while
on exit event
Algorithm 2 Pseudo code for weakly coupled collaborative
task: Comms State (S)
Arguments: Ct, Cs, Cn, O
on enter event
Evaluate: Kb ∧Cs ∧Cn ∧Nr
output
−−−→Ei
while S is active ∧Ei is not None do
if Ct = False then
return O0 ∼S = Deactivate
end if
if Ei = True then
Comms: mt ∨mr
return Oi
end if
end while
on exit event: Update Kb
The internal communication of a robot, a team member, is
confined to its local host, i.e. not exposed to the communica-
tion network. Only inter-robot communication is allowed on
==PAGE:9==
the network. Inter-robot communication creates a means of
sharing only the required information for collaborative task,
which preserves the resources used on the network. Consum-
ing the minimal bandwidth of the network ensures successful
message delivery and energy-efficient communication.
The wireless ad-hoc network facilitates inter-robot commu-
nication, with each robot functioning as an independent ad-
hoc node. The node utilizes the Better Approach To Mobile
Adhoc Networking protocol (B.A.T.M.A.N)4, which proac-
tively maintains information about other existing nodes in
the range [33]. This information (Nr) helps to activate or
deactivate the parts of HFSMBTH behavior contributing to
shared missions. Therefore, the behavior can be designed to
handle both single-robot task or multi-robot task. Moreover,
any robot can utilize single-hop or multi-hop communication
without additional supporting infrastructure such as routers.
This mechanism behaves in a decentralized manner. Each
member of the team takes their own decision to complete
the shared mission based on the knowledge base comprised
of communication and task statuses. The proposed architec-
ture provides the platform to design and develop complex
decentralized multi-robot team. Although the development and
testing of complex behavior is challenging, the behavior of the
team for a single collaborative task can be tested individually.
The communication architecture adds the scalability and multi-
hop communication ability.
For any complex mission, the capability of the entire team
is based on the individual capabilities to execute the task
and communicate. Our proposed architecture exhibits key
properties such as decentralization, flexibility, robustness, and
scalability.
III. IMPLEMENTATION
The proposed concept for deploying a multi-robot team
utilizes HFSMBTH behavior and inter-robot communication
architecture. For embedded and real-time support, multi-robot
communication and distributed discovery, the Data Distribu-
tion Service (DDS) was chosen as ROS Middleware (RMW)
for Robot Operating System 2 [34]. It was an inspiration to
implement the entire architecture in ROS2 Humble.
Internal communication is supported by CycloneDDS5 im-
plementation. Although there are various options to DDS
implementation for ROS2, cycloneDDS is more robust than
the other options regarding crashes and response time [35].
DDS addresses the need for reliable and real-time in-
formation dissemination. However, the inter-robot (bridge)
communication was chosen to be implemented with Eclipse
Zenoh. For multi-robot scenarios, Eclipse Zenoh operates on
minimalist discovery overhead and can operate in peer-to-
peer communication mode, while DDS can have extremely
high number of discovery packets even on wired connections.
The performance evaluation of Eclipse Zenoh and DDS sup-
ports our choice of Zenoh [36]. Since both DDS and Zenoh
4https://www.open-mesh.org/projects/batman-adv/wiki/BATMAN IV
5https://github.com/eclipse-cyclonedds
are available for communication between ROS2 hosts, cy-
cloneDDS was configured to use only the loopback interface.
This streamlines the inter-robot communication to transport
via zenoh protocol.
We used zenoh-bridge-ros2dds 6, a standalone exe-
cutable package specifically designed for ROS2. According
to the functionality of zenoh-bridge-ros2dds, robots
were deployed with different ROS DOMAIN IDs. On each
robot, zenoh-bridge-ros2dds was configured in peer
mode and other configuration based on the type, simulation
setup or real-world setup.
The inter-robot (bridge) communication follows a Pub-
lish/Subscribe model using CommsMsg, a custom ROS mes-
sage package. CommsMsg serves as a communication lan-
guage. CommsMsg addresses only the content of communica-
tion as mentioned in Section II. This kind of communication
represents limited data transfer for collaborative tasks that
utilize minimal bandwidth. However, CommsMsg is totally
based on the use case, a liberty to the user developing the
behavior.
For building up the communication knowledge base, we
opted FlexBe userdata that can be passed along from state
to state and indirectly from sub-BT to sub-BT. Despite not
being two-way data flow as in BTs, one-way data flow keeps
the awareness of the robot aligned even in cyclic behaviors.
Furthermore, we used Latte Pandas to deploy the robots, as it
supports ad-hoc/IBSS mode.
A. Simulator Setup
Notably, before deploying the architecture on real robots,
a good practice is to exploit a simulation environment. So
far, there is no multirobot simulator to simulate with an ad-
hoc network. We introduce a setup using existing simulator
and other packages. For simulating the inter-robot commu-
nication, the FlexBE engine7 and HFSMBTH behavior
of each robot were executed on different latte pandas. How-
ever, each robot was spawned on a single host using re-
spective namespaces. This single host, simulator machine,
provides the simulation environment through Gazebo and
RViz2 for visualization purposes; see fig. 3. Furthermore,
zenoh-bridge-ros2dds on the simulator machine con-
figured in peer mode without any restrictions. However, it
was configured to allow only the CommsMsg and robot’s
publishers, subscribers, actions, and services on respective
latte pandas. This allows the FlexBE engine on latte panda
to control and mirror the behavior of the respective robot in
the simulator machine.
B. Real World Setup
Each robot has ROS2 system, FlexBE engine, and
HFSMBTH behavior on the respective host, see fig.1.
Despite each robot being on a separate machine, names-
paces are required to visualize robots on the user’s sys-
tem. Although the ROS namespace can be applied with
6https://github.com/eclipse-zenoh/zenoh-plugin-ros2dds
7https://github.com/FlexBE/flexbe behavior engine
==PAGE:10==
Fig. 3: A figure showing the simulation setup of a team
of three robots using our proposed decentralized multirobot
system architecture, where red dashed lines shows the range
of individual wireless interface, black connecting lines shows
single-hop communication. Here only the user machine has
ROS2, Gazebo simulator, and RViz.
zenoh-bridge-ros2dds, which eliminates the necessity
of deploying each ROS node with a namespace, we dis-
covered in our experiments that at present zenoh-bridge
ros2dds doesn’t support more than one host 8.
IV. EVALUATION
To evaluate the proposed system architecture, we deployed
multi-robot teams in different simulated scenarios. The goal
was to assess whether the system could execute both individual
and collaborative tasks as needed, using communication mes-
sages and each robot’s knowledge base. This evaluation aims
to analyze the interaction between communication behavior
and task execution. In order to assess the system’s capacity for
adaptation during runtime, robot malfunctions and uncertainty
were also induced.
A. Scenarios
Two mission scenarios were evaluated to assess the ability
of the system in collaborative tasks both weakly and strongly
coupled. Mission scenario A tests whether the system can
execute a mission without all participants maintaining constant
connectivity. Mission scenario B tests the system in a strongly
coupled collaborative task.
1) Mission A: A Team of turtlebot4 was used, see Fig.4.
However, the scenarios were formulated to include the het-
erogeneous robot team scenario by appointing different ca-
pabilities to each robot in the team. Two Turtlebot 4, named
Alpha and Bravo, each had distinct primary goals and abilities.
Both can transfer any collected object to another turtlebot.
Alpha can only collect object A from the resource point and
can deliver objects A and E to Zone X. Bravo can collect
objects B and E, but can only deliver B to Zone Y. However,
actions such as collecting, delivering, and transferring objects
were assumed to be completed once the robot reached the
designated pose. The goal of the mission is to complete
individual goals of both robots in the team, i.e. delivering
resources A, B, and E to their respective zones.
8https://github.com/eclipse-zenoh/zenoh-plugin-ros2dds/issues/305
(a) Robot Alpha running HFSMBTH behavior
(b) Robot Bravo running HFSMBTH behavior
Fig. 4: Both robots are deployed in a similar environment
to only simulate the behavior influenced by communication
behavior, excluding any visual influence
2) Mission B:
A team of three heterogeneous robots,
Terrain Hopper, GeoMiner, and RexBot, was deployed for
a drilling operation in an abandoned mine; see Fig.5. The
objective is to identify the location of the mining resource
and perform a drilling operation for resource extraction.
Fig. 5: Demonstration of multirobot team deployed in Gazebo
GeoMiner is a three-leg robot specialized for drilling oper-
ations. However, Terrain Hopper uses a manipulator, which
is mounted on its top, to collect GeoMiner and position
GeoMiner for deployment. Next, GeoMiner deploys itself
upon receiving confirmation from Terrain Hopper and config-
uration on deployment. The deployment configuration means
==PAGE:11==
the position and orientation of GeoMiner for drilling in the
specified location. This configuration is estimated by the
Terrain Hopper as it has the manipulator to scan for mining
resources. RexBot’s responsibility is to supply resources to
Terrain Hopper, i.e. GeoMiner and battery. The goal of the
mission is to perform drilling on a specified location deep in
the abandoned mine. It is assumed that exploration, detection,
and localization of mining resource were already executed,
and considered out of scope for this evaluation.
B. Communication and Task Execution Behavior
1) Mission A: The respective behaviors are being designed
including CommsState and SyncActionState, see fig.
6.
(a) Robot Alpha behavior
(b) Robot Bravo behavior
Fig. 6: Cyclic behaviors. Here GoToPoseState, LookForState,
CollectResourceState, ApproachState, ReceiveState are the
SyncAction States. CheckOrderState, PublishCommsState and
CheckNeighboursState are the CommsState.
During mission execution, both robots, Alpha and Bravo,
were observed successfully completing their respective tasks.
Additionally, the process of collecting and transferring object
E was initiated by the PublishCommsState function of
Alpha. Throughout the mission, the transmission (tx) and
reception (rx) data rates were recorded, with a peak rate of
300 kbit/sec.
2) Mission B: In Mission B, the robotic behaviors exhibit a
tightly coupled interaction, as illustrated in Figure 7. The de-
ployment of GeoMiner is initiated only after Terrain Hopper’s
UR10 arm reaches the DeploymentSignal state. Both
DeploymentSignal and DrillingDetails are classi-
fied as types of CommsState. GeoMiner remains in standby
mode until it receives the deployment signal along with the
corresponding deployment pose. This sequence demonstrates
a coordinated deployment process, highlighting the success-
ful execution of GeoMiner’s deployment through inter-robot
communication. Furthermore, Terrain Hopper communicated
the completion of GeoMiner deployment to RexBot.
(a) Terrain Hopper’s UR10 behavior
(b) GeoMiner behavior (Three legs robot)
Fig. 7: Tightly coupled behaviors.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented a decentralized multirobot system
that uses HFSMBTH, our HFSM communication states and
semantics, and a ad-hoc network. This system architecture
can be used to design flexible multirobot behaviors for any
coordination task, be it a weakly coupled tasks or strongly
coupled tasks. We also demonstrated the system capability
to perform weakly coupled collaborative tasks which requires
a workspace area larger than the inter-robot communication
range. Moreover, we highlighted the necessity of multirobot
simulator. To address existing limitations, we introduced a
simplified simulation setup, which can serve as a foundation
for future developments.
In future, we intend to extend the inter-robot communication
support on flexible behavior trees. This gives the benefits of
running inter-robot communication as BTs in HFSMBTH, i.e.
increased modularity, broad applicability on type of messages,
and re-usability. Furthermore, we intend to introduce a better
simulation setup which will not require deployment of robots
behavior engine in separate machines. Moreover, it will have
the feature to simulate the ad-hoc network within.
==PAGE:12==
REFERENCES
[1] P. Ogren, “Increasing modularity of uav control systems using computer
game behavior trees,” in AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control
Conference 2012, 2012.
[2] M. Colledanchise, A. Marzinotto, and P. ¨Ogren, “Performance analysis
of stochastic behavior trees,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3265–3272, 2014.
[3] D. Isla, “Gdc 2005 proceeding: Handling complexity in the halo 2 ai.(3
2005),” Retrieved August, vol. 31, p. 2017, 2005.
[4] Y. A. Sekhavat, “Behavior trees for computer games,” International
Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools, vol. 26, no. 02, p. 1730001,
2017.
[5] A. Champandard and P. Dunstan, The Behavior Tree Starter Kit, pp. 27–
46. in Game AI Pro 360, 09 2019.
[6] A. Kl¨ockner, “Behavior trees for uav mission management,” vol. 220,
p. 57 – 68, 2013. Cited by: 21.
[7] M. Colledanchise and P. ¨Ogren, “Behavior trees in robotics and ai,” July
2018.
[8] R. Ghzouli, T. Berger, E. B. Johnsen, S. Dragule, and A. Wasowski,
“Behavior trees in action: a study of robotics applications,” in Proceed-
ings of the 13th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Software
Language Engineering, SLE 2020, (New York, NY, USA), p. 196–209,
Association for Computing Machinery, 2020.
[9] M. Colledanchise and L. Natale, “On the implementation of behavior
trees in robotics,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 5929–5936, 2021.
[10] M. Iovino, E. Scukins, J. Styrud, P. ¨Ogren, and C. Smith, “A survey of
behavior trees in robotics and ai,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
vol. 154, p. 104096, 2022.
[11] M. Colledanchise, A. Marzinotto, D. V. Dimarogonas, and P. Oegren,
“The advantages of using behavior trees in mult-robot systems,” in
Proceedings of ISR 2016: 47st International Symposium on Robotics,
pp. 1–8, 2016.
[12] G. Heppner, N. Berg, D. Oberacker, N. Spielbauer, A. Roennau, and
R. Dillmann, “Distributed behavior trees for heterogeneous robot teams,”
in 2023 IEEE 19th International Conference on Automation Science and
Engineering (CASE), pp. 1–8, 2023.
[13] P. Schillinger, S. Kohlbrecher, and O. von Stryk, “Human-robot collab-
orative high-level control with application to rescue robotics,” in 2016
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 2796–2802, 2016.
[14] C. I. Sprague and P. ¨Ogren, “Adding neural network controllers to
behavior trees without destroying performance guarantees,” in 2022
IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 3989–3996,
IEEE, 2022.
[15] E. Scheide, G. Best, and G. A. Hollinger, “Learning behavior trees for
robotic task planning by monte carlo search over a formal grammar,” in
Proc. RSS Workshop on Learning (in) Task and Motion Planning, 2020.
[16] F. Rovida, B. Grossmann, and V. Kr¨uger, “Extended behavior trees for
quick definition of flexible robotic tasks,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 6793–
6800, IEEE, 2017.
[17] J. Kuckling, A. Ligot, D. Bozhinoski, and M. Birattari, “Behavior trees
as a control architecture in the automatic modular design of robot
swarms,” in International conference on swarm intelligence, pp. 30–43,
Springer, 2018.
[18]
¨O. ¨Ozkahraman and P. ¨Ogren, “Combining control barrier functions and
behavior trees for multi-agent underwater coverage missions,” in 2020
59th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 5275–5282,
IEEE, 2020.
[19] A. Romay, S. Kohlbrecher, A. Stumpf, O. von Stryk, S. Maniatopoulos,
H. Kress-Gazit, P. Schillinger, and D. C. Conner, “Collaborative au-
tonomy between high-level behaviors and human operators for remote
manipulation tasks using different humanoid robots,” Journal of Field
Robotics, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 333–358, 2017.
[20] J. M. Zutell, D. C. Conner, and P. Schillinger, “Flexible behavior trees: In
search of the mythical hfsmbth for collaborative autonomy in robotics,”
2022.
[21] R. Olfati-Saber, J. A. Fax, and R. M. Murray, “Consensus and coop-
eration in networked multi-agent systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 95, no. 1, pp. 215–233, 2007.
[22] L. E. Parker, “On the design of behavior-based multi-robot teams,”
Advanced Robotics, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 547–578, 1995.
[23] J. W. Bradbury, S. L. Vehrencamp, et al., Principles of animal commu-
nication, vol. 132. Sinauer Associates Sunderland, MA, 1998.
[24] M. O. Riedl, “Human-centered artificial intelligence and machine learn-
ing,” Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 33–
36, 2019.
[25] J. Hautala, “Can robots possess knowledge? rethinking the dik (w)
pyramid through the lens of employees of an automotive factory,”
Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–
10, 2021.
[26] T. Fitzgerald, K. McGreggor, B. Akgun, A. K. Goel, and A. L. Thomaz,
“A visual analogy approach to source case retrieval in robot learning
from observation,” in Workshops at the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, 2014.
[27] T. Fitzgerald, K. Bullard, A. Thomaz, and A. Goel, “Situated mapping
for transfer learning,” in Fourth annual conference on advances in
cognitive systems, 2016.
[28] M. Racca, A. Oulasvirta, and V. Kyrki, “Teacher-aware active robot
learning,” in 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction (HRI), pp. 335–343, IEEE, 2019.
[29] H. Ravichandar, A. S. Polydoros, S. Chernova, and A. Billard, “Recent
advances in robot learning from demonstration,” Annual review of
control, robotics, and autonomous systems, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 297–330,
2020.
[30] M. Colledanchise, R. Parasuraman, and P. ¨Ogren, “Learning of behavior
trees for autonomous agents,” IEEE Transactions on Games, vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 183–189, 2018.
[31] A. Neupane and M. A. Goodrich, “Learning swarm behaviors using
grammatical evolution and behavior trees.,” in IJCAI, pp. 513–520, 2019.
[32] S. S. O. Venkata, R. Parasuraman, and R. Pidaparti, “Kt-bt: A framework
for knowledge transfer through behavior trees in multirobot systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 4114–4130, 2023.
[33] A. Neumann, C. Aichele, M. Lindner, and S. Wunderlich, “Better
approach to mobile ad-hoc networking (batman),” IETF draft, pp. 1–
24, 01 2008.
[34] S. Macenski, T. Foote, B. Gerkey, C. Lalancette, and W. Woodall, “Robot
operating system 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild,” Science
Robotics, vol. 7, May 2022.
[35] L. J. Dust, E. Persson, M. Ekstr¨om, S. Mubeen, and E. Dean, “Quan-
titative analysis of communication handling for centralized multi-agent
robot systems using ros2,” in 2022 IEEE 20th International Conference
on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), pp. 624–629, 2022.
[36] W.-Y. Liang, Y. Yuan, and H.-J. Lin, “A performance study on the
throughput and latency of zenoh, mqtt, kafka, and dds,” 2023.
==PAGE:13==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
