==PAGE:1==
Improving carrying capacity estimates for Absolute
Environmental Sustainability Assessments (AESA)
Focusing on land use and the built environment
Master thesis
Mira Frimer-Larsen (s183621)
Michelle Haugaard Kilbæk (s183630)
January, 2025
Supervisors: Eldbjørg Blikra Vea & Michael Zwicky Hauschild
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Improving carrying capacity estimates for Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessments
(AESA)
Focusing on land use and the built environment
Master thesis
January, 2025
By
Mira Frimer-Larsen (s183621) and Michelle Haugaard Kilbæk (s183630)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibli-
ographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygningstorvet,
Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This study has been prepared over five months at the Department of Environmental and Resource
Engineering within the section for Quantitative Sustainability Assessment at the Technical University
of Denmark, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Architectural Engineering.
Mira Frimer-Lasen (s183621)
Signature
Date
Michelle Haugaard Kilbæk (s183630)
Signature
Date
ii
26-01-2025
26-01-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Human activities continue to exert pressures on the environment beyond levels that natural systems
can sustain [12]. This highlights the increasing relevance of absolute environmental sustainability as-
sessments (AESA). Impacts associated with the midpoint category land use are gaining recognition
as critical factors to consider [22]. In response, this study aims to assess sustainability of a Danish
dwelling, Villa Grenaa, in an absolute perspective, with a particular emphasis on land use. Addition-
ally, the study seeks to identify and evaluate current thresholds used to define sustainable levels of
land use and land use change.
The study consists of three main parts. In the first part, the underlying methods of the life cycle as-
sessment (LCA) and AESA are outlined, followed by an analysis of the results. Four sharing principles
and two approaches to assume the number of residents in Villa Grenaa was applied for the AESA.
Furthermore, the sensitivity of three scenarios regarding the inventory modelling and two scenarios
regarding alignment of system boundaries to the allocated share was evaluated. Throughout part one,
all 16 impact categories in EF 3.0 were assessed for a comprehensive scope. In the second part,
a literature review was conducted with a dedicated focus on land use, which narrowed the scope
from 16 impact categories to this specific focus on land use. Here, literature proposing thresholds
for land use was identified, with an emphasis on studies that present carrying capacity estimates.
The literature review enabled an evaluation of existing carrying capacity estimates based on a set of
criteria. The outcome is an updated carrying capacity. Part tree combines the AESA from part one
and insights from the literature review from part two. Various carrying capacity estimates for land use
were compared, and methods to enhance both the geographical considerations of the inventory and
the carrying capacity estimate were evaluated.
The AESA results indicate that Villa Grenaa cannot be categorised as absolute sustainable across all
impact categories. For six out of 16 impact categories, whether the absolute sustainability threshold
is exceeded depends on the sharing principle. A dynamic approach of the inventory modelling for
operational energy reveals significant effects on selected impact categories. The choice of carrying
capacity estimates for land use leads to differing AESA conclusions for two sharing principles. To the
extend that geographical considerations were incorporated in this study - both within the inventory
and the carrying capacity - slight variations in results are observed. However, these changes are not
substantial enough to alter the AESA conclusion. Findings of this study were used to formulate a set of
recommendations. Most importantly, increased transparency, consistency and improved assessment
coverage are advised. Enhanced coverage is needed for carrying capacity estimates to account for
transformation flows and for inventory modelling to better align with current allocation methods.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
A big thank you goes to our supervisors, Eldbjørg Blikra Vea and Michael Zwicky Hauschild for making
our work on this project possible. We would like to thank Eldbjørg for continuously encouraging us
throughout the project, for many inspiring discussions and for always being willing to answer our
questions or help us find answers by reaching out to others. Michael Zwicky Hauschild should be
thanked for providing valuable feedback through critical questions and for supporting us in formulating
the scope of the project.
Finally, we would like to thank Manja Nørrekær Lund and Anders Bjørn for taking their time to engage
in our project, answering questions and share their knowledge. And to Caroline Amalie Clausen and
Harald Desing for helping us gather data and for clarifying uncertainties.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Glossary
1
1
Introduction and background
3
1.1
Life cycle assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Absolute environmental sustainability assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Land use
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Aims and research questions
7
3
Life cycle assessment and absolute environmental sustainability assessment
8
3.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Basis for the life cycle assessment of Villa Grenaa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.2
Basis for the absolute environmental sustainability assessment . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Basis for sensitivity scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Results and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
LCA results and hotspot analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
AESA results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.3
Sensitivity related to inventory modelling and system boundaries . . . . . . . .
25
4
Review of boundaries and translation approaches for land use
29
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Basis for the literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Basis for suggestion of a carrying capacity estimate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Results and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.1
Existing boundaries for land use
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Boundaries translated to carrying capacity estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.3
Suggestion for carrying capacity estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Influence of carrying capacity estimates and spatial variation for land use in AESA
43
v
==PAGE:8==
5.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.1
Basis for sensitivity related to carrying capacity estimates . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.2
Basis for sensitivity related to spatial variability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Results and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.1
Carrying capacity estimates for the sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.2
Sensitivity related to carrying capacity estimates and spatial variability . . . . .
50
6
Discussion and perspective
52
6.1
Inventory modelling and temporal aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2
Allocation and allocation principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Uncertainties related to the derived carrying capacity estimate
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Importance and complexity in addressing spatial variability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.5
Perspective to the Danish building sector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Concluding remarks
60
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.2
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Bibliography
62
Appendix
69
A Planetary boundary framework
69
B LCA and AESA
71
B.1 Elaboration of dynamic electricity modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
B.2 Sharing principles and allocated shares . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.3 Qualitative evaluation of uncertain parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
B.4 Comparison of results from LCAbyg
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
B.5 Normalised sensitivity coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
C Literature review
78
C.1 Details on literature search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
C.2 Comparison of characterisation factors for ecoregions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
D Characterisation factors for land occupation
80
E
Supplementary material in Excel
82
vi
==PAGE:9==
E.1 Inventory modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
E.2 Results of LCA, AESA and land use in AESA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
E.3 Literature review scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Glossary
Appropriable fraction
Fraction of land area that can be utilised by human activities.
Attributional modelling
Quantification of environmental impacts directly attributable to a product
or system throughout its life cycle, using average data for the involved
processes [37].
Background system
Processes represented by generic data from life cycle inventory (LCI)
databases due to the absence of specific data, e.g. upstream activities
in the supply chain and end-of-life processes [37].
Best estimates
The use of average conditions to avoid normative conservative, precau-
tionary choices in LCA [37].
Boundary
Human-determined value or range of the control variable linked to the
objective. Sometimes referred to as sustainability boundary.
Boundary principle
Foundation for defining and quantifying a boundary: regeneration level,
threshold or based on historical observations.
Carrying capacity based nor-
malisation factor
The maximum sustained environmental intervention a natural system
can withstand without experiencing negative changes in structure or
functioning that are difficult or impossible to revert [10].
Carrying capacity estimate
The maximum sustained environmental intervention a natural system
can withstand without experiencing negative changes in structure or
functioning that are difficult or impossible to revert [10] for the use of
LCA-based AESA. Sometimes referred to as metric.
Characterisation factors
Contribution per quantity of an elementary flow to a specific environmen-
tal impact [37].
Control variable
A measure of human pressure on the environment [74].
DPSIR framework
The Driver, Pressure, State, Impact and Response framework provides a
structure to describe and analyse relationships between the environment
and human activities [65].
Environmental consequence
This term is used in the DPSIR framework of this study to indicate the
environmental response associated with the respective indicator.
Foreground system
Processes modelled based on primary data collected by the LCA prac-
titioner [37].
Functional unit
The quantitative description of the service which is assessed [37].
1
==PAGE:12==
Impact pathway
A cause-effect chain of an environmental mechanism [37]. In this study
expressed through the DPSIR framework [65].
Indicator
For the purpose of the literature review, the term indicator is used as a
classification of thresholds to a boundary. Various thresholds may be
classified within the same indicator if they are based upon the same un-
derlying boundary. Indicator is sometimes referred to as environmental
indicator.
Multifunctional process
Processes that provide more than one function (e.g. waste incineration
provides the service of getting rid of waste and may deliver production
of heat and electricity) [37].
Natural land
Natural land refers to the potential land cover assuming no human ac-
tivity. Sometimes referred to as potential natural land.
Objective
States the relevant environmental issue to avoid or the Earth-system
process to protect for a certain boundary.
Response
Response of Earth-systems to environmental impacts caused by anthro-
pogenic interference. In this study, the term response is also used in
connection to the DPSIR framework. In such cases, response refers to
policy responses.
Reference flow
The amount of product that is needed to fulfil the functional unit [37].
Sharing principle
A principle, based on different ethical norms, used to assign carrying
capacity to an anthropogenic system or process [12].
Spatial variability
Spatial variability is used in this study as a general term for different as-
pects, that involves geographical considerations. Spatial variability is
throughout the study also referred to as spatial variation, spatial differ-
entiation and spatial coverage. These terms cover equivalent meanings.
Sustainability threshold
The sustainability threshold is one. When annual characterised impacts
divided by the assigned share is above one, the system cannot be cat-
egorised as absolute sustainable.
System boundaries
System boundaries define which activities that are included in the LCA.
Threshold
A quantified value based on the boundary. The threshold is expressed
as one value, as opposed to a boundary, which may be expressed as a
range. This means that in this study, the definition of a boundary and a
threshold is closely connected.
Translation approach
Characteristics of the method for translating thresholds to carrying ca-
pacity estimates.
2
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction and background
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a widely used method that enables quantification of potential environ-
mental impacts associated with an anthropogenic system throughout its lifetime. Yet, human activi-
ties continue to exert pressures on the environment beyond levels that natural systems can sustain
[12]. This underscores the growing importance of absolute environmental sustainability assessments
(AESA), in which Earth-system boundaries are applied. The planetary boundary (PB) framework
identifies nine Earth-system processes and defines corresponding boundaries [58]. These bound-
aries, along with other science-based thresholds, serve as a foundation for methods that connect the
relative results of LCA to the limits of natural systems [64] [10] [61].
Within life cycle assessments, impacts associated with the midpoint category land use are increasingly
recognised as important aspects [22]. By 2012, rates of land use change were already deemed a
threat to species’ ability to adapt to climate change [52]. Furthermore, in 2015, the planetary boundary
for land-system change was identified as being transgressed [71]. This highlights the urgent need
for greater focus on assessing impacts from land use interventions. However, evaluating land use
impacts from an absolute perspective is inherently complex due to a broad range of environmental
consequences linked to land use and land use change [47]. Additionally, land use interventions are
considered relevant to address at finer spatial resolutions, further complicating the task of defining
absolute sustainability boundaries for land use.
Recent publications [35] and initiatives [45] within the Danish building sector show increasing focus
on the impacts of land use interventions, partly arising from a recent preference for wood-based
building materials as a decarbonising strategy [35]. While land use impacts are considered relevant
for building LCAs and AESAs [5], they are still occasionally omitted from comprehensive assessments
due to limitations in the applicability of existing methods for evaluating land use impacts in relation to
threshold values within the LCA framework [75].
1.1
Life cycle assessment
The early development of LCA oriented methods began in the 1960s due to energy and material
scarcity concerns in the combination with concerns on environmental degradation [37]. Since then,
the methodology have been further developed and standardised, while it have gained increasing
attention. Today, Global standards (ISO 14040 [68] and ISO 14044 [69]) and European guidelines
(ILCD [77]) provide a foundation for a standardised LCA framework.
3
==PAGE:14==
Current LCA practice consists of four phases, namely Goal and scope definition, Inventory analysis,
Impact assessment, and Interpretation [37]. In the Goal and scope definition phase, the context
of the study is outlined along with the main hypotheses and methods used in the LCA. During the
Inventory analysis phase, input and output flows are collected and scaled according to the reference
flow as determined from the defined functional unit. In the Impact assessment phase, inventory flows
are converted into potential impacts. A range of impact assessment (LCIA) methods enables this
translation. Among common LCIA methods are CML, ReCiPe and the Environmental Footprint (EF)
method [26]. Finally, in the Interpretation phase, results are interpreted in accordance with the defined
goal and scope [37].
The final interpreted results from an LCA can be used in a relative comparison of one anthropogenic
system against another that provides similar functions. In such case, the assessment may be used to
evaluate if one anthropogenic system performs better than another from an environmental perspec-
tive. Another common use of LCA results is hotspot analysis, where critical impacts caused by the
analysed system can be identified.
Following the ISO 14040 standard [68], classification and characterisation are mandatory steps of the
impact assessment. By classification, elementary flows that can be assigned to impact categories are
derived from the inventory. Elementary flows are hereafter characterised to be expressed in a com-
mon metric for each impact category. Different environmental models specific to the impact category
can be used for this quantification. Characterisation factors can be derived by empirical modelling or
following a fate-exposure approach, where characterisation factors are expressed through the prod-
uct of a fate, exposure and effect factor. An impact pathway from human activities to the resulting
impacts on the environment can be explained by the DPSIR (Drivers, Pressures, State, Impact and
Response) framework [65], since a key purpose of the DPSIR framework is to describe human and
environmental interactions [32]. Connections between the DPSIR framework and LCA practice are
also found. The classification into elementary flows may be interpreted as a translation from drivers
to pressures, while characterisation may reflect the translation from pressure to state [10]. Figure 1.1
shows an example of an impact pathway from the production of soybeans to a potential political re-
sponse, illustrated through the DPSIR framework.
Figure 1.1: DPSIR framework example of soybean production.
4
==PAGE:15==
1.2
Absolute environmental sustainability assessment
Absolute environmental sustainability assessments enable evaluation of anthropogenic systems us-
ing Earth-system boundaries as a reference [12]. As opposed to the relative sustainability assess-
ment, AESA aims to assess not only if one system performs better than another, but also if the perfor-
mance may be deemed ’good enough’ for the system to be categorised as sustainable. Two methods
to enable LCA-based AESAs are presented. Bjørn and Hauschild [10] present a framework using car-
rying capacity based normalisation factors to link LCA indicators to absolute measurements. Here,
carrying capacity is defined as ”the maximum sustained environmental intervention a natural system
can withstand without experiencing negative changes in structure or functioning that are difficult or
impossible to revert” [10]. Another method proposed by Ryberg et al. [61] enables the translation of
LCA indicator metrics to correspond to control variables of the planetary boundary framework through
characterisation factors.
Control variables are defined as a measure of human pressure on the environment [74]. The planetary
boundary framework proposes values for control variables at the precautionary end of an uncertain
zone, aiming to protect the relatively stable environment of the Holocene [58]. The uncertainty zone
reflects uncertainties about the thresholds for human pressures on Earth-system processes to main-
tain a stable and resilient environment [58]. A more detailed introduction to the PB framework can be
found in Appendix A. In this study, a carrying capacity estimate is defined as ”the maximum sustained
environmental intervention a natural system can withstand without experiencing negative changes in
structure or functioning that are difficult or impossible to revert for the use of LCA-based AESA.”, as
outlined in the Glossary. This definition closely aligns with that of Bjørn and Hauschild [10], but is
specifically delimited to estimates for the use of LCA-based AESAs. Thus, a planetary boundary may
be considered as a carrying capacity estimate if it is expressed in a metric compliant with an LCIA
method.
In practice, AESAs are done by allocating a share of the carrying capacity to the analysed system,
according to one or more sharing principles. If the environmental impacts associated with the system
exceed the allocated share, the system cannot be considered absolute sustainable. On a national
scale, it is common to apply a single sharing principle, while assessments at the sector or product
level often require a combination of sharing principles [62]. Downscaling of global boundaries to either
national, sectorial or product scale is inevitably associated with normative choices [4]. Moreover, the
choice of sharing principle shows a large influence on the allocated share [62]. Since no standardised
method for allocation exists [75], applying various sharing principles and ensuring transparency on
the underlying methods and choices is valuable. A study review by Bjørn et al. [12] finds that the
5
==PAGE:16==
most commonly used sharing principles are equal per capita and grandfathering. However, both of
these face the critique of being unequal in terms of distributive justice on a global scale [72] [9].
1.3
Land use
Land provides multiple valuable functions both within the biosphere, geosphere and anthroposphere.
This includes cycling of nutrients, water and carbon. Moreover, land provides habitat for human and
non-human life, while functioning as climate regulation and providing cultural value such as archae-
ological, palaeontological and aesthetics [76] [49]. Humans have used land and caused land use
changes since pre-history. With growing population as well as industrialisation and urbanisation, land
use and land use changes have accelerated. Impacts hereof show both in form of climate change,
loss of biodiversity and soil quality, hence the importance of including land use and land use change
in environmental assessments [49].
Within the LCA methodology, elementary flows can be characterised into one single score for the
land use impact category. Land use is classified as either occupation or transformation interventions.
Occupation represents the use of a land area over a certain time period given in m2·yr, while land
transformation reflects the change of a land area in m2 to a new type of occupation [49]. Key elements
identified for the characterisation modelling of land use are the area of land occupied or transformed,
the regeneration time and a measure or indicator of the land quality being used. The latter varies
between affected impact pathways [60].
In the planetary boundary framework, impacts caused by either land occupation or transformation
are related to the land-system change and biosphere integrity Earth-system processes. For land-
system change, percentage of forested land area is the most recently proposed control variable [71].
The boundary was deemed surpassed in 2015 and continuously evaluated as transgressed in 2023
[57]. For functional biosphere integrity, human appropriation of the biospheres net primary production
(HANPP) was proposed as a proxy in the most recent PB update [57]. Control variables are mainly
addressed as global boundaries. However, in the case of land-system change regional boundaries
at biome level are included, since regional impacts may have consequences at continental or global
scale [71]. Appendix A provides further details on previous control variables for land-system change
and biosphere integrity.
6
==PAGE:17==
2
Aims and research questions
This study aims to assess the absolute environmental sustainability of a Danish dwelling, Villa Grenaa,
considering all midpoint impact categories of EF 3.0 for a comprehensive evaluation. Furthermore, the
study seeks to identify and evaluate boundaries and carrying capacity estimates, focusing exclusively
on land use through a detailed literature review. Carrying capacity estimates will be analysed for the
purpose of comparison and derivation of new values aligned with EF 3.0, with special emphasis on
geographical aspects. This study addresses the following research questions:
(i) What are the impacts of a Danish dwelling based on a life cycle assessment, and can it be
categorised as absolute environmentally sustainable?
(ii) What methods and approaches exist for developing environmental sustainability boundaries for
land use?
(iii) How can carrying capacity estimates for land use be improved to address spatial variation?
(iv) How sensitive are absolute environmental sustainability assessment results to improved carry-
ing capacity estimates and geographical considerations?
The structure of the study is illustrated in Figure 2.1. Methods, results and analyses are presented
in three chapters. The first addresses the LCA and AESA of Villa Grenaa, and the second provides
a literature review centered on land use. Insights from these two chapters are synthesised in a third
chapter, which evaluates the influence of carrying capacity estimates and geographical aspects for
land use in AESA. The three chapters are followed by a discussion, integrating key findings and a
conclusion with summarising remarks and recommendations. Readers are encouraged to consult the
glossary for terminology used in this study.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the report structure.
7
==PAGE:18==
3
Life cycle assessment and absolute
environmental sustainability assessment
3.1
Method
3.1.1
Basis for the life cycle assessment of Villa Grenaa
This section introduces the case study, Villa Grenaa, used for the LCA. The case introduction is
followed by a methodology description of the LCA based on the main elements of the recommended
report structure described in [37].
3.1.1.1
Villa Grenaa
Villa Grenaa is a single-family dwelling with a floor area of 135 m2. During the construction, the
focus was on minimising the environmental impacts of the dwelling. The cladding and load-bearing
structure are made of wood, the insulation is wood fibre insulation, and the vapour and wind barrier
are paper- and wood-based, respectively. The foundation is made of concrete and reinforcement,
the interior walls are covered by gypsum with a finishing layer of clay paint and the roof covering
consists of colour-coated metal sheets. The dwelling is primarily heated by an air-to-water heat pump
and floor heating, and secondarily by the solar panel system. Natural ventilation is provided though
ventilation windows. Villa Grenaa is certified with DGNB Platinum according to the 2016 pilot manual
for single-family dwellings and is also PEFC-certified [18].
3.1.1.2
Goal
The intended application of the LCA study is to assess if a Danish dwelling can be categorised as
absolute environmental sustainable. To examine this, an absolute environmental sustainability as-
sessment will be conducted on the basis of the LCA results. A further purpose is to investigate the
sensitivity of different carrying capacity estimates for land use with a focus on spatial differentiation.
The results of this study represent a single product system and will not be compared to other systems.
The study is of descriptive nature, meaning that the study will not be used to support decisions. Thus,
the decision context is Situation C1 [37].
The study is a part of a master thesis in Architectural Engineering at the Technical University of Den-
mark. The study is supervised by Eldbjørg Blikra Vea and Michael Zwicky Hauschild. The inventory
data is obtained at the public available case library at Videncenter om Bygningers Klimapåvirkninger
8
==PAGE:19==
(VCBK) [18]. The study will be disclosed to the public, and it is expected that the study primarily
addresses an audience with a thorough knowledge of LCA.
3.1.1.3
Scope
The scope of the LCA study is defined in accordance with the goal. The deliverables include both
inventory and impact assessment results.
The functional unit (FU) is defined as ”Annual housing of residents in one dwelling unit build in accor-
dance with the Danish Building Regulation with a lifetime of 50 years”. The reference flow needed to
fulfil the function is Villa Grenaa. The lifetime of 50 years does not necessarily correspond to the ac-
tual lifetime, but it is assumed in accordance with the methodology in the Danish Building Regulation
(BR18) [14]. A comprehensive list of inventory flows for the entire system can be found in Appendix
E.1.
The inventory analysis is based on an attributional modelling framework using average processes. In
accordance with the ISO Hierarchy, multifunctional processes should be handled by system expansion
[37]. System expansion considers the substitution of co-products thereby avoiding direct allocation,
but requires detailed information on processes. Thus, multifunctional processes in the background
system were handled by cut-off in this study due to limited knowledge about actual processes. As
an example, recycling is handled by cut-off, hence crediting from the recycling processes was not
included. For the purpose of AESA, a favourable affect of handling multifunctional processes by
cut-off is the increased control of the system boundaries.
DS/EN 15978 [67] defines the modules and stages through the lifetime of a product. In this assess-
ment, the included modules are A1-A3, B4, B6 and C3-C4 with reference to BR18 [14]. In addition
to the defined modules by BR18 [14], the assessment also include occupation and transformation of
land area caused by the dwelling, to achieve a more accurate evaluation in relation to the focus on
land use in this study. Land transformation is included within the construction of the dwelling (A5), and
land occupation is included in the use stage (B1). Land transformation during the end-of-life stage
is excluded, as it is assumed that the construction site will continue to be used for built-up area in
accordance with the district plan for the area [51]. Figure 3.1 illustrates the modules and stages in
a building LCA cf. DS/EN 15978 [67], where modules included in this assessment are highlighted.
Modules included cf. BR18 are coloured brown and additional modules included in this assessment
are coloured light blue.
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Modules and stages in a building LCA cf. DS/EN 15978 [67]. Modules included in this
study are highlighted. Modules cf. BR18 are coloured brown. Additional modules are light blue.
Figure 3.2 illustrates the foreground and background system based on the included modules. The
foreground system is modelled based on inventory data provided by the case library at VCBK [18],
while representative processes for the background system are assumed based on environmental
product declarations (EPDs) and average processes. Based on the defined system boundaries, it is
assumed that no multifunctional processes occur in the foreground system. To model the inventory,
the database Ecoinvent version 3.8 is used in SimaPro version 9.4.
Figure 3.2: Product system illustrating included LCA processes and the foreground- and background
system.
10
==PAGE:21==
3.1.1.4
Life cycle inventory
The inventory modelling is performed with attention to spatial-, temporal-, and technological represen-
tativeness. Considerations regarding the representativeness are elaborated in Appendix E.1. Here,
all selected Ecoinvent processes are outlined for each respective building material. In addition to this,
main assumptions linked to the modelling is described. In this section, modelling choices regarding
the inventory are elaborated on.
Processes in Ecoinvent are selected based on a prioritised approach. Materials with an EPD are mod-
elled using ’production’ processes, as more geographical specific production processes are available
compared to ’market for’ processes. Transportation occurring within the product stage is included
based on data from similar ’market for’ processes. In the case of materials without an EPD, ’market
for’ processes were prioritised, when a European geographical location was available. If European
data were not available, European ’production’ processes were used and modelled following similar
approaches as for materials with an EPD.
Operational energy use
The dwelling is heated by a heat pump and floor heating based on electricity, thus no contribution
from district heating is considered for operational energy use. A steady electricity demand of 43.9
kWh/m2/yr for building operation is assumed throughout the lifetime. 22.3 kWh/m2/yr is covered by
electricity generation from installed solar panels [18]. The remaining 21.6 kWh/m2/yr is modelled
based on projections on the Danish electricity mix in 2020, 2030 and 2050. The electricity projections
are shown in percentages by electricity generation source in Table 3.1. Future projections are based
on data presented in Heide et al. [38] based on sources by the Danish Energy Agency. Due to
current policy [43], change of electricity generation patterns are expected within the lifetime of the
building. Therefore, a dynamic approach was chosen for the assessment, in which future electricity
scenarios are taken into account. Potential technological improvements are not accounted for. A
detailed overview of processes used and assumptions made in the modelling of electricity for building
operation is presented in Appendix B.1 and E.1. Predicted change in electricity generation patterns
of countries from which Denmark imports electricity, namely Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands and
Germany, is also accounted for and presented in Appendix E.1.
11
==PAGE:22==
Table 3.1: Projection of electricity production divided into energy sources in Denmark in year 2020,
2030 and 2050.
2020
2030
2050
Coal
8.8%
0%
0%
Oil
0.8%
0.08%
0.09%
Gas
3.4%
0.3%
0.09%
Waste
14.2%
7.2%
5.5%
Biomass
4.9%
0.4%
0.3%
Solar
3.4%
17.02%
24.2%
Wind - offshore
24.3%
38.6%
44.5%
Wind - onshore
22.5%
31.03%
30.9%
Import
17.7%
5.4%
0%
3.1.2
Basis for the absolute environmental sustainability assessment
In this study, the LCIA method Environmental Footprint (EF) is utilised. The method, developed by
the European Commission, is based on the International Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) incorporating
modifications to align with EU recommendations and policies [29]. In this study, the characterisation
of the impact categories at the midpoint level (i.e. the level of potential environmental changes) is
performed in accordance with EF 3.0. Table 3.2 presents the 16 impact categories included in EF
3.0, alongside the annual global carrying capacity estimates applied in this study, as defined by Sala
et al. [64]. It should be noted, that the carrying capacity for land use deviates from the one provided
by Sala et al. [64], since Sala et al. [64] did not provide an estimate for land use in compliance with
the EF metric. Thus, a later estimate by European Commission’s Joint Research Centre (JRC) is
used for land use [1].
Table 3.2: Included impact categories in the EF method and corresponding global carrying capacity
estimates from Sala et al. [64].
Impact category
Unit
Carrying capacity estimate
Climate change
kg CO2 eq
6.81E+12
Ozone depletion
kg CFC11 eq
5.39E+08
Ionising radiation
kBq U-235 eq
5.27E+14
Photochemical ozone formation
kg NMVOC eq
4.07E+11
Particulate matter
disease inc.
5.16E+05
Human toxicity (non-cancer)
CTUh
4.10E+06
12
==PAGE:23==
Human toxicity (cancer)
CTUh
9.62E+05
Acidification
mol H+ eq
1.00E+12
Eutrophication (freshwater)
kg P eq
5.81E+09
Eutrophication (marine)
kg N eq
2.01E+11
Eutrophication (terrestrial)
mol N eq
6.13E+12
Ecotoxicity (freshwater)
CTUe
1.31E+14
Land use
Pt
5.21E+15a
Water use
m3 depriv.
1.82E+14
Resource use (fossils)
MJ
2.24E+14
Resource use (minerals and metals)
kg Sb eq
2.19E+08
a) Based on an email correspondence from JRC [1].
3.1.2.1
Sharing principles
The share of the carrying capacities allocated to Villa Grenaa is calculated using four different sharing
principles. These are all based on a combination of two sharing principles providing the basis for (1)
a downscale from a global carrying capacity to one Danish citizen and (2) assigning the share of a
Danish citizen to their dwelling. To assign the share specific to the analysed dwelling, Villa Grenaa,
the assumed number of residents in Villa Grenaa is added to the equation. Figure 3.3 outlines the
allocation steps from the global share to the share assigned to Villa Grenaa.
Figure 3.3: Allocation steps to allocate the share of global carrying capacities for the assessed
dwelling in Denmark.
In this study, the allocation from global scale to one Dane is based on two different ethical norms.
An egalitarian approach through the sharing principle equal per capita and a prioritarian approach
through capability to reduce. These are combined with two second approaches. One based on suffi-
ciency and an utilitatian or inegalitarian/aquired rights-based principle, depending on the point of view.
These principles are chosen based on a combination of the most common practice, data availability
and principles deemed to be more in line with the principles of the Doughnut for Urban Development
[9]. Allocation of the global carrying capacity raises ethical questions regarding distribution justice
13
==PAGE:24==
[30], thus other principles focused on fulfilment of human needs [39] could be interesting to include.
However, it is left out of this study since it is currently narrowed to a smaller palette of impact cate-
gories, and it is most robust for climate change [39]. The assigned share, based on the four included
sharing principles, can be determined by the following equations. See Appendix B.2 for further details.
The allocated shares are based on data from 2019, year of construction of the dwelling.
SP1 = Equal per capita · Expenditure grandfathering · Number of residents
SP2 = Equal per capita · Sufficiency · Number of residents
SP3 = Capability to reduce · Expenditure grandfathering · Number of residents
SP4 = Capability to reduce · Sufficiency · Number of residents
Equal per capita
Equal per capita assumes equally distribution among all individuals. The world population size was
7,742,724,795 people in 2019 [34], resulting in a share of 1.3·10−10 per capita.
Capability to reduce
Capability to reduce is founded on the principle that countries with less wealth per person are pro-
vided with a larger share, because they are considered less capable to reduce their impacts [9]. A
country’s capability to reduce is measured by its gross domestic product (GDP). The allocation follows
the methodology used in the Doughnut for Urban Development [9]. Here, the original European En-
vironmental Agency (EEA) approach is modified to ensure that the total allocated impact in the world
equate with the global carrying capacity [9]. 193 represents the number of countries of the United
Nations. Data about population sizes and GDP are found on the World Bank, World Development
Indicators [34]. The GDP is expressed in purchasing power parities (PPP) international dollars. At
the reference year 2019, the capacity inverse GDP per Danish capita was determined to 1.7·10−11.
See calculations in Appendix E.2.
Expenditure grandfathering
For expenditure grandfathering, the share is allocated through final consumption expenditure (FCE)
for a dwelling following the method applied by Brejnrod et al. [17]. First, the share that spendings on
household compose of the Danish GDP is calculated. This share is assumed as an average for one
Danish citizen. Based on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
household spendings account for 47% of the Danish GDP in 2019 [27]. The share of FCE for house-
hold allocated to dwellings is estimated by expenditure related to the dwellings life cycle. Based on the
category FU02 Average household consumption by consumption group and price unit from Statistic
Denmark [70], the following two consumption categories were related to the dwellings life cycle: 04
14
==PAGE:25==
Housing, electricity and heating and 05 Furniture, household equipment and household services. Re-
lated subcategories to 04 and 05 are outlined at Table 3.3. The subcategories 041 and 042 reflect the
product stage (A1-A3), the construction stage (A4-A5), refurbishment (B5) and the end-of-life stage
(C1-C4). The subcategory 043 reflects the replacement stage (B4) and subcategory 045 reflects the
expenditures for the operational energy use (B6) [75]. The subcategories in category 05 are included
to reflect the materials used for flooring and heating plants. Unlike the approach described by Brejn-
rod et al. [17], subcategory 043 is included to better align with the system boundaries defined by the
scope.
Table 3.3: Included subcategories for category 04 and 05, based on fixed prices in 2019 [70].
Expenditure
[DKK]
% of main
category
% of subcategory
allocated to dwelling
04 Housing, electricity and heating
103854
04.1.1.0 Actual rentals paid by tenants
27999
27.0%
100%
04.2.1.0 Imputed rentals of owned occupiers
36740
35.4%
100%
04.3.1.0 Materials for building maintenance
1443
1.4%
100%
04.5.1.0 Electricity
7353
7.1%
29%
04.5.2.1 Gas
1443
1.4%
100%
04.5.3.0 Liquid fuels
629
0.6%
100%
04.5.4.9 Solid fuels
1792
1.7%
100%
04.5.5.0 District heating and others
13162
12.7%
100%
Total of category to dwelling
82.2%
05 Furniture, household equipment and
services
16361
05.1.2.2 Flooring
60
0.4%
40%
05.3.1.4 Heaters and coolers
10
0.1%
40%
Total of category to dwellings
0.2%
As outlined in Table 3.3, the subcategories 04.5.1.0, 05.1.2.2 and 05.3.1.4 are only partially allocated
to dwellings. The shares allocated to dwellings for these subcategories are based on values pre-
sented in Brejnrod et al. [17]. Based on the shares for each subcategory, the total expenditure share
for category 04 and 05, that can be allocated to dwellings, was calculated to 82.2% and 0.2%, re-
spectively. From the total average household consumption category (FU02), category 04 compose a
share of 32.8% while category 05 compose a share of 5.2%. Thus, the share of FCE for household
allocated to dwellings was found to be:
15
==PAGE:26==
FCEdwe
FCEHH
= 32.8% · 82.2% + 5.2% · 0.2% = 26.9%
By applying this result to the share that spendings on household compose of the Danish GDP, a
share of 12.7% is reached. Thus, 12.7% is an estimate of an average Danes spendings on dwellings.
Calculations are provided in Appendix E.2.
Sufficiency
The sharing principle based on sufficiency relies on an estimate of the minimum energy required for
a decent living as an attempt to reflect basic human needs. The estimate of decent living energy
(DLE) is based on decent living dimensions defined by Millward-Hopkins et al. [50]. The total DLE
for a household is modelled based on household needs of various materials and services. The total
DLE allocated to a household is 15.64 GJ per capita [9]. The categories associated with a dwelling
is: house construction, thermal comfort, illumination and water heating. These categories are used to
calculate the share of DLE allocated to a dwelling. House construction describes the energy intensity
of house construction, which is assumed to correspond to the product stage (A1-A3). The energy
required for thermal comfort, illumination and water is assumed to reflect the operational energy use
(B6). Table 3.4 gives an overview of the included decent living dimensions and categories related to
a dwelling. The total DLE allocated to Danish dwellings is determined to be 18.9% [9].
Table 3.4: Overview of the included categories of the decent living dimensions defined by Millward-
Hopkins et al. [50] and used in the Doughnut for Urban Development [9].
DLE [GJ/cap]
% of total DLE
Shelter and living conditions
House construction
0.8
5.1%
Thermal comfort
0.7
4.5%
Lighting
0.04
0.3%
Hygiene
Water heating
1.4
9.0%
Total DLE to dwellings
18.9%
Number of residents
The residents are determined based on two different methods. First, the number is based on the
methodology from the DGNB Villa manual 2023 [55]. Here, a bedroom counts for two persons and
additional rooms count for one person, resulting in 3 residents in Villa Grenaa. Secondly, the number
16
==PAGE:27==
of residents are determined based on the national average of persons living in single-family dwellings
in Denmark. It is found that the national average of m2/person in single-family dwellings is 58.8
m2/person [70], resulting in 2.3 residents in Villa Grenaa.
Allocated shares
By applying two different numbers of residents to all sharing principles, eight allocated shares are
obtained for Villa Grenaa. These are presented in Appendix B.2. To assess if Villa Grenaa can be
categorised as absolute environmental sustainable, the imbalance presented in Equation 3.1 must be
fulfilled:
IV G,i
CCi · SPV G,n
=≤1
(3.1)
Where IV G,i is the annual characterised impact resulting from Villa Grenaa for the impact category, i.
CCi is the carrying capacity estimate for the impact category, i, and SPV G,n is the share assigned to
Villa Grenaa for the sharing principle, n.
3.1.3
Basis for sensitivity scenarios
The sensitivity of the AESA conclusion is evaluated by analysing the influence of changes in param-
eters that may affect the resulting impacts from Villa Grenaa. In this study, the sensitivity scenarios
focus on inventory modelling and system boundaries, as detailed below.
Parameters identified to potentially have an influence on the results are qualitatively argued to be
more or less uncertain, see Appendix B.3. On that basis, the sensitivity towards three modelling
choices is evaluated in three individual scenarios. The sensitivity is tested for each scenario based
on the difference in results relative to the base scenario. The base scenario is modelled as elabo-
rated in subsection 3.1.1. The scenarios are presented in Table 3.5. For Scenario 1-3, solely the
analysed parameter is changed, while the remaining inventory is kept identical to the base scenario.
This enables a better understanding of changes in results due to the perturbation of each parameter
individually.
Table 3.5: Overview and description of the sensitivity scenarios related to inventory modelling.
Scenario
Description
Base scenario
Follows modelling choices as elaborated in subsection 3.1.1
Scenario 1 (S1)
For a process found to cause a great impact, the inventory is adjusted to use a
generic process in Ecoinvent, as opposed to a process modified according to the
EPD.
17
==PAGE:28==
Scenario 2 (S2)
Modelling of electricity consumption for operation is changed to a static electricity
mix throughout the lifetime of Villa Grenaa. The current Ecoinvent ’market for’ pro-
cess for Danish electricity at low voltage is used. This dataset is based on year
2018.
Scenario 3 (S3)
Villa Grenaa’s lifetime is changed to 100 years. An increased amount of materials
for replacements is accounted for. The predicted electricity mix for year 2050 is
used for the additional years of building operation.
Process modifications are performed to achieve a more representative inventory in cases where data
is available through EPDs. However, such modifications are naturally followed by choices with the risk
of increased uncertainty. The purpose of Scenario 1 is to assess the influence of using more case-
specific inventory processes compared to generic Ecoinvent processes. The number of assumptions
associated with the modelling of dynamic electricity is considered large relative to other processes
within the inventory. Therefore, the sensitivity of Scenario 2 is tested. Since it is acknowledged that
buildings often have a longer lifetime than 50 years [3], Scenario 3 is considered relevant for the
assessment. 100 years is chosen as a representative lifetime for buildings based on an assessment
from SBi [3].
Within the AESA, it is an aim to match the system boundaries of the LCA according to the applied
sharing principle with the highest possible accuracy [30]. However, this task is not always simple,
mainly due to lack of data. The system boundaries of this LCA are presented in subsection 3.1.1,
Figure 3.2. In subsubsection 3.1.2.1, the stages covered by the underlying methods of expenditure
grandfathering and sufficiency, as applied in this study, are specified. Both for the coverage from
FCE and DLE, misalignments to the scope occur. In FCE, transport, electricity and waste from the
construction stage (A4-A5) are accounted for, however they are not included in the system boundaries
in the LCA. Allocation based on DLE does not include the end-of-life stage (C3-C4), while this stage
is within the system boundaries of the LCA. Table 3.6 presents the tested scenarios in relation to the
system boundary alignment.
Table 3.6: Overview and description of the sensitivity scenarios related to system boundaries.
Scenario
Description
Base scenario
Follows modelling choices as elaborated in subsection 3.1.1
18
==PAGE:29==
Scenario 4 (S4)
The construction stage is included in the inventory by adding transportation and
waste during the construction stage based on estimates provided by Andersen et
al. [7]. In accordance with Andersen et al. [7], energy consumption during the
construction phase is excluded due to lack of representative data. The Ecoinvent
processes used to modelled the transport can be seen in Appendix E.1.
Scenario 5 (S5)
The end-of-life stage (C3-C4) are excluded from the inventory.
Scenarios 1-3 are tested in an absolute perspective applying eight different allocated shares, as de-
fined in subsubsection 3.1.2.1. Scenario 4 and 5 are evaluated in an absolute perspective for the
relevant sharing principles. Sharing principles based on expenditure grandfathering (i.e. SP1 and
SP3) are relevant for Scenario 4, while sharing principles based on sufficiency (i.e. SP2 and SP4)
are relevant for Scenario 5. By interpreting the results in an absolute perspective, it can be identified
if either of the scenarios leads to a change in the AESA conclusion relative to the conclusion obtained
for the base scenario. An overview of sharing principles and the total number of allocated shares,
accounting for the number of residents, for each of the scenarios are provided in Table 3.7. Including
the base scenario, this gives a total of 40 AESA results for each of the 16 impact categories.
Table 3.7: Overview of the sharing principles applied to the AESA of each scenario.
Scenario
Applied sharing principles
Number of allocated shares
Scenario 1 (S1)
SP1 - SP4
8
Scenario 2 (S2)
SP1 - SP2
8
Scenario 3 (S3)
SP1 - SP4
8
Scenario 4 (S4)
SP1 and SP3
4
Scenario 5 (S5)
SP2 and SP4
4
For each scenario, the relative difference in impacts from the base scenario is calculated. For Sce-
nario 3, the normalised sensitivity coefficient [37], as presented in Equation 3.2, is calculated. The
sensitivity is considered large, if the normalised sensitivity coefficient XIS,k > 0.5.
XIS,k = ∆IS/IS
∆ak/ak
(3.2)
Where XIS,k is the normalised sensitivity coefficient for changes of a parameter, k. IS is the calculated
impact score, ∆IS is the change of impact score, ak is the value of the scenario without perturbation
and ∆ak is the perturbation [37].
19
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Results and analysis
3.2.1
LCA results and hotspot analysis
This section presents the characterised potential impacts per functional unit assessed using the LCIA
method EF 3.0. The characterised impacts are shown in Table 3.8. The abbreviations for impact cat-
egories presented in the table will be utilised in the subsequent figures. Within the available material
for the case study, an LCA performed in LCAbyg is available for Villa Grenaa [18]. A comparison of
the results from LCAbyg is made to the results obtained in this study, which are presented in Table 3.8.
Results are obtained for seven impact categories in LCAbyg using the CML LCIA method. Four of
these are expressed in the same unit as characterised results using the EF 3.0 LCIA method. For
these four impact categories, the characterised impacts, calculated in this study by Simapro and the
EF 3.0 method, are generally found to be greater. However, this differentiation is not considered to
be unrealistic. A differentiation is expected since inventory processes differ, and since different LCIA
methods are applied. The comparison can be found in Appendix B.4.
Table 3.8: Annual characterised potential impacts of Villa Grenaa with a lifetime of 50 years. Charac-
terisation is in accordance with EF 3.0.
Impact category
Abbreviation
Unit
Annual characterised
impact
Climate change
CC
kg CO2 eq
1.43E+03
Ozone depletion
OD
kg CFC11 eq
1.94E-04
Ionising radiation
IR
kBq U-235 eq
5.34E+01
Photochemical ozone formation
POF
kg NMVOC eq
5.17E+00
Particulate matter
PM
disease inc.
1.22E-04
Human toxicity (non-cancer)
HTOX,NC
CTUh
3.47E-05
Human toxicity (cancer)
HTOX,C
CTUh
4.39E-06
Acidification
AC
mol H+ eq
6.76E+00
Eutrophication (freshwater)
EUT,F
kg P eq
4.91E-02
Eutrophication (marine)
EUT,M
kg N eq
1.34E+00
Eutrophication (terrestrial)
EUT,T
mol N eq
1.52E+01
Ecotoxicity (freshwater)
ECOTOX
CTUe
3.27E+04
Land use
LU
Pt
1.31E+05
Water use
WU
m3 depriv.
5.72E+02
Resource use (fossils)
RU,F
MJ
1.68E+04
Resource use (minerals and metals)
RU,M
kg Sb eq
3.69E-02
20
==PAGE:31==
To provide a deeper understanding of the results, a hotspot analysis is performed to identify the
modules and processes exerting the largest contribution to the outcomes. Figure 3.4 illustrates the
percentage-wise distribution of the impacts between the product stage (A1-A3), the transformation
of land (A5), the occupation of land (B1), the operational energy use (B6) and the end-of-life stage
(C3-C4). Replacements (B4) are included in the product stage (A1-A3). The data behind Figure 3.4
can be found in Appendix E.2.
Figure 3.4: Contribution across LCA modules of potential impacts for Villa Grenaa with a lifetime
of 50 years. Product (A1-A3), land transformation (A5), land occupation (B1), replacements (B4),
operational energy use (C4) and end-of-life (C3-C4).
Figure 3.4 shows that the production of materials accounts for the majority of the environmental im-
pacts in all impact categories, particularly in ozone depletion, water use and resource use (fossils).
Land use stands out as the only impact category with contribution from land transformation (A5) and
land occupation (B1), as expected. Between these, land transformation from potential forest to urban
site in A5 shows the highest contribution. The operational energy use (B6) also shows a notable influ-
ence on impact categories such as ionising radiation, human toxicity (non cancer) and resource use
(minerals and metals). The most substantial contributions from the end-of-life stage occur for climate
change and human toxicity (cancer). The Institute of Building, City and Environment at the University
of Aalborg (BUILD) published a report in 2020 assessing the global warming potential of 60 Danish
21
==PAGE:32==
buildings [79]. The report indicates that the environmental impacts associated with building materials
are generally two to four times greater than those resulting from building operation. For Villa Grenaa,
the impacts on climate change is determined to 7.67 kg CO2-eq/m2/yr for the product stage and 1.04
kg CO2-eq/m2/yr for the operational energy. For the product stage, this result corresponds to the
median value presented in the report [79], while the result for operational energy is at the lower end
relative to the dwellings analysed in the report. However, it should be emphasised that these results
are not directly comparable due to potential differences in calculation methodologies. Nevertheless,
the results of our study are in line with the results of the report published by BUILD [79].
The results indicate that especially the product stage is important for the dwelling to analyse further.
Figure 3.5 illustrates the building components contribution to the product stage. The data behind the
figure can be found in Appendix E.2.
Figure 3.5: Contribution across the product stage (A1-A3 (B4 included)) of potential impacts for Villa
Grenaa with a lifetime of 50 years.
The roof constitutes the most significant contributor to all environmental impact categories, except
for ozone depletion, human toxicity (non cancer), water use and resource use (minerals and met-
als). The particleboard emerges as the building material with the greatest contribution in the roof.
The particleboard component with the largest contribution varies across impact categories. For land
use, the wood components in the particleboard are substantial, while for human toxicity (cancer) it is
22
==PAGE:33==
urea formaldehyde resin. For ozone depletion and resource use (mineral and metals), heating plants
show the largest contribution. For ozone depletion, the refrigerant in the heat pump caused the large
contribution, while for resource use (minerals and metals) it is the use of copper in the heat pump. In
the report published by BUILD [79], the roof is identified as the building component with the greatest
contribution to climate change in dwellings, followed by the ground deck, as like in the findings for
climate change at Figure 3.5. The influence of the modelling choice for the particleboard production
process will be further examined in the sensitivity analysis, Scenario 1.
The BUILD report [79] indicates, that technical components (excluding solar panels) account for up
to 10% of the total climate change impact from materials. In contrast, solar panels are reported
to contribute approximately 12% of the total impact from materials. For Villa Grenaa, solar panels
are responsible for 17% of the impacts from materials on climate change, which is slightly higher.
The solar panels were modelled based on material quantities provided by VCBK [18]. However, the
selected Ecoinvent process for solar panels is shown to be twice as efficient as those actually used for
Villa Grenaa. To address this discrepancy, a further analysis of the contribution from solar panels was
conducted, reducing the amount of solar panels in the inventory to account for the higher efficiency of
the Ecoinvent process. This adjustment results in a decreased contribution from solar panels to the
total climate change impact of building materials, reducing it to 9.2% (see Appendix E.2).
3.2.2
AESA results
The annual characterised results presented in Table 3.8 are further analysed in relation to absolute
sustainability by normalising the results using the carrying capacity estimates presented in Table 3.2
and eight allocated shares as presented in 3.1.2.1. The results presented in Figure 3.6 are obtained
using Equation 3.1 for all impact categories. See Appendix E.2 for a further overview of AESA results.
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.6: Results from the AESA including all eight allocated shares illustrated at a logarithmic
scale. Results illustrated by a dot are obtained assuming 3 residents. Results illustrated by a cross
are obtained assuming 2.3 residents.
The results illustrated in Figure 3.6 show that regardless of the applied sharing principle included in
this study, Villa Grenaa cannot be considered absolute sustainable. This conclusion draws upon the
result that none of the sharing principles are below the sustainability threshold for all the included
impacts categories. Five impact categories (climate change, particulate matter, freshwater ecotoxi-
city, resource use (fossils) and resource use (minerals and metals)) transgress the allocated share
regardless of the applied sharing principle. For climate change, the allocated share is exceeded by
approximately 434% in the worst case. This transgression is lower than results presented in Brejnrod
et al. [17], however it does not seem unrealistic. Five impact categories (ozone depletion, ionising
radiation, terrestrial eutrophication, human toxicity (cancer) and water use) stay within the allocated
share for all sharing principles. Whether the remaining six impact categories (photochemical ozone
formation, human toxicity (non-cancer), acidification, freshwater and marine eutrophication and land
use) exceed or not are thus depended on the applied sharing principle. These trends are in line with
other studies [75] [17].
The results align with expected trends. When assuming 3 residents, the conclusion generally moves
closer to absolute sustainability compared to 2.3 residents. The largest transgressions - or the results
24
==PAGE:35==
closest to transgression, in cases where impact categories remain within the allocated share - are
observed when applying Sharing Principle 3 (SP3). SP3 is based on a combination of capability to
reduce and expenditure grandfathering, which allocates the smallest share to Villa Grenaa among
the included sharing principles. In contrast, applying Sharing Principle 2 (SP2) results in the largest
allocated share, which is almost 12 times larger than the share allocated when applying SP3. I addition
to this, when the number of residents is accounted for, the largest allocated share (that is, SP2 with
3 residents) is 15 times greater than the smallest (that is, SP3 with 2.3 residents). This underscores
the significance of the chosen sharing principle in the assessment. As such, the choice of sharing
principle cannot be considered irrelevant and should be addressed with transparency.
3.2.3
Sensitivity related to inventory modelling and system boundaries
In this section, the results of the sensitivity analysis of Scenario 1-5, as defined earlier in subsec-
tion 3.1.3, are presented. Figure 3.7 presents the influence of the tested scenarios related to the
inventory modelling (S1-S3), and Figure 3.8 presents the results of the sensitivity scenarios related
to the system boundaries (S4-S5). The data behind the figures are outlined in Appendix E.2.
Figure 3.7: The AESA results of the sensitivity analysis of Scenario 1, 2 or 3 compared to the base
scenario. Illustrated at a logarithmic scale. The bars represent the variation across the eight allocated
shares.
25
==PAGE:36==
S1 illustrates the effects of using generic data for the modelling of the particleboard, resulting in a
slightly higher impact score relative to the base scenario for all impact categories expect for resource
use (mineral and metals). The largest difference was observed for climate change with a relative
difference of 13% followed by marine eutrophication with a difference of almost 7%. These findings
indicate that modifications in this process have a slight influence on the results. This relatively small
effect may be attributed to geographical constraints within the Ecoinvent database. In the base sce-
nario, process adjustments were implemented to better align with the characteristics of the specific
product analysed. However, since data for Norwegian production of wood is not available in Ecoin-
vent, the only adjustment is a change in the electricity input to reflect the Norwegian electricity grid.
In S2, impact scores increased for 15 out of 16 impact categories, when the operational energy was
modelled based on a static approach instead of a dynamic approach. The findings align with expec-
tations, given the projection on increased reliance on renewable energy sources in the future. The
largest differences were observed on ionising radiation and freshwater eutrophication, both being
more than doubled. Processes related to nuclear electricity generation show large contributions to
ionising radiation. The mining of coal and lignite accounts for a substantial share of the impacts related
to electricity production, for freshwater eutrophication. Since both nuclear and coal-based electricity
generation are phased out in the dynamic electricity modelling, these results are reasonable. Addition-
ally, resource use (fossils) and climate change show relatively large increases in impacts compared
to the base scenario, with increases of 60% and 49%, respectively. In contrast, a 3% decrease was
noted for resource use (minerals and metals), attributable to the higher demand for metals in the dy-
namic mix. Even though this is considered a slight decrease, it reflects the greater reliance on solar
and wind energy, which require metal resources, compared to the 2018 mix, which to a greater extent
was based on fossil fuels.
When assessing the dwelling assuming a lifetime of 100 years instead of 50 years (S3), the impacts
decrease compared to the base scenario for all impact categories. This reduction reflects impacts
from materials with an estimated lifetime of more than 100 years, as these do not require replace-
ment throughout the lifetime of 100 years of Villa Grenaa. Since emissions related to production and
disposal are assumed equally distributed throughout the lifetime of the dwelling, the yearly impact for
materials with a lifetime of more than 100 years is reduced. Within the inventory, this is the case for
the majority of materials in the ground deck and rim foundation, namely concrete, mesh reinforcement
and pressure resistant EPS. In the hotspot analysis in subsection 3.2.1, the ground deck composes
a relatively large contribution to multiple impact categories. An additional factor, which is expected to
influence the decreased results, is the electricity for building operation. In Scenario 3, the modelled
26
==PAGE:37==
electricity grid for 2050 is assumed for the additional 50 years of lifetime, as no information on elec-
tricity mix predictions beyond this time frame was found. The 2050 electricity process is expected to
cause a reduced amount of emissions for most impact categories compared to the electricity scenar-
ios of 2020 and 2030. Consequently, the yearly impacts caused by electricity for building operation is
reduced. The normalised sensitivity coefficient is found to be between 0.03 and 0.17 across impact
categories for this scenario (S3). Since the normalised sensitivity coefficient is below 0.5 for all impact
categories, the lifetime is not considered a significant parameter (see Appendix B.5). The greatest
difference between S3 and the base scenario is seen for land use and freshwater eutrophication with
a decrease of 17% and 15%, respectively.
In Figure 3.8 it can be seen that with an increased alignment with the system boundaries for the sharing
principles based on expenditure grandfathering (S4), the AESA conclusion remains unchanged for all
impact categories. Extending the system boundaries in the LCA to include transportation and waste in
the construction stage results in an increase across all impact categories. This is a plausible outcome
given the inclusion of additional processes. The largest increase is observed for ionising radiation,
with an increased impact of 25% compared to the base scenario.
Figure 3.8: The AESA results of the sensitivity analysis of the system boundary alignment between
LCA and applied sharing principles. Illustrated at a logarithmic scale. The bars represent the variation
across the relevant sharing principles. S4 includes SP1 and SP3. S5 includes SP2 and SP4.
27
==PAGE:38==
In S5, the impact scores decrease across all impact categories. The highest reductions are observed
for climate change and human toxicity (cancer), which decreases with 18% and 16%, respectively.
A decrease was expected, since the waste processes was excluded in the inventory to align with
the processes included in the applied sufficiency method. The influence on climate change and hu-
man toxicity (cancer) highlights the role of waste management in these impact categorises, primary
driven by the incineration of wood and plastic products. In contrast, for other impact categories in-
cluding freshwater eutrophication, land use, water use and both of the resource use categories, the
differences are minimal, remaining below 2%.
The misalignment between system boundaries in LCA and the applied sharing principles is addressed
in other recent building AESAs [30] [38] [75] indicating an increased focus on this issue. For instance,
Verhaeghe et al. [75] deselect emission grandfathering as a sharing principle due to uncertainties
regarding its alignment with data in Exiobase. This issue of discrepancy is further discussed in sec-
tion 6.2.
Figure 3.7 and Figure 3.8 illustrate that none of the analysed scenarios change the overall conclusion,
which is that Villa Grenaa cannot be considered absolute sustainable when considering all 16 impact
categories. For Scenario 1, 2, 4 and 5, even when considering the impact categories separately, the
conclusion regarding absolute sustainably for each respective impact category remains unchained to
the conclusion of the base scenario. Only for Scenario 3, a different conclusion may be obtained for the
resource use (fossils) depending on the applied sharing principle. When applying Sharing Principle
2, while assuming 3 residents, resource use (fossils) cannot be considered absolute sustainable in
the base scenario, while in Scenario 3, with an extended lifetime of Villa Grenaa, it can.
28
==PAGE:39==
4
Review of boundaries and translation
approaches for land use
4.1
Method
Existing boundaries proposed for the land use impact category are identified by a literature review.
Additionally, the literature review provides an overview of thresholds that are further translated into
carrying capacity estimates. Identified thresholds and carrying capacities are qualitatively evaluated,
providing the basis for suggestions to a carrying capacity estimate derived in this study. In this section,
the underlying method for the literature review and the basis for suggestions to derive a carrying
capacity estimate are elaborated.
To ensure a consistent use of terms, reference is made to the glossary, which explains how terms
are used and understood in this study. Particularly relevant to this chapter is the distinction between
boundary and threshold. In this study, these terms are understood similarly. However, the boundary
should be understood as the foundation for the threshold. For example, a boundary may be expressed
as a range, from which a threshold can be proposed (e.g. by the median or average of the boundary
range). We acknowledge that this terminology differs from other definitions within the field and from
the PB framework. However, since no universally accepted definitions for these terms exist and their
usage varies across the literature, we outline how these terms are understood in this study.
4.1.1
Basis for the literature review
A literature review is conducted to identify and systematic evaluate current methods and approaches
to define sustainability boundaries for land use. With the aim of forming the basis for suggestions
and recommendations on future carrying capacity estimates, the methodology of the review is to
(1) review current land use thresholds, (2) identify the boundary basis and underlying principles, (3)
classify thresholds to an indicator and (4) identify the translation approach from thresholds to carrying
capacity estimates.
An initial list of literature comprising 28 studies was provided by supervisor Eldbjørg Blikra Vea. Details
regarding the literature search can be found in Appendix C.1. This literature is hereinafter referred to
as primary literature. Additional literature, referred to as secondary literature, were identified through
citations within the primary literature. The primary literature provides thresholds, while the secondary
literature serves as basis for elaborating on the boundaries from which these thresholds are derived,
29
==PAGE:40==
as well as the underlying methods.
To refine the primary literature, an initial set of criteria was applied, as outlined below:
• The study must be written in English and presented as academic articles or reports.
• The study must provide an original approach to propose a boundary, threshold or translation
approach for land use. Studies that directly adopt previously identified thresholds and translation
approaches for land use are excluded (e.g. Vargas-Gonzalez et al. [73] and Jovet et al. [42],
that use the method as presented by Bjørn and Hauschild [10]).
Of the 28 studies in the primary literature, 20 studies published between 2015 and 2024 meet the initial
criteria, as outlined in Appendix E.3. These studies are included in a review scheme to establish an
overview of various boundaries, thresholds, and translation approaches for land use.
The review scheme is inspired by the framework method developed by Vea et al. [74] to ensure a sys-
tematic and consistent approach. First, thresholds are classified by environmental indicators, values,
and units. This is followed by an elaboration of underlying methods to the identified thresholds, which
includes descriptions of: boundary ranges, elaboration on boundaries, boundary principle, origins,
objectives, response variables, spatial variabilities and uncertainties. Lastly, translations of thresh-
olds are mapped by identifying the metrics, translation approaches, LCIA method compliance and
uncertainties. An overview of the layout of the review scheme is presented in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the layout and components of the literature review scheme.
30
==PAGE:41==
The review does not provide an exhaustive list of existing land use thresholds and boundaries, rather
it presents recent literature with different approaches and applications of sustainability boundaries.
Additionally, the established review scheme form the basis for a direct expansion of the literature
review to include additional studies focussing on land use or to include other impact categories.
4.1.2
Basis for suggestion of a carrying capacity estimate
To enable a more detailed focus on the possibilities for improved carrying capacity estimates, a second
set of criteria, as outlined below, was applied to the 20 studies, that met the initial criteria.
• The study must have a scientific basis or approach. This excludes studies with political agendas
and targets (e.g. Dao et al. [21]).
• The study must derive a threshold for land use, thereby excluding studies presenting approaches
to assess land use without quantification (e.g. Bjørn et al. [11]).
• The study must include a carrying capacity estimate.
Seven studies meet these additional criteria, providing the basis for further assessment of the carrying
capacity estimates identified herein. This further assessment follows the below outlined evaluation
points, which form the basis for suggestions to an improved carrying capacity estimate for land use.
• Position of the carrying capacity, threshold and environmental consequences on the impact
pathway following the DPSIR framework [65].
• If and how spatial variability is addressed and/or accounted for in the proposed carrying capacity
estimate.
• How strong the consistency between identified objectives and suggested threshold is.
• The underlying boundary principle to the threshold that a carrying capacity is derived from.
4.2
Results and analysis
4.2.1
Existing boundaries for land use
Following the steps in subsection 4.1.1, 13 thresholds were identified for land use. To enable easy
reference to the identified thresholds hereinafter, these are related to different land use indicators, e.g.
such as ’soil erosion’. Various thresholds may be classified within the same indicator, if they are based
upon the same underlying boundary, as outlined in the glossary for the definition of an indicator. The
full literature review can be seen in Appendix E.3. A description of the identified indicators is presented
in Table 4.1. Two of the identified indicators, surface air temperature and precipitation do not propose
a threshold [11].
31
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.1: Overview and description of identified indicators.
Indicator
Description
Soil erosion
The soil erosion indicator uses soil formation rates as applicable for tol-
erable soil erosion rates based on two main assumptions (1) soil func-
tions do not deteriorate, when soil erosion rates are below ’natural’ ero-
sion rates, and (2) ’natural’ soil erosion rates are equal to soil formation
rates. Soil formation rates include soil formation by weathering and dust
deposition [76].
Soil quality index (SQI)
The SQI indicator describes soil properties based on four aggregated
metrics from LANCA: erosion resistance, mechanical filtration, ground-
water regeneration and biotic production [22].
Biodiversity
This indicator builds on biodiversity conservation goals based on e.g.
habitat loss and fragmentation [52].
Forest land
Forest land includes three forest biomes: tropical forest, temperate for-
est and boreal forest. This indicator expresses forested land to be main-
tained as a percentage of the potential forested land in the Holocene
[71].
Forest land and biodiversity
This indicator expresses a combination of the foundation of the biodiver-
sity and forest land indicators [24].
Cropland use
This indicator is expressed through a maximum percentage of ice-free
land surface that should be converted into cropland [58].
Anthropised surface
This indicator is expressed through a maximum percentage of ice-free
land surface that should be converted into anthropised land as a proxy
for alebo and carbon storage [21].
NCP
NCP is the nature’s contribution to people. NCP is used as a measure
for functional integrity (i.e. the capacity of human-modified ecosystems
to provide ecological functions and contributions to people) [59].
HANPP/eHANPP
HANPP is the human appropriation of net primary production and is used
to measure functional integrity of the biosphere [57]. The eHANPP is
the embodied HANPP and reflects the consumption-based allocation to
HANPP to final biomass products from agriculture and forestry [54].
Surface air temperature
This indicator is addressed through modelling of changes in surface air
temperature as a result of changes in albedo and evapotranspiration
[11].
32
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.1: Overview and description of identified indicators (continued).
Indicator
Description
Precipitation
This indicator focusses on water balance perturbations’ impact on pre-
cipitation, which is addressed through terrestrial moisture recycling [11].
Biocapacity
The biocapacity indicator measures the amount of biologically produc-
tive land areas available to provide the ecosystem services that humanity
consumes [16].
4.2.2
Boundaries translated to carrying capacity estimates
This section elaborates on the seven studies that fulfil the additional criteria defined in subsection 4.1.2.
The evaluation focusses on the spatial coverage, translation approach and uncertainties related to
the quantification. Table 4.2 provides an overview of the seven studies included in the further assess-
ment along with selected information related to the indicator. The full assessment can be found in
Appendix E.3.
Table 4.2: Indicator, carrying capacity estimate (metric) and LCIA compliance method.
Indicator
Metric (yearly flow)
LCIA compliance
Study
Soil erosion
1)
1.27E+13 kg soil loss
CFs of Saad et al.[63]
[10]
2)
1.38E+14 kg C deficit
ILCD 2011
[78]
Soil quality index
5.21E+15 Pt
EF 3.0 + 3.1
[1]
Biodiversity
1)
1.04E+14 m²·yr
LCI results
[10]
2)
3.76E+13 Pt
EF 3.0 + 3.1
[47]
Forest land
Deforestation ≤-11 Mha
-
[48]
Forest land and biodiversity
5.03E+13 m²·yr
LCI results
[24]
Cropland
1)
1.94E+13 m²·yr
ReCiPe 2016
[24]
2)
18.1E+6 km²·yr
ReCiPe 2016
[33]
Soil erosion
For the soil erosion indicator, a threshold is proposed at 0.85 tons/ha/yr tolerable soil erosion [10]. This
threshold is the mean value of the range provided by Verheijen et al. [76] with an upper and lower limit
of 0.3-1.4 ton/ha/yr, thereby following best estimates practices in LCA. The boundary range is based
on reported rates of overall soil formations for mineral soils in Europe with the objective of avoiding
loss of one or more soil functions. Transgression of the boundary can cause both off- and on-site
33
==PAGE:44==
responses, such as flooding and loss of nutrients, seeds and organic matter, ect. [76]. Bjørn and
Hauschild [10] translate this threshold into a metric of 1.27·1013 kg soil loss by multiplying the global
terrestrial area, expressed at the state point on the impact pathway. The metric is not compatible
with ILCD recommendations, but it aligns with the global average characterisation factors provided
by Saad et al. [10]. Wolff et al. [78] present another translation approach for the threshold to be
compatible with the ILCD recommendation. Before the EF method, the ILCD recommendation was
to evaluate land use based on soil organic matter [29]. Wolff et al. [78] translate the soil erosion
threshold to a carrying capacity of 1.38·1014 kg C deficit.
Soil quality index
The soil quality index is used to derive a carrying capacity expressed in Pt to be compatible with the
EF method. A carrying capacity of 5.21·1015 Pt is estimated [1] based on a reduction of the global
normalisation reference for land use provided by Crenna et al. [20]. The reduction is calculated
based on an average of reduction factors of four soil properties, equivalent to those included in the
soil quality index: soil erosion, biotic production, groundwater regeneration and mechanical filtration.
For soil erosion, the reduction is based on the exceedance of global soil loss, estimated by Borrelli et
al. [15] to the carrying capacity proposed by Bjørn and Hauschild [10]. For the remaining three soil
properties, the global impact level is assumed equal to the tolerance, as carrying capacity estimates
for these could not be found. No objective or response variable were explicitly stated for the soil
quality index in the reviewed literature.
Biodiversity
Two studies [10] [47] propose a threshold for land use based on the biodiversity indicator. Both studies
use a range from 25-75% conserved nature presented by Noss et al. [52] based on 13 studies, that
each provide estimates for nature to be conserved. Bjørn and Hauschild [10] follow the best estimate
practise of LCA and provide a threshold based on the median, resulting in a threshold of 31% natural
land area that must be conserved. Matuštík et al. [47] propose a threshold of 50% of each ecoregion
to be conserved, using the mean value of the range provided by Noss et al. [52]. These thresholds are
based on the objective of conserving biodiversity with the response variable being loss of biodiversity.
The threshold of 31% natural land area is translated to a metric of 1.04·1014 m2·yr [10], while the 50%
threshold is translated to 3.76·1013 Pt to be compatible with EF [47].
Forest land
The boundary of the forest land indicator is based on the updated planetary boundary framework
in 2015 [71], hence an objective is protection of the Holocene stable environment. The proposed
threshold is at 75% maintained original forested land on the ice-free land surface, set at the precau-
34
==PAGE:45==
tionary end of the range 54%-75% maintained forest land. Here, original forested land refers to the
potential forested land cover during the Holocene. The range is derived from a weighted aggregate
of boundaries from the three biomes: tropical, temperate and boreal forest with the ranges 60-85%,
30-50% and 60-85%, respectively. Steffen et al. [71] state that well-founded arguments indicate that
a threshold of tropical forest land-cover change exist and could trigger the widespread conversion
of tropical forest to a savanna or grassland, if crossed. The boundaries of temperate and boreal
forest are provisional boundaries based on sensitivity studies or no research [71]. The response to
transgression includes widespread conversion of the Amazon to a savanna or grassland, reduction
of evapotranspiration and changing albebo [71]. This boundary is translated by Meyer and Newman
[48] to a deforestation rate of ≤-11 Mha/yr for the rest of this century. This translation is based on
the suggestion that 0.9 Gha of reforestation is needed by the end of this century [48] [71].
Forest land and biodiversity
This indicator reflects a combination of the boundary presented for the forest land indicator and the
50% conservation of nature boundary based on Noss et al. [52] for the biodiversity indicator. Desing
et al. [23] propose a threshold at 65% conserved land area set at the precautionary end of the range
52-65% of land area remaining. This threshold is a weighted aggregate of thresholds for tropical, tem-
perate and boreal forest and other land area to be maintained (excluding polar land and the remaining
land, i.e. mountain ranges, wetlands, etc.) with the boundary ranges of 50-85%, 30-50%, 50-85%
and 50%, respectively [24]. The objective reflects the combination of forest land and biodiversity in-
dicators, hence the objective is protection of the Holocene stable environment by climate regulation
and conservation of biodiversity. The response variable includes loss of biodiversity and widespread
conversion of the Amazon to a savanna or grassland, reduction of evapotranspiration and changing
albebo [71].
Cropland use
In the planetary boundary framework of 2009 [58], a threshold is proposed at maximum 15% of the
ice-free land surface to be converted into cropland, set at the precautionary end of the boundary
range from 15-20%. The objective is to maintain the stable environmental state of the Holocene by
land surface climate coupling [33], while the response variable is conversion of Amazon rainforest
due to changing evapotranspiration. Desing et al. [23] and Gebara and Laurent [33] translate this
threshold to 1.94·1013 m2·yr and 18.1·106 km2·yr, respectively.
4.2.2.1
Spatial variability
The impacts of land use and land use change are relevant to address at regional or biome scale
rather than- or in combination with global scale [21]. Noss et al. [52] present a range from 25-75%
35
==PAGE:46==
conserved nature. This range forms the basis for carrying capacity estimates at global level [47]
[10], hence not accounting for regional differences. However, Noss et al. [52] also state that not only
the conservation of nature, but also the functional connection between large contiguous reserves is of
importance to biodiversity integrity, which is not accounted for in the presented carrying capacities [47]
[10] [23]. Also, when using forest land as basis for carrying capacities, location-specific factors may
be relevant. Specific for tropical forests low resilience conditions exist, in which a critical reduction
of tree cover is smaller than for conditions at high resilience. Beyond the critical reduction of tree
cover, a shift in states (e.g. from tropical forest to savanna) may occur [40]. This argument further
emphasises the influence of spatial differentiation at lower resolutions for the forest land indicator.
Still, the carrying capacity estimate based on forest land is a global average value [48]. Bjørn et
al. [12] found that spatial resolution is among the most important factors influencing AESA results.
However, the seven reviewed studies provide carrying capacities to be used as global averages.
Spatial variation is addressed to various degrees within the seven shortlisted studies. Some use global
boundaries without explicitly addressing potentially overlooked thresholds due to spatial variability
[48] [33]. Others provide global average carrying capacities, but acknowledge and explicitly state
the possibility of different environmental circumstances at a lower spatial resolution [23] [78]. Further
elaboration on issues related to a spatially generic approach is provided by Bjørn and Hauschild [10]
and Matuštík et al. [47]. Here, further elaboration includes suggestions for potential handling of such
issues or more detailed descriptions of enhanced issues related to spatial variability.
The geographical basis for the global carrying capacity estimates vary among the seven studies. Av-
erage European data is used for soil erosion [76], an average based on different regions and countries
is used for biodiversity [52] and global aggregates are used in the case of cropland [58]. Matuštík et al.
[47] provide a global carrying capacity estimate based on aggregated ecoregion-specific references.
Desing et al. [23] propose a threshold based on a weighted aggregate of thresholds at biome level.
These thresholds at biome level are also individually translated into carrying capacity estimates and
kept at the resolution of biome level, thus enabling the possibility of a more regional AESA. However,
this requires information on the location of environmental interventions, which often comes with high
uncertainty.
4.2.2.2
Translation approach
All studies, where a carrying capacity is defined, assume a temporal steady-state, hence not account-
ing for temporal dynamics. In some studies [10] [33] [78], this assumption is addressed and related
uncertainties are highlighted. One study includes a temporal scope in the translation [48]. Here, an
appropriate deforestation rate is based on the time period from 2018 and the remaining of this century
36
==PAGE:47==
[48].
Most studies translate the threshold to a carrying capacity directly by multiplying an area, with few
exceptions [47] [1] [78]. The area used for the translation differs according to the indicator. An example
hereof is the forest land and biodiversity indicator, where the proposed threshold is based on the
potential natural land area at biome level. The carrying capacity is translated accordingly based on the
potential area of forests (tropical, temperate and boreal) and other biomes (i.e. savanna, grassland,
shrubland and desert). In the case of the cropland indicator, the total ice-free land area is used. Bjørn
and Hauschild [10] address how carrying capacities derived by a spatially generic approach, simply
by multiplying the global terrestrial land area, may be overestimated. This is due to the fact that
emissions rarely occur homogenously distributed. In the case of land use, this shows in land areas
which can be considered as unavailable as resource for human activities. Therefore, emissions in
the form of land occupation and transformation are not expected in such areas. Matuštík et al. [47]
account for this issue in the derivation of a carrying capacity estimate by excluding land areas deemed
to be rarely occupied by human activity.
Other translation approaches identified are the use of characterisation factors (CFs) [47] and a re-
duction ratio relative to the current global impacts of land use [1]. The latter by JRC [1], uses the
carrying capacity estimate for soil loss provided by Bjørn and Hauschild [10] together with the global
normalisation reference established by Crenna et al. [20]. It should be noted that the carrying capac-
ity estimate for soil loss exclusively accounts for land occupation flows, whereas the normalisation
reference applied covers both occupation and transformation flows. In the translation by Matuštík et
al. [47], the 50% left to nature threshold [52] is translated to a carrying capacity estimate by aggre-
gating over land cover in ecoregions. Characterisation factors for SQI were applied to the respective
land cover and ecoregion. However, characterisation factors are provided at country level, for which
reason country-specific CFs were assigned to each ecoregion based on the largest overlay [47]. In
Appendix C.2 a selection of country-specific characterisation factors from SQI are shown for coun-
tries covered by either of the two ecoregions: European Atlantic mixed forests and Central European
mixed forests. The two ecoregions are selected from the Ecoregion map by Dinerstein et al. [25]. An
extract of SQI CFs for occupation flows show that, in the case of forest occupation, relatively large
differences in characterisation factors between countries may be found, depending on the ecoregion
(see Appendix C.2).
4.2.2.3
Consistency and uncertainty
The boundaries are related to the identified objectives through different boundary principles. Uncer-
tainties may vary arccos the applied boundary principle. The soil erosion threshold is related to the
37
==PAGE:48==
objective of avoiding deterioration or loss of soil functions through a regeneration level. In addition to
the uncertainty linked to the method of estimating a soil formation rate, uncertainties occur due to the
main assumptions that soil formation rates equals ’natural’ soil erosion rates, and that soil functions
are maintained with ’natural’ erosion rates. In the case of biodiversity, forest land and cropland, a
threshold boundary principle is applied. Here, uncertainties mainly arise from the lack of proof to a
certain threshold value. The biodiversity thresholds identified in this review are based on the mean
or median of 13 studies proposing different threshold values ranging from 25-75%. Forest land and
cropland threshold values are based on observations and environmental modelling, which also comes
with uncertainty.
For each of the indicators, the position on the impact pathway for the carrying capacity, threshold
and environmental consequence was identified using the DPSIR framework [65]. Results hereof are
illustrated in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Carrying capacities, thresholds and environmental consequences position on the impact
pathway. Carrying capacities indicated in orange, thresholds in light blue and environmental conse-
quences in brown.
This illustration only expresses environmental consequences directly connected to the translated
thresholds included in the literature review. The identified environmental consequences may cause
new states where other environmental consequences are relevant. These dynamics are not consid-
38
==PAGE:49==
ered further. Moreover, the drivers and responses of the DPSIR framework [65] were excluded from
this illustration. They are beyond the scope of this evaluation, namely evaluating carrying capacities,
thresholds and environmental consequences, which are located only at pressure, state and impact
positions.
As illustrated in Figure 4.2 for all indicators, the threshold value is located at the state point of the
impact pathway with the exception of soil erosion. In case of soil erosion, the threshold is identified at
the pressure point. Thereby, it may be easier to measure however the risk of a decreased relevance
to the environmental concern increases [74]. For the biodiversity indicator, thresholds were translated
to carrying capacities at different positions on the impact pathway. The review shows that carrying
capacities mostly are expressed at the pressure point increasing the measurability, which is relevant
for the applicability to the LCA methodology. The identified environmental consequences are located
at the impact position. Ideally, this indicates a closer link to the actual effect. However, none of the
environmental consequences was quantified, hence the actual level of impact, that is the basis of the
boundary, is not known. As an example, no quantified value on the change of evapotranspiration and
albedo caused by the proposed deforestation rate was identified in the primary or secondary literature
[48] [71].
The linkage between the identified objective and threshold appears to be stronger for some indicators
than others. The objective identified for the forest land indicator is climate regulation. Forest cover
from tropical, temperate and boreal forest play a stronger role in climate regulation than other biomes
[71]. Hereof tropical and boreal forest are estimated to have stronger influence on the climate system
than temperate forest cover. In the proposed threshold at global level, these are weighted accordingly.
This indicates consistency between the objective and the threshold. In the case of soil erosion, soil
functions should be protected, while the threshold is based on soil formation rates, which shows a
weaker consistency between the objective and threshold. Additionally, the objective is to avoid loss
of soil functions at global scale, while the threshold is based on European data [76], which entails
weaker consistency and uncertainty.
4.2.3
Suggestion for carrying capacity estimate
The forest land indicator showed consistency between the objective and threshold. Moreover, a
boundary based on forest land is considered relevant, especially when used at global scale, since
regional changes of forest land show global consequences [53]. However, this indicator excludes
boundaries for other biomes such as grassland and shrubland, while occupation of such biomes may
influence the biodiversity. Desing et al. [23] aims to capture both impacts on biodiversity and climate
regulation by combining proposed boundaries of forest land [71] and biodiversity [52]. Since climate
39
==PAGE:50==
change and biosphere integrity are recognised as core boundaries within the planetary boundary
framework [71], and since land use and land use change show impact on both of these, it is consid-
ered relevant to include boundaries of both forest land and biodiversity in a carrying capacity estimate
for land use. As spatial resolution remains an important factor to address [12], translating boundaries
to carrying capacities at the resolution of biome level is considered meaningful. Moreover, as it was
illustrated in Figure 4.2, Desing et al. [23] (i.e. the forest land and biodiversity indicator) present a
carrying capacity at the pressure point, while the environmental consequence is at the impact point.
Thereby, the possibility of environmental relevance and a carrying capacity estimate, that is control-
lable, increases.
Based on this, the approach by Desing et al. [23] is followed in this study, namely a combination of
the forest land and biodiversity indicator. The global potential natural land area, assuming no influ-
ence from human activities, at biome level, as well as appropriable minimum and maximum fractions
attributed to human are shown in Table 4.3. Presented areas are provided by Desing et al. [2] based
on Ramankutty and Foley [56] and Snyder et al. [66]. The minimum and maximum appropriable frac-
tions are derived based on the median of the range identified for the biodiversity indicator presented
by Noss et al. [52], namely 31% conserved natural land area. The median is chosen to follow the
best estimate approach [37], following the approach by Bjørn and Hauschild [10].
The threshold of 31% conserved natural land area results in 69% natural land area being appropriable
for human activities. Specifically for forest land, stricter boundaries were identified for tropical and bo-
real forests (i.e. 60-85% conserved natural forest land) and the boundary at the precautionary end of
the range for temperate forests (i.e. 50% conserved natural forest land). These stricter boundaries
are accounted for in the proposed appropriable fractions for the forest land biomes, by applying the
more strict appropriable fractions instead of the faction of 69%. This is outlined in Table 4.3. Here, the
potential natural land area of other biomes includes the potential natural areas of grassland, shrub-
land and tundra. These are interpreted as a single biome since the appropriable fractions of these
respective biomes do not differ.
Table 4.3: Potential area for different biomes without human interference and appropriable fractions.
Biome
Potential area [m2]
Min. appropriable fraction
Max. appropriable fraction
Tropical forest
2.26E+13
15%
40%
Temperate forest
1.70E+13
50%
69%
Boreal forest
1.57E+13
15%
40%
Other biomes
3.87E+13
69%
69%
40
==PAGE:51==
Aggregated
9.40E+13
While Desing et al. [23] propose a threshold based on the minimum appropriable fraction, thereby
adhering to the precautionary principle, this study presents a threshold derived from the mean ap-
propriable fraction. The mean appropriable fraction is calculated using the minimum and maximum
appropriable fractions presented in Table 4.3. By aggregating all appropriable areas across biomes,
a total global area of 4.74·1013 m2·yr attributed to human activities is obtained. Polar areas, savanna,
desert and a rest of land (i.e. land that does not fit into other biome categories) are excluded. These
areas are considered to be rarely occupied by humans, and are therefore not considered available
resources for human activities. This approach aligns with the concept proposed by Matuštík et al.
[47].
The carrying capacity estimate, derived in this study, corresponds to a threshold of 67.5% of natural
land area remaining, calculated based on the share of land areas appropriable for human activities
relative to the total land area. By excluding remote areas and accounting for boundaries of forest
land, this threshold is stricter than other identified thresholds focusing exclusively on biodiversity (i.e.
31% and 50%, see Appendix E.3).
Carrying capacities at biome level as well as a global aggregate are presented at Table 4.4. Calcula-
tions are provided in Appendix E.2.
Table 4.4: Mean appropriable fraction and appropriable area at biome level. The % of total land is
the share of natural land that should be conserved of the total land area based on the aggregated
appropriable area.
Biome
Mean appropriable fraction
Appropriable area [m2·yr]
Tropical forest
27.5%
6.21E+12
Temperate forest
59.5%
1.01E+13
Boreal forest
27.5%
4.30E+12
Other biomes
69%
2.67E+13
Aggregated
4.74E+13
% of total land
67.5%
Desing et al. [23] present land use data on current human activities for the built environment, cropland,
pasture and forest plantations. The land cover of cropland, pasture and forest plantations is based on
41
==PAGE:52==
the reference year 2010. The area of built environment is based on the reference year 2015. These
land cover types add to a total area of 5.53·1013 m2 with human activities based on data from 2010
and 2015. Comparing this to the appropriable land area for human activities, calculated in this study
and presented in Table 4.4, human activities exceed the appropriable land use.
42
==PAGE:53==
5
Influence of carrying capacity estimates and
spatial variation for land use in AESA
Since there are different approaches both to define thresholds for Earth-system processes and to
further translate these into carrying capacity estimates (see subsection 4.2.2), it becomes relevant to
assess the influence of the applied carrying capacity estimate, when conducting an AESA. Carrying
capacity estimates are often spatially generic however acknowledged to be relevant at a lower spatial
resolution for selected impact categories [10]. Global carrying capacity estimates, as defined by Sala
et al. [64], were applied for the AESA in this study. Since Sala et al. [64] did not provide a carrying
capacity estimate for land use, that aligns with the EF method, a later estimate from JRC [1] was
used for land use. By integrating findings from chapter 3 and chapter 4, this section evaluates how the
AESA results for land use, in the context of the case study, may be influenced by (1) applying different
carrying capacity estimates, (2) applying country-specific characterisation factors to the elementary
flows and (3) applying a carrying capacity estimate, derived in this study, which is based on location-
specific considerations.
5.1
Method
5.1.1
Basis for sensitivity related to carrying capacity estimates
The influence of applying different carrying capacities is investigated for estimates in compliance with
the EF method expressed in Pt. We interpret, that the carrying capacity estimate based on soil quality
index proposed by JRC [1] covers both land occupation and transformation flows. This interpretation
is based on the elaboration of the underlying method provided in subsection 4.2.2. However, this
was not explicitly stated by JRC [1]. Matuštík et al. [47] propose a carrying capacity expressed in
Pt based on biodiversity, covering solely occupation flows. To enable comparison across carrying
capacity estimates in Pt, we derive the estimate provided by JRC [1] for occupation flows only. The
method follows the approach in JRC [1], but a global normalisation factor for occupation of 5.30·1015
Pt from Crenna et al. [20] is used instead of a global normalisation factor covering both occupation
and transformation flows.
In subsection 4.2.3, a carrying capacity estimate expressed in m2·yr based on forest land and biodi-
versity was derived. For the purpose of a comparison to other carrying capacity estimates expressed
in Pt, a translation of this estimate is carried out using Equation 5.1.
43
==PAGE:54==
CC =
∑
i
(Fi · Ai · CFi)
(5.1)
F is the appropriable fraction, that can be utilised by human activities, A is the potential natural land
area in m2, understood as the potential land area without human interference, and i is the respective
biome. CF are characterisation factors from the soil quality index in the unit Pt/m2·yr [22] and CC
is the carrying capacity estimate expressed in Pt, solely applicable for occupation flows. Table 5.1
presents the applied global characterisation factors for each biome. The appropriable fraction, F
and the potential natural land area, A is presented in subsection 4.2.3 in Table 4.4 and Table 4.3,
respectively.
Table 5.1: Biomes and the best matching occupation flows and corresponding soil quality index char-
acterisation factors [22], used in this study.
Biomes
Occupation flow
SQI CF, Global
Tropical forest
Forest
21 Pt/m2·yr
Temperate forest
Forest
21 Pt/m2·yr
Boreal forest
Forest
21 Pt/m2·yr
Grassland & steppe
Grassland
36 Pt/m2·yr
Shrubland & tundra
Shrub land
18 Pt/m2·yr
To apply these carrying capacity estimates (i.e. estimates defined by JRC [1], Matuštík et al. [47] and
the one derived in this study) for land use in AESA, the scope defined for the LCA output must align
with the carrying capacity estimates. The carrying capacity estimates only cover occupation flows,
thus the annual characterised result for land use must cover the same, meaning that the transfor-
mation flows for land use are excluded in this assessment. Consequently, the occupation flows are
characterised manually using global characterisation factors for soil quality index [22], with the excep-
tion of the occupation flow linked to the site of Villa Grenaa, where a characterisation factor specific
to Denmark is utilised. Appendix D presents the applied global characterisation factors. Soil quality
index covers terrestrial impacts only, hence the applied characterisation factors of seabed and water
bodies are zero.
5.1.2
Basis for sensitivity related to spatial variability
Until this point, global average characterisation factors have been applied to the elementary flows
and in the carrying capacity estimate derived in this study. However, relying on global averages may
lead to under or overestimation of actual regional land use impacts. This discrepancy implies that
44
==PAGE:55==
the characterisation factors may not accurately reflect regional soil properties, and that carrying ca-
pacity estimates based on global averages might not adequately account for potential region-specific
boundaries in the area, where emissions from the analysed system occur. In the Ecoinvent database,
global occupation flows, and consequently global characterisations factors, are applied as default,
even though the selected inventory process is geographically specific. To address these issues, a
sensitivity analysis focusing on spatial variation is conducted to investigate whether the application of
location-specific considerations in both the LCIA and the translation of the carrying capacity estimate
derived in this study affects the conclusions of the AESA.
5.1.2.1
Geographical representativity in LCIA
To increase the geographical representativity in the inventory, a focus is narrowed to wood-based
materials, to restrict the extent of the task. Wood-based materials are chosen as these compose a
great amount of the materials for Villa Grenaa, and are relevant land use. Furthermore, only wood-
based materials with an EPD are considered, as these provide location-specific information about the
material origin. The aim is to apply country-specific characterisation factors to the elementary flows,
which are results of emissions for the selected wood-based materials. To do so, the occupation flows,
associated with the materials, are identified.
For the materials: structural timber, wind tuss, wood wool and glued laminated timber, the EPDs
indicates that the wood originates from Norway [18]. In the Ecoinvent database, we identified that
the production of these wood types mainly leads back to the following land occupation flows: forest
extensive, forest intensive and traffic area rail/road embankment. The relevant occupation flows are
highlighted in Figure 5.1.
For each of the three occupation flows, the total emissions occurring from the production of struc-
tural timer, wind tuss, wood wool and glued laminated timber to Villa Grenaa, are calculated. Based
on this, the fractions attributable to Norwegian wood production relative to the total occupation flows
for Villa Grenaa are obtained, see Figure 5.1 and Appendix E.2. These reflect the fractions, where
Norwegian characterisation factors are applied. Global average characterisation factors are applied
to the remaining occupation flows, except for the land occupation from the dwelling. Here, a charac-
terisation factor specific to Denmark is utilised. The applied characterisation factors can be found in
Appendix D. Figure 5.1 illustrates these steps and the calculated fractions for global and Norwegian
characterisation factors.
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.1: Visualisation of the steps towards integration of country-specific characterisation factors
in the LCIA for occupations flows related to wood-based materials for Villa Grenaa.
The results of the analysis will be compared to the base scenario. In the context of AESA, the re-
sults will be tested for the eight allocated shares (see subsubsection 3.1.2.1) and for various carrying
capacity estimates in compliance with EF.
5.1.2.2
Location-specific carrying capacity estimate
In the previous subsection 5.1.1, it was explained how global average characterisation factors were
applied to convert the suggested carrying capacity estimate from m2·yr to Pt. It is considered valu-
able to further explore opportunities to derive a carrying capacity estimate that corresponds to the
geographical information from the inventory, to better reflect boundary conditions in the area where
emissions from Villa Grenaa occur. Location-specific carrying capacity estimates can be derived in
cases, where spatial information on environmental interventions is available. To our knowledge, no
commonly applied method for this currently exists. In this study, Equation 5.2 is proposed for this
purpose. Many systems are complex, and therefore it is not expected that geographical information
can be gathered with great accuracy for the complete inventory. Consequently, the proposed method
includes a fraction, where the location of the inventory is uncertain, to which a spatial generic carrying
capacity estimate is applied.
CCcase = Fglobal,avg · CCglobal,avg +
∑
Fcountry · CCcountry
(5.2)
CCcase is the carrying capacity estimate specific to the assessed system, CCglobal,avg is a spatial
46
==PAGE:57==
generic carrying capacity estimate, and CCcountry is a country-specific carrying capacity estimate.
Fglobal,avg is the faction of the total occupation flows where the location is uncertain, and Fcountry is the
fraction of the occupation flows, that occurs in a specific country. The carrying capacity derived in this
study in Pt can be used for CCglobal,avg. Additionally, a carrying capacity estimate specific to a given
country should be calculated. Following the approach to the estimate calculated in subsection 4.2.3,
the potential natural land area at biome level must be known for the relevant country. During this study,
it was not possible to obtain the necessary data. Consequently, a more location-specific carrying
capacity estimate will be developed using an alternative method.
Based on information provided in EPDs for wood-based materials in Villa Grenaa, we found that 63%
of the forest occupation can be attributed to forestry in Norway and 5% to forestry in Denmark. These
shares are used to derive a location-specific carrying capacity estimate for Villa Grenaa. How these
fractions are determined is visualised in Figure 5.2 and calculations are presented in Appendix E.2.
Figure 5.2: Visualisation of the method to determined the share of the total occupation forest flows
that can be allocated to Denmark and Norway for Villa Grenaa.
To derive a location-specific carrying capacity estimate, these fractions are taking into account in the
translation from m2·yr to Pt. The translation is conducted based on the carrying capacity estimate
of this study (see subsection 4.2.3). Based on a biome classification map by Dinerstein et al. [25],
Norway’s primary forest biome is identified as boreal forest and Denmark’s forest as temperate for-
est. Table 5.2 provides an overview of the biomes, the calculated fractions and the corresponding
occupation flows and characterisation factors.
47
==PAGE:58==
Table 5.2: Fractions of biomes allocated to Norwegian wood-production (boreal forest), the site of Villa
Grenaa (temperate forest). The rest of these fractions and biomes of tropical forest, grassland and
shrubland are attributed to global characterisation factors. For each biome, the relevant occupation
flow and CF [22] is shown.
Biomes
Villa Grenaa fraction
Occupation flow
SQI CF
Tropical, GLO
100%
Forest
21 Pt/m2·yr
Temperate, GLO
95%
Forest
21 Pt/m2·yr
Temperate, DK
5%
Forest
52 Pt/m2·yr
Boreal, GLO
37%
Forest
21 Pt/m2·yr
Boreal, NO
63%
Forest
-9 Pt/m2·yr
Grassland & steppe, GLO
100%
Grassland
36 Pt/m2·yr
Shrubland & tundra, GLO
100%
Shrub land
18 Pt/m2·yr
A location-specific carrying capacity estimate in Pt is calculated for Villa Grenaa, CCV G, by the fol-
lowing Equation 5.3, based on the information presented in Table 5.2. Calculations are provided in
Appendix E.2.
CCV G =
∑
i
(FV G,i ·Fi ·Ai ·CFGLO,i)+
∑
i
(FV G,i ·Fi ·Ai ·CFNO,i)+
∑
i
(FV G,i ·Fi ·Ai ·CFDK,i) (5.3)
FV G,i is the Villa Grenaa fraction for biome i presented in Table 5.2. The appropriable fraction, Fi
and area, Ai for biome i are both presented in Table 4.4. CFGLO,i, CFNO,i, and CFDK,i are SQI
characterisation factors for the relevant biome, i, presented in Table 5.2.
It is observed that characterisation factors for forestry in Norway are negative values, suggesting that
the use of forest yields a benefit [22]. This outcome arises from the calculation approach applied in
LANCA, which will be elaborated upon in section 6.4.
5.2
Results and analysis
In this section, the sensitivity of three parameters affecting land use AESA results is analysed. The
three parameters analysed are (1) the influence of the choice of carrying capacity estimate, (2) the
affect of applying a location-specific carrying capacity estimate and (3) the influence of an increased
geographical representative inventory. First, the carrying capacities applied for the analysis are pre-
sented and secondly the results for the analysis of all three parameters are outlined and evaluated.
48
==PAGE:59==
5.2.1
Carrying capacity estimates for the sensitivity analysis
The carrying capacities considered for the analysis are presented in Table 5.3. Naturally, a higher
carrying capacity estimate provides greater room to manoeuvre for the assessed dwelling. However,
it is considered relevant to evaluate whether different carrying capacity estimates lead to varying
conclusions regarding the absolute environmental sustainability of land use for Villa Grenaa.
Table 5.3: Carrying capacity estimates (metrics) expressed in Pt included in the sensitivity analysis.
The estimates are solely applicable for occupation flows.
Indicator
Metrics (yearly flow)
Spatial
Source
1) Soil quality index
4.86E+15 Pt
Global
Modification of JRC [1]
2) Biodiversity
3.76E+13 Pt
Global
Matuštík et al. [47]
3) Forest & biodiversity
1.09E+15 Pt
Global
Derived in this study
4) Forest & biodiversity
1.02E+15 Pt
Location-specific
Derived in this study
The carrying capacity estimates in Table 5.3 will hereinafter be referred to by the numbers 1) - 4). The
calculations of the carrying capacity estimates 1), 3) and 4) can be found in Appendix E.2.
The carrying capacity estimates 1) - 3), presented in Table 5.3, are spatially generic. It should be
noted that carrying capacity estimate 4) is applicable only for Villa Grenaa with the functional unit
defined in subsubsection 3.1.1.3, since it relies on location-specific details of the material production
and the location of Villa Grenaa.
The carrying capacity estimate 2) is the most stringent estimate with a value of two orders of magnitude
lower than the other three estimates. The estimates derived in this study, 3) and 4), are comparable
in order of magnitude to carrying capacity 1), however more conservative. The lower estimate 2)
provided by Matuštík et al. [47] can be attributed to differences in the global normalisation reference
applied in the translation to Pt. The carrying capacity estimate 1) is derived using a normalisation
factor provided by Crenna et al. [20], as calculated by Faragò et al. [28]. However, Matuštík et al.
[47] argue that the values computed by Faragò et al. [28] represent an overestimation, as they include
land areas rarely utilised by humans. Consequently, Matuštík et al. [47] have restricted their carrying
capacity estimate to only consider five land covers that are considered to be occupied by humans.
Thereby, remote areas are excluded. Additionally, they account for the current land cover fractions
by ecoregion. We interpret that Matuštík et al. [47] tries to assure that the global weighted average is
weighted corresponding to the fractions of current occupation in the five considered land cover types.
49
==PAGE:60==
5.2.2
Sensitivity related to carrying capacity estimates and spatial variability
This section presents the results of the analysis for the choice of carrying capacity, location-specific
estimate and geographical representativeness of the inventory. Figure 5.3 summarises the results for
all three parameters in an absolute perspective. The potential annual characterised impact of Villa
Grenaa for land use is 1.09·105 Pt, only covering occupation, for the base scenario and 8.01·104 Pt
with increased geographical representativeness. The calculations behind can be found in Appendix
E.2. Following the method of subsection 3.1.2, the assessment includes eight allocated shares.
Figure 5.3: Land use results of the AESA for Villa Grenaa for the base scenario and the scenario with
increased geographical precision, including the eight allocated shares, illustrated at a logarithmic
scale. Results illustrated by a dot are obtained assuming 3 residents. Results illustrated by a cross
are obtained assuming 2.3 residents. 1) - 4) represents the analysed carrying capacity estimates.
Figure 5.3 illustrates that Villa Grenaa can be categorised as absolute sustainable for land use, when
evaluated using the carrying capacity estimate 1) for Sharing Principle 1 and 2, for 2.3 and 3 res-
idents. For the remaining three carrying capacity estimates, land use impacts exceed the sustain-
ability threshold independent of the chosen sharing principle. The highest transgression is observed
for estimate 2), which aligns with expectations due to the more stringent carrying capacity estimate.
The largest carrying capacity 1) is close to 130 times larger than this estimate. The results show that
depending on the sharing principle, the conclusion regarding environmental sustainability changes
between the applied carrying capacity estimates. Thereby, the choice of carrying capacity estimate
is considered a sensitive parameter.
50
==PAGE:61==
Only a relatively small change in results is obtained when applying the carrying capacity estimate
4) compared to 3). As it is detailed in subsection 5.1.2, carrying capacity estimate 3) and 4) fol-
lows similar translation approaches. However, estimate 4) is based on increased location-specific
considerations. This result indicates that the assessment is not highly sensitive to location-specific
considerations within the carrying capacity estimate for this study. However, it should be noted that
the applied country-specific characterisation factors represent an initial attempt to account for regional
boundaries. The estimate only partially incorporates location-specific considerations due to limited
data availability.
As the geographical representativeness of the inventory increased, the impact for land use was re-
duced, bringing the AESA results closer to the sustainability threshold. Both for forest, extensive-
and intensive occupation flows, the country-specific characterisation factors for Norway are lower
than the global average, leading to an expected decrease in the characterised impact. However, this
decrease is not considered highly significant, with the relative difference of 26.5%. Furthermore, as
shown in Figure 5.3, the AESA conclusion remains unchanged to the the results from the base sce-
nario. The assessment was limited by the extend to which geographical information was specified for
the inventory. With more details on geographical data, Villa Grenaa could be modelled with a greater
geographical precision, potentially leading to more significant changes in the results.
51
==PAGE:62==
6
Discussion and perspective
Through this study, a focus has been on addressing the influence of different parameters to the con-
clusions of the AESA for the case study, both for a comprehensive list of impact categories in com-
pliance with the EF method and specifically for land use. Parameters such as LCI modelling, sharing
principles, carrying capacity estimates and geographical aspects have been assessed. This section
gathers the findings from the three chapters into a cohesive discussion, addressing the study’s limi-
tations, providing a foundation for reflections on further research and finally draws perspective to the
relevance of land use in the built environment.
6.1
Inventory modelling and temporal aspects
The potential environmental impacts of the case study were quantified through an LCA. Conducting
an LCA often involves simplifications and modelling assumptions due to the unavailability of precise
data or the complexity of modelling a comprehensive system in details, particularly with respect to
temporal dynamics [6]. In this study, a dynamic modelling approach was applied for the electricity used
for building operation, incorporated to consider potential developments within the electricity market.
The modelling was based on electricity production in 2020, along with projections for 2030 and 2050.
Given that the electricity market is influenced by external factors such as policy and international
dynamics, these projections are subject to uncertainties. Projections beyond 2050 were unavailable
and therefore, the model assumes a static electricity mix from 2050 to 2069, which may not reflect the
likely evolution of the electricity market during this period. However, despite this simplified approach
of accounting for potential developments in the electricity mix, the sensitivity analysis showed notable
differences in the impacts among various impact categories, when the results were compared to a
static approach.
Static inventory modelling was used to model the building materials, meaning that time aspects and
technological developments in the production of materials required for replacement were not consid-
ered. Consequently, replacements are based on the same process data as year 0, as no reliable
projections for future material production were found and since this is the common practice following
the Danish Building Regulation [14]. However, since the sensitivity analysis of a dynamic modelling
approach of operational electricity showed a notable effect for selected impact categories, placing
emphasis on dynamic modelling of material production may also prove relevant.
The environmental impacts over the lifetime of 50 years were distributed equally, which however
52
==PAGE:63==
misaligns with the reality. An example hereof is the replacement of building materials during the
lifetime. After 40 years, solar panels need to be replaced, resulting in emissions associated with the
production of solar panels in that year. This is relevant in the context of AESA as it might lead to an
under or overestimation of emissions in specific years [75]. This remains relevant to this study, since
yearly average impacts are used for the assessment of whether emissions from Villa Grenaa stay
within the Earth’s carrying capacity.
The above discussed temporal and technological simplifications of the assessment can be addressed
through dynamic LCA modelling. In dynamic LCA, time-dependent emission discounting (i.e. time-
dependent characterisation of emissions, where future emission factors are assessed lower than the
current ones) are accounted for [8]. However, dynamic LCA is not yet common practice in the Danish
building sector, resulting in limited exploration of its uncertainties and limitations [6]. Furthermore, the
availability of comparable case studies remains scarce [6].
6.2
Allocation and allocation principles
Four sharing principles were considered in the AESA of Villa Grenaa, since no standardised method
for allocation exists, and the choice of sharing principle influences the AESA conclusion for certain im-
pact categories (see Figure 3.6). The sharing principles used in this study were selected from a range
of options, making the selection subjective. Consequently, an alternative AESA conclusion cannot
be ruled out if different sharing principles were applied. Among other factors, the considered shar-
ing principles were selected based on judgements of the Doughnut for Urban Development [9]. The
Doughnut for Urban Development is based on the principles of Doughnut Economics, which empha-
sise maintaining a social foundation within environmental boundaries [44], and it contextualises these
principles for the building industry. Therefore, using allocation judgments inspired by the Doughnut for
Urban Development is deemed relevant for this study. Global shares were downscaled to one Dane
using equal per capita or capability to reduce. Equal per capita is included even though it considered
not to be well-aligned with principles of Doughnut Economy [9]. It is criticised for implying equality,
even though an equal allocated share arguably lead to unequal opportunities. Multiple arguments
that equal per capita may not give equal opportunities exist, here among different needs across the
World, and the fact that past emissions are not considered [9] [21]. Therefore, it is debatable whether
drawing conclusions on sustainability, based on results derived from an equal per capita approach,
is entirely fair.
Allocating to the dwelling was done using expenditure grandfathering or sufficiency. Expenditure
grandfathering can be considered to follow utilitarian ethics, assuming that spendings generally reflect
53
==PAGE:64==
what provides value to people. However, it is also considered to follow acquired rights principles.
Acquired rights is considered problematic for allocating shares from the global to the national level,
as this approach is considered to enhance inequality. Therefore, expenditure grandfathering is only
applied at sector level in this study, where it is deemed less problematic [30]. However, AESA results
derived from expenditure grandfathering should still be interpreted with caution as it relies on the
current economy, which is widely regarded as unsustainable [30].
The IPCC report from 2022 [41] highlights sufficiency policies as opportunities to ensure the well-being
for all humans while remaining within planetary boundaries. This aligns with arguments by Francart et
al. [30], who consider sufficientarianism as ”the most consistent approach when considering ambitious
sustainability transitions to stay within the PBs while ensuring social sustainability” [30]. To allocate
a share to one dwelling, following this view of justice, the decent living energy (DLE) method [50] is
applied in this study. The DLE method assumes an average household floor space of 15 m2/person,
which is substantially reduced compared to this study, assuming a floor space of 58.8 m2/person [70]
or 45 m2/person [55] in Villa Grenaa. Following assumptions from the DLE method, Villa Grenaa
should shelter 9 residents. This scenario would allow for a 3 to 3.91 times greater share allocated to
Villa Grenaa. However, based on the floor plans for Villa Grenaa [18], this is considered an unrealistic
scenario and the share should not be allocated accordingly. Alternatively, if the actual floor space
in Villa Grenaa (i.e. 45-58.8 m2/person) is applied to the energy calculations, instead of assuming
15 m2/person, the share assigned to dwellings increases from 18.9% to 31.6 or 36.2%, respectively,
following the DLE approach [50] (see Appendix E.2). However, since the philosophy of DLE is to
allocate according to the minimum energy needed for a decent living, as opposed to current standards
of living, this approach is not recommended.
As addressed in subsection 3.1.3, the sharing principles are meant to cover all processes attributed
to the analysed system as defined in the scope of the assessment. This issue is partly addressed by
testing the sensitivity of different scenarios, focussing on alignment between system boundaries and
sharing principles in subsection 3.2.3. In addition to the misalignments identified in this study, other
studies [38] [30] highlight outdoor spaces as elements that are often included in the allocated share,
yet typically excluded from the scope of the LCA for a building. Misalignments between the coverage
of the LCA and the allocated shares may be consequences from lack of data or knowledge regarding
the inventory. For selected building stages and components, correction factors are outlined in the
Doughnut for Urban Development [9], which can be used to increase consistency between system
boundaries and the allocated share. These are provided for CO2-eq/m2 only, and were therefore not
used in this study. An additional issue arises from the truncation that process-based LCA (PLCA)
54
==PAGE:65==
entails, when the LCA is conducted solely by PLCA. Truncation in PLCA occurs due to the cut-off of
some processes, that are considered to be negligible or far up the supply chain. A way to address
this issue is by using hybrid LCA (i.e. combining input-output LCA (IO-LCA) with PLCA using IO-LCA
to account for processes that could not be covered by the PLCA [30] [9]). Further evaluation of this
option is beyond the scope of this study.
6.3
Uncertainties related to the derived carrying capacity estimate
A carrying capacity estimate was derived in subsection 4.2.3 and translated to be compatible with
EF in subsection 5.1.1. Evaluation points were used as basis for the evaluation of existing carrying
capacity estimates identified from the literature review (see subsection 4.1.2). Following the same
evaluation points, the carrying capacity estimate derived in this study is discussed.
Figure 6.1 illustrates the position of threshold, carrying capacity estimates and environmental conse-
quences on the impact pathway using the DPSIR framework [65].
Figure 6.1: Carrying capacities, threshold and environmental consequences position on the impact
pathway for the carrying capacity estimate derived in this study.
Two carrying capacity estimates are included in the figure: one expressed in m2·yr and one translated
to Pt. The estimate expressed in m2·yr is at the pressure point, and is considered more easily measur-
able. The translation to Pt at the state point requires additional steps, following a greater uncertainty
regarding methodological choices of the translation. SQI characterisation factors were used for the
translation to Pt. Since the SQI is expressed as one single indicator aggregated based on four indi-
cators of LANCA, it entails some limitations. The four indicators are aggregated based on an equal
weight due to simplicity even though expert judgements indicate advantages of different weights [22].
Additionally in the SQI, one indicator of LANCA was left out, while this choice might cause loss of
information regarding the soil quality [22]. For the translation in this study, SQI characterisations fac-
tors were applied to different biomes (see Appendix E.2). However, some discrepancy between the
biomes and the best matching characterisation factors were identified. For forest cover, there is a dis-
tinguish between tropical, temperate and boreal forests at biome-level, while for the characterisation
55
==PAGE:66==
factors there are not. Consequently, a generic forest occupation flow was applied to all forest biomes.
This outlines some limitations when translating the carrying capacity estimate from the pressure to
the state point, which should be considered when applying this carrying capacity estimate.
The carrying capacity estimate is spatially generic and applicable for global average assessments. At
the pressure point, carrying capacity estimates at the resolution of biome-level are provided for five
biomes in m2·yr. Possibilities and limitations for increased spatial variability at country-level is further
discussed in the following section, section 6.4.
Consistency between the objective and the applied threshold is regarded valuable. The objective
of the forest land and biodiversity indicator is conservation of biodiversity and maintenance of cli-
mate regulation. The threshold represents the needed remaining land area based on environmental
boundaries of forest land for climate regulation and conservation targets for biodiversity, including
both forest land and other biomes. This initially suggests strong consistency between the threshold
and the objective. However, critiques of the applied boundaries may suggest a less consistent link.
Desing et al. [24] question the limited focus on forest biomes in relation to climate regulation, arguing
that vegetation in other biomes (e.g. grasslands) can have similar effects on albedo and evapo-
transpiration [24]. This issue is addressed to some extent by expanding the focus to include other
biomes. However, other biomes are only considered in the threshold based on biodiversity conser-
vation boundaries, meaning that potential boundaries for other biomes on climate regulation are not
accounted for. Critiques regarding biodiversity protection boundaries have also been identified. The
target for biodiversity protection may need to be stated more explicitly to clarify what is encompassed
by conservation of biodiversity [47]. Furthermore, Noss et al. [52] highlight that not only the protected
share of land biomes but also the connectivity of reserves, which allow for movement of organisms, is
of importance for biodiversity conservation. This aspect is not addressed by the suggested threshold,
thereby contributing to inconsistency between the object and the threshold.
It should be noted, that the carrying capacity estimate in this study, regardless of expressed in m2·yr
or Pt, solely covers occupation flows from the inventory. This is a limitation since it reduces applica-
bility as characterised results often include both occupation and transformation flows. A limitation is
followed by the methodological choice of excluding land areas, that were assumed rarely occupied
by human activities, from the carrying capacity estimate. Among excluded biomes were desert and
polar regions, however some countries are entirely belonging to such regions [22], which indicate that
the carrying capacity estimate may be underestimated. On the other hand avoiding the exclusion of
remote areas may lead to overestimated carrying capacities.
56
==PAGE:67==
The carrying capacity estimate derived in this study is derived from a narrowed perspective, since it
is solely based on boundaries and translation approaches identified in the seven studies that propose
carrying capacity estimates. Therefore, it can not be excluded that other indicators may also be
relevant for proposing carrying capacity estimates for land use. In the literature review additional
thresholds were identified, however not translated to be compliant with LCIA. Whether this is due
to less relevance for land use or due to the complexity of translating thresholds to LCIA compliant
metrics remains unknown. Additional thresholds with relevance for land use may be identified in an
expanded literature review.
6.4
Importance and complexity in addressing spatial variability
Previous sections (section 6.2 and section 6.3) addressed challenges regarding allocation and car-
rying capacity estimates. This study finds that the choice of sharing principle and carrying capacity
estimate appears to be the most important factors for the results (see Appendix E.2). This evaluation
aligns with the findings of Bjørn et al. [12], which additionally highlight the high importance of spatial
resolution.
With an increased focus on land use, this study examined how location-specific considerations could
be incorporated into the LCIA and the carrying capacity estimate to enhance the accuracy of geo-
graphical conditions (see chapter 5). In the context of the impact assessment, it was highlighted that
global characterisation factors were connected to country-specific inventory processes in Ecoinvent.
To increase the degree of spatial differentiation, country-specific characterisation factors were man-
ually applied to flows related to forest occupation. In practise, this approach is highly impractical, as
it requires detailed insights regarding the inventory’s contribution to specific elementary flows with
relevance on a regional level. Within the building sector, product-specific data are more commonly
utilised. However, the material origin is not always specified in the EPDs complicating this approach.
This limitation also arises in the effort to derive a carrying capacity estimate matching the location of
inventory flows. In this context, the availability of data regarding the potential natural land area for
Norway was an additional limiting factor, leading to an alternative approach using the global poten-
tial natural land area. Although this approach may leads to increased uncertainties, it nevertheless
attempts to account for spatial variation specific to the case. The regionalisation is important as it
potentially enables identification of regional occurrences that might be overlooked by a global as-
sessment approach [12]. Subdividing a complex system into various parts, and thereby assessing
environmental sustainability at lower scales, may be an approach to enable increased emphasis on
regional assessments. However, Matuštík et al. [47] emphasise that with global supply and produc-
57
==PAGE:68==
tion chains, it would be impractical to apply various carrying capacity estimates to different parts of a
product system. Within the field, consensus and a systematic approach to address spatial variation
in LCA-based AESA is currently lacking [12]. This underscores the need to continue to investigate
the possibility of addressing land use boundaries at a lower spatial scale in AESA.
In the context of integration of country-specific characterisation factors, negative factors were ob-
served for forestry in Norway. The characterisation factors for SQI were calculated as the difference
between a reference ecosystem quality and the ecosystem quality for the specific land use type [22].
In LANCA v2.5, the reference ecosystem quality was estimated as an area-weighted average of all
potential natural vegetation in the specific country. This approach is an update from earlier, where the
reference ecosystem quality was equal to the quality of the potential natural vegetation of the biome
with the largest area in the specific country [22]. Regardless of the updated approach, outliers among
the characterisation factors still occur. Consequently, this might lead to an underestimation in the
location-specific characterised impact and the carrying capacity estimate.
The current recommended index for land use is based on soil quality [49]. The EF method uses
an aggregated index for soil quality based on four different soil properties, which complicates the
inclusion of spatial aspects, as different biomes are associated with varying levels of soil properties.
Additionally, land use is a broad impact category covering various environmental indicators [47], which
becomes evident from the identified carrying capacities, since these are based on various objectives
relevant for land use. This complicates the linkage between carrying capacities and the single index
score based on soil properties in LCA.
6.5
Perspective to the Danish building sector
Since the AESA conducted in this study was evaluated with an increased focus on the land use impact
category, a reflection is drawn on the current use of land. Rockström et al. [59] state that 45-50% of
the global land cover can currently be categorised as dominantly natural. Within the Danish building
sector, a Reduction Roadmap was presented in 2022, showing CO2-emission reduction paths for new
buildings in Denmark, based on targets of the Paris Agreement [46]. A share of the global emission
budged was allocated to Danish buildings, applying equal per capita and emission grandfathering for
the allocation to national and sectorial level, respectively [46].
Recently, the Reduction Roadmap was extended to include restoration targets for protected nature,
acknowledging the need to move beyond the heavy focus on CO2-emissions within the Danish building
industry. The so-called Beyond the Roadmap presents yearly global and Danish nature restoration
targets to align with the 30x30 Kumming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework [45]. In Beyond the
58
==PAGE:69==
Roadmap, it is stated that 15% of the global land cover is currently under protection, which requires
a restoration of 15% protected nature. This is in line with that presented by Rockström et al. [59]. In
Denmark, only 1.6% land cover is currently designated as protected nature [45].
Beyond the Roadmap presents a potential redistribution of current land cover in Denmark to comply
with the 30% protected nature target in 2030. In the projected land use distribution, the primary
conversion of land is agricultural, followed by the conversion of production forest to protected nature.
Land cover from the built environment and infrastructure remains close to unchained with a slight
increase in land cover. In recent years, an increased attention have been paid to the use of bio-based
building materials with the potential of decreasing climate impacts for buildings [35]. This tendency
combined with the Roadmap’s projections on conversion of Danish production forest [45] and an
already transgressed use of forest land globally, based on the planetary boundaries framework [57],
show the relevance of increased attention on land use impacts within the building sector.
Another aspect within the Danish building sector is the increased focus on land use as a major driver
of biodiversity loss. The largest impacts from urban developments happen outside the local site due to
global supply chains (e.g. material extraction and forestry) [9]. Therefore, it is essential to assess the
impact of biodiversity over the entire life cycle (i.e. on-site and specially off-site biodiversity) caused
by land use changes. In connection to the publication of the Doughnut for Urban Development [9],
a biodiversity tool was released to measure impacts on biodiversity, calculating both on-site impacts
from local land use and off-site impacts from the use of materials globally. The tool simplifies the quan-
tification compared to existing LCA methodology but is connected with uncertainties [31]. Thereby,
the tool should be seen as a first-step attempt to quantify biodiversity in the built environment [31].
59
==PAGE:70==
7
Concluding remarks
7.1
Conclusion
An absolute environmental sustainability assessment of Villa Grenaa revealed that Villa Grenaa can-
not be considered as absolute sustainable across all 16 impact categories of the EF method. For
six impact categories (photochemical ozone formation, human toxicity (non-cancer), acidification,
freshwater- and marine eutrophication and land use), transgression of the sustainability threshold
showed a dependency on the applied sharing principle. The product stage emerged as the largest
contributing stage for all impact categories. Across the five scenarios included in the sensitivity anal-
ysis, modelling of electricity proved to be the most sensitive parameter, with a doubling of impacts
for ionising radiation and freshwater eutrophication. However, the overall AESA conclusion remains
unchanged for all scenarios.
Based on findings in the literature review, it can be concluded that various approaches to address
land use from an absolute perspective exist, from which nine novel proposals on carrying capacity
estimates were identified. For land use, it can be concluded that current carrying capacities are mainly
expressed at the pressure point on the impact pathway, while the environmental consequences were
found to be expressed at the impact point. Despite the focus in the literature on defining Earth-system
boundaries for land use, another conclusion emerging from the literature review is the lack of con-
sistency and the uncertainty associated with translating thresholds into carrying capacity estimates.
Moreover, it was found that current carrying capacity estimates are derived as global averages.
Carrying capacity estimates may be improved by placing greater emphasis on a consistent link be-
tween the proposed carrying capacity and the environmental consequences arising from land use
interventions. This study presents a method to account for the location of land use interventions
caused by a system in a carrying capacity estimate, by applying country-specific characterisation fac-
tors. However, this method introduced high uncertainty and complexity, making the approach both
challenging and impractical. To the extend that geographical considerations could be incorporated in
this study, their influence was found to be minimal and it did not alter the AESA conclusion for Villa
Grenaa. Other factors, being the choice of sharing principle and carrying capacity estimate, showed
a greater influence on the results.
60
==PAGE:71==
7.2
Recommendations
This section summaries recommendations to LCA and AESA practitioners and developers, and to the
Danish building sector.
• It is recommended to place greater emphasis on the applicability of allocation principles within
LCA with a particular focus on ensuring transparency of the life cycle modules that are covered
by the allocation. This recommendation is especially relevant given the recent development of
new allocation methods and the ongoing demand for refining existing approaches or introducing
novel methods [39] [50].
• It is recommended to develop standardised guidelines for AESA practice. These guidelines
should include proposals for suitable allocation principles, emphasise key transparency require-
ments and underscore the importance of conducting sensitivity analysis, especially regarding
the choice of carrying capacity estimate. To remain relevant and aligned with ongoing advance-
ments in the field, such guidelines should be updated regularly.
• It is recommended to place greater emphasis on aligning the different stages of AESA for land
use. This includes ensuring consistency from inventory modelling to the characterisation of re-
sults, and the selection of appropriate carrying capacity estimate. If alignment between resulting
land use impacts and carrying capacity estimates remains challenging, it may be valuable to
consider if various indicators are in fact needed for a comprehensive assessment of land use.
• It is recommended to further investigate the possibilities of including transformation flows in car-
rying capacity estimates for land use to enhance consistency with impact assessments, and to
avoid normative choices and potential limitations in capturing impacts related to land transfor-
mation.
• It is recommended to develop more robust, region-specific methodologies that balance precision
with feasibility, in order to better address the spatial aspects of impacts and carrying capacity
estimates for regional impact categories, such as land use. As a starting point, it would be
valuable to apply country-specific elementary flows in LCA databases as default.
• It is recommended that the Danish building sector continue prioritising the quantification of bio-
diversity impacts given the major role of land use in driving biodiversity loss. Furthermore, it is
recommended that the Danish building sector continue investigating in a dynamic LCA approach
and discounting in characterisation to better account for the temporal distribution of impacts.
61
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
Information from JRC provided by Eldbjørg Blikra Vea. Email correspondace, April 2024.
[2]
Personal communication with Harald Desing. Email correspondence, September 2024.
[3]
Niels-Jørgen Aagaard et al. Levetider af bygningsdele ved vurdering af bæredygtighed og to-
taløkonomi. Dansk. SBI 30. SBI forlag, Nov. 2013.
[4]
European Environment Agency, F Wugt Larsen, and T Lung. Is Europe living within the limits
of our planet? – An assessment of Europe’s environmental footprints in relation to planetary
boundaries. Publications Office, 2020. DOI: doi/10.2800/890673.
[5]
Camilla Ernst Andersen et al. “Assessment of absolute environmental sustainability in the built
environment”. In: Building and Environment 171 (2020), p. 106633. ISSN: 0360-1323. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.106633. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0360132319308467.
[6]
Camilla Ernst Andersen et al. “Turning dynamic LCA principles into practice”. In: Journal of
Physics: Conference Series 2600.15 (Nov. 2023), p. 152025. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2600/
15/152025. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2600/15/152025.
[7]
Camilla Marlene Ernst Andersen et al. Klimapåvirkning fra: 45 Træbyggerier. Dansk. 1st ed.
BUILD Rapport 10. This publication is covered by the Danish Copyright Act. Institut for Byggeri,
By og Miljø (BUILD), Aalborg Universitet, May 2023.
[8]
Rådet for Bæredygtigt Byggeri. DGNB Renovering og Nybyggeri. https://rfbb.dk/certificeringstype/
nye-bygninger-og-omfattende-renoveringer. Accessed: 2025-01-24. 2025. URL: https://rfbb.dk/
certificeringstype/nye-bygninger-og-omfattende-renoveringer.
[9]
Harpa Birgisdottir et al. The Doughnut for Urban Development: Manual, Appendix and Database.
Launch event of the Doughnut for Urban Development ; Conference date: 22-06-2023 Through
22-06-2023. The Danish Architectural Press, June 2023.
[10]
Anders Bjørn and Michael Hauschild. “Introducing carrying capacity-based normalisation in
LCA: framework and development of references at midpoint level”. In: The International Journal
of Life Cycle Assessment 20 (May 2015). DOI: 10.1007/s11367-015-0899-2.
[11]
Anders Bjørn et al. “Challenges and opportunities towards improved application of the planetary
boundary for land-system change in life cycle assessment of products”. In: Science of The Total
Environment 696 (2019), p. 133964. ISSN: 0048-9697. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.
2019.133964. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969719339348.
62
==PAGE:73==
[12]
Anders Bjørn et al. “Review of life-cycle based methods for absolute environmental sustain-
ability assessment and their applications”. In: Environmental Research Letters 15 (Aug. 2020).
DOI: 10.1088/1748-9326/ab89d7.
[13]
Social- og Boligstyrelsen. Bygningsreglementet 2015 4.1 Generelt. URL: https : / / historisk .
bygningsreglementet.dk/br10_02_id68/0/42/2 (visited on 11/26/2024).
[14]
Social- og Boligstyrelsen. Bygningsreglementets vejledning om bygningers klimapåvirknings.
URL: https://www.bygningsreglementet.dk/tekniske-bestemmelser/11/brv/version-2-bygningers-
klimapaavirkning/kap-1_1/ (visited on 10/17/2024).
[15]
Pasquale Borrelli et al. “An assessment of the global impact of 21st century land use change
on soil erosion”. In: Nature communications 8.1 (2017), pp. 1–13.
[16]
Michael Borucke et al. “Accounting for demand and supply of the biosphere’s regenerative ca-
pacity: The National Footprint Accounts’ underlying methodology and framework”. In: Ecological
Indicators 24 (2013), pp. 518–533. ISSN: 1470-160X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.
2012.08.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1470160X12002968.
[17]
Kathrine Nykjær Brejnrod et al. “The absolute environmental performance of buildings”. In:
Building and Environment 119 (2017), pp. 87–98. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.04.003.
[18]
Videncenter for Bygninger Klimapåvirkninger. Casebibliotek. URL: https://byggeriogklima.dk/
casebibliotek/?caseTypeName=Enfamiliehuse&PageSize=6&Page=1 (visited on 10/11/2024).
[19]
Stockholm Resilience Centre. Planetary boundaries. URL: https://www.stockholmresilience.org/
research/planetary-boundaries.html (visited on 10/13/2024).
[20]
Eleonora Crenna et al. “Global environmental impacts: data sources and methodological choices
for calculating normalization factors for LCA”. In: The International Journal of Life Cycle Assess-
ment 24 (2019), pp. 1851–1877.
[21]
Hy Dao, Pascal Peduzzi, and Damien Friot. “National environmental limits and footprints based
on the Planetary Boundaries framework: The case of Switzerland”. In: Global Environmental
Change 52 (2018), pp. 49–57. ISSN: 0959-3780. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.
2018.06.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959378017312153.
[22]
Valeria De Laurentiis et al. “Soil quality index: Exploring options for a comprehensive assess-
ment of land use impacts in LCA”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 215 (2019), pp. 63–74.
ISSN: 0959-6526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.12.238. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095965261833960X.
[23]
Harald Desing, Gregor Braun, and Roland Hischier. “Ecological resource availability: A method
to estimate resource budgets for a sustainable economy”. In: Global Sustainability 3 (Oct. 2020).
DOI: 10.1017/sus.2020.26.
63
==PAGE:74==
[24]
Harald Desing et al. “Powering a Sustainable and Circular Economy- An Engineering Approach
to Estimating Renewable Energy Potentials within Earth System Boundaries”. In: Energies 12
(Dec. 2019), p. 18. DOI: 10.3390/en12244723.
[25]
Eric Dinerstein, David Olson, and Anup et al. Joshi. Ecoregions 2017. https : / / ecoregions .
appspot.com/. Accessed: 2024-12-19.
[26]
EcoChain. From data to impact data: Impact Assessment in LCA (LCIA). 2024. URL: https:
//ecochain.com/blog/lcia-in-lca-explained/ (visited on 09/23/2024).
[27]
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Household spending. URL: https:
//www.oecd.org/en/data/indicators/household-spending.html?oecdcontrol-38c744bfa4-var1=
DNK&oecdcontrol-00b22b2429-var3=2019 (visited on 11/06/2024).
[28]
Maria Faragò et al. “National inventories of land occupation and transformation flows in the world
for land use impact assessment”. English. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment
24.8 (2019), pp. 1333–1347. ISSN: 0948-3349. DOI: 10.1007/s11367-018-01581-8.
[29]
Simone Fazio et al. Supporting information to the characterisation factors of recommended EF
Life Cycle Impact Assessment methods. EUR 29600 EN JRC114822. Luxembourg: Publica-
tions Office of the European Union, 2018. ISBN: 978-92-79-98584-3. DOI: 10.2760/002447.
[30]
N Francart et al. “Building within planetary boundaries: setting and assessing absolute sustain-
ability targets at the building level”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Vol. 2600. 15.
IOP Publishing. 2023, p. 152015.
[31]
Nicolas Francart et al. “The Doughnut Biotool: A tool to assess life-cycle biodiversity impacts
from building projects”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science 1402.1
(Oct. 2024), p. 012049. DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/1402/1/012049. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/1755-1315/1402/1/012049.
[32]
Peder Gabrielsen and Peter Bosch. “Environmental indicators: typology and use in reporting”.
In: EEA, Copenhagen (2003), pp. 1–20.
[33]
C.H. Gebara and A. Laurent. “National SDG-7 performance assessment to support achieving
sustainable energy for all within planetary limits”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Re-
views 173 (Mar. 2023), p. 112934. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2022.112934.
[34]
World Bank Group. DataBank - World Development Indicators. URL: https://databank.worldbank.
org/source/world-development-indicators (visited on 11/06/2024).
[35]
Rasmus Nøddegaard Hansen et al. “Reducing the land-use impact of wooden buildings with
fast-growing biobased materials: A Danish case study”. In: Resources, Conservation and Re-
cycling 212 (2025), p. 107926. ISSN: 0921-3449. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2024.
107926. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921344924005196.
64
==PAGE:75==
[36]
Kim Haugbølle et al. BUILD levetidstabel: Version 2021. Dansk. 2nd ed. BUILD Rapport 32.
Institut for Byggeri, By og Miljø (BUILD), Aalborg Universitet, Dec. 2021.
[37]
Michael Z. Hauschild, Ralph K. Rosenbaum, and Stig Irving Olsen. Life Cycle Assessment -
Theory and Practice. Springer, 2018. ISBN: 978-3-319-56474-6. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 319-
56475-3.
[38]
Mia Heide, Katarzyna Maria Dudka, and Michael Z. Hauschild. “Absolute sustainable CO2-
limits for buildings should reflect their function. A case study of four building typologies”. In:
Developments in the Built Environment 15 (2023), p. 100175. ISSN: 2666-1659. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.dibe.2023.100175. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2666165923000571.
[39]
Mia Heide, Michael Hauschild, and Morten Ryberg. “Reflecting the importance of human needs
fulfilment in absolute sustainability assessments: Development of a sharing principle”. In: Jour-
nal of Industrial Ecology 27 (May 2023). DOI: 10.1111/jiec.13405.
[40]
Marina Hirota et al. “Global resilience of tropical forest and savanna to critical transitions”. In:
Science 334.6053 (2011), pp. 232–235.
[41]
IPCC. Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/
wg3/. Accessed: 2024-12-28. 2022. URL: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/ (visited on
12/28/2024).
[42]
Yoann Jovet et al. “Assessing the Potential for Electrification of the Food Industry and Its Impli-
cations for Environmental Sustainability”. In: Energies 17 (2024). DOI: 10.3390/en17112602.
[43]
Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet Klima-. Klimastatus og -fremskrivning 2024. URL: https://
www.kefm.dk/klima/klimastatus-og-fremskrivning/klimastatus-og-fremskrivning-2024 (visited on
10/12/2024).
[44]
Doughnut Economics Action Lab. About Doughnut Economics. Accessed: 2024-12-23. URL:
https://doughnuteconomics.org/about-doughnut-economics.
[45]
Sinus Lynge, Mikkel Schlesinger, and Steffen Maagaard. Beyond the Roadmap. URL: https:
//reductionroadmap.dk/beyond-the-roadmap (visited on 01/07/2025).
[46]
Sinus Lynge, Mikkel Schlesinger, and Steffen Maagaard. Reduction Roadmap 1.0. URL: https:
//reductionroadmap.dk/non-profit-association (visited on 01/07/2025).
[47]
Jan Matuštík, Aleš Paulu, and Vladimír Kočí. “Is normalization in Life Cycle Assessment sus-
tainable? Alternative approach based on natural constraints”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production
444 (2024), p. 141234. ISSN: 0959-6526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2024.141234.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652624006814.
65
==PAGE:76==
[48]
Kate Meyer and Peter Newman. “The Planetary Accounting Framework: a novel, quota-based
approach to understanding the impacts of any scale of human activity in the context of the
Planetary Boundaries”. In: Sustainable Earth 1 (Oct. 2018). DOI: 10.1186/s42055-018-0004-3.
[49]
Llorenç Milà i Canals et al. “Key Elements in a Framework for Land Use Impact Assessment
Within LCA (11 pp)”. In: The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 12 (Jan. 2007).
DOI: 10.1065/lca2006.05.250.
[50]
Joel Millward-Hopkins et al. “Providing decent living with minimum energy: A global scenario”.
In: Global Environmental Change 65 (2020), p. 102168. ISSN: 0959-3780. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102168. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0959378020307512.
[51]
Plan- og Byggeafdelingen Nordjurs Kommune. Lokalplan 009-707. Boligområde ved Ramskovvej
i Grenaa. Teknik og Miljø, 2008.
[52]
Reed Noss et al. “Bolder Thinking for Conservation”. In: Conservation biology: the journal of
the Society for Conservation Biology 26 (Feb. 2012), pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-1739.2011.
01738.x.
[53]
Björn Nykvist et al. National environmental performance on planetary boundaries: a study for
the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency. Jan. 2013.
[54]
Daniel O’Neill et al. “A good life for all within planetary boundaries”. In: Nature Sustainability 1
(Feb. 2018). DOI: 10.1038/s41893-018-0021-4.
[55]
Rådet for Bæredygtigt Byggeri. DGNB Villa Pilotmanual 2022 v2. https://rfbb.dk/publikation/
dgnb-villa-pilotmanual-2022-v2. Accessed: 2024-12-28. 2022. URL: https://rfbb.dk/publikation/
dgnb-villa-pilotmanual-2022-v2.
[56]
Navin Ramankutty and Jonathan A. Foley. “Estimating historical changes in global land cover:
Croplands from 1700 to 1992”. In: Global Biogeochemical Cycles 13.4 (1999), pp. 997–1027.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1029/1999GB900046. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1029/1999GB900046. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1020/
1999GB900046.
[57]
Katherine Richardson et al. “Earth beyond six of nine planetary boundaries”. In: Science Ad-
vances 9.37 (2023), eadh2458. DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adh2458. eprint: https://www.science.org/
doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.adh2458. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.adh2458.
[58]
Johan Rockström et al. “A safe operating space for humanity”. In: Nature, v.461, 472-475 (2009)
46 (Jan. 2013).
[59]
Johan Rockström et al. “Safe and just Earth system boundaries”. In: Nature 619 (May 2023),
pp. 102–111. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06083-8.
66
==PAGE:77==
[60]
Ralph K. Rosenbaum et al. “Life Cycle Impact Assessment”. English. In: Life Cycle Assessment:
Theory and practice. Springer, 2018, pp. 167–270. ISBN: 9783319564753. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-319-56475-3_10.
[61]
Morten W. Ryberg et al. “Development of a life-cycle impact assessment methodology linked
to the Planetary Boundaries framework”. English. In: Ecological Indicators 88 (2018), pp. 250–
262. ISSN: 1470-160X. DOI: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.12.065.
[62]
Morten W. Ryberg et al. “How to bring absolute sustainability into decision-making: An industry
case study using a Planetary Boundary-based methodology”. In: Science of The Total Environ-
ment 634 (2018), pp. 1406–1416. ISSN: 0048-9697. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.
2018.04.075. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969718312397.
[63]
Rosie Saad, Thomas Koellner, and Manuele Margni. “Land use impacts on freshwater regu-
lation, erosion regulation, and water purification: a spatial approach for a global scale level”.
In: The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 18 (2013), pp. 1253–1264. URL: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:110669991.
[64]
Serenella Sala et al. “Environmental sustainability of European production and consumption
assessed against planetary boundaries”. In: Journal of Environmental Management 269 (2020),
p. 110686. ISSN: 0301-4797. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110686. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301479720306186.
[65]
Edith Smeets, Rob Weterings, et al. “Environmental indicators: Typology and overview”. In:
(1999).
[66]
PK Snyder, C Delire, and JA Foley. “Evaluating the influence of different vegetation biomes on
the global climate”. In: Climate Dynamics 23 (2004), pp. 279–302.
[67]
Dansk Standard. “DS/EN 15978:2012 Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og anlæg – Vurdering
af bygningers miljømæssige kvalitet – Beregningsmetode”. In: (2012).
[68]
International Standard. “ISO 14040:2006 Environmental management — Life cycle assessment
— Principles and framework, Edition 2”. In: (2006).
[69]
International Standard. “ISO 14044:2006 Environmental management — Life cycle assessment
— Requirements and guidelines, Edition 1”. In: (2006).
[70]
Danmarks Statisik. Statistikbanken. URL: https://statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/default.asp?w=
1920 (visited on 11/06/2024).
[71]
Will Steffen et al. “Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet”.
In: Science 347.6223 (2015), p. 1259855. DOI: 10.1126/science.1259855. eprint: https://www.
science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1259855. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/
science.1259855.
67
==PAGE:78==
[72]
Joachim Peter Tilsted and Anders Bjørn. “Green frontrunner or indebted culprit? Assessing
Denmark’s climate targets in light of fair contributions under the Paris Agreement”. In: Climatic
Change 176.8 (2023). DOI: 10.1007/s10584-023-03583-4.
[73]
Marcial Vargas-Gonzalez et al. “Operational Life Cycle Impact Assessment weighting factors
based on Planetary Boundaries: Applied to cosmetic products”. In: Ecological Indicators 107
(2019), p. 105498. ISSN: 1470-160X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2019.105498. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1470160X19304832.
[74]
Eldbjørg Blikra Vea et al. “Framework to define environmental sustainability boundaries and a
review of current approaches”. In: Environmental Research Letters 15.10 (Sept. 2020), p. 103003.
DOI: 10.1088/1748-9326/abac77.
[75]
Robine Verhaeghe et al. “Carrying capacity-based benchmarks for Belgian residential build-
ings”. In: Journal of Environmental Management 370 (2024), p. 122914. ISSN: 0301-4797. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2024.122914. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0301479724029001.
[76]
F.G.A. Verheijen et al. “Tolerable versus actual soil erosion rates in Europe”. In: Earth-Science
Reviews 94.1 (2009), pp. 23–38. ISSN: 0012-8252. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.
2009.02.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001282520900035X.
[77]
Kirana Wolf. JRC Reference Reports: The International Reference Life Cycle Data System
(ILCD) Handbook. Feb. 2012. ISBN: 9789279216404.
[78]
Anastasia Wolff, Natacha Gondran, and Christian Brodhag. “Detecting unsustainable pressures
exerted on biodiversity by a company. Application to the food portfolio of a retailer”. In: Journal of
Cleaner Production 166 (2017), pp. 784–797. ISSN: 0959-6526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2017.08.057. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652617317730.
[79]
Rune K. Zimmermann et al. Klimapåvirkning fra 60 bygninger: Muligheder for udformning af
referenceværdier til LCA for bygninger. Vol. 2020:04. Forskning i det byggede miljø, SBi. Kgs.
Lyngby: Polyteknisk Boghandel og Forlag, 2020, p. 96.
68
==PAGE:79==
A
Planetary boundary framework
The planetary boundary (PB) framework was first presented in 2009 by the Stockholm Resilience
Centre led by Johan Rockström. The incentive to define planetary boundaries emerges from the
recognition that human actions have become a main driver of global environmental changes. This
follows the concern that pressure, caused by human activities, pushes the Earth-system to a state less
conductive for humans to thrive [58]. Therefore, nine Earth-system processes deemed to potentially
cause unacceptable environmental change if the associated threshold is crossed, are identified in
the planetary boundary framework. The following nine processes were identified: climate change,
ocean acidification, stratospheric ozone depletion, biochemical flows, global freshwater use, change
in land use, biodiversity loss, atmospheric aerosol loading and chemical pollution. For the latter two,
thresholds were yet to be quantified. In the planetary boundary framework, thresholds are defined
to protect the relatively stable environment experienced during the Holocene, in which humans were
found to thrive. Planetary boundaries are placed at a ’safe’ distance to the identified threshold, defining
the limits for human pressure on the nine processes to maintain a stable and resilient environment.
The first presentation of the planetary boundary framework in 2009 concludes that three out of seven
quantified boundaries are surpassed [58].
In 2015, Steffen et al. [71] revised and updated the planetary boundary framework of 2009. Sub-global
aspects of selected boundaries were addressed, hereby accommodating that changes in control vari-
ables at sub-global level may influence global dynamics. Additionally, two core boundaries were
identified, namely climate change and biosphere integrity. The core boundaries are predicted on their
own to have the potential to drive the Earth-system into a new state [71]. Latest, in 2023 Richardson
et al. [57] further revised and updated the planetary boundary framework, reaching to the conclusion
that six out of nine planetary boundaries are transgressed. Additionally, global boundaries for the
previously not quantified processes: novel entities and atmospheric aerosol loading were proposed.
In Figure A.1 below, the status of the nine processes in year 2009, 2015 and 2023 is illustrated.
69
==PAGE:80==
Figure
A.1:
Planetary
boundary
updates
in
2009,
2015
and
2023.
Illustration
from:
https://www.stockholmresilience.org/ [19].
Land-system change and biosphere integrity
For land-system change, the control variable presented in 2009 [58] was based on global ice-free
land cover converted to cropland. In the 2015 update by Steffen et al. [71], percentage of forested
land area was proposed as control variable for land-system change. The boundary was deemed
surpassed in 2015 and continuously evaluated as transgressed in 2023 [57]. Additionally, land use
is addressed through the rate of biodiversity loss, referred to as biosphere integrity from the 2015 PB
update and onwards. In 2009, biodiversity integrity is addressed by a rate of extinction of species
per year. It is stated that changes in land use exert the most significant effect to this control variable
[58]. In 2015, it is proposed to include the biodiversity intactness index (BII) as a control variable of
biosphere integrity. Human impacts, such as land use, are addressed through the BII [71]. Latest
in 2023, human appropriation of the biospheres net primary production (HANPP) was proposed as a
proxy for functional biosphere integrity [57].
70
==PAGE:81==
B
LCA and AESA
B.1
Elaboration of dynamic electricity modelling
Several assumptions were necessary for the modelling of a dynamic electricity inventory. It should
be noted that potential future efficiency of technologies is not accounted for in the dynamic modelling.
Presumptions of future electricity consumption in Denmark follow data presented by Heide et al. [38]
based on sources by the Danish Energy Agency. Imports from Germany, Norway, Sweden and The
Netherlands are assumed, hence future electricity processes for these countries are also modelled
for the inventory based on predicted shares for each country, as presented by Heide et al. [38]. The
main assumptions, in relation to modelling of future electricity processes, are listed below.
• Year 2020, 2030 and 2050 were selected as reference years for the dynamic modelling. This
means that between 2019 and 2030, a static electricity modelled based on 2020 data is as-
sumed. For 2030 to 2050 a static electricity modelled based on 2030 data is assumed. For
2050 to 2069, or 2050 to 2119 for the 100 years of building service life scenario, the Danish
electricity consumption is modelled based on predictions for 2050.
• Electricity for building operation of Villa Grenaa is assumed at low voltage. The Danish electricity
consumption processes for the three reference years are modelled at high voltage. Therefore,
additional processes for transformation of electricity from high to low voltage are modelled.
• The existing Ecoinvent process for Danish electricity, ”Market for Electricity, high voltage DK”,
was used and modified to fit shares according to the 2020, 2030 and 2050 electricity mix pre-
dictions.
• Various processes are available in the Ecoinvent database for electricity production from one
source (e.g. 1 MW or 3 MW wind turbine). For the projected scenarios, the share of e.g.
electricity from wind is distributed between the various wind production processes following the
distribution of the existing Ecoinvent process for Danish electricity.
• Electricity production from solar energy and waste is available at low and medium voltage, re-
spectively. For the projected scenarios, these are used as inputs for high voltage for simpli-
fication. This is accounted for in the transformation from high to medium and medium to low
voltage, preventing double-counting in the transformation of the share of electricity produced at
low or medium voltage.
71
==PAGE:82==
• For the 2050 scenario, data from Heide et al. [38] suggest a net export of Danish electricity
production. Therefore, no import was assumed in the 2050 scenario.
72
==PAGE:83==
B.2
Sharing principles and allocated shares
The allocated shares of the four sharing principles can be calculated using the following equations:
SP1
=
1
popworld
· FCEHH
FCEpers
· FCEdwe
FCEHH
· Ni
(B.1)
SP2
=
1
popworld
· DLEdwe
DLEtotal
· Ni
(B.2)
SP3
=
popcountry
GDPcountry
∑193
country=1( popcountry
GDPcountry · popcountry)
· FCEHH
FCEpers
· FCEdwe
FCEHH
· Ni
(B.3)
SP4
=
popcountry
GDPcountry
∑193
country=1( popcountry
GDPcountry · popcountry)
· DLEdwe
DLEtotal
· Ni
(B.4)
popworld is the world population size in 2019. FCEHH is the final consumption expenditure for a
household, FCEpers is the final consumption expenditure for a person and FCEdwe is the final con-
sumption expenditure for a dwelling. DLEdwe is the decent living energy for a dwelling, and DLEtotal
is the total decent living energy. popcountry is the population of a specific country, and GDPcountry is
the gross domestic product for the country. Ni indicates the number of residents in the dwelling.
The equations below present the eight allocated shares to Villa Grenaa for the four sharing principles
applied in this study. See Appendix E.2 for detailed calculations.
For N = 3:
SP1
=
1
7.742.724.795 · 0.47 · 0.27 · 3 = 4.90 · 10−11
(B.5)
SP2
=
1
7.742.724.795 · 0.19 · 3 = 7.28 · 10−11
(B.6)
SP3
= 1.66 · 10−11 · 0.47 · 0.27 · 3 = 6.32 · 10−12
(B.7)
SP4
= 1.66 · 10−11 · 0.19 · 3 = 9.39 · 10−12
(B.8)
For N = 2.3:
SP1
=
1
7.742.724.795 · 0.47 · 0.27 · 2.3 = 3.76 · 10−11
(B.9)
SP2
=
1
7.742.724.795 · 0.19 · 2.3 = 5.58 · 10−11
(B.10)
SP3
= 1.66 · 10−11 · 0.47 · 0.27 · 2.3 = 4.85 · 10−12
(B.11)
SP4
= 1.66 · 10−11 · 0.19 · 2.3 = 7.20 · 10−12
(B.12)
73
==PAGE:84==
B.3
Qualitative evaluation of uncertain parameters
Table B.1 lists a qualitative assessment of relevant parameters that potentially influence the LCIA
results [5]. It should be noted that even though a parameter is stated as certain, it does not mean
that this parameter reflects the actual case with 100% certainty, but rather that such parameter is
considered more certain relative to other parameters in this LCA.
Table B.1: Qualitative evaluation of uncertainty of selected parameters.
Parameter
Assessment
Evaluation
Building area
The actual area of Villa Grenaa is know [18]. Thus, this
parameter is not considered uncertain.
Certain
Amounts of building materials
A complete list of materials and quantities for Villa
Grenaa is available [18]. This data is considered as rel-
atively certain, as it is provided by the first tier suppliers.
Certain
Energy consumption use phase
The energy consumption for Villa Grenaa is available
[18]. This data is considered as relatively certain, as it
is provided by the first tier suppliers.
Certain
Electricity mix
The electricity mix was modelled based on multiple as-
sumptions including predictions on future electricity im-
port patterns, future electricity mix of DK and import
countries as well as electricity generation technologies.
Therefore, this parameter is evaluated as uncertain.
Uncertain
Choice of processes
Processes from the Ecoinvent database were used. In
some cases existing processes were modified to reflect
the case better. Across the inventory, the representa-
tiveness of the chosen processes vary according to lack
of more suitable processes and data availability. For
materials with an EPD, processes were modelled ac-
cording to data provided in the EPD. This parameter is
considered uncertain.
Uncertain
Building lifetime
According to the Danish Building Regulation, the life-
time is assumed to be 50 years [14]. This is only con-
sidered as a lifetime for the calculation, to which the
actual lifetime might differ [14]. A lifetime of up to 100
years can be considered as normal [13]. Therefore, this
parameter is considered uncertain.
Uncertain
74
==PAGE:85==
Lifetime of building materials
The lifetime of building materials were generally as-
sumed based on estimates provided by BUILD [36].
Even though the actual lifetime remains unknown, this
parameter is evaluated as certain, since lifetime data
provided by BUILD is considered most representative.
Certain
End of Life scenarios
For materials with an EPD, EoL scenarios are assumed
based on data provided herein. For the remaining mate-
rials, assumptions on EoL scenarios are based on com-
mon practice in Denmark or Europe for the specific ma-
terial, which is considered uncertain.
Uncertain
75
==PAGE:86==
B.4
Comparison of results from LCAbyg
Table B.2: Comparison of total annual characterised impacts of Villa Grenna using the CML method
in LCAbyg [18] and the results obtained in this study using the EF 3.0 methods in Simapro.
Impact category
Unit
CML in LCAbyg
EF 3.0 in SimaPro
Climate change
kg CO2-eq/yr
1.32E+03
1.43E+03
Ozone depletion
kg CFC11-eq/yr
2.47E-05
1.94E-04
Resource use, minerals
kg Sb-eq/yr
2.73E-02
3.69E-02
Resource use, fossil
MJ/yr
1.48E+04
1.68E+04
76
==PAGE:87==
B.5
Normalised sensitivity coefficient
Table B.3: Normalised sensitivity coefficient for sensitivity Scenario 3 regarding the building lifetime.
Impact category
Normalised sensitivity coefficient
Climate change
0.11
Ozone depletion
0.027
Ionising radiation
0.13
Photochemical ozone formation
0.11
Particulate matter
0.14
Human toxicity, non-cancer
0.065
Human toxicity, cancer
0.051
Acidification
0.092
Eutrophication, freshwater
0.15
Eutrophication, marine
0.12
Eutrophication, terrestrial
0.12
Ecotoxicity, freshwater
0.094
Land use
0.17
Water use
0.036
Resource use, fossils
0.048
Resource use, minerals and metals
0.029
77
==PAGE:88==
C
Literature review
C.1
Details on literature search
Relevant literature to the literature review was identified by the following steps:
1) Examining existing literature reviews on AESA methods (Bjørn et al. 2020, Clausen et al. 2024,
Paulillo et al. 2024), environmental boundaries (Vea et al. 2020), and studies publishing carrying
capacity estimates already known to the authors (Bjørn et al. 2015, Vargas-Gonzalez et al. 2019,
Sala et al. 2020, Gebara et al. 2023).
2) Screening the reference lists of the studies identified in 1) and the later studies citing them for
additional relevant studies.
3) Examining recent studies and their references with estimates of carrying capacity basis (i.e. envi-
ronmental boundaries) that has yet not been translated to carrying capacities for LCA-based AESA.
78
==PAGE:89==
C.2
Comparison of characterisation factors for ecoregions
The European broadleaf and mixed forest ecoregion covers Denmark, Germany, The Netherlands,
Belgium and France. The characterisation factors from SQI [22] are provided in Table C.1 for forest
occupation as an example of land cover.
Table C.1: Country-specific characterisation factors from SQI [22] for forest cover.
Occupation flow
DK
DE
NE
BE
FR
forest
52
52
52
52
51
forest, natural
42
41
42
42
41
forest, primary
42
41
42
42
41
forest, secondary
42
42
42
42
41
forest, used
56
59
56
79
78
forest, extensive
48
48
48
48
47
forest, intensive
56
59
56
79
78
The Central European mixed forests ecoregion covers Poland, Ukraine, Belarus, Germany, Romenia,
Russia, Lithauania, Czech republic, Moldova and Austria. The characterisation factors from SQI [22]
are provided in Table C.2 for forest occupation as an example of land cover.
Table C.2: Country-specific characterisation factors from SQI [22] for forest cover.
Occupation flow
PO
UA
BY
DE
RO
RU
LT
CZ
MD
AT
forest
52
28
52
52
44
10
52
51
40
50
forest, natural
42
18
42
41
34
0
42
41
30
40
forest, primary
42
18
42
41
34
0
42
41
30
40
forest, secondary
42
18
42
42
34
0
42
41
30
40
forest, used
59
32
59
59
51
17
59
78
47
78
forest, extensive
48
24
48
48
40
6
48
48
37
47
forest, intensive
59
32
59
59
51
17
59
78
47
78
79
==PAGE:90==
D
Characterisation factors for land occupation
Table D.1: Land use occupation flows for Villa Grenaa and applied SQI global and country-specific
characterisation factors provided by De Laurentiss et al. [22].
Occupation flow
SQI CF, global
SQI CF, Norway
Occupation, annual crop
50
-
Occupation, annual crop, irrigated
50
-
Occupation, annual crop, irrigated, intensive
51
-
Occupation, annual crop, non-irrigated
50
-
Occupation, annual crop, non-irrigated, extensive
46
-
Occupation, annual crop, non-irrigated, intensive
51
-
Occupation, construction site
111
-
Occupation, dump site
105
-
Occupation, forest, extensive
18
-12
Occupation, forest, extensive, DK
48a
-
Occupation, forest, intensive
34
18
Occupation, grassland, natural (non-use)
36
-
Occupation, grassland, natural, for livestock grazing
55
-
Occupation, industrial area
139
-
Occupation, inland waterbody, unspecified
-17
-
Occupation, mineral extraction site
111
-
Occupation, pasture, man made
55
-
Occupation, pasture, man made, extensive
39
-
Occupation, pasture, man made, intensive
58
-
Occupation, permanent crop
50
-
Occupation, permanent crop, irrigated
50
-
Occupation, permanent crop, irrigated, intensive
50
-
Occupation, permanent crop, non-irrigated
50
-
Occupation, seabed, drilling and mining
0
-
Occupation, seabed, infrastructure
0
-
Occupation, shrub land, sclerophyllous
18
-
Occupation, traffic area, rail network
139
-
Occupation, traffic area, rail/road embankment
122
158
Occupation, traffic area, road network
162
-
80
==PAGE:91==
Occupation, unspecified
69
-
Occupation, unspecified, natural (non-use)
185
-
Occupation, urban, discontinuously built
116
-
Occupation, urban/industrial fallow (non-use)
139
-
Occupation, water bodies, artificial
0
-
a) Country-specific CF for Denmark.
81
==PAGE:92==
E
Supplementary material in Excel
E.1
Inventory modelling
E.2
Results of LCA, AESA and land use in AESA
E.3
Literature review scheme
82
==PAGE:93==
83
==PAGE:94==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
