==PAGE:1==
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On
Context Preservation For Reading Applica­
tions With Adaptive User Interfaces
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading
Applications With Adaptive User Interfaces
Master Thesis
January, 2025
By
Helena Eschricht Jensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was prepared over six months at the Cognitive Systems (CogSys) section at
DTU Compute at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment of the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Helena Eschricht Jensen ­ s194571
Signature
January 30, 2025
Date
ii
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Reading has evolved little since the invention of the printing press, and interfaces for
reading materials are still predominantly static. This makes it challenging to adapt reading
to specific user needs, such as those of people with visual impairments. In recent years,
advancements in digital reading technology have allowed users to adjust their reading
interfaces by, e.g., changing the font size, line spacing, font type, etc.; however, these
changes still have to be manually applied by the user. This is a problem because the
optimal settings for a reading interface may not be known a priori, and they may further
change depending on the user’s situation and state of mind.
Reading the Reader is a research project at the Technical University of Denmark in col­
laboration with the Royal Danish Academy of Architecture, Design, and Conservation. Its
goal is to create a reading application with an adaptive user interface that can automati­
cally assess the effect of typography settings and apply changes to the interface to provide
an optimal reading experience in real time. This thesis aims to contribute to the Read­
ing the Reader project by introducing context preservation that enables users to resume
reading faster after typography changes have been applied. Typography changes are
applied through so­called interventions, and there are currently four intervention designs
in the reading application: Popup, Undo, Notification, and Gradual.
A design of the context­preserving functionality is proposed through a systematic review of
the state­of­the­art highlight techniques for visual searches and an analysis of the reading
application in which the context­preserving functionality is to be implemented. The design
for the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification is similar, and it focuses on exploring
how much context the user needs to resume reading fast. The design for the Gradual in­
tervention is slightly different, as the amount of context is decided by the intervention’s de­
sign. The context­preserving functionality is then evaluated through a carefully designed
within­subjects experiment with 22 participants to estimate its effect on the user’s ability
to resume reading. Furthermore, comparisons between the interventions are performed
to estimate an optimal intervention design when context preservation is introduced. The
experiment results showed that the context­preserving functionality only had a significant
impact on the Gradual intervention, where both the time it takes users to resume reading
after an intervention is introduced and their own evaluation of the difficulty of resuming
reading decreased significantly. Furthermore, qualitative user feedback also detected a
general user preference towards the Gradual intervention. The fact that no significant
effect of context preservation was detected for the remaining interventions is surprising,
and a limitation on the sample size is also acknowledged as contributing to this.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Reading the Reader Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Related Work
7
2.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Context­Preserving Functionality ­ Design
19
3.1
Autobiographical Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Design Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Appearance of the Context­Preserving Functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4
How Much Context is Enough? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.5
Where Do We Learn the Most? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.6
Final Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
Context­Preserving Functionality ­ Implementation
37
4.1
Overview of the Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2
Clean Up and Refactoring of Existing Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.3
Transforming Data from the Eye Tracker to Screen Coordinates . . . . . . . 41
4.4
Determining Which Text to Highlight
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5
Experiment Design
49
5.1
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.3
Physical Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.4
Recruitment of Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.5
Experiment Road Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.6
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6
Analysis of Results
57
6.1
Demographics of Test Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.2
Reading Comprehension Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.3
Determining Intervention Times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.4
Determining Statistical Significance of Intervention Times
. . . . . . . . . . 66
6.5
User Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
7
Discussion
85
7.1
On the Design and Implementation of the Context­Preserving Functionality
85
7.2
On the Effect of Context Preservation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
7.3
On the Optimal Intervention Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
7.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
iv
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:7==
8
Conclusion
93
Bibliography
97
A Mock­ups
101
A.1 Blinking Text ­ Version 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
A.2 Blinking Text ­ Version 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
B Recruitment
102
C Subject Information Letter
103
D Reading Comprehension Tests
106
D.1 Blockhead Hans
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
D.2 Four Sisters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
D.3 Odin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
D.4 The Little Match Girl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
D.5 The Subtle Knife . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
E
Questionnaires
113
E.1 Compulsory question ­ Gradual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
E.2 Compulsory questions ­ Popup, Undo, and Notification . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
F
Git Repository
114
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Reading has evolved little since the invention of the printing press1. Whether analog or
digital, the interface of reading materials is still predominantly static today2, which makes
it difficult to adapt it to specific user needs, particularly those who are visually impaired.
For example, people with central vision loss often face difficulties when reading; many
usually have to move their heads from side to side or backward and forward, and if the
text is displayed on a digital reader, many also often adjust the brightness or the con­
trast of the screen or change the font size if possible. The many adjustments required to
make reading more comfortable for people with central vision loss may make following an
educational program more difficult and lead to social problems.
Through recent years, new digital solutions such as ebook readers (the Amazon Kindle3,
as an example) have emerged, offering users new ways of reading and allowing them
to adapt the layout of their books in a multitude of ways, for instance by changing the
font type, background color, font size, line spacing etc. This is a step towards making
reading more accessible; however, changes to the layout of an ebook reader, such as a
Kindle, must be made manually by the user. This task can be time­consuming, as the
optimal layout setting may not be known a priori. Furthermore, the optimal setting may
also change depending on the user’s situation and state of mind.
Imagine instead that your reading material is aware that you are looking at it, and it has
the ability to adapt as you read it. Imagine further that the text could learn your reading
style and actively support this while you were reading. Reading the Reader is an ongo­
ing research project at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in collaboration with
the Royal Danish Academy of Architecture, Design, and Conservation, whose goal is to
address the problem of making reading more accessible, particularly to visually impaired
people. Their wish is to leverage the newest technological advancements to create a read­
ing application with an adaptive user interface based on a machine learning model that
can decode a user’s reading pattern and simultaneously optimize the visual presentation
of the reading material toward the user’s reading pattern, thereby providing the optimal
reading experience. The optimization is done by, e.g., updating the letter spacing, font
size, or the like.
This thesis aims to contribute to the Reading the Reader project by introducing context
preservation with the goal of enabling users to resume reading faster after the aforemen­
tioned model has applied changes to the visual representation of a text. This thesis builds
on top of previous work on the reading application, and the application and its current state
will be introduced further in the following section. Section 1.2 then presents the motiva­
tion behind this thesis in more detail based on the current state of the reading application.
Finally, section 1.4 presents the overall structure of the thesis.
1.1
The Reading the Reader Application
The reading application is a modification of the open source epub reader Flow4, which is a
browser­based e­reader built using the React library. The reading application consists of
1Source: https://people.compute.dtu.dk/pgba/research/reading-the-reader/. Last accessed: 21­01­2025.
2Source:
https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/news/artificial-intelligence-will-help-to-improve-reading-
opportunities-for-millions-of-people/. Last accessed: 22­01­2025.
3Source: https://www.amazon.com/b?ie=UTF8&node=11516960011. Last accessed: 22­01­2025.
4Source: https://madewithreactjs.com/flow. Last accessed: 22­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
1
==PAGE:10==
two main screens: a library of the books available in the application (see figure 1.1a) and
a screen displaying the contents of a given book (see figure 1.1b). Clicking on a book in
the library automatically navigates the user to the book screen, where the selected book’s
content is displayed. In the library, it is possible to upload, delete, and search for books.
However, all books must be uploaded in epub format.
The book screen consists of a title bar and a single book page, displaying the text of
the current page the user reads. The user must use the left and right arrows on the
connected keyboard to change pages. Alternatively, if needed, the page’s gray areas can
be configured to enable page changes. The title bar displays the name of the selected
book and its author. Secondly, it also contains an action bar with four actions: a notification
bell, an undo button, a layout settings button, and a close button. The notification bell
becomes active once a notification intervention is triggered (more on this later), and the
undo button is enabled once layout changes suggested by an intervention are applied,
allowing the user to go back to previous layout settings. The layout settings button opens
a dialog menu in the middle of the screen, where the user can freely update the book’s
layout (see figure 1.2). Among the available settings, the user can change the font (font
size, font type, line height, and boldness), select a layout mode (light, dark, and sephia),
and update the margins. Lastly, the close button closes the current book and navigates
back to the library screen.
(a) The library screen.
(b) The book screen.
Figure 1.1: The two main screens of the reading application.
To enable the real­time adaption of the user interface, the reading application utilizes a
biosensor measurement device that measures relevant biological data on the user. Cur­
rently, the biosensor device constitutes an eye tracker, which can collect information about
the user’s eye movements (fixations, saccades, regressions, etc.), pupil dilation, and read­
ing patterns, among other metrics. The goal is for this data to be fed to a robust set of
machine learning algorithms, which can classify features from this complex, noisy, multi­
modal biological data in real­time, enabling the application to adopt and assess the impact
Figure 1.2: The layout settings dialog of the reading application. Various layout options
are available.
2
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:11==
of individualized typographic settings and support the changing needs of the user. These
machine learning algorithms are currently under development5.
Once the machine learning algorithms detect that an update to the text would benefit
the user, the question arises of how to present these suggested changes to the user
meaningfully. This challenge was addressed in previous work by Pereira and Andrei [1],
where four so­called intervention designs were developed. On its own, an intervention
should be understood as
“intentional action to change a situation, with the aim of improving it or pre­
venting it from getting worse”
as also defined by the Cambridge University Dictionary6. The four intervention design
suggestions from Pereira and Andrei [1] deal with different levels of intrusiveness and
user freedom. They are:
• Popup: A dialog box that pops up in the middle of the screen. The dialog con­
tains an explanatory text telling the user why the intervention was triggered and an
example of the typography changes the application would like to apply. The user
has the option to either accept the changes or discard them. An illustration of this
intervention design is presented in figure 1.3a.
• Undo: For this intervention design, the suggested typography changes are applied
instantly without warning the user. Afterward, the user has the option to undo the
changes by pressing the undo button in the action bar, which causes the application
to return to the previous typography settings. Figure 1.3b presents an example of
this intervention design.
• Notification: A notification bell that blinks on and off with a frequency of 0.5 seconds
for a total duration of 3.5 seconds, after which is stays “on”. When the user presses
the notification bell, a dialog will appear below it with the exact same content as the
Popup dialog. Figure 1.4 presents an example of this intervention design.
• Gradual: For this intervention design, the suggested typography changes are ap­
plied to the text gradually upon page changes. This means the text will be updated
slightly every time the user changes a page until a desired setting has been reached.
Similar to Undo, this intervention applies changes to the interface without warning
the user. Figure 1.5 presents an example of this intervention design.
Since the machine learning model responsible for evaluating and updating typography
settings based on user needs is under development, any updates currently suggested
by the above interventions are manually defined test cases. These test cases were de­
veloped by Pereira and Andrei [1] and consist of increasing the font size and the line
height. The typography changes are furthermore applied to the entire book. This means
that the user may experience some text from a previous page being moved to the current
page when an update is applied because the increased font size and line height means
it can no longer fit on the current page. This applies to all four interventions. However,
it is most prominent for the Gradual intervention, as this intervention applies changes on
page changes. When changing pages, the user may thus initially encounter text they
have already read. This has also been appointed by Pereira and Andrei [1].
5Source: https://people.compute.dtu.dk/pgba/research/reading-the-reader/. Last accessed: 28­01­2025.
6Source: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/intervention. Last accessed: 21­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
3
==PAGE:12==
All four intervention designs are currently available in the application, and they are trig­
gered manually in the following manner:
• Pressing P on the keyboard triggers the Popup intervention.
• Pressing U on the keyboard triggers the Undo intervention.
• Pressing N on the keyboard triggers the Notification intervention.
• Pressing G on the keyboard triggers the Gradual intervention.
(a) Popup.
(b) Undo.
Figure 1.3: Popup and Undo intervention designs by Pereira and Andrei [1]
.
(a) The blinking notification bell.
(b) The notification dialog.
Figure 1.4: Notification intervention design by Pereira and Andrei [1]
.
1.2
Motivation
The research conducted by Pereira and Andrei [1] revealed an overall tendency towards
the Gradual intervention being the optimal intervention design based on user preferences.
This is even though the time it took for users to resume reading upon a page change with
the Gradual intervention was not the shortest compared to the other interventions.
One primary concern about all four intervention designs from previous work is that the
user loses their current reading position in the text and, thus, their sense of context when
typography changes are applied. This may unnecessarily disrupt the user’s reading flow
and provide an undesirable user experience. Furthermore, it serves as a natural bottle­
neck for further reducing the time a user takes to resume reading after an intervention
has been introduced. This concern was also addressed by Pereira and Andrei [1] in
their thesis. Through further exploration of the project and conversations with involved
researchers, this was found to be an essential research area that needed to be explored
in greater detail. Thus, the motivation for the work of this thesis was fostered: to explore
ways of enabling users to preserve context after typography changes have been applied
– a context­preserving functionality.
4
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:13==
(a) First page.
(b) Second page.
(c) Third page.
(d) Fourth page.
Figure 1.5: Gradual intervention design by Pereira and Andrei [1]. The typography up­
dates slowly as the user changes the page.
The exploration of the context­preserving functionality concerned not only its design but
also its effectiveness on the user experience and whether these results contradict or com­
plement those found by previous work on optimal intervention design.
1.3
Research Questions
Based on the above motivation, a problem statement consisting of three research ques­
tions was defined, serving as a foundation for the work of this thesis. The questions
revolve around the notion defined in the above sections and are as follows:
• RQ1: How might we design and implement functionality that helps the reader pre­
serve context in a text after an intervention has been introduced?
• RQ2: What is the effect of using the context­preserving functionality?
• RQ3: Is Gradual still the optimal intervention after introducing the context­preserving
functionality?
1.3.1
A Note on the Scope of the Project
One of the primary goals of the Reading the Reader research project is to develop a
reading application that can support the visually impaired, such as people suffering from
central vision loss. The work of this thesis will not, however, cover any specific visual
impairments; rather, it will focus on context preservation in a broader sense and target
a “general” user. Among others, this was based on the novelty of context preservation
in reading applications discovered during the literature review and the lack of previous
research conducted in this regard (more on this in chapter 2). This also means that the
obtained results may need alterations to fit a specific user group.
Furthermore, the thesis will only focus on designing context preservation for the sephia
mode of the reading application. This was found by previous research by Pereira and
Andrei [1] to be the most favorable layout mode by users, and to limit the scope of the
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
5
==PAGE:14==
design, it was thus decided to focus only on this mode. Future work should focus on
updating the design to fit all three layout modes.
1.4
Structure of the Thesis
The overall structure of the thesis is divided into six main parts:
• an academic literature review of relevant related work to help guide the design of
the context­preserving functionality, as presented in chapter 2,
• an analysis of relevant design considerations as well a presentation of the final de­
sign of the context­preserving functionality, as presented in chapter 3,
• a presentation of relevant implementation details of the context­preserving function­
ality in the reading application, as presented in chapter 4
• a presentation and analysis of the experiment conducted during this thesis as a part
of answering the research questions, as presented in chapter 5,
• a thorough analysis of the results of the experiment, as presented in chapter 6,
• a discussion of the current state of the context preserving functionality and its effec­
tiveness as well as limitations and future research avenues, as presented in chapter
7.
The methodologies applied for each part of the thesis will be presented in relevant chap­
ters.
As a prerequisite, the reader is expected to have some knowledge of statistics (normal dis­
tributions, non­parametric tests, hypothesis testing, etc.) and experiment design (within­
subjects design, between­subjects design, etc.). To review the implementation of the
context­preserving functionality in chapter 4, some knowledge of React applications and
TypeScript is also required.
6
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:15==
2
Related Work
Answering the research questions defined in section 1.3 has required a thorough analysis
of the problem at hand and a systematic review of relevant literature to leverage previous
research findings. The review performed during the course of this thesis has aimed to fol­
low best practices for literature reviews within software engineering by taking their starting
point in the works of Petersen, Vakkalanka, and Kuzniarz [2] and Wohlin [3] on systematic
mapping studies and snowballing. The following chapter will present the literature review
process of this thesis and the results obtained based on the works of these authors.
2.1
Method
The first step of the literature review process was to create a start set of relevant publi­
cations. According to Petersen, Vakkalanka, and Kuzniarz [2], this can be achieved by
defining a set of research questions, extracting relevant keywords from these, and creat­
ing a search string to search for literature in relevant databases. This ensures the start
set contains the publications most relevant to the context. Inclusion and exclusion criteria
may further be applied, for instance to narrow a broad search space or exclude specific
research topics.
Once the start set had been defined, snowballing could be performed. This iterative pro­
cess includes both backward and forward snowballing. According to Wohlin [3], backward
snowballing consists of reviewing the reference list in a given publication to identify new
papers to include. This can also be understood as ”looking backwards in time”. Relevant
inclusion and exclusion criteria, such as keywords or publication years, must be estab­
lished before the snowballing to ensure that only relevant papers are obtained. Forward
snowballing is performed by identifying new papers from the list of papers citing the paper
being examined. This can also be understood as ”looking forward in time.” Again, relevant
inclusion and exclusion criteria must be defined before the snowballing. The snowballing
procedure is continued until no new papers are identified.
The systematic literature review conducted in this thesis applies that backward snow­
balling has been conducted manually, whereas forward snowballing has been a mix of
an automatic and manual task. The automatic task of forward snowballing has utilized
Google Scholar’s 1 mechanism for identifying papers citing a given publication based on
title keyword requirements. The resulting list of publications was then manually inspected
to establish the final set of relevant publications. Note that automatic forward snowballing
through DTU FindIt2, the academic database of the Technical University of Denmark, was
not possible at the time of writing this thesis, as the database did not have any methods
for automatically searching through citations of a given paper.
The primary database for obtaining relevant papers for this thesis has been Google Scholar,
based on the recommendation from Wohlin [3], as this allows for the most unbiased re­
sults. DTU FindIt has worked as a supplement, and any start set or subsequent snowball
set is thus a union of the publications found using these databases.
1Available at: https://scholar.google.com. Last accessed: 29­01­2025.
2Available at: https://findit.dtu.dk. Last accessed: 29­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Findings
The start set for the literature review was compiled by first defining a set of search key­
words. At first, it seemed natural to include the phrase context­preserving functionality
directly in this set. This would ensure that only the most relevant literature would be in­
cluded in the review, as only research areas very similar to the context of this thesis would
be targeted. The phrase context­preserving functionality is, however, something that has
been developed specifically to describe functionality for the Reading the Reader research
project. Thus, other relevant works may describe a similar functionality using other words
or phrases, and these may not be discovered if literature is searched using only keywords
from this phrase. To ensure that as much relevant literature was captured in the review,
the meaning of the context­preserving functionality and its purpose was thus investigated
in greater detail to extract other relevant keywords.
The main purpose of the context­preserving functionality is to enable users to resume
reading quickly after an intervention has ended. This means that users should be able to
locate where in the text they were reading right before the given intervention was intro­
duced. In other words, they need to perform a visual search task, to find a target piece of
text. This requires the design of some indicator that can guide the users’ attention towards
this piece of text. This reasoning lead to the following definition of context preservation:
Definition 2.2.1 (Context Preservation). The ability to highlight or visualize relevant infor­
mation to the user, which can help them perform a visual search task to discover where
they should resume reading once an intervention has ended and typography changes
have been applied.
This definition of context preservation resulted in the relevant search keywords highlight,
highlighting, information, information visualization, visual search, read, and reading. Fur­
thermore, the keywords text, word, and words were added as means for expanding the
search space in regards to reading.
Multiple keywords were discarded during the course of defining the start set of relevant
search keywords, as they were found to not contribute significantly to the search space.
Among others, this includes the words user, design, context, preserving, and functionality
as well as their related synonyms. Specifically, the latter three keywords may seem odd to
exclude at first, given the phrase context­preserving functionality from RQ1; however, the
reasoning was as follows: Setting a hard requirement that all relevant titles must include
some combinations of the keywords context, preserving, and functionality resulted in no
relevant publications at all, even when all other keywords were optional, and softening the
requirement such that all of these keywords were optional showed that none of the titles
of the relevant publications from the search contained these words. This emphasized
the novelty of the research area, and also established the importance of defining the
meaning of context preservation, like in definition 2.2.1. Thus, it was decided to discard
context, preserving, and functionality from the set of relevant search keywords. Similar
considerations were made for user and design.
While defining the start set of search keywords, it was discovered that certain keywords
could be excluded from the search query as they added too much noise to the search
results. These keywords include comprehension, artificial intelligence, and ai. As the
work of this thesis is not to create a context­preserving functionality that utilizes artificial
intelligence, the latter two keywords could be safely excluded without compromising the
quality of the start set of relevant publications. Further, it was discovered multiple times
that titles containing the word comprehension, which may have seemed relevant at first,
never turned out to be relevant. Thus, it was also decided to exclude this keyword actively.
8
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:17==
These two keyword exclusions effectively halved the search results from more than 450
to 261 publications that had to be manually inspected. The final set of relevant search
keywords, the topic from which they were drawn, and their status are presented in table
2.1.
Status
Related topic
Relevant search keyword
Included
Highlighting in visual searches
highlight,
highlighting,
visual
search,
information,
information
visualization
Included
Reading applications
read, reading, text, word, words
Excluded
Reading applications
comprehension
Excluded
Artificial intelligence
artificial intelligence, ai
Table 2.1: Final set of relevant search keywords for RQ1
Based on the search keywords, search queries for Google Scholar and DTU FindIt, pre­
sented in listings 2.1 and 2.2 respectively, were created supporting the following boolean
conditions:
1. The title of a relevant publication must include either the keyword highlight or high­
lighting.
2. The title of a relevant publication must include at least one of the following key­
words: visual search, information, information visualization, read, reading, text,
word, words.
3. The title must not include any of the following keywords: comprehension, artificial
intelligence, ai.
The reasoning behind boolean condition 1 is that making relevant text stand out using
some form of highlighting must be considered the most important feature of the context­
preserving functionality to ensure that users can resume reading as fast as possible.
Boolean condition 2 was defined to narrow the search space for highlighting techniques to
reading settings and visual searches to align with the research questions. Finally, boolean
condition 3 was defined based on the need to exclude keywords, as presented earlier.
1
(intitle:highlight OR intitle:highlighting) (intitle:visual -search OR intitle:
information OR intitle:information -visualization OR intitle:read OR
intitle:reading OR intitle:text OR intitle:word OR intitle:words) -
comprehension AND -artificial -intelligence AND -ai
Listing 2.1: Google Scholar search string for start set for RQ1.
1
(title:highlight OR title:highlighting) AND (title:visual -search OR title:
information OR title:information -visualization OR title:read OR title:
reading OR title:text OR title:word OR intitle:words) AND NOT title:
comprehension AND NOT title:artificial -intelligence AND NOT title:ai
Listing 2.2: DTU FindIt search string for start set for RQ1.
After establishing the start set of relevant publications, snowballing was performed. The
keyword requirements for the automatic part of the forward snowballing using Google
Scholar are presented in listing 2.3. Note that these requirements are a relaxed version
of the requirements from listing 2.1, considering that the search is conducted from a set
of already relevant publications.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
9
==PAGE:18==
1
intitle:highlight OR intitle:highlighting OR intitle:visual -search
Listing 2.3: Google Scholar forward snowballing search string for RQ1.
The literature review for the context­maintenance functionality was finalized on October
15, 2025, and is accurate as of this date. A summary of the key metrics from the review
is presented in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Key metrics from the literature review for the context­preserving functionality.
The obtained literature has been sorted into appropriate categories for ease of reading
and will be presented in the following subsection. Section 2.2.1 presents highlighting
techniques for enhancing different text properties. Section 2.2.2 introduces highlighting
techniques concerning symbols and icons. Finally, section 2.2.3 presents other forms of
highlighting on graphical user interfaces that are not covered in any of the aforementioned
categories.
2.2.1
On Highlighting By Enhancing Specific Text Properties
Numerous highlighting methods for visual searches of texts have been researched where
highlighting is performed by enhancing certain text properties such as changing the ty­
pographical emphasis (boldface, italic, underline, etc.), text color, or background color to
create a pop­out effect. Spoto and Babu [4] investigated the effect of monochrome meth­
ods for highlighting in alphanumeric displays with green letters on a black background.
The authors compared highlighting using high intensity with reverse video (reversing the
text and background color; in this case, the result was black letters on a green back­
ground) and found that although the search accuracy for both highlighting methods was
fairly similar, reverse video was superior in terms of user response time. Unfortunately,
the exact color codes used by the authors in the experiment are not recorded in the paper,
making it harder to apply their findings in other experiments.
Philipsen [5] also explored highlighting modes on displays with black backgrounds by in­
vestigating six different ways of highlighting text menu items and their effect on users’
10
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:19==
search performance. Similar to Spoto and Babu [4], a bright text condition and reverse
video were explored, but only white was used instead of green. The authors further in­
cluded red text color, reverse color, red text on a green background, and blue text on
a yellow background as highlighting modes. Results from the experiment revealed an
overall benefit in terms of decreased search time for all highlighting modes compared to
not having a highlight. The bright white highlighting mode further revealed the best per­
formance in terms of search time, followed by both opponent color combinations (red on
green and blue on yellow), and the reverse video mode performed the worst, contradicting
findings of Spoto and Babu [4]. Lastly, the authors found that familiarity regarding how
the menu options were presented also strongly affected the search performance, where
familiarity with the presentation mode was shown to improve search performance.
Ling and van Schaik [6] explored the effects of different combinations of text and back­
ground color on search performance and user preferences in navigation bars on web
pages. The combinations were: black on white, blue on white, blue on yellow, yellow on
blue, red on green, and green on red, and the precise color codes used by the authors
are provided in table 2.2. Overall, the authors found that color combinations with higher
levels of contrast between background and text lead to faster search times and were also
rated more favorably by users. Among their selection of color combinations, blue text on
a white background and yellow text on a blue background performed the best in terms of
search time. It was also rated as users’ first and second most favorable, respectively.
Color name
black
white
blue
yellow
red
green
Color code (hex)
#000000
#FFFFFF
#0000FF
#FFFF00
#FF0000
#008000
Illustration
Table 2.2: Colors used by Ling and van Schaik [6].
Krzos [7] also investigated the usage of color as a highlighting technique to establish a
preliminary ranking of a selection of colors based on the subjective preferences of 82
users. The study tested two modes of color highlighting – text color and background color
– with the following six colors: cyan, magenta, yellow, red, green, and blue. The precise
color codes are listed in table 2.3. Results showed that users mostly preferred green for
the text color highlighting mode, while yellow was ranked the worst. The experiment was
conducted on a white background. Similar to Ling and van Schaik [6], the author discov­
ered that contrast between colors plays an important role in the preferences of users and
that yellow text color, for instance, provides very low contrast between the background
and the text, which explains its low ranking, as it makes it more difficult to read. No signifi­
cant differences were found between the remaining colors, making them equally useful as
highlighters. For the background color highlighting mode, cyan obtained the best score,
closely followed by green and yellow, and blue was rated the least favorable. For this
experiment, the text color was set to black, which might again explain the ranking of the
colors, as cyan provides a good contrast between text and background. In contrast, the
contrast between the blue background and black text is significantly worse. No significant
differences were found between the remaining colors.
Color name
cyan
magenta
yellow
red
green
blue
Color code (hex)
#00FFFF
#FF00FF
#FFFF00
#FF0000
#00FF00
#0000FF
Illustration
Table 2.3: Colors used by Krzos [7].
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
11
==PAGE:20==
Wu and Yuan [8] explored the effect of highlighting text in tables and user’s search per­
formance. In their experiment, users were to search for information in tables with differ­
ent table styles where the search target was highlighted using one of three highlighting
modes: blinking text (on/off frequency of 0.3 seconds), reverse video (white text on black
background), and red text color. The non­highlighted parts of the tables were styled with
a uniform gray background and black text color. Results of the experiment showed that
all highlighting styles decreased the reading time of the tables to at least half compared
to a non­highlighted condition and that the red text color was superior in reading time.
Unfortunately, the authors did not provide the exact color codes used in the experiment,
making it harder to apply their findings in other experiments.
Strobelt et al. [9][10] studied the effectiveness of common highlighting techniques, both
in combination and isolation, to explore how to maximize pop­out effects while minimiz­
ing the visual interference between techniques. Visual interference is referred to by the
authors as how techniques affect each other when a target and distractors are applied
simultaneously. Three experiments were conducted on nine commonly used highlighting
techniques to determine: 1) a ranking from strongest to weakest, 2) the degree of visual
interference between techniques, and 3) the effectiveness of combining two techniques
into compound highlighting techniques. The authors characterize a strong highlighting
technique as a higher probability that users would accurately detect the highlighted text.
Similarly, a weak technique indicates a lower probability of users detecting the highlight.
The nine highlighting techniques included in the study were common techniques that can
easily be realized through HTML, LATEX etc., and consisted of red font color, yellow back­
ground color, underlined text, increased font size, italic font style, boldface font style,
rectangular text border, increased letter spacing, and text­shadow. The exact settings
used and illustrations of each technique are included in table 2.4.
Technique
Setting
Illustration
Red font color
rgb(227,26,28)
text
Yellow background color
rgb(255,255,50)
text
Underlined text
N/A
text
Increased font size
150%
text
Italic
N/A
text
Boldface
N/A
text
Rectangular text border
N/A
text
Increased letter spacing
5px
t e x t
Text shadow
CSS:
text-shadow: 4px 4px
3px rgb(50, 50, 50);
text
text
Table 2.4: Highlighting techniques explored by Strobelt et al. [9][10]. Note that the third
column is included for illustrative purposes only. For more details, the reader is referred
to the original papers.
For all three experiments, the participants were asked to search through dense text and
identify target words with the correct highlight technique. Results of the first experiment,
where highlighting techniques were analyzed in isolation, lead to the following ranking
from strongest to weakest: 1) font size, 2) border, 3) background, 4) red, 5) bold, 6)
shadow, 7) underlined, 8) spacing, 9) italic. For the second experiment, users were to se­
lect the text highlighted by a target technique (A) when a distractor (B) and a combination
of the target and the distractor (A + B) were also present. The results showed that all tech­
12
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:21==
niques except for the italic font style decreased performance when introducing distractors.
The authors further discovered a general tendency towards weak distractor techniques
negatively influencing strong target techniques. The ranking of the techniques in terms
of performance was almost the same as for the first experiment, except for a switch be­
tween border and font size. For the last experiment, users were to select the compound
highlight technique (A + B) when techniques A and B were present. Results of this ex­
periment showed that only the combination of underlining and increased letter spacing
had an increase in performance relative to both techniques. All other combinations were
either asymmetrical (gain for one, loss for the other) or resulted in performance loss for
both techniques. The authors conclude by presenting five guidelines for using highlighting
techniques for scenarios based on their results. The guidelines are summarized in table
2.5.
Scenario
Guideline
Only one feature must be highlighted
Choose a highlighting technique with a
strong pop­out effect such as increased
font size, border, or yellow background
Both features should have the same visi­
bility; visual conjunctive search is not im­
portant
Choose highlighting techniques that do
not interfere much with each other and
have a strong pop­out effect of similar
strength, such as bold and yellow back­
ground, rectangular border, and red text
color or increased font size and yellow
background
The conjunction of the two features is
more important than their single occur­
rence.
Choose two techniques that scored high in
the visual conjunction test of Study 3, such
as rectangular border and red text color,
font size and red text color, or increased
font size and yellow background
One feature is significantly more important
than the other and should stick out
Choose the two techniques in a way that
one of them has a significantly higher pop­
out effect than the other, for instance, yel­
low background and increased letter spac­
ing or increased font size and underlined
text
Both features should have the same vis­
ibility, and the conjunction of the two
should be easy to see
Choose highlighting techniques that do
not interfere much with each other and
have a strong pop­out effect of simi­
lar strength.
Additionally, their visual
conjunction should be easy to detect.
Good candidates are border and red text
color, increased font size and yellow back­
ground, and yellow background and bold­
face font style
Table 2.5: Summary of guidelines from the study by Strobelt et al. [9] [10].
Wang, Wang, and Ting [11] also explored highlighting effects based on typographical em­
phasis as they investigated the effects of using two different font sizes and five different
highlighting techniques on search performance when searching through Chinese sym­
bols. The highlighting techniques comprised boldface, underline, and italic text, as well
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
13
==PAGE:22==
as adding a character border and shadow. The authors highlight that all typographical
emphasis modes resembled those typically included in Microsoft’s Office software suite.
Results of the experiment showed that boldface, italic, and shadowed text performed bet­
ter in terms of search time than underline and character borders, and that boldface yielded
the fastest overall search time. This contradicts the findings of Strobelt et al. [9][10], where
character border was ranked the strongest and italic the weakest highlighting technique of
the techniques based on typographical emphasis. Although the experiments are very sim­
ilar in character, Wang, Wang, and Ting [11] explored highlighting in relation to Chinese
symbols, whereas Strobelt et al. [9][10] focused on text presented in the Latin alphabet.
This might explain the difference in results, as Chinese and Latin symbols are very differ­
ent in nature, and thus the same typographical emphasis might influence them differently.
Wang, Wang, and Ting [11] further found that texts with a 12­point letter size were faster to
search than texts with 10­point letter size; in a later study by Wang [12] the same conclu­
sion as in the study by Wang, Wang, and Ting [11] was drawn, and this study further found
that text presented in two narrower columns enabled faster searching than text presented
in one wide column.
Doi [13] aimed to compliment the works of Strobelt et al. [9][10] as they believed that
the test setting of [9] did not properly match a real­life usage and purpose of a graphical
user interface. The study sought to verify the following two hypotheses: 1) the search
performance of a user is better when using boldface font style as a highlighting technique
compared to color, and 2) the search performance decreases with an increasing number
of elements. The chosen highlighting color was red, and non­highlighted words were black
(the authors do not provide exact color codes). Three highlighting variations were used:
color, boldface font type, and color and boldface font type combined. The experiment
was further conducted with a white display background. The experiment’s results verified
the second hypothesis as the reaction time generally showed longer when users had to
search for a target between many words compared to few. Furthermore, results also
showed that the reaction time was shorter under the bold highlighting condition and that
the percentage of hits was lower when highlighting by color, suggesting that boldface font
type is a better choice for highlighting. This finding also contradicts the findings of Strobelt
et al. [9][10], and the authors contribute that this might be due to a difference in the design
of the experiment tasks. In the study by Strobelt et al. [9][10], users were asked to search
through a dense text to find as many highlighted words as possible, and all highlighted
words were targets. Contrastingly, the study by Doi [13] intended to mimic more realistic
graphical user interfaces, and thus highlighted words were not always the target of the
search task. Furthermore, the search screen of Doi [13] also comprised fewer words
than that of Strobelt et al. [9] with more space between individual words. The authors
emphasize that this should be examined in more detail with the other highlighting modes
also presented by Strobelt et al. [9][10].
Leaning on the need for testing highlighting modes for real­life graphical user interfaces,
Gagl [14] investigated if foveal and parafoveal perceptibility of blue and underlined text
is reduced compared to black text during reading. The fovea and parafovea are two
regions of the visual field, where the fovea is the central region responsible for sharp
vision, and the parafovea surrounds the fovea and provides peripheral support to the
foveal vision[15]. The ability to recognize blue text in these vision spaces was identified as
potentially constrained by the low number of foveally centered blue light­sensitive retinal
cells. Blue and underline is a typical design choice for hyperlinks on, e.g., web pages, and
based on eye tracking of test users, the study concluded that even though the reading time
was shortest for black, non­underlined text, no significant effect on eye movements was
14
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:23==
discovered when reading blue and underlined text compared to black text. The authors
thus conclude that the compound highlighting technique of blue and underline can be
safely used as a highlighting technique.
In conjunction with highlighting on web pages, Kickmeier­Rust and Albert [16] investigated
whether the density of highlighted items influences search performance and user satisfac­
tion in search tasks. In the study, users were asked to identify as quickly and accurately
as possible whether a given target noun was present among a set of 140 nouns. Three
different highlighting densities were explored: 0 % (no nouns were highlighted), 15 %, and
49 %. The study results showed significantly shorter response times for searches where
15 % of the nouns were highlighted compared to both 0 % and 49 %. Similarly, the answer
accuracy was also significantly higher in the setting with 15 % highlighted nouns. Users
furthermore reported significantly higher satisfaction in the 15 % setting. This suggests
that visual searches can be improved by adjusting the amount of highlighted items on a
graphical user interface. However, the authors conclude that future research should look
into whether there is a difference in optimal densities depending on the type of material
being searched through.
2.2.2
On Highlighting in Relation to Symbols and Icons
Highlighting is not only applicable to interfaces dominated by text but can also be utilized
in other display types, such as displays with many icons, as presented by the papers in
this section.
Wang et al. [17] compared the influence of different methods for highlighting Chinese
symbols beneath icons on visual search performance. Three highlighting techniques (red
text color, bold text, and flickering text) and a no­highlighting condition were tested in two
icon settings: colored icons and grayscale icons. Unfortunately, the authors have not
provided the exact color and flicker settings. Their experiment showed that the shortest
search time for grayscale icons was achieved with flickering text and red text, and for
colored icons, it was flickering text alone. The flickering text furthermore had the highest
search accuracy across both icon settings.
Huang [18] investigated, among other, the effects of figure/background color combina­
tions of simple icons on visual search performance. Five color combinations were tested:
black/blue, black/red, black/yellow, white/blue, and white/yellow. The exact colors are
presented in table 2.6 in CIE coordinates. All icons were further displayed on a white back­
ground. Their experiment showed that the color combination of the icons’ figure/back­
ground significantly affected the search performance and that the white/yellow and white/blue
color combinations resulted in shorter search time than the remaining color combinations.
In general, it was discovered that higher contrast between the figure and background
colors led to faster searching and was rated more favorably, which also aligns with the
findings of Ling and van Schaik [6] and Krzos [7].
Red
Yellow
Blue
White
Black
L
57.1
176.1
75.7
194.7
2.8
x
0.6171
0.4414
0.1857
0.3285
0.3065
y
0.3312
0.4880
0.2351
0.3330
0.2807
Illustration
Table 2.6: The CIE coordinates of the colors used in the study by Huang [18].
Huang, Chen, and Chiang [19] also explored the effects of figure/background color com­
binations and icon flickering on visual search performance. Five color combinations were
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
15
==PAGE:24==
investigated, with the exact color codes presented in table 2.7: black/blue, black/red,
black/yellow, white/blue, and white/yellow. Two components of icon flickering were fur­
ther explored (border and symbol), with three flickering rates: 1 Hz, 3 Hz, and 5 Hz.
Results of their experiments showed that the color combination of the icons’ figure/back­
ground significantly affected the search performance, similar to Huang [18]. However, the
present study found that the search time for black/red and white/blue color combinations
resulted in a shorter search time than the remaining color combinations. This contradicts
the findings of Huang [18], where the white/yellow color combination was deemed better
than black/red. The authors do not address this difference in results further. The authors
further found that flickering of different icon components also significantly affected users’
search performance, with search times for icon border flickering being shorter than icon
symbol flickering and search time for flicker rates of 3 Hz and 5 Hz shorter than 1 Hz.
Red
Yellow
Blue
White
Black
L
57.1
176.1
75.7
194.7
2.8
x
0.617
0.441
0.186
0.329
0.307
y
0.331
0.488
0.235
0.333
0.281
Illustration
Table 2.7: The CIE coordinates of the colors used in the study by Huang [18].
Lastly, the study by Shen et al. [20] also investigated the effects of figure/background
color combinations on the visual search performance of icons, and they further explored
whether luminance contrast between background and foreground color could play a vital
role in this. Four background (black, red, blue, and purple) and foreground (white, yellow,
green, and turquoise) colors were chosen for the experiment, yielding 16 combinations.
Three luminance settings (6:1, 12:1, and 18:1) for each foreground color were further
explored. The exact color codes are presented in table 2.8 in CIE coordinates. The
experiment setup was the same as for both the Huang [18] and Huang, Chen, and Chiang
[19] studies, and the results of the experiment showed that the medium luminance contrast
had a significant effect on search time compared to low and high contrast. For color
combinations, a significant effect of foreground/background color was also discovered,
aligning with previous studies, and white/black, yellow/black, turquoise/black, white/red,
and yellow/red all showed significantly better search time performance than the remaining
combinations. No difference could be discovered among the combinations, however.
Although icons are quite different in nature compared to text, for instance, in size, spac­
ing, usage, etc., the above­mentioned studies have been included in this literature review
because they present interesting findings in terms of color combinations, luminance con­
trasts, and flickering of icons/text that are worth considering for the design of the context­
preserving functionality. It is worth mentioning that icon design for visual searches is a
vast research area, and the above should not be understood as an exhaustive representa­
tion of the publications within this field. Many of these publications, however, are targeted
towards specific icon features such as aspect ratio between foreground and background
or type of icon to use, which is not directly transferable to text highlighting.
2.2.3
On Other Forms of Highlighting in Graphical User Interfaces
Research have also been conducted on other forms of highlighting in visual searches, and
the following section will present alternative takes on highlight techniques for graphical
user interfaces.
Zhai et al. [21] explored how to create pop­out effects on graphical user interfaces us­
16
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:25==
a
b
L
Illustration
Background colors
Black
­1.95
­6.65
26
Red
49.15
37.75
26
Blue
65.87
­108.46
26
Purple
53.79
­46.09
26
Foreground colors
White1
­3.19
­11.95
62
White2
­3.62
­15.94
77
White3
5.90
­26.63
98
Yellow1
­18.47
61.14
62
Yellow2
­22.81
75.09
77
Yellow3
­26.25
83.87
98
Green1
­58.15
58.84
62
Green2
­73.04
72.53
77
Green3
­83.45
77.81
98
Turquoise1
­31.67
­21.05
62
Turquoise1
­40.06
­27.03
77
Turquoise1
­43.54
­34.50
98
Table 2.8: The CIE coordinates of the colors used in the study by Shen et al. [20].
ing “masks”. Two experiments were conducted on three kinds of masking: one where
the background was masked to test the pop­out effect and background readability, and
one where the search target was masked to test the readability of the mask under dif­
ferent mask configurations. The details of all mask configurations for both experiments
are presented in table 2.9. For the first experiment, darkening, bleaching, and blurring
masks were explored, and the results showed that the blurring mask performed the worst
in terms of both target selection time and background readability. The difference between
the remaining two masks was less clear; darkening resulted in a shorter target selection
time, while bleaching was better for background readability. An important result was that
the target type (text, icon, button, etc.) did not seem to influence the effect of the mask.
For the second experiment, the blurring mask was switched for a so­called “screening”
mask, where some pixels in the mask were turned yellow, as the blurring mask did not
perform well in the first experiment. The screening mask was further motivated by ease of
implementation. Each mask was tested on five configuration levels. For darkening, even
the lowest level seemed to enable users to be cued for searching, and further darken­
ing did not increase search performance significantly. Users further rated higher levels of
darkening as better in making the target pop­out than lower levels. In terms of the reading
performance of the masked area, only the very extreme level significantly affected this.
However, subjective ratings gradually worsened as darkening levels increased. For the
bleaching mask, it was discovered that the lowest level of bleaching was not effective
enough to guide the user’s attention, and stronger bleaching effects produced still shorter
selection times. The subjective user ratings indicated that selecting the unmasked target
became significantly easier as bleaching levels increased. The readability of the bleached
area was further similar to that of the area masked by darkening, also for the subjective
ratings. For the screening mask, even the lowest screening level appeared to provide a
strong search cue for users, and higher screening levels did not increase search perfor­
mance significantly. Subjective ratings of the mask revealed that even the lowest screen­
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
17
==PAGE:26==
ing level made the task significantly easier, and a further increase in screening level made
the task seem even easier. Regarding readability, the time of selecting the target word
from the masked area remained flat except at the extreme level.
In general, no overall conclusion of one mask being superior to the others could be made
for the two experiments performed by Zhai et al. [21].
Mask type
Darkening
Bleaching
Blurring
Screening
Experiment 1
configuration
­100
reduced
brightness,
+35 increased
contrast
­60
reduced
contrast
Gaussian filter­
ing of 1.5 pix­
els
N/A
Experiment
2
configura­
tions
­20,
­40,
­
60,
­80,
and
­100
reduced
brightness,
+50 increased
contrast for all
levels
­30, ­45, ­60, ­
75, and ­95 re­
duced contrast
N/A
Overlaid
a
uniform,
pe­
riodic,
yellow
(rgb(255, 255,
85))
pattern
onto
the
masked
area
such that 12%,
25%,
37%,
62%, or 75%
of
the
pixels
were blocked.
Table 2.9: Mask settings for the experiments of Zhai et al. [21].
Khan et al. [22] also explored highlighting by masking, and they further investigated how
to guide users’ attention on large wall­sized displays with multiple observers, such as
those used in meeting rooms and the like. The “spotlight” technique, as denoted by the
authors, consisted of displaying a circular part of the interface normally while darkening
the remaining. However, the exact darkening condition is not stated in detail in their paper.
The results of their experiment suggested that the spotlight is preferred over the standard
cursor and outperforms it by a factor of 3.4 on a wall­sized display. It is worth noting that
many aspects of the design space of this publication are very different from the design
space of context­preserving functionality of this thesis, for instance, the large display or
the multiple­observers aspect; however, it was decided to include it in this literature review
anyways as it underlines the idea that highlighting techniques does not need to be built
on emphasizing text properties alone.
Griffin and Robinson [23] also explored alternative ways for highlighting, as they investi­
gated the effectiveness of leader lines compared to color in highlighting important infor­
mation in coordinated multiple­view geo­visualization systems. The preliminary results of
their experiments showed no significant difference in either the effectiveness or the ef­
ficiency of the two highlighting models in supporting the visual search for information in
linked displays. The authors thus conclude that leader lines are just as effective as the
color highlighting method. Again, the design space of this publication is widely different
from the context­preserving functionality of this thesis, especially concerning the multiple­
view aspect. However, it highlights the importance of understanding that even the most
widely adopted highlighting techniques might not be the only ones that work for a given
interface.
18
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:27==
3
Context­Preserving Functionality ­
Design
The following chapter will present the design of the context­preserving functionality and
how this has been derived. Firstly, section 3.1 will present a critical note on the methodol­
ogy utilized throughout the design process for the context­preserving functionality. Sec­
tion 3.2 then presents a thorough analysis of the context in which the functionality is to be
implemented, establishing five overall design considerations. Next, section 3.3 analyzes
relevant findings from chapter 2 in relation to these design considerations to establish their
viability as potential design candidates for the appearance of the context­preserving func­
tionality. The set of final design candidates for the appearance of the context­preserving
functionality is listed in section 3.3.5. Section 3.4 discusses another important consider­
ation not covered by the related work, namely how much context to present to the reader
after an intervention has been triggered. Finally, section 3.5 reflects on which design
candidate(s) would provide us with the most knowledge upon being tested. Section 3.6
details the final design of the context­preserving functionality.
All design suggestions have been realized as mock­ups through the design tool Figma1.
It is worth noting that, in some cases, it was impossible to recreate the proposed designs
fully. This is because the designs were sometimes represented as parameters that were
difficult to translate into properties of Figma. This is especially true for the masks, pre­
sented in section 3.3.1. In some cases, sample images were provided in the paper from
chapter 2 outlining the proposed design, and these have also been used as guidelines
to get as close to the proposed colors, masks, etc., as possible. As the purpose of the
mock­ups was not to get lost in the finer details but rather to gain an overall understanding
of the viability of the given highlighting technique as a design for the context­preserving
functionality, this was not considered a prominent issue.
3.1
Autobiographical Design
Many decisions regarding the design of the context­preserving functionality have been
based directly on the findings of related work from chapter 2. However, there have been
cases where the related work could not provide proper guidelines because of the novelty
of the research area. For these cases, the author of this thesis has taken inspiration
from the autobiographical design methodology described by Neustaedter and Sengers
[24] to derive a proper design decision. Among others, this has been utilized to design
the ephemerality of the context­preserving functionality as described in section 3.3.6.
Autobiographical design is described by Neustaedter and Sengers [24] as
”(...) design research drawing on extensive, genuine usage by those creating
or building the system.”
In their paper, they state that although this methodology is often underdocumented and
commonly considered a questionable approach, many researchers have found great value
in utilizing themselves as target end users and evaluating their design through continuous
self­usage. The authors highlight that the methodology allows for faster feedback loops
and tinkering with the product because real end users could be incorporated early in the
1Available at: www.figma.com. Last visited: 27­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
19
==PAGE:28==
design process. Furthermore, it allows for early innovation, especially in novel research
areas where no existing system or culture can be established.
Similar to other design methods, the autobiographical design methodology has concerns
and drawbacks that should be considered carefully before utilizing it. Among others,
Neustaedter and Sengers [24] highlights that autobiographical designs work best when
researchers genuinely need the system they are developing. If the genuine need is ab­
sent, then the self­usage may only provide a limited understanding of the system. The
authors further argue that autobiographical design does not provide results that are known
to be generalizable to a broader community of users, in contrast to doing experiments with
multiple end users.
Neustaedter and Sengers [24] further describe that genuine usage in autobiographical
design is closely linked to long­time usage, and all of the researchers interviewed for
the paper responded that they had been using the systems they were building for more
than a year. Because of the limited time frame for this thesis, this long­term usage has,
of course, not been feasible for developing the context­preserving functionality for the
reading application. Thus, the design process of the context­preserving functionality is
considered only to be inspired by autobiographical design rather than fully incorporating
it.
3.2
Design Considerations
The findings of section 2 revealed that the literature on highlighting techniques in visual
searches contains many interesting findings but also many contradicting results. It be­
came evident that no overall guidelines could be provided for designing a specific high­
lighting style, as this is highly context­dependent. To move forward with the design of the
context­preserving functionality, the context in which it was to be implemented was thus
considered in more detail.
The first important consideration discovered by the author of the thesis was that the read­
ing application contains four different kinds of interventions: Popup, Undo, Notification,
and Gradual. Aligning with RQ3, the context­preserving functionality should be designed
such that it embraces all four interventions, thus allowing us to determine the effect of it
and whether Gradual is still the preferred intervention design. Although all interventions
need some form of context preservation, it was considered convenient to split the inter­
ventions into the following two groups: group A (Gradual) being “passive” interventions,
and group B (Popup, Undo, and Notification) being “active” interventions. The reasoning
behind the grouping is as follows: For each of the interventions Popup, Undo, and No­
tification, readers are required to respond more actively to them once they are triggered
(for instance by reading a popup dialog or pressing a button), and this requires them to
partially or fully stop reading. For these interventions, it would thus make sense that the
context­preserving functionality actively draws the reader’s attention towards whatever
they were reading when the intervention was triggered – in other words“remind” them of
the context they have just encountered. For the Gradual intervention in group A, however,
the reader does not need to actively do anything to engage with the intervention, except
perhaps locating the potentially overlapping text between the previous and the new page.
This can be accomplished by still remaining in some sort of reading flow. Thus, to avoid
too much redundancy for the reader, it was argued that it makes more sense to draw their
attention towards the text they are about to read rather than remind them of what they
have just read. This distinguishment between the interventions of groups A and B has
been encapsulated in the following design consideration:
20
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:29==
• Focus: Each intervention is considered as belonging to either group A (“passive” in­
terventions) or group B (“active” interventions), and the focus of the context­preserving
functionality should differ depending on the group.
– Group A: The context­preserving functionality should focus on drawing the reader’s
attention towards the text they are about to read and away from the text they
have just read.
– Group B: The context­preserving functionality should focus on reminding the
reader of what they have just read.
Apart from the above, four other design considerations based on the context of the read­
ing application have been established, and they are listed below. These considerations
apply to all interventions no matter which group they belong to in the Focus design con­
sideration, and they establish the focus of the remainder of the design process for the
context­preserving functionality.
• Pop­out: The context­preserving functionality should have a pop­out effect such
that it stands out from the remaining parts of the application, thus guiding the reader’s
gaze towards the desired focus.
• Ephemerality: The functionality should not be permanently present; rather, it should
disappear after some time to allow the reader to continue reading peacefully. Allow­
ing the functionality to remain a permanent part of the interface upon being triggered
may cause unnecessary disturbance for the reader, which is undesirable.
• Readability: The reader should be able to read the text highlighted by the context­
preserving functionality without trouble. The functionality thus cannot be too intru­
sive.
• Reader control: To allow the reader to remain in control of the application and thus
align with the User Control design principle[25], the non­highlighted text should also
remain readable and accessible even after the highlight is introduced. Disobeying
this may leave the reader feeling forced to behave in a certain way, which may, in
turn, cause them to disregard the application overall, which is undesirable.
3.3
Appearance of the Context­Preserving Functionality
The following section will discuss relevant design suggestions from chapter 2 as potential
design candidates for the appearance of the context­preserving functionality. The sug­
gestions will all be evaluated in relation to the five design considerations from section
3.2.
3.3.1
Using Masks
Zhai et al. [21] proposed masks as a means for highlighting items on a graphical user
interface, and among their suggestions, bleaching (foreground and background), dark­
ening (foreground and background), and screening (foreground only) performed better
on different aspects. These mock­ups were thus created to help assess their potential
as a design for the context­preserving functionality. They are presented in the following
subsections.
Background Masks
The bleaching and darkening background mask mock­ups are illustrated in figure 3.1.
Based on these, both background masks were quickly discarded as candidate designs
for the context­preserving functionality for both intervention groups A and B in the Focus
design consideration, as they were considered too intrusive. Concerns were made that
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
21
==PAGE:30==
introducing changes to the entire screen would startle readers more than help them and
disrupt their reading flow for a longer time, thus potentially prolonging the intervention time
unnecessarily. Furthermore, concerns about the readability and accessibility of the non­
highlighted text masked by the background mask were also made, and this was found to
violate the Reader control design consideration too much.
(a) Bleaching.
(b) Darkening.
Figure 3.1: Mock­ups for using background masks for highlighting text, based on the
background masks from Zhai et al. [21].
Foreground Masks
For the bleaching foreground masks, the intervention groups were considered individually.
For group B, the bleaching foreground mask (illustrated in figure 3.2) was considered too
subtle on levels 1 and 2, and on level 5 it was further feared that the bleaching would
compromise too much on the Readability design consideration. Although Zhai et al. [21]
concluded that neither of the masks seemed to compromise on readability, the author of
this thesis notes that the main goal of the experiment performed by Zhai et al. [21] was
for a user to locate targets containing at most short words or sentences. In contrast,
the primary goal for designing the context­preserving functionality is for people to search
through more dense texts to continue reading, even when the mask is applied. Stricter
requirements for readability must thus be expected in this particular context. On levels 3
and 4, the bleaching mask further seemed to have a “reverse” highlighting effect, where
the the text on which the mask is applied seemed to fall into the background, attracting
more attention to the non­masked text. This was undesirable, as it would compromise on
the Focus design consideration for this group.
For the Gradual intervention in group A, the same considerations as for group B applied for
bleaching levels 1, 2, and 5, respectively. For levels 3 and 4, however, it was considered
whether this “reverse” highlighting technique could instead be applied to the overlapping
text from a previous page to remove attention from it. An example of this design is illus­
trated in figure 3.3. The mock­up showed promising results, as it complied with all five
design considerations for this group, and it was thus considered a decent design candi­
date for the context­preserving functionality for the Gradual intervention.
The screening foreground mask (illustrated in figure 3.4) was considered too subtle on
level 1 for both intervention groups, most likely due to the overall low contrast between
the light sephia background and the yellow highlight. Contrastingly, on levels 3­5 it was
considered too intrusive, and on levels 4 and 5 the mask further seemed to compromise
the Readability design consideration on similar grounds to that of the bleaching mask.
On the other hand, a level 2 screening mask seemed to comply fine with all five design
22
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:31==
considerations for both groups. Thus, it was considered a reasonable design candidate
for the context­preserving functionality for all four interventions.
Lastly, the darkening foreground mask (illustrated in figure 3.5) was found to be a reason­
able design candidate for the context­preserving functionality for both intervention groups
on levels 1 or perhaps a mix of level 1 and 2 as it aligned well with all design considera­
tions. The remaining masks seemed to have a good pop­out effect, however they were
found to compromise too much on the Readability design consideration.
(a) Bleaching level 1.
(b) Bleaching level 2.
(c) Bleaching level 3.
(d) Bleaching level 4.
(e) Bleaching level 5.
Figure 3.2: Mock­ups for using a bleaching foreground mask for highlighting text, based
on the foreground masks from Zhai et al. [21].
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.3: Using a level 3 bleaching mask to create a “reverse” highlight effect, where the
overlapping text from a previous page (the two first sentences) is masked to emphasize
where the new text begins.
(a) Screening level 1.
(b) Screening level 2.
(c) Screening level 3.
(d) Screening level 4.
(e) Screening level 5.
Figure 3.4: Mock­ups for using a screening foreground mask for highlighting text, based
on the foreground masks from Zhai et al. [21].
24
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:33==
(a) Darkening level 1.
(b) Darkening level 2.
(c) Darkening level 3.
(d) Darkening level 4.
(e) Darkening level 5.
Figure 3.5: Mock­ups for using a darkening foreground mask for highlighting text, based
on the foreground masks from Zhai et al. [21].
3.3.2
Using Typographical Emphasis
Multiple typographical emphases highlighting techniques were suggested by the literature
reviewed in chapter 2. Because contradicting results were found for their effectiveness,
all suggestions except for increased font size were considered design candidates for the
context­preserving functionality. Although the increased font size was ranked by Strobelt
et al. [9][10] as the best highlighting technique in isolation, this type of highlight may not
have the desired effect when incorporated into the reading application. The interventions
introduced by the application may increase the font size similarly to the highlight, violat­
ing the Pop­out design consideration. This could, of course, be mitigated by making an
increased font size dynamic in relation to the font size changes introduced by the interven­
tion; however, concerns were also made with regards to making the highlight disappear
over time (the Ephemerality design consideration), as increasing the font size of a certain
text piece may also alter the position of the following text pieces. Their positions thus also
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
25
==PAGE:34==
have to be corrected when removing the highlight, and it was a cause for concern that this
would involve too much movement on the screen overall and disrupt readers too much,
potentially prolonging the intervention time.
(a) Bold text.
(b) Character border.
(c) Italic text.
(d) Shadowed text.
(e) Underlined text.
Figure 3.6: Examples of using typographical emphasis techniques to highlight text in the
reading application.
Mock­ups of each of the considered typographical emphasis techniques are illustrated
in figure 3.6. Upon immediate inspection, it became clear that all of these techniques,
except the character border and the underlined text, would be too subtle to catch the
reader’s attention for both intervention groups, thus compromising the Pop­out design
consideration. The darkening foreground mask presented in section 3.3.1 was, however,
far superior to both the underline and the character border in terms of pop­out effect, and
all typographical emphasis techniques were thus discarded as design candidates for the
context­preserving functionality for all interventions.
26
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:35==
3.3.3
Using Blinking Text
Highlighting by making text blink or flicker was suggested as a highlighting technique in
relation to icons by both Huang, Chen, and Chiang [19] and Wang et al. [17], and two
different mock­ups were made to assess the viability of this as a design candidate for the
context­preserving functionality.
An initial proposal was designed where text would flicker on and off so that the text would
disappear completely in the off state. The mock­up can be found in appendix A.1. It was
quickly discovered, however, that reading a blinking text is noticeably more difficult than
reading a static text, and this would probably disrupt the reading flow of the reader signif­
icantly, violating the Readability design consideration and potentially prolonging the time
intervention time. The benefit of the clear pop­out effect thus seemed to be outweighed
by the negative consequences of not being able to read the highlighted text properly. At­
tempts were made with different blinking frequencies, however none seemed to balance
the level of disruption and pop­out effect properly.
A second design was made where the text in the off­state was changed from 0 % visibility
to 40 % visibility in an attempt to mitigate some of the problems found by the first design.
This mock­up can be found in appendix A.2. With this design the reader would also be
able to read the highlighted text in the off state, however the blinking effect was still found
to be too intrusive as it caused too much movement, even at lower frequencies. Blinking
text was thus effectively discarded as a candidate for designing the context­preserving
functionality for both intervention groups.
3.3.4
Using Colors
Using colors as a highlighting technique has been proposed and tested multiple times by
many authors in the literature reviewed in chapter 2, suggesting that color generally works
well for highlighting something on a screen.
In general, it was found that color works well and is rated favorably by users when there
is a good contrast between the background and foreground color. Ling and van Schaik
[6] found that the background­foreground color combinations yellow on blue and blue on
white performed well in terms of improved search time. Huang, Chen, and Chiang [19],
and Huang [18] also found white on yellow and white on blue to perform better than other
color combinations. Shen et al. [20] found white on black, yellow on black, turquoise on
black, white on red, yellow on red, and white on red to show significantly shorter search
times than other color combinations. Krzos [7] found that black text color in combination
with cyan, green, and yellow background color performed better than other color com­
binations regarding user preferences. Strobelt et al. [9][10] found that black on yellow
performed better than multiple typographical emphasis techniques.
Mock­ups of these various different color combinations were created (illustrated in figure
3.7), however many of the design suggestions were effectively discarded, as it was found
that although they offer a strong pop­out effect, they would compromise too much on the
Readability design consideration for both intervention groups. The discarded combina­
tions include those with bright blue, yellow, and green background colors such as figures
3.7b, 3.7c, 3.7g, 3.7j, 3.7k, and 3.7l respectively. More subtle colors such as figure 3.7e
or 3.7f or perhaps pastel versions of the bright yellow or green were considered decent
choices. However, these would have to be investigated in more detail to determine if the
pop­out effect would compromise the effectiveness of the highlight, for instance, readabil­
ity or level of distraction.
It is worth noting that many of the color combinations proposed by the literature were
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
27
==PAGE:36==
tested for strong pop­out effects and fast searching time rather than readability. All com­
binations were further tested on shorter words or icons only. This is a quite different
context than for reading applications, where the readability of the highlight should be a
top priority. This may help explain why color combinations, which were otherwise rated
favorably in chapter 2, did not work well in this particular setting.
(a) Blue on white.
(b) Yellow on blue.
(c) White on blue.
(d) Turquoise on blue.
(e) White on black.
(f) White on red.
(g) White on yellow.
(h) Yellow on black.
(i) Yellow on red.
(j) Black on cyan.
(k) Black on green.
(l) Black on yellow.
Figure 3.7: Using the best background­foreground color combinations suggested by the
findings of chapter 2 as the context­preserving functionality.
Apart from using two colors for highlighting, Krzos [7] also suggested using a single text
color as a highlighting technique, and among their suggestions, green was ranked the
best, and the remaining colors (except for yellow) showed no significant differences be­
tween each other. Strobelt et al. [9][10] also found red text color to perform better than
multiple typographical emphasis techniques, and Gagl [14] established that the color blue
can be safely used as a highlighting technique, as it does not compromise significantly on
readability.
Mock­ups of the various colors suggested by the above authors were created, and they are
28
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:37==
illustrated in figure 3.8. Through these, it became clear that text color generally seemed
to work well for highlighting text in the reading application. However, some colors should
be avoided, such as the bright green and cyan in figures 3.8c and 3.8b respectively, due
to the poor contrast between the background and foreground, which compromises the
Readability design consideration.
(a) Blue.
(b) Cyan.
(c) Green.
(d) Magenta.
(e) Red.
Figure 3.8: Using the best text colors suggested by the findings of chapter 2 as the context­
preserving functionality.
3.3.5
Final Design Candidates
Based on the above analysis, a list of candidates for the appearance of the context­
preserving functionality could be derived for each intervention group. The lists are dis­
played in tables 3.1 and 3.2, respectively.
The design candidates will be evaluated further in section 3.5.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
29
==PAGE:38==
Group A: Gradual
Highlighting technique
Where to apply it
Notes
Screening
foreground
mask, level 2
On a part of the new text
that the reader is about to
read
Darkening
foreground
mask, level 1 or 2
On a part of the new text
that the reader is about to
read
Bleaching
foreground
mask, level 3 or 4
On the overlapping text be­
tween the previous and the
new page, i.e., on a part of
the text that the reader was
reading right before the in­
tervention was triggered
This will create a “reverse”
highlight effect, where the
emphasis is put on the new
text by masking the old one
Foreground­background
color
combinations
with
more subtle colors than
what
has
been
investi­
gated in chapter 2
On a part of the new text
that the reader is about to
read
These
have
yet
to
be
tested
for
effectiveness
such
as
pop­out
effect,
readability
or
level
of
distraction, etc.
Text colors such as blue,
red, magenta, or other col­
ors that provide good con­
trast between background
and foreground color as
well as readability
On a part of the new text
that the reader is about to
read
Selecting a color that has
not been explored by the
works presented in chap­
ter 2 must be done with
care, as this will not have
been tested for pop­out ef­
fect, readability or level of
distraction etc.
Table 3.1: Design candidates for the appearance of the context­preserving functionality
for the interventions of group A (Gradual).
3.3.6
On the Ephemerality of the Highlight
As stated in section 3.2, one of the design considerations concerns the ephemerality of the
highlight introduced by the context­preserving functionality. More specifically, it states that
once the highlight is introduced, it should also disappear again over time and not remain a
permanent part of the interface of the reading application. This design consideration was
important, as leaving a permanently highlighted piece of text may cause unnecessary
disturbance to the reader, which would be undesirable.
Since all of the highlighting techniques discovered in chapter 2 deal with permanent high­
lights, and thus not highlights that disappear over time, none of the related works offer any
guidelines on how a given technique can be removed from an interface again, or for how
long it should be present on the interface before being removed. Once again, it was nec­
essary to analyze the context in which the highlight was to be implemented to determine
possible answers to these questions.
For all updates to the user interface of the reading application, the level of disturbance
should be kept to an absolute minimum to avoid interrupting the reader too much or too
many times while they are reading. Thus, it makes logical sense that removing the high­
light should be performed easily and as subtly as possible. One could, of course, argue
that a fast removal ensures that the reader is not disturbed by the highlight for a too long
30
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:39==
Group B: Popup, Undo, and Notification
Highlighting technique
Where to apply it
Notes
Screening
foreground
mask, level 2
On a part of the text that the
reader was reading right
before the intervention was
triggered
Darkening
foreground
mask, level 1 or 2
On a part of the text that the
reader was reading right
before the intervention was
triggered
Foreground­background
color
combinations
with
more subtle colors than
what
has
been
investi­
gated in chapter 2
On a part of the text that the
reader was reading right
before the intervention was
triggered
These
have
yet
to
be
tested
for
effectiveness
such
as
pop­out
effect,
readability
or
level
of
distraction, etc.
Text colors such as blue,
red, magenta, or other col­
ors that provide good con­
trast between background
and foreground color as
well as readability
On a part of the text that the
reader was reading right
before the intervention was
triggered
Selecting a color that has
not been explored by the
works presented in chap­
ter 2 must be done with
care, as this will not have
been tested for pop­out ef­
fect, readability or level of
distraction etc.
Table 3.2: Design candidates for the appearance of the context­preserving functionality
for the interventions of group B (Popup, Undo, and Notification).
time; however, this would require a sudden change to the user interface, which may cause
additional disturbance and/or confusion and cause the reader to leave their reading flow.
This undesirable behavior also contradicts the purpose of the context­preserving func­
tionality, which is to help readers resume reading as fast as possible. Thus, the removal
should not be too sudden, rather it should happen slowly and over time to minimize poten­
tial disruption of the reader’s reading flow. An example of such removal could be a fading
animation, where the highlighted text slowly fades from a highlighted state back to a nor­
mal state. Fading animations are very common in user interfaces, and depending on the
development platform, they are usually highly customizable. Questions thus arise on how
to configure this fading animation to best suit the context of the reading application. As
no guidelines could be provided from the related works, the author ultimately decided the
configuration in an autobiographical manner (see section 3.1) based on experimentation.
During this process, it was considered that the highlight should be present long enough
for readers to recognize it but not for too long, as this may provide an undesirable user
experience. It was also considered that the preferred timing of the fading animation may
depend on the reading speed of individual readers using the application – fast readers
may prefer the highlight to be present for a shorter time than slow readers – or how fast
they respond to the changes applied to the user interface through the intervention.
Previous work by Pereira and Andrei [1] found that the total time it takes from an interven­
tion has ended to the reader resumes reading spans from 13 to 17 seconds without any
context­preserving functionality. Since the purpose of the context­preserving functional­
ity is to decrease this time, it logically follows that the highlight should be present on the
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
31
==PAGE:40==
reading interface for less than 17 seconds. Experimentation showed that a configuration
of three seconds of constant highlight followed by a three­second fading animation back
to normal worked well. This means the highlight will be visible on the reading interface
for six seconds. This timing provided just enough guidance without interfering too much
with the reading flow, thus providing a comfortable user experience. The configuration is,
of course, a subject of discussion, as it has been determined through autobiographical
design, and thus, it may not fit all users of the reading application. Nevertheless, this was
considered a reasonable design decision for this thesis, considering the novelty of the
research area, and ultimately a decision on the configuration had to be made.
Relevant details on the implementation of the fading animation will be presented in chapter
4.
3.4
How Much Context is Enough?
The above section focused on figuring out which highlighting technique(s) the context­
preserving functionality could utilize regarding appearance. This included experimenting
with colors, masks, and typographical emphasis techniques to discover the best design
suggestions that align with the five design considerations Focus, Readability, Pop­out,
Ephemerality, and Reader control. Another essential aspect of the context­preserving
functionality, however, includes figuring out how much to highlight. In other words, how
much context would a reader need to be able to resume reading fast after an intervention
has been triggered? The following section provides an analysis of potential design sug­
gestions for the amount of context to highlight and arrives at the three suggestions Word,
Sentence, and Paragraph, which have been implemented in the reading application.
As discovered through the literature review, reading applications with adaptive user inter­
faces, such as the one currently being developed by the Reading the Reader research
project, is a novel research area. Further, only one relevant paper on the density of high­
lighted words in visual searches was discovered, namely the works of Kickmeier­Rust and
Albert [16]. Although their findings reveal that highlighting a relatively small amount of text
does improve a user’s search time, their experiment setting was vastly different than the
setting of the reading application. In contrast to Kickmeier­Rust and Albert [16], we are
not interested in highlighting so­called ”non­target” words, meaning words unimportant for
a reader to preserve context after an intervention has been triggered. Kickmeier­Rust and
Albert [16] further states that more research is needed to determine if the optimal density
of highlighted words depends on the type of material searched. Thus, previous research
can only be sparsely utilized to determine how much context the context­preserving func­
tionality should provide to help readers resume reading fast.
At first, we consider the smallest amount of context that the context­preserving function­
ality could provide to a user. Arguably, this constitutes a single word, and it should further
be the last word the user was reading before an intervention was triggered. Otherwise,
the user would not be presented with the most recent context. One could, of course, ar­
gue that words consist of characters and that a single character provides an even smaller
context than a word. In contrast to words, however, single characters do not offer much
meaningful interpretation when reading a text consisting of many words spanning multiple
pages, as would be the use case for the reading application developed by the Reading the
Reader research project. For example, imagine reading the sentence “The dog danced
around the sandy field.” Imagine further that the context­preserving functionality would
provide the letter d in the word danced as context to the user when typography changes
have been applied by an intervention. Although d is a part of five of the seven words
in the sentence, and thus arguably a big part of its context, it does not in itself offer any
32
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:41==
meaningful interpretation that a reader can use to decipher where in the text they were
reading when an intervention was triggered. Contrastingly, the word danced would in­
stantly provide important associations for the reader (for instance, that it was the dog who
was dancing), which can help them regain context faster after the intervention has ended.
Furthermore, in a large review of research on eye movements in reading and information
processing, Rayner [26] states that a mean saccade traverses between 7­9 letter spaces
when reading English silently. Other research on how the brain processes language has
also found evidence suggesting that readers do not ordinarily read each letter in a word,
rather they process the word as a whole2. Lastly, it requires very well­calibrated and
precise eye­tracking equipment to track a single character instead of a full word. Prelim­
inary experimentation with the eye­tracking tool used throughout this thesis showed that
although it was of good quality, it was difficult to track the current character a user was
looking at accurately. All of the above suggests that the smallest meaningful context the
context­preserving functionality could provide to a reader is a single word. From this point
forward, this design will be referred to as the highlight mode Word.
Questions thus arise on whether a single word would be enough context. Imagine, for
instance, reading the following piece of text: “First, the dog was looking out the window.
Then the dog was dancing next to the fireplace.” In this case, the word dog appears in both
sentences. Highlighting dog alone would thus not provide much context to the reader –
was the dog looking out the window or dancing when I stopped reading? One could thus
argue that a single word is an incomplete context, whereas a full sentence is a more
complete one, as it (usually) contains more words and thus more information. Providing a
more complete context to a reader after an intervention has ended may decrease the time
it takes them to resume reading more significantly, compared to only providing a single
word. From this point forward, this design suggestion will be referred to as the highlight
mode Sentence.
Expanding on the above reasoning, one could further argue that although a sentence is a
more complete context, it still provides the reader with limited information. The texts used
for the experiment of this thesis are the same as those used in previous work (more on
this in chapter 5). Examining these reveals that all texts consist of paragraphs and that all
paragraphs comply with the following definition from Cambridge University Dictionary3:
”[a paragraph is] a short part of a text, consisting of at least one sentence and
beginning on a new line. It usually deals with a single event, description, idea,
etc.”
It follows logically that sentences can be a part of paragraphs but not the other way around,
and this thus implies that a paragraph can be understood as a more complete context
than a sentence. Once again, providing a more complete context, such as a paragraph,
may decrease the intervention time more significantly than providing only a sentence.
From this point forward, this design suggestion will be referred to as the highlight mode
Paragraph.
One could, of course, continue this line of reasoning and arrive at multiple other sug­
gestions for the amount of context the context­preserving functionality could highlight.
2In a blog post, Matt Davis from the MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit at Cambridge University broke
down the science behind a viral meme from 2003 on the phenomenon of typoglycemia, which is the ability to
read even when the letters inside individual words are scrambled. His post refers to multiple scientific papers
suggesting that information in the shape of an entire word plays an important role when reading. Source:
https://www.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/people/matt.davis/cmabridge/. Last accessed: 31­12­2024.
3Source: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/paragraph. Last accessed: 01­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
33
==PAGE:42==
Examples include providing a set of words, sentences, or paragraphs, and all of these
may be equally good design suggestions. These suggestions must, of course, also be
examined in greater detail, and considerations of, e.g., how many words a “set” of words
consists of or what relation they have to the last word the reader was reading before the
intervention was triggered should be explored further. Since no research on the density of
highlights for context­preserving functionalities for reading applications with adaptive user
interfaces has been conducted, it was decided to keep the design simple. Furthermore,
the design suggestions Word, Sentence, and Paragraph are all based on well­defined
concepts within reading, which was favorable. Lastly, Kickmeier­Rust and Albert [16]
found that highlighting a smaller part of the interface results in shorter search times com­
pared to highlighting a large part, which also suggests that Paragraph may be a decent
upper bound on the amount of context to provide to the reader.
3.5
Where Do We Learn the Most?
The above sections revealed multiple design suggestions for the context­preserving func­
tionality, all focusing on important aspects. For the appearance, relevant candidates from
the related work have been listed in section 3.3.5. For the density of the context, the three
suggestions Word, Sentence, and Paragraph have been derived and described in section
3.4.
As also captured by RQ2, this thesis aims to propose a design for the context­preserving
functionality and test its effect on the user’s performance and preferences. Since multiple
design suggestions seemed equally viable, the author found it suitable to develop a test
case where more than one design option was explored. It became apparent, however,
that it would be infeasible to include all suggestions in such a test case, as this would
become too complicated to properly execute and analyze within the limited time frame of
this project. Thus, the design candidates had to be prioritized to determine which would
bring the most value to the Reading the Reader research project upon being tested.
The analysis of the design space showed that there are two overall approaches to the
design of the context­preserving functionality: 1) focusing on the appearance (colors,
masks, etc.), and 2) focusing on the density (amount of highlight). The findings of the
related work of chapter 2 revealed that plenty of research on how to design the appearance
of a highlight for visual searches has already been conducted. Although these findings
have not been discovered and tested directly within the context of reading applications
with adaptive user interfaces, they can still be applied, as shown by the analysis of section
3.3. The density of the highlight, on the other hand, is a relatively novel research area
with no significant findings as of the writing of this thesis. It was thus decided that the
test scenario for this project would focus on testing the different density options for the
context­preserving functionality, as this was found to provide more learning opportunities
for the Reading the Reader research project. The details of the experiment designed to
test the different candidates are outlined in chapter 5.
A design for the appearance of the highlight still has to be chosen; otherwise, it would not
be visible on the user interface. Ultimately it was decided to differentiate between the two
intervention groups of the Focus design consideration based on the following reasoning:
After some preliminary tests, the bleaching mask was found to work the best for the Grad­
ual intervention as the reverse highlighting effect provided some nice connotations to the
design – the idea that the overlapping text remains “in the background” because it has
already been read – that the other design candidates did not. The bleaching mask was
further found to be easy to implement, as the bleaching effect could be achieved by chang­
ing the text color from black to a nuance of gray. This would also allow for the smoothest
34
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:43==
fading animation between the highlighted and non­highlighted state of the text. However,
as the bleaching mask did not provide a good design candidate for the interventions of
group B it was instead decided that the context­preserving functionality should highlight
text by making the text color blue for the Popup, Undo, and Notification interventions.
This was, among other things, motivated by the ease of implementation, and similar to
the bleaching mask, selecting a text color would create the smoothest fading animation
between the highlighted and non­highlighted state. Finally, although a red text color has
been tested slightly more than a blue, the author found that using a complimentary color
for the highlight in relation to the background (sephia vs. blue) would provide a slightly
better pop­out effect. The latter is once again an autobiographical design choice. For
future work, it may be more appropriate to allow readers to select their highlight color
based on their preferences. It may also be worthwhile to investigate whether there is a
significant difference between the effects of using different designs for the appearance of
the highlight.
3.6
Final Design
The final design of the context­preserving functionality is as follows:
For each of the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification, the following three highlight­
ing modes have been designed:
• Word: The last word that the reader was reading before an intervention was trig­
gered will be highlighted.
• Sentence: The last sentence that the reader was reading (or in the midst of reading)
before an intervention was triggered will be highlighted.
• Paragraph: The last paragraph that the reader was reading (or in the midst of read­
ing) before an intervention was triggered will be highlighted.
All text, no matter which highlighting mode, will be highlighted by changing the color from
black (hex color code: #000000) to blue (hex color code: #0000FF). The blue color will
remain persistent for three seconds, after which it will fade from blue to black again for a
duration of three seconds. The highlight is thus present on the screen for six seconds. An
example of the design of the Word, Sentence, and Paragraph highlight mode is presented
in figure 3.9.
Only one highlight mode has been designed for the Gradual intervention. This highlight
mode includes displaying the text that overlaps from one page to the next with a gray color
(hex color code: #808080) to create a bleaching mask effect. The gray color will remain
persistent for three seconds, after which it will fade from gray to black again for a duration
of three seconds, similar to the blue highlight for the other interventions. The highlight
is thus present on the screen for six seconds. Figure 3.10 presents an example of the
gradual highlight mode.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) The Word highlight mode.
(b) The Sentence highlight mode.
(c) The Paragraph highlight mode.
Figure 3.9: Examples of the different highlight modes designed for the interventions
Popup, Undo, and Notification.
Figure 3.10: Example of the highlight mode for the Gradual intervention.
36
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:45==
4
Context­Preserving Functionality ­
Implementation
The following chapter will present relevant implementation details of the context­preserving
functionality in the reading application. Section 4.1 provides an overview of the different
layers of the application and the data flow among them. Section 4.2 introduces important
clean­up and refactoring steps implemented to maintain the reading application better.
Section 4.3 presents the algorithm that has been used for transforming gaze data from
the eye tracker to screen coordinates as well as an extra calibration step that was needed
due to issues with the built­in calibration of the Tobii eye tracking system. Finally, section
4.4 presents the algorithm for figuring out which text to highlight based on a user’s gaze
data.
The application code has been provided with the hand­in of this thesis and it is also avail­
able in an online Git repository, which can be found in appendix F.
4.1
Overview of the Application
The reading application uses the React1 library with a mix of TypeScript, Python, and
.tsx files (a syntax extension to TypeScript to support writing HTML­like markup2). The
application can be run using the following command line prompt:
pnpm run dev
Figure 4.1 presents an overview of the application structure. As can be seen from the
figure, the application consists of three main layers: a data layer, a domain layer, and a
UI layer.
The data layer consists of a server implemented in the tobii.py file. Among the server’s
most important responsibilities is to receive raw gaze data from the eye tracker, filter this,
and forward the most necessary data to the domain layer to update UI to align with the
user’s behavior. Secondly, the server also receives updates on events triggered in the
application, such as when interventions are triggered. Finally, it stores the raw gaze data
and the received events in relevant files for later retrieval. The tobii.py file has only been
modified slightly during this thesis to comply with the new experiment setup where both
intervention types and highlight modes are tested. To run the server script, the following
command line can be used:
python tobii.py <user id> <intervention type> <highlight mode>
The user ID, intervention type, and highlight mode arguments are only used for naming
the CSV and log files under which the user’s data is stored. Note that the highlight mode
argument is effectively discarded for the Gradual intervention.
The following intervention type options are available: g (Gradual), p (Popup), u (Undo),
and n (Notification). Similarly, the following highlight mode options are available: p (Para­
graph), s (Sentence), w (Word), and n (no highlight).
The domain layer consists of the Connector class, a class implemented during the work
of this thesis. The main purpose of the domain layer is to facilitate the communication
1Source: https://react.dev/. Last accessed: 09­01­2025.
2Source: https://react.dev/learn/writing-markup-with-jsx. Last accessed: 09­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) An overview of the application layers.
(b) A specification of the features
and sub­layers of the UI.
Figure 4.1: An overview of the different layers in the application and what data flows
between them.
between the data layer and the UI layer. The details of how the Connector class works
are covered in section 4.2.2.
Finally, the UI layer is responsible for rendering the user interface of the reading applica­
tion, and it consists of three main features: Calibrator, Library, and Book. The Calibrator
feature has been implemented during this thesis, and it covers an extra calibration step
deemed necessary for the context­preserving functionality to work properly. This will be
covered in section 4.3.1. The Library feature consists of the library screen presented
in section 1.1, where the user can view the books available in the reading application.
This layer has not been modified during the course of this thesis. Finally, the Book fea­
ture is responsible for rendering the book screen described in section 1.1, where the
user can read the contents of a selected book. The Book feature further contains two
sub­layers, Page and Dialogs, where Page is responsible for rending the actual book
screen, and Dialogs contains all the dialogs available in the application. This covers the
intervention dialogs NotificationDialog, UndoDialog, and PopupDialog, as well as the
FontAdjustmentSuggestionDialog which corresponds to the layout settings dialog of fig­
ure 1.2. The latter dialog has not been modified during the course of this thesis.
The Page layer in the Book feature consists of multiple components layered on top of
each other to create the desired layout of the book screen. The structure of these layers
is illustrated in figure 4.2.
38
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.2: An overview of the layered components in the Page layer of the Book feature.
4.2
Clean Up and Refactoring of Existing Code
Throughout the implementation of the context­preserving functionality, many smaller or
larger clean­up and refactoring steps were introduced to allow for better application main­
tenance. The most important ones will be highlighted in this section.
4.2.1
Enforcing Single Responsibility and Removing Redundancy
Before this clean­up, many components were gathered inside the same files, making
distinguishing between their purpose and responsibilities difficult. To get a better overview
of the individual components and their interactions as well as allow for better maintenance
in the future, the single responsibility principle3 was utilized to split the large files into
individual components.
During this clean­up, redundant and unused components and code snippets were also
deleted. Among others, this concerns the PopupBorderDialog component, which was
a duplicate of the PopupDialog component. Furthermore, many components also con­
tained a lot of unused imports. Additional cleaning may be needed in the future, for in­
stance, to align and merge the four files tobii.py, tobiiAsyncio.py, tobiisl.py, and
tobiisl2.0.py that all seem to be a different version of handling a connection to the eye
tracker.
4.2.2
Introducing the Connector Class
The Connector class was implemented based on a need for centralized handling of the
connection between the reading application and the Tobii eye tracker, as it became clear
that multiple components were creating open connections simultaneously. This was found
to be redundant, confusing, and hard to maintain.
The main part of the Connector class consists of creating a web socket that connects to a
localhost server on port 8765. This server is hosted by the tobii.py script, where mes­
sages between the eye tracker, the reading application, and the server are exchanged.
The primary message direction is from the server to the Connector class where new gaze
3For instance described in this Medium article:
https://medium.com/@GetInRhythm/mastering-solid-
principles-a-comprehensive-guide-for-software-engineers-da53b054c9e1. Last accessed: 09­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
39
==PAGE:48==
data is forwarded from the eye tracker. Upon receiving a message with gaze data, the
Connector first transforms the data to screen coordinates using the algorithm presented
in section 4.3. It then determines whether the application is in a state of calibration or
not. If calibration is in progress, the screen coordinates are stored in appropriate arrays
as described in section 4.3.1. Otherwise, the screen coordinates are subject to extra cal­
ibration. If the application is in a state that should listen for new gaze data, the updated
screen coordinates are forwarded to the appropriate listeners.
The Connector class supports having multiple listeners. At first, this was required be­
cause of previous implementations, however all other listeners except for the BookPane
component were effectively removed during clean up. It was decided, however, to keep
the multiple listeners functionality, as it provides a nice way to expand the reading applica­
tion in the future. The listeners are handled in the Connector class through the listeners
variable, an array of ListenerFunctions. A ListenerFunction is a specific type of func­
tion that all listeners must comply with, and its interface is depicted in listing 4.1. Multi­
ple subtypes could be added in the future if needed. A listener is added by calling the
addListener() function on the Connector component, which adds it to the listeners
array. Similarly, a listener is removed again by calling the removeListener() function.
1
type ListenerFunction = (event: string) => void;
Listing 4.1: The ListenerFunction interface.
To ensure a consistent amount of listeners in the application, a listener should be added
only when a component mounts and similarly be removed when the component unmounts
again. For example, the BookPane calls the removeListener function as depicted in listing
4.2 when it unmounts. A similar pattern should be followed if listeners are added to other
places in the application.
1
useEffect(() => {
2
return () => {
3
connector.removeListener(eventListener)
4
}
5
}, [connector]);
Listing 4.2: Removing the BookPane listener when the component unmounts.
Currently, there is only one scenario where the screen coordinates should not be for­
warded to the listeners. To understand this, a bit of background information is needed.
Whenever gaze data is sent to the BookPane listener, and the coordinates are within the
reading area, BookPane will update its currentElement variable. The reading area is de­
fined as the light orange rectangle where text is displayed in the book screen of 1.1b, or
similarly the BookPane component in figure 4.2. The currentElement variable stores the
HTML element that best resembles the text the user is currently reading. The variable will
thus also naturally store the element the reader was reading right before an intervention is
triggered. The algorithm for determining this is described in greater detail in section 4.4.
Whenever a Popup intervention is triggered, a dialog will be displayed in the center of the
screen, as shown in figure 1.3a. This means that the dialog is also displayed in the center
of the reading area. Thus, any gaze data forwarded to BookPane while the user looks at
the dialog will be considered valid and will cause an update in the currentElement vari­
able. Any updates after the intervention is triggered mean that the currentElement will
no longer contain the value of the element that the user was reading right before the inter­
vention was triggered. This is undesirable behavior, as it will cause the context­preserving
40
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:49==
functionality to highlight the wrong text. To avoid this, the application is thus set to not lis­
ten for new gaze data once the Popup intervention is triggered. The application returns to
a listening state again whenever the dialog is dismissed. For the remaining interventions,
the above is not an issue; when triggering an Undo intervention, the text is highlighted
instantaneously; thus, no incorrect update to the currentElement will happen. For the
Notification intervention, the dialog is displayed outside of the reading area, which means
that any screen coordinates received here will not be considered valid in terms of reading,
and no update to the currentElement variable will be triggered here either. For the Grad­
ual intervention, the above is not needed at all, as the context­preserving functionality
highlights overlapping text between consecutive pages.
The Connector class exports a reference object that can be imported elsewhere in the
application, inspired by the Singleton design pattern. To ensure that only one connection is
established between the tobii.py server and the connector, the connection is initialized
in the _app.tsx file using the init() function, which connects to the localhost server
on port 8765. The _app.tsx file defines the application’s main component, which is the
component initialized by the Next.js library upon launching the reading application.
4.3
Transforming Data from the Eye Tracker to Screen
Coordinates
Gaze data is received from the eye tracker through the Connector class, where it is trans­
formed into screen coordinates. The exact transformation has been implemented during
previous work on the reading application and moved to the Connector class during a
refactoring step. A minor update to the transformation algorithm has been added for this
project, which is an extra calibration step described in section 4.3.1.
The transformation from gaze data to screen coordinates is a linear scaling transformation.
Gaze data is received as floating point values in the domain [0, 1], and these are scaled
using the scaleLinear() function from the d3 React library to an output domain. In this
case, the output domain is the size of the screen. A code snippet of the transformation is
shown in listing 4.3. Note that four values are received from the server. This corresponds
to the left and right eye gaze coordinates, respectively, and the gaze point on the screen
is found as the average of these points.
1
// Format gaze data to average of received numbers
2
const gazeCoords = event.data.replace(/()/, '').split(",");
3
4
const leftX = parseFloat(gazeCoords[0]);
5
const leftY = parseFloat(gazeCoords[1]);
6
const rightX = parseFloat(gazeCoords[2]);
7
const rightY = parseFloat(gazeCoords[3]);
8
9
const gazeX = (leftX + rightX) / 2;
10
const gazeY = (leftY + rightY) / 2;
11
12
// Scale formatted data to window coordinates
13
const scaleX = d3.scaleLinear()
14
.domain([0, 1])
// Input domain
15
.range([0, window.innerWidth]); // Output domain
16
17
const scaleY = d3.scaleLinear()
18
.domain([0, 1])
// Input domain
19
.range([0, window.innerHeight]); // Output domain
20
21
const scaledGazeX = scaleX(gazeX);
22
const scaledGazeY = scaleY(gazeY);
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.3: An illustration of the eye tracker issue experienced by the thesis’s author. The
eye tracker had trouble calibrating properly to the upper and lower bounds of the screen,
leaving the screen to seem “shorter” than it actually was, causing the context preserving
functionality to select the wrong item to highlight.
23
24
// Perform extra calibration
Listing 4.3: Transforming gaze data to screen coordinates
4.3.1
Extra Calibration
During preliminary experiments with the context­preserving functionality, it was discov­
ered that, specifically for the author of this thesis, the eye tracker had trouble calibrating
properly at the top and bottom of the screen. More specifically, the tracker consistently
found that the screen was “shorter” than it actually was, and thus it had trouble selecting
the correct word, sentence, or paragraph to highlight. This issue is illustrated in figure 4.3
for clarification. Multiple attempts were made to mitigate this issue prior to implementing
the extra calibration step. This included experimenting with a headrest to minimize head
movements during and after calibration, positioning the head in different ways in relation
to the eye tracker, and positioning the body at different horizontal distances to the tracker.
None of these solutions could properly resolve the issue, however.
The extra calibration step has been implemented through the Calibrator function in the
calibrator.tsx file. The Calibrator consists of a new screen, and the different states of
the screen are illustrated in figure 4.4. The extra calibration works as follows: The reader
is instructed to press the space bar on the keyboard, after which a red circle appears at
the top of the screen, as shown in figure 4.4a. Upon pressing space, the application is
instructed to collect gaze data and store this in a dedicated topPoints array. The red dot
is visible for five seconds, after which it will disappear, and the gaze data collection for this
dot will end. After a one second delay, a similar red dot will appear at the bottom of the
screen as depicted in figure 4.4b. Once this dot is visible, the application is instructed to
collect gaze data again, only storing this in a bottomPoints array. This dot is also visible
for five seconds, after which it disappears, and the gaze data collection ends.
Once gaze data has been collected for both points, a top and bottom value is calculated as
the average of the values stored in their respective arrays. These values are then stored
locally in the browser using the localStorage property, after which they can be retrieved
when the extra calibration is performed. The extra calibration is essentially another linear
scaling of the scaledY coordinate to match it better with the reading area of the reading
application. The scaling once again utilizes the d3 library, and the code of the scaling is
described in listing 4.4. Note that the output domain for the y coordinate is slightly different
42
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:51==
here than for the scaling algorithm in listing 4.3. This is because the calibration points only
cover the part of the screen where the text is displayed, disregarding, for instance, the
action bar at the top, as is also depicted in figure 4.4.
(a) Top calibration.
(b) Bottom calibration.
Figure 4.4: Screenshots of the extra calibration step.
1
// Fetch data for the calibration points in screen coordinates
2
const topY = parseFloat(localStorage.getItem(CalibrationPoint.TOP + "Y") ?? "0
");
3
const bottomY = parseFloat(localStorage.getItem(CalibrationPoint.BOTTOM + "Y")
?? "0");
4
5
// Stretch data in the y direction to match the reading area of the
application
6
const mapY = d3.scaleLinear()
7
.domain([topY, bottomY])
8
.range([50, window.innerHeight - 90]);
9
10
const mappedY = mapY(scaledGazeY);
Listing 4.4: Extra calibration of gaze data
It is worth noting that the above calibration is not based on any scientific findings from
relevant papers or the like; rather, it is based purely on experimentation with and obser­
vations of the behavior of the reading application and the eye tracker. This is, of course,
not desirable, as this means that the method has not been scientifically proven to work
well. The intention was to use this calibration implementation as an explorative tool to
investigate the issue of the built­in calibration system for the eye tracker and then utilize
the findings to determine which other scientifically proven calibration method to imple­
ment instead. Due to time constraints, however, the latter could not be achieved without
significantly delaying the experimentation phase and, thus, the whole project. It was thus
decided to continue with the linear scaling algorithm described above as the extra cali­
bration step, as this had shown through experimentation to mitigate some of the issues
of the built­in calibration in a satisfactory manner.
4.4
Determining Which Text to Highlight
The following section will describe how the context­preserving functionality determines
which text to highlight. The exact algorithm used depends on whether the intervention
being triggered belongs to group A or B of the intervention groups of the Focus design
intervention, as different handling strategies are needed for these. Common to both are,
however, that they utilize the fact that each epub file provided to the application is rendered
as plain HTML code, where each paragraph of the book is wrapped in a p tag. Among
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
43
==PAGE:52==
others, this has been used to determine the position of each paragraph in the book and
on which page it is rendered by calling the TypeScript built­in getBoundingClientRect()
function. The following subsections will present the two algorithms for determining which
text to highlight.
4.4.1
Group A: Gradual
For the Gradual intervention of group A, the goal is to mask any overlapping text between
the previous page and the new page once a typography change is triggered on a page
change. The primary functionality for determining this overlap has been implemented in
the fetchPage() function in the ReaderGridView component.
The layout of a book is stored in the reader component implemented in the reader.tsx
model file. Pages in a book are arranged horizontally and can be accessed by setting
a specific horizontal scroll offset. To figure out which text is rendered on each page,
the function pagedParagraphs() has been implemented on the reader component. This
function inspects all paragraphs in the book and determines their corresponding page by
examining the horizontal offset of the paragraph through the left property of the para­
graph’s boundingClientRect. The function then returns a dictionary of all pages in the
book and their corresponding paragraphs, as well as the current scroll position of the
layout, corresponding to the current page of the book.
When the Gradual intervention is active and a page change is triggered, the fetchPage()
uses the pagedParagraphs() function to fetch the layout of the page the user has just
read, and stored this in the variable oldLayout. The application then waits for a Promise
object from the handleNextPage() function, indicating that the next page has been ren­
dered, and then uses the fetchPage() function to fetch the paragraphs rendered on the
new page. This is stored in the variable newLayout. Any paragraphs being present in
both oldLayout and newLayout – elementsToAnimate – are then animated using the
fadeAnimation() function to mimic the bleaching mask. The animation specifications are
described in the intervention-reader.css style sheet as the fading-text-gray class
and keyframe controls. The fadeAnimation() function implements the fading animation
by adding the fading-text-gray class name to the elements of elementsToAnimate cor­
responding to paragraphs in the epub file.
4.4.2
Group B: Popup, Undo, Notification
For the interventions of group B, the goal is to highlight the last word, sentence, or para­
graph that the user was reading (or in the midst of reading) when an intervention was
triggered, in accordance with the Word, Sentence, and Paragraph highlighting modes.
This has been accomplished in the following manner:
As mentioned in the introduction of this section, each paragraph is wrapped in a p HTML
tag upon rendering the book. This allows us to determine the position of each paragraph
by calling the getBoundingClientRect() function. This works well for the Paragraph
highlight mode, however for the remaining highlight modes more granularity is needed.
Thus, modifications to the rendering of the epub file have been added, such that in the
case that either of the Word or Sentence highlight modes are selected, each word in
the text is also wrapped in a span tag with a word class. It is important to note that
white spaces are not considered words, and thus they are not wrapped in span elements,
rather the white space is left between the span elements. This also simplifies figuring out
which elements to highlight, which is described next, as only text is considered during this
process. The modification has been implemented by updating the applyCustomStyle()
callback function in the BookPane component.
44
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:53==
The BookPane component is set to receive events from the Connector class through the
call back function eventListener(). This function is responsible for handling two kinds
of events received by the Connector class:
• Type 1: events with new gaze coordinates from the user.
• Type 2: events indicating that a highlight should be displayed to the reader.
Upon receiving events of type 1, BookPane updates its currentElement variable, which is
a variable that stores the HTML element that best matches the current gaze coordinates
of the reader. For the Word and Sentence highlight modes the currentElement variable
stores a single word (a span element with class word), and for the Paragraph mode a
paragraph is stored (a p element).
The getCurrentElement() function determines which element to store. This function in­
spects all HTML elements (either paragraphs or words, depending on the highlight mode)
in the book to determine which element aligns the best with the current gaze coordi­
nates of the reader. The alignment is performed in the following manner: If the reader’s
gaze coordinates are inside the bounding box of a given HTML element (obtained by
the getBoundingClientRect() function), then currentElement is set to this element.
Otherwise, the shortest distance from the gaze point to the element is determined and
stored. This distance is calculated by observing the HTML element as surrounded by
eight “zones”, as depicted in figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5:
The different zones of an HTML element used by the algorithm of the
getCurrentElement() function to determine which element the reader is currently looking
at.
Different calculations are performed depending on which zone the gaze coordinates lie
within. For the zones top and bottom, the distance is calculated as the vertical distance
between the gaze coordinates and the corresponding side of the element, as a straight
line must be considered the shortest distance. Similarly, for the left and right zones, the
distance is calculated as the horizontal distance between the gaze coordinates and the
corresponding side of the element. For the corner zones top left, top right, bottom left,
bottom right, the shortest distance must be the straight line between the gaze coordinates
and the corresponding corner of the HTML element. Thus, the distance can be calculated
using the Pythagorean theorem[27]. An example is depicted in figure 4.6, where the gaze
coordinates are in the top left zone. Here the red distances can easily be determined using
the bounds of the HTML element and the screen coordinates of the current gaze point,
and the green distance can be determined by the Pythagorean theorem, for instance,
utilizing the hypot() function of the JavaScript Math library.
If the current gaze point of the user does not lie within the bounding box of any HTML ele­
ment in the book (word or paragraph), then a distance to all elements has been calculated,
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.6: Example of determining the shortest distance from the gaze coordinates to
the HTML element when the gaze coordinates lie in a corner zone.
and the element corresponding to the shortest distance is selected as the currentElement.
Once the currentElement is set and an event of type 2 is received, BookPane applies
a fading animation to the currentElement in a similar manner as for the elements be­
ing masked for the Gradual intervention. For the Sentence highlighting mode, however,
a final step must be performed before the animation is applied. As described earlier,
the variable currentElement stores either a word or a paragraph, depending on the
highlighting mode. This means that for the Sentence highlight mode, the sentence to
which the current word belongs must be identified. This is accomplished through the
findSentenceToHighlight() function. For the texts used in the experiment of this the­
sis, very simple end­of­sentence assumptions could be made, namely that a sentence is
always found between two period (“.”) characters. This is a very simplified assumption
that suited well for this project because of the format of the texts being used for experi­
mentation; however, this must be refined in the future to also suit other sentence formats,
for instance, sentences beginning or ending with question marks (“?”), exclamation points
(“!”) or quotation marks (“ ”), etc.
The specifications for the animation applied to the text being highlighted by the context­
preserving functionality for the interventions of group B are described in the intervention
-reader.css style sheet as the fading-text-blue class and keyframe controls.
A Note on the Assumptions behind the Algorithm
The above algorithm for determining which text to highlight is based on the assumption
that the attention of the reader is linked to the foveal gaze direction, i.e., that the user
will be looking directly at the words they are currently reading. This is a well­known as­
sumption within eye tracking work, as described in the book Eye Tracking Methodology ­
Theory and Practice by Duchowski [15]. This assumption may not always be true, how­
ever. Rayner [26] stated that although a majority of the words in a text are fixated when
reading English silently, many words are also skipped and thus not processed in the foveal
part of the gaze. For so called “function” words, which are shorter words, the probability
of fixating them during reading is a low as 35 %, and for “content” words, the probability
is 85 %. Furthermore, a clear relationship between word length and fixation probabil­
ity has been discovered, where words consisting of two or three characters are fixated
around 25 % of the time, whereas words with eight characters are almost always fixated,
and often more than once. This suggests that, when reading, some part of the text is
only processed parafoveally or peripherally, and more research is needed to investigate
whether this impacts the above assumption. Lastly, Akthar et al. [28] states that readers
with central vision loss tend to use eccentric viewing strategies such as Preferred Retinal
46
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:55==
Locus4 when reading. This means that text may no longer be processed in the gaze’s
foveal region; thus, the above assumption on reading behavior cannot support this group
of users. As supporting readers with central vision loss was not a part of the scope of
this thesis, this was not considered a major issue, however more research is of course
needed in the future to enhance the application further in relation to this.
4Shifting the vision slightly in an attempt to “look around” the central scotoma, which is the dark spot in the
center of the vision that is present upon central vision loss. Source: https://www.enhancedvision.com/low-
vision-info/preferred-retinal-locus.html. Last accessed: 06­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:57==
5
Experiment Design
The following chapter will describe how the conducted experiment (as part of answering
RQ2 and RQ3) has been designed.
5.1
Goal
The purpose of the experiment was to collect data that could help answer the questions
posed by RQ2 and RQ3, namely:
• RQ2: What is the effect of using the context­preserving functionality?
• RQ3: Is Gradual still the optimal intervention after introducing the context­preserving
functionality?
To be able to compare the results found in this experiment and the results of previous
work, the experiment of this thesis was structured in a similar fashion as that of Pereira
and Andrei [1], although necessary alterations were made to suit the context of this project
better. They will all be described in the following sections.
5.2
Design
Multiple experiment design options were investigated. However, it was ultimately decided
to use a variation of the repeated measures design as described in chapter 13 of the book
by Lammers and Badia [29]. This design offered the best option for answering RQ2 and
RQ3 while balancing the project’s limited time frame and resources. Other options, such
as a completely randomized factorial design and a mixed factorial design were consid­
ered; however, they were discarded based on the following reasoning: The completely
randomized factorial design would mean that each test participant would be randomly as­
signed to one level of each independent variable – a between­subjects design – meaning
that they would only experience one combination of intervention type and highlight mode.
This would require many more test participants than what could reasonably be gathered
for this project to determine statistical significance, and it was thus determined infeasible.
A mixed design is described by Lammers and Badia [29] as a combination of randomiza­
tion and repeated measures, where participants are randomly assigned to the different
levels of one independent variable while experiencing all levels of another independent
variable. This means that one of the independent variables is blocked for each participant.
For this experiment, blocking the highlight mode so that each participant would experience
only one highlight mode would not allow for the detection of any differences in preferences
for individual participants. Another concern with blocking the intervention type was that it
would allow too much learning effect between successive texts in an experiment. Thus,
the mixed factorial design was also discarded. Lastly, a fractional factorial design[30]
was also considered in an attempt to mitigate the learning effects from the mixed design,
among other aspects, however this would only allow for some effects of the interactions
between interventions and highlight modes to be distinguished. Compared to having a
repeated measures design, this was found to be less desirable.
The repeated measures design described by Lammers and Badia [29] focuses on ex­
periments where all test participants experience all combinations of all levels of the in­
dependent variables in an experiment. The independent variables for the experiment of
this thesis were identified as the intervention type (four levels: Popup, Undo, Notification,
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
49
==PAGE:58==
Participant
group
Text 1
Text 2
Text 3
Text 4
Group X
Popup + Word
Notification
+
Sentence
Undo + Para­
graph
Gradual
Group Y
Notification
+
Word
Undo + Sen­
tence
Popup + Para­
graph
Gradual
Group Z
Undo + Word
Popup + Sen­
tence
Notification
+
Paragraph
Gradual
Table 5.1: Experiment groups. Each participant was assigned randomly to one of these
groups during the experiment.
Gradual) and the highlight mode (three levels: Word, Sentence, Paragraph). Note that
the highlight mode is only applicable for the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification,
as the Gradual intervention has its own design. Creating an experiment where all partici­
pants would experience all combinations of the two independent variables would require
each participant to read 10 texts per experiment (one for Gradual, and three for each of
the remaining interventions). With an average reading time per text of almost four minutes
according to previous research by Pereira and Andrei [1] (not counting the time it takes a
participant to answer any questionnaires), a concern was that this would cause an unde­
sirable fatigue effect during the experiment. This was thus ruled as an infeasible design.
Instead, it was decided that each participant would experience only a subset of the pos­
sible combinations while still making sure that all participants experienced all levels of
each independent variable. To ensure that all combinations would still be tested during
the experiment, the combinations were divided into three groups as described in table
5.1, and all test participants were assigned randomly to one of the groups. By design, all
participants would experience all intervention types and highlight modes no matter which
group they would be assigned.
Furthermore, it was decided that each participant would experience a “baseline” treat­
ment consisting of one particular intervention type and highlight mode combination. This
would ensure that for one combination of the levels of the independent variables, many
more data points would be collected. Thus, a more confident estimation of the mean in­
tervention time for this combination could be established during the analysis phase, which
would increase the chances of determining a significant difference between this and other
treatments and thus provide better answers to RQ2 and RQ3. The selected combination
was the Popup intervention with the Sentence highlight mode. The Popup intervention
was selected based on previous research as Pereira and Andrei [1] found this to be the
second most favorable intervention next to Gradual. The Sentence highlight mode was
further selected, as this was found to be the design for the context density in which the
author had the most confidence, as it was found to provide just enough context without
asking the reader to reread too much text. The reader may note that, by the design of the
experiment, all test participants would also be exposed to the Gradual treatment; how­
ever, this intervention was not selected as the baseline because it does not have one of
the highlight modes Word, Sentence, or Paragraph. Data on this intervention thus cannot
help determine the effect of these highlight modes.
As can be seen in table 5.1, the Popup and Sentence combination would already be a
part of the selected treatments for group Z. To avoid too much repetition for this particular
group, as well as enable the collection of more data points for other combinations, it was
decided to replace the second Popup and Sentence treatment with either Undo and Sen­
50
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:59==
tence or Notification and Sentence, ensuring that the latter two treatments were exposed
equally many times. A table of the final groups can be found in table 5.2 in section 5.2.3.
The following section notes the texts being used for the experiment. Finally, section 5.2.3
provides a short summary of the experiment that the reader can refer to throughout the
remainder of the thesis.
5.2.1
Experiment texts
As seen in table 5.2, each participant is expected to read five texts during the experiment
of this thesis. To enable as much direct comparison between previous results and results
found by this thesis, it was decided to reuse the four texts from the experiment conducted
by Pereira and Andrei [1]. This concerns the fairy tale Blockhead Hans by Hans Christian
Andersen, the excerpt Four Sisters from the book Family of Liars by E. Lockhart, an
excerpt from the book The Subtle Knife by Phillip Pullman, and the excerpt Odin from the
book Norse Mythology by Neil Gaiman. Blockhead Hans can be freely obtained through
Project Gutenberg1, which is a library of free e­books. The remaining texts were not
available from Project Gutenberg, and Pereira and Andrei [1] did not clearly state in their
project from where these texts have been obtained, so their origin could unfortunately not
be determined properly. For the fifth text, it was decided to use the fairy tale The Little
Match Girl by Hans Christian Andersen, found through the library of Project Gutenberg,
as this is a public domain text, and thus, it is free to use. Furthermore, it was found to fit
well with the remaining text, which already included a fairy tale by this author.
The texts were divided such that the Blockhead Hans text was used for the Gradual in­
tervention only, and the remaining texts were used for the other interventions. This was
based on two grounds: firstly, to align with the experiment design of Pereira and Andrei
[1], and secondly, because the Blockhead Hans text is significantly longer than the other
texts and the Gradual intervention requires multiple page changes. Using any of the other
texts with the Gradual intervention would require them also to be significantly longer; oth­
erwise, the full effect of the intervention cannot be obtained. This would also mean that
the total reading times for each text would be longer, and thus, the total experiment time
would be prolonged. This was not desirable, as it was a concern that this would intro­
duce fatigue effects for the test participants. The Blockhead Hans text could have been
used for the other intervention types; however, as these interventions do not require page
changes, combining them with such a long text would be unnecessary.
5.2.2
Counterbalancing the Experiment
As the purpose of all interventions is similar (updating the typography of the current text
that the reader is reading), it was a concern that carry­over and learning effects would
interfere with the experiment results. Thus, counterbalancing was introduced in an at­
tempt to mitigate these issues. The counterbalancing was implemented by randomizing
the order in which interventions and highlight modes were shown to the participants so
that no two participants experienced the same order. Similarly, the order of the texts that
the participants were to read was also randomized such that every intervention and high­
light combination was exposed to every text (except for the fairy tale of Blockhead Hans
used only for the Gradual intervention as described in section 5.2.1). Lastly, every text
was also followed by every other text.
5.2.3
Experiment Design – Summary
The following section summarizes the design of the experiment conducted during this
thesis. The following variables were identified:
1Available at: https://www.gutenberg.org/. Last visited: 08­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
51
==PAGE:60==
• Independent variables:
– Intervention type. Four levels: Popup, Undo, Notification, Gradual.
– Highlight mode. Three levels: Word, Sentence, Paragraph. Note that the high­
light mode is only applicable for the Popup, Undo, and Notification interven­
tions, as the Gradual intervention has a different design.
• Dependent variables:
– Intervention time: The total time it takes from an intervention has been triggered
to the participant resumes reading. The intervention time is established based
on eye tracking data.
– Participant feedback. The feedback is based on data collected through ques­
tionnaires provided to participants after each text and a post­conversation be­
tween the participant and the experiment observer.
Both of the dependent variables will be described further in section 5.6
The test participants were assigned randomly to one of the groups of table 5.2.
Participant
group
Text 1
Text 2
Text 3
Text 4
Text 5
Group X
Popup
+
Sentence
Popup
+
Word
Notification
+ Sentence
Undo
+
Paragraph
Gradual
Group Y
Popup
+
Sentence
Notification
+ Word
Undo
+
Sentence
Popup
+
Paragraph
Gradual
Group Z
Popup
+
Sentence
Undo
+
Word
Undo
+
Sentence
OR
Noti­
fication
+
Sentence
Notification
+
Para­
graph
Gradual
Table 5.2: Final experiment groups. Each participant was assigned randomly to one of
the groups.
5.3
Physical Setup
The experiment was conducted on an HP EliteDesk 800 G2 TWR machine running Win­
dows 10 Pro, and the screen connected to it had a resolution of 2560×1440 pixels. Fur­
thermore, the eye tracker used was a Tobii 4C eye tracker2. For the experiment, the
participants were instructed to sit in front of the screen at a distance of approximately
60 cm. A keyboard and a mouse were provided to them on the table before the screen.
The participants were told that they should choose a position in the chair in which they
could remain seated with comfort for the duration of the entire experiment. The partic­
ipants were further instructed to sit and act as naturally as possible, without restricting
themselves unnecessarily, to mimic a real­life reading situation as much as possible. All
participants complied with this, and no participant seemed to move around in the chair
during the experiment in a matter which disrupted the data collection.
The experiment was conducted in a computer lab at the Technical University of Denmark
in November 2024.
2See more at: https://gaming.tobii.com/. Last accessed: 29­01­2025.
52
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:61==
5.4
Recruitment of Participants
Participants were recruited through various channels, among others, from the acquain­
tances of the author of this thesis. Furthermore, recruitment through the public Facebook
group “DTU Students ­ Technical University of Denmark”3, a group for all current or previ­
ous students of DTU, also took place. Fliers were further handed out at the canteen at the
Lyngby campus. Finally, attempts were also made to recruit participants through the DTU
Learn platform by reaching out to groups for which the author of the thesis had previously
been a teaching assistant. An example of the text written on the flyer, in the Facebook
post, or in an announcement on DTU Learn for recruiting participants is provided in ap­
pendix B.
Approximately half of the total number of participants for the experiment were recruited
from acquaintances of the author of the thesis. This, of course, poses a threat to the
viability of the obtained results, as there is a change of undesirable bias, for instance,
because the participant group all share certain characteristics (among others, they are all
university students or recent graduates from university) or they may have an emotional
attachment that makes them perform in a certain way. This bias should be considered
when evaluating whether the sample group accurately represents the larger group of po­
tential end users of the reading application. More on this in chapter 7. Due to the narrow
time frame and the limited resources available for the project, however, recruiting partici­
pants through acquaintances was considered a necessary part of the recruitment process
to obtain enough participants for the experiment.
5.5
Experiment Road Map
The road map for the experiment was as follows: Upon arriving at the computer lab,
the participant was greeted and shown where to sit. They were then presented with an
overview of the experiment and its goals, and the subject information letter and the con­
sent form were provided. Examples of both of these can be found in appendix C. A copy
of the letter was also provided to the participant to bring home after the experiment. After
agreeing to the terms presented in the letter and the consent form signed, the eye tracker
was calibrated to the participant through the Tobii eye tracker calibration software4. The
reading application was then presented to the participant, and they were provided some
time to familiarize themselves with it. Upon finalizing this, the extra calibration step (pre­
sented in section 4.3.1) was performed, after which the experiment was started.
For each experiment, the participant was instructed to read five different texts, all avail­
able in the reading application. During the reading session, the participant’s gaze data
would be recorded through the eye tracker and stored in appropriate files. The partici­
pant was instructed to press the space bar on the keyboard when they started reading
the text and again once they had finalized the reading. The time stamps of these key­
board presses were recorded in a log file together with a recording of the time stamp at
which the intervention was triggered. After each text, the participant was asked to answer
a reading comprehension test based on the text read (presented in section 5.6.3) and
then a questionnaire on their experience of the intervention they were exposed to (pre­
sented in section 5.6.4). A short post­conversation on the participant’s experience was
also performed, and relevant findings were written down.
Upon finalizing the reading of all texts, the participant was offered a soda and some candy
as a token of appreciation for participating in the experiment.
3Available at: https://www.facebook.com/groups/2240079379. Last accessed: 20­01­2025.
4See more at: https://www.tobii.com/. Last accessed: 20­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
53
==PAGE:62==
5.6
Data Collection
Participant data was collected in five manners for the experiment, and they will all be cov­
ered in the following subsections. Before any data collection, the participant was provided
a subject information letter stating which and how data would be collected and their rights
during and after the experiment. The subject information letter was based on resources
provided by the Institutional Review Board of DTU Compute, which is
”responsible for the evaluation of ethical considerations for projects involving
the collection of any human data (i.e. through experiments), which do not
fall within the area of competence and responsibility of the regional health
sciences ethics committees.”5
A copy of the letter can be found in appendix C.
5.6.1
Participant Demographics and Handle
Prior to starting the experiment, the participant was provided a handle (an id), under which
all of their data collected during the experiment would be stored. Furthermore, the follow­
ing demographics were collected on each participant:
• Name
• Age
• Occupation
• Self­reported vision condition
5.6.2
Eye Tracking Data
Throughout the experiment, the reader’s gaze position was continuously measured using
the Tobii 4C eye tracker system. This would provide valuable insights into the reading be­
havior of the participants, for instance, to determine how long it takes for them to resume
reading after an intervention has been introduced. The same metric was also measured
by Pereira and Andrei [1] in previous work, allowing direct comparison between the inter­
ventions with and without context preservation. The tracking is configured in the tobii.py
file as described in section 4.1. The Tobii eye tracker collects gaze data with a frequency
of 90 Hz6, and all data is forwarded to the tobii.py script where it is stored in a CSV
file. Data from each treatment the participant was exposed to (i.e., each intervention and
highlight combination they tried) was stored in separate CSV files. This allowed for easy
access and maintenance of the data for later analysis.
Aside from the reader’s gaze data, other time stamps were also recorded. As mentioned
in section 5.2, the reader was instructed to press the space bar on the keyboard whenever
they started or stopped reading during the experiment. Time stamps for each space bar
press were recorded in a separate log file (one for each treatment the participant was
exposed to). These time stamps allowed for easy filtration of the gaze data later on to
only observe data where the participant was reading. Similarly, the same log file recorded
a timestamp of when an intervention was triggered.
Before starting the experiment, the eye tracker was calibrated to the participant through
the built­in calibration tool provided by the Tobii software and the extra calibration step,
as explained in section 4.3.1.
5Available at: https://www.compute.dtu.dk/about-us/institutional-review-board. Last accessed: 08­01­
2025.
6Available
at:
https://help.tobii.com/hc/en-us/articles/213414285-Specifications-for-the-Tobii-Eye-
Tracker-4C. Last accessed: 09­01­2025.
54
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:63==
5.6.3
Reading Comprehension Tests
Upon finalizing the reading of a text, the participant was provided with a reading compre­
hension test. This test was created to help ensure that participants were actively attempt­
ing to read and understand the text rather than skimming through it to mimic a real­life
reading situation as much as possible. Furthermore, the reading comprehension tests
were also included to resemble the data collection of the previous study by Pereira and
Andrei [1]. Once again, this was to ensure that the results obtained during this thesis
were as directly comparable to the results of previous studies as possible. Unfortunately,
Pereira and Andrei [1] did not provide examples of the questions from their reading com­
prehension tests; thus, new questions were formed.
Five tests were created in total, one for each of the five texts included in the experiment,
and they all consisted of three multiple­choice questions relating to different parts of the
text. The reading comprehension tests were created using Google Forms7 and answers
to the questions were differentiated by requesting the participant enter their experiment
handle.
During the experimentation phase, an error was discovered in the reading comprehension
test for the text The Little Match Girl by Hans Christian Andersen. The error concerns the
question “Why was the little girl barefoot in the snow?” where multiple participants found
that two of the four multiple­choice options could be correct, and thus, they did not know
which to choose. The two options were “She gave her slippers to another child” and “Her
slippers were stolen” respectively. The author of the thesis acknowledges the error, as
the formulation of the answer options was indeed found to be too ambiguous, and the
error was corrected in the data analysis phase by allowing either of the two options to be
a correct answer to the question.
The reading comprehension tests for each of the five texts are provided in appendix D.
5.6.4
Questionnaires on the Reader’s Experience
After completing the reading comprehension test of the text in question, the reader was
also asked to fill out a questionnaire about their experience of the intervention and highlight
mode they were presented with during the reading session. Ten different questionnaires
were created; one for the Gradual intervention and three for each of the Popup, Undo, and
Notification interventions, each with three highlighting modes Word, Sentence, and Para­
graph. For all questionnaires, the reader was instructed to enter their handle to identify
their answers during the analysis phase.
The questionnaire for the Gradual intervention contained one compulsory question and
an option for writing additional comments. The compulsory question concerned the “re­
covery difficulty,” where readers were asked to rate how easy or difficult they thought it
was to continue reading upon a page change on a 5­point Likert scale[31]. The Likert
scale can also be found in appendix E.1. The Likert scale and question are similar to
a question asked by Pereira and Andrei [1] during their work on the reading application.
This was intentional, as it allowed for direct comparison between previous results and
results discovered by this thesis to assist in the answering of RQ2. During the course
of running the experiments, a few participants noted that they misread the scale at first
and, for instance, answered 4 instead of 2. This could have potentially been avoided by
changing the question to a statement such as “I found it very easy to continue reading
when changing pages” and then altering the scale to include the statements “Strongly
disagree”, “Disagree”, “Neutral,” “Agree”, and “Strongly agree” instead of the numbers
7See more at: https://www.google.com/forms/about/. Last accessed: 20­01­2025.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
55
==PAGE:64==
1­5. For this project, it was decided not to alter the question, as it would make a direct
comparison between previous and current results more challenging. However, this would
be an option for future work.
The questions contained in the questionnaire for the Gradual intervention can be found in
appendix E.1.
For the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification, the questionnaires are very similar
and contain almost the same questions except for the Notification intervention which in­
cluded an additional question on whether the participant interacted with the notification
or not. This question was added to effectively discard any answers in the data analy­
sis phase where the participant did not interact with the notification, as these would not
provide any valuable insights into the user experience of the intervention. All question­
naires for the three interventions contained three (four for the Notification intervention)
compulsory questions and an option to add additional comments.
Similar to the Gradual intervention, the questionnaires for the Popup, Undo, and Notifica­
tion interventions also contain a question on the recovery difficulty. This is again similar to
previous work by Pereira and Andrei [1] and would also further allow for direct comparison
between the interventions. Furthermore, these interventions also contained a question on
the accuracy of the highlighted text, where participants were asked to state whether or not
the application highlighted the correct text (the word, sentence, or paragraph that the par­
ticipant was reading right before the intervention was triggered). This question was added
to understand the eye tracker’s behavior and whether the accuracy would affect the ob­
tained results. Finally, the questionnaire contained a question on the amount of highlight,
where participants were asked to rate whether they found the amount of highlight to be
fitting or not. This question was added retrospectively after the first 11 participants, as
it provided valuable information on whether there is a significant difference between the
three highlight modes. Attempts were made to obtain answers to the question from the
first 11 participants to increase the sample size. More on this in chapter 6.
The questions contained in the questionnaires for the Popup, Undo, and Notification in­
terventions can be found in appendix E.2.
5.6.5
Post Conversation
After each text, a small post­conversation was initiated with the participant, during which
the observer would ask follow­up questions about the participant’s experience or ask them
to elaborate on the answers provided to the questionnaires. Furthermore, this conversa­
tion was also used to answer any clarifying questions the participant might have about
the project, the data collection, the application, etc.
56
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:65==
6
Analysis of Results
The following chapter presents a comprehensive analysis of the data obtained through
the performed experiment in an attempt to provide answers to RQ2 and RQ3. Section
6.1 analyses the demographics of the group of test participants. Section 6.2 presents a
short note on the results of the reading comprehension tests. Section 6.3 analyses the ob­
tained gaze data to determine so­called intervention times. Section 6.4 then analyzes the
obtained intervention times to uncover any statistical significance between them. Finally,
section 6.5 analyzes the obtained user feedback to uncover any preferences towards
intervention designs and highlight modes.
6.1
Demographics of Test Participants
A total of 22 test participants were recruited for the experiment, nine female and 13 male,
with an average age of 24.2 years. The majority of the test participants were students
at university (19), studying either toward a bachelor’s, master’s, or PhD degree. A few
(3) were full­time employees and a single (1) participant was a public school student (in
Danish: Folkeskole). This demographic is visualized in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Distribution of participant occupation.
Eight of the participants reported having some degree of myopia, and a few wore glasses,
however they all stated that their eye condition would not affect their abilities to read the
texts for the experiment. Three participants further reported having corrected to normal
vision through glasses or contact lenses, although they did not remember whether the
correction was due to myopia, hyperopia, or something third. A single test participant
reported astigmation, a condition similar to myopia, and another reported troubles with
stereopsis. Again, both of these participants stated that their eye condition would not
affect their abilities to read the texts for the experiment. The remaining nine participants
reported having normal vision. A visualization of this demographic is depicted in figure
6.2.
As can be seen above the participant group is somewhat narrow in terms of both age
range and occupation, and this naturally raises concerns of whether this sample can be
considered an accurate representation of the population of end users of the reading ap­
plication. As also stated in section 5.4, the limited time frame and resources available for
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.2: Distribution of participant self­reported vision.
this thesis meant that alternative approaches for recruiting test participants were neces­
sary, for instance, through the author’s acquaintances. This was deemed vital to obtain
enough test participants, however this also inevitably means that the results of the the­
sis may have undesirable bias. Alternative and larger user groups should be tested to
account for any such bias in future work.
6.2
Reading Comprehension Tests
As also presented in section 5.6.3, the purpose of the reading comprehension tests was to
ensure that the participants actively engaged in understanding the texts they were reading,
to mimic a real reading situation as much as possible. Each question in the reading
comprehension tests was scored in the following manner:
• A correct answer to the question provides 1 point.
• A wrong answer provides 0 points.
Thus, the minimum and maximum scores for a test are 0 and 3 points, respectively, as
there are three questions per test.
The following mean values for each of the reading comprehension tests were obtained:
• The Subtle Knife: 2.73 points
• The Little Match Girl: 2.23 points
• Odin: 2.86 points
• Four Sisters: 1.65 points
• Blockhead Hans: 2.95 points
As can be seen above, four out of five tests received a mean score well above 2 points,
which means that a participant answered at least two questions correctly on average.
Thus, the general observation is that it seems like the test participants were paying at­
tention to the texts they were reading. This is very desirable, as it means that there is
potential for the results of this thesis to generalize to real­life reading situations.
One notable exception to the above is the tests for the text Four Sisters, where the av­
erage score is 1.65 points. Examining the results of this test in greater detail (available
58
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:67==
in appendix D), it is clear that most answers to each question are correct and that the
participants primarily struggled with questions one and two. For the second question,
which concerned which food was served on the 4th of July in the narrator’s family, 11 par­
ticipants answered correctly, while the remaining 9 participants selected an option with
a dish also mentioned in the text. Thus, it can be concluded that although only a little
more than half of the answers provided were correct, all participants selected an option
mentioned in the text. This still shows some level of engagement towards the text. In the
post conversation, many participants further stated that they found the Four Sisters text to
be the hardest of all of the five texts. This was primarily due to the number of characters
and places being introduced, making it hard to keep track of the story. The same concern
was not expressed for any of the other texts. In future work it may be suitable to select a
different text than Four Sisters better to align the difficulties of all texts in the experiment.
In conclusion, although the score for the reading comprehension test for Four Sisters is
somewhat lower than the remaining texts, the general impression through the experiment
was that all participants engaged equally in reading all five texts. Thus, no differentiation
between the results obtained from the texts will be made.
6.3
Determining Intervention Times
As also mentioned in section 5.6.2, gaze data was tracked during the experiment as it
was considered to provide valuable insights into the reading behavior of test participants.
More specifically, gaze data has been utilized to determine how long it takes before a
participant resumes reading once an intervention has been triggered. This includes any
potential reading of popups, button clicks, potential typography updates, and rereading of
text that the participant has already read, all the way until a normal reading pattern of the
user can be detected again. From this point forward, the metric will be referred to as the
intervention time, and the exact definition is stated in definition 6.3.1.
Definition 6.3.1 (Intervention time). The time it takes for a participant to resume read­
ing after an intervention has been triggered. This includes any interaction with the inter­
vention, such as reading text on a dialog or pressing a button, and any adjustment time
needed after the typography changes have been applied. The participant may reread text
they have already read before the intervention was triggered as a part of the adjustment
time, which will also be counted towards the intervention time. Thus, the end of the inter­
vention time is defined as the point in time when the user resumes reading and they are
reading new text.
The above definition of intervention time resembles a similar metric defined in previous
work by Pereira and Andrei [1], although their definition did not clearly state whether any
rereading of text was included or not. The definition contained in this thesis was updated to
include rereading in the intervention because it was considered that if the participant was
not affected by the intervention, then they would not need to reread any text. Thus, any
rereading means that the reading flow of the participant is still influenced by the changes
applied by the intervention.
The intervention time has been determined for each of the intervention type and highlight
mode combinations described in section 3.6. Together with previous results by Pereira
and Andrei [1], this has allowed for an estimation of the effect of the context­preserving
functionality in accordance with RQ2. Moreover, it has also helped provide answers to
RQ3 on whether the Gradual intervention is still the preferred intervention design from an
effectiveness point of view.
The following section will present the process for determining the intervention times for
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
59
==PAGE:68==
each of the intervention type and highlight combinations, and section 6.3.2 presents the
obtained results.
6.3.1
Method
The data analysis process for each of the intervention type and highlight combinations is
very similar in nature and consists of four overall steps:
1. Filtering of gaze data to only observe data when the participant was actually reading.
2. Determining when the given intervention was triggered based on log file data.
3. Determining saccades and fixations based on the Identification by 2­means cluster­
ing (I2MC) algorithm.
4. Creating an interactive plot of the saccades and fixations and using this to determine
when the participant resumed reading again.
The following subsections will describe each of the four steps in greater detail.
Step 1: Filtering of Data
As also mentioned in section 5.5, all test participants were instructed to press the space
bar on the provided keyboard whenever they started or finished reading a text. The space
bar press would trigger a time stamp to be stored in an appropriate log file for later re­
trieval. The timestamps in these log files have been utilized to filter the gaze data of each
participant only to observe data from when the user was actually reading. The function­
ality for determining these time stamps is provided in the function parse_log_file() in
the eye_tracking_utils.py file.
Step 2: Determining When the Intervention Started
The log files further store a timestamp for when an intervention was triggered in the ap­
plication. For the Popup, Undo, and Gradual interventions, these time stamps directly
correlate with the intervention start time stamp. For the Notification intervention, the test
participant would not always interact with the notification straight away, rather there were
multiple cases where the interaction started a few seconds later. The intervention start
timestamp for the Notification intervention has thus been determined in combination with
the interactive gaze plot, as will be described further in section 6.3.1.
Step 3: Determining Saccades and Fixations
According to Rayner [26] and Duchowski [15], two primary eye movements need to be
considered in reading and information searches: saccades and fixations. The authors
describe saccades as continuous movements we make with our eyes between fixations
to reposition the fovea to a new location, and fixations as relatively still movements that
stabilize the retina over an object of interest, such as a text. Furthermore, the duration
of both a saccade and a fixation is highly influenced by the task at hand; according to
Rayner [26], a typical reading saccade lasts around 30 ms and covers a distance of 2°,
whereas a 5°saccade typical for scene perception lasts about 40­50 ms.
To properly analyze the behavior of a participant’s gaze during the experiment, it was nec­
essary to determine their fixations and saccades. This has been achieved through a set
of data analysis functions provided to the author of the thesis by the Reading the Reader
project. The most important functions are the find_fix() and find_sac_from_fix().
As the name suggests, find_fix() is responsible for determining fixations. Once the
fixations have been estimated, the saccades between the fixations can be determined
through the find_sac_from_fix() function.
The implemented algorithm for determining fixations is the I2MC algorithm by Hessels
et al. [32], which is an algorithm initially developed for eye tracking in infants and small
60
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:69==
children. As described by the Hessels et al. [32], the I2MC algorithm is designed to be
robust against many noise levels and when periods of data may be lost. This has also
been verified through thorough comparisons with seven other state­of­the­art fixation de­
tection algorithms. The algorithm revolves around two­means clustering (hence the name
Identification by 2­means clustering or I2MC), and it works in three main steps, which will
be covered in short here. For more details, the reader is referred to the original paper.
• Step 1: Interpolation of missing data. At first, short periods of missing data are
interpolated using a monotonic interpolation method. Interpolation is limited to gaps
that are shorter than 100 ms to ensure that data is not interpolated over complete
saccade­fixation­saccade sequences and to minimize the number of blinks being
interpolated.
• Step 2: Two­means clustering. After the interpolation, two­means clustering is
performed using a sliding window of 200 ms over the gaze signal. 200 ms ensures
that the window covers at most two fixations at a time. Within each window, two­
means clustering is performed by dividing the data into two groups, and the tran­
sitions between clusters are identified, focusing on when and how frequently they
occur. This process is illustrated in figure 6.3 based on a figure from the original
paper. The main idea behind the identification is that if the gaze signal in a given
window contains a saccade, there will be few cluster membership transitions, and
these will be concentrated around a specific point in time, which will be the time
point of the saccade. This is also depicted on the left side of figure 6.3. If, on the
other hand, the gaze signal contains only a fixation, the cluster membership tran­
sitions between the two clusters are driven only by the noise in the fixations. This
is depicted on the right side of figure 6.3. Cluster weights are calculated for each
window, reflecting the likelihood of a transition.
• Step 3: Fixation labeling. The final step is to label fixation candidates. Fixation
candidates are identified based on a cutoff threshold. The cutoff threshold is de­
termined as the mean clustering weight plus two standard deviations. All periods
below this cutoff are labeled as fixation candidates, and consecutive candidates are
merged. Fixation candidates shorter than a certain threshold are further removed.
The I2MC algorithm was first developed for MatLab1, however it has later been extended
to support Python2 also.
Numerous other fixation and saccade detection algorithms could have been chosen for
the detection phase, for instance, one of the 10 algorithms described by Andersson et al.
[33] in their evaluation from 2017. The I2MC algorithm was selected based on recom­
mendations from the Reading the Reader research project, and it was further motivated
by the ease of implementation, as scripts running the algorithm were already available.
After having obtained the fixations from the gaze data based on the I2MC algorithm, the
saccades could be determined through the find_sac_from_fix() function. This function
loops through all fixation pairs and classifies the movements between them according to
the following four categories:
• S: A proper saccadic movement
• I: Likely a saccadic movement, but incomplete due to a few missing points
1Source: https://github.com/royhessels/I2MC. Last accessed: 13­01­2025.
2Source: https://github.com/dcnieho/I2MC_Python. Last accessed: 13­01­2025
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.3: An illustration of the two­means clustering process of the I2MC algorithm by
Hessels et al. [32]. The figure is inspired by a similar figure in the original paper.
• P: A non­saccadic movement
• N: Noise
The category a movement belongs to depends on the probability of the movement be­
ing a saccade and its completeness. The probability of a movement being a saccade is
determined through the function saccadic_prob(), which utilizes a number of different
heuristics, among others, the standard model developed by Carpenter [34]. The function
returns a “goodness” value that is close to 1 when the duration of the movement is within
the range defined by Carpenter’s model and approaches 0 for outliers. A movement is
deemed a saccade if this returned value is greater than or equal to 0.33. The complete­
ness of a movement is simply determined by looking at whether any data between the
two fixations is missing.
Step 4: Determining When the User Resumed Reading
Once the fixations and saccades were obtained, they were plotted using the ETPlot()
function, also provided by the Reading the Reader project. This function creates an inter­
active plot of the gaze data, including, among others, fixations, saccades, noise, speed
of the saccades, etc. This was utilized to inspect each participant’s reading pattern fur­
ther to determine when they resumed reading after an intervention was triggered. This
inspection was performed manually for all test participants. An example of this plot for a
random participant can be found in figure 6.4.
As can be seen from the legend of the interactive plot in figure 6.4, the dark blue marks
indicate the x position of a fixation, and the red marks indicate the y position of the same
fixation. Figure 6.5 further visualizes the characteristic lines of the interactive plot, which
indicates the lines of text that a participant is reading.
Once the interventions of group A of the Focus design consideration is triggered (Popup,
Undo, and Notification), the line pattern is often interrupted by one of the patterns of figure
6.6. These patterns have been discovered empirically through the data analysis, and they
62
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.4: The interactive plot of the gaze data for a test participant using the ETPlot()
function.
are characterized in the following manner:
• Popup pattern: The lines that the user is reading become significantly shorter, the
x position of the lines is placed around the center of the screen between 20 and 40
degrees on the positional axis, and the y position of the lines is placed slightly lower
at around 10 to 20 degrees. This pattern is depicted in figure 6.6a. The pattern
aligns well with the popup dialog design as depicted in figure 1.3a, where the dialog
is positioned in the center of the screen, and the lines of the dialog are significantly
shorter than the lines of the book.
• Notification pattern: This pattern is similar to that of the popup pattern, only that
the x position of the reading lines is placed significantly higher at around 45 to 55
degrees on the positional axis, and the y position of the lines is placed closer to
the bottom between 0 and 20 degrees. This pattern is depicted in figure 6.6c. The
pattern also aligns well with the design of the notification dialog, as illustrated in
figure 1.4, where the dialog is placed in the upper right corner of the screen.
• Undo pattern: The undo pattern is not a pattern as such, rather it simply shows a
much more chaotic behavior of the gaze of the user, as also depicted in figure 6.6b.
This pattern varies a lot from participant to participant, however common to many is
that the gaze wanders significantly more around the screen, hence the radical shifts
in both the x and y positions as also depicted in the figure. Occasionally, the reading
of the small undo dialog can be detected. The lines between seconds 35­40 in the
plot in figure 6.6b exemplify this. This is, however, usually very hard to distinguish
from the otherwise messy pattern and often requires a plot of the fixations on the
screen as guidance.
The interactive pattern for the Gradual intervention is slightly different, among others,
because it happens during a page change. Page changes can easily be identified in the
interactive plot as sudden “drops” in the y position. This occurs as a participant changes
their gaze from the bottom of the previous page to the top of the new one. Examples
of page changes with the Gradual intervention can be seen in figure 6.7. The overall
characteristic of the gradual pattern is as follows:
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.5: Indications of the lines of text that a participant is reading.
• Gradual pattern: Upon a page change, the user (usually) does not resume read­
ing immediately, rather they are interrupted by the gray text, which causes them to
wander there gaze around the screen in a more messy manner. An example of this
is depicted in figure 6.7a. As the user continues interacting with the intervention
through more page changes, the disturbance (usually) becomes smaller, and the
user (usually) resumes reading faster. This is depicted in figure 6.7b through 6.7d,
where the “messy” part of the gaze signal becomes slightly shorter as the number
of page changes increases.
There are notable exceptions to the above characteristic, which have been encountered
during the data analysis. Among others, the participant may initially reread the gray text to
understand the intervention. This will be depicted in the interactive gaze plot as a regular
reading pattern similar to the pattern before the intervention was triggered. As stated
in definition 6.3.1, any rereading of text must also be counted towards the intervention
time. To properly distinguish between when the participant rereads text and when they
resume reading, a plot of the fixations on the screen has also been utilized. An example
of these is depicted in figure 6.8. Similarly, examples were also encountered where the
adjustment time was so short that it could not properly be detected from the interactive
gaze plot alone. The fixations plot thus also had to be utilized in these situations.
The fixations plots have also been utilized to estimate the intervention end time for the
other interventions. Among other aspects, these have revealed that some participants
glance at the notification bell for the Notification intervention for some time before actually
interacting with it. Furthermore, they have also revealed that many participants return to
look at the Undo dialog after the intervention time, perhaps to dismiss it, as this does not
happen automatically. Lastly, the fixations plot has also been vital for determining exactly
when the intervention time has ended in terms of estimating when a participant rereads a
text and when they resume reading some new text.
6.3.2
Results
Table 6.1 presents the estimated intervention times for each participant for the interven­
tions Popup, Undo, and Notification. Similarly, table 6.2 presents the estimated inter­
vention times for the Gradual intervention. All results are stated in seconds. Note the
64
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:73==
(a) Popup.
(b) Undo.
(c) Notification.
Figure 6.6: Alternative patterns in the interactive gaze plot found when the interventions
Popup, Undo, and Notification are triggered.
following legend for the tables:
• F: Failed. A failed experiment was caused by a bug in the application, which pre­
vented the highlight from being shown properly.
• NR: Not recorded. Various reasons may have caused the experiment data not to be
recorded, for instance, a bug in how the recording was performed or because the
participant had to leave the experiment.
• NI: No interaction. The participant did not interact with the intervention. This only
applies to the Notification intervention.
• D: Discarded. An intervention time could not be determined, and this experiment is
thus discarded.
For this experiment, data was discarded for two participants. For the participant with
handle 0112, the context­preserving functionality continuously highlighted text at the top
of the screen instead of where the participant was reading before an intervention was
triggered. This was very undesirable, and from the gaze data it was observed that this
behavior also disturbed the user more than helped them resume reading. Thus, data
for this participant was discarded. For the participant with handle 0113, data from one
treatment was very difficult to analyze due to corrupted log and CSV files, and thus an
intervention time could not be determined properly.
A Note on the Accuracy of the Highlight
As also stated in section 5.6.4, all questionnaires for the Popup, Undo, and Notification
interventions contained a question asking the participant to evaluate whether the context­
preserving functionality highlighted the correct piece of text or not. The purpose of the
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
65
==PAGE:74==
(a) First page change.
(b) Second page change.
(c) Third page change.
(d) Fourth page change.
Figure 6.7: Examples of the pattern for the Gradual intervention.
question was to investigate the behavior of the eye tracker and whether or not the accuracy
of the context­preserving functionality would affect the overall results. In 52.4 % of the total
number of answers to this question, the participants replied that the context­preserving
functionality highlighted the correct piece of text, while 33.8 % replied that the wrong
text was highlighted. The remaining 13.8 % percent replied that they did not notice the
highlight and thus did not know whether it was correct.
In all cases where the highlight was wrong, the participants were asked to clarify how
far off it was, and for all cases, it turned out that the highlight was only off by at most a
couple of sentences (in many cases, far less), and the participants thus still felt like the
highlight was helpful for preserving the context after the intervention had ended. Thus, it
was deemed appropriate to include all the obtained intervention times for further analysis.
The effects of this will be discussed further in chapter 7.
6.4
Determining Statistical Significance of Intervention Times
Once the estimated intervention times were obtained from all test participants, relevant
statistical analysis could be performed to produce data that could provide answers to RQ2
and RQ3. The purpose of RQ2 is to investigate the effect of the context­preserving func­
tionality, if any such exists. As the main purpose of the context­preserving functionality
is to reduce the intervention time as much as possible, it makes sense to figure out if a
best­performing highlight mode exists for any of the interventions Popup, Undo, and Noti­
fication, and whether this affects the intervention time significantly compared to previous
results by Pereira and Andrei [1]. A similar study was performed for the Gradual interven­
tion, although a best­performing highlight mode could not be determined here, as there is
only one. To answer RQ3, it would further be interesting to investigate whether there are
any significant differences in the intervention times between the four interventions with
66
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:75==
(a) A plot of all fixations occurring while the
participant is reading the second page of the
Blockhead Hans book, including any adjust­
ment time.
(b) A plot of the fixations occurring during the
estimated adjustment time. As can be seen,
the participant rereads part of the text (the
orange dots), which shows up in the inter­
active plot as regular reading.
(c) A plot of the fixations occurring after the
adjustment period.
Figure 6.8: Examples of the fixation plots utilized in the data analysis process for the
Gradual intervention to identify when the intervention time ended properly.
their best­performing highlight mode. Thus, the following objectives were defined for the
statistical analysis of the intervention times:
• Objective 1: Determine whether there is a best­performing highlight mode for each
of the three interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification.
• Objective 2: Determine whether there is a significant difference between the inter­
vention times from previous results and current results, considering the best per­
forming highlight mode for all four interventions.
• Objective 3: Determine whether there is a significant difference in the intervention
times between the interventions when a (best­performing) highlight mode is intro­
duced.
The method for determining statistical significance is very similar for all of the interven­
tions, and it will be presented in section 6.4.1. Section then 6.4.2 presents the results of
the analysis.
6.4.1
Method
For each of the three objectives defined above, a null hypothesis, H0, and an alternative
hypothesis, HA, were formulated, and hypothesis testing was conducted. Before perform­
ing the hypothesis testing, however, it was important to determine whether the sampled
data followed a normal distribution, as this would determine whether a parametric or non­
parametric test should be selected.
The normality test of the sampled data was performed using Quantile­Quantile plots (QQ­
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
67
==PAGE:76==
Intervention type
Popup
Undo
Notification
Highlight mode /
User handle
W
S
P
W
S
P
W
S
P
0101
7.32
F
4.98
20.53
0102
7.43
7.37
NR
NI
0103
4.76
4.13
6.31
7.33
0104
29.21
23.42
21.78
29.97
0105
20.04
22.30
NR
NI
0106
8.37
23.90
12.64
5.70
0107
13.62
5.03
20.13
12.42
0108
23.20
16.51
15.63
NI
0109
13.46
6.23
1.00
NI
0110
7.41
8.35
17.79
NI
0111
10.37
9.35
1.98
NI
0112
D
D
D
NI
0113
D
23.99
40.25
14.40
0114
11.48
8.54
6.32
NI
0115
14.54
25.08
13.22
23.48
0116
10.50
6.91
NR
NI
0117
18.99
16.34
24.88
8.00
0118
8.92
11.76
NI
10.00
0119
8.74
8.97
5.76
NI
0120
27.17
18.16
3.73
NI
0121
17.69
3.89
1.16
34.00
0122
27.93
14.00
18.58
26.22
Table 6.1: Estimated intervention times (in seconds) for the Popup, Undo, and Notification
interventions, each with the three possible highlight modes Word (W), Sentence (S), and
Paragraph (P).
plot) based on the book by Brockhoff et al. [35]. In a QQ­plot, the sample data is plotted
against the expected quantiles for a normal distribution. If the sample data is normally
distributed, then the observations are close to the expected ones, and the plot will be
close to a straight line. The QQ­plots for the different treatments (intervention type and
highlight mode) are illustrated in figure 6.9. The reader will observe that a QQ­plot has not
been made for the treatment with Notification and Word. For this particular treatment, only
one value for the intervention time could be collected, as the remaining test participants
who were subject to this combination did not interact with the notification. Thus, it does not
make sense to create a QQ­plot for this treatment, let alone determine whether it follows
a normal distribution or not. This treatment will not be included in the remaining analysis
as obtaining significant information from only a single sample value is very difficult.
The QQ­plots quickly revealed that only the Popup and Sentence treatment was close
to resembling a normal distribution. Transformations to log­normal distributions were at­
tempted with the remaining treatments; however, the results were not significantly im­
proved. For many of the treatments, the sample size is the biggest issue, as can also
be seen in table 6.1. The largest group in the table is the Popup and Sentence combina­
tion with a sample size of 21, however the remaining groups contains less entries. The
samples for all groups are furthermore relatively scattered. All of this combined makes it
difficult to precisely determine whether the sample follows a normal distribution or not. In
68
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:77==
Gradual/
User handle
First page change
Second page change
Third page change
0101
F
F
F
0102
F
F
F
0103
3.5
2.5
2
0104
15
F
F
0105
NR
NR
NR
0106
2.5
1
3.5
0107
4
2.5
2
0108
2.5
1
1
0109
4.5
2.5
F
0110
4
4
F
0111
10
10
6
0112
2.5
1.5
1.5
0113
9
3
F
0114
6
10.5
F
0115
5
2.5
2
0116
F
F
F
0117
13
5
1.5
0118
1.5
1.5
1
0119
5
2.5
2.5
0120
F
F
F
0121
1.5
2.5
F
0122
8.5
1
3
Table 6.2: Estimated intervention times (in seconds) for the Gradual intervention.
conclusion, it was found that a normal distribution could not be assumed for the collected
data. This meant that a non­parametric test should be selected for the hypothesis testing.
Multiple non­parametric tests exist, suitable for different purposes depending on how
many samples should be compared and whether they are independent or not. According
to MacFarland and Yates [36], a Mann­Whitney U­Test can be used when comparing two
independent samples, and a Kruskal­Wallis­Test is suitable for cases with three or more
independent samples. For the objectives defined in the introduction of this section both
two­sample (Objective 1 and Objective 2), three­sample (Objective 1) and four­sample
(Objective 3) scenarios are present, which meant that both the Mann­Whitney U­Test and
the Kruskal­Wallis­Test should be utilized. This thesis will not cover the details of how
these non­parametric tests work.
The non­parametric test reveals whether we can accept or reject H0; however, for the test
with more than two treatments, it is necessary to perform a post hoc analysis to determine
which groups are significantly different. For this thesis, the Dunn pairwise comparison
test with Bonferroni correction has been utilized, as this was found by Dinno [37] to be the
appropriate nonparametric pairwise comparison procedure when a Kruskal–Wallis test is
utilized.
Both the Kruskal­Wallis­Test and the Mann­Whitney U­Test produce a p value, which mea­
sures evidence against H0, and the interpretation of the p value will be based on the book
by Brockhoff et al. [35]. The interpretation is provided in table 6.3. Any p value greater
than 0.05, which is the globally chosen default one according to Brockhoff et al. [35],
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
69
==PAGE:78==
(a) QQ­plot for the Gradual
intervention.
(b) QQ­plot for the Popup
intervention with the Word
highlight mode.
(c) QQ­plot for the Popup in­
tervention with the Sentence
highlight mode.
(d) QQ­plot for the Popup in­
tervention with the Paragraph
highlight mode.
(e) QQ­plot for the Undo
intervention with the Word
highlight mode.
(f) QQ­plot for the Undo in­
tervention with the Sentence
highlight mode.
(g) QQ­plot for the Undo in­
tervention with the Paragraph
highlight mode.
(h) QQ­plot for the Notifi­
cation intervention with the
Sentence highlight mode.
(i) QQ­plot for the Notification
intervention with the Para­
graph highlight mode.
Figure 6.9: QQ­plots of the data collected from the experiment.
means that H0 will be rejected.
p value
Interpretation
p < 0.001
Very strong evidence against H0
0.001 ≤p < 0.01
Strong evidence against H0
0.01 ≤p < 0.05
Some evidence against H0
0.05 ≤p < 0.1
Weak evidence against H0
p ≥0.1
Little or no evidence against H0
Table 6.3: Interpretation of the p value according to Brockhoff et al. [35].
6.4.2
Results
The results for each of the three objectives defined in the introduction of this section will
be detailed in the following subsections. The mean values and standard deviations of the
intervention times for each intervention are further presented in table 6.4. These will be
70
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:79==
used heavily for the hypothesis testing for each objective.
Intervention type
Highlight mode
Mean intervention time (s)
Standard deviation (s)
Popup
Word
14.96
8.84
Sentence
13.85
6.76
Paragraph
14.08
5.25
None
15.68
6.80
Undo
Word
12.50
8.87
Sentence
7.81
8.42
Paragraph
18.46
10.90
None
15.32
8.02
Notification
Sentence
15.64
7.00
Paragraph
16.10
10.93
None
11.57
8.53
Gradual
Yes
4.03
3.34
No
14.93
10.23
Table 6.4: Mean values for all intervention types with and without context preservation.
Note that None in highlight mode for the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification refers
to no context preservation, i.e., the results of previous studies by Pereira and Andrei [1].
Objective 1: Determining A Best Performing Highlight Mode
For each of the interventions Popup and Undo the following null­ and alternative hypoth­
esis were formulated:
H0 : µW = µS = µP = σ
HA : µi ̸= σ for at least one i ∈{W, S, P}
where µi is the mean value of the intervention time for the highlight mode i ∈{W, S, P},
where W refers to the Word highlight mode, S refers to the Sentence highlight mode, and
P refers to the Paragraph highlight mode.
For the Notification intervention, the following null­ and alternative hypotheses were for­
mulated:
H0 : µS = µP
HA : µS ̸= µP
Note that the Word highlight mode is not included in the data analysis of the eye tracking
data for this intervention, as also mentioned in section 6.4.1.
Box plots for each treatment of the three interventions are presented in figure 6.10. For
the Popup intervention (depicted in figure 6.10a), the interquartile ranges are largest for
the Word treatment and smallest for the Paragraph treatment, although the difference is
not too large altogether. More notable is the difference in the median position, which is
considerably higher for the Paragraph treatment compared to the remaining groups. This
could indicate that some significant differences between the groups do exist. Lastly, the
spread of the quartiles is also considerably smaller for the Paragraph treatment than for
Word and Sentence.
For the Undo intervention (depicted in figure 6.10b), the most interesting observation is
that the interquartile ranges for the Paragraph treatment lie considerably higher than for
the remaining two treatments. A similar behavior is observed for the median value. This
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
71
==PAGE:80==
also indicates that some significant differences may exist between the treatments, even
though the overall spread of the values lies within the same spectrum.
Lastly, the Notification intervention (depicted in figure 6.10c) shows a considerable dif­
ference between the size of the interquartile range, the spread, and the median values
between the two treatments. This may also suggest some significant difference between
these groups, although all observations of the Sentence treatment also lie within the range
of the observations of the Paragraph treatment.
(a) Box plot for the Popup intervention treat­
ment with the three highlight modes.
(b) Box plot for the Undo intervention treat­
ment with the three highlight modes.
(c) Box plot for the Notification intervention
treatment with the two highlight modes Sen­
tence and Paragraph.
Figure 6.10: Box plots for each of the three interventions for the hypothesis testing for
Objective 1.
The p values obtained through the hypothesis testing for this objective can be found in
table 6.5. As can be seen, all values are above 0.1, which according to Brockhoff et al.
[35] means that there is little to no evidence against H0. All values are further above 0.05,
which means that H0 is accepted for all three intervention types. In other words, although
the box plots indicated some difference between the treatments, no statistically significant
difference between the three highlight modes could be detected for any of the intervention
types, based on the eye tracking data alone.
The reason that none of the p values show a significant difference between any of the
highlight modes, even though the box plots show some differences, is most likely due to
the small sample size for each group. Particularly, the Undo intervention may suffer from
the small sample size; the p value for this hypothesis test is very close to indicating weak
evidence against H0, and a larger sample size may have resulted in an even lower p value
72
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:81==
and stronger evidence against H0.
Hypothesis
Popup
Undo
Notification
Test
Kruskal­Wallis­Test
Kruskal­Wallis­Test
Mann­Whitney U­Test
p value
0.97757
0.10945
0.75505
Table 6.5: p values for the hypothesis tests of Objective 1.
Objective 2: Comparing with Previous Results
Initially, the goal was to determine a preferred highlight mode for each of the three inter­
vention types Popup, Undo, and Notification; however, the results of Objective 1 showed
that this was not possible based on the sampled data. Thus, a preferred highlight mode
cannot be selected for comparison with previous data, so we will compare with all three
highlight modes instead.
For each of the four intervention types, the following null­ and alternative hypotheses were
formulated:
H0 : µW = µS = µP = µp = σ
HA : µi ̸= σ for at least one i ∈{W, S, P, p}
where µi is the mean value of the intervention time for the highlight mode i ∈{W, S, P, p},
where W, S, and P refers to the different highlight modes and p refers to previous results
by Pereira and Andrei [1].
Box plots for the data collected on the treatments of each of the four interventions are
presented in figure 6.11. Most notable is the box plot for the Gradual intervention, where
both the spread, the interquartile ranges, and the median value seem to be considerably
smaller for the sample with highlight compared to the sample without highlight. This in­
dicates that the two treatments may present some significant differences. For both the
Popup and Undo interventions, the data for the non­highlight treatment does not seem
considerably different in terms of the spread, interquartile ranges, and median value. No­
tably, the median value of the non­highlight treatment is most similar to the Paragraph
treatment. For the Notification intervention, the median value of the previous result is
very close to the median value of the Paragraph treatment; however, the spread is con­
siderably smaller than both treatments, and the interquartile ranges are similar in size to
that of the Sentence treatment, although they lie considerably lower. This also suggests
that some differences between the treatments may be present.
The p values obtained through the hypothesis testing for this objective can be found in
table 6.6.
Hypothesis
Popup
Undo
Notification
Gradual
Test
Kruskal­Wallis­Test
Kruskal­Wallis­Test
Kruskal­Wallis­Test
Mann­Whitney U­Test
p value
0.80722
0.40230
0.10899
2.6e­13
Table 6.6: p values for the hypothesis tests of Objective 2.
As can be seen from the table, the p values for the Popup, Undo, and Notification inter­
ventions are all above 0.1, which indicates little to no evidence against H0, and H0 is thus
accepted for these interventions. In other words, no significant difference can be detected
between the intervention times with and without a highlight mode when considering eye
tracking data alone. The weak evidence against H0 may once again be caused by the
small sample size. Particularly, the Notification intervention may suffer from this; the p
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
73
==PAGE:82==
(a) Box plot for the Popup intervention treat­
ment with the three highlight modes and the
no­highlight mode from previous results.
(b) Box plot for the Undo intervention treat­
ment with the three highlight modes and the
no­highlight mode from previous results.
(c) Box plot for the Popup intervention treat­
ment with the two highlight modes Sentence
and Paragraph as well the no­highlight
mode from previous results.
(d) Box plot for the Gradual intervention
treatment with and without highlight.
Figure 6.11: Box plots for each of the four interventions for the hypothesis testing for
Objective 2.
value for this hypothesis test is very close to indicating weak evidence against H0, and
a larger sample size may have resulted in an even lower p value and stronger evidence
against H0.
The p value for the Gradual intervention is clearly below 0.001, showing very strong ev­
idence against H0 according to Brockhoff et al. [35]. For this intervention, H0 is thus
rejected, and HA is accepted. In other words, a significant difference in the intervention
time has been detected for the Gradual intervention when a highlight mode is introduced,
and the intervention time is shortest with the highlight.
Objective 3: Comparing the Interventions When Context Preservation Is
Introduced
The following null­ and alternative hypotheses were formulated:
H0 : µG = µP = µU = µN = σ
HA : µi ̸= σ for at least one i ∈{G, P, U, N}
where P refers to all treatments for the Popup intervention, U refers to all treatments for
the Undo intervention, N refers to all treatments for the Notification intervention, and G
74
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:83==
refers to the Gradual intervention with highlight mode, as it was discovered that this was
significantly better than the treatment without highlight.
Figure 6.12: Box plot for all treatments for the Popup, Undo, and Notification interventions
as well as the treatment for the Gradual intervention with highlight.
Box plots for all interventions and their respective treatments are depicted in figure 6.12.
The most prominent observation from the plot is that the Gradual intervention seems to
have a considerably smaller range, interquartile range, and median value than many of
the other treatments. This indicates some statistical significance may present between
the Gradual intervention and some of the remaining treatments. Furthermore, the Undo
and Sentence treatment also has a median value and an interquartile range that lies lower
than the Notification and Sentence treatment, although the same was observed for the
Undo and Sentence and Undo and Paragraph treatments, as also depicted in the figure,
where no statistical significance was detected.
The p value for the hypothesis test was found to be 5.7e­09 using the Kruskal­Wallis­
Test, which is considerably lower than 0.05 and suggests very strong evidence against
H0 according to Brockhoff et al. [35]. This means that a significant difference between
the groups was present. A post hoc analysis was performed, and the resulting p values
are presented in table 6.7. Note that abbreviations for the treatments have been utilized
in favor of readability. This means that, e.g., “N + P” refers to the treatment Notification
and Paragraph, “N + S” refers to the treatment Notification and Sentence and so forth.
The table of p values reveals a significant difference between the Gradual intervention
and the Notification and Sentence sample, all Popup treatments, and the Undo and Para­
graph treatment, which also aligns well with the observations from the box plots in figure
6.12. Furthermore, the p value for the comparison of the Gradual intervention and the No­
tification and Paragraph sample is also close to showing weak evidence for a significant
difference between these two groups. As the intervention time for the Gradual interven­
tion is the shortest, this means that this intervention design has shown to perform better
in terms of shortest intervention time than many of the other interventions when context
preservation is introduced.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
75
==PAGE:84==
G
N + P
N + S
P + P
P +S
P + W
U + P
U + S
U + W
G
1.000000
0.101341
0.003435
0.009639
0.000004
0.01287
0.003286
1.000000
0.926982
N + P
0.101341
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
N + S
0.003435
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.552837
1.000000
P + P
0.009639
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.931719
1.000000
P + S
0.000004
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.392866
1.000000
P + W
0.012870
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
U + P
0.003286
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.540536
1.000000
U + S
1.000000
1.000000
0.552837
0.931719
0.392866
1.000000
0.540536
1.000000
1.000000
U + W
0.926982
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
Table 6.7: p values for the hypothesis testing for Objective 3. Values below 0.05 are
marked with green, indicating a significant difference between the two groups being com­
pared.
6.5
User Feedback
Aside from the eye tracking data, data on the participants’ preferences were collected
both quantitatively and qualitatively, as described in section 5.6. The quantitative data
will be evaluated against the three objectives defined in the introduction of section 6.4 to
determine whether they align with or oppose the results found through the eye tracking
data.
The collected quantitative user feedback data on the participants’ ability to recover from
an intervention is ordinal[31], and there has been debate whether it is appropriate to an­
alyze ordinal data using parametric and non­parametric methods, as these often expect
continuous distributions. Research conducted by Sullivan and Artino Jr [38] revealed,
however, that parametric tests can provide valuable insights into the distribution of Likert­
scale­answers, although one should be careful not to represent the mean value with large
decimal precision. Further research by Mircioiu and Atkinson [39] also revealed that ap­
plying non­parametric analysis on data surveyed from Likert scales leads practically in
all cases to the same conclusions as those drawn from parametric analysis. Although a
few diagrams of the distribution of answers to the Likert­scale­data showed tendencies
toward normal distributions, the the sample size of the collected data is limited for many
treatments. Thus, it was decided that the analysis of this data in terms of statistical sig­
nificance between treatments would continue to utilize the non­parametric tests from the
analysis of the eye tracking data.
6.5.1
Objective 1: Determining The Best Performing Highlight Mode
The interventions and will be examined individually for this objective.
As mentioned in section 5.6.4, the question on the amount of highlight was added in
retrospectives, as it was found to provide valuable information that could be used to de­
termine whether there is a significant difference between the participants’ preferences for
the highlight modes. The questions were added as mandatory questions to the ques­
tionnaire after the experiment with participant number 11 had been conducted. For some
of the previous participants, the answer to this question was also noted during the post­
conversations, and their answers were thus added to the collected data. Finally, some
answers were also collected by reaching out to previous participants later on.
Popup
The distribution of the recovery rate scores for the Popup intervention and their corre­
sponding medians, mean values, and standard deviations are presented in figure 6.13
and table 6.8 respectively. Both the graphs, the medians, and the mean values reveal
a fairly similar tendency, namely that the participants found it not too easy, but not too
76
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:85==
difficult either, to recover from the intervention with all three highlight modes. The par­
ticipants seemingly found the Paragraph mode the most difficult to recover from and the
Sentence mode the easiest based on mean values. However, only a small difference
between the best and worst is present. The median value for the Word and Sentence
is further the same, suggesting that the test participants found it equally easy to recover
from the Popup intervention with both highlight modes.
The following hypothesis test for the recovery rate scores was formulated:
H0 : µW = µS = µP = σ
HA : µi ̸= σ for at least one i ∈{W, S, P}
and a Kruskal­Wallis­Test revealed a p value of 0.22352, which does not indicate any
significant difference between the mean values of the three highlight modes. This also
aligns with the results found with the eye tracking data.
(a) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Word.
(b) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Sentence.
(c) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Paragraph.
Figure 6.13: Recovery rate scores for the treatments of the Popup intervention.
Word
Sentence
Paragraph
Median
2.0
2.0
3.0
Mean
2.25
2.14
2.86
Standard deviation
0.66
1.01
0.83
Table 6.8: Mean values and standard deviations for the recovery rate scores for the treat­
ments of the Popup intervention.
For the answers to the question on the amount of highlight, presented in table 6.9, a
somewhat different tendency seems to unfold. Although the amount of answers is sparse
for all highlight modes, it seems like the participants generally found that highlighting a
single word was not enough, highlighting a paragraph was too much, and many of the
participants found the Sentence highlight mode to be fitting.
Undo
The distribution of the recovery rate scores for the Undo intervention and their correspond­
ing medians, mean values, and standard deviations are presented in figure 6.14 and table
6.10 respectively. Similar to the Popup intervention, both the graphs, the medians, and
the mean values all reveal the same tendency for the Undo intervention, namely that the
Paragraph highlight mode seem to perform slightly better than the Word and Sentence
modes, although the difference is not too large overall. Furthermore, according to the
mean values, the Word highlight mode was the most difficult to recover from.
The following hypothesis test for the recovery rate scores was formulated:
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
77
==PAGE:86==
I would like more text
to be highlighted
I found the amount of
highlight to be fitting
I would like less text
to be highlighted
Highlight mode
#
%
#
%
#
%
Word
4
80
1
20
0
0
Sentence
1
9.1
8
72.7
2
18.2
Paragraph
0
0
1
25
3
75
Table 6.9: Distribution of answers to the question “How did you find the amount of high­
light?” for the Popup intervention. # refers to the number of answers obtained, and %
refers to the corresponding percentage value.
H0 : µW = µS = µP = σ
HA : µi ̸= σ for at least one i ∈{W, S, P}
and a Kruskal­Wallis­Test revealed a p value of 0.55161, which indicates that no significant
difference between the recovery rates of the highlight modes is present for the Undo
intervention. This also aligns with the findings of the eye tracking data.
(a) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Word.
(b) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Sentence.
(c) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Paragraph.
Figure 6.14: Recovery rate scores for the treatments of the Undo intervention.
Word
Sentence
Paragraph
Median
3.0
3.0
2.5
Mean
3.57
3.25
2.88
Standard deviation
1.29
0.97
1.27
Table 6.10: Mean values and standard deviations for the recovery rate scores for the
treatments of the Undo intervention.
For the question on the amount of highlight, presented in table 6.11, the answers are
again fairly sparse, however the same tendency as for the Popup intervention seems to
be present. An overwhelming amount of participants seemed to find that Word highlight
mode provided too little highlight, and for the Sentence highlight mode, the participants
generally found the amount of highlight to be fitting. For the Paragraph mode, only a
single answer is provided, which makes it difficult to conclude anything, as we cannot
know whether this value is a valid representative of the entire population or an outlier.
Notification
The distribution of the recovery rate scores for the Notification intervention and their cor­
responding medians, mean values, and standard deviations are presented in figure 6.15
and table 6.12 respectively. As for the eye tracking data analysis, only a single value
78
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:87==
I would like more text
to be highlighted
I found the amount of
highlight to be fitting
I would like less text
to be highlighted
Highlight mode
#
%
#
%
#
%
Word
6
100
0
0
0
0
Sentence
0
0
3
75
1
25
Paragraph
0
0
0
0
1
100
Table 6.11: Distribution of answers to the question “How did you find the amount of high­
light?” for the Undo intervention. # refers to the number of answers obtained, and % refers
to the corresponding percentage value.
could be collected for the Word highlight mode for both the recovery rate and the amount
of highlight. This makes it difficult to conclude anything for this highlight mode for the
Notification intervention, as we cannot know whether the answers are a valid representa­
tive of the population or an outlier. For the Sentence and Paragraph highlight modes, the
distribution of answers reveals that more participants rated the Sentence mode as easier
to recover from than the Paragraph mode. This is also expressed in the mean and the
median values, which are higher for the Paragraph highlight mode.
The following hypothesis test for the recovery rate scores of the Sentence and Paragraph
highlight modes was formulated:
H0 : µS = µP
HA : µS ̸= µP
and a Mann­Whitney U­Test between the Sentence and Paragraph modes revealed a
p value of 0.36487, however, which indicates that no significant difference between the
recovery rates of the highlight modes is present. This also aligns with the findings of the
eye tracking data.
(a) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Word.
(b) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Sentence.
(c) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Paragraph.
Figure 6.15: Recovery rate scores for the treatments of the Notification intervention.
For the question on the amount of highlight, presented in table 6.13, an overwhelming
amount of participants rated the Sentence to provide an amount of highlight to be fitting,
and for the Paragraph mode the answers were split evenly between being fitting and being
too much highlight. Again, this aligns with the findings from the other two interventions,
where the Sentence highlight mode also seems to be the most favorable.
6.5.2
Objective 2: Comparing with Previous Results
Unfortunately, only the mean values for the recovery rates have been provided by Pereira
and Andrei [1] for previous results. Furthermore, recovery rates were not collected for
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
79
==PAGE:88==
Word
Sentence
Paragraph
Median
2.0
2.0
3.0
Mean
2.0
2.13
2.8
Standard deviation
0.0
1.27
1.17
Table 6.12: Mean values and standard deviations for the recovery rate scores for the
treatments of the Notification intervention.
I would like more text
to be highlighted
I found the amount of
highlight to be fitting
I would like less text
to be highlighted
Highlight mode
#
%
#
%
#
%
Word
1
100
0
0
0
0
Sentence
0
0
5
100
0
0
Paragraph
0
0
2
50
2
50
Table 6.13: Distribution of answers to the question “How did you find the amount of high­
light?” for the Notification intervention. # refers to the number of answers obtained, and
% refers to the corresponding percentage value.
the Gradual intervention. This makes it largely difficult to compare the current results with
previous work, however some comparison is possible. The mean values for the recovery
rate scores of the experiment by Pereira and Andrei [1] are provided in table 6.14.
Undo
Popup
Notification
Mean
2.87
2.43
1.35
Table 6.14: Mean values for the recovery rate scores of the experiment by Pereira and
Andrei [1].
Overall, the ranking of the three interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification in terms of
recovery rate scores is similar to the results found by Pereira and Andrei [1]; the Undo
intervention is rated as the most difficult to recover from, followed by the Popup and the
Notification intervention. The difference in mean values between the Popup and the No­
tification intervention is not nearly as strong as was found by Pereira and Andrei [1], how­
ever; the best mean value for the Notification intervention (the Sentence highlight mode)
is only marginally better than the best value for the Popup intervention (also the Sentence
highlight). Furthermore, the mean values for all treatments for both interventions seem to
fall within the same spectrum (∼2.1 ­ 2.8), making it hard to distinguish them, and there
is a high chance that a larger sample size will reflect a different outcome.
For both the Undo and the Notification interventions, however, the recovery rate scores
are notably higher for the experiment of this thesis compared to results by Pereira and
Andrei [1]. This is surprising, as it would otherwise be expected that the users would find
it easier to recover from an intervention when help is provided. This suggests that the
current design of the context­preserving functionality may not offer the necessary help
for the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification. Once again, the sample size of the
recovery rate scores is limited, which means there is a high insecurity in the results. A
larger sample size is needed to establish whether this tendency is, in fact, present or
whether the data collected during this thesis is subject to outliers.
80
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:89==
Figure 6.16: Recovery rate scores for the treatments of the Gradual intervention.
6.5.3
Objective 3: Comparing the Interventions
The distribution of the recovery rate scores for the Gradual intervention and the corre­
sponding mean value and the standard deviation are presented in figure 6.16 and table
6.15 respectively. The graphs, the median, and the mean value reveal that an overwhelm­
ing number of participants found the Gradual intervention very easy to recover from upon
page changes. The medians and the mean values for the Gradual intervention seemed
further to be considerably lower than the medians and means for the other interventions,
which suggests that some significant difference exists. A Kruskal­Wallis­Test also re­
vealed a p value of 6.7­09, confirming this hypothesis and the resulting p values of a post
hoc Dunn test are presented in table 6.16.
Gradual
Median
1.0
Mean
1.58
Standard deviation
0.99
Table 6.15: Mean values and standard deviations for the recovery rate scores for the
Gradual intervention.
As can be seen in the table, there seems to be a significant difference between the Grad­
ual intervention and the Undo intervention with the Word highlight mode, as well as the
Undo intervention with the Sentence highlight mode. In other words, the participants
seemed to recover with significantly more ease for the Gradual intervention than for the
Undo intervention with Word and Sentence highlight modes. No significance is detected
among the remaining groups. This result is surprising, as no significant differences were
detected between the Gradual intervention and these treatments for the eye tracking data.
Similarly, for the treatments among which a significant difference in the eye tracking data
was detected, no significant differences in the recovery rates were observed. This high­
lights that the mental perception of a user experience may not always align with what is
happening physically.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
81
==PAGE:90==
G
N + P
N + S
P + P
P +S
P + W
U + P
U + S
U + W
G
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.259098
1.000000
1.000000
0.343109
0.02191
0.012785
N + P
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
N + S
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
P + P
0.259098
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
P + S
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.724799
P + W
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.724799
U + P
0.343109
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.540536
1.000000
U + S
0.021910
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
U + W
0.012785
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.724799
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
Table 6.16: p values for the pairwise Dunn test of the recovery rates for all interventions.
Values below 0.05 are marked with green, indicating a significant difference between the
compared groups.
6.5.4
Analyzing the Performance of the Highlight Modes Across
Interventions
The above analysis of the interventions and highlight modes revealed an overall tendency
towards the Sentence highlight mode being the preferred one for most of the interventions.
This inspired a wish to investigate this hypothesis in further detail. The distribution of the
combined recovery rate scores across intervention types is depicted in figure 6.17. The
graphs do not immediately reveal any tendencies towards a favored highlight mode, rather
they all seem somewhat similar in nature. This is also supported by the mean and median
values for each highlight mode treatment, as presented in table 6.17. A Kruskal­Wallis­
Test was performed on the combined data, and the returned p value for the hypothesis
test was 0.21394, which is above 0.05, so no statistical significance could be determined
between the overall rating of the different highlight modes.
(a) Distribution of recovery
rate
scores
for
the
treat­
ment Word across interven­
tion types.
(b) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Sentence across intervention
types.
(c) Distribution of recovery
rate scores for the treatment
Paragraph across interven­
tion types.
Figure 6.17: Recovery rate scores for the three treatments Word, Sentence, and Para­
graph across intervention types.
Word
Sentence
Paragraph
Median
2.5
2.0
3.0
Mean
2.81
2.37
2.85
Standard deviation
1.18
1.16
1.11
Table 6.17: Mean values and standard deviations for the recovery rate scores for the three
treatments Word, Sentence, and Paragraph across intervention types.
The answers for the question on the amount of highlight was also grouped across in­
terventions, and the results are presented in table 6.18. This table reveals a somewhat
82
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:91==
different tendency than the recovery rate scores, namely that the test participants primar­
ily found the Word highlight mode to provide too little highlight, the Paragraph highlight
mode to be too much, and the Sentence highlight mode to be fitting.
I would like more text
to be highlighted
I found the amount of
highlight to be fitting
I would like less text
to be highlighted
Highlight mode
#
%
#
%
#
%
Word
10
62.5
6
37.5
0
0
Sentence
1
5
16
80
3
15
Paragraph
0
0
3
33.33
6
66.67
Table 6.18: Distribution of answers to the question “How did you find the amount of high­
light?”. # refers to the number of answers obtained, and % refers to the corresponding
percentage value.
6.5.5
Qualitative Feedback
Aside from the quantitative data collected through the questionnaires, the participants also
expressed qualitative feedback on the intervention types and highlight modes through
questions and the post­conversation, as also mentioned in section 5.6.
Through the experiments, it generally became clear that the Gradual intervention was
the most favored by many participants, as this was the intervention type that received the
most praise. Among the positive feedback, the participants mentioned that the subtleness
of the intervention was very likable, and many participants did not even notice the typog­
raphy change during the reading session. They also commented on the graying of the
overlapping text being very intuitive and fitting their mental model of the text being from a
previous page. Some participants stated that the user experience would have been even
smoother if some introduction to the intervention design had been given beforehand, i.e.,
the user would know that some text may be grayed when the intervention is triggered.
This was not included in the experiment of this thesis, among others, because this would
prevent an authentic first reaction to the intervention because the participant would be
provided with some knowledge of what was about to happen. Secondly, this would also
change the design of the experiment significantly compared to the experiment of Pereira
and Andrei [1], which was undesirable, as it would prevent direct comparison between the
experiment results.
For the remaining interventions, the general feedback was that both the Popup and the
Undo interventions were too intruding, and the Notification intervention was too subtle.
The latter is also very clear from the collected data, where many participants did not
interact with the notification because they did not notice it, as shown in table 6.1. This also
confirms similar results found by Pereira and Andrei [1]. Furthermore, many participants
also had a startling reaction to the Undo intervention being triggered, and many mentioned
that this was their least favorite design.
Some participants also suggested changes or updates that would improve the user ex­
perience. Among these, one suggested waiting for typography updates until a user has
finished reading a complete paragraph, which may enable faster recovery after the inter­
vention. This would also prevent users from being interrupted mid­sentence, which may
be favorable. Another user suggested that upon typography updates, the current text that
the user was reading would remain in the same physical position on the screen, as he
found that this would help him resume reading faster. This hypothesis is also supported
in the collected eye tracking data; upon the end of an intervention, many participants
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
83
==PAGE:92==
returned to approximately the same physical place on the screen as where they were
reading before the intervention was triggered. This design for the highlight modes was
also considered during the course of this thesis; however, due to time constraints, it was
not included. It may be worth exploring this in future work on the context­preserving func­
tionality to uncover whether this decreases the intervention times further and provides a
better user experience.
Another participant also wanted a better option for comparing the current typography set­
ting and the suggested update. Currently, the Notification and Popup interventions in­
cludes a dialog, which displays an example text with the typography updates suggested
by the application, however there is no option for a direct comparison between the two.
This may also be worth considering for future work.
Lastly, one user suggested having a “redo” option in cases where the user undoes the
typography changes but then wishes to apply them anyway. This happened once dur­
ing an experiment, where a participant first applied the changes, then used the “undo”
option, and then wished to redo them again, after which he spent considerable time man­
ually updating the typography to match the changes suggested by the intervention. This
is the same participant who wanted a more direct comparison between the current and
suggested typography settings.
84
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:93==
7
Discussion
At this point, a design of the context­preserving functionality has been proposed and im­
plemented in chapters 2, 3, and 4, an experiment has been designed and conducted, as
described in chapter 5, and the results have been analysed to determine the effects of
context preservation as presented in chapters 5 and 6 respectively. The following chap­
ter will discuss the above results and their impact on the Reading the Reader research
project in relation to the research questions defined in section 1.3. Finally, this chapter
will present ideas for future improvement for both the context­preserving functionality and
the reading application as a whole.
7.1
On the Design and Implementation of the
Context­Preserving Functionality
The first research question concerned the design and implementation of the context­
preserving functionality, namely:
RQ1: How might we design and implement functionality that helps the reader
preserve context in a text after an intervention has been introduced?
RQ1 was, among others, addressed and answered through a systematic review of rel­
evant literature presented in chapter 2. The scope of the literature review was defined
by including suitable keywords from RQ1 to ensure that only literature relevant to the
given context was reviewed. Specifically, the phrase context­preserving functionality was
analyzed in greater detail to discover keywords that would help describe a similar func­
tionality in works by other researchers. This resulted in a state­of­the­art presentation of
relevant highlighting techniques, which would later serve as a guideline for designing the
context­preserving functionality.
The reader should note that the results obtained from the literature review are subject
to the applied methodology. The cornerstone of the literature review is the methodology
presented in the works by Petersen, Vakkalanka, and Kuzniarz [2] and Wohlin [3]. Fur­
thermore, the outcome is based on the selected set of search keywords, the databases
from which the relevant publications are retrieved, and the time the review is conducted.
Choosing a different methodology than the one described by Petersen, Vakkalanka, and
Kuzniarz [2] and Wohlin [3] or a different set of search keywords may likely result in a dif­
ferent outcome. The author of the thesis notes, however, that the selected methodology
was chosen in an effort to obtain the best and most relevant results.
Aside from the literature review, a thorough analysis of the context in which the context­
preserving functionality was to be implemented was performed in chapter 3. The study
resulted in the five design considerations Focus, Pop­out, Ephemerality, Readability, and
Reader control. These considerations served as the foundation for the design of the func­
tionality, and all relevant highlighting techniques were evaluated against them to deter­
mine the most suitable candidates. Specifically, the Focus design consideration revealed
a want for distinguishing between the Popup, Undo, and Notification intervention group
and the Gradual intervention. This was based on the reasoning that for the Gradual in­
tervention, the user can remain in a reading flow while interacting with it. Thus, it makes
sense to emphasize the text they are about to read to avoid too much redundancy when
rereading the text. Contrastingly, the user has to actively leave their reading flow when in­
teracting with the remaining interventions, and it was thus argued that a reminder of what
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
85
==PAGE:94==
they have just read would help them resume reading faster. The above is again subject to
the methodology applied, and adopting different design considerations would have likely
resulted in different outcomes. The five design considerations were defined in an effort to
encapsulate the most critical aspects of the context­preserving functionality. Other con­
siderations, or alterations of the above considerations, could have been specified instead.
For instance, one could have chosen not to differentiate between the interventions at all,
thus providing the same highlight mode for all four types. This would have resulted in a
different design of the context­preserving functionality, which in turn may have changed
the outcome of the experiment. Some benefit in distinguishing between the interventions
was detected, however, as the results of the experiment showed that the proposed de­
sign of the context­preserving functionality for the Gradual intervention worked well, as it
resulted in a significantly lower intervention time and also received many positive com­
ments. Among others, many expressed that the usage of the bleaching mask aligned well
with their mental model.
The analysis of the context in which the context­preserving functionality was to be imple­
mented further revealed the presence of two dominant design aspects: how the context­
preserving functionality should look (appearance) vs. how much context it should provide
(density). This only concerned the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification, as the
design for these interventions was differentiated from the Gradual intervention due to the
Focus design consideration, as described above. Based on the reasoning that plenty of
research has already been conducted on the appearance of highlighting techniques and
their performance, it was decided that the work of this thesis would focus on the density
of the context­preserving functionality, as this is a relatively novel research area. Three
suggestions for the density were created, namely Word, Sentence, and Paragraph, each
emphasizing a different amount of text to highlight after a layout change had been applied.
The experiment results would have likely differed if the appearance design aspect had
been selected instead of density. However, in order to choose an appearance of the
highlight technique used by the context­preserving functionality, one would also have to
select a density, as it would otherwise be impossible to know what to highlight. This would
require the design to be based on some assumptions about how much context a user
would prefer, which in turn may have created a confounding variable in the experiment.
Although this also applies when focusing on the density of the highlight, the appearance
design could be based on much stronger assumptions, as it would leverage the findings of
previous research on the effectiveness of highlighting techniques. It is, of course, possible
that the selected appearance is not the most optimal, and perhaps other appearance
designs would provide even lower intervention times than the current design. This would
have to be explored in greater detail in future work.
Similarly, other density options could have been explored, which may have resulted in
a different experiment outcome. The current options were selected in an effort to keep
the design simple and intuitive for the users. However, future work could investigate
whether other density options result in significantly different intervention times and user
preferences, for instance by providing a set of words, sentences, or paragraphs as con­
text. Likewise, options for customizing the density of the context­preserving functionality
should also be investigated.
Finally, RQ1 was answered by implementing the above design into the reading application
as described in chapter 4. Among others, an algorithm for determining which text the
context­preserving functionality should highlight was designed and implemented. The
algorithm was based on the primary assumption that the user will look directly at the
86
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:95==
words they are reading. This is a well described assumption within the literature of eye
tracking work, however it may not be able to support users with visual impairments such
as central vision loss, as this user group often use eccentric viewing strategies, where
text is not processed in the foveal region of the gaze. This is a well­known limitation of
the works of this thesis, and future work should explore how to support this user group
better.
7.2
On the Effect of Context Preservation
The second research question focused on the effect of the context­preserving functionality
and is restated below:
RQ2: What is the effect of using the context­preserving functionality?
To answer RQ2 an experiment was designed and conducted to gather relevant data on
the users’ behavior when being introduced to the context preserving functionality as de­
scribed in chapter 5. The experiment data was further analyzed in chapter 6, where the
overall conclusion was that no significant effect between the density options could be
determined for either of the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification in terms of de­
creased intervention time or a better ability to resume reading after the intervention had
ended. In other words, all three density options performed equally well. There were,
however, tendencies in the data, among others that the median value for the Popup and
Paragraph treatments were notably larger than for the remaining Popup treatments or
that the values of the 25th and 75th quartile of the Undo and Paragraph treatment were
notably larger than the remaining Undo treatments. Furthermore, a general tendency in
the participants’ preferences towards the Sentence design for both the Popup, Undo, and
Notification intervention was detected.
Comparing the performance of the interventions with and without context preservation
(results of previous studies) further revealed that only for the Gradual intervention a sig­
nificant difference in intervention time and recovery rate could be detected, i.e., that the
Gradual intervention with context preservation performed better than without. In other
words, neither of the highlight modes Word, Sentence, or Paragraph significantly de­
creased the intervention time or the users’ ability to resume reading compared to previous
results for any of the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification. In fact, the recovery
rate scores for the Undo and Notification interventions seemed to increase considerably
when context preservation was introduced compared to previous results. This is an in­
teresting result, as it would otherwise be expected that providing help to the user would
decrease the time it takes for them to resume reading compared to not providing help.
Tendencies were present, however, for instance, for the intervention time of the Notifica­
tion intervention, where the results were close to showing weak evidence against H0, i.e.,
that some difference may be present between the performance of the intervention with
and without context preservation.
The above results are highly influenced by the methodology applied. For this thesis, a
variation of a repeated measures experiment design was selected where each test par­
ticipant would experience a subset of treatments (a combination of an intervention type
and a highlight mode) while still experiencing all levels of all independent variables. This
was found to be the most suitable experiment design based on the limited time frame and
resources available to conduct it. Another experiment design could have been employed,
as also discussed in section 5.2, for instance, by allowing all participants to explore all
possible treatments, and this would have likely resulted in a different outcome. As also
addressed in section 5.2, the applied experiment design was selected by the author in
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
87
==PAGE:96==
an attempt to obtain the best and most reliable results within the scope of the project, for
instance, to avoid fatigue or learning effect between successive texts, as was a concern
with other designs.
The design of the experiment has, of course, also influenced the amount of data that
could be gathered for each treatment. For example, due to the experiment design and
the number of recruited participants, only 5­7 data points on intervention times, recovery
scores, and user feedback could be gathered for many treatments. With a sample of
this size, it can be difficult to know whether the collected data properly represents the
entire population or contains outliers that should be discarded. This is particularly true for
the above results on the effect of the context­preserving functionality for the interventions
Popup, Undo, and Notification. It is possible that a larger sample size would have resulted
in different outcomes, as it may increase the chances of obtaining stronger results against
the null hypothesis. Perhaps significant differences between the interventions or highlight
modes could even be detected. More research is required to establish this.
Furthermore, as also addressed in section 5.4 and section 6.1, the group of test partici­
pants were fairly similar, both in terms of age and profession, which also influences the
generalizability of the obtained results. For instance, neither of the test participants suf­
fered from any severe visual impairments such as central vision loss, and more research is
thus needed to adapt the context­preserving functionality to this user group. It is likely that
different designs would be required to support people who are visually impaired because
their needs are different than those with normal vision. Similarly, it may also be likely that
different visual impairments require different designs. All of this should be explored in
greater detail.
Lastly, it is worth noting that the data included in the analysis comprised both data where
the context­preserving functionality highlighted the correct piece of text and where it did
not (a correct piece of text referring to the word, sentence, or paragraph that the user was
reading or in the midst of reading when the intervention was triggered). In 33.8 % of the
experiments the participants reported that a wrong piece of text was highlighted, however
it was also discovered that the highlight was never off by more than a couple of sentences,
and in many cases far less. Thus, based on the participants’ feedback on their experi­
ences, it was concluded that the highlight still provided some help to them. However,
this assumption may have been incorrect, and in some cases, it may also have provided
some unintentional confusion or perhaps prolonged the intervention time unnecessarily.
This concern was not expressed by the participants in their feedback, and it was further
not detected in the analysis of the gaze data, however future research may leverage from
only including data where the context preserving functionality highlights the correct piece
of text.
7.3
On the Optimal Intervention Design
The third research question focused on evaluating the interventions with their best­performing
highlight mode to determine an optimal intervention design. More specifically, the wish
was to investigate whether the Gradual intervention would still be the optimal intervention
design, as determined by previous studies when the context­preserving functionality is
introduced. The research question is restated below:
RQ3: Is Gradual still the optimal intervention after introducing the context­
preserving functionality?
Answering RQ2 revealed that no optimal highlight mode could be determined for either of
the Popup, Undo, and Notification interventions. Thus, RQ3 was addressed by comparing
88
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:97==
the intervention times, recovery rate scores, and participant feedback across all interven­
tion and highlight mode combinations to investigate whether one combination performed
significantly better than the remaining. For the intervention times, a significant difference
was observed between the Gradual intervention and the Notification and Sentence combi­
nation, all combinations involving Popup, and the Undo and Paragraph combination. The
Gradual intervention time was the shortest of all the before­mentioned combinations. In
other words, when context preservation is introduced, the intervention time for the Grad­
ual intervention seems significantly shorter than for many other intervention designs. For
the recovery rate scores, a significant difference was detected between the Gradual inter­
vention and the Undo and Sentence as well as Undo and Word treatments. The recovery
rate score for the Gradual intervention was the lowest of the before­mentioned combina­
tions. In other words, when context preservation is introduced, the participants found it
significantly easier to resume reading when being exposed to the Gradual intervention
compared to the Undo intervention with the Sentence and Word highlight modes. The
latter result is quite interesting, as it reveals that for the groups where no significant differ­
ence in the eye tracking data could be observed, a significant difference in recovery rate
scores was detected and vice versa. This highlights that the mental model of a user may
not always correlate with their physical responses.
Lastly, the qualitative user feedback also revealed an overall preference among the par­
ticipants towards the Gradual intervention, as this intervention design received the most
praise and positive feedback. Further, many even selected this directly as their favorite
design.
The reader will note that many of the concerns regarding the experiment design as dis­
cussed in section 7.2 for RQ2 are, of course, also present for the results obtained for RQ3.
This accounts for both the experiment design, the amount of data that could be collected,
and the data included in the analysis. As also stated in 7.2, however, the author selected
the applied experiment design and data analysis method in an attempt to obtain the best
and most reliable results.
7.4
Future Work
The following section will present recommendations for future studies regarding the context­
preserving functionality and the reading application in general. All of the highlighted av­
enues were discovered during the course of this thesis.
7.4.1
More Precision on Which Text To Highlight
As mentioned multiple times throughout the thesis, the context­preserving functionality
did not always highlight the correct piece of text for the interventions Popup, Undo, and
Notification. There may be several reasons for this, for instance, due to poor calibration
of the participants using the built­in Tobii calibration software, errors in the extra calibra­
tion step added during this project, or errors in the conversion between gaze data and
screen coordinates. To create a more reliable user experience, it will be worth looking
into whether the highlight’s precision can be improved.
7.4.2
Preserve Absolute Position of Highlighted Text on Screen After
Applying Typography Changes
During the data analysis phase and through participant feedback, it was discovered that
many participants naturally returned to the absolute onscreen position where they were
reading prior to the typography changes applied by an intervention. Thus, it may be worth
exploring whether it will be possible to preserve the vertical position of the text in the book
after typography updates and how this affects the user experience. This was explored
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
89
==PAGE:98==
briefly for this thesis, however it was deemed infeasible to implement due to time con­
straints. However, evidence from the collected gaze data suggests that this may improve
the user experience significantly.
7.4.3
Supporting Readers With Visual Impairments
As mentioned in both section 7.1 and 7.2, the design and implementation of the context­
preserving functionality suggested by this thesis have not been developed and tested
on users with visual impairments. Among others, the algorithm for determining what the
context­preserving functionality should highlight is based on the assumption that text is
processed in the foveal region of the gaze, which does not necessarily apply to users with
central vision loss or the like. To make the application support this group of users, it is vital
that this is explored in greater detail in future work. Moreover, this user group should also
be included in future experiments. Among others, this will allow researchers to estimate
whether the current design of the context­preserving functionality needs to be modified,
as the needs of users with visual impairments may be different from users with normal
vision.
7.4.4
Personalization and Customization of the Context Preserving
Functionality.
The Nielsen Norman Group describes personalization as the system’s ability to adapt to
a specific user, for instance, by showing them content related specifically to their role,
and customization as the user’s ability to make changes to a system to better support
their specific needs, for instance by altering colors or selecting topics of interest1. They
further state that both of these can be effective ways of improving the user experience of
a product if implemented with care. This may be worth exploring in greater detail in future
work, for instance, by allowing users to select a preferred appearance of the context­
preserving functionality or how much context they would like to be provided or by making
the application adapt the amount of context to be shown to the user based on their reading
patterns.
7.4.5
Update Design of the Context­Preserving Functionality to Fit All
Layout Modes
As mentioned in section 1.3.1, the context­preserving functionality has only been designed
for the sephia mode of the reading application. This decision was made in an attempt to
keep the scope of the project simple. The sephia mode was selected based on previous
research by Pereira and Andrei [1], where the sephia layout mode was found to be the
one most preferred by users. This also means that the appearance of the highlight has
not been adapted to fit with the light or dark layout modes, and future work should focus
on deriving a design that would fit well with these.
7.4.6
Enable Direct Comparison Between Old and New Typography
As also mentioned in section 6.5.5, one user expressed the need for a more direct com­
parison between the current typography settings and the new settings suggested by an
intervention. The user stated that this would enable him to make a more enlightened
choice when selecting whether to apply the changes or not. This could also be expanded
further such that the application stores a set of previous typography settings that the user
can compare and select. This would allow the comparison to also be available for the
Undo and Gradual interventions.
7.4.7
Increase the Pop­out Effect of the Notification Intervention
During the analysis of both the qualitative and the quantitative data collected during the
experiment, it became evident that the Notification is likely too subtle in its current design,
1Source: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/customization-personalization/. Last accessed: 23­01­2025.
90
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:99==
as many participants did not interact with it because they did not notice it. Suppose this
intervention design is to be included in the future version of the reading application. In
that case, it may be worth exploring whether the design should be made more intrusive,
for instance, by adding an additional popup or sound when the notification is triggered.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
91
==PAGE:100==
92
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:101==
8
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to explore how context preservation could be designed as
well as its effect on the user experience of the reading application currently under develop­
ment by the Reading the Reader research project at the Technical University of Denmark
in collaboration with the Royal Danish Academy of Architecture, Design, and Conserva­
tion. The term context preservation was developed to describe a phenomenon where
users lose their reading position, and thus the context, of a text they are reading when an
intervention introduces typography changes in the application. Previous research found
this to be an important topic to explore, as this may significantly improve the application’s
user experience.
The problem statement of this thesis resulted in three research questions, which will be
addressed individually below, along with how they have been answered through the work
of this thesis.
RQ1: How might we design and implement functionality that helps the reader
preserve context in a text after an intervention has been introduced?
RQ1 was answered in three steps: 1) through a systematic review of relevant literature
to leverage findings of previous research, 2) through a thorough analysis of the context
in which the functionality was to be implemented to discover vital design considerations,
and 3) through a careful implementation into the reading application.
The systematic literature review was based on the methodology described by the works of
Petersen, Vakkalanka, and Kuzniarz [2] and Wohlin [3] on systematic mapping studies and
snowballing within software engineering. Relevant keywords were extracted from RQ1 to
obtain only the most pertinent research. Specifically, the phrase context­preserving func­
tionality was analyzed in greater detail to get relevant keywords, resulting in the following
definition of context preservation:
The ability to highlight or visualize relevant information to the user, which can
help them perform a visual search task to discover where they should resume
reading once an intervention has ended and typography changes have been
applied.
This definition resulted in a review of the state­of­the­art highlighting techniques in visual
searches. The most prominent observation of the literature review was the many con­
tradicting results on which highlighting technique can be considered “the best”, and that
it generally depends on the context it is to be implemented within. Thus, before a high­
lighting technique could be selected for the context­preserving functionality, the context
in which it was to be implemented was analyzed in greater detail.
The analysis of the context resulted in five design considerations (Focus, Pop­out, Ephemer­
ality, Readability, and Reader control), which served as the foundation for the design of
the context­preserving functionality, and all relevant highlighting techniques discovered
through the literature review were evaluated against these to determine the most suitable
candidates. Particularly, the Focus design consideration revealed an interesting want for
distinguishing the Gradual intervention from the remaining interventions. This was based
on the reasoning that a user can remain in a reading flow when interacting with the Gradual
intervention. Contrastingly, they must actively leave their reading flow when interacting
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
93
==PAGE:102==
with the Popup, Undo, and Notification interventions. It was thus argued that to avoid re­
dundancy for the user, it makes the most sense that the context­preserving functionality
focuses on highlighting the next thing that the user should read for the Gradual interven­
tion, and for the remaining interventions, it focuses on remind the user of what they have
just read.
For the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification, the analysis of the context in which
the context­preserving functionality was to be implemented further revealed the presence
of two dominant design aspects: whether to focus on how the context preserving func­
tionality should look (appearance) vs. how much context is should provide to the user
(density). Based on the reasoning that plenty of research has already been conducted on
the appearance of highlighting techniques and their performance, it was decided that the
work of this thesis would focus on the density of the context­preserving functionality, as
this is a relatively novel research area. Three suggestions for the density were created,
namely Word, Sentence, and Paragraph, each emphasizing a different amount of text to
highlight after a layout change had been applied.
Finally, the design of the context­preserving functionality was implemented into the read­
ing application by extending the existing application and adding new components and
functionality as needed. Among others, this resulted in a Connector class centralizing
the connection to the server responsible for sending gaze data to the reading application
and an algorithm for determining what text to highlight based on the assumption that the
words a user is reading will be processed in the foveal region of the gaze. Moreover, a sin­
gle responsibility principle was also enforced on all components to ease the maintenance
of and future work on the application.
RQ2: What is the effect of using the context preserving functionality?
RQ2 was answered by designing and conducting an experiment enabling the author
to gather relevant data on the user’s behavior when being introduced to the context­
preserving functionality. This data constituted the user’s gaze data, questions on the
user’s ability to resume reading after an intervention was introduced, their preference
towards the amount of highlight shown, and other qualitative feedback the user would
provide during the experiment. The experiment was designed as a version of a repeated
measures design where users would experience a subset of the possible treatments (in­
tervention type and highlight combinations) while still being exposed to all possible inter­
vention types and highlight modes. This design was found to be the most feasible and
the one providing the most reliable results, given the limited time frame and resources
available for this thesis.
The analysis of the data obtained from the experiment revealed the following:
1. For the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification, a “best performing” highlight­
ing mode could not be determined, i.e., all three highlight modes seem to perform
equally well for all these interventions.
2. For the Popup, Undo, and Notification interventions, there further seems to be no
considerable effect on the performance of the interventions with and without context
preservation, where performance without context preservation stems from previous
studies by Pereira and Andrei [1]. This is a very interesting result, as it would other­
wise be expected that providing help to the users would increase the performance
of the intervention compared to not providing help.
3. There was an overall tendency towards the users preferring the Sentence highlight
94
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:103==
design in terms of how much context the context preserving functionality should
provide for the interventions Popup, Undo, and Notification.
4. For the Gradual intervention, introducing the context preservation significantly im­
proved the performance of the intervention both in terms of how long it takes for
users to resume reading after typography changes have been applied, as well as
how easy they thought it was to resume reading.
RQ3: Is Gradual still the optimal intervention after the introduction of the
context­preserving functionality?
Finally, RQ3 was answered by comparing data from the above experiment across all four
interventions to investigate whether any tendencies could be revealed. Overall, it was
found that the Gradual intervention with context preservation performed significantly better
than many of the other intervention designs with context preservation, both in regards to
how long it takes users to resume reading after typography changes have been applied,
as well as how easy they thought it was to resume reading. Furthermore, a tendency
towards the user preference of the Gradual intervention was detected, as this intervention
design received the most positive comments, and many even selected this directly as their
favorite.
Limitations, uncertainties, and sources of error in regard to all three research questions
have also been identified and discussed. Lastly, important future research avenues have
been addressed, which include ensuring that the context­preserving functionality supports
users with visual impairments and implementing important aspects discovered during the
experiment, such as preserving the absolute position of the text after typography changes
have been applied.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
95
==PAGE:104==
96
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1]
Luz Emma Pereira and Mihai­Valentin Andrei. “Designing a Typography­Adaptive
Reading Interface for Individuals with Central Vision Loss”. Master thesis. Technical
University of Denmark, June 2024.
[2]
Kai Petersen, Sairam Vakkalanka, and Ludwik Kuzniarz. “Guidelines for conducting
systematic mapping studies in software engineering: An update”. In: Information
and software technology 64 (2015), pp. 1–18.
[3]
Claes Wohlin. “Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a
replication in software engineering”. In: Proceedings of the 18th international con­
ference on evaluation and assessment in software engineering. 2014, pp. 1–10.
[4]
Cheryl G. Spoto and A.J.G. Babu. “Highlighting in Alphanumeric Displays: The Effi­
cacy of Monochrome Methods”. In: Proceedings of the Human Factors Society An­
nual Meeting 33.5 (1989), pp. 370–374. DOI: 10.1177/154193128903300530. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1177/154193128903300530. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/
154193128903300530.
[5]
Geerd Philipsen. “Effects of six different highlighting modes on visual search perfor­
mance in menu options”. In: International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction
6.3 (1994), pp. 319–335. DOI: 10.1080/10447319409526098. eprint: https://doi.org/
10.1080/10447319409526098. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/10447319409526098.
[6]
Jonathan Ling and Paul van Schaik. “The effect of text and background colour on
visual search of Web pages”. In: Displays 23.5 (2002), pp. 223–230. ISSN: 0141­
9382. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-9382(02)00041-0. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0141938202000410.
[7]
Paweł Krzos. “The usage of colours as a text highlighting technique”. In: Zeszyty
Naukowe Małopolskiej Wyższej Szkoły Ekonomicznej w Tarnowie 4 (36) (2017),
pp. 101–110.
[8]
Jen­Her Wu and Yufei Yuan. “Improving searching and reading performance: the
effect of highlighting and text color coding”. In: Information & Management 40.7
(2003), pp. 617–637. ISSN: 0378­7206. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-
7206(02)00091-5. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378720602000915.
[9]
Hendrik Strobelt et al. “Guidelines for Effective Usage of Text Highlighting Tech­
niques”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 22.1 (2016),
pp. 489–498. DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2015.2467759.
[10]
Hendrik Strobelt et al. “Errata to “Guidelines for Effective Usage of Text Highlighting
Techniques” [1]”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
22.5 (2016), pp. 1637–1637. DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2532240.
[11]
Hsiu Feng Wang, Pei Yu Wang, and Hsin Chung Ting. “The influence of highlighting
and font size on visual search performance”. In: Contemporary Ergonomics and
Human Factors 2012. CRC Press, 2012, pp. 91–98.
[12]
Hsiu­Feng Wang. “Influence of highlighting, columns, and font size on visual search
performance with respect to on­screen Chinese characters”. In: Perceptual and Mo­
tor Skills 117.2 (2013), pp. 528–541.
[13]
Toshihisa Doi. “Effective highlighting modes of graphical user interfaces in visual
information search”. In: Universal Access in the Information Society 22.1 (2023),
pp. 111–119.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
97
==PAGE:106==
[14]
Benjamin Gagl. “Blue hypertext is a good design decision: no perceptual disad­
vantage in reading and successful highlighting of relevant information”. In: PeerJ 4
(2016), e2467.
[15]
Andrew T. Duchowski. Eye Tracking Methodology ­ Theory and Practice. Third.
Springer, 2017.
[16]
Michael D Kickmeier­Rust and Dietrich Albert. “Highlighting–Or Why Google Is That
Successful”. In: Usability Symposium. 2005, pp. 45–52.
[17]
Li Wang et al. “Influence of highlighting words beneath icon on performance of vi­
sual search in tablet computer”. In: Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality: 7th In­
ternational Conference, VAMR 2015, Held as Part of HCI International 2015, Los
Angeles, CA, USA, August 2­7, 2015, Proceedings 7. Springer. 2015, pp. 81–87.
[18]
Kuo­Chen Huang. “Effects of computer icons and figure/background area ratios and
color combinations on visual search performance on an LCD monitor”. In: Displays
29.3 (2008), pp. 237–242.
[19]
Kuo­Chen Huang, Chen­Fu Chen, and Shu­Ying Chiang. “Icon flickering, flicker
rate, and color combinations of an icon’s symbol/background in visual search per­
formance”. In: Perceptual and motor skills 106.1 (2008), pp. 117–127.
[20]
Zhangfan Shen et al. “The effects of color combinations, luminance contrast, and
area ratio on icon visual search performance”. In: Displays 67 (2021), p. 101999.
[21]
Shumin Zhai et al. “Graphical means of directing users’ attention in the visual in­
terface”. In: Human­Computer Interaction INTERACT’97: IFIP TC13 International
Conference on Human­Computer Interaction, 14th–18th July 1997, Sydney, Aus­
tralia. Springer. 1997, pp. 59–66.
[22]
Azam Khan et al. “Spotlight: directing users’ attention on large displays”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems. 2005,
pp. 791–798.
[23]
AL Griffin and AC Robinson. “Comparing color and leader line approaches for high­
lighting in geovisualization”. In: Proc. GIScience. 2010.
[24]
Carman Neustaedter and Phoebe Sengers. “Autobiographical design in HCI re­
search: designing and learning through use­it­yourself”. In: Proceedings of the De­
signing Interactive Systems Conference. DIS ’12. Newcastle Upon Tyne, United
Kingdom: Association for Computing Machinery, 2012, pp. 514–523. ISBN: 9781450312103.
DOI: 10.1145/2317956.2318034. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2317956.2318034.
[25]
Interaction Design Foundation. What is User Control? https://www.interaction-
design.org/literature/topics/user-control. Last accessed: 01­01­2025.
[26]
Keith Rayner. “Eye Movements in Reading and Information Processing: 20 Years
of Research”. In: Psychological Bulletin — 1998, Volume 124, Issue 3. American
Psychological Association (PsycARTICLES), 1998. ISBN: 19391455. DOI: 10.1037/
0033-2909.124.3.372. URL: https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.124.3.372.
[27]
Wolfram. Pythagorean Theorem. https://resources.wolframcloud.com/FormulaRepository/
resources/Pythagorean-Theorem. Last accessed: 06­01­2025.
[28]
Farah Akthar et al. “A comparison of reading, in people with simulated and actual
central vision loss, with static text, horizontally scrolling text, and rapid serial visual
presentation”. In: Journal of Vision 21.12 (2021), pp. 5–5.
[29]
William J. Lammers and Pietro Badia. Fundamentals of Behavioral Research. https:
/ / uca . edu / psychology / fundamentals - of - behavioral - research - textbook/. Last ac­
cessed: 07­01­2025. Willam J. Lammers, 2004.
[30]
ScienceDirect. Fractional Factorial Design. https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/
engineering/fractional-factorial-design. Last accessed: 08­01­2025.
98
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:107==
[31]
SurveyMonkey. Likert Scale. https://www.surveymonkey.com/mp/likert-scale/. Last
accessed: 07­01­2025.
[32]
Roy S. Hessels et al. “Noise­robust fixation detection in eye movement data: Iden­
tification by two­means clustering (I2MC)”. In: Behav. Res. 49 (2017), pp. 1802–
1823. URL: https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-016-0822-1.
[33]
Richard Andersson et al. “One algorithm to rule them all? An evaluation and dis­
cussion of ten eye movement event­detection algorithms”. In: Behavior research
methods 49 (2017), pp. 616–637.
[34]
R.H.S. Carpenter. Movements of the Eyes. Pion, 1988. ISBN: 9780850861099.
URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=i9dqAAAAMAAJ.
[35]
Per B. Brockhoff et al. Introduction to Statistics at DTU. DTU, 2024.
[36]
Thomas W. MacFarland and Jan M. Yates. Introduction to Nonparametric Statistics
for the Biological Sciences Using R. Springer, 2016. ISBN: 978­3­319­30633­9.
[37]
Alexis Dinno. “Nonparametric pairwise multiple comparisons in independent groups
using Dunn’s test”. In: The Stata Journal 15.1 (2015), pp. 292–300.
[38]
Gail M Sullivan and Anthony R Artino Jr. “Analyzing and interpreting data from
Likert­type scales”. In: Journal of graduate medical education 5.4 (2013), pp. 541–
542.
[39]
Constantin Mircioiu and Jeffrey Atkinson. “A comparison of parametric and non­
parametric methods applied to a Likert scale”. In: Pharmacy 5.2 (2017), p. 26.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
99
==PAGE:108==
100
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:109==
A
Mock­ups
A.1
Blinking Text ­ Version 1
Prototype Link
A.2
Blinking Text ­ Version 2
Prototype Link
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
101
==PAGE:110==
B
Recruitment
Hello everyone!
My name is Helena, and I am current pursuing my master’s degree in Computer Science
and Engineering. I am in the midst of writing my final thesis in User Experience, and I
have reached a point where I have designed and build a prototype that needs to tested
on some real users – that’s why I am reaching out to you!
I am looking for anyone of any age and gender who would be interested in spending 30­
40 minutes with me trying out some cool new eye tracking technology while reading in an
online reading application.
About the project:
My thesis is a part of a larger research project at DTU called ”Reading the Reader”, where
we aim to create a reading application with an adaptive user interface. This means that
the UI of the application will change to support you while you read, to give you the best
possible experience, for instance by changing the line height, font type, letter spacing or
the like – anything you can imagine.
About the test:
The experiment is very simple: You will be presented with a set of different texts that you
are to read in the application, while an eye tracker monitors your eye movements. The
interface of the application might change during the experiment, and the goal is to validate
the design of these changes. You will be asked to evaluate your experience after reading
each text (a short questionnaire of roughly 3­4 questions). Breaks will of course also be
included if needed.
WHEN?
Preferably during the first two weeks of November (1st ­ 15th), to also avoid getting too
close to the exam period, however I know we all have busy study lives, so I will be open
for testing during the whole of November, so we can find a date that suits you better.
HOW LONG?
I expect the test to take 30­40 minutes at most, however this also depends on how fast of
a reader you are. Don’t hesitate to reach out if you are a slow reader though – the goal
of the experiment is not to validate reading speed, and your reading speed will not affect
the results!
WHERE?
In a lab at DTU, building 321. More details will be provided at signup.
HOW DO I REACH OUT?
Hit me up at s194571@student.dtu.dk, and write when you would have the time to partic­
ipate in the experiment.
Thank you for reaching the bottom of my post – I hope to hear from you!
102
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:111==
C
Subject Information Letter
Dear paricipant,
This is a letter to inform you about the nature of the experiment I am conducting. It is
important that you read this letter carefully. Should you have any questions, please do
not hesitate to contact me (Helena Eschricht Jensen, s194571@student.dtu.dk) for clari­
fication.
Your rights as a participant
Your participation in this experiment is entirely voluntary. This means that you have the
right to leave the experiment at any point in time without any consequences for yourself
and without providing an explanation. Should you withdraw from the experiment, the data
collected on you up until the point of withdrawal may still be used for research purposes
as a part of this thesis project. I will ask you for an informed consent to participate in the
experiment after you have been informed about the nature of the experiment through this
letter and any additional questions you may have.
Purpose of the research project
This experiment is a part of my master thesis project, which I am writing in association with
the Reading the Reader research project at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The purpose of this research project is to create digital reading experiences where the
reading interface adapts to individual users based on their needs, for instance to aid the
visually impared. My contribution within this project is to enhance the usability of various
interactive interventions and measure their impact on the reading experience.
Data storage and handling
All data recorded during the course of the experiment will be anonymized, i.e., it will not
be stored in relation to any information that would allow to identify you later on. Your data
will be stored under a specific handle, and you will be presented with this handle at the
beginning of the experiment. The following information will be recorded on you: your age,
your gender, your eye movements during the experiment, and any answers you might
provide to the experiment questionnaires. Your data will not be shared with anyone else
apart from me.
Information regarding the experiment
For this experiment, you will be asked to read five different texts in the digital reading
application. The texts might consist of multiple pages, and the reading application allows
you to change between pages by pressing either the left or right arrow keys on the pro­
vided keyboard. The reading application contains a few other features such as options
for setting typography settings and choosing a display mode. You will be provided some
time to familiarize yourself with the reading application at the beginning of the experiment
before any data is recorded.
Your task during the experiment is to read the texts presented to you in the reading ap­
plication. While reading, you might experience some changes happening on the screen.
These changes are called interventions, and they might disrupt your reading flow and
require your attention. When an intervention is introduced you should respond to it as
you find necessary and resume reading as soon as possible. After each text you will be
presented with a small reading comprehension test and a questionnaire to assess your
reading experience. I expect that the experiment will take between 30 and 40 minutes. A
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
103
==PAGE:112==
small break will be provided for you approximately halfway through the experiment.
If you have any questions about the experiment, the methods used, or your safety and
rights, please do not hesitate to contact me (Helena Eschricht Jensen,
s194571@student.dtu.dk) during or after the experiment.
With kind regards,
Helena
Consent form
[To be filled out before the experiment by the observer.]
Experiment: Experiment on interventions and context preservability as a part of a master
thesis project in relation to the Reading the Reader research project at DTU.
Observer: Helena Eschricht Jensen
[To be filled out before the experiment by the participant.]
I confirm that:
• I was satisfactorily informed about the study concerned both verbally and in writing
by means of the subject information letter.
• I have had the opportunity to put forward questions regarding the experiment and
the research project and these questions have been answered satisfactorily.
• I have carefully considered my participation in the experiment and the research
project.
• I participate at my own free will.
I agree that:
• My data will be acquired for scientific purposes as mentioned in the subject infor­
mation letter in fully anonymized form.
I understand that:
• My participation is voluntary, and I have the right to withdraw from the experiment
at any point in time without having to provide a reason.
• Should I withdraw, my research data collected up until the point of withdrawal may
still be used for research purposes.
• My privacy is protected according to Danish law and European guidelines (GDPR;
EU 2016/679).
• My consent will be sought every time I participate in a new experiment.
104
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:113==
I hereby give my consent to participate in this experiment:
Full name
Date, place
Signature
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
105
==PAGE:114==
D
Reading Comprehension Tests
D.1
Blockhead Hans
Q1: Why did the two clever brothers think they would be able to win the Princess’s
hand?
A. They were the only suitors allowed to woo the Princess.
B. They believed their extensive knowledge and skills made them suitable.
C. They had been friends with the Princess for a long time.
D. Their father was the King’s advisor.
Correct answer: B.
Q2: What unusual item did Blockhead­Hans use as a cooking implement?
A. A clay pot
B. An old shoe
C. A crow’s feather
D. A piece of cloth
Correct Answer: B.
Q3: How did the Princess respond to Blockhead­Hans’s unique answers and ac­
tions?
A. She dismissed him as she did with the others.
106
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:115==
B. She was offended and left the room.
C. She admired his quick wit and decided to marry him
D. She ignored him and moved on to the next suitor.
Correct answer: C.
D.2
Four Sisters
Q1: Why did Tipper, the narrator’s mother, throw parties on Beechwood Island?
A. She enjoyed celebrating special occasions.
B. She loved to decorate and plan events.
C. She was lonely and enjoyed being around people.
D. She was required to host events for charity.
Correct answer: C.
Q2: What traditional food did the narrator’s family eat on the Fourth of July at Clair­
mont house?
A. Deep­fried clams and lemonade
B. Corn on the cob, hamburgers, and watermelon
C. Fish and chips
D. Hot dogs and potato salad
Correct Answer: B.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
107
==PAGE:116==
Q3: Which activity marked the end of the family’s Fourth of July celebration?
A. Watching the fireworks from the Big Beach
B. Singing around the bonfire
C. Setting off sparklers on the lawn
D. Watching a Sousa march
Correct answer: A.
D.3
Odin
Q1: What sacrifice did Odin make to gain wisdom and knowledge of the runes?
A. He gave up his throne at Hlidskjalf.
B. He sacrificed his two ravens, Huginn and Muninn.
C. He hung from Yggdrasil for nine days and nights without food or drink.
D. He offered his kingdom to another god.
Correct answer: C.
108
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:117==
Q2: What is the role of Huginn and Muninn, Odin’s two ravens?
A. They guard the gates to Valhalla.
B. They bring Odin news and knowledge from across the world.
C. They decide who wins or loses in battle.
D. They are messengers to the other gods.
Correct Answer: B.
Q3: What happens to those who fall bravely in battle according to the text?
A. They become one of Odin’s ravens.
B. They are sent to serve in Hlidskjalf.
C. They are brought to Valhalla by the Valkyries to feast and fight with Odin.
D. They are reincarnated as noble warriors.
Correct answer: C.
D.4
The Little Match Girl
Q1: Why was the little girl barefoot in the snow?
A. She preferred to walk barefoot.
B. Her slippers were stolen.
C. She gave her slippers to another child.
D. Her slippers were too small and hurt her feet.
Correct answers: either B or C.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
109
==PAGE:118==
Q2: Why did the little girl not want to go back home?
A. Her home was far away.
B. She was enjoying the snow.
C. She feared being beaten for not selling any matches.
D. She didn’t know the way home.
Correct Answer: C.
Q3: What vision did the little girl see when she lit the second match?
A. A warm stove with brass knobs.
B. A Christmas tree with bright candles.
C. A room with a roast goose on the table.
D. A blanket to warm herself.
Correct answer: C.
110
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:119==
D.5
The Subtle Knife
Q1: Why does Will hold his mother’s hand, even though he is twelve years old?
A. He is afraid of getting lost.
B. He wants to be comforted.
C. He doesn’t want her to leave.
D. He knows she needs guidance and support.
Correct answers: D.
Q2: What detail does Mrs. Cooper notice that suggests something is wrong with
Will’s mother?
A. She is holding Will’s hand too tightly.
B. She only put makeup on one eye.
C. She seems very happy.
D. She recognizes Mrs. Cooper immediately.
Correct Answer: B.
Q3: What does Will ask Mrs. Cooper to do for his mother?
A. Give her a place to stay temporarily.
B. Help her find a job.
C. Take her to a doctor.
D. Teach her piano lessons.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
111
==PAGE:120==
Correct answer: A.
112
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:121==
E
Questionnaires
E.1
Compulsory question ­ Gradual
Recovery difficulty.
On a scale of 1 (very easy) to 5 (very difficult) please rate how
easy or difficult you thought it was to continue reading when changing page.
1
2
3
4
5
Very easy
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
Very hard
E.2
Compulsory questions ­ Popup, Undo, and Notification
Recovery difficulty.
On a scale of 1 (very easy) to 5 (very difficult) please rate how
easy or difficult you thought it was to resume reading after the intervention.
1
2
3
4
5
Very easy
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
Very hard
Accuracy.
Did the application correctly highlight the [word/sentence/paragraph] that you
were reading?
Yes
No
⃝
⃝
Highlight amount.
How did you find the amount of highlight? Please select the state­
ment that is most suitable.
⃝
I would have liked more text to be highlighted.
⃝
I found the amount of highlight to be fitting.
⃝
I would have liked less text to be highlighted.
⃝
I did not see any highlight.
*Interaction.
Did you interact with the notification?
Yes
No
⃝
⃝
*Only for the Notification intervention.
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
113
==PAGE:122==
F
Git Repository
https://lab.compute.dtu.dk/rtr/intervention-reader-2#
114
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
==PAGE:123==
Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User
Interfaces
115
==PAGE:124==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
compute.dtu.dk
