==PAGE:1==
Utilizing a Personalized Learning
way for Developing an
Entrepreneurial Mindset
Lipi Begum (s222500)
Farzana Sultana (s210207)
Supervised by:
Robin van Oorschot and Dorothea Georgiadou
Technical University of Denmark
January 22, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Literature Review
4
3
Methodology
7
4
Findings
35
5
Discussion
44
6
Conclusion
51
A Dataset for Quantitative Data
55
B Dataset for Qualitative Data (Interview Transcripts)
55
1
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis aims to explain how an experiential and adaptive learning framework can
be utilized to enhance the teaching of the entrepreneurial mindset in the online course.
Specifically, the entrepreneurial mindset development through the study ”Developing an
Entrepreneurial Mindset through Serious Games” at the Technical University of Den-
mark. The quantitative and qualitative data sources include quiz attempts, time spent
watching videos, and interviews used to investigate student engagement patterns and
learning patterns.
Using the data analysis approach, the study highlights the major
problems and assesses the approaches to the concept of personalized learning (Ertmer
& Newby, 2013). Outcomes reveal the effectiveness of linking educational content to
measures, using practical cases, and offering additional assistance to address learners’
variability (Lack´eus, 2020). Altogether, by using the students’ activities and acquisition
correlated to different aspects of the course, the study explores modes of students’ partic-
ipation and learning difficulties and possibilities and strategies for handling them alone
in regards to constructing the learning experiences for individual learners (Piperopoulos
& Dimov, 2015).
1
Introduction
These days, it can be noticed among pupils that the ratio of thinking as an entrepreneur
is increasing because education sectors emphasize some programs, including the qual-
ity of solving problems, believing in a creative way, and the quality of adaptability and
risk-taking (Amarneh, Alshurideh, Al Kurdi, and Obeidat (2021)) (Ashman, Kalyuga, &
Sweller, 2020). These kinds of programs are recognized as entrepreneurship education. By
attending these types of courses learners can prepare themselves for real-world challenges
where they have to think independently (Arasti, Kiani Falavarjani, & Imanipour, 2012)
(Sirelkhatim & Gangi, 2015). Day by day this education has become more acceptable in
education sectors all over the world due to its unique noticeable structure which enables
an individual to tackle the issues of the modern era so that learners can contribute to
both financial and social growth (Piperopoulos & Dimov, 2015) (Solomon, 2007).
”Developing an Entrepreneurial Mindset through Serious Games” is an online course that
2
==PAGE:4==
is designed through recorded lectures, quizzes, assignments, peer discussions, and group
works that engage students actively with this course. This course includes digital tech-
nology to provide learners not flexible only but interactive education environment also
(Bai, Li, & Liu, 2021), where pupils can practice decision-making approaches, as well as
pupils, can practice exercises that are related to practical work that is rarely available
in traditional classroom (Leu, Kinzer, Coiro, Castek, & Henry, 2017) and (Greenhow,
Graham, & Koehler, 2022).
Even though the structure of the course is well, students’ experience and engagement
with the course varied significantly. While some students understand the concept easily,
others face difficulties. This difficulty indicates a customized learning approach needs
to be employed based on students’ preferences, requirements as well as aims (Ertmer &
Newby, 2013). As a result, it gives a chance for learners to enjoy their education jour-
ney through various methods and gives a chance for pupils to apply their own pace in
the learning process while employing customized learning in education through adapting
course materials and tasks so that it can facilitate their progress (Bangert, 2008),. Cus-
tomized learning can improve engagement among learners and courses by giving them a
chance to focus on preferred subjects. When these methods are employed in the learning
process of entrepreneur education it becomes more effective for pupils as they can get
knowledge about concepts more deeply by making the relation between their interests
and real-world challenges (Bates, 2022). From the adult learning theories it can be said
that the learning journey becomes more effective only if learners have some control over
their learning process including when content is meaningful for them as well as if they
think that they can apply their knowledge in their real-life situation.
On the other hand, for employing customized learning in an effective way in virtual
entrepreneurship education, it is significant to consider to get clear concept of engage-
ment between learners and educational content (Carroll, Houghton, Forrest, McCarthy,
& Sanders-O’Connor, 2020). At the time structure of an effective digital course there
should be a balance between course materials and students engagement.
In our research, we focus on a course that runs on an online platform and the name of the
course is ”Developing an Entrepreneurial Mindset Through Serious Games”. This course
is organized by recorded videos, Quizzes, peer reviews, assignments, feedback, and so on.
Our research aims to see how students engage with the course activities, try to find out
3
==PAGE:5==
what difficulties they face while attending the course, as well as develop a personalized
learning pathway to make the learning more effective.
From our point of view, our research plays a vital role in digital entrepreneurship edu-
cation both theoretically and practically. In terms of theory, it finds effective teaching
methods as well as also can give some suggestions for course planners and educators to
make online education more productive. Our thesis is organized in the following way:
chapter 2 literature review where we review existing research which are worked on person-
alized learning as well as engagement with virtual learning courses. Chapter 3 describes
about method we used in this research, in Chapter 4 we will talk about our research
results which we found from both qualitative and quantitative analysis, chapter 5 will
describe the whole process of our work in the discussion, and Chapter 6 we will conclude
our whole research process.
Overall, the main aim of this study is to develop a customized learning pathway accord-
ing to individual interests and methods that they apply for learning so that students can
achieve the best result from the course. By employing personalized learning techniques,
this study aims to make entrepreneurial education more fruitful so that learners become
more prepared for real-world possible issues that they may be facing.
2
Literature Review
In the last few decades, many universities and schools have started to incorporate en-
trepreneurial competencies into their curriculum. Skills development program comprises
problem-solving, creativity, adaptability, and risk-taking as major learning activities to
cater to the challenges of the world. (Piperopoulos & Dimov, 2015) post that the kind
of education that prepares students for entrepreneurial opportunities also skills them to
be proactive agents that benefit society and the economy. Similarly, (Solomon, 2007) has
pointed out that this type of learning is crucial to promote self-employability and cre-
ativity among learners so that they can fit the difficult world puzzles appropriately. The
course “ Developing an Entrepreneurial Mindset Through Serious Games” is a unique ap-
proach to this development since it involves the use of technology-based tools to present
a real-life learning environment that combines both theory and practice.
Interaction remains a significant factor in the effectiveness of learning environments in
4
==PAGE:6==
digital teaching. Similarly (Carroll et al., 2020), suggested that the evidence of a com-
plementary course design has a strong interplay between the content delivery and the
activities that would make the students engaged. Examples of digital courses include
‘’Developing an Entrepreneurial Mindset Through Serious Games” where the use of in-
structional methods like quizzes and peer discussions combine to produce an effective
course. According to (Greenhow et al., 2022), the use of digital platforms offers conve-
nience and accommodation, and the students can develop their learning circumstances.
Nevertheless, (Ertmer & Newby, 2013) document the fact that students have varying
preferences which creates a challenge of how best to present content and get their atten-
tion.
Personalization of learning now appears as one of the most current strategies in education,
aiming at satisfying the needs of learners by adapting the contents delivered to their pref-
erences. This paper defines personalized learning as the process of using data analytics
and adaptive technologies to create customized approaches to learning that will facilitate
student engagement and improve learning outcomes (Lack´eus, 2020). Studies show that
when learners are allowed to influence specific factors in learning that are being presented
learners are usually more active and also their results are better (Bangert, 2008) (Bates,
2022).(Ertmer & Newby, 2013), the author’s emphasis on scaffolding to tackle complex
issues to have better understanding of the complex topics. To some extent, this is in
agreement with the tenets for adult learning, which assert that relevant content greatly
boosts the learning process (Knowles, 1980)(Ertmer & Newby, 2013).
Though the application of flexible and interactive digital platforms brings convenience,
however flexibility also leads to certain concerns like student engagement and completion.
In recent years, there has been a lot of focus on students’ attitudes to content, and the
ways, in which some students perform much better or, conversely worse, depending on
learning styles and perceptions (Carroll et al., 2020). These gaps highlight the necessity
for different learning techniques to empower all learners to gain optimal value from the
learning process.
Introducing serious games into the learning process allows learning entrepreneurship as a
process that promotes realistic experience and decision-making. This offers high levels of
participation by students to solve real-world problems and construct knowledge as well
as focuses on learning through the process, through the completion of works that stress
5
==PAGE:7==
the development of a set of crucial entrepreneurial skills, including flexibility, innovation,
and decision-making skills (Piperopoulos & Dimov, 2015). This research also proved that
serious games are not only such fun tools for learning but also they improve the imple-
mentation of what has been learned (Leu et al., 2017). Hence, serious games are useful in
fostering time management skills, and creativity since these talents are fundamental for
entrepreneurship (Greenhow et al., 2022). Also, the sources show that practice-oriented
constructivism involves the use of serious games, simulation, and collaboration as well
as project-based education significantly supports the cognitive skills that are related to
entrepreneurship.
Engagement and learning can be enhanced by creating personalized learning paths by
using students’ experiences with digital technology. Accompanying data analysis of time
on tasks, quiz results, and feedback can help teachers monitor, find patterns, and align
content to meet the student’s needs (Carroll et al., 2020). Not only cognitive learning
difficulties are eliminated, but individual orientation is also used in the tasks that are de-
signed for educational activities, thus providing enhanced students’ motivation (Bangert,
2008).
Engagement and student experience issues remain challenges for structured online courses,
even when such courses show potential. According to (Ertmer & Newby, 2013), a prob-
lem with the traditional instructional process is that it does not convey diverse learning
styles. That’s why the integration of personalized learning methods becomes more es-
sential. According to (Bangert, 2008), mastery paths increase participation because the
student can choose what they want to learn from the course materials at one time at their
own time. (Bates, 2022) also supports this by pointing out that working adult learners
are highly encouraged when learning information that is relevant to their context.
Generally, enterprise education delivered in a more personalized manner leads to enhanced
learning due to the applicability of theory to practice.(Carroll et al., 2020) acknowledge
that teaching and learning involve the integration of content and learner interaction, this
makes course design very sensitive, and teaching should be adjusted depending on goals
that are expected to be achieved.
The current methods of teaching entrepreneurship online and in serious games still need
additional improvements. Recent research uses a single learning method that doesn’t
adjust its lessons to fit students who learn differently from each other.
The ”Devel-
6
==PAGE:8==
oping an Entrepreneurial Mindset Through Serious Games” course shows this problem
because non-business students find the basics hard to understand while they have high
engagement with the course content. High quiz attempt rates in hard topics show that
evaluation methods need better alignment with teaching materials. Despite general ac-
ceptance of adaptive technologies researchers still need clear evidence of how they impact
student achievement over time (Dillenbourg, 2016). Through performance tracking and
engagement measurement, this thesis works as a bridge to these gaps by revealing learn-
ing habits while crafting educational tools to help non-business learners excel and offering
design feedback from user data. This research approach provides new ways to show how
individualized learning methods boost student connection and progress throughout the
course(Rasheed, Kamsin, & Abdullah, 2020). By doing so the study sets a foundation
that serves all students.(Piperopoulos & Dimov, 2015)(Bangert, 2008).
The literature points towards the proposition that entrepreneurial education when sup-
ported by a program of personalized learning with a blend of digital technologies has the
potential to enhance the quality of the overall student experience. This however high-
lights the need to pay careful attention to engagement strategies, as well as the selection
of content, to fit the needs of a diverse learning audience toward realizing the intended
outcomes. Through writing this thesis, the creation of the entrepreneurial persona is pos-
sible by examining the development of student performance and engagement and the use
of data collection to determine learning experiences and the mapping of learning paths.
3
Methodology
Research Design
This study employs a sequential mixed-method approach, including quantitative and
qualitative data for getting a comprehensive understanding of learners’ engagement and
experience toward ”Developing mindset through Serious game” which was run on the
digital platform (W. C. Creswell, 2009) The research design explored in this chapter
supports the identification of trends and patterns from quantitative data followed by
the qualitative data and identification of the reasons and recommendations from the in-
terviews (J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017). This approach is quite useful in integrating
quantitative information with qualitative knowledge (Ertmer & Newby, 2013) .
7
==PAGE:9==
Our aim in this research is to find out the answer to the following key questions:
1.
How students engage in the course using items like videos, quizzes, surveys, peer
reviews, and so forth, and the experiences about such items as how challenging or easy
they find?
Quantitative data is collected to monitor factors such as how long students spend in a
video session, and how many quiz attempts they take to complete the course in order to
notice trends in learners. This quantitative data is supported by semi-structured inter-
views (qualitative data) to further understand from the student’s perspective innovative
elements, their difficulties, and usability.
2. What are the most familiar difficulties that maximum students face and how it affect
their learning processes?
Qualitative interviews offer detailed information such as what kind of challenges most
of the students face, how they feel about it, and what their suggestions are to over-
come these. Quantitative information like re-watching videos and high quiz attempts
contributes to patterns associated with these issues.
3. In what ways can the data collected from the pupils’ interactions be applied to create
learning paths that can assist in fulfilling various learning styles and needs of the pupils?
Quantitative analysis defines and predicts relationships (as between the amount of time
spent on videos and quiz attempts) and qualitative data explains the reasons behind
these results. Combined, they influence the design of an individual learning path for the
student based on his/her learning style and the utmost improvement of the effectiveness
of the course (Rasheed et al., 2020).
By responding to these research questions in a structured way this study will attempt to
design learning paths for students that will greatly increase their educational output in
the context of the given course, which in turn will make specific educational programs
more effective for a variety of students. With this sequential mixed-methods approach,
the study achieves a complete understanding of the research problem and proposed solu-
tions leading to the course improvement (Knowles, 1980).
8
==PAGE:10==
Data collection approach
Quantitative data
Quantitative data is collected from the course advisor; the data were included by:
Figure 1: Summary of student engagement and performance data, including video dura-
tion, time spent, and relative time watched, attempts
Video Engagement: Here the data was about the duration of the video, how long
the students watched the video, and the relative time watch that indicates the percentage
of watching video. This information can help us understand student engagement and
identify areas for improvement (Rasheed et al., 2020).
Quiz Performance: For analyzing quiz performance the data from attempts is used
which indicates how many times an individual tries to pass the quiz . Full data can be
viewed in Appendix A.
9
==PAGE:11==
Data analysis process
Initial Correlation Analysis
In the data analysis section the first objective was to find the relation between the inter-
action with the videos and the results in quizzes.
Figure 2: Correlation between relative time watch and quiz attempts
The primary goal of this analysis was to explore the correlation between spending time
by students for watching videos which is indicated in column J(relative time watched)
and the number of attempts to pass the quiz which is mentioned in column D(Attempts).
This correlation is crucial because it reflects student activity and learning achievement
levels (Ertmer & Newby, 2013). However, a difficulty was encountered while trying to
make correlations; It can be seen that each module has multiple videos but they have
single quizzes.
As a result, it was difficult to relate the relative time watched with
quiz attempts for individual videos. Then we decided to calculate the average for all
relative time watches within a module so that it can be found one data for relative
time watch for one module which is indicated in column K (average relative time watch)
and easily can make the correlation between quiz attempts and average relative time
10
==PAGE:12==
watch(J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017). Full data can be seen in Appendix A.
Figure 3: Calculate average relative time watch for per module (column K)
Categorizing Students by Engagement with Course Material (Video)
Method:
Table 1: Thresholds for Engagement Categorization.
Type
Range for Engagement (%)
Description
Active
≥80
Students who are highly engaged with the course
Selective
50 ≤Total Average < 80
Students who are engaged with specific modules
Minimal
< 50
Students who are minimally engaged with the course
That is why we try to divide our students into three categories as Active, Minimal,
and Selective. This can be seen in Table 1. So we consider those students active whose
total average relative time watched (column L) was equal to or greater than 80, on the
other hand, those students who are selective whose total average relative time watched
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 4: Categorize student’s engagement based on total average(column L)
is between 50 and 80 means these types of students didn’t see all the videos, they
only saw those videos that they felt were interesting.In contrast, in minimal categories,
we only put those students whose video engagement is really low. It is less than 50.
The purpose was to establish an initial structure of how students engage with course
materials and primarily how they interact with videos in particular as a measure of
activity (Ertmer & Newby, 2013).
But from these categories, we didn’t find the overall overview of our dataset because we
only considered their students’ video engagement (Rasheed et al., 2020). Without taking
into consideration other performance metrics such as quiz attempts, the categorization
does not provide actionable insights for personalized learning.
Tracking Performance Week by Week
In this method, we try to see how students’ performance and engagement change through-
out the course. To achieve this, we measure student performance and engagement week
by week. For example, we compare the current week with the previous week such as if
we consider week 2 as the current week, we compare it with week 1; if we consider week
3 as the current week, we compare it with week 2, and so on. This longitudinal approach
enabled the flow of more findings regarding the dynamics of the learning behaviors of the
students over time together with their engagement and performance (J. W. Creswell &
12
==PAGE:14==
Clark, 2017) (Rasheed et al., 2020).
Attempts: To assess the number of attempts made by the students in a module, there is
a certain framework used for analyzing the standard and commitment level. More specif-
ically, if a student would need the same number of attempts to solve tasks in the present
and previous week, the performance is said to be ‘stable’ implying that the student has
been learning in the right manner (J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017). If a student needs less
number of attempts compared to the previous week, the student is classified as
‘high
performer’ because he has shown learning progress coupled with better mastery of class
content. On the other hand, if more tries are needed the student is classified as a “low
performer” meaning they may struggle to understand the content or learn in a way the
material is presented (Ertmer & Newby, 2013). For example, if we look at Figure 5, for
student id 6 in Module id 764010, he made 2 attempts to pass the quiz in that week and
he took 4 attempts in Moduleid 764007 to pass the quiz in the previous week. So he will
be classified as a high performer because he needs less number of attempts compared to
the previous week, thus we can see in column I named as Performance category (diff by
quiz). Thus, this has a clear template to analyze trends regarding performance through-
out the course, and decisions regarding support or recognition for improvement (Braun
& Clarke, 2013). Full data about attempts can be seen in Appendix A.
Figure 5: Tracking student performance(column I) and engagement(column K) week by
week
Engagement: Course activity participation is measured from the average relative
time watch that the student spends watching course videos, to understand their level of
participation in the content (Rasheed et al., 2020). If a student’s average relative watch
13
==PAGE:15==
time in a given week has not changed in the second week, the algorithm categorizes them
under “no change” implying that the student continues to engage with the materials.
If a student has watched more videos than before in the week, this is labeled as
“in-
creased engagement,” which is an indication that the student is more interested, or
trying harder to comprehend the contents of the videos (Ertmer & Newby, 2013). On
the other hand, if a student views a few videos the system considers it as ‘decreased
engagement’ implying that the student is less involved or paying attention to the course
content. For example, if we look at figure 5 we can see that student id 5 has average
relative time watch(column E) for week one is 43.66, for week two is 93.67 and these
two weeks engagement difference(column J) is 50.01 which means that student was more
engaged in second week compared to first week that is why it is leveled as Increased En-
gagement in column K. Full data can be viewed in Appendix A. This framework assists
in tracking and noting patterns in engagement.
By observing quiz attempts and relative time watch, we try to find out students’ per-
formance trends. We divided performance trend into 4 categories: stable, sudden drop,
gradual drop and improvement (Ertmer & Newby, 2013) (Rasheed et al., 2020) Which
can be seen in Table 2.
We consider the performance trend Stable category those students whose quiz attempt
Table 2: Performance Categories Based on Quiz Attempts and Video Engagement
Category
Definition
Criteria
Stable
Performance is consistent over
the course
No change in both quiz attempts
and video engagement
Improvement
Both performance and engage-
ment is increased
Quiz attempts difference is clas-
sified as high performer and
video watching time is increased
Sudden Drop
Show negative performance
Quiz attempts difference is clas-
sified as low performer and de-
creased engagement for video
watching
Gradual Drop
Either performance or engage-
ment is negative
The quiz attempt difference may
show low performance, or the av-
erage relative time watch may in-
dicate decreased engagement
difference was unchanged and their average relative time watch difference was no change.
This shows that the students within this group, were active and consistent in their par-
ticipation with the materials as offered within the course, (Rasheed et al., 2020). For
14
==PAGE:16==
Improvement, we consider those students whose quiz attempt difference was indicated
as ’high performer’ and whose average relative time watch difference shows ”increased
engagement”, which indicates that students have advanced quite a lot in the learning and
participation processes (Ertmer & Newby, 2013). For Sudden Drop we consider AND
function. When both quiz attempt difference and average relative time watch difference
show negative such as quiz difference indicates ”low performer” and average relative time
watch shows ”decreased engagement,” that time, we say sudden Drop. About this, one
can observe a decline in the performance and also the participation rates (J. W. Creswell
& Clark, 2017). By contrast, for Gradual Drop we consider OR function. When any
quiz attempt difference or average relative time watch difference indicated negative per-
formance that time, we consider Gradual Drop. For example, that time quiz attempt
difference can be indicated as ”low performer” or average relative time watch can be
shown as ”decreased engagement”. For example, one of them is rather negative it implies
that the pace is slowing down, engagement or performance is decreasing step by step
(Braun & Clarke, 2013).
Generalizing some aspects of this evaluation framework calls certain vital questions for
several groups of students, for whose participation and performance indicators must be
estimated more correctly. For example, learners who scored zero on any of the indicators
in the previous week but have interacted in the current week will be shown to have a
negative learning trend in the current paradigm. This could mislead the students on ef-
fort and progress since their re-engagement should be considered value instead of lack of
something else (Rasheed et al., 2020). Also, there is a problem of grouping students who
try quizzes at a different frequency with a considerable degree of regularity. For instance,
a student who takes one attempt for a quiz in every week is categorized under the same
level as a student who takes six attempts per week. But in fact, these students drastically
differ effectively and academically, and when viewing these students as equal the view-
point omits their specific behavioral patterns and instructional requirements (Ertmer &
Newby, 2013). These scenarios point to the necessity of a better differentiation of the
groups according to the level of activity and the number of attempts made on each quiz.
15
==PAGE:17==
Refinement of Engagement and Performance Metrics
Method: For considering the above issues we divide our student’s performance trend
into 5 categories. Such as improvement, struggling, stable, drop, and potential decline.
Such a refined framework enables us to categorize and recognize the patterns of learning
dynamics to support different learner cohorts more effectively and meaningfully (Rasheed
et al., 2020) (Ertmer & Newby, 2013).
Table 3: Performance Categories Based on Quiz and Video Engagement Differences
Category
Criteria
Improvement and Stable
Both performance and engagement same as
table 2
Struggling
Quiz attempt difference shows either No
Change or Low performer, but engagement
difference for video is increased
Drop
Either: (1) Low performance for difference of
Quiz attempt, and the difference of video en-
gagement indicates No Change or Decreased;
or (2) Difference of Quiz attempt shows No
Change and Engagement decreased for Video
Potential Decline
High Performance for difference of Quiz at-
tempt, even though engagement decreased or
No Change for video
For improvement and stable the conditions we didn’t change. Students under the
“drop” category are obtained if quiz difference reveals the student is a low performer
and the student under observation does not show improved relative time watch difference
or shows deterioration. In addition, others whose attempt difference in the quiz is “no
change” yet the change in average of relative time watch indicates “less engagement” are
also in this category (Rasheed et al., 2020).
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 6: Performance Categories Based on Quiz and Video Engagement Differences
(column J) labeled as Performance Trend
Students are put under “potential decline’‘ if their difference in the quiz attempt is
“high performer’‘ yet their average relative time watch difference is either “decreased
engagement” or “no change.” This is emphasized on cases whereby learners perform well
in quizzes but have poor attitudes towards the course content (Ertmer & Newby, 2013).
Students are classified as “struggling” if their quiz attempt difference is “ No Change
or Low performer” while their average relative time watch difference shows “increased
engagement”. This implies that learners are participating in the courses though they are
not improving in quizzes as expected (J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017).
The application of this refined framework is that it becomes an improved system of dis-
tinguishing between performance trends of students.
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 7: For example, student ID 3 has a performance trend of ”Drop” in module
764016, ”Improvement” in module 764019, ”Potential Decline” in module 764007 and
757930, ”Struggling” in 780717 and 764010
Figure 8: For example, student ID 16 has a performance trend of ”Drop” for 3 weeks,
”Potential Decline” for 2 weeks and Stable for only 1 week
By applying these conditions, we found an overall overview of the student’s perfor-
18
==PAGE:20==
mance. From Figure 9, it can be seen how many students are in each category across all
modules.
Figure 9: Overall overview of student performance per module.
In addition to this, based on these performance trend categories, we also divided our
students into three categories: Active, Minimal Engage, and Struggler. To maintain
a similar quality of education among students within these categories, we can develop a
personalized learning system specifically for each group. That’s why we divide a large
number of students in these groups
How we determined this category:
”Active”: If ”Improvement” > all other performance trends.
”Struggler”: If ”Struggling” > all other performance trends.
”Minimal Engage”: Otherwise (if the summation of (drop, stable, potential decline)
is greater than the other 2 categories).
This categorization is based on performance trends. If an individual has an improvement
trend in most modules, we classify that student as Active. If a student has a struggling
performance trend in most modules, we classify that student as a Struggler. By contrast,
if the summation of ”Drop,” ”Stable,” and ”Potential Decline” trends is greater than the
other two performance trends, we classify the student as Minimal Engage.
Table 4: Number of Total Students in Each Category
Student Type
Number of Students
Minimal Engage
363
Struggler
12
Active
39
19
==PAGE:21==
In the data of Table 4, it can be seen that a total 414 learners attended the course.
Among them maximum of students fall in the Minimal Engage category which is 363
students. The second labeled group is struggler which consists of only 12 pupils. These
categories of students indicate that they were struggling to do good performance in as-
sessments even though they had good engagement with the course, the reason behind
this may be encountering difficulties in coping with the course including course material
or structure. The rest of the Students fall in the Active category, including 39 students.
In this category, those students are present who have higher engagement with video and
good performance in assessment. Even though the percentage of students in this group
is low, it is a subset of learners who are involved in the course actively and benefit from
the course most.
But then again, we changed our method although it gives overall performance throughout
the course, we want to know each student’s performance for each week. To give answer to
our research question we have to identify where an individual encounters challenges that
are not answered by this method. It just gives an overall overview of how many students
are assigned to each category based on performance trends. For example, Figure 10 ex-
presses how many attempts are needed to pass quizzes for student id 3 across different
modules. From there we can get an idea how students’ performance change throughout
the course. In this graph X-axis indicates Module IDs and Y-axis represents number of
quiz attempts.
20
==PAGE:22==
Figure 10: Number of quiz attempts across per module for a student
It can be seen that the number of attempts is not same for every module. Some
module needs few attempt which represent the content of this module is well-structured
or content was easy to understand while other needs more attempts which represents the
content is complex or quiz was difficult to pass.
Clear Data
We excluded the Module ID 764016 from our analysis since redundancies of transfer
codes might have occurred.
As we look at the data, for each student the values for
the quiz attempts and video viewings were recorded as zero each time. Also, all the
students within this module had a zero score on the quiz, meaning that no meaningful
interaction or performance information could be obtained. Under these assumptions, we
agreed that adding this module in the analysis would distort the results and not offer any
relevant information. For this reason, this particular module was excluded to increase
the credibility of collected data. As this module was module number 5 and it is deleted
that is why module 6 and module 7 we will mentioned as a module 5 and 6 respectively
for the rest of the sections.
21
==PAGE:23==
Finding Exactly the Same Pattern
At this point, we are trying to find students whose quiz attempts are similar as well as
watch videos in the same manner. To begin with, the focus of the analysis was made
strictly on matching students in terms of their quiz attempt profile. However, this did
not turn out greatly successful as only four or five students would have the same kind
of pattern.
To increase the number of students identified per pattern, we added the
Standard Deviation method as the enhanced metric for grouping students in terms of
their behaviors.
Figure 11: Finding patterns by Standard Deviation
Nonetheless, the student identification per pattern effort that was undertaken is still
insufficient for analysis or segmentation.
That’s why now we try to average of quiz
attempts to see if there are any similarities in student patterns.
Average of Quiz Attempts
But this time a number of students’ average quiz attempts was the same but they had
totally different quiz attempts throughout the course, this can be seen in Figure 12,
which is why we again didn’t work further with this method. Full data can be viewed in
Appendix A. Same thing we have done with relative time watch to see the same video
engagement for the same group of students, but unfortunately, it doesn’t work as well.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 12: Finding patterns based on average quiz attempts
Then we try to see student quiz attempts and average relative time watch across per
module within a graph. Here we shows graph for several students as an example. The blue
line represents average relative time watch for per module id and yellow line represents
quiz attempts for per module id. Here in figure 4, we show student id 2, student id 100,
student id 10 as an example.
(a) Student 2
(b) Student 100
(c) Student 10
Figure 13: Quiz attempts and average relative time watched across per module for selected
students
These graphs reveal the profile of how students’ learning behavior and how their
impact evolves over different modules. From these visualizations, we obtain a concept
to view students’ interaction with the course over time and receive direction on how to
continue to our study.
Analysis for specific-module:
Video engagement in combination with quiz results revealed an understanding of stu-
dent learning behaviors and learning profiles. Engagement with videos can be measured
23
==PAGE:25==
through the average time students spend watching individual modules or/and revisiting
certain parts of the video material to grasp concepts or ideas presented by an instructor.
On the other hand, performance based on quiz results and the number of tries clearly
indicates students’ comprehension of the subject and their ability to pass the knowledge
forward to other disciplines. The analysis of these two components separately allows
finding students thoroughly watching videos but failing quizzes, or vice versa, quizzes
mastery with a low level of video engagement.
This separation of analysis enables a
differential focus for future improvements on the content of instructions as well as the
patterns of support to be offered to learners.
Per student performance based on quiz performance:
There are several methods to track student accomplishment, and one of the most sensi-
tive steps is a quiz attempt with emphasis on the student’s path through the modules.
Hence, through the number of attempts such quizzes provide essential insights of the
learning process with the students. For instance, in Module 746537, we are measuring
how many students passed the quiz on the first attempt, the second attempt, the third
attempt, and so on. This learning analytics outlines the points where most of the learners
faced challenges and also points out specific modules or concepts that might need further
elaboration or just different delivery styles (Ertmer & Newby, 2013).
Such findings are most helpful in improving the teacher’s effectiveness and the learning
aids used in the learning process. The information that teachers get from observing the
aspects of their lessons, in which learners experience difficulty or confusion, allows them
to adjust their approach or present the necessary ideas using more comprehensible or
entertaining examples and resources. These changes are meant to foster understanding
among the students and expand their learning experiences in general (Rasheed et al.,
2020) (J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017).
.
24
==PAGE:26==
(a) Module 746537
(b) Module 757930
(c) Module 764007
(d) Module 764010
(e) Module 764019
(f) Module 780717
Figure 14: Number of learners for quiz attempts for each module. Each graph illustrates
the number of students who passed the quiz by 1,2 or subsequent attempts
Refinement of Average Relative Time Watch
To improve our analysis, we modified our data in a different way. Specifically, we worked
on the average relative time watch to categorize students into a few distinct groups.
We divided the average relative time watch into five categories, which can be shown in
figure 15, column I:
• 0: When the average relative time watch is less than or equal to 29
• 0.5: When the average relative time watch is greater than 29 and less than or equal
to 50
• 0.75: When the average relative time watch is greater than 50 and less than or
equal to 85
• 1: When the average relative time watch is greater than 85 and less than or equal
to 120
• 1.5: When the average relative time watch is greater than 120
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 15: Average relative time watch categories(column I)
By modifying our data in this way, our analysis became more effective and provided
better insights into student engagement.
Per student performance based on average relative time watch:
In this section, we will adopt a constructive perspective to analyze students’ activity by
the module, and the average relative time spent to watch the content. For instance, in
module 746537, we will assess the distribution of students across various relative time
categories: 0, 0.5, 0.75, 1, and 1.5. A value of 1.5 means that the student has watched
full video more than one. Thus, this analysis will allow us to establish interest levels and
then examine the possibilities of increasing the level of engagement.
(a) Module 746537
(b) Module 757930
(c) Module 764007
(d) Module 764010
(e) Module 764019
(f) Module 780717
Figure 16: Number of learners for relative time watch for each module.
Each graph
illustrates the spending time for watching video by students across modules
26
==PAGE:28==
Find out students ID based on similar quiz attempt pattern:
We achieve this by evaluating element-wise and threshold difference is one, which give us
an insight into the similar quiz patterns of the students. For instance, Student ID 2 has
quiz patterns as 1,2,4,1,2,3 and Student ID 8 has patterns as 2,2,4,2,2,3. So we put them
in the same group. By comparing this way we can understand the student’s learning
behaviors and their performance trends. Full data can be viewed in Appendix A.
Figure 17: Group of learners depends on quiz pattern
The Group Index is an identification number for a group of students, for which the
attempts on quizzes are nearly the same throughout the course. The last column of the
table shows the number of students that fall under each group; this shows a summary of
how the students within the class are grouped according to their learning behaviors and
quiz attempts (J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017).
Find out students’ ID based on similar relative time watch pattern
For average relative time watch, we did the same thing when they had quite similar av-
erage relative time watch category patterns that time we put them in the same group.
For example, student id 22 has averaged relative time watch category (1.5, 0, 0.75, 1.5,
0.75, 0), 164 has (1.5,0,1,1.5,0,0), 195 has (1, 0, 0, 1.5, 0, 0) and so on. Full data can be
seen in Appendix A.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 18: Group of learners depends on relative time watch pattern
The problem we had with the first strategy was that when working with large groups,
some student IDs presented with quiz patterns that were dissimilar from others making
it harder to define good groups. For this problem, we changed our approach to look for
patterns of each attempt and each relative time watch category.
In particular, students grouped according to the exact quiz attempts for each module are
used now. For instance,in Figure 19, in Module 746537 we established that 174 students
needed 1 attempt, 6 students needed 6 attempts, 9 students did not attempt at all which
is zero attempts, and so on. It enables us to classify the students with the same results
obtained in a certain module.
We applied the same to all other modules of the program so as to develop consistency of
how to assess and group students. This more refined approach is useful when the data is
partitioned by modules because it allows us to appreciate the learning patterns and how
to target individuals who require intervention.
Figure 19: Learners categorized by quiz attempts per module, showing the distribution
of learners based on the frequency of quiz attempts needed to pass a quiz.
Similarly, we expanded our study to partition students according to their average
relative time watch categories for each of the modules. For instance, in Figure 20, when
using Module 746537, we got the following distribution: 155 students in category 1.5 of
28
==PAGE:30==
the average relative time watch, 91 in category 1, 32 in category 0.5 and so on.
This way the students can be categorized according to their participation level of each
module and therefore determine how much time they spend. Organizing students into
such groups for all of the modules will allow tracing the patterns of their engagement, rec-
ognizing those students who may need extra encouragement or supervision to contribute,
or altering the content and the approaches used according to the learning preferences
typical for each group. This targeted analysis helps us to create a more thorough picture
of specific student learning behaviors in addition to the performance-based grouping that
we also utilize .
Figure 20: Learners categorized by relative time watch, showing the distribution of learn-
ers based on the seeing the time of video
From this analysis we are able to obtain insight into quiz performance and average
relative time watch as two unique measures. Looking at the quiz attempts mobilized the
analysis of the student performance profile within each of the modules, categorizing stu-
dents according to the exact number of attempts made to successfully complete the quiz.
In the same manner, by considering relative time watch, we segregated concerns pre-
senting engagement based on the actual observation time relative to expected durations
into coherent groups of students. These different analyses give a more accurate profile
of student learning behavior, identifying different patterns of performance and activity.
Such a dual view helps to identify the main difficulties which are experienced by different
groups of students and introduces the prerequisites for more effective intervention and
changes in study courses (Braun & Clarke, 2013).
In this aspect, such an approach can be looked at as exhibiting various characteristics of
adaptivity learning which is the practice of learning tailored to the learner’s needs. This
allows planning of strategies to face some obstacles, facilitate participation/learning, and
in this way improve learners’ outcomes (Knowles, 1980) (Ertmer & Newby, 2013).
29
==PAGE:31==
Combined pattern: But, we wanted to see their combined performance both for at-
tempts and average relative time watch category. For example, in Figure 21, 746537 mod-
ule 42 students have attempted 1 and video engagement 0, 14 students have attempted 1
and video engagement 0.5, 26 students have attempted 1 and video engagement 0.75, 30
students have attempted 1 and video engagement 1 and so on. We did the same things
for the rest of the modules. Full data can be view in appendix A.
,
Figure 21: Combined graph
In this section, we find a way to go further to analyze student’s engagement and
performance for specific modules. For example, we will see in our Finding sections for
modules 1, 2, 3, and 4 those students are more engaged with video they need fewer
attempts.
Which expresses that watching the video helped them to understand the
concept and perform well in quiz. By contrast, different patterns can be seen for modules
5 and 6. Despite their engagement with course materials learners need multiple attempts
to pass the quiz. which indicates that either the course material of these modules was
difficult or the quiz of these modules did not fully align with the content. Apart from
this, it also indicates that pupils were struggling to employ in their assessment what they
learned from these modules. That is why, in the next section we will try to investigate
why these issues have emerged and how could be solved so that the learning journey for
every student will be effective.
30
==PAGE:32==
Qualitative data
An interview session was organized with learners who attended the course to explore their
experiences regarding the course as well as the challenges they faced while attending the
course (Guest, Bunce, & Johnson, 2006). Interview questions, as well as responses from
participants, can be viewed in Appendix B.
Participant Selection: Those learners have been contacted who successfully completed
the course. The aim is to interview the students to gain valuable knowledge that can
help our program to be more fruitful for every student regardless of their study back-
ground (Guest et al., 2006).
For the interview session, 15 participants were selected
because we wanted to have a comprehensive understanding of their experience with the
course rather than presenting all learners’ perceptions (Guest et al., 2006). The interview
was conducted in two sessions. In the first session, 8 participants participated while the
maximum of the students’ viewpoints was similar. In the second session, 7 participants
participated. But that time didn’t find so much difference in the perception of the inter-
viewee as well and it started repetition. That is why we decided to conduct interviews
with 15 students depending on the data saturation model. (Guest et al., 2006), from
the author’s observation it can be said that a small group size was adequate while the
responding viewpoint is being started repeating. Another reason is this study is like
exploratory research where the main purpose is to find out a deep understanding of a
specific problem rather than focusing on the size of the sample that is mentioned in
(J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017).
Focus area of interview: The interview analyzes problems that students experienced
when attending the course (Piperopoulos & Dimov, 2015). Alongside, it examines the
participant’s ideas about the design of the course, its structure, and components, for
example, recorded video lectures, quizzes, group tasks, and the rich interactivity of the
course (Ertmer & Newby, 2013). The interview seeks to collect feedback on the outline
of the course and suggestions on how to better tailor the course for the learners in terms
of clarity, engagement, and effectiveness (Rasheed et al., 2020) (Braun & Clarke, 2013).
Process: The interview was done through an audio call (Guest et al., 2006). It of-
fers the participants an environment free from undue pressure and which people find
comfortable to offer their experience and feedback. Claims made by the participants are
recorded during every voice call for clarity and sustainability of the information gathered.
31
==PAGE:33==
These were then written down in very fine documented format from the tape recordings
(J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017). This makes it easier to analyze the responses of the
participants as indicated in the following discussion. To maintain ethical standards all
participants’ identities were removed from the transcribing process to ensure that their
information could not be recognized. This is done to ensure that no participant can be
identified and to encourage people to give genuine feedback (Braun & Clarke, 2013).
Qualitative Analysis
Thematic Analysis:In this stage, we conducted a qualitative analysis of the data col-
lected from the interviews to determine the patterns of beliefs, emerging trends, and other
characteristics among the sample interviewees.The approach of thematic analysis that in-
volved the categorization of data as well as the identification of patterns was adopted to
analyze the data set with a view of exploring the experiences and preferences of the learn-
ers (Braun & Clarke, 2013).
Positive Experiences: We also looked at the areas within the course that learners
found useful and interesting. These are factors like the concept of the recorded video,
the connection between quiz and video, or how group tasks might promote collaboration.
Emphasizing such favorable aspects contributes to the identification of what aspects pro-
vide excellent service and how students get benefits from them.
Problems they face: We discussed the problems students may face during the course.
This comprised of things like comprehending Module 5 (Differentiation Strategies) and
Module 6 (Income Statement) that may be difficult to grasp, how to organize time well,
or specific areas concerning the organization of the course like quizzes. Knowing these
challenges helps in understanding the difficulties that the students experience and demon-
strates where there is a chance to assist them (Rasheed et al., 2020) (Knowles, 1980).
Suggestions: The follow-up for the students was to provide suggestions and opinions
towards continuous enhancement of the course offered. Proposals included making the
content clearer when the topics presented required more time, presenting a more detailed
commentary, matching the content with assessments more closely, or offering more prac-
tice materials. These recommendations may be useful for course development towards
improving learning for students (Li˜n´an & Chen, 2009). Due to that, this specific type of
thematic analysis allows for gaining a structured understanding of what students say, as
32
==PAGE:34==
well as pointing at the possibilities for further improvement of the course (Piperopoulos
& Dimov, 2015).
Integration of Quantitative and Qualitative Data
After analyzing the interview responses and identifying patterns, we compared these find-
ings with the quantitative results to ensure consistency (J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017).
To get a holistic view of how students learn, we connected the descriptions given by
students during the interviews to the statistical results. This comparison also ensured
consistency of reporting and also provided a cross-check in the validation of trends be-
tween the qualitative and quantitative data.
This methodological triangulation helps
the study’s findings; we see patterns in the data, both qualitative and quantitative, and
attempt to link them to represent a cohesive picture of student learning behaviors and
difficulties (Greenhow et al., 2022) (Bangert, 2008).
33
==PAGE:35==
Themes
Quantitative analy-
sis
Qualitative
analy-
sis
Suggestions
Engagement
with
video
and
Perfor-
mance in Quiz
Learners
who
are
highly engaged with
video
requires
fewer
attempts for a quiz.
Learners
said
that
videos
were
well
structured and helped
them
to
understand
the concept
Embedding
quizzes
within the video for
increasing
learners’
engagement
with
study material
Difficulties in Modules
5 and 6
Despite
of
students’
good
engagement
with
the
course
re-
quire more attempts.
Lacking
of
previous
knowledge
regarding
the business concepts
and
found
financial
terms
difficult
to
understand
Glossary
and
real-
world examples from
various
backgrounds
can be included
Collaborative
Work
and peer review
Group
activities
helped to improve the
students’ engagement
and performance
Learners
mentioned
that
group
work
helped them to un-
derstand the complex
topic but sometimes
it needs clear instruc-
tions
to
get
better
outcomes
Require clear instruc-
tions for effective peer
review
Challenges in Quiz
Few
modules
need
more quiz attempts
Learners
feel
some
quiz’s
structure
and
word
ambiguous
to
understand
Use more simple lan-
guage for quiz and add
practice quiz specially
for complex concepts
Engagement
differ-
ence
according
to
Backgrounds
Learners
who
came
from
Non-Business
background
need
more
attempts
in
Business-heavy
mod-
ules
Learners
mentioned
that
they
felt
dif-
ficulties
regarding
business term
Develop introductory
optional
module
for
non-business learners
Table 5: Integration of Quantitative and Qualitative Data
34
==PAGE:36==
4
Findings
Quantitative findings
Correlation Between Raw Data
We conducted an initial analysis to explore the correlation between the total amount
of time that students spent watching the course videos mentioned as the relative time
watched, and the number of quiz attempts. The objective was to know if there is any
positive relationship between the amount of time spent watching videos and the number
of attempts needed to solve the quizzes; this hypothesis checks the effectiveness of videos
used in learning (Ertmer & Newby, 2013) (Dillenbourg, 2016).
Combined pattern:
In order to have a better picture of learners’ behaviors, we combined the performance
strategies by categorizing the quiz attempts and the average relative time watched. For
instance, in Module 746537, we observed that: 42 students had one quiz attempt and a
video engagement of 0, 14 students had 1 quiz attempt and a video engagement of 0.5, 26
students had 1 quiz attempt and a video engagement of 0.75, 30 students had one quiz
attempt and a video engagement of 1, and so on.
These combined analyses offer a clear picture of how quiz performance and video engage-
ment are related to one another, as well as when doing so can help us understand the
particular groups of students who have the learning behaviors in common. This makes
it possible to categorize students systematically across all the modules taught and then
ensure that their productivity standards, that is quiz performance and video engage-
ment, have been addressed and captured systematically. It also increases our knowledge
of learning behaviors in addition to promoting the construction of interventions designed
to increase both participation and achievement (Ertmer & Newby, 2013).
35
==PAGE:37==
Figure 22: Learners grouped by quiz attempts and video engagement for better under-
standing of combined learning behaviors.
We then analyze how many attempts of quizzes are adjoined to the views of videos of
each module and draw conclusions from the data obtained. For Modules 1, 2, 3, and 4,
the data reveals a clear trend: the spending hour on videos and quiz completion analysis
suggests that students with higher engagement levels with the video content are likely to
attempt the quizzes fewer times before completing them. This study supports our research
that activity with learning content increases the likelihood of better understanding of
that content as well as Reducing the amount of effort required to achieve the learning
objectives(Greenhow et al., 2022).
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 23: Visualizations of quiz attempts and video engagement patterns across six
modules.
Identifying Performance Trends
Our analysis revealed distinct performance patterns across the modules:
Module 1 to 4: The students showed their best performance in these modules, students
watched the videos actively and practically did not need additional attempts to take
quizzes.
This means that the course materials used in these particular modules are
adequate for facilitating students’ learning.
In regards to the type of content in the
videos and quizzes, there seems to be a proper match and a clear way through which
37
==PAGE:39==
the students are able to understand the content as well as to respond to the quizzes in a
confident way (Ertmer & Newby, 2013).
Module 5 and 6: The following trend was not observed in these modules. In the case of
Module 5 (Differentiation Strategies) and Module 6 (Income Statement) students retained
high view times in videos but in quizzes they demanded many attempts. This raises some
questions about the content of resources for these modules. The higher number of quiz
attempts could indicate challenges.
These trends identified areas of concern, especially in Modules 5 and 6; therefore, at the
end of the course; videos, quizzes, and their relation should be reconsidered. Solving
problems such as these has ways of benefiting all students (Greenhow et al., 2022).
Qualitative Findings
Students who took the entrepreneurship course were interviewed to learn about their
experience with the “Developing an Entrepreneurship Mindset Through Serious Games”
program. Since the interviews focused on the course, we gathered important information
about it and its potential.
With the help of qualitative information that gets from the students’ feedback, together
with the quantitative data, such as the time spent by students watching videos and quiz
attempts, we came up with suggestions that were supposed to make the course more
efficient. This type of integration enabled one to compare trends in general, for example,
areas of success were found while comparing difficulties that are rooted in definite modules
or concepts (J. W. Creswell & Clark, 2017) (Braun & Clarke, 2013).
One of the significant implications derived from this comparison exercise is to make
a more tailored instructional process.
This would make the course effective because
it would consider the understandings, learning preferences, and needs of the students
hence delivering course content in a manner that will be accessible to all the students
(Dillenbourg, 2016).
Students’ Common Experiences
Most of the students participating in the course come from technical backgrounds like
computer engineering, mechanical engineering, and software engineering. These fields,
which ensure a solid foundation in logical analysis and problem-solving, keep business
38
==PAGE:40==
concepts out of the formal education of their educational backgrounds. Consequently,
most students encountered difficulties when it came to mastering materials that required
basic business information. This deficit was especially noticeable in those modules that
began the process of familiarizing students with specific business terms or where addi-
tional financial calculations were necessary.
For instance, in the Module 5 Differentiation Strategies lecture, terms like ‘competitive
advantage’ as well as ‘value proposition’ were used and some of the students did not
understand them since they are business-related concepts. In addition to this, students
lacked adequate context, or sample information needed to relate the various concepts
with real-life situations which aggravated their problems.
Challenges were even more complicated in module 6 which focused on Income Statements.
This module’s expectations involved problem-solving mathematical skills with objectives
such as profit margins and potential revenues. Some said they do not even have a basic
knowledge of how the income statement works or its usage in decision-making, for ex-
ample, student number 4 replied when we asked him about difficulties he faced, ”Yes
week 6 which is about income statement was difficult for me as they use more advanced
concept. An individual who has not any previous knowledge about this concept will not
easy to understand the concept.”
Positive aspects:
Several areas of the course received favorable responses. The use of Videos was deemed
useful by most of the participants; student number 8 says: ” Videos and assignments
were the most helpful”. A maximum of the pupils said that they benefited from the con-
tent in the videos by helping them grasp major ideas expounded on in class. The nature
of delivering information in the form of visuals and structures used helped students un-
derstand difficult content. A common recommendation given by many participants was
that there should be more real-world examples used within the video so the content is
more relatable and therefore easier to apply. student number 1 says ”case studies can
be added from different fields.” Also, some students suggested using smaller parts and
breaking groups of videos instead of filming all the content in one video to avoid over-
loading students’ memories. For example, student number 8 suggests that ”breaking
39
==PAGE:41==
complex topics into shorter segments could enhance understanding”.
Another important improvement is that participants enjoyed Group Activities as most
of the learners marked a positive attitude toward such assignments. For example, stu-
dent number 9 says, ”The best aspect of the course for me was “working with the
team”.” The subjects emphasized that group tasks were useful for the practical applica-
tion of theoretical material and helped students to realize how they may apply certain
ideas in practice. Group work (in online classes and out-of-class activities) also supported
peer learning whereby one student could learn from the work of his/her peers. student
number 13 says, ”The group work in the Miro board, Idea brainstorming and know
other opinions” made the course more interesting for him. For the majority of the partic-
ipants, such activities enlightened them that ideas are consolidated alongside enhancing
team pull and communication aptitude.
Briefly, videos, group activities, Miro board work which are the most important segments
of the course, were appreciated and useful.
Difficulties Faced Across Modules
Module 5 (Differentiation Strategies): Maximum of the interviewees found this
module difficult to understand due to lacking of prior knowledge. Student number
5 said ”For me week 5 was difficult to understand. I come from technical background
but this topic required previous knowledge that is why I used additional resources to
understand the topic.” Students recommended including more case studies or exercises
to simplify the material. Student number 8 suggested, ”Including detailed case studies
and step-by-step explanations of complex topics would be beneficial.”
Module 6 (Income Statement): Most of the participants struggled with the terminol-
ogy used in this module (e.g., ”operating income,” ”depreciation”, ”Income statement”).
”There were 2 or 3 questions that I couldn’t get right so I had to ask for help from
my fellow group-mates. As being non-business student, the concepts were a bit difficult
for me to understand perfectly in one go.” said by student number 9. They felt the
videos lacked sufficient explanation, while the quizzes required deeper knowledge, forcing
them to rely on external resources. ”for week 1 to 4 the videos were well-connected with
the quiz. But 5 and 6 were not because for quiz it need more deeper knowledge but
in video just showed general concepts. My suggestion for improvements are embedding
40
==PAGE:42==
quizzes within the video, adding real-world examples, as well as additional material can
be added or summarize of the video can be added as a pdf” said by student number 2.
Consequently, students needed more attempts compared to other modules, despite good
video engagement, ”maximum time I could able to pass by one attempt. Sometimes I
revisit while failed in quizzes to see why my answer was incorrect.” confessed by student
number 2.
Specific Feedback Patterns Among Students
Struggles with Quizzes: Although, quizzes as beneficial in course content reinforce-
ment and understanding assessment, interviewees explained the following features as
rather disadvantageous. One of the shared challenges was a lack of clarity when for-
mulating questions which was evident when several students complained of complex or
unclear questions in quizzes by mentioning this comment, Student number 11 said
”The complexity of questions and the need for precise answers often led to multiple at-
tempts.” Some questions tendered more than one multiple choice and knowing which
one was correct out of the many was rather difficult. One of the issues experienced in
this regard was seen in Module 6 where quizzes involved students in analyzing complex
scenarios. Some of the questions given are rather ambiguous and their preparation in the
form of quizzes only discouraged the learners, thus discouraging them from learning.
One of the main issues was a problem with practice problems as well.
For example,
student number 9 says ”The quizzes are fair overall, but providing additional practice
questions and clearer examples would make them more accessible.” Many participants
also reported being more comfortable if there had been more practice quizzes or exer-
cises before the actual quizzes. They believed that by practicing sample questions they
could prepare themselves to understand the kind of questions that will be posed, and the
level of their difficulty so that they prepare adequately to give their best in answering
the questions. These practice quizzes could also give instant feedback which will help
students to identify where they have to lackthe to understand concept.
The weaknesses of the quiz could be mitigated by the application of clearer, less ambigu-
ous questions and by providing additional practice quizzes to help prepare the student for
the quizzes making a quiz less threatening and much more effective as a tool for teaching.
It is believed that this approach could improve students’ state of mind in terms of pre-
41
==PAGE:43==
paredness and confidence in solving such problems and thereby improve learning among
students.
Feedback About Videos: The video content was acknowledged as the most valuable
source about the existence and the main explanations of the key concepts introduced
within the course. For example, student number 7 said ”Both videos and assignments
helped me to understand the concept. From the video I get knowledge.” Students enjoyed
clear and logically built video materials which helped to build the base when reading more
complicated sections.
Nevertheless, participants also provided measures to make the videos even more effective
for enhancing understanding of the material. This brought in one of the most frequent
suggestions where the interviewees said that the videos should be shorter and divided
into segments. Dividing the concepts into smaller elements that have a more precise
topic would be useful for students to better understand. For instance, student number
11 mentioned that ”The duration was appropriate, but shorter segments for dense topics
would be helpful.” Further, students opined that quizzes should be incorporated right at
the base of the video stream. ”some quizzes included nuanced or detailed questions that
were not directly covered in the material, requiring additional preparation.”, mentioned
by student number 8. ”However, integrating more examples from the videos into the
quizzes would strengthen the connection.” that was added by student number 8 for
better engagement.
Another recommendation made was that more real-life examples should be provided es-
pecially in more complex areas. According to students, tangible examples brought into
practice enhance the chances of understanding those concepts in question. For instance,
the failure to explain how concepts or ideas seen in a classroom apply in real business
organizations might leave students struggling to appreciate the application of what they
are being taught.
With these recommendations, the course content could be more effective still and get
across and through better and comprehensively reach and serve more people in terms of
learning styles.
Inclusive Learning Needs: One of the major issues students pointed out was the need
to accommodate different learning styles to ensure that every person can study comfort-
ably. This feedback highlighted the need for resources and realistic scenarios to close
42
==PAGE:44==
those gaps mainly for people with no business background knowledge. This insight came
from student number 2 comment: ”From my point, I think a beginner section can
be added for students who have zero knowledge about topic as well as glossaries can be
included for complex terms as well as visual summary can be added for difficult topics. ”
As for the changes that were recommended most often, the need for a glossary that
would provide definitions of the terms used within the document was pointed up. Several
students and many of the technical students, in particular, had difficulty understand-
ing business terminology, for example, the financial vocabulary discussed in Module 6.
Students also pointed out that the source should use precise definitions and contextual
elaborations to these terms which made it difficult for them to remain attentive through-
out the process of applying the specific concepts. It, therefore, needs to be supplemented
with a concise form of a glossary that contains in a glance the various terms with ex-
amples, in particular, to overcome the mentioned barriers to enable the students a more
confident interaction with the content.
Students also suggested the adoption of real-life instances in order to make the content
more familiar. Student number 4 mentioned that ” Adding real-world case studies from
different backgrounds can make this course more interactive.” A maximum of participants
supported adopting samples from technological contexts including tech ventures or soft-
ware development companies. If the sequence of the business concepts was presented in
terms of stories, technical students would be linked with their educational backgrounds.
For example, presenting some numerical or financial topics in the context of the budget-
ing of a start-up organization or the growth of a certain software product could be much
easier for students with technical backgrounds to grasp.
43
==PAGE:45==
Flowchart: Personalized Learning Pathways
Start: Assess Learners Educational Background
Business Pupils
Non-Business Pupils
Course content
Introductory Business Concepts
Glossaries
Shared Pathways: Embedded Quizzes, Shorter Videos, Peer Review, Group Discussion
End: Customized Learning Pathways
5
Discussion
Synthesis of Key Findings
The present inquiry focuses on separate profiles as far as student motivation and learn-
ing difficulties in the course “Developing an Entrepreneurial Mindset Through Serious
Games” are concerned. Quantitative analysis established a relationship between rela-
tive time watched in the video and performance in quizzes, such that increased relative
44
==PAGE:46==
time watched was linked to reduced attempts to quizzes in Modules 1 to 4 for which
contents were well designed and matched. However, Modules 5 and 6 were considerably
challenging, the students had to attempt the quiz several times even if they had a high
engagement in the video content implying the break of the coherence between the video
material and quiz. From the interviewed students, other issues that were revealed re-
volved around difficulties in comprehending financial terms and ideas, especially from
students who were without a background in business. These results reaffirm the necessity
of adding the fundamental modules and contextually related examples to teach learners
perspectives and reduce knowledge gaps.
Connection to Existing Literature
The results corroborate and extend the prior literature on personalized learning in the
context of entrepreneurial education: This is a validation and extends on the work by
(Piperopoulos & Dimov, 2015) focusing on the use of experiential learning, supported by
the findings that indicate the positive effects of group work and collaboration. These ele-
ments were most helpful in boosting the raised skills for practical problem solving as well
as the engagement levels. Also, (Lack´eus, 2020) pointed to the usefulness of experiential
learning approaches like simulations and case learning, which were considered effective in
the enhancement of comprehension as well as interest by participants in this study.
Further, the study also substantiates (Dillenbourg, 2016) for modular learning by ac-
knowledging students’ needs for video segmentation to mitigate cognitive load effectively.
The use of glossaries and the fact of avoiding the use of any complicated terms are fur-
ther in line with (Knowles, 1980) on the premise of adult learners that all the texts and
materials used in learning should be easy to comprehend based on the background of the
learner.
The challenges noted in Modules 5 and 6 are with close reference to (Ertmer & Newby,
2013), the author’s emphasis on scaffolding to tackle complex issues. Thus, by imple-
menting strategies like pre-quizzes and glossaries or beginner modules the course might
help the students prepare for advanced financial management concepts. This study also
supports the (Rasheed et al., 2020) opinion that learning pathways are important to cap-
ture or track students’ activity and individual learning preferences such as pre-quizzes and
glossaries – this could assist the students in handling more complex notions of finance.
45
==PAGE:47==
This study also supports (Rasheed et al., 2020), that cultivating students’ awareness that
basic learning can be made fun by letting them follow the mode of learning that they
prefer.
By integrating experiential and constructivist learning, modular content and adaptive
learning techniques indicate practical ways of improving learning environments for di-
verse learners.
Addressing Research Questions
The study addressed the three research questions as follows:
Student Engagement: Sources of quantitative data helped to discover different pat-
terns concerning students’ engagement across the course. In Modules 1 to 4, the student
engagement seemed good and here it has been shown that more time spent watching
the videos equated to fewer attempts in quizzes when the content was well organized
(Amarneh et al., 2021) (Holton, Wilson, & Bates, 2009). In contrast, in Modules 5 and 6,
students needed more quiz attempts although the students were very active in watching
the related videos attached to the assessments, indicating some mismatch between the
content and the quizzes perhaps due to difficulty in the lessons presented in the videos
or the assessments themselves. The quantitative results derived from the present study
were qualitatively complemented by the students, who stated that in earlier modules,
the content was clear – which contributed to enhanced understanding; in contrast, in
subsequent modules, the introduction of difficulties led to reduced performance.
Learning Difficulties: Challenges that limited the learning progress of the student
were highlighted in the qualitative feedback. From the interviews, some of the challenges
experienced included: The participants struggled to decipher some of the financial terms
used, many of the content sources provided information density that caused cognitive
overload, and sometimes the quiz questions posed were either ambiguous or too complex.
These problems were especially apparent in Modules 5 and 6, as students who came from
non-business fields could not easily fill content gaps on their own.
Personalized Learning Pathways: Information derived from that analysis was used
to provide different instructions to develop the different learning needs. These comprised
the use of modular video content to lessen the cognitive load, the use of glossaries to
demystify difficult business terms, as well as the use of foundational content for the non-
46
==PAGE:48==
business student. The combination of the quantitative data with the opinions of students
made it easier to address issues that originated from video engagement rates and attempts
in a quiz since inclusive solutions can easily be implemented to ensure all students have
easy access to learning content.
What Can Be Done for Personalized Learning?
To bring a more individual approach into the learning-teaching process and make re-
course materials more effective several changes can be made. These are done to fulfill
each learner’s need, fill the gaps created by student learning differences, as well as offer
the students a conducive learning environment full of enthusiasm.
Optional Beginner Modules: As found out from the quantitative results, students
faced significant difficulties in the two modules to pass the quizzes though they had a
high engagement, Modules 5 and 6 which involved basic financial concepts understand-
ing of income statements, and differentiation strategies. Qualitative feedback from the
interviews showed that the respondents got confused with the technical business terms
and had problems in the application of such concepts. So these required first-degree fun-
damental business modules including income statements, differentiation strategies, and
financial analysis should be provided to non-business students so that before they are
exposed to these advanced notions, they will develop the basic understanding that will
serve as a platform to build from. Such modules may comprise over-simplified text de-
scriptions of the topics with examples to make understandable the students to the main
core parts of the course. With these strategies, the course will be able to reduce the bar-
riers to understanding for non-business students and equip them with appropriate tools
and knowledge to apply business in their areas of specialization.
Real-World Examples from Diverse Fields:
Qualitative data from interviews emphasized the value of relatable examples, as many
students found abstract business concepts difficult to grasp.
By giving examples in common and wide-ranging professions like engineering or technol-
ogy, the learner is given a way to relate the concepts encountered in business to tangible
contexts. For example, when relating certain differentiation strategies to software devel-
opment or engineering product design students, will be motivated to learn about those
strategies since the information is presented in a field that is related to theirs. The ap-
47
==PAGE:49==
proach also improves understanding while also showing how business concepts apply in
different fields. In particular, students argued that this concept should be illustrated
by case examples originating from software- or technology-related start-ups so that the
material could be more realistic and so that the ideas to be taught could be translated
more easily into the applied context of the technical disciplines(Rasheed et al., 2020).
Structured Templates for Peer Reviews:
To improve the process of peer review, having fewer rounds of peer review to perform
on each activity reduces the chances of offering shallow feedback and enables students
to give useful feedback. Constructive feedback is more effective because it assists other
learners in understanding their strengths, and weaknesses, as well as encourages other
learners to observe outcomes in the context of a positive learning environment.
Structured templates inclusive of detailed instructions for peer reviews guarantee that the
feedback given is consistent, constructive, and actionable. These are useful for directing
the students on how best they can assess their peers’ work within a given task, by accuracy
and conceptual understanding. For instance, the peer-review form could be structured
in subheadings that focus on noting the positive aspects, recommending changes, and
questions the author could answer. This structure promotes deep thinking about what
one wants to contribute and minimizes the chance of general unproductive comments.
Accordingly, if these improvements are made, it will be able to make the students’ learning
experience engaging. These changes also ensure that students get feasible feedback, and
this helps them exercise their skills of understanding in the classroom.
Scaffolded Quizzes
Additional qualitative feedback suggested that further elaborations with regard to quiz
answers enhanced comprehension as well as pre-quiz tests can also enhance adaptability.
Pre-tests would provide students with an option of taking practice quizzes on particularly
difficult topics to familiarize themselves with the kind of questions asked and the level of
difficulties posed. This could help students to have a clear concept and pass the quiz in
fewer attempts. Detailed feedback on quiz answers can also help a learner to grasp the
concept. Providing feedback on why specific answers are right or wrong would enable
them to learn where they went wrong when solving a problem.
48
==PAGE:50==
The idea of employing pre-quizzes as the priming for the final assessments corresponds
with the guidelines discussed by (Ertmer & Newby, 2013) who pointed out that scaffold-
ing plays an important role in the delivery of online education. Regarding this approach
students mentioned it will assist them in establishing core knowledge; making fewer at-
tempts in quizzes and increasing their confidence level while solving harder tests.
Glossaries for Business Terminology
From the qualitative data obtained from the study, the researcher found that students
had a lot of difficulties interpreting business-related terms. On the methodological level,
quantitative parameters also showed increased effectiveness when glossaries were incor-
porated into the learning materials.
The inclusion of glossaries with definitions of complex terms like ‘gross profit’ and ‘operat-
ing profit’ would seem to explain to the students the complex terms with ease. Additional
clarification could also be made regarding the terms and it would also be helpful to pro-
vide examples for each to enable the students to use these in practice.
Students’ advice to include glossaries to explain such terms as ‘competitive advantage’
and ‘gross profit’ as supported by (Knowles, 1980) suggesting that the provision of sim-
plified materials enhances the adult learning process. Hence, detailed definitions and
contextual examples help students by enabling them to overcome complexity on their
own and make learning enjoyable.
Video Segmentation for Better Comprehension
Based on the qualitative data, videos should be divided into smaller segments because
it is easier for the audience to understand shorter material compared to longer ones.
Additional testing could be in the form of quizzes within the videos where the students
would catch themselves if they have not understood the video or topic being tackled.
This suggestion was made by the students to incorporate modular videos because shorter,
focused content segments improve information acquisition and memory. This is similar to
a suggestion of (Dillenbourg, 2016) where learning content is divided into smaller parts
to fit the different cognition loads. This is an effective way of dealing with the issues that
students undergo while handling long and complex videos containing a lot of information,
thus breaking the information into bits that students are comfortably able to grasp and
49
==PAGE:51==
remember without getting overwhelmed.
By adopting these developments, the course impacts will be extended to all its learners
as it becomes more learner-centered. These changes would enable students to handle the
content better and perform better, than they are doing now, with more confidence.
Limitations
Even though this study gives valuable insight into the relationship between student en-
gagement and performance, there are certain limitations still present. First and foremost,
for this study data was collected from a course that is run on a virtual learning platform
which included data for video engagement and quiz performance but didn’t provide any
data related to other educational factors such as learner’s interaction with course ma-
terial, study habits or any kind of external support.
Apart from this, as this study
was conducted in a limited time frame, it is not possible to see the long-term effects or
sustainable improvement by applying a personalized learning approach.
Future Research
This study can play a vital role in future research by giving insight not about engagement
and assessment only but also providing practical suggestions for tailoring course in a
way that can be effective for all learners regardless of their study background. One of
the most noticeable contributions in this study expresses how a well-structured course
content affects on student’s learning outcome through exploring data which was found
by quantitative and qualitative data where engagement and assessment were considered
respectively. Researchers can use this framework by expanding with additional metrics
such as students’ interaction with course material, and how an individual is emotionally
engaged with course materials or they can extend the observing period so that they
can see the outcome of their implications in the long term as well as employing this
method not only in digital platform but traditional education platform also for deeper
understanding of learners behavior in various educational settings. Additionally, in this
study highly focused on personalized learning approach so that diverse background pupils
also can be benefited along with business background students.
Future research can
50
==PAGE:52==
explore the effectiveness and scalability of including introductory modules, glossaries
as well as customized educational approach for addressing lacking of knowledge while
students joined from other educational fields.
6
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to assess the correlation between the level of engagement and students’
performance in the course titled “Developing an Entrepreneurial Mindset Through Se-
rious Games.” The research objectives were to determine the difficulties that learners
encounter when undertaking the course and to develop recommendations on how its ef-
fectiveness could be improved for the target learning population. The discovery shows
that students’ interaction with educational content in particular, with videos, can influ-
ence their performance in quizzes. This is an infallible truth as experience shows that
when the course content was logically organized and assessments matched with the ed-
ucational tools, the student’s performance improved. For instance, in modules 1 to 4,
the frequencies of views: videos that the students watched revealed that students who
spent more time on videos performed better in the quizzes. This emphasizes the need for
resources to be designed effectively and for greater structure and correspondence between
learners’ resources and the tests. Yet, this trend was not observed for all the modules
under analysis. In the two modules, 5 (Differentiation Strategies) and 6 (Income State-
ment), the student seemed to have challenges even though there was a show of interest
in the videos. They have suggested that the problems resulted from the divergence be-
tween quiz content and video material, the topics’ level of difficulty, and the presence of
business terms. Such difficulties were even more apparent among those learners who had
no prior educational background in business because such knowledge makes it easier for
a person to understand the principles of balancing financial statements. These results
emphasize the need to provide an easy optional session or at least a handout for the
student who may not be conversant with technical and business knowledge. This study
pointed out positive features of the course as well. From the study, videos were accepted
as the best medium, which students should use when explaining concepts clearly and
in simple ways. Some of the participants were happy that videos served as the basis of
their learning, but they gave suggestions like splitting long videos into several parts, and
51
==PAGE:53==
including case studies to make them more relevant and easier to grasp. Regarding group
activities, students expressed positive attitudes as they stated that those activities en-
abled the group members to perform group tasks, share knowledge, and also apply theory
to practice (Hadwin, J¨arvel¨a, & Miller, 2017) (Smith, Heindel, & Torres-Ayala, 2008).
These activities helped in peer learning and also made the learners understand well what
they were being taught. The participants also offered their feedback when developing
the subsequent steps to improve this course even further. Students recommended that
structured templates should be used when performing peer reviews so that the reviews
will focus on good and actionable comments. Further, they suggested creating practice
quizzes that should be incorporated into the content and giving descriptive feedback while
doing assessments that would help in revealing the causes of misconceptions and reem-
phasizing the material. Such improvements will not only efforts to address the described
difficulties but both create and guarantee that the course can further be built as a model
for teaching entrepreneurship inclusive of all while being efficient.
References
Amarneh, B. M., Alshurideh, M. T., Al Kurdi, B. H., & Obeidat, Z.
(2021).
The
impact of covid-19 on e-learning: Advantages and challenges. In Proceedings of the
international conference on artificial intelligence and computer vision (aicv2021)
(pp. 75–89). doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-76346-6 8
Arasti, Z., Kiani Falavarjani, M., & Imanipour, N. (2012). A study of teaching methods
in entrepreneurship education for graduate students. Higher Education Studies,
2(1), 2–10. doi:
10.5539/hes.v2n1p2
Ashman, G., Kalyuga, S., & Sweller, J. (2020). Problem-solving or explicit instruction:
Which should go first when element interactivity is high? Educational Psychology
Review, 32(1), 229–247. doi:
10.1007/s10648-019-09500-5
Bai, Y., Li, H., & Liu, Y.
(2021).
Visualizing research trends and research theme
evolution in e-learning field: 1999–2018. Scientometrics, 126(2), 1389–1414. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-020-03760-7
Bangert, A. W.
(2008).
The development and validation of the student evaluation
52
==PAGE:54==
of online teaching effectiveness. Computers in the Schools, 25(1–2), 25–47. doi:
10.1080/07380560802157717
Bates, A. W. (2022). Teaching in a digital age. Tony Bates Associates Ltd.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2013). Successful qualitative research: A practical guide for
beginners. London, UK: SAGE Publications.
Carroll, A., Houghton, S., Forrest, K., McCarthy, M., & Sanders-O’Connor, E.
(2020).
Who benefits most?
predicting the effectiveness of a social and
emotional
learning
intervention
according
to
children’s
emotional
and
be-
havioural difficulties.
School Psychology International, 41(3), 197–217.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0143034319898741
Creswell, J. W., & Clark, V. L. P. (2017). Designing and conducting mixed methods
research. SAGE Publications.
Creswell, W. C. (2009). Research questions and hypotheses. In Research design: Quali-
tative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches (4th ed., pp. 133–141). SAGE
Publications.
Dillenbourg, P. (2016). The evolution of research on digital education. International Jour-
nal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 26(2), 544–560. doi:
10.1007/s40593-
016-0106-z
Ertmer, P. A., & Newby, T. J. (2013). Behaviorism, cognitivism, constructivism: Com-
paring critical features from an instructional design perspective. Performance Im-
provement Quarterly, 26(2), 43–71. doi:
10.1002/piq.21143
Greenhow, C., Graham, C. R., & Koehler, M. J. (2022). Foundations of online learn-
ing: Challenges and opportunities. Educational Psychologist, 57(3), 131–147. doi:
10.1080/00461520.2022.2090364
Guest, G., Bunce, A., & Johnson, L. (2006). How many interviews are enough?: An
experiment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods, 18(1), 59–82. doi:
10.1177/1525822X05279903
Hadwin, A. F., J¨arvel¨a, S., & Miller, M. (2017). Self-regulation, co-regulation, and shared
regulation in collaborative learning environments. In D. H. Schunk & J. A. Greene
(Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation of learning and performance (pp. 83–106).
New York, NY: Routledge.
Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/313369294
53
==PAGE:55==
Holton, E. F., Wilson, L. S., & Bates, R. A. (2009). Toward development of a generalized
instrument to measure andragogy. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 20(2),
169–193. doi:
10.1002/hrdq.20014
Knowles, M. S.
(1980).
The modern practice of adult education: From pedagogy to
andragogy (1st published 1970; revised 1980 ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Cambridge
Adult Education.
Lack´eus, M.
(2020).
Entrepreneurship in education:
What, why, when, how.
OECD
Publishing.
Retrieved
from
https://www.oecd.org/cfe/leed/BGP
Entrepreneurship-in-Education.pdf
Leu, D. J., Kinzer, C. K., Coiro, J., Castek, J., & Henry, L. A. (2017). New literacies:
A dual-level theory of the changing nature of literacy, instruction, and assessment.
Journal of Education, 197(2), 1–18. doi:
10.1177/002205741719700202
Li˜n´an, F., & Chen, Y. W. (2009). Development and cross-cultural application of a specific
instrument to measure entrepreneurial intentions. Entrepreneurship: Theory and
Practice, 33(3), 593–617. doi:
10.1111/j.1540-6520.2009.00318.x
Piperopoulos, P., & Dimov, D.
(2015).
Burst bubbles or build steam?
en-
trepreneurship education, entrepreneurial self-efficacy, and entrepreneurial in-
tentions.
Journal of Small Business Management,
53(4),
970–985.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/jsbm.12116
Rasheed, R. A., Kamsin, A., & Abdullah, N. A. (2020). Challenges in the online com-
ponent of blended learning: A systematic review. Computers & Education, 144,
103701. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103701
Sirelkhatim, F., & Gangi, Y.
(2015).
Entrepreneurship education: A systematic lit-
erature review of curricula contents and teaching methods. Cogent Business and
Management, 2(1), 1052034. doi:
10.1080/23311975.2015.1052034
Smith, G. G., Heindel, A. J., & Torres-Ayala, A. T. (2008). E-learning commodity or
community: Disciplinary differences between online courses. Internet and Higher
Education, 11(3–4), 152–159. doi:
10.1016/j.iheduc.2008.06.008
Solomon, G.
(2007).
An examination of entrepreneurship education in the united
states. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, 14(2), 168–182.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1108/14626000710746637
54
==PAGE:56==
A
Dataset for Quantitative Data
The dataset used in this project is submitted as a separate .xlsx file named The-
sis Dataset.xlsx
B
Dataset for Qualitative Data (Interview Transcripts)
The dataset for Qualitative Data used in this project is submitted as a separate .pdf file
named Qualitative Data Interview response.pdf
55
