==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering
A Time-Predictable GPU Core for Real-Time
Systems
Master Thesis
Arijus Grotuzas (s223574)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Many real-time systems are safety-critical, meaning their inability to execute a soft-
ware task within given deadlines could lead to catastrophic consequences. A consider-
able fraction of these systems rely on the timely execution of data-parallel algorithms.
These systems have been proven to benefit from computational offloading to highly
parallel accelerators known as General Purpose Graphics Processing Units (GPG-
PUs).
Safety standards require the developers of commercial safety-critical systems to
provide guarantees over their temporal behavior, specifically to provide sound esti-
mates of their worst case execution time (WCET). For many safety-critical systems,
finding the exact longest possible execution time is often infeasible.
Therefore, a
highly trusted industry approach is to bound all possible execution times from above
by performing a static timing analysis. Static timing analysis tools can provide accu-
rate WCET estimates given a structural representation of a program under analysis
and an abstract timing model of a hardware platform. However, the accuracy of the
static timing analysis output can be easily tainted by a flawed understanding of the
hardware platform’s timing model, which is often a direct result of highly complex
and proprietary technology featured in many commercial hardware platforms.
The highly competitive market of GPGPUs has propelled the commercial-of-the-
shelf (COTS) GPGPUs to feature highly complex and proprietary hardware designs.
This renders COTS GPGPUs infeasible for static timing analysis and, as such, for
safety-critical real-time systems.
In this project, we attempt to design a time-predictable GPU core to form the
basis for time-predictable GPGPU architectures. First, we pinpoint the main hard-
ware components of GPGPUs that hamper static analysis and their effects on time-
predictability.
Then, we derive a time-predictable GPU core by applying consid-
erations for time-predictable GPU architecture obtained from the GPGPU time-
predictability assessment and literature. Finally, we assess the feasibility of the GPU
core design for safety-critical systems by performing a manual static analysis.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a master degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, 1st February, 2025
Arijus Grotuzas (s223574)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my sincere gratitude to everyone who supported and assisted me in
completing this thesis. I am incredibly thankful to my supervisors - Martin Schoeberl
and Emad Jacob Maroun, whose guidance has been crucial in steering this project
in the right direction. Their expert advice, insightful recommendations, and unwa-
vering support have significantly enhanced this thesis and its foundational research,
providing a strong academic basis and facilitating progress throughout the project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
GPU Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
General Organization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Execution Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Memory Hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Thread Divergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.5
Scheduling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.6
Pipeline of SM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
GPU Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.1
Computer Graphics Programming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
GPGPU Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Time-Predictable Computer Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
WCET Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Related Work
23
3.1
GPUs in Real-Time Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
WCET Analysis of GPUs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Making GPUs Time-Predictable
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Time-Predictability of GPUs
29
4.1
Warp Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Control Flow Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Vector Register File
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Caches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.5
Off-Chip Global Memory and Interconnect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Design
35
5.1
ISA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
SM Micro-Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.1
Unified Warp Scheduler and Warp Table . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.2
Front-end . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.3
Back-end
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.4
Vector Register File
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Evaluation
51
6.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
WCET Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusion
61
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Appendix A
Instruction Encoding
65
Appendix B
Assembly Code
67
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Safety-critical real-time systems are prevalent across various industries, including the
medical, automotive, aviation, and space sectors. As the name implies, these systems
must operate quickly, safely, and reliably, as any failure to do so could threaten
the safety of both the environment and people. Common examples of such systems
include robotic arm controllers, aircraft controllers, and car brake controllers. The
safety of such systems relies not only on their functional correctness but also on
their temporal correctness. Thus, if specific tasks are not executed within specified
deadlines, potential system failure might occur, leading to potential catastrophes.
Therefore, the design of such systems must adhere to safety specifications that ensure
critical tasks are executed correctly within the required timeframes [1].
While the most common functional safety-critical software applications are se-
quential [2], some safety software applications can benefit from or may even require
parallelization of portions of application code. For example, real-time systems in the
automotive domain require unprecedented computational resources to accelerate com-
mon Computer Vision (CV) and Machine Learning (ML) tasks. Execution of such
tasks is crucial to many modern autonomous driving and advanced driver-assistance
systems [3]. Thus, safety-critical systems in automotive, avionics, robotics, and space
domains often run programs that may require computation offloading and can benefit
from high levels of parallelization [2]. Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) can come
into play to help accelerate computationally intensive tasks, as they provide a high
level of computational throughput (multiple hardware units dedicated to performing
the same task) and allow for parallel execution of a single instruction on different data
sets. Additionally, the increasing adoption of General-Purpose GPU (GPGPU) com-
puting commenced the establishment of hardware platforms and software tools that
allow computation offloading for real-time systems. Consequently, much research has
been devoted to using GPUs for accelerating real-time systems [4,5].
Modern GPU architectures are designed to improve the Average Case Execu-
tion Time (ACET). While this design paradigm may seem appropriate for devel-
oping GPUs—given that their primary purpose is to enhance desktop computing
performance—this approach is ill-fitted for GPU-based safety-critical systems. Sim-
ply equipping safety-critical systems with commercial-of-the-shelf (COTS) GPUs is
not enough; much focus should be shifted toward ensuring that GPU-based real-time
systems comply with safety standards. Doing so requires applying techniques to esti-
mate the longest possible execution time of an application. Standard industry tech-
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
niques rely on underlying knowledge about the specific GPU architecture [2], making
applying them to COTS GPUs diﬀicult. For most, if not all, commercially available
GPUs, information about the underlying architecture is kept behind closed doors due
to their proprietary implementation details.
Additionally, even fully knowing the
implementation is often not enough, as some hardware features of COTS GPUs are
too complex to analyze.
Each domain has safety-related standards, such as ISO 26262 [6] (automotive)
and IEC 61508 [7] (generic electronic systems), for developing safety-critical systems.
Developing systems that comply with these standards requires addressing temporal
independence as one of the key technical requirements [2, 8].
In other words, the
system should provide an estimate of the longest possible time it takes to execute
a particular task and guarantee that no single task will ever prevent other tasks
from completing within given deadlines by taking up too much of the processor’s
execution time [2]. One way to address temporal independence is by performing a
Worst-Case Execution Time (WCET) analysis, which is recommended by the safety
standards [6,7].
All WCET estimation tools fall into one of three main categories: measurement-
based, static, or hybrid analysis techniques [9]. The first category includes tools that
estimate WCET by recording various execution times of a software task running on
a particular hardware. The second category encompasses tools that estimate WCET
without actually executing an application but rather by inspecting a control-flow
graph of a task and enriching the graph with timing details of a specific hardware
platform to compute an upper bound on WCET. The last category contains tools
that combine elements of the previous two approaches. Static analysis is the most ap-
plicable and trusted for safety-critical systems since it provides safe WCET estimates
albeit at the cost of higher pessimism [9, 10]. However, static analysis techniques
require a precise specification of the hardware’s timing model, which is easy to de-
rive for well-documented and simple hardware designs. Due to the highly competitive
market of GPUs, GPU vendors are releasing fast, highly complex, and ill-documented
GPU microarchitectures. Therefore, the lack of publicly available documentation and
highly complex hardware designs renders static WCET analysis techniques infeasible
for analyzing commercial state-of-the-art GPUs.
Thus, there is a need to define novel GPU architectures that are time-predictable
[2]. Such architectures should be designed with simplicity in mind to reduce com-
plexity and dynamic behavior as much as possible. Additionally, these architectures
should be open-source or well-documented to enable WCET analysis for GPU-based
real-time systems. Optimizing GPU architectures for WCET will likely reduce the
ACET, meaning that GPUs for real-time systems would be, on average, slower than
their desktop counterparts.
Therefore, it is essential to effectively balance perfor-
mance with analyzability when designing time-predictable GPUs, as safety-critical
systems still rely on GPUs for their high throughput and parallelism to execute com-
putationally heavy safety-critical tasks.
The most essential building block of a GPGPU architecture is a GPU core. A sys-
tem that consists of time-predictable components is time-predictable itself; therefore,
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
a time-predictable GPU core forms the basis for time-predictable GPU computing.
This project aims to design a time-predictable GPU core micro-architecture for safety-
critical real-time systems. The outcome of this project is an RTL description of a
time-predictable GPU core, which helps in providing trustworthy WCET guarantees.
Since the proposed GPU core is intended as a building block of a more extensive sys-
tem, this project does not consider designing other GPU components such as memory
interconnect, CPU to GPU communication, GPU DRAM controller, and multi-level
cache systems. However, the effects of other GPU components on time-predictability
and GPU core behavior are discussed.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter will describe relevant background information, which forms the basis
for the work presented in this thesis. The following topics introduced and explained
in this chapter are: General GPU Architecture Structure, GPU Programming, Time-
Predictable Hardware, and WCET analysis.
2.1
GPU Architecture
The intent behind designing the first GPUs was to accelerate the task of rasterizing
images (a process of converting an image described in vector graphics into a series of
pixels that can be displayed on a computer display) to improve the eﬀiciency of desk-
top computing. Over time, GPUs further evolved to support real-time rendering of
3D computer graphics, popularized by the emerging video game industry. Therefore,
some of the older GPUs were strictly optimized for graphics rendering, and only a
mere fraction of the hardware was programmable [11].
In graphics processing, a rendering pipeline converts geometric primitives repre-
senting a 3D scene (3D models described as a set of triangles with connected points)
into a raster image. One of the stages of this pipeline is the vertex processing stage,
which is responsible for transforming vertices to the camera’s reference coordinate
space, adding lighting information to vertices, and clipping the vertices that the cam-
era would not see. Since 3D graphics rendering in the ’90s and early 2000s was not
subject to varying implementations, this part of the rendering pipeline was purely
implemented in hardware (and other stages too). However, the need to customize
the rendering pipeline emerged over time, forcing Nvidia to make the vertex pro-
cessing stage and other rendering pipeline stages programmable, allowing developers
to customize how a 3D scene is rasterized. This forced GPUs to adopt a different
architectural design.
While the GPU industry matured into the state it is in today, GPU vendors saw
another opportunity for GPU applications, which was motivated by the use of GPUs
in scientific research: general-purpose computing. Therefore, modern GPUs balance
both general-purpose computing and graphics rendering application domains. Specif-
ically, most modern Nvidia GPUs are compatible with Compute Unified Device Ar-
chitecture (CUDA), meaning that they support GPGPU programming through hard-
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
ware and API support. Therefore, modern GPUs are used for gaming and accelerating
machine learning (ML), computer vision (CV), and general-purpose computing tasks.
Due to their specialization in accelerating domain-specific tasks, GPUs have di-
verged from CPUs in architectural design, thus adopting different terminology and
architectural patterns. Specifically, since GPUs emerged due to the need to process
embarrassingly parallel workloads, they are designed to provide higher arithmetic
throughput than CPUs. As a result, most of the GPU area is dedicated to arithmetic
units and memory structures, with only a fraction of the area reserved for control.
The following subsections describe contemporary GPU architecture. However, due
to the highly competitive GPU market, GPU vendors have publicly disclosed little
information about COTS GPU architecture. Therefore, the descriptions of the inner
components of GPU architecture are mainly based on a cycle-accurate GPU simulator
GPGPU-Sim [12] (modeling microarchitectures similar to Nvidia Fermi) documenta-
tion, other open-source GPUs such as Vortex [13], Nvidia patents, and other research
articles that attempt to reverse engineer COTS GPUs. Additionally, throughout this
project, Nvidia terminology will be used to refer to the GPU components and terms
due to the tendency of literature to use its terminology.
2.1.1
General Organization
Modern GPUs consist of an array of Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) style
processors [14], called Streaming Multiprocessors (SM). In many modern GPU archi-
tectures, multiple SMs are grouped into clusters; see Figure 2.1. Each SM consists of
multiple SIMD lanes, often called Scalar Processors (SP) or CUDA cores in Nvidia
devices, executing a single instruction on a set of operands. Specifically, each SM
contains a control unit that orchestrates the execution of all SIMD lanes, where each
lane executes the same instruction on different data in parallel. Thus, each SIMD
lane operates on the smallest computational unit in GPU terminology - a thread. In
the context of CPUs, multithreading introduces the issue of context switching and its
associated delays; however, GPU architectures avoid the delays of context switching
by containing dedicated hardware units for managing the state of all active threads
in SM. Additionally, each SM is a deeply pipelined processor that implements the
same ISA. Usual Nvidia implementations indicate long pipelines in SMs [12].
Each SIMD lane operates in a Single Instruction, Single Data (SISD) fashion. The
control unit in SM is responsible for decoding and issuing a single instruction to all
SIMD lanes that operate on that instruction type; see Figure 2.2. GPUs contain
dedicated SIMD lanes for distinct sets of instructions; therefore, homogeneous SIMD
lanes are often grouped into larger units called function units. Contemporary GPUs
include a special-function unit (SFU), integer function unit, floating-point function
unit, load/store function unit (LD/ST), and, as of Nvidia’s Volta [15], a tensor core
unit. The term scalar processor or CUDA core is often used to refer to either floating
point or integer SIMD lane that performs atomic operations excluding load/store
instructions. The LD/ST unit processes the load/store instructions, and the SFU unit
==PAGE:17==
2.1 GPU Architecture
7
Figure 2.1. High level overview of modern GPGPU architecture.
executes transcendental operations such as sine and reciprocals. When an instruction
is decoded, the SM can only issue that instruction to a corresponding function unit.
This approach allows the GPU to issue independent instructions to different function
units (typically pipelined) to prevent variable-latency instructions from stalling the
entire SM.
An SM typically processes threads in fixed-size groups called warps. Each warp
is processed in a lockstep manner, and the number of threads the SM can house can
be much greater than the warp size. To process a single warp in lockstep, each SM
generally contains the same number of SIMD lanes as the warp size. Typically, each
function unit contains enough hardware resources to match the number of threads in
a warp to allow all warps in the thread to be processed in parallel.
2.1.2
Execution Model
GPUs operate on compiled routines called compute kernels or shaders. A compute
kernel is a function written for highly parallel workloads, representing an algorithm’s
inner loops. A compute kernel is written for parts of algorithms that are data-parallel
and have little to no reliance on system resources such as I/O devices. In the GPU
hardware model, a single iteration of a program loop maps to a single thread. Hence, a
thread is a stream of instructions restricted to a subset of the program data executed
in parallel. Additionally, synchronization and communication of threads in kernel
functions allow for greater control over how the routine that is executed on a GPU.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
Figure 2.2. High level overview of a SM architecture.
A thread is the lowest level of abstraction for performing a computation or a
memory operation. Threads are executed in parallel on a hardware level and operate
on the data that belong to the corresponding program loop index. To fully utilize
hardware resources, threads are grouped into larger sets called thread blocks.
A
thread block is a collection of concurrently executing threads that can cooperate
among themselves [16]. An array of thread blocks is called a grid; see Figure 2.3.
The host device, usually a CPU, is responsible for launching a grid to a GPU for
execution along with the program data. Thus, a single grid executes a kernel, reads
inputs from global memory, and writes results to global memory. Both grids and
thread blocks can be multidimensional to ease the computations performed on either
vectors, matrices, or volumes.
The scheduling hierarchy in a GPU is organized as follows: A GPU executes
one or more grids; SM executes one thread block at a time; and a collection of SPs
executes a single instruction for a group of threads in a thread block. Additionally,
each thread block is subdivided into groups of 32 threads called warps in Nvidia
GPUs and into 64 or 32 threads called wavefronts in AMD GPUs. An SM switches
between executing multiple warps/wavefronts every few clock cycles within a single
==PAGE:19==
2.1 GPU Architecture
9
thread block to provide better resource utilization.
Figure 2.3. Thread hierarchy in contemporary GPUs.
At the lowest level, modern GPU architectures implement the Single Instruction
Multiple Threads (SIMT) execution model [17].
While similar to the SIMD, the
SIMT mainly differs in how divergent execution paths are handled. In the SIMT
model, selected threads in a warp can be activated or deactivated using thread masks
so that instructions and data are processed only on the active threads.
What is
interesting is how the masking of threads is then used to accommodate branching.
When a divergent statement, such as IF/ELSE, is encountered in the warp, two
execution paths are implicitly created by constructing two thread masks: one for the
threads that will execute the IF part and one for the threads that will execute the
ELSE part. Then, the two execution paths are processed serially to ensure that threads
in either of the two paths get to execute correct instructions. The serialization of the
two paths is then achieved by first executing the instructions of the IF part with
the first thread mask and then executing the instructions of the ELSE part with the
second thread mask; see Figure 2.4.
Such a control flow process can accommodate branching, although not very eﬀi-
ciently. When diverging paths in SIMT are serialized, some SIMD lanes do not do
fruitful work for the disabled threads (the results of these lanes are usually just not
committed to the register file). However, masking and serializing divergent paths
in SIMT helps avoid the overhead of maintaining each thread’s PC. This control
flow mechanism is implemented in contemporary GPUs using thread masking and a
stack-based control flow algorithm, introduced in Subsection 2.1.4.
2.1.3
Memory Hierarchy
Current GPUs employ complex memory hierarchies to supply threads with data to
process eﬀiciently. The modern GPU architectures consist of an off-chip global mem-
ory and multiple levels of caches; see Figure 2.5. The global memory stores instruction
data, data that the threads should process, and the results of computation. Addition-
ally, global memory facilitates transferring data to and from the host device and
communication of different SMs. The cache system in GPU serves as an overflow
region, storing a more significant portion of active data than what SM’s register file
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
Figure 2.4. Serialization of diverging paths in the SIMT model. For the sake of simplicity,
the warp size is four threads. The example kernel executes basic block 2 for the first two
threads and then basic block 3 for the remainder of the threads. After executing the two
divergent paths, the threads synchronize and execute basic block 4.
can hold, thus providing fast memory access times if the requested data is already in
the cache. At the bottom of the GPU cache hierarchy sits the L2 cache shared by all
the SMs. It is a unified area for instructions, data, constants, and textures. Each SM
has access to the L2 cache via the interconnect.
The memory local to each SM consists of a vector register file (VRF), shared
memory, data cache, instruction cache, and constant cache.
The VRF stores the
register state of each active warp. The constant cache is a read-only cache that stores
constants and read-only variables. In some Nvidia architectures, the instructions and
constants share a unified intermediate L1.5 cache before being split into separate
L1 caches [18]. The L1.5 acts as an on-processor L2 cache, therefore having a perfor-
mance characteristic between L1 and L2. The shared memory is a software-controlled
memory used by threads to communicate and share data, and it is often implemented
as a multi-bank scratchpad memory. The threads are then responsible for managing
the data in the shared memory. Specific Nvidia GPUs contain a unified memory for
the L1 data cache and the shared memory. Thus, the size of the shared memory in
these GPUs can be dynamically allocated upon kernel invocation.
To avoid delays associated with switching between different warp, each SM con-
tains a VRF that stores the register state for each thread in each active warp. Since
current GPUs contain VRFs that can be up to 256 Kib in size and each instruc-
tion in every warp can use up to 3 operands per instruction, a multi-ported memory
structure is required to issue a single instruction to the execution pipeline. Large
multi-ported memory structures consume a lot of area and energy. Thus, GPUs sim-
==PAGE:21==
2.1 GPU Architecture
11
Figure 2.5. Simplified diagram providing overview of modern GPU memory hierarchy.
ulate a large multi-ported VRF as multiple banks of single-ported RAMs with buffers
and arbitration logic, see Figure 2.6.
In Nvidia GPUs, such a multi-banked VRF is called an ”operand collector” [19].
The arbitration logic eliminates memory bank conflicts by only granting read access
to non-conflicting requests in every clock cycle, and buffers gather the operands for
a single instruction of a warp over multiple clock cycles. This design idea saves both
energy and area.
2.1.4
Thread Divergence
Thread divergence occurs within a warp when threads disagree on the execution path
after a conditional branch. While all threads in a warp execute in parallel, the SIMT
model restricts threads within the same warp from executing different instructions at
any given clock cycle. Therefore, converging blocks of threads within a warp have to
be executed serially until re-converging again. To allow serialization of threads in a
warp, SMs contain a per-warp stack. The SIMT stack holds entries for each diverging
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background
Figure 2.6. Simplified overview of a typical multi-bank multi-port vector register file.
In
Nvidia architectures, this structure of vector register file is known as an operand collector
[19].
execution path in a warp, and each entry includes an active mask that specifies which
threads should be active during the execution of a diverging path.
A per-warp SIMT stack (referred to as IPDOM stack in Nvidia microarchitec-
tures) conveniently allows the execution of nested conditional paths and eliminates
context-switching delays [20, 21].
A per-warp stack is maintained when a thread
block is assigned to an SM. The stack entries contain an active mask (specifying
which threads of the warp should be active) along with the address of the subsequent
instruction to execute (next program counter) and the address of the instruction at
which threads must wait to synchronize (re-convergence program counter). The GPU
handles the divergence and re-convergence of threads through dedicated instructions,
which are automatically inserted by the compiler. These instructions are responsible
for modifying the SIMT stack. When a conditional branch instruction is encountered,
the compiler inserts an instruction that pushes two entries to the stack: one for the
threads that take the branch and one for those that do not. At the end of each execu-
tion path, the compiler inserts a re-convergence instruction, which pops the top entry
from the stack, thus allowing the execution to continue with the lower entries in the
stack. The lowest entry in the stack is always dedicated to the main execution path
and, therefore, contains a mask that sets all threads to be active and a re-convergence
program counter set to the address of the last program instruction.
2.1.5
Scheduling
Each SM in a GPU operates on a single thread block at a time.
The dedicated
hardware unit - block scheduler assigns blocks to SMs. In most Nvidia GPUs, the
scheduler distributes thread blocks across all available SMs in a Loose Round-Robin
==PAGE:23==
2.1 GPU Architecture
13
(LRR) order. Before assigning a block of threads to an SM, the scheduler performs an
occupancy test to assess whether the resource occupancy is low enough to allow a new
thread block into an SM. If the grid size surpasses the amount of SMs available on
the GPU, the scheduler will assign the remaining blocks to execute later. Therefore,
more than one thread block can be assigned to a single SM. Once one of the SMs
frees up, i.e., finishes the execution of the assigned thread block, the block scheduler
is responsible for assigning a queued thread block to a free SM.
A typical SM contains a pipelined execution path that executes a single instruction
for all threads in a warp in a lockstep.
The reason for grouping all threads into
warps is to hide memory latency.
Memory accesses are frequent, and so are the
cache misses due to the streaming access patterns of most kernel programs. Memory
instructions incur a variable latency ranging from a few to hundreds of clock cycles.
Thus, stalling the SM pipeline for a single warp upon a cache miss would severely
hinder the GPU performance. Therefore, SMs contain dedicated scheduling units,
called warp schedulers in Nvidia architectures, that switch to executing different warp
upon dispatching a variable latency instruction.
Specifically, this allows memory
access latencies to be hidden (associated with memory instructions) by permitting
another ready warp to issue its instructions in the meantime. This approach also
hides pipeline stalls. A warp might be stalled in a GPU pipeline if at least one of
its threads encounters a pipeline hazard. Therefore, SMs are built to quickly switch
between warps by containing large VRFs to maintain warp state, thus eliminating
context-switching delays.
The warp scheduler usually obeys a scheduling policy for selecting a warp that
should occupy the SM’s resources for a given time. The policy can be as simple as
Round-Robin (RR), where each thread can execute a single instruction every clock
cycle. Unfortunately, RR is not a work-conserving policy, and as such, typical Nvidia
GPUs use Greedy then Loose Round Robin (GTLRR) policy instead [22]. In GTLRR
policy, a selected warp executes until it is blocked by a long-latency operation (typ-
ically a memory instruction); the hardware resources are then handed over to the
next available warp in an RR order [23]. By scheduling the warps in GTLRR, the
SM can avoid multiple warps stalling simultaneously since greedy scheduling ensures
that warps will often be at different PCs. A warp scheduler is typically implemented
as two independent schedulers in two separate pipeline stages of the SM.
2.1.6
Pipeline of SM
SMs contain a pipelined execution path, which is logically divided into front-end
and back-end. The front end is responsible for fetching warp instructions, assessing
pipeline hazards, and issuing instructions.
The back end is accountable for accu-
mulating the operands for warp instructions, dispatching a warp instruction to one
of the function units, and writing the results back to the VRF. The front-end con-
tains two decoupled schedulers constituting a single warp scheduler: instruction-fetch
and instruction-issue schedulers [24]. The back-end includes a VRF access scheduler
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background
(operand collector introduced in Subsection 2.1.3) that services operand fetch requests
for instructions. The usual SM consists of the following logical pipeline stages: fetch
& decode, issue, register access, execute, and write back; see Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7. Typical SM pipeline.
The diagram is based on the pipeline diagram of cycle
accurate GPGPU simulator - GPGPU-Sim [12].
The fetch & decode stage of the SIMT pipeline includes a fetch scheduler, a
decoder, and access to the instruction cache. The fetch-scheduler grants access to
fetch one or more instructions from the instruction cache for a single warp from a set
of eligible warps. A warp is eligible if no valid instructions for the warp reside in the
instruction buffer. The fetch-scheduler selects a warp to access the instruction cache
in a LRR order. If the access to the cache results in a hit, the fetched instruction
is decoded and placed in the instruction buffer. Otherwise, if the access results in a
cache miss, the cache generates a memory request, and the warp needs to re-fetch the
instructions from the cache. The scheduler then skips the warp if the request to the
instruction cache results in a miss.
The issue stage contains an instruction buffer, issue scheduler, scoreboard, and a
SIMT stack. The instruction buffer shared between issue and fetch & decode stages
contains multiple entries for every active warp and is used to buffer decoded instruc-
tions. Numerous entries for each warp allow the scoreboard algorithm to investigate
dependencies between any two warp instructions. The scoreboard detects pipeline
hazards, such as Write After Write (WAW) or Read After Write RAW. The issue
scheduler, which constitutes another LRR scheduler (decoupled from the LRR sched-
uler of the fetch & decode stage), selects a warp whose instructions from the in-
struction buffer should be issued for execution. The scheduler chooses warps whose
instructions pass a scoreboard test and are not waiting on a synchronization barrier
or a long latency operation.
The SIMT stack in the issue stage keeps track of diverging paths by maintaining
active thread masks for each path. When instructions are issued for execution, the
thread mask is used to prevent inactive threads from altering the state of the VRF.
Therefore, the issue scheduler inspects the selected warp’s Top Of The Stack (TOS)
entry in the SIMT stack (each warp has its stack) and passes the thread mask to the
selected function unit along with the instruction. The active thread mask enables
the masking of the outputs of the function units when committing them to the VRF.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 GPU Programming
15
This means that SIMD lanes still compute the results for the inactive threads, and
only the thread mask dictates which warps can write to the VRF.
The register access stage contains only the operand collector and arbitrator logic
to the function units. The operand collector gathers operands for different warp in-
structions over multiple clock cycles to avoid bank access conflicts (a single instruction
might request operands stored in the same bank). The instructions are only issued to
a corresponding function unit when the operand collector has collected their operands.
The execute stage consists of multiple parallel pipelines called function units. Each
function unit contains hardware resources dedicated to executing a single type of
instruction.
The SIMD lanes of the function units execute the warp instruction
in a pipelined manner; however, different function units have different numbers of
pipelines. For instance, the SFU often contains many more pipeline stages than the
integer function unit since it computes transcendental operations such as sines and
reciprocals. Once the results from either of the function units are ready, they are
written back to the VRF by the writeback stage. The arbiter of the write backstage
decides which function unit will commit its results to the VRF.
2.2
GPU Programming
Historically, GPUs started as fixed-function hardware accelerators for graphics ren-
dering, offering limited programmability. The early versions of GPUs would execute
a set of fixed functions to render 3D graphics, known as a graphics rendering pipeline.
The host device would offload 3D objects for rendering as geographical primitives
to the GPU and instruct the GPU to begin processing. The GPU would then pro-
cess these primitives by passing them through the hardware-implemented rendering
pipeline. However, due to the growing gaming industry, the need for customizing the
rendering pipeline emerged. As such, Nvidia released Geforce 3, the first GPU capa-
ble of allowing programmers to customize a small fraction of the rendering pipeline.
Over time, a more significant fraction of the rendering pipeline became configurable
by small assembly programs called shaders.
Early GPU architectures were not easily scalable, as different pipeline stages con-
tained microprocessors implementing different ISAs until Nvidia adopted the Unified
Shader Model [25]. The adoption of the model forced Nvidia to restructure subsequent
Nvidia microarchitectures to be more general, which allows reusing the hardware re-
sources for implementing most of the rendering pipeline in software and allows the
execution of general-purpose GPU programs. Furthermore, restructuring the Nvidia
architectural design model motivated the release of CUDA and OpenCL - APIs for
GPGPU computing. Therefore, consecutive GPU architectures began to adopt a new
and scalable GPU programming and architecture concept. This unified architecture
approach allows programmers to configure GPUs for custom algorithms and rendering
pipelines.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Background
GPU programming has diverged into two application domains: computer graphics
rendering and general-purpose computing. The following subsections describe both
of these.
2.2.1
Computer Graphics Programming
Computer graphics rendering works by offloading a set of geometric primitives to the
GPU memory and processing them in parallel using the graphics rendering pipeline
[26].
The pipeline consists of programmable and non-programmable stages.
Pro-
grammers can write small custom programs called shaders that specify how objects
present in a 3D scene should be rendered/processed during different pipeline stages.
These shader programs are uploaded to the GPU and are used to implement the
programmable rendering pipeline stages.
Each shader works by accepting a specific datatype (often defined by the graph-
ics rendering API), processing the data, and producing a defined output type. The
GPU then renders the 3D objects represented as a set of geometric primitives by
applying the different user-defined shaders on the primitives in parallel. In between
the programmable pipeline stages, the GPU utilizes fixed-function hardware units to
accelerate the non-programmable pipeline stages, as these stages require no config-
urability and have simple implementation [27].
Standard graphics rendering operations that require no varying implementations
are performed in hardware. For instance, texture filtering (as simple as linear in-
terpolation between two or more pixel values) is necessary for almost any graphics
rendering; however, since it is a relatively simple operation that requires no cus-
tomization, all GPUs support it at the hardware level. Additionally, rasterization,
the process of constructing a pixel matrix for displaying a rendered scene, is a nec-
essary non-customizable feature of graphics rendering implemented at the hardware
level [13].
2.2.2
GPGPU Programming
Programming contemporary GPUs for general-purpose computing uses the same con-
cept as programming them for graphics rendering. However, in the case of general-
purpose computing, the APIs for GPU programming launch a kernel, an abstract
general-purpose shader, instead of a series of shaders. The kernel is executed like a
shader program, except the APIs expose greater control of GPU resources through
general-purpose programming language constructs. Unlike a shader program, the ker-
nel is not restricted to being a part of a graphics rendering pipeline defined by software.
Therefore, a kernel launched by GPGPU API can avoid using any fixed-function hard-
ware for graphics processing. Additionally, GPGPU APIs such as CUDA and OpenCL
allow programmers to specify the number of threads used to execute a kernel on a
given dataset.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Time-Predictable Computer Architecture
17
GPU programs are launched by the host by uploading a kernel program to the
GPU off-chip memory along with the program data. Kernel programs are executed
as subroutines launched by a main program running on a CPU. Therefore, kernel
programs, usually described in high-level languages, are compiled into machine code
(supported by GPU’s ISA) separately from the main program. The main program
is only then responsible for interfacing with the GPU through a series of commands
provided by GPUGPU APIs. A typical program that interfaces with a GPU contains
the following steps to accelerate a subroutine: uploading the subroutine instructions
and data to the GPU off-chip memory, instructing the GPU to execute the subroutine,
and copying the data to the global memory from the GPU off-chip memory. Suppose
a main program has multiple subroutines that need to be accelerated. In that case,
uploading the instructions and data to the GPU memory often becomes a bottleneck
in heterogeneous computing, where data must be frequently transferred to and from
GPU memory.
2.3
Time-Predictable Computer Architecture
The correctness of the real-time systems depends not only on their functional aspects
but also on their temporal aspects. Tasks performed by real-time safety-critical sys-
tems must terminate before a given deadline to avoid potential system failure, which
could lead to catastrophic consequences. Therefore, many safety standards require
estimating the resources a safety-critical system needs to use, including execution
time [6]. Thus, knowing the worst-case execution time (WCET) of a software task
running on intended hardware is critical for assessing whether or not the system is
safe to use. However, since it is often infeasible to compute the exact WCET, it
is only regarded as a theoretical value. Therefore, a common industry approach is
to estimate it through a measurement-based WCET analysis [10].
Unfortunately,
this method tends to underestimate the WCET, making it an inadequate choice for
evaluating the safety of real-time systems.
On the other hand, estimating a bound that bounds all potential execution times
from above, known as the WCET bound, is a more conservative yet safer approach.
The bound guarantees that all observable execution times will always be less than
or equal to the bound. To calculate the WCET bound, it is advantageous that the
processor is easy to analyze; however, if the complexity of the processor is too high
(e.g., it features too many dynamic features that significantly increase the variation of
execution times), calculating the bound becomes infeasible. Calculating the WCET
bound is easy for time-predictable processors - processors that are easy to analyze
and have a low WCET.
Modern processor implementations, however, are not time-predictable since they
include many features designed to improve average-case execution time (ACET), thus
increasing the WCET. Most of these features are ISA-independent and are imple-
mented strictly in hardware. Standard techniques to improve average case perfor-
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Background
mance include instruction and data caching, pipelining, dynamic branch prediction,
instruction-level parallelism (ILP), speculative execution, out-of-order execution, and
multithreading. Therefore, modern computer architecture follows the ideology: Make
the common case fast and the uncommon case correct [28]. As such, processors contain
many dynamic features aimed at optimizing performance. These features increase the
overall WCET and make it diﬀicult to model a processor for static analysis tools. For
safety-critical systems, such a design pattern is not preferable. Therefore, a different
design ideology must be adopted: Make the worst case fast and the whole system easy
to analyze [29].
While modern computer architectures contain features aimed at decreasing the
ACET, it is possible to achieve time-predictable architectures that maintain relatively
good performance, albeit at the cost of increased ACET. Some features that improve
the ACET can be exchanged with more straightforward yet predictable features to
ensure modern processors’ relatively high performance and time-predictability. For
example, design features such as simple pipelines with minimal dependencies between
instructions, simple static branch prediction or predicated ISA, single-level cache
hierarchies, fixed-length ISA, and compiler-controlled caching methods are but a few
ways to ensure that the processor is time-predictable and has a low WCET [29].
A good example of designing time-predictable computer architectures is the T-
CREST project [30]. The T-CREST project presents novel solutions for time-predictable
multi-core architectures, and the main contributions of the T-CREST project include:
a time-predictable processor - Patmos [31], a time-predictable Core-to-core network-
on-chip (NoC) - Argo, a time-predictable memory interconnect - Bluetree [32], a
time-predictable SDRAM controller, and integration of compiler with WCET analysis
tool for obtaining tight WCET bounds. These combined features can allow designing
multi-core time-predictable computer architectures for real-time systems. The com-
ponents of a multi-core architecture presented in the T-CREST project are designed
to be easy to analyze for WCET analysis tools and guarantee a low WCET. Therefore,
a system that consists of time-predictable components is often time-predictable itself.
2.4
WCET Analysis
To ensure a safety-critical software system adheres to safety standards, it is necessary
to provide guarantees over its execution time. A way to do this is to perform a timing
analysis. The timing analysis can result in two values: the shortest possible execution
time, known as the Best Case Execution Time (BCET), and the longest possible
execution time, known as the Worst Case Execution Time (WCET); see Figure 2.8.
Finding the exact values for these variables requires identifying the precise inputs
or environment configurations that cause the execution time to be either the longest
or the shortest. This is a problem that is often impractical to solve. Additionally,
determining the BCET is not as crucial for safety-critical systems as determining
WCET since WCET dictates the reliability of a safety-critical system. Therefore, all
==PAGE:29==
2.4 WCET Analysis
19
timing analysis methods focus on estimating the WCET.
Figure 2.8. Overview of timing analysis terms.
Finding WCET is a well-known problem in the development of real-time systems.
Therefore, many tools and techniques exist to tackle this problem, which are intro-
duced and described in [10]. Generally, there are two main approaches to timing anal-
ysis: deterministic and probabilistic. Furthermore, these two approaches are further
split into three categories: static, dynamic, and hybrid timing analyses. Combinations
of the two approaches and categories of timing analysis give rise to various techniques
for estimating the WCET [9]. Deterministic time analysis is concerned with comput-
ing a single value for WCET, usually an upper bound. In contrast, probabilistic time
analysis attempts to construct a probability distribution over all possible execution
times. The probabilistic timing analysis methods are not yet mature enough, so fewer
tools exist for performing probabilistic timing analysis [33]. Therefore, we focus on
introducing the deterministic variant of the three timing analysis methods: static,
dynamic, and hybrid.
Static analysis methods do not attempt to estimate the WCET of a program by
executing it on real hardware but instead by taking a structural representation of it
and combining it with an abstract timing model of a hardware platform. Static anal-
ysis methods consist of two main parts: Low-level analysis - where a timing model
of a computer architecture is derived from the functional and temporal behavior of
each hardware component, and High-level analysis - where a structural representa-
tion of the program under analysis is enriched with the timing model of the hardware
platform to derive a WCET estimate. The WCET estimate is derived by finding the
longest program execution path from the program’s structural representation enriched
with the hardware timing model. The control flow graph (CFG) is the most popular
choice for program representation in state-of-the-art static analysis tools. Since the
timing models used for static analysis are often pessimistic, the derived WCET es-
timate is an upper bound for all execution times. Although static analysis methods
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Background
can guarantee that the actual WCET will never be more significant than some bound,
they can often produce unrealistic bounds if the analysis’s assumptions or inputs are
flawed. For instance, highly complex or poorly documented hardware features can
provide unrealistic hardware timing models, which might result in inaccurate WCET
bound estimation.
Performing static timing analysis is straightforward for simple processors since de-
riving their timing model is relatively easy; however, many modern processors are not
simple and feature highly complex hardware components that make it diﬀicult to de-
rive accurate timing models [34]. For instance, to accurately model caches’ functional
and temporal behavior, one needs to keep a history of the cache state, which leads
to a state explosion. Additionally, poorly documented or undocumented computer
architectures (due to their proprietary nature) make it impossible to derive accurate
timing models. Therefore, attempting to perform static analysis on contemporary
hardware platforms can result in a high level of pessimism when deriving a WCET
estimate, making most COTS processors inadequate for real-time systems as these
processors cannot meet time guarantees for safety standards.
Dynamic timing analysis, or measurement-based timing analysis, attempts to cap-
ture the WCET of a software task by iteratively running it on a hardware platform
with varying program inputs and environment configurations. The analysis method
provides both minimal observed execution time and the maximal observed execution
time, which typically overestimates the BCET and underestimates the WCET [10].
The problem of finding the program input that gives rise to WCET within the search
space of all program inputs is often intractable. Therefore, finding the exact WCET
through dynamic timing analysis is often infeasible. However, industrial practices for
assessing the safety of real-time systems rely on dynamic analysis as users may be
simply unable to produce the information needed to apply static timing analysis [9].
These users may need to conceive increasingly stressful tests to certify their products
against safety-related standards. Therefore, static timing analysis is more trustworthy
than dynamic static analysis as long as users can provide accurate inputs.
The last category of timing analysis includes hybrid timing analysis methods. Hy-
brid analysis combines the techniques of both previous approaches: derived timing
information of the processor through measurement-based analysis is augmented with
the control flow of a program to provide a WCET estimate. Therefore, hybrid anal-
ysis methods offer a higher degree of trustworthiness over dynamic analysis as these
methods include a more analytical approach to the computation of the WCET esti-
mate.
No timing analysis technique rules over all others by providing higher trustwor-
thiness and scaling to complex hardware platforms. Generally, each method is better
equipped to analyze systems with certain properties. For instance, static timing anal-
ysis is best fitted for fail-operation systems that must guarantee the highest level of
safety integrity, where deriving accurate timing models for these systems is obtainable
through affordable costs. However, only a tiny fraction of hardware architectures fall
into this category. Therefore, dynamic and hybrid analysis methods are often the
only choice for complex COTS hardware platforms, and among the two, the hybrid
==PAGE:31==
2.4 WCET Analysis
21
analysis provides a higher degree of trustworthiness. However, hybrid timing anal-
ysis methods are still plagued by the shortcomings of measurement-based analysis.
Alternatively, probabilistic methods offer a better safety guarantee over hybrid and
measurement-based techniques; however, these methods haven’t yet achieved the ma-
turity required for commercial products.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Related Work
This chapter will discuss relevant related work, specifically about GPU applications
in real-time systems, WCET analysis of programs running on GPUs, and others’
attempts at making GPUs time-predictable.
3.1
GPUs in Real-Time Systems
Many real-time systems must execute computationally intensive algorithms on large
datasets to perform their tasks satisfactorily. For instance, autonomous driving sys-
tems rely on processing each frame of real-time footage using either image processing
or ML algorithms to make informed decisions [35]. At the same time, interventional
radiology systems require real-time image processing to reconstruct high-resolution
visualizations from real-time medical imaging [36]. Therefore, due to the inherently
large data structures and time constraints associated with these problem domains, the
algorithms applied to these domains operate on large datasets and perform numerous
computational operations in parallel.
Furthermore, real-time systems demand that these algorithms deliver results with
low latency, as the safety-critical decision-making process depends on these results to
provide a decision within a specified deadline. Consequently, researchers are actively
exploring the use of massively parallel accelerators, such as GPUs, for real-time sys-
tems in different domains. For instance, automated train operation is considered a
possible emerging technology trend in the railway domain, which would require envi-
ronment perception in some cases [37]. Therefore, there would be a need to accelerate
ML and or image-processing tasks for automated train operation using GPUs.
Additionally, interest in adapting GPUs in real-time systems for avionics and space
domains is increasing. Attempts to incorporate GPUs in the avionics domain feature
a case study attempting to use a GPU for vision-based navigation of an aircraft [38].
At the same time, the application of GPUs in the space domain is gaining traction
from researchers, as GPUs provide ways to increase the onboard processing capa-
bility of spacecraft [39]. Image-based autonomous guidance and navigation control,
onboard sensor data processing, and image data compression are just a few exam-
ple spacecraft tasks that would benefit from computational offloading to an onboard
GPU. While interest in using GPUs to accelerate domain-specific tasks in different
real-time systems applications is growing, COTS desktop GPUs are unsuitable for
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Related Work
power—and area-constrained real-time systems due to their power requirements and
inability to meet safety standards.
Due to the growing need for high-performance computing (HPC) and the low
applicability of desktop GPUs in real-time systems, modern hardware vendors are
developing heterogeneous hardware platforms for safety-critical systems. These sys-
tems feature a safety-compliant CPU and integrated/dedicated GPU for power- and
area-constrained real-time systems. The main idea of such platforms is to provide a
high-performance and safety-compliant hardware platform. One example of such a
platform is Tesla’s Full Self-Driving Computer [40], which implements the autonomous
driving feature of Tesla’s vehicles and contains a CPU, a Neural Network Accelerator
(NNA), and a GPU. Another example is the Nvidia Xavier [41] and Nvidia Tegra [42]
platforms, SoCs equipped with an ARM multi-core CPU and an Nvidia GPU [15],
designed for safety-critical systems and aimed at autonomous machines.
The performance of Nvidia Tegra X1, a hybrid System on Module (SoM), has
been assessed in the use case of real-time pedestrian detection for autonomous driv-
ing system, and it has been observed that Tegra X1 has twice as high reported energy
eﬀiciency as usual COTS desktop GPUs [43]. However, on heterogeneous hardware
platforms with a CPU and an integrated GPU (iGPU), shared memory accesses con-
stitute a significant source of temporal interference for programs running in parallel
on the CPU and iGPU [2].
Specifically, ’black box’ arbitration mechanisms and
components (e.g., memory interconnect, memory controller, caches) containing pro-
prietary and undisclosed technology can considerably impact temporal predictability
and WCET estimation. Therefore, Cavichioli et al. [44] analyze variations in latencies
within various memory access patterns for Tegra K1, a hybrid System on Chip (SoC),
and X1 devices. The most relevant identified contention points are access arbitration
to the main memory provided by the memory controller, contention on the bus to
global memory from different clients, and coherency protocols on the last-level caches.
While the vendors of such platforms ensure that their CPUs are safety-compliant,
little is known about the execution time variability of featured GPUs, variations in
memory access latencies, and contention for shared resources. The high complexity
of such platforms and proprietary technology make the application of static WCET
methods infeasible. Therefore, measurement-based or hybrid time analysis methods
are more suitable for such platforms. However, high variability in execution times
can still negatively impact the accuracy of the WCET estimation provided by these
methods.
3.2
WCET Analysis of GPUs
Most research in WCET analysis of GPUs focuses on proposing novel strategies for
characterizing the WCET of applications running on GPUs, using either hybrid or
probabilistic timing analysis methods. Researchers validate the feasibility of these
strategies by applying them to either COTS GPUs or cycle-accurate GPGPU sim-
==PAGE:35==
3.2 WCET Analysis of GPUs
25
ulators such as GPGPU-Sim [12].
However, performing static timing analysis on
COTS GPUs is infeasible due to these hardware platforms’ proprietary nature and
high complexity.
In both static and hybrid timing analysis methods, a Control Flow Graph (CFG)
is constructed to represent all possible execution paths of a program in an abstract rep-
resentation. The CFG is then enriched with timing information specific to the hard-
ware platform (obtained either through measurements or a hardware timing model),
on which the program will execute to derive the WCET bound of the program [9]. It
may seem natural to apply the same techniques for constructing CFGs for CPUs to
GPUs, as every thread in a warp executes the same instruction. However, the SIMT
model handles thread divergence differently than CPUs, which impacts the control
flow. For each thread taken separately, this does not affect the construction of the
CFG; however, at the warp level, this divergence introduces additional transitions in
the control flow that must be accounted for in the warp-level CFG [45].
Betts et al.
applied a hybrid WCET analysis method for GPUs, proposing a
novel approach for constructing CFGs that model thread divergence [46]. However,
Jeanmougin et al. argue that the assumptions made by Betts et al. in their CFG
construction method can sometimes be overly optimistic, leading to underestimations
of the WCET [45]. They attributed this to the fact that Betts et al.’s CFG construc-
tion does not closely follow SIMT semantics and may introduce unnecessary extra
edges. Therefore, Jeanmougin et al. proposed their technique for building an accu-
rate CFG directly from Nvidia SASS (a low-level assembly language supported by
Nvidia GPUs) code for programs running on GPUs, which closely adheres to SIMT
semantics [45].
An alternative approach to characterizing the WCET of a software task running on
a GPU is to perform Measurement-Based Probabilistic Timing Analysis (MBPTA).
Specific properties must be satisfied to apply MBPTA, namely that the execution
times are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) [47]. These properties can
be ensured through hardware randomization (e.g., random replacement cache policy)
or software randomization (e.g., random reordering of independent instructions or
random data structure allocations in memory). Rodriguez et al. applied MBPTA to
a COTS GPU by extending software randomization techniques to GPU application
source code [47]. They validated their approach using a pedestrian detection use case
on an Nvidia Xavier platform. Conversely, Berezovsky et al. showed that hardware
or software randomization is not strictly required for deriving WCET estimates for
MBPTA analysis by applying Extreme Value Theory (EVT) [48]. They assessed their
approach on Kepler GK104 [49] and proved that safe and tight WCET bounds can
be obtained without hardware or software time randomization.
Additionally, Huangfu et al. propose applying abstract interpretation [50] to GPU
L1 data caches to statically estimate the WCET of L1 data caches [51]. Their im-
plemented static WCET analyzer for L1 data caches exhibits a low overestimation of
GPU L1 data cache misses and computes safe and tight WCET bounds. They evalu-
ated the WCET L1 data cache analyzer using the cycle-accurate GPGPU simulator
GPGPU-Sim.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Related Work
3.3
Making GPUs Time-Predictable
The literature on making GPUs time-predictable primarily contains proposals for
smaller components that are time-predictable for GPU architectures to ease the adop-
tion of static analysis methods for GPUs. For instance, warp scheduling in GPUs is
the primary source of timing variations, and as such, few articles analyze the timing
variations of warp scheduling in GPUs [52,53].
Crouzet et al. argue that the literature assessing WCET of programs running
on GPUs assumes that each SM in GPU inherently respects a specified scheduling
policy [54].
Thus, the literature overlooks the problem of lack of synchronization
between SM’s fetch and issue schedulers. For example, Huangfu et al. argue that the
Greedy then Round-Robin (GTRR) policy is a good choice for predictable GPU warp
scheduling; however, they consider the policy as applicable for issue stage scheduler
only and assume that the selected warp is always ready (its instruction queue is not
empty) [53].
A typical SM features fetch and issue schedulers that often go out of sync, thus not
obeying an expected warp scheduling policy individually and together [54]. The warp
selection in the issue stage depends on the number of ready/decoded instructions and
dependencies between decoded and issued instructions. In contrast, the fetch stage’s
warp selection depends on the number of decoded instructions and memory/cache
access latencies. Therefore, the warps are scheduled in loose order, thus not strictly
obeying the scheduling policy. The inability of the schedulers to consistently enforce
a scheduling policy leads to unpredictable GPU behavior, making applying static
timing analysis to GPUs impossible. Therefore, Crouzet et al. propose a solution for
synchronizing the two SM schedulers to enable reliable static analysis and implement
their approach in Vortex [13,54], a RISC-V-based open-source GPU.
The solution proposed by Crouzet et al. to address the problem of warp schedulers’
inability to respect a scheduling policy is threefold [54]: (i) using a single unique warp
scheduler for both issue and fetch stages to ensure that instructions are fetched and
issued at the same pace, (ii) using large capacity instruction queues to hide the latency
of loading instructions from the cache and (iii) compensating for breaks in instruction
flow (i.e., cache misses and branches) by inserting NOPs to ensure the issue scheduler
never runs out of instructions. Additionally, Crouze et al. assess the performance
impact of different scheduling policies for their synchronized warp scheduling and
report that the GTLRR policy results in the highest number of Instructions Per
Cycle (IPC) [54].
Additionally, modern GPUs adopt cache hierarchies to store frequently used data
and to reduce the number of direct global memory accesses, which becomes another
source of timing variations. Huangfu et al. conducted multiple benchmarks to assess
the usefulness of L1 data caches in GPUs for real-time systems [55]. They found
that, on average, L1 data cache bypassing led to higher performance. Despite this,
they argue that L1 data caches are not utilized correctly in GPUs and propose a
time-predictable cache bypassing method (implemented for GPGPU-Sim) to use the
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Making GPUs Time-Predictable
27
L1 data cache more effectively for GPUs. Alternatively, Jia et al. propose a static L1
data cache bypassing method that determines at compile-time which load instructions
should utilize the L1 data cache [56]. Therefore, the research suggests that L1 data
caches can be omitted from GPUs to improve their time-predictability at a minimal
to no performance cost.
However, the researchers argue that the L1 data cache
should still be utilized in time-predictable GPUs by adjusting the L1 data cache
to application data access patterns. Specifically, the cache policies should be either
statically managed or have easily predictable behavior.
For example, Huangfu et
al. [57] propose a warp-based load/store instruction reordering framework to allow
for accurate miss rate analysis of GPU L1 data cache.
The negligible performance improvement from utilizing L1 data caches in GPUs
comes from the ability of GPUs to mask memory access latencies. GPU applications
exhibit different data localities and access patterns compared to CPU applications.
While CPUs often fetch a single cache block, GPUs perform large warp-wide data ac-
cesses often coalesced into larger memory requests. COTS GPUs contain many SIMT
lanes, which hold hundreds of active warps in flight, meaning there is always plenty of
work to do while waiting for data from higher levels of the memory hierarchy, such as
the L2 cache. Therefore, GPUs can effectively hide kernel applications’ tendency to
exhibit streaming access patterns - data is fetched and used only once. Additionally,
Huangfu et al. did not attempt to bypass the L2 cache, and even though accessing
the L2 cache has a longer delay than accessing the L1 cache, this delay is considerably
smaller than accessing DRAM directly [55].
While the serialization of divergent execution paths in GPUs does not negatively
impact the static WCET analysis, it does lengthen the longest possible execution
time of an application. Therefore, Klashtorny et al. [58] propose a predictable warp
splitting to utilize the system resources of the SM better. When a divergence in the
execution path of a kernel program occurs, the warp splits into two sets of active
warps, and SM serially executes the two sets, meaning that some SIMD lanes remain
unutilized when either set of active warps is processed. Klashtorny et al. attempt
to solve this issue by executing the two splits of the warp in parallel by adding
architectural and ISA modifications to a GPU.
From Nvidia’s perspective, it might not be beneficial to introduce time-predictable
architectural components to their GPUs; however, a few design choices have been
made that introduce a time-predictable control logic in their COTS GPUs. From Ke-
pler microarchitecture, Nvidia moved some control logic off the chip and into the ISA
level [59]. Control instructions containing information about instruction scheduling
started appearing in subsequent Nvidia microarchitectures. A single control instruc-
tion would be inserted into the program code for every few operational instructions
for architectures prior to Volta, and after Volta architecture, a single control code
appears for every operational instruction. The control information pertained in the
control instructions helps prevent data hazards. Furthermore, it helps reduce on-chip
control logic complexity, thus leading to higher compute unit density per chip and
better energy eﬀiciency.
Each control instruction would contain bit fields informing the GPU about reuse
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Related Work
flags, different types of barriers, and stall cycles. The reuse flags allow the placement
of an operand in a reuse cache so that the subsequent instructions can fetch the
data immediately from the cache instead of the operand collector. The barrier bit
fields instruct the scheduler to set specific instructions to wait until the completion
of another instruction; for instance, an instruction could be set to wait for a variable
latency instruction, which allows the compiler to solve dependency hazards by making
more globally informed decisions. Finally, the stall cycles field would tell the scheduler
how many cycles a specific instruction should stall for, which serves as another way
to solve pipeline hazards. While such a design choice was primarily motivated by the
benefit of cutting down on control logic dedicated to scheduling, we believe it makes
the Nvidia GPU architectures after Kepler architecture more time-predictable.
While most literature in the domain of time-predictability of GPUs centers around
proposing individual time-predictable components to make the entire GPU architec-
ture time-predictable, Spliet proposes a time-predictable GPU-like SIMD architecture
for real-time systems [60]. The contributions include a time-predictable wide SIMD
processor and a closed-page policy time-predictable DRAM controller. The proposed
SIMD architecture schedules work for large-sized warps as a sequence of uninterrupt-
ible overlapping memory and compute phases. The overlapping of memory and com-
pute phases is achieved by allowing a single warp to occupy either compute (SPs) or
memory access resources (LD/ST units). Additionally, large data transfers between
the VRF and scratchpad memory and between scratchpad memory and DRAM are
implemented to address data caching. The proposed SIMD architecture, however, is
only implemented as a cycle-accurate simulator, and thus, no RTL implementation
is provided.
Besides considering time-predictable warp scheduling, DRAM transfers, and caching,
Spliet also considers a time-predictable VRF organization [60]. Since warps must
query large operands every clock cycle, vast register data must be stored on-chip.
Naturally, this would require building an enormous multi-ported memory structure.
Therefore, a common approach is to create an illusion of large multi-ported memory
by constructing it out of multiple dual-ported (1R1W) memory banks. However, this
requires solving bank access conflicts, as a single instruction might request multi-
ple register data from the same bank. Therefore, Spliet proposes two VRF banking
schemes that allow instructions to fetch their operands without arbitration mecha-
nisms to avoid bank conflicts: banking by a register number and banking by the
warp number. The first scheme places the register contents based on the register
(registerNumber mod bankCount) number and requires the compiler to perform clever
register renaming to avoid bank conflicts. The second approach places all operands of
a warp in a single bank and thus requires three pipeline stages to avoid bank conflicts
as long as warps access the VRF in a round-robin fashion.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Time-Predictability of
GPUs
GPUs incorporate distinct hardware design principles compared to CPUs to support
a highly parallel execution model. Features such as large vector register files, wide
memory accesses, and dynamic warp execution are just a few elements that differenti-
ate GPUs from CPUs. While these features improve average-case performance, they
prevent real-time system developers from calculating the upper bound for the longest
execution time.
In this chapter, the most prominent features that incur timing variability and thus
diminish predictable behavior are mentioned, and their dynamic behavior is discussed,
laying the foundation for predictable GPU architectures.
4.1
Warp Scheduling
SMs use two schedulers to populate the back end of the pipeline with instructions
to process: one for fetching instructions and another for issuing instructions. Even
though both of these schedulers enforce a specific scheduling policy, such as GTlRR,
to issue and fetch the instructions, the scheduling policy is not always strictly followed
by either of the schedulers. The schedulers attempt to follow the scheduling policy
as best as they can. However, many structural and dependency hazards can prevent
them from issuing particular instructions in the expected order.
The instruction that the instruction-fetch scheduler fetches from the instruction
cache depends not only on the instruction-issue scheduler and instruction cache but
also on the instruction buffer that holds decoded instructions. Suppose the instruction
buffer of a particular warp is full of decoded instructions, meaning those instructions
were not issued because of dependency or structural hazards (e.g., no available func-
tional units or dependencies between issued and non-issued instructions). In that
case, the instruction-fetch scheduler will skip this warp and will choose to fetch in-
structions for another warp. Therefore, this warp will be skipped until there is space
in the instruction buffer of this warp for new instructions. Additionally, if a request
to an instruction cache for selected warp results in a cache miss, this warp will then
be skipped and will have to re-fetch the instruction the next time it is scheduled. In
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Time-Predictability of GPUs
that case, no instruction will be pushed into the corresponding warp’s instruction
buffer.
On the other hand, the instruction chosen to be issued by the issue scheduler
depends on the currently available functional units, ready operands, status of the
instruction buffer (if one warp’s instruction buffer is empty, it will not issue any in-
structions for this warp), and dependencies between instructions (mandated by the
scoreboard). Additionally, it is nearly impossible for some instructions to determine
when they will be issued from the instruction buffer if they depend on a variable
latency instruction, such as memory read or memory store instruction. For instance,
if a particular warp’s arithmetic instruction depends on a load instruction, the arith-
metic instruction for this warp will not be issued until the results of the memory
instruction are available in the VRF.
Additionally, scoreboard algorithms, arbitration mechanisms for VRF, and the
number of available functional units can severely impact which warp’s instructions
are selected to issue. The scoreboard is responsible for tracking dependencies between
the different instructions of the same warp and, as such, dictates which non-conflicting
instructions can be granted access to fetch their operands from the VRF. Then, to
avoid bank conflicts in the VRF, most GPUs use highly complex arbitration mech-
anisms to space out conflicting access over multiple clock cycles. Sometimes, this
means some instructions are ready to issue earlier than expected since their requests
for operands did not induce any VRF bank conflicts, and the operand requests could
be serviced earlier. Moreover, the number of available functional units influences the
issue scheduler’s decision on which instruction to issue.
Therefore, instructions are not pushed and consumed from the instruction buffer
in the same order or at the same rate as mandated by the scheduling policy: different
structural and dependency hazards that each scheduler must obey and the dependen-
cies between the two schedulers prevent them from following the intended scheduling
policy. Additionally, the two schedulers often go out of sync, where one scheduler
might fetch instructions for one warp while another will issue instructions for an-
other. From a functional perspective, there is nothing wrong with this approach as it
is a work-conserving approach - instructions continuously arrive from the instruction
cache and are continuously consumed by different functional units. This approach,
however, complicates static analysis as it is nearly impossible to statically determine
which instructions will be fetched, which instructions will be issued, and in what
order.
We can avoid this problem by coordinating the fetch and issue schedulers to ensure
predictable scheduling behavior using the approach proposed by Crouzet et al. [54],
described earlier.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Control Flow Mechanisms
31
4.2
Control Flow Mechanisms
To address diverging execution paths, such as the ones produced by if/then/else
statements or varying numbers of loop iterations for different threads within a warp,
typical SMs use both instruction predication and stack-based control flow algorithms.
Predicate registers and stack-based control flow algorithms are used to disable and
enable threads in the warp when executing different execution paths. Such a control
flow scheme is advantageous for time predictability as it avoids branch prediction and
speculative execution. Predication combined with the serialization of divergent paths
can be statically determined, simplifying the construction of control flow graphs for
static analysis.
While serialization of divergent execution paths is advantageous for static time
analysis, this process tends to lengthen the WCET of the entire program since diver-
gent paths are processed serially. Typical if/then/else statements split the warp
into two execution paths; two thread masks are generated: one for the treads that
take the branch and one for the ones that do not.
Theoretically, when processing the threads with one mask, other threads can be
processed with the complement of the same mask in parallel, given that there are
plenty of available SIMD lanes (assuming that a warp size is usually the same as the
number of parallel SIMD lanes, then there is always plenty of SIMD lanes to execute
both paths in parallel). Additional hardware elements would have to be added to the
pipeline to fetch separate instructions simultaneously for diverging paths; however,
this could effectively help reduce the longest possible execution time of a program.
However, the maximum reduction in WCET would depend on the difference between
the number of executed instructions of the two different execution paths. In other
words, if one execution path needs to process more instructions than the other, then
at some point, the SIMD lanes used for executing the other path would do no valuable
work. As such, this would be the limiting factor for the possible reduction in WCET.
Better utilization of hardware resources can be achieved using a time-predictable
warp-splitting approach for conditional branches proposed by Klashtorny et al. [58].
However, we believe that unless there is a strict need to lower the WCET beyond
its current value, serialization of divergent paths as a control flow is an appropriate
choice for a time-predictable control flow, as other methods might increase design area
and lower energy eﬀiciency due to the control logic needed to parallelize diverging
execution paths on GPU.
4.3
Vector Register File
Creating large multi-ported memories comes at the cost of higher chip area and re-
duced power eﬀiciency.
However, supporting the residence of hundreds of active
threads on a single SM requires storing and accessing large amounts of register data.
Therefore, modern GPUs build their VRFs out of multiple single-ported (1R1W)
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Time-Predictability of GPUs
SRAM memory banks to provide the illusion of a large multi-port VRF. The arbi-
tration logic in front of the banks controls access to them to avoid bank conflicts,
and data collection units collect operands for instructions over multiple clock cycles.
Such design choice for a VRF improves area and power eﬀiciency and helps avoid
bank conflicts.
If the arbitration logic is non-deterministic in the VRF, the arbitrator used to
fetch data from different banks can exhibit dynamic behavior. Furthermore, Nvidia
does not publicly disclose the arbitration logic implemented in the VRF (operand
collector) used by their GPUs [61]. So, if the arbitration logic is unknown, then it
is impossible to statistically determine the latency of reading the operands from the
VRF. Therefore, it is impossible to statically determine the latency of each instruction
as the arbitration decisions for fetching operands are not visible at the ISA level.
Furthermore, some operand fetch requests will be stalled if bank conflicts exist. These
requests will be stalled until the conflicts are resolved, causing additional delays that
cannot be statically predicted if arbitration logic is undetermined.
To ensure predictable vector operand access, we can exchange non-deterministic
arbitration logic with deterministic albeit performance-hampering arbitration logic.
Specifically, using smart banking schemes proposed by Spliet [60], introduced earlier,
we can avoid VRF bank conflicts and even potentially eliminate the use of arbitration
logic in the VRF file. One possible time-predictable banking scheme is to bank VRF
based on warp number, meaning each warp’s data resides on a single bank and then
simply have each warp fetch its operands over three clock cycles. The other approach
is to bank the VRF by vector register number, which allows an instruction to fetch all
three operands in a single clock cycle (as long as the operands reside in different banks)
and use register renaming to avoid any instruction ever to have to fetch operands that
reside in the same memory bank.
4.4
Caches
While CPU performance highly depends on multi-level cache systems, caches are the
most eminent source of execution time variations in CPUs. The inclusion of multi-
level cache hierarchies in CPUs renders static analysis practically infeasible. On the
other hand, GPU performance does not directly depend on caches since shared scratch-
pad memory and many concurrent in-flight threads effectively hide global memory
access latencies [61]. Despite that, GPUs still deploy multi-level caches to amortize
off-chip DRAM access latencies further.
In typical GPUs, the first-level cache is split into separate caches for instructions
and data, and the last-level cache, typically the L2 cache, is shared for both data
and instructions. Having instructions and data in separate caches helps with time
predictability, as data cache misses do not evict instructions from the cache and
vice versa. On the contrary, performing a timing analysis of the L2 cache becomes
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Off-Chip Global Memory and Interconnect
33
incredibly complicated, as separating the analysis of instruction and data accesses is
impossible.
Additionally, COTS GPUs include non-blocking L1 data caches in their SMs. A
miss-status holding register (MSHR) is allocated if a cache miss occurs in the L1
cache. If no free MSHR registers are available, then any subsequent L1 data cache
access will block the memory pipeline. As a result, the entire memory pipeline stalls
until a single MSHR register frees up. The stalling of the memory pipeline, in turn,
will affect the scheduling policy as the issue scheduler then avoids choosing warps
whose decoded instructions contain memory instructions.
First-level cache misses generate long latency requests to the higher-level data
cache, typically the L2 cache, and in the case of the higher-level data cache misses, it
might produce a variable latency request to the global memory. Since even a single-
level cache is problematic for static WCET analysis, typical GPU memory systems
containing L1 and L2 caches and sometimes intermediate caches, such as L1.5, are
practically not analyzable [29].
Even though typical multi-level caches are included in GPUs to improve their
average performance, their inclusion will influence the behavior of other hardware
components (it is then impossible to determine this behavior statically) and obscure
static timing analysis. However, a single-level cache hierarchy with dedicated instruc-
tion and data caches could be favorable for performance with no adverse effects on
time predictability, since there is evidence to support the claim that a single-level
cache brings no adverse effects on GPU performance compared to multi-level cache
system [55].
4.5
Off-Chip Global Memory and Interconnect
The SM’s memory instructions issue requests to the GDRAM when the requested
instruction data is unavailable on-chip. Specifically, a global memory request arises
when a cache miss occurs in both the L1 and the L2 data caches. In typical GPU archi-
tectures, global memory requests have variable latency due to contention for shared
memory resources, request queues, complex arbitration mechanisms, and DRAM con-
trol mechanisms.
In a typical GPU, the array of SMs is connected via an on-chip network to mul-
tiple memory partition units [12]. Each memory partition unit contains an L2 cache
(usually, the L2 data cache is the last-level cache), a memory controller, and access
to an off-chip DRAM channel. The interconnect arbitration mechanisms determine
which SM’s request is serviced first by the memory partition. Therefore, memory
instructions can have variable latency if the arbitration mechanisms in the memory
interconnect are non-deterministic. Additionally, to bind the execution time of mem-
ory instructions, one needs to accurately predict cache misses and know about the
state of memory interconnect contention at any given time.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Time-Predictability of GPUs
Research suggests that GPUs use open-page policy DRAM controllers to provide
better throughput and save energy [12,60]. Open-page DRAM controllers leave rows
open after completing a memory access request, anticipating that more columns from
the same row will be requested later. Such a DRAM control strategy is favorable for
throughput-oriented architectures as it avoids the overhead of pre-charging and acti-
vating rows between subsequent requests. However, this increases timing variations
for DRAM accesses since any requests’ execution time will now vary based on those
that precede it, thus diminishing time-predictable behavior.
Conversely, closed-page policies can guarantee fixed latency access to the DRAM
since each memory request starts and finishes with all banks being precharged. There-
fore, the deterministic nature of closed-page policies guarantees predictable DRAM
accesses since they eliminate timing interference between requests by pre-charging all
banks between two DRAM requests.
Overall, time-predictable memory accesses can be guaranteed using time-predictable
memory controllers that implement closed-page DRAM policies [62, 63], and pre-
dictable arbitration mechanisms for the memory interconnect [32].
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Design
A time-predictable SM is the foundation for time-predictable GPU computing. In
this project, we propose a design for a time-predictable SM that aids the static time
analysis in computing a tight WCET bound.
The proposed SM is a statically scheduled, pipelined, and fully configurable SIMD
processor that uses predication as a control flow mechanism. Static scheduling allows
the compiler to make more globally optimized scheduling decisions that obey pipeline
delays and solve potential hazards. Predication avoids dynamic control flow features
such as speculative execution that complicate static analysis. All delays are visible
at the ISA level, assuming the memory requests are serviced in a fixed time. Overall,
the design of the SM is aided by simplicity to ensure a simple processor model, which
helps with computing accurate WCET analysis values.
This chapter introduces the proposed design of a time-predictable SM. Specifically,
the SM’s ISA and micro-architecture will be presented in detail.
5.1
ISA
The SM implements a predicated instruction set. The instruction set consists of 17
instructions; see Table 5.1. All instructions can be predicated, except for the compare
instruction. Therefore, the compiler/programmer can add optional predicates to the
arithmetic, load/store, and branch instructions. The SM has four vector predicate
registers, which have a length equivalent to the warp size and contain single-bit ele-
ments. Out of the four registers, the first register is read-only and is always set to
true (all individual bits are set to 1).
All instructions can accept at most 3 VRF operands. The MAD instruction is the
only instruction that requires three operands. All other instructions will use up to 2
VRF operands. The SM has 32 vector general-purpose registers (VGPR) with 32-bit
length vector elements. The operands of all instructions come from the VGPR except
for the load special-register instruction, LDS, whose operand comes from the special
register file (SRF). The SRF contains read-only registers with values for thread index,
warp index, block index, warp width, and block width. The SRF values for thread
index, warp index, warp width, and block width are always constant, while the block
index is initialized to the block ID the SM is processing (every time a new block is
being processed).
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Design
Mnemonic
Description
NOP
No operation
RET
Return from kernel execution
LD
Load from global memory
ST
Store to global memory
LDS
Load data from special register file to VRF
ADDI
Add immediate to operand
LUI
Load immediate to upper 22 bits of destination register
SRLI
Shift right first operand by number of bits in second operand
SLLI
Shift left first operand by number of bits in second operand
ADD
Add to operands together
SUB
Subtract one operand from another
AND
Bitwise and between two operands
OR
Bitwise or between two operands
MUL
Multiply two operands
MAD
Multiply first two operands and add third operand to the result
BR
Branch if predicate is true
CMP
Compare two operands and store result in predicate register file
Table 5.1. List of instructions implemented by the SM.
The intention to use 32 vector registers for the SM is motivated by the conclusion
that most kernel programs are optimized to use 32 general-purpose registers. Spliet
analyzed different benchmarks compiled for Nvidia’s Kepler microarchitecture hard-
ware [60]. 32 VGPR could contain all required program data for nearly all analyzed
benchmarks without spilling into main memory. This is a direct result of Nvidia’s
compiler register allocation optimization pass, which optimizes programs to not ex-
ceed 32 VGPRs for register usage. Therefore, the fact that the Nvidia compiler can
optimize programs to use only 32 VGPRs directly indicates that the proposed SM
design would require a similar number of VGPRs.
The instructions for SM are encoded as 32-bit instruction words; see Figure A.1.
All instructions contain opcode and predicate bit fields, which always have the same
position in the instruction word. The positions of the destination and the three source
operand bit fields are kept at the same positions in the instruction word to ease the
decoding of the instructions. Since the VRF of the SM contains 32 vector registers
for each warp, the operands of each instruction are encoded in 5-bit width fields.
==PAGE:47==
5.2 SM Micro-Architecture
37
Additionally, to allow instructions to load large immediates (e.g., 32-bit immedi-
ate), the load upper immediate, LUI, is used to load the upper 20 bits of the immediate
into the destination register. Following a LUI instruction, the add immediate instruc-
tion, ADDI, can be used to load the lower remaining bits into the destination register.
This is a standard approach for loading large immediate in many ISAs; for instance,
RISC-V ISA uses the same approach [64]
The control flow is addressed using two instructions: BR and CMP. The compare
instruction, CMP, compares two operands by a specified comparison operator (encoded
in the instruction) and stores the result in the corresponding predicate register. When
the compare instruction is not give a predicate (the predicate bit field is set to zero),
the comparison result is dismissed since the instruction will attempt to write to the
first predicate register, which is read-only. On the other hand, the BR instruction
is responsible for conditional and unconditional jumps based on the predicate value.
The branch instruction, BR, makes a conditional jump if the corresponding predicate
evaluates to true. However, suppose the compiler/assembler does not predicate the
branch instruction. In that case, the instruction will perform an unconditional jump
since the predicate bit field will be set to zero, forcing the instruction to use the first
predicate register, which is always true.
The branch instruction performs a jump (for an entire warp only) as long as
at least one thread in the warp meets a condition evaluated by a previously issued
compare instruction. In other words, branch instruction performs a jump as long
as a single element in the predicate vector register is set to 1. In practice, different
threads might need to execute varying numbers of loop iterations, for instance, when
the number of loop iterations for a thread depends on the thread’s ID. Therefore,
performing a jump if at least one thread in the warp meets a branch condition allows
processing all execution paths of all threads in a warp.
However, it is assumed
that the compiler/programmer predicates the instructions within loop statements
and reevaluates the predicate register between loop iterations to avoid modifying the
state of the threads that do not take the branch.
The load special instruction, LDS, is used for loading the values from the SRF into
the VRF. When the LDS instruction is executed, the specified special register value
is copied to the warp’s destination vector register. The values in the special register
file can be used to calculate each thread’s local index (within a block) or global index
(within a block grid).
The global index of a thread is typically used as an array
index to load and store the data to and from the global memory. The multiply-add
instruction becomes especially handy in combination with the load special instruction
for calculating the global index of each thread.
5.2
SM Micro-Architecture
The primary philosophy of GPU design is to hide memory request latencies by overlap-
ping the processing of warps performing arithmetic instructions with warps accessing
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Design
the memory. Therefore, the SM’s execution model can be viewed as a series of overlap-
ping compute and access phases of different warps. Separate phases of different warps
can be overlapped to hide the latency of cache misses and global memory accesses,
which usually take hundreds of clock cycles. Such a design principle requires sepa-
rating the hardware resources for computation and memory accesses. The proposed
SM leverages this architectural design to provide high throughput while exhibiting
time-predictable behavior.
The time-predictable SIMD processor features a pipelined execution path to keep
numerous threads in flight; see Figure 5.1. The pipeline is divided into two logical
stages: front-end and back-end. The front-end is responsible for fetching instructions
from cache/memory, decoding instructions, choosing warps whose instructions should
be issued for execution, and addressing the control flow. On the other hand, the back-
end is responsible for executing arithmetic instructions, loading/storing data to and
from cache/memory, and committing the results of memory and ALU operations
to the VRF. The two logical pipelines interface using control signals to ensure cor-
rect instruction scheduling. Unlike contemporary Nvidia architectures, the proposed
SIMD core only supports a single kernel at a time, assumes that the grid block is
one-dimensional, supports only integer arithmetic, and does not support accelerating
graphics rendering.
Figure 5.1. A high-level overview of the time-predictable SM’s pipeline. The blue-colored
signals denote control signals.
The design of the red components is not covered in this
project.
The SM’s pipeline contains six logical pipeline stages: Instruction Fetch (IF),
==PAGE:49==
5.2 SM Micro-Architecture
39
Instruction Decode (ID), Instruction Issue (ISS), Operand Fetch (OF), Execute (EX),
and Writeback (WB). The number of logical pipeline stages does not necessarily
correspond to the number of physical pipeline stages. The number of physical pipeline
stages in the SM depends on the instruction cache latency and the latency of the
SRAM technology.
Assuming a pipelined instruction cache, the instruction fetch
stage contains additional intermediate pipeline stages to hide the latency of fetching
instructions.
The instruction FIFO queue lengths (implemented out of registers)
in the instruction issue stage also depend on instruction cache latency. Since the
preferred memory technology for implementing the individual banks of the VRF would
be SRAM, the operand fetch stage includes additional pipeline stages to hide the
latency of accessing the SRAM.
To ensure time-predictable scheduling of warps, we adopt the Crouzet et al. ap-
proach of a unified warp scheduler for coordinating the fetch and issue stages of
an SM’s pipeline [54]. Therefore, the time-predictable SM contains a unified warp
scheduler that coordinates the two pipeline stages by selecting a warp for which in-
struction should be fetched and issued simultaneously. As mentioned earlier, each
warp contains an issue FIFO queue to support this approach, whose length is equiva-
lent to the number of physical fetch pipeline stages plus the single decode stage. The
FIFO queues allow the buffering of fetched instructions and the provision of the warp
scheduler with necessary information.
The pipeline in the SM’s design is subject to RAW data hazards. The pipeline
does not implement forwarding because it would significantly increase the circuit
area since forwarding would require forwarding large data vectors. Therefore, when
an instruction depends on the outputs of a previous instruction, bubbles need to
be inserted into the pipeline. To allow better pipeline utilization, the compiler/pro-
grammer is responsible for resolving the RAW hazards by inserting either NOPs or
independent instructions between two dependent instructions. The Write after Write
(WAW) and Write after Read (WAR) do not exist in the SM’s pipeline because a
single warp cannot have two of its instructions occupying both ALU and memory
pipelines at the same time (the warp is set as pending immediately after a memory
instruction is issued).
The SM is designed to interface with a block scheduler and the global memory; see
Figure 5.1. The design of the block scheduler and DRAM controller are not considered
in this project. There are many literature attempts at designing predictable DRAM
controllers [62, 63]. The instruction and data caches are separated to improve time-
predictability; however, the design of the caches is not considered in this project.
5.2.1
Unified Warp Scheduler and Warp Table
A unified warp scheduler simplifies determining the order in which the warps are
scheduled by ensuring that instructions are issued and fetched at the same rate. This
allows the schedule of warps to be determined statically. To coordinate fetch and
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Design
issue stages, the warp scheduler is supplied with information about the warp states
from the warp table and the current status of the instruction issue queues.
The warp scheduler is not only responsible for determining the order in which
instructions are issued and fetched but also for orchestrating the execution in the
SM by acting as a finite state machine that controls the datapath (pipeline). The
scheduler is directly connected to the valid/ready handshake interface for interfacing
with the block scheduler. When the block scheduler raises a valid signal, the warp
scheduler initializes the warp table with relevant entries and proceeds to orchestrate
the scheduling of warps. When all warps have been processed, the warp scheduler
raises the ready signal and keeps it that way until the block scheduler re-asserts the
valid signal.
To improve the overall performance of the SM and allow for overlapping differ-
ent warps across ALU and memory pipelines, the warp scheduler selects warps in a
GTLRR order from a pool of eligible warps. Eligible warps are determined by assess-
ing the state of each warp contained in the entries of the warp table. The GTLRR
policy selects the same warp for as long as possible until a long-latency instruction
is issued for that warp; then, the policy chooses the next warp in an RR order from
a pool of eligible warps; see Figure 5.2. Such scheduling allows different warps to
be at different PC values, which lowers the probability of multiple warps stalling
simultaneously due to a long-latency instruction (all warps execute the same kernel
code). This technique attempts to maximize the utilization of hardware resources by
increasing the number of overlapping pairs of phases (compute and memory phases)
between warps.
The scheduling policy can be statically determined since stalling
specific warps depends primarily on the appearance of memory instructions in the
program code.
Figure 5.2. Example schedule of warps under GTLRR policy. Note that at clock cycle 12 no
warp is scheduled since warp 0 finished it’s execution and warp 1 is stalled since warp 2 is
still stalling the memory pipeline.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 SM Micro-Architecture
41
The warp table contains entries for each currently active warp and contains in-
formation regarding the warp’s state. The total number of entries in the warp table
is the total number of active warps the SM can hold; however, not all entries are
necessarily valid. If the block has fewer warps than what the SM can hold, only the
fraction of the entries in the warp table will be set to valid. The warp table contains
the following entries for every active warp:
• Current PC;
• Valid bit - used to indicate if warp entry is valid;
• Active bit - used to indicate if the warp is active, meaning that not all of the
warp’s instructions have been fetched and executed;
• Pending bit - used to indicate if the warp is waiting on a long-latency instruction;
• Done bit - used to indicate if all of the warp’s instructions have been fetched
but not necessarily executed;
• Thread mask - current active thread mask of the warp.
When assigning a block to an SM, the block scheduler asserts a valid signal along
with the data that contains block information, specifically the block ID and the
number of valid warps.
Then, upon receiving a handshake signal from the block
scheduler to start processing, the warp scheduler initializes the relevant entries in the
warp table (using the data received from the block scheduler) as valid and sets them
as active, not done, and not pending. Additionally, the active thread mask for each
warp’s entry is set to all threads being active, and the PC of each warp is set to zero.
After the warp scheduler initializes the warp table, it proceeds to schedule the
warps using the data contained in the table. The state of each warp is then used
to determine the pool of eligible warps. The warp scheduler specifically selects the
next warp to schedule from the set of valid warps that are active and not pending.
Additionally, when a memory pipeline is occupied (processing a memory instruction),
the warp scheduler assesses which warps have a memory instruction at the front of
their issues queue and removes them from the pool of active warps as long as the
memory pipeline is occupied. Suppose the pool of eligible warps is empty. In that
case, the warp scheduler asserts a stall signal to the rest of the pipeline to give time
for dependencies to resolve; specifically, the issue stage won’t issue any warps, and
the fetch stage will fetch NOPs instead.
The done bit field is not used by the scheduler but instead by the instruction
fetch stage. Since an instruction is fetched and issued for a warp simultaneously, the
scheduler must continue scheduling it even after fetching its last instruction to allow
the remaining few instructions to enter the execution stage. Therefore, the done field
is specifically used to indicate that NOPs should be fetched when this warp is selected
by the warp scheduler (since there are no more valid instructions left for the warp)
and that the warp’s PC should not be incremented further in the IF stage. When an
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Design
instruction is fetched for a warp by the IF stage, the corresponding warp table entry
is updated with an incremented PC. Additionally, the active thread mask of the entry
is passed down through the remainder of the pipeline to mask out the results of the
active threads only.
Different stages of the pipeline can update the entries in the warp table to update
the state of the warps. The issue stage sets the warp as pending when it issues a
long latency instruction (memory instruction) for that warp. When a long latency
instruction for that warp finishes, the warp is set as not pending again by the memory
pipeline. The write-back stage sets the active bit to zero for a warp sets the warp
as inactive) when it encounters a RET instruction to mark a warp’s execution as over.
Finally, the IF stage sets a warp as done when it fetches a RET instruction for a warp.
5.2.2
Front-end
The front end of the SM pipeline consists of three pipeline stages: IF, ID, and ISS.
The IF stage is responsible for fetching an instruction for the currently selected warp,
resolving branch instructions, and updating the warp table. The ID stage is respon-
sible for decoding the fetched instruction’s bit fields. The ISS stage is responsible for
issuing an instruction for the selected warp from the instruction queues.
The IF stage comprises a warp table, branch control unit, predicate register file,
and fetch control logic. As described earlier, the warp table maintains the state of
executing warps and forwards this information to the warp scheduler. The IF stage is
responsible for fetching the instruction from the instruction cache for a warp selected
by the warp scheduler (the address to the instruction cache is the PC of the chosen
warp). The fetch logic is then responsible for updating the PC of the selected warp
by incrementing the PC field of a corresponding entry in the warp table. To hide
the latency of a pipeline cache access, the fetch stage contains an additional pipeline
stage for delaying relevant information associated with the fetched instruction, such
as warp’s ID and active thread mask.
The branch instructions are resolved in the IF stage to avoid flushing the pipeline
when a branch is taken and to minimize the number of delay slots. The branch control
unit contained in the IF stage is responsible for executing control flow instructions.
Suppose a fetched instruction is a branch instruction whose predicate evaluates to
true. In that case, the branch control unit informs IF logic to update the associated
warp’s PC to the jump address in the warp table so that the instructions starting at
the branch address can be fetched instead. The predicate register file contained in
the IF stage forwards the selected predicate to the branch control unit. The branch
control performs a jump if at least a single bit in the predicate is evaluated to be true
to allow all diverging paths to execute. While branch instructions are resolved in the
IF stage, the predicate value is only evaluated in the ALU pipeline of the EX stage.
Therefore, to address the RAW hazard between CMP and BR instructions, bubbles or
independent instructions need to be inserted between any two CMP and BR instructions.
It is the responsibility of the compiler/programmer to address these hazards.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 SM Micro-Architecture
43
The ID stage accepts the fetched instruction and its associated warp’s ID and
thread mask from the IF stage. It is responsible for decoding the instructions and
constructing the 32-bit immediate contained in the instruction. The ID stage then
forwards decoded fields such as instruction opcode, destination register, operand reg-
isters, special register, and predicate register along with the 32-bit immediate, in-
struction’s warp ID, and active thread mask to the ISS stage.
The ISS stage is responsible for pushing decoded instructions into the issue FIFO
queues, removing the entries from the queues, and setting warps as pending when a
long-latency instruction has been dispatched. When the warp scheduler is not stalling
the pipeline, the issue logic will remove an entry from one of the issue queues based
on the currently selected warp by the warp scheduler. If the removed instruction
is a memory instruction, then the ISS stage will set the selected warp as pending
by modifying its entry in the warp table. When a new decoded instruction arrives
from the ID stage, the instruction is pushed into one of the queues depending on
the warp ID retrieved from the instruction decode stage (passed through the pipeline
from the IF stage). Each decoded field by the ID stage has several FIFO queues
corresponding to the number of active warps the SM can hold. Therefore, when a
decode instruction arrives from the ID stage, each decoded field is pushed to a separate
queue corresponding to its warp. Additionally, when an instruction is ”popped” from
an issue queue, we mean that all the corresponding queues for each decoded field
remove a single head entry. The popped entries are then forwarded to the OF stage.
In typical SM design, the instruction issue queues serve as a way to allow the
scoreboard algorithm to assess for dependencies between any two instructions. In the
case of the proposed SM, the dependencies are resolved by the compiler; therefore, the
issue queues are used to allow the warp scheduler to immediately switch between any
two warps (since the fetched and decode instructions will be available at the queues)
and to assess which warps have waiting decoded memory instructions. Additionally,
the queues serve as buffers to hold the fetched and not yet issued instructions since
the warp scheduler might select a specific warp for only a few clock cycles before
switching to another warp.
For example, suppose the SM has two IF stages and one ID stage and supports
only two active warps. Let’s say the warp scheduler fetches instructions for the first
warp and switches to the second warp before issuing the fetched instructions for the
first warp. We can visualize this behavior with a pipeline diagram; see Figure 5.3.
The three fetched instructions for the first warp will continue propagating through
the pipeline, regardless of whether the warp scheduler currently selects the first warp.
Therefore, a FIFO queue is necessary to hold these instructions until the scheduler
decides to issue them. As we can see, the three issued instructions will fill up the
issue queue for the first warp before the warp scheduler switches to the first warp
again and begins to drain the issue queue. In the mean time, we can see that the
instructions fetched for the second warp are filling the issue queue the same way as
for the first warp.
To make sure we can hold all of the fetched non-issued instructions the issue
queues should have the same number of slots as there are number of pipeline stages
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Design
Figure 5.3. Pipeline diagram of warp scheduling. The x-axis denotes time in clock cycles,
while the y-axis corresponds to a pipeline stage.
Each cell in the grid above W0 shows
which program code instruction occupies the corresponding pipeline stage at a given clock
cycle and for which warp. For instance, i1w2 denotes the first instruction for the second warp.
The cells corresponding to W0 and W1 show the state of the issue queues at a given clock
cycle. The cells corresponding to row SW denote the warp selected by the warp scheduler
for a given clock cycle.
leading up to the queues. Otherwise, there a risk of loosing issued instructions.
Due to the concurrent execution of multiple warps, the SM pipeline is subject to a
potential structural hazard in the ISS stage. The hazard occurs when an instruction
from one warp occupies a memory pipeline, and another warp needs to issue its
instruction to the same pipeline. The memory pipeline can process a single memory
instruction at a time (often requiring multiple clock cycles to process it), and if any
other warp has memory instruction waiting at the beginning of their issue queue,
the warp scheduler must stall issuing other memory instructions until the instruction
currently occupying the memory pipeline is finished. This hazard is addressed by
informing the warp scheduler if any warp currently occupies the memory pipeline,
and if so, the warp scheduler then skips warps with memory instructions at the front
of their issue queue.
5.2.3
Back-end
The back-end of the SM’s pipeline contains the following logical pipeline stages: OF,
EX, and WB. The OF stage fetches the operands from the VRF, the EX executes
the instructions, and the WB writes the EX stage’s results to the VRF.
The OF stage contains the VRF and logic for forwarding the instructions and
data to two parallel pipelines.
The VRF, described in more detail in Subsection
5.2.4, can sustain three vector operand reads and a single vector write in every clock
cycle. VRF implementation allows the pipeline to avoid complex arbitration logic for
fetching operands or delaying the pipeline upon fetching the operands. To respect the
SRAM access latency, the forwarding of instruction, warp ID, and thread mask to the
==PAGE:55==
5.2 SM Micro-Architecture
45
consecutive pipeline stages is delayed to meet the latency of SRAM read operation.
Additionally, the OF stage has access to the predicate register file. If the instruction
is predicated, the OF will fetch the corresponding predicate register and combine
it with the active thread mask (bitwise and between the active thread mask and
predicate register value). Since the predicate value is evaluated in the ALU pipeline,
the predicate result is forwarded to the OF state to avoid unnecessary delays between
predicated instructions and CMP instructions. When the operands are ready for the
instruction, the OF stage contains demultiplexing logic that forwards the instruction
to either the ALU or memory stage. If the ALU stage should execute the instruction,
the ALU stage gets the instruction along with its operands, while the memory stage
gets an NOP and vice versa.
The Ex stage consists of two parallel pipeline stages (function units): Memory
Stage (MEM) and ALU Stage (ALU). This effectively allows warps performing com-
pute phases to overlap with those performing access phases. The ALU stage contains
the same number of SIMD lanes as the warp size, and the MEM stage contains the
same number of LD/ST units (LSUs) as the warp size. Both stages accept an instruc-
tion, combined thread mask (computed by the OF stage), warp ID, and the operands
of the instruction from the OF stage.
The ALU stage is responsible for processing arithmetic instructions and compari-
son instructions. Each SIMD lane in this stage consists of an ALU, a Multiplier, and
a Multiplier (MAD) unit. The ALU, Multiplier, and the MAD unit operate on two
scalar operands (vector operand elements). The three computation units are sepa-
rated in each lane to ensure that the latency of multiplication does not contribute to
the critical path when not needed. The SIMD lane control is responsible for choos-
ing the correct SIMD lane operation that all SIMD lanes should perform and the
operands on which each lane should operate. Each SIMD lane can accept the fol-
lowing operands: first source operand, second source operand, third source operand,
immediate, and an SRF register. The results of each SIMD lane are forwarded to the
shared writeback stage.
The SIMD lane control orchestrates the execution of different arithmetic instruc-
tions. When aMAD instruction arrives at the ALU stage, the control tells each lane to
pass all three scalar operands to the MAD unit and to take the MAD unit output as
the lanes output. When a MUL arrives at the ALU stage, the two first source operands
are passed to the Multiplier, and the output of each SIMD lane is the output of the
Multiplier. Otherwise, for other arithmetic operations, the control will set an ALU
operand for all the lanes and choose the output of the ALU. Additionally, the ALU
stage contains an SRF that holds values for computing thread indexes. When a LDS
instruction is encountered, the ALU control orders each SIMD lane to forward the
value of the selected SRF register. The compare instruction, CMP, is evaluated by
the ALU lanes by performing a subtraction between two operands and assessing the
negative, positive, zero outputs of each lane. The NZP field contained in the CPM
instruction is combined with the negative, positive, zero outputs to evaluate the
predicate value of each SIMD lane. ALU stage forwards the results of the comparison
to the predicate register file.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Design
The MEM stage processes the LD and ST instructions. The MEM stage consists
of multiple Load/Store Units (LSUs) that process the load and store instruction
individually for each thread in a warp—the LSUs interface with the data cache, which
in turn interfaces with the global memory. The combined thread mask received from
the OF stage disables LSUs for inactive threads. When the MEM stage receives a
memory instruction, it informs the warp scheduler that it is occupied to prevent new
instructions from entering the stage. The MEM stage holds the instruction and the
operands necessary for executing the memory operation until all LSUs have processed
the memory request. When all LSUs have finished, the memory stage is ready for a
new instruction, the result is forwarded to the WB stage, and the warp scheduler is
informed that the MEM stage is free.
The WB stage contains a large pipeline register shared by the ALU and MEM
stages and multiplexing logic that chooses between forwarding the results of either the
ALU or MEM stages to the VRF. Due to the concurrent execution of warps, another
structural hazard occurs at the WB stage. The hazard stems from MEM and ALU
stages sharing a single VRF write port. If the concurrent stages attempt to write
their results at the same clock cycle, the shared writeback stage can only forward a
single result to the VRF. To allow both stages to write their results to the VRF, the
WB stage contains a delay register that delays the results of the ALU stage by one
clock cycle to allow the MEM stage to store its results instead. It then continues
taking the results from the delay register until a pipeline bubble is encountered in the
ALU delay register. Then, it switches back to writing the non-delayed ALU results.
The WB stage always prioritizes storing the results of the MEM stage over the ALU
stage.
If both stages attempt to write their results at the same time again, the process
repeats. The assumption is that if a memory instruction is issued, then a bubble will
be pushed by the OF stage to the ALU stage. This occurs because only a single in-
struction can reside in the OF stage, which means that if one stage gets an instruction
from the OF stage, the other stage must receive a bubble. This unintentional pipeline
bubble can be utilized to allow the MEM stage to store its results in the VRF. The
WB stage stores the results in the VRF file by forwarding the results along with the
received thread mask to the OF stage (the thread mask is used to disable inactive
threads’ results).
5.2.4
Vector Register File
The VRF used in the proposed SM is implemented as four single-ported (1R1W)
banks of SRAM memory; see Figure 5.4. This organization of VRF improves energy
eﬀiciency and reduces design area. The four-bank VRF allows fetching up to three
vector operands in each clock cycle as long as each operand resides in a separate
bank. As a safety measure, a fixed-priority arbiter grants read access to each bank
for a single read address at a time. If multiple read addresses point to the same bank,
==PAGE:57==
5.2 SM Micro-Architecture
47
the arbiter will grant access to read data to the first address only (from read address
one to read address three).
Figure 5.4. The design of the VRF contained in the proposed SM.
The ability of the VRF to guarantee time-predictable vector operand access re-
lies on the banking scheme implemented by the VRF. To ensure a low WCET while
avoiding bank conflicts, we implemented the register number banking scheme pro-
posed by Spliet [60].
The bank address of each register is based on the register
number (bankAddress = registerNumber mod 4). As long as each instruction queries
operands that reside in different banks, bank conflicts can be avoided at no cost to
time-predictability. For each bank, every eight consecutive entries store register data
for individual warps; see Figure 5.5.
The addresses for reading and writing vetor operands to and from the VRF com-
prise warp ID and the vector register number. Therefore, the lower 5 bits of a read-
/write address correspond to the vector register number, and the remaining upper
bits correspond to the warp ID. The lower two bits of a read address are used to
select the correct bank, the next 3 bits are used to select the register entry in the
bank, and the remaining bits are used as the address offset to ensure data is read for
the correct warp. Each bank in the VRF has warpCount × 8 entries, and each entry
is warpSize × 32 bits wide.
The VRF can accept reading and writing simultaneously due to the use of 1R1W
memory banks. When a write is issued to the VRF, the write data and address are
forwarded to each bank, except that a demultiplexer enables the correct bank for
writing (demux output depends on the write address). Additionally, each memory
bank accepts a write mask that specifies which threads should commit their results
to the VRF.
Such a VRF implementation guarantees that the latency of fetching operands for
every instruction is no greater than one clock cycle. To provide predictable vector
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Design
Figure 5.5. Banking scheme used in the proposed VRF. The VRF uses a banking scheme
in which the vector register values for a single warp are stored in each bank’s every eight
consecutive entries.
register accesses, the VRF relies on register renaming to avoid potential bank conflicts.
Therefore, the SM depends on the compiler/programmer to devise clever register
renaming strategies to avoid bank conflicts. When compiling/writing program code,
the compiler/programmer must avoid using vector operands for instructions that
reside in the same bank; for example, if we have an ADD instruction, then the two
source operands cannot be v4 and v8; however v4 and v5 are totally fine. In general,
the VRF bank conflicts can be avoided as long as the rule: rs1 mod 4 ̸= rs2 ̸= rs3,
holds for every instruction in the program code.
5.3
Implementation
The proposed design is implemented in Chisel. The Chisel code encapsulates the
RTL description of the proposed SM in a single fully configurable entity. The SM
can support varying numbers of warps, warp sizes, and blocks (only for defining block
address length). The code implements the previously described RTL design with a
few additional changes:
• Instead of implementing instruction and data caches, the SM interfaces with
two synchronous memories to access instructions and program data. These two
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Implementation
49
memories are synthesized to block RAM and feature a single-cycle delay for
reading data. Both memories have a configurable length and consist of entries
that are 32-bits wide. The SM entity described in Chisel allows the initialization
of instruction and data memories from hexadecimal files during compilation to
upload program data and code to the SM.
• The Chisel code describes the VRF as a single entity consisting of multiple
memory banks and arbitration logic. The memory banks are implemented as
separate synchronous-read and synchronous-write memories mapped by the syn-
thesis tool to on-chip block RAM. These memories feature a single-cycle delay
when reading the data. Therefore, to ensure the correct bank’s data is routed
to the right output port, the VRF’s input read addresses are placed in registers
to decide which read port should read which bank’s output when the data is
available from the memory banks.
• Due to the single-cycle delay in reading the data from instruction memory and
VRF banks, the OF and IF stages feature one additional pipeline stage to hide
the memory latency. Therefore, the Chisel code describes the SM as a pipeline
comprising eight physical pipeline stages.
• An arbitration mechanism is implemented to allow the multiple LSUs to access
the data memory since the SM’s pipeline has access to a single synchronous data
memory whose data bus is 32 bits. Considering that the warp size is usually
greater than one, any memory operation would have to perform multiple smaller
memory operations per thread (fetch/store a single vector element); therefore,
numerous LSUs would attempt to read data from memory simultaneously. Thus,
handshaking between LSU units and memory access arbiter (implemented as
fixed priority arbiter) is used to ensure the LSU executes memory operations
in an orderly fashion.
Because of the arbitration mechanism, each memory
operation features a 4 Clock Cycle (CC) initialization latency (due to the FSM
featured in the arbitration logic) and 3 CC latency per LSU.
• Since all except one register in the SRF are constants, the SRF file is primarily
implemented as several constants connected to the SIMD lanes in the ALU
(block width, warp size, thread ID, and warp ID remain constant for every
block execution).
The only exception is the block ID, which is stored in a
register that the warp scheduler initializes every time it receives a start signal
from the block scheduler.
The block ID is obtained as part of the data in
the read/valid handshake between the warp scheduler and the block scheduler.
When LDS instruction is encountered, the SIMD lane control chooses one of the
constants as an operand to the SIMD lane.
We provide the Chisel code for the time-predictable SM in an open-source at:
https://github.com/ArijusGrotuzas/wcet-gpu.
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
To assess the feasibility of applying the proposed SM in safety-critical real-time sys-
tems, some guarantees about its performance and time predictability must be pro-
vided.
Therefore, this chapter presents the experimental setup, evaluation of the
proposed SM’s performance, and WCET analysis of an example program running on
the SM.
6.1
Experimental Setup
To assess the performance of the SM, the design was synthesized for the DE2-115
board, which contains a Cyclone IV FPGA [65]. A top-level entity was created to
synthesize the SM for the development board. The top-level entity contains the SM,
separate instruction and data memories, a cycle counter, debounce logic for input
switches and a UART module. Instead of using caches, the SM directly interfaces
with two separate memories: one for instructions and one for data. During synthesis,
these memories are initialized with hexadecimal files to upload the program code and
data to the SM. The synthesized design clock input was connected to the onboard 50
Mhz clock signal.
The output of the cycle counter is connected to 18 onboard LEDs. The binary
output of the cycle counter can be observed to note the execution time of bench-
marks. 8 onboard switches are used to set the data sent from the block scheduler
to the SM’s warp scheduler, specifically the block ID and the number of valid warps.
Before assigning the input of these switches to the warp scheduler, the top-level entity
debounces the switch signals. Additionally, one of the push buttons featured on the
development board is connected to the valid port of the valid/ready interface shared
between the warp scheduler and an envisioned block scheduler (the four push buttons
featured on the DE2-115 development board are debounced).
The UART module featured in the top-level entity allows for assessing whether
the program outputs are correct or not.
A push button connected to the UART
module indicates when the data should be transmitted to the receiver. The UART
module dumps all the data memory contents over a serial communication medium.
The received data memory contents can be used to assess the outputs of the executed
kernel code against the expected kernel results.
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Evaluation
6.2
Performance
Three benchmarks were written to assess the performance of the proposed SM; see
Listings B.1, B.2 and B.3. Each benchmark contains a varying number of memory
instructions compared to arithmetic instructions; see Table 6.1. The first benchmark
Saxpy, a single precision version of daxpy operation, reads two numbers from two
arrays, computes a product of the first number and a constant, and adds the last
number to the product.
The second benchmark Hamming computes the hamming
weight of every number contained in the array.
The third benchmark Fibonacci
computes the ith number in the Fibonacci sequence for every ith thread.
Benchmark
# Mem.
# Arith.
Ratio of Mem. to Arith.
Saxpy
3
8
0.375
Hamming
2
9
0.222
Fibonacci
1
9
0.111
Table 6.1. Number of memory and arithmetic instructions featured in each benchmark. In-
structions for calculating the global thread indexes are excluded, as well as BR and CMP
instructions.
Each benchmark features a different degree of per-thread loop behavior. Out of the
three benchmarks, the Fibonacci benchmark contains the least memory instructions
and exhibits the longest looping behavior.
The loop behavior in the Fibonacci
depends on the thread index; therefore, the execution time of a single warp for this
benchmark depends on the highest thread index in the warp (max{threadIdx0, . . . ,
threadIdxn}, where n = |warp|). The loop behavior of Hamming depends only on
the binary string for which the hamming weight is computed. The execution time of
Saxpy is mainly bound by the memory instruction latency since it features no loops
in the kernel code.
To assess the performance of the SM, we ran the three benchmarks for a single
block, whose size was 256 threads (8 warps × 32 threads). Additionally, each bench-
mark contains at least a single memory instruction to store the computation results.
The results of the computation are stored in the data memory of the SM. After ex-
ecuting the kernel, the memory contents are dumped through a UART to assess if
the benchmarks were executed correctly. Needless to say, each benchmark produced
correct results when executed on the synthesized design of SM. When measuring the
execution times for each benchmark, it was observed that measured execution times
never varied for the same kernel as long as the number of active warps was the same.
Therefore, when comparing the results, a single observation of the execution time of
each kernel is presented since there are no variations between different executions of
the same kernel (as long as the number of valid warps is the same).
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Performance
53
The instruction and data memories were initialized with hexadecimal data files
when synthesizing the SM’s design to upload benchmark code and data. For each test
case, the instruction memory was initialized with the benchmark’s machine code, and
the data memory was initialized with data from two test arrays. The two test arrays
consisted of sequentially increasing numbers from 0 to 255, and the starting address
of the first array was memory address 0, while the last array’s starting address was
the first array’s end address + 1. Both arrays had lengths equivalent to the block
size (256), meaning the first 512 entries in the data memory were initialized before
executing each benchmark. The Saxpy benchmark is the only one that uses both
test arrays, while Hamming only used the first test array, and the Fibonacci did not
use either. For each test, the synthesized design was flashed onto the FPGA, and
the number of active warps was asserted through 8 onboard switches connected to
the top-level entity. The execution of each kernel was initialized by asserting the
valid signal through a push button. The execution time was noted for each test case
by assessing the binary sequence highlighted by the onboard LEDs connected to the
output of the cycle counter.
Out of all benchmarks, the Fibonacci obtained the longest execution time, while
Hamming obtained the lowest execution time; see Figure 6.1. The staggering execution
time of Fibonacci benchmark compared to the other two benchmarks can be primar-
ily attributed to the inherently long looping behavior of the benchmark. Since there
are 256 threads in the block, one of the warps had to perform 256 iterations of a loop
to compute the 256th number of the Fibonacci sequence. Each iteration of the loop
in the assembly code of Fibonacci has six instructions, which means that a single
warp had to execute 1536 instructions to accommodate the longest loop. On the other
hand, the short execution time of the Hamming benchmark can be attributed to the
fact that the benchmark features only two memory instructions, and when executed,
it did not need to perform that many iterations of a loop. For instance, even for the
longest bit-string in the data array, it had to execute only eight iterations of a loop
(i.e., 256 = 11111111).
Even though memory instructions have a long execution latency (compared to
arithmetic instructions) in the SM’s pipeline, the impact of these instructions on per-
formance is negligible if the kernel needs to perform many iterations of a loop (i.e., if
the number of arithmetic operations is significantly higher than memory operations).
However, if the ratio of memory instructions to arithmetic instructions is relatively
high, then it might become diﬀicult for the SM to hide the latency of memory instruc-
tions. Therefore, in the case of the measured execution time of Saxpy benchmark,
the number of arithmetic instructions performed was insuﬀicient to hide the laten-
cies of the three memory access operations. On the other hand, Hamming benchmark
achieves the lowest execution time since only two memory operations are performed
in total, with a low number of loop iterations per thread.
Additionally, the effect of the number of parallel SIMD lanes on the SM’s per-
formance was assessed. The three previously introduced benchmarks were executed
with the following combinations of active warps and warp size: 8 warps and 8 threads
per warp, 4 warps and 16 threads per warp, and 2 warps and 32 threads per warp. It
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Evaluation
Figure 6.1. Measured execution times of the three benchmarks:
Saxpy, Fibonacci and
Hamming. Given a 50 Mhz clock signal, the execution times in seconds of each benchmark
are: Saxpy - 46.74 µs; Fibonacci - 142 µs; Hamming - 15.66 µs.
is important to note that each of the three combinations features the same number
of threads per block - 64 threads. For all three benchmarks, having 32 thread-wide
warps resulted in the lowest execution times, while having 8 thread-wide warps re-
sulted in the longest execution times; see Figure 6.2. Therefore, the results of the test
support the claim that having more SIMD lanes in parallel can significantly increase
the performance of SM.
The results show that the Fibonacci benchmark had the longest execution time
for all three groups of warp and thread configurations. Even when the Fibonacci
benchmark was run with 32 threads per warp, the execution time was only slightly
shorter than the execution time of Saxpy with 8 warps and 8 threads and still more
significant than the execution time of Hamming with 8 warps and 8 threads. The long
execution times of the Fibonacci benchmark can be attributed, just as before, to the
fact that this benchmark needs to perform a greater amount of arithmetic instructions
than the other two benchmarks due to the loop iterations it needs to perform.
The overall performance increase is smaller when switching between 16 and 32
threads per warp than when switching between 8 and 16 threads per warp. We suspect
the reason why 32 threads do not give such a significant performance improvement
over 16 threads as 16 over 8 do is because the decrease between warps is much
smaller between 16 and 32 thread groups compared to 8 and 16 thread groups (4
warp difference between 8 and 16 thread groups, while only 2 warp difference between
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Performance
55
Figure 6.2.
Measured execution times of the three benchmarks, Saxpy, Fibonacci and
Hamming, for three different combinations of active warps and warp size. Given a 50 Mhz
clock signal, the execution times in seconds of each benchmark for all groups are: Saxpy -
15.2 µs, 6.7 µs, 5.98 µs; Fibonacci - 37.96 µs, 21.72 µs, 13.96 µs; Hamming - 12.16 µs, 9.08
µs, 8.12 µs.
the 16 and 32 thread groups). Having more warps means there will be a need to
issue more memory operations, and even though having fewer threads per warp will
result in shorter memory operation execution times, it is more favorable to dispatch
larger memory operations to avoid the overhead of initializing memory operations.
Additionally, we suspect that having more warps will result in higher overhead for
executing memory operations as the likelihood of multiple warps having a memory
instruction waiting at the issue queues is higher, which can result in the warp scheduler
stalling the entire pipeline.
What’s also interesting to note is that when run with 4 warps and 16 threads and 2
warps and 32 threads, the Saxpy benchmark results in lower execution times compared
to Hamming when run with the same warp and thread configurations. Earlier, when the
two benchmarks were executed with 8 warps and 32 threads, Saxpy had significantly
higher execution time than Hamming did. We believe this is because of the initial
overhead of performing memory operations, which increases with the number of warps,
as described earlier. Each memory operation performed by the SM for a single warp
has an initial overhead of a few clock cycles, so if the warp size is bigger and fewer
warps need to perform memory operations, the SM is less likely to stall.
The proposed SM achieves higher performance when executing programs that
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Evaluation
feature a low ratio of memory to arithmetic instructions. Additionally, to achieve
higher throughput, it is favorable to feature larger warp sizes to avoid warp-switching
delays (when multiple warps must perform memory operations simultaneously). If
arithmetic instructions cannot hide the latency of the memory instructions, then the
memory instructions become the main bottleneck. It is hard to say more about the
SM’s performance unless its performance is assessed against other SMs. However,
we believe there is reason to suspect that the ACET of the proposed SM is lower
than that of different designs since the design of the SM was primarily motivated by
achieving low WCET, which often comes at the cost of reduced ACET.
6.3
WCET Analysis
To prove that the proposed SM is time-predictable, it is necessary to prove that a
static WCET analysis can be easily carried out for the SM. Since the proposed SM
does not have a compiler, nor is any available static analysis tool compatible with the
proposed SM, a manual computation of a WCET bound is carried out. The manual
analysis consist of constructing a program’s structural representation and enriching it
with the timing model of the SM. We chose a program that features multiple execution
paths as a program under analysis; see Subfigure 6.3b.
(a) CFG of the program under analysis. Note
that this is a CFG for a single thread in a
warp.
(b) Program under analysis in C.
Figure 6.3. Structural representation of a program under analysis for manual static WCET
analysis.
A CFG was constructed to represent the structure of the program under analysis.
The CFG highlights the longest possible execution path and the shortest possible
==PAGE:67==
6.3 WCET Analysis
57
execution path through the program; see Subfigure 6.3a. From the CFG we can see
that the longest execution path is BB1 →BB2 →BB3 →BB4 →BB6 and shortest
possible execution path is BB1 →BB5 →BB6. However, it is essential to note that the
constructed CFG shows only the execution paths for a single thread in isolation. In
the SIMT execution model, all diverging paths are serialized, and the results of the
threads that do not take specific paths are discarded. Therefore, the longest (and only)
execution path for a single warp becomes BB1 →BB2 →BB3 →BB4 →BB5 →BB6.
Therefore, to derive the WCET of a single warp, we need to add the individual WCETs
of each basic block of the program. To derive the WCET of the entire program, we
also need to consider the schedule of warps and their WCETs.
In the proposed SM, the execution latency of a memory operation depends on
the number of active threads in a warp. The fewer threads performing a memory
operation, the lower the memory operation latency will be. If we know the number of
threads per warp, we can always guarantee that a memory operation will never have
a longer latency than the latency of the same operation with all active threads. In
the proposed SM, a memory instruction will travel through the IF, ID, ISS, and OF
stages to arrive at the memory pipeline, where it will take multiple clock cycles to be
processed. Due to the current implementation of SM featuring a single data memory
whose data bus width is equivalent to the vector register element width, 32 bits, an
arbitration mechanism is used to arbitrate access to memory for each LSU. Therefore,
a single memory operation will have an initial 4 CC (due to FSM initialization)
overhead and 3 CC latency for every LSU (due to handshaking between LSU and
the arbitration mechanism). Other instructions, such as arithmetic, comparison, and
branch instructions, have a constant latency—all other instructions (except branch
instructions since they are processed in the second stage of IF) will be processed by
all pipeline stages in seven clock cycles.
The WCET for the entire program occurs when all the warps’ threads need to
execute the longest execution path.
Therefore, in the case of the program under
analysis, all the warps’ threads would have to execute the BB6 (all threads are enabled
for this basic block in the warp), which features a long-latency instruction (memory
operation) whose latency can vary based on the number of active threads. We can
set the input for the program under analysis such that each thread has to execute
the BB6, which would give rise to WCET. For the program under analysis, the input
that would give rise to WCET would contain the data array initialized with all values
greater than 30.
To derive the WCET estimate of a program running on the proposed SM, we need
to know the schedule of the warps (that will occur when executing the program), the
number of active warps, and the latency of each compute/access phase. Since the
unified warp scheduler, introduced earlier, guarantees to obey the intended scheduling
policy, and if we assume that memory operations have a constant execution latency (or
at least low variation in execution times), we can derive the warp schedule statically
using the described behavior of the warp scheduler. To derive the WCET estimate
for the program under analysis, we assume that only 2 warps are active and each
warp only has 4 threads. We can then look at the assembled code and separate it into
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Evaluation
sections of compute and access phases; see Listing B.4. The compute phase would
consist of a segment of the assembly code that does not feature memory operations.
The access phase would consist of a single memory operation of the assembly code
(since a single memory operation will reside for multiple clock cycles in the memory
stage). We can derive the WCET for each phase featured in the program and use
these WCETs and the derived schedule of warps to estimate the upper bound for
WCET for the entire program; see Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4. The imagined warp schedule of the program under analysis. The schedule consists
of two schedules for two independent warps (sequences of access and compute phases). The
schedule is derived for 2 warps of 4 threads in size. Each block corresponds to an access/-
compute phase and is named after the corresponding compute or access phase. For instance,
C1 corresponds to compute phase 1, and ST corresponds to the ST instruction featured in
the assembly code. Additionally, arrows between the two schedules indicate the transfer of
control between the two warps.
By looking at the assembled code, we can derive three compute and two access
phases; see Listing B.5. We can then derive the WCET for each phase: Compute
phase 1 - 12 clock cycles (CC), Compute phase 2 - 5 CC, Compute phase 3 - 4 CC,
and each access phase - 15 CC. Additionally, it takes 7 CC to fill up the pipeline.
Therefore, the compute phase 1 for both warps will be delayed by an additional 7 CC.
The warp scheduler will switch between the two active warps when one of the warps
is set as pending, which occurs after issuing a memory operation. Additionally, we
need to account for some delays inherent in the pipeline that are caused by how the
warps are scheduled.
When one warp is ready to issue a memory operation before the other warp frees
up the memory stage, there will be a 2 CC delay between the access phases of two
warps. This happens because the OF and ISS stages stall the pipeline when waiting for
memory resources to free up, thus causing two bubbles to propagate through the back-
end. For instance, the warp that has issued the memory operation first is set pending
until it finishes, and the other warp will be stalled if it has a memory operation at
the head of its instruction queue. The bubbles travel through the pipeline, causing
a 2 CC delay between two warps in consecutive access phases. The same situation
occurs for any number of warps if all warps need to issue memory instructions and
==PAGE:69==
6.3 WCET Analysis
59
the memory stage is currently occupied. The same 2 CC delay would occur between
the access and compute phases of the same warp if there were no other instructions to
issue while waiting for the memory stage to free up (mainly because all other warps
had finished their execution). Additionally, a two CC delay will occur at the end of
the schedule to allow the FSM of the warp scheduler to transition to the idle state,
and 1 CC delay will occur between issuing one warps memory operation and then
switching to another warp and issuing its arithmetic instruction.
By looking at the warp schedule enriched with the WCETs of each compute/access
phase, we can estimate the possible WCET of the entire program. Therefore, the
WCET of the program under analysis, when executed with a block size of 8 (2 warps×
4 threads), is 95 CC. To ensure that the exact WCET is bounded from above by the
estimate, we can introduce some uncertainty in the estimate and claim that the
WCET of the program under analysis will never be greater than 105 CC. We can
notice from the schedule that there are fewer delays when switching between warps
when one warps compute phase takes longer to process than the other warps access
phase (the lantency of a memory operation can be hidden by the latency of arithmetic
operations)
The program under analysis was assembled to machine code and executed on
the SM with a block size of 8. The input data array consisted of elements equal to
35. The observed time of the program was 96 CC; therefore, we can claim that the
estimated WCET bound accurately estimated the WCET. Consequently, we can claim
that we achieved the goal of creating a time-predictable SM. The same procedure
discussed in this Subsection can be followed to assess the WCET of a program running
on the proposed SM for any number of warps. However, if the program contains
loop behavior, we can take the longest loop execution time of any thread within the
warp for each warp’s loop execution time (due to the earlier introduced SM’s loop
implementation).
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this project, we attempted to motivate further the need to build safety-compliant
GPU architectures to accelerate data-parallel algorithms executed on safety-critical
systems. Furthermore, we used this motivation to assess the current threats to time-
predictable GPU architectures imposed by the design of contemporary GPUs. The
conclusions drawn from evaluating design features that hamper the time-predictability
in COTS GPUs allowed us to design a time-predictable GPU core for safety-critical
systems.
We successfully pinpointed the primary sources of timing variation in modern
GPU design. However, many other GPU components remain whose interplay can
significantly impact execution time variations that were not considered in this project.
For instance, CPU to GPU offloading plays a major role in execution time variations
[66]. As such, it is necessary to estimate the WCET of the offloading to estimate the
WCET of programs that use GPUs to accelerate certain parts of program code.
To derive a time-predictable SM design we applied literature considerations for
time-predictable GPU architectures.
Specifically, we adopted approaches of time-
predictable warp scheduling [54], time-predictable VRF organization [60], and by
moving some of the instruction scheduling logic into the compiler level.
While we successfully designed an SM capable of executing configurable block
sizes, the design was primarily concerned with building a basis for time-predictable
GPU architecture, and many typical SM features were not considered. Therefore, the
current design of the SM leaves a lot to be desired for commercial real-time systems.
For instance, the SM implements a relatively small ISA, features only integer arith-
metic lanes, and does not support deeply nested diverging execution paths. Usual
SIMD architectures feature many more arithmetic instructions of different data types,
control flow instructions, and transcendental instructions [67]. To support these in-
structions, typical SMs feature separate SIMD lanes for performing floating point
arithmetic and transcendental operations, such as sine and reciprocal [15].
Addi-
tionally, the four predicate registers in the SM limit the possible number of nested
conditional execution paths, and instead, a stack-based control flow would be more
beneficial for the SM [21]. Addressing these issues would improve the feasibility of
applying the SM to accelerating safety-critical real-time systems.
In this project, we limited ourselves to designing a time-predictable SM only;
however, to better evaluate the feasibility of time-predictable GPU computing for
real-time systems, it would be beneficial to integrate this design into a larger system,
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Conclusion
such as an entire GPU. Scaling our current design to a GPU level would necessitate
the introduction of multiple proposed SMs, along with additional system components
like a memory interconnect and an SDRAM controller. These components must also
be time-predictable to ensure the overall GPU platform maintains time predictability.
Furthermore, the ACET of the current SM design could be enhanced by incorporating
separate instruction and data caches without compromising time predictability.
Different benchmarks were developed to evaluate the proposed SM performance.
However, these benchmarks do not provide significant insights into the SM’s overall
performance or other important design characteristics, such as energy eﬀiciency or
circuit area. The performance tests indicated that using wider warps and consistently
issuing multiple arithmetic instructions can enhance the SM’s performance. However,
it is diﬀicult to make definitive statements about its performance without comparing
the design to alternatives.
Given that many safety-critical real-time systems operate on energy-constrained
devices, evaluating the SM’s energy eﬀiciency is essential to determine its suitability
for these hardware platforms. Additionally, GPU devices typically have large chip
areas due to their high degree of thread-level parallelism requirement. This can pose
challenges for area-constrained devices commonly used in real-time systems. There-
fore, assessing the area occupancy of the SM design is necessary.
We evaluated the feasibility of applying static timing analysis methods to the pro-
posed SM (Streaming Model). The manual approach to static analysis required us
to construct a different structural representation of the program being analyzed com-
pared to what is typically used in static analysis tools. This unique representation is
necessary due to the fundamentally different execution model of GPUs in contrast to
CPUs. After enhancing the representation with the timing model of the SM, we suc-
cessfully estimated the Worst-Case Execution Time (WCET) of an example program.
This ability to conduct manual static analysis demonstrates that the proposed SM
is time-predictable, suggesting that potential static analysis tools can be adapted to
support it.
Overall, this project successfully managed to design a time-predictable GPU core,
albeit with some implications, such as assessing the performance of the SM in isola-
tion and only considering fixed latency memory accesses. While it is hard to say much
about the performance of the proposed SM without comparing its performance to con-
temporary SM performance, we can claim that the SM can achieve high throughput
by supporting wide warps and executing programs that strike a great balance between
arithmetic and memory operations to hide the memory operation latency. By proving
that a manual static analysis can provide an accurate WCET estimate, we can claim
that the SM is time-predictable. Therefore, the proposed SM can lay the foundation
for future work to build fully functional time-predictable GPU architectures.
==PAGE:73==
7.1 Future Work
63
7.1
Future Work
Since the design of the proposed SM is not entirely viable for many real safety-critical
applications, we highlight a few out of many possible steps for future work:
• The currently implemented ISA is not fully complete - it lacks instructions fea-
tured by many other COTS SMs, such as additional arithmetic instructions,
instructions for transcendental operations, and advanced control flow instruc-
tions. The current ISA supported by the proposed time-predictable SM only
implements 10 arithmetic instructions and even small processor architectures
such as RISC-V support many more arithmetic instructions [64].
Transcen-
dental operations, such as sine, cosine, and reciprocals, are standard in many
data-parallel algorithms and could be added to the SM to improve throughput.
Adding these functions would require adding an SFU to the SM. Additionally,
the control flow in the current ISA is implemented by combining comparison
instruction with branch instruction and instruction predication. However, mod-
ern GPUs use stack-based control flow, which requires specific instructions for
controlling the stack of each warp. Such control flow can be easily implemented
with as little as three instructions [68].
• The current instruction encoding for the SM leaves many bits in the instruction
word unused; see Figure A.1. A better utilization of unused bit-fields in the
current ISA could be achieved by introducing more instructions to the ISA
and adding additional function fields to similar instructions, just as in RISC-V
ISA [64].
• The current SM design’s control flow leaves much to be desired.
Currently,
predication is the only option for executing diverging paths, and the four pred-
icate registers are not enough to support deeply nested branches.
Simple
IF/THEN/ELSE statements require using one predicate register for the IF part
while the complement of this predicate for the ELSE part; therefore, in the cur-
rent design, a single IF/THEN/ELSE statement would occupy two out of three
available predicate registers.
Modern GPUs use per-warp maintained SIMT
stacks, which the compiler is responsible for controlling [68]. The IF could be
easily fitted with a per-warp SIMT stack, and the stack manipulation instruc-
tions could also be resolved in the IF stage.
This is, however, not a direct
suggestion to exchange instruction predication with stack-based control flow,
but rather to complement it.
• The current SM design does not consider on-chip memory systems. COTS GPU
cores often feature compiler-controlled shared memory and separate data and
instruction caches. Since evidence supports that single-level cache systems can
be used in time-predictable architectures [29], the SM’s performance could be
improved through data and instruction caches. Additionally, some algorithms
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Conclusion
running on GPUs might benefit from sharing data between threads in a single
thread block. Alternatively, to support data caching and inter-warp commu-
nication, a software-controlled scratchpad memory can be used to implement
shared memory [29].
• Many real-time systems that could benefit from GPU acceleration execute com-
puter vision or AI algorithms. These algorithms often rely on floating-point
arithmetic to provide accurate results. To enable the porting of such algorithms
on the proposed SM, SIMD lanes dedicated to floating point arithmetic need to
be introduced. For instance, COTS GPU cores feature many mixed-precision
floating point arithmetic units [69].
• Support for graphics rendering is not so crucial for real-time systems, so adding
this functionality to the SM might not be of any real benefit. However, texture
filtering units and texture caches would greatly help accelerate graphics process-
ing if needed. The texture units could implement linear and bilinear filtering of
textures.
• Comparing the SM’s performance against alternative designs is necessary to
provide a more trustworthy assessment. One way to do so would be to port com-
mon industry benchmarks for the proposed SM, comparing the execution time
against other SM designs such as Vortex [13]. Porting standard benchmarks for
assessing GPU performance would require extending the ISA to support some
of the instructions present in the benchmarks.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
Instruction Encoding
Figure A.1. Encoding of instructions for the SM’s ISA.
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Assembly Code
1 // SAXPY
2
3 lds x1, s0
// thread id
4 lds x2, s1
// warp id
5 lds x3, s3
// warp width
6 lds x5, s4
// block width
7 lds x6, s2
// block id
8
9 mad x4, x3, x2, x1
// x4 = (warpWidth * warpID) + threadID
10
// = (local thread ID)
11
12 addi x9, x0, 0
// x base address
13 addi x10, x0, 256
// y base address
14
15 mad x7, x5, x6, x4
// x7 = (blockWidth * blockID) + localThreadId
16
// = (global thread ID)
17
18 addi x8, x0, 512
// output base address
19 addi x17, x0, 5
// load constant a = 5
20
21 add x12, x9, x7
// addr(X[i]) = baseX + i
22 add x13, x10, x7
// addr(Y[i]) = baseY + i
23 add x21, x8, x7
// addr(output[i]) = baseOutput + i
24
25 ld x18, x12
// load X[i] from global memory
26 ld x19, x13
// load Y[i] from global memory
27
28 mad x20, x17, x18, x19
// a * X[i] + Y[i]
29 nop
30 nop
31
32 st x21, x20
// store output[i] to global memory
33 ret
Listing B.1. Saxpy benchmark assembly code.
1 // Compute fibonacci sequence
2
3 lds x1, s0
// thread id
4 lds x2, s1
// warp id
5 lds x3, s3
// warp width
6 lds x5, s4
// block width
==PAGE:78==
68
Appendix B Assembly Code
7 lds x6, s2
// block id
8
9 mad x4, x3, x2, x1
// x4 = (warpWidth * warpID) + threadID
10
// = (local thread ID)
11
12 addi x9, x0, 0
// i = 0
13 addi x10, x0, 512
// output array base address
14
15 mad x7, x5, x6, x4
// x7 = (blockWidth * blockID) + localThreadId
16
// = (global thread ID)
17
18 addi x13, x0, 0
// a = 0
19 addi x14, x0, 1
// b = 1
20 add x16, x10, x7
// addr(output[i]) = baseOutput + i
21
22 LOOP:
23
@p1 cmp %nz x9, x7
// i =< j
24
@p1 add x15, x13, x14
// ith_val = a + b
25
@p1 addi x9, x9, 1
// i += 1
26
@p1 addi x13, x14, 0
// a = b
27
@p1 addi x14, x15, 0
// b = ith_val
28
@p1 br LOOP
29
30 st x16, x14
// output[i] = b
31 ret
Listing B.2. Fibonacci benchmark assembly code.
1 // Compute Hamming weight
2
3 lds x1, s0
// thread id
4 lds x2, s1
// warp id
5 lds x3, s3
// warp width
6 lds x5, s4
// block width
7 lds x6, s2
// block id
8
9 mad x4, x3, x2, x1
// x4 = (warpWidth * warpID) + threadID
10
// = (local thread ID)
11
12 addi x9, x0, 0
// number array base address
13 addi x10, x0, 512
// output array base address
14
15 mad x7, x5, x6, x4
// x7 = (blockWidth * blockID) + localThreadId
16
// = (global thread ID)
17 addi x15, x0, 1
// load 1 for AND operation
18 addi x11, x0, 0
// count = 0
19
20 add x12, x9, x7
// addr(number[i]) = baseNumber + i
21 add x13, x10, x7
// addr(output[i]) = baseOutput + i
22 nop
23
24 ld x14, x12
// load number[i] from global memory
25
26 LOOP:
27
@p1 cmp %nz x14, x0
// number[i] =< 0
==PAGE:79==
Appendix B Assembly Code
69
28
@p1 and x16, x14, x15
// number[i] & 1
29
@p1 nop
30
@p1 srli x14, x14, 1
// number[i] >>= 1
31
@p1 add x11, x11, x16
// count += number[i] & 1
32
@p1 br LOOP
33
34 st x13, x11
// store count to global memory
35 ret
Listing B.3. Hamming weight benchmark assembly code.
1 // Program Under Analysis
2
3 lds x1, s0
// thread id
4 lds x2, s1
// warp id
5 lds x3, s3
// warp width
6 lds x5, s4
// block width
7 lds x6, s2
// block id
8
9 mad x4, x3, x2, x1
// x4 = (warpWidth * warpID) + threadID = (local
thread ID)
10
11 // BB1
12 addi x9, x0, 0
// int i = 0;
13 addi x10, x0, 20
14 addi x11, x0, 30
15
16 mad x7, x5, x6, x4
// x7 = (blockWidth * blockID) + localThreadId =
(global thread ID)
17
18 addi x13, x0, 14
// res[4] base address
19 add x16, x13, x7
// res[threadIdx];
20 ld x12, x7
// data[threadIdx];
21
22 @p1 cmp %p x12, x10
// data[threadIdx] > 20;
23 @p3 cmp %n x12, x10
// data[threadIdx] < 20;
24 @p2 cmp %p x12, x11
// data[threadIdx] > 30;
25
26 // BB2
27 @p1 addi x14, x0, 5
// int a = 5;
28
29 // BB3
30 @p2 add x15, x12, x14
// a + data[threadIdx];
31 @p2 st x16, x15
// res[threadIdx] = a + data[threadIdx];
32
33 // BB4
34 @p1 add x9, x0, x14
// i = a;
35
36 // BB5
37 @p3 addi x9, x0, 10
// i = 10;
38
39 // BB6
40 addi x9, x9, 1
// i = i + 1;
41
42 ret
==PAGE:80==
70
Appendix B Assembly Code
Listing B.4. Program under analysis assembly code.
1 // ---------------------- Compute Phase 1 ----------------------
2
3 lds x1, s0
// thread id
4 lds x2, s1
// warp id
5 lds x3, s3
// warp width
6 lds x5, s4
// block width
7 lds x6, s2
// block id
8
9 mad x4, x3, x2, x1
// x4 = (warpWidth * warpID) + threadID
10
11 // BB1
12 addi x9, x0, 0
// int i = 0;
13 addi x10, x0, 20
14 addi x11, x0, 30
15
16 mad x7, x5, x6, x4
// x7 = (blockWidth * blockID) + localThreadId
17
18 addi x13, x0, 14
// res[4] base address
19 add x16, x13, x7
// res[threadIdx];
20
21 // ---------------------- Access Phase 1 ----------------------
22 ld x12, x7
// data[threadIdx];
23
24 // ---------------------- Compute Phase 2 ----------------------
25 @p1 cmp %p x12, x10
// data[threadIdx] > 20;
26 @p3 cmp %n x12, x10
// data[threadIdx] < 20;
27 @p2 cmp %p x12, x11
// data[threadIdx] > 30;
28
29 // BB2
30 @p1 addi x14, x0, 5
// int a = 5;
31
32 // BB3
33 @p2 add x15, x12, x14
// a + data[threadIdx];
34
35 // ---------------------- Access Phase 2 ----------------------
36 @p2 st x16, x15
// res[threadIdx] = a + data[threadIdx];
37
38 // ---------------------- Compute Phase 3 ----------------------
39 // BB4
40 @p1 add x9, x0, x14
// i = a;
41
42 // BB5
43 @p3 addi x9, x0, 10
// i = 10;
44
45 // BB6
46 addi x9, x9, 1
// i = i + 1;
47
48 ret
Listing B.5. Program under analysis assembly code dissected into compute and access phases.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
J. C. Knight, “Safety critical systems: challenges and directions,” in Proceedings
of the 24th international conference on software engineering, pp. 547–550, 2002.
[2]
J. Perez-Cerrolaza, J. Abella, L. Kosmidis, A. J. Calderon, F. Cazorla, and J. L.
Flores, “Gpu devices for safety-critical systems: A survey,” ACM Computing
Surveys, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1–37, 2022.
[3]
I. S. Olmedo, N. Capodieci, and R. Cavicchioli, “A perspective on safety and real-
time issues for gpu accelerated adas,” in IECON 2018-44th Annual Conference
of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pp. 4071–4077, IEEE, 2018.
[4]
M. Yang, “Avoiding pitfalls when using nvidia gpus for real-time tasks in au-
tonomous systems,” in Proceedings of the 30th Euromicro Conference on Real-
Time Systems, 2018.
[5]
G. Lentaris, K. Maragos, I. Stratakos, L. Papadopoulos, O. Papanikolaou,
D. Soudris, M. Lourakis, X. Zabulis, D. Gonzalez-Arjona, and G. Furano, “High-
performance embedded computing in space: Evaluation of platforms for vision-
based navigation,” Journal of Aerospace Information Systems, vol. 15, no. 4,
pp. 178–192, 2018.
[6]
“Iso 26262: Road vehicles – functional safety,” standard, International Organi-
zation for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland, Mar. 2018. 2nd edition.
[7]
R. Bell, “Introduction to iec 61508,” in Acm international conference proceeding
series, vol. 162, pp. 3–12, Citeseer, 2006.
[8]
J. P. Cerrolaza, R. Obermaisser, J. Abella, F. J. Cazorla, K. Grüttner, I. Agirre,
H. Ahmadian, and I. Allende, “Multi-core devices for safety-critical systems: A
survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1–38, 2020.
[9]
J. Abella, C. Hernández, E. Quiñones, F. J. Cazorla, P. R. Conmy, M. Azkarate-
Askasua, J. Perez, E. Mezzetti, and T. Vardanega, “Wcet analysis methods:
Pitfalls and challenges on their trustworthiness,” in 10th IEEE International
Symposium on Industrial Embedded Systems (SIES), pp. 1–10, IEEE, 2015.
==PAGE:82==
72
Bibliography
[10] R. Wilhelm, J. Engblom, A. Ermedahl, N. Holsti, S. Thesing, D. Whalley,
G. Bernat, C. Ferdinand, R. Heckmann, T. Mitra, et al., “The worst-case
execution-time problem—overview of methods and survey of tools,” ACM Trans-
actions on Embedded Computing Systems (TECS), vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1–53, 2008.
[11] R. Marroquim and A. Maximo, “Introduction to gpu programming with glsl,”
in 2009 Tutorials of the XXII Brazilian Symposium on Computer Graphics and
Image Processing, pp. 3–16, IEEE, 2009.
[12] A. Bakhoda, G. L. Yuan, W. W. Fung, H. Wong, and T. M. Aamodt, “Analyzing
cuda workloads using a detailed gpu simulator,” in 2009 IEEE international
symposium on performance analysis of systems and software, pp. 163–174, IEEE,
2009.
[13] B. Tine, K. P. Yalamarthy, F. Elsabbagh, and K. Hyesoon, “Vortex: Extend-
ing the risc-v isa for gpgpu and 3d-graphics,” in MICRO-54:
54th Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture, pp. 754–766, 2021.
[14] D. A. Patterson and J. L. Hennessy, Computer organization and design ARM
edition: the hardware software interface. Morgan kaufmann, 2016.
[15] J. Choquette, O. Giroux, and D. Foley, “Volta: Performance and programmabil-
ity,” Ieee Micro, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 42–52, 2018.
[16] NVIDIA Corporation, “Nvidia’s next generation cuda compute architecture:
Fermi,” tech. rep., NVIDIA, 2009. Accessed: 2024-09-30.
[17] M. McCool, J. Reinders, and A. Robison, Structured parallel programming: pat-
terns for eﬀicient computation. Elsevier, 2012.
[18] Z. Jia, M. Maggioni, J. Smith, and D. P. Scarpazza, “Dissecting the nvidia turing
t4 gpu via microbenchmarking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.07486, 2019.
[19] S. Liu, J. E. Lindholm, M. Y. Siu, B. W. Coon, and S. F. Oberman, “Operand
collector architecture,” 2010. US Patent 7,834,881.
[20] G. F. Diamos, R. C. Johnson, V. Grover, O. Giroux, J. H. Choquette, M. A.
Fetterman, A. S. Tirumala, P. Nelson, and R. M. Krashinsky, “Execution of
divergent threads using a convergence barrier,” 2018. US Patent 10,067,768.
[21] S. Moy and J. E. Lindholm, “Method and system for programmable pipelined
graphics processing with branching instructions,” Sept. 20 2005.
US Patent
6,947,047.
[22] I. S. Olmedo, N. Capodieci, J. L. Martinez, A. Marongiu, and M. Bertogna,
“Dissecting the cuda scheduling hierarchy: a performance and predictability per-
spective,” in 2020 IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications
Symposium (RTAS), pp. 213–225, IEEE, 2020.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
73
[23] M. Gebhart, D. R. Johnson, D. Tarjan, S. W. Keckler, W. J. Dally, E. Lindholm,
and K. Skadron, “Energy-eﬀicient mechanisms for managing thread context in
throughput processors,” in Proceedings of the 38th annual international sympo-
sium on Computer architecture, pp. 235–246, 2011.
[24] T. M. Aamodt, W. W. L. Fung, T. G. Rogers, and M. Martonosi, General-
purpose graphics processor architectures. Springer, 2018.
[25] E. Lindholm and S. Oberman, “The nvidia geforce 8800 gpu,” in 2007 IEEE Hot
Chips 19 Symposium (HCS), pp. 1–17, IEEE, 2007.
[26] D. B. Kirk and W. H. Wen-Mei, Programming massively parallel processors: a
hands-on approach. Morgan kaufmann, 2016.
[27] K. Fatahalian and M. Houston, “Gpus: A closer look: As the line between gpus
and cpus begins to blur, it’s important to understand what makes gpus tick.,”
Queue, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 18–28, 2008.
[28] J. L. Hennessy and D. A. Patterson, Computer architecture: a quantitative ap-
proach. Morgan kaufmann, 2017.
[29] M. Schoeberl, “Time-predictable computer architecture,” EURASIP Journal on
Embedded Systems, vol. 2009, pp. 1–17, 2009.
[30] M. Schoeberl, S. Abbaspour, B. Akesson, N. Audsley, R. Capasso, J. Garside,
K. Goossens, S. Goossens, S. Hansen, R. Heckmann, et al., “T-crest: Time-
predictable multi-core architecture for embedded systems,” Journal of Systems
Architecture, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 449–471, 2015.
[31] M. Schoeberl, W. Puﬀitsch, S. Hepp, B. Huber, and D. Prokesch, “Patmos: A
time-predictable microprocessor,” Real-Time Systems, vol. 54, pp. 389–423, 2018.
[32] G. Plumbridge, J. Whitham, and N. Audsley, “Blueshell: A platform for rapid
prototyping of multiprocessor nocs and accelerators,” ACM SIGARCH Computer
Architecture News, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 107–117, 2014.
[33] R. I. Davis and L. Cucu-Grosjean, “A survey of probabilistic timing analysis
techniques for real-time systems,” LITES: Leibniz Transactions on Embedded
Systems, pp. 1–60, 2019.
[34] C. Ferdinand and R. Heckmann, “ait: Worst-case execution time prediction
by static program analysis,” in Building the Information Society: IFIP 18th
World Computer Congress Topical Sessions 22–27 August 2004 Toulouse, France,
pp. 377–383, Springer, 2004.
[35] S. Kato, E. Takeuchi, Y. Ishiguro, Y. Ninomiya, K. Takeda, and T. Hamada, “An
open approach to autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Micro, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 60–68,
2015.
==PAGE:84==
74
Bibliography
[36] A. Eklund, P. Dufort, D. Forsberg, and S. M. LaConte, “Medical image process-
ing on the gpu–past, present and future,” Medical image analysis, vol. 17, no. 8,
pp. 1073–1094, 2013.
[37] J. Athavale, A. Baldovin, and M. Paulitsch, “Trends and functional safety cer-
tification strategies for advanced railway automation systems,” in 2020 IEEE
International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2020.
[38] M. Benito, M. M. Trompouki, L. Kosmidis, J. D. Garcia, S. Carretero, and
K. Wenger, “Comparison of gpu computing methodologies for safety-critical sys-
tems: An avionics case study,” in 2021 Design, Automation & Test in Europe
Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pp. 717–718, IEEE, 2021.
[39] L. Kosmidis, J. Lachaize, J. Abella, O. Notebaert, F. J. Cazorla, and D. Steenari,
“Gpu4s: Embedded gpus in space,” in 2019 22nd Euromicro Conference on
Digital System Design (DSD), pp. 399–405, IEEE, 2019.
[40] E. Talpes, D. D. Sarma, G. Venkataramanan, P. Bannon, B. McGee, B. Floering,
A. Jalote, C. Hsiong, S. Arora, A. Gorti, et al., “Compute solution for tesla’s full
self-driving computer,” IEEE Micro, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 25–35, 2020.
[41] D. Franklin, “Jetson agx xavier and the new era of autonomous machines webi-
nar,” 2020.
[42] NVIDIA
Corporation,
“Nvidia
tegra
x1
-
nvidia’s
new
mobile
super-
chip.”
http://international.download.nvidia.com/pdf/tegra/Tegra-
X1-whitepaper-v1.0.pdf, 2015. Accessed: Nov. 2024.
[43] V. Campmany, S. Silva, A. Espinosa, J. C. Moure, D. Vázquez, and A. M. López,
“Gpu-based pedestrian detection for autonomous driving,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 80, pp. 2377–2381, 2016.
[44] R. Cavicchioli, N. Capodieci, and M. Bertogna, “Memory interference character-
ization between cpu cores and integrated gpus in mixed-criticality platforms,”
in 2017 22nd IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and
Factory Automation (ETFA), pp. 1–10, IEEE, 2017.
[45] L. Jeanmougin, T. Carle, P. Sotin, and C. Rochange, “Warp-level cfg construc-
tion for gpu kernel wcet analysis,” in 21st International Workshop on Worst-Case
Execution Time Analysis (WCET 2023), vol. 114, pp. 1–1, Schloss Dagstuhl–
Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.
[46] A. Betts and A. Donaldson, “Estimating the wcet of gpu-accelerated applica-
tions using hybrid analysis,” in 2013 25th Euromicro Conference on Real-Time
Systems, pp. 193–202, IEEE, 2013.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
75
[47] I. Rodriguez Ferrandez, A. Jover Alvarez, M. Maria Trompouki, L. Kosmidis,
and F. J. Cazorla, “Worst case execution time and power estimation of multicore
and gpu software: a pedestrian detection use case,” ACM SIGAda Ada Letters,
vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 111–117, 2023.
[48] K. Berezovskyi, F. Guet, L. Santinelli, K. Bletsas, and E. Tovar, “Measurement-
based probabilistic timing analysis for graphics processor units,” in Architecture
of Computing Systems–ARCS 2016: 29th International Conference, Nuremberg,
Germany, April 4–7, 2016, Proceedings 29, pp. 223–236, Springer, 2016.
[49] NVIDIA Corporation, “Nvidia’s next generation cudaTM compute architecture:
KeplerTM gk110/210,” tech. rep., NVIDIA, 2012. Accessed: 2024-12-04.
[50] M. Alt, C. Ferdinand, F. Martin, and R. Wilhelm, “Cache behavior prediction
by abstract interpretation,” in Static Analysis: Third International Symposium,
SAS’96 Aachen, Germany, September 24–26, 1996 Proceedings 3, pp. 52–66,
Springer, 1996.
[51] Y. Huangfu and W. Zhang, “Wcet analysis of gpu l1 data caches,” in 2018 IEEE
High Performance extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2018.
[52] K. Berezovskyi, K. Bletsas, and B. Andersson, “Makespan computation for gpu
threads running on a single streaming multiprocessor,” in 2012 24th Euromicro
Conference on Real-Time Systems, pp. 277–286, IEEE, 2012.
[53] Y. Huangfu and W. Zhang, “Static wcet analysis of gpus with predictable warp
scheduling,” in 2017 IEEE 20th International Symposium on Real-Time Dis-
tributed Computing (ISORC), pp. 101–108, IEEE, 2017.
[54] N. Crouzet, T. Carle, and C. Rochange, “Coordinating the fetch and issue warp
schedulers to increase the timing predictability of gpus,” in 2024 27th Euromicro
Conference on Digital System Design (DSD), pp. 343–350, IEEE, 2024.
[55] Y. Huangfu and W. Zhang, “Real-time gpu computing: Cache or no cache?,” in
2015 IEEE 18th International Symposium on Real-Time Distributed Computing,
pp. 182–189, IEEE, 2015.
[56] W. Jia, K. A. Shaw, and M. Martonosi, “Characterizing and improving the use
of demand-fetched caches in gpus,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM international
conference on Supercomputing, pp. 15–24, 2012.
[57] Y. Huangfu and W. Zhang, “Warp-based load/store reordering to improve gpu
time predictability,” Journal of Computing Science and Engineering, vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 58–68, 2017.
[58] A. Klashtorny, Z. Wu, A. M. Kaushik, and H. Patel, “Predictable gpu wavefront
splitting for safety-critical systems,” ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing
Systems, vol. 22, no. 5s, pp. 1–25, 2023.
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[59] Z. Jia, M. Maggioni, B. Staiger, and D. P. Scarpazza, “Dissecting the nvidia volta
gpu architecture via microbenchmarking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06826,
2018.
[60] R. Spliet, A SIMD architecture for hard real-time systems. PhD thesis, Apollo -
University of Cambridge Repository, 2020.
[61] P. Voudouris and G.-J. van den Braak, Analysis and modeling of the timing
bahavior of GPU architectures. PhD thesis, Master’s thesis, Eindhoven University
of Technology, 2014.
[62] B. Akesson, K. Goossens, and M. Ringhofer, “Predator: a predictable sdram
memory controller,” in Proceedings of the 5th IEEE/ACM international confer-
ence on Hardware/software codesign and system synthesis, pp. 251–256, 2007.
[63] E. Lakis and M. Schoeberl, “An sdram controller for real-time systems,” in 16th
IEEE International Symposium on Object/component/service-oriented Real-time
distributed Computing (ISORC 2013), pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2013.
[64] A. Waterman, Y. Lee, R. Avizienis, H. Cook, D. A. Patterson, and K. Asanovic,
“The risc-v instruction set.,” in Hot Chips Symposium, vol. 1, 2013.
[65] Terasic Technologies, DE2-115 User Manual, 2011. Accessed: 2025-01-30.
[66] R. Cavicchioli, N. Capodieci, M. Solieri, M. Bertogna, et al., “Novel method-
ologies for predictable cpu-to-gpu command offloading,” in Leibniz International
Proceedings in Informatics, LIPIcs, vol. 133, Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum
fur Informatik GmbH, Dagstuhl Publishing, 2019.
[67] N. Corporation, Parallel Thread Execution ISA Version, 2025. Accessed: 2025-
02-01.
[68] C. D. Kersey, H. Kim, and S. Yalamanchili, “Lightweight simt core designs for
intelligent 3d stacked dram,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Memory Systems, pp. 49–59, 2017.
[69] N. Corporation, “Nvidia tesla v100 gpu architecture,” tech. rep., NVIDIA, 2017.
White Paper.
