==PAGE:1==
as 
 
Experimental and Operational Modal Analysis Applied to 
a Simplified 2D Model of a “Floating” Wind Turbine – 
Theory vs Experiment 
Andreas Trolle Henry 
DTU Construct 
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering 
==PAGE:2==
Experimental and Operational Modal
Analysis Applied to a Simplified 2D Model
of a “Floating” Wind Turbine – Theory vs
Experiment
Andreas Trolle Henry
Master Thesis
Denmarks Technical University
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
February 2, 2025
Supervisors:
Professor, Dr.-Ing., Dr.techn Ilmar Ferreira Santos Ilmar Ferreira Santos, Sebastian Vikær
Damsgaard & Bruno Resende Ferreira Rende
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents a newly developed Simplified 2D Model of a “Floating” Wind Tur-
bine test rig, used for testing modal parameter estimation techniques. Experiments are
conducted to examine the efficacy of five different OMA methods: ITD, ERA, SSI, PR
and FDD. The results of which are compared to EMA estimates identified using the
pLSCF technique. Theoretical mathematical models of the static test rig are developed
and compared to experimental results, showing good agreement between theory and ex-
periment, with a few notable differences caused by coupling to the excitation source.
Experiments are conducted on the test rig under operation, and a harmonic filter devel-
oped for OMA is applied. The harmonic filter proved to not be effective for operating
conditions inducing low frequency harmonic disturbances, such as the ones present in a
wind turbine.
For the static test rig, the OMA techniques overall yield estimates similar to the pLSCF,
with SSI and PR techniques performing significantly better than the remaining OMA
techniques. The results show advantages of combining estimates across OMA methods,
leading to the development of an automatic OMA routine (DTW-AOMA). The routine
combines estimates across the five presented OMA techniques and sorts modes using Dy-
namic Time Warping. The DTW-AOMA routine is compared to semi-automatic OMA
routines, A-ERA, A-SSI and A-PR, yielding less accurate estimates but providing a
framework for high degrees of automation with minimized user interaction.
Master thesis
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This bachelor thesis is submitted at the Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements of acquiring
a degree in Master of Science in Engineering in Mechanical Engineering. The project is
accredited 30 ECTS points, and was realized in the period 2nd of September 2024 to 2nd
of February 2025. The thesis was realized under the supervision of Professor, Dr.-Ing.,
Dr.techn Ilmar Ferreira Santos, with co-supervision of Sebastian Vikær Damsgaard &
Bruno Resende Ferreira Rende.
Master thesis
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
First and foremost I would like to extend my graditute and appreciation to Professor,
Dr.-Ing., Dr.techn Ilmar Ferreira Santos for his phenomenal supervision and guidance,
many good conversations, and for giving me the opportunity to develop a test rig and
work with modal analysis experimentally.
Second, I would like to thank Sebastian Vikær Damsgaard & Bruno Resende Ferreira
Rende for their great supervision, teachings and insightful discussions.
I would also like to thank the DTU Construct Workshop team who helped manufacture
parts necessary for the completion of this thesis.
Lastly, I am deeply grateful to my wife Mikala for her unending patience, and her unwa-
vering support, love and encouragement.
Master thesis
iii
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Contents
Page
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgments
iii
Nomenclature
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Floating Offshore Wind Turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
6
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Central Limit Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Mean and Mean Square
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Correlation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Fourier Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.5
Spectral Densities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.6
Modal Parameter Estimation Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.7
Modal Parameter Post Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.8
Modal Decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.9
Measurement Specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.2
Frequency Response Function Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.3
Single Degree of Freedom Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2.4
Poly-Reference Least Squares Complex Frequency Identification
Technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.5
Shaker Excitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.3.1
Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.2
Rank of the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.3.3
Shaker Excitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.3.4
Ibrahim Time Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3.5
Eigensystem Realization Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.3.6
Stochastic Subspace Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.3.7
AR Models and Poly Reference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2.3.8
Frequency Domain Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.3.9
Modal Participation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Master thesis
iv
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
2.4
Modal Assurance Criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
2.5
Accuracy and Automation of OMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
2.5.1
Automation of OMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
2.5.2
Dynamic Time Warping AOMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3
Experimental Facilities
55
3.1
Test Rig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.1.1
Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4
Theoretical Mathematical Modelling
59
4.1
Rigid Body
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2
Point Mass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.3
Finite Element Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5
Analysis and Results
68
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.1.1
Theoretical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.1.2
EMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.1.3
OMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.1.4
Summary Analysis and Discussion of Isolated Tower . . . . . . . .
96
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
5.2.1
Theoretical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
5.2.2
EMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
5.2.3
OMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
5.2.4
Summary Analysis and Discussion of Fully Assembled Test Rig
.
131
5.3
The Test Rig During Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
6
Conclusion
135
6.1
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
References
138
A MAC Plots
141
A.1 Isolated Tower Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
A.2 Fully Assembled Test Rig
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
B FRFs
143
B.1 Dry Friction FRFs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
144
C Signal Analysis
145
D Force and moment equations
148
E Accuracy Plots
152
Master thesis
v
==PAGE:8==
NOMENCLATURE
NOMENCLATURE
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AOMA
Automatic Operational Modal Analysis
ARMA
Auto Regressive Moving Average
CF
Correlation Function
CLT
Central Limit Theorem
COM
Center of Mass
CSD
Cross Spectral Density
DFT
Discrete Fourier Transform
DOF
Degree of Freedom
DTW
Dynamic Time Warping
EMA
Experimental Modal Analysis
EOM
Equation(s) of Motion
ERA
Eigensystem Realization Algorithm
EVP
Eigenvalue Problem
FDD
Frequency Domain Decomposition
FEM
Finite Element Method
FE
Finite Element
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
FRF
Frequency Response Function
FWOT
Floating Offshore Wind Turbine
IID
Independent and identically distributed
IRF
Impulse Response Function
ITD
Ibrahim Time Domain
LSFD
Least Square Frequency Domain
LTI
Linear Time Invariant
Master thesis
vi
==PAGE:9==
NOMENCLATURE
NOMENCLATURE
MAC
Modal Assurance Criterion
MIMO
Multiple Input Multiple Output
OMA
Operational Modal Analysis
pLSCF
Poly-Reference Least Squares Complex Frequency-Domain
PR
Poly Reference
PSD
Power Spectral Density
RBM
Rigid Body Model
SDOF
Single Degree of Freedom
SD
Spectral Density
SISO
Single Input Single Output
SSD
Stochastic Subspace Identification
SVD
Singular Value Decomposition
Latin letters and symbols
A
Continuous time system matrix
Ac
Companion matrix
Ad
Discrete time system matrix
Ak
AR matrix
B
Continuous time input matrix
Bd
Discrete time input matrix
C
Observation/output matrix
D
Feedthrough matrix
F(ω)
Frequency spectrum of input f(t)
f
Input vector
G
Spectral density matrix
H
Frequency response function or block Hankel matrix
K
Stiffness matrix
L
Modal participation matrix
Master thesis
vii
==PAGE:10==
NOMENCLATURE
NOMENCLATURE
M
Mass matrix
O
Projection matrix
p
Absolute modal participation vector
R
Correlation function matrix
Tij
Toeplitz matrix
u
State space input vector
u
Theoretical mode shape
v
State space vector of process noise
w
State space vector of measurement noise
X(ω)
Frequency spectrum of x(t)
X
Data matrix of measured signals x
x
Measured signal vector
Y(ω)
Frequency spectrum of y(t)
Y
Data matrix of responses y
y
Response vector
z
State space vector
E[ ]
Expectation
f
Frequency [Hz]
fn
Natural frequency [Hz]
fs
Sampling rate
Gxx
Power spectral density
Gxy
Cross spectral density
k
Discrete time instant
N
Number of samples
NA
Number of AR coefficients
Ni
Number of inputs
NM
Number of MA coefficients
Master thesis
viii
==PAGE:11==
NOMENCLATURE
NOMENCLATURE
Nm
Number of modes
nm
Number of bottom masses
No
Number of outputs
Nclust
Number of hierarchical clusters
NKL
Number of springs in left spring holder
NKR
Number of springs in right spring holder
p(x)
Probability density function
q(t)
Modal coordinate
Rxx
Autocorrelation function
Rxy
Cross-correlation function
s
Block Hankel matrix rows
T
Time period
t
Time
xi
Translation of mass i
Greek letters and symbols
∆t
Time step
γ2
Coherence
λn
Continuous time pole/eigenvalue
µ
Mean
µn
Discrete time pole/eigenvalue
ω
Frequency [Rad/s]
ωn
Natural frequency [Rad/s]
ωn,d
Damped natural frequency [Rad/s]
πn
Relative modal participation factor
Γ
Observability matrix
γn
Modal participation vector
Ψ
Modal matrix
Master thesis
ix
==PAGE:12==
NOMENCLATURE
NOMENCLATURE
ψn
Mode shape
σ
Standard deviation
τ
Time lag
θ
Rotation around main shaft axis
εi
Tolerance parameter of modal quantity i
φ
Wing rotation angle
ζn
Damping ratio [ ]
Master thesis
x
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
In 2025 the demand for low carbon energy sources and electrified grids has never been
bigger. At the same time, the global energy consumption is continually increasing, with
no expectation of slowing down. This puts tremendous pressure on energy producers
to scale up production and installation of renewable energy sources. However, they are
often faced with installation restrictions, as consumers do not want to live with wind or
solar farms “in their backyard”. As such offshore wind turbines have become popular in
many countries, causing little to no consumer backlash, combined with their large scale,
allowing for large quantities of power generated. However, supply of such turbines cannot
keep up with demand, due to difficulties associated with and resources required to install
large structures in deep waters. Further, there are natural barriers to continual build up
of offshore turbines, as they can only be installed at certain ocean depths.
For decades wind turbine manufacturers have been trying to come up with solutions to
these challenges. One solution, that we are likely to see being implemented in the future,
is the Floating Offshore Wind Turbine (FOWT). Compared to the standard offshore tur-
bine, it is associated with much lower installation cost, and it may be deployed at much
deeper waters. While the dynamics of preexisting traditional offshore wind turbines have
been studied extensively, the potential introduction of a new type of turbine calls for
much additional research.
While theoretical mathematical models are typically developed for dynamical analysis,
experimental analysis is preferred when possible. Within the field of mechanical engineer-
ing, the dynamics of a system is typically found through Experimental Modal Analysis
(EMA), yielding the modal parameters of the system. Such analysis requires the esti-
mation of input-output relations, typically Frequency Response Functions (FRF), which
in turn requires taking the system out of operation. Further, when the system is sig-
nificantly large or massive, performing EMA is associated with enormous cost, and is
typically wholly impractical. For larger structures, such as wind turbines, methods re-
lying only on output are therefore utilized. These techniques are known as Operational
Modal Analysis (OMA) methods. EMA methods utilize more information about the sys-
tem, and as such their estimates are more trustworthy and reliable, but they may not be
possible to utilize in practice.
Naturally, it is of interest to investigate the efficacy of OMA compared to EMA meth-
ods and for that purpose, a simplified 2D model of a “floating” wind turbine has been
constructed, and will be used for the experimental research in this thesis. The overall
purpose is to analyze how well OMA methods compare to EMA methods, and further
analyze if any particular OMA techniques perform better than others, for the types of
dynamics present in this type of structure. Further, it is of interest to investigate if the
combination of several OMA techniques may be applied to yield more accurate results.
To gain additional insights for interpretation and analysis of the experimental results,
different theoretical mathematical models of the test rig will be developed and analyzed.
Master thesis
Page 1 of 152
==PAGE:14==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Literature Review
Moreover, as offshore wind turbines are costly to have continually inspected by experts,
it is of interest develop automatic monitoring techniques, to detect possible dynamics
changes prior to a potential breakdown. This is of interest in many areas, but due to the
cost associated with a single FOWT, and the difficulty and cost associated with manual
inspection, it is of significant interest in this case. Therefore, this thesis will also develop
a routine applying OMA techniques, for automatic detection of changes to dynamics, and
apply this routine to the test rig data.
The report is structured in the following manner. The remainder of Section 1 presents a
literature review of the relevant fields and topics of this thesis, followed by a presentation
of the conceptual differences between a traditional wind turbine and a FOWT. Section 2
will introduce the theoretical basis for conducting EMA and OMA, as well as presenting
one EMA technique and five OMA techniques to be used in the analysis part of the the-
sis. Section 3 presents the test rig utilized for the experimentation of this report, and the
data acquisition system. Section 4 will present three theoretical mathematical models
of the test rig: a point mass, a rigid body and a Finite Element (FE) model. Section 5
presents the results and analysis of the mathematical models and the EMA and OMA
techniques, on both the fully assembled test rig, as well as a simplified version with the
“turbine blades” removed. Lastly, Section 6 will conclude on the main findings of the
analysis and provide future aspects.
1.1
Literature Review
An extensive literature review is conducted prior to undergoing this study, in order to
establish a comprehensive understanding of the fields and topics, that are relevant for the
upcoming analysis. The purpose of the literature review is to gain knowledge and insights
into EMA and OMA applications, OMA applied to wind turbines and wind turbine like
structures and the automation of OMA methods. After an extensive examination of the
literature in the field, several key sources are highlighted and important findings from
the studies are presented in this section.
Ewins [1] present and describe a range of original EMA methodologies, the theoretical
basis for the methodologies as well as techniques and applications. Similarly Brincker
et al. [2] presents the theoretical basis, estimation techniques and the applications of
a range of OMA methodologies, as well as the requisite signal processing required for
proper utilization of the techniques. Both pieces of literature highlight the advantages of
EMA being its higher level of detail and accuracy, although it is often associated with
higher cost and the object of analysis being put temporarily out of commission. Oppo-
sitely, they highlight the advantages of OMA being its ability to perform modal analysis
on commissioned objects, and its lower cost (especially for large and massive structures),
although this may come at the cost of lowered accuracy and detail level. These differ-
ences make OMA the preferred analysis type for large civil engineering structures. OMA
assumes white noise excitation, an assumption broken by the harmonic frequency from
the rotating turbine blades. Solutions have been developed to mitigate this problem, such
Master thesis
Page 2 of 152
==PAGE:15==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Literature Review
as the study by Peeters et al. [3], who introduced a harmonic filter to remove harmonic
disturbances. The study considered operational data from a helicopter in-flight and a
running diesel engine, and the authors concluded that having applied the harmonic filter
resulted in trustworthy OMA estimates. Another solution was shown by Svendsen [4],
who improved OMA estimates by applying a notch filter to data from a rotordynamic
test rig.
The advantages of OMA compared to EMA, combined with the possibility of removing
harmonic disturbances, makes OMA an attractive choice for modal analysis of wind tur-
bines. As such, OMA have been applied to wind turbines in multiple studies. Damgaard
[5] presents basic theory behind both EMA and OMA, their application to offshore wind
turbines, and how the dynamic behavior of wind turbines differ from other civil engi-
neering structures.
Further, a literature review of OMA applied to wind turbines is
presented, showing that the experimental analysis of wind turbines is limited compared
to other types of civil engineering structures, such as buildings and bridges.
Reques´on [6] applied OMA to identify modal parameters of a full scale Vestas wind tur-
bine, using the Stochastic Subspace Identification technique, and compared results to
a theoretical model. The technique was able to identify modal parameters, and results
showed a general good comparison between theoretical and experimental results. Only
certain modes, specifically related to the turbine blades proved difficult to identify. Re-
cently, Berend ter Meulen et al. [7] introduced a hybrid OMA technique, combining a
Frequency Domain Decomposition technique and a Power Spectral Density Transmissi-
bility approach, and applied it to data from a numerical model representing an operating
two-bladed offshore wind turbine. The results showed that the combined hybrid tech-
nique outperformed the two individual approaches, while also reducing the possibility
of misidentifying modes created by harmonic disturbance. The combination of multiple
OMA techniques has also been shown by Paulsen [8] to reduce the uncertainty and in-
crease accuracy of modal parameter estimates.
Pimenta et al. [9] applies the Covariance driven Stochastic Subspace Identification tech-
nique on experimental data from an operational FOWT, focusing specifically on the lowest
modes associated with platform motion. They find that the technique is able to identify
the lowest modes, and performs better with a high level of data pre-processing. Similar
to the analysis of a FOWT, Ruzzo et al. [10] [11] employed the Enhanced Frequency
Domain Decomposition OMA technique to study the effect of response record length on
parameter estimates, of low frequency rigid body modes on floating offshore structures.
The study found that natural frequency estimates were less impacted, but damping ratios
were overestimated for short response records.
Mikkelsen et al. [12] performs OMA on a wind turbine tower, and proposes an algorithm
for automating the modal parameter estimation process.
The algorithm employs the
Stochastic Subspace Identification technique, and utilizes Auto Modal Assurance Crite-
rion combined with histograms to identify a predefined number of modes. The algorithm
proves successful in identifying the first two modes, despite the two modes being very
closely spaced.
Master thesis
Page 3 of 152
==PAGE:16==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.2
Floating Offshore Wind Turbine
Other methods for automation of OMA (AOMA) has also been developed, for a va-
riety of applications. Damsgaard [13] develops a routine for automating the Stochas-
tic Subspace Identification, the Eigensystem Realization Algorithm and Poly Reference,
performing estimations through the utilization of stabilization diagrams, and agglomer-
ative hierarchical clustering. The routines are used to identify modal parameters of a
rotor-bearing test rig, and the quality of the estimates increased by the use of the auto-
mated techniques. A similar approach is implemented by Magalh˜aes et al. [14], where
the Covariance based Stochastic Subspace Identification technique is complemented by
stabilization diagrams and hierarchical clustering, to estimate modal parameters of the
Infante D. Henrique bridge. They conclude that the identification algorithm combined
with high quality equipment, can automatically and accurately identify modal parame-
ters for several modes.
Rosso et al. [15] utilize a machine learning technique to predict the combination of control
parameters to use in the Covariance based Stochastic Subspace Identification technique,
naming it the intelligent AOMA (i-AOMA) technique. It was applied to data from the
Al-Hamra Firous Tower in Kuwait, and identified the same modes as have been previ-
ously found, as well as two additional new ones. Finally, Cho et al. [16] proposes an
AOMA technique where Stochastic Subspace Identification combined with uncertainty
estimates, are utilized to remove outliers in clustering. They apply the AOMA technique
to data from three different bridge types, concluding that the technique provides accurate
estimates, regardless of the bridge type.
1.2
Floating Offshore Wind Turbine
Before moving on to the underlying theory utilized for the analysis in this project, this
section will briefly introduce the concept of the Floating Offshore Wind Turbine (FOWT),
and how it led to the design and construction of the test rig, serving as the focal point
for the experimental investigations detailed in this thesis.
Currently, two main types of wind turbines are employed at large scale. The onshore
wind turbine and the offshore wind turbine. The offshore turbines have the advantage
of generally being much larger, thus supplying more power. However, they come with
the disadvantage of being difficult and costly to install. Further, the current technology
limits them to only being operational in certain coastal areas, with specific ocean depths.
Attempting to mitigate these obstacles, wind turbine manufacturers have for years been
working on the development of a FOWT. As the name suggests, the FOWT is conceptu-
ally designed to float in the water, as opposed to being installed in the ground, thus being
held up by buoyancy forces. Further, it is designed with a larger mass at the bottom of
the structure, lowering the center of gravity, thus preventing it from tipping over. Lastly,
it is mounted to the bottom with anchors, which ensures it stays in place, and providing
restriction against large rotations around its center of mass. Sketches of an offshore fixed
base wind turbine and a FOWT is shown in Figure 1.
From a dynamics point of view, the behavior of a FOWT is expected to be quite differ-
Master thesis
Page 4 of 152
==PAGE:17==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.2
Floating Offshore Wind Turbine
ent from a fixed base wind turbine. First it is being supported by buoyancy forces as
opposed to reaction forces on the ground. Further, as it is not fixed on the ground, it
will be able to freely rotate around its center of mass (with rotations being limited by
the slack in anchor cable length). Lastly, the surrounding water and the anchors, will
introduce stiffness and damping to the rotational movement around the center of mass.
To investigate these dynamics a simplified 2D model of the FOWT has been developed.
A sketch of the concept is shown in Figure 1c. The concept is inspired by a variety
of 2D fixed base wind turbine model prototypes located in Building 414 at DTU. The
concept is developed as a 2D model, to isolate the dynamics to a single plane. The main
tower in the concept, is constructed by three main masses, connected by slender beams.
The wind turbine blades are constructed as two slender beams, with a single mass fixed
to each of the slender beams. To model the rotational degree of freedom, the tower is
simply supported at the middle mass of the tower. The stiffness introduced by water and
anchors are modeled by introducing a rotational stiffness, around the rotational degree of
freedom from the simple support, but no damping is including. The up-and-down motion
induced by buoyancy forces via waves are not included in the concept. The concept was
developed and a test rig was constructed just prior to the initiation of this thesis. The
constructed test rig is presented in Section 3.1, and a detailed description of the design
considerations and construction of the test rig is presented by Trolle in [17].
(a) Fixed base
(b) FOWT
(c) Conceptual sketch
Figure 1: Sketches of fixed base and floating offshore wind turbines, and conceptual
sketch of the simplified 2D model of a FOWT
Master thesis
Page 5 of 152
==PAGE:18==
2
THEORY
2
Theory
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
This section presents the most important theoretical subjects used in performing EMA
and OMA. A more exhaustive examination of subjects relevant to performing general
modal analysis may be found in Newland [18], Brincker [2], Ewins [1] and Allemang et
al. [19].
2.1.1
Central Limit Theorem
As will be presented and made apparent later in this report, a key assumption in OMA
is that the dynamic response of the system is that of a Gaussian signal with a zero mean.
To justify the satisfaction of such an assumption, the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) may
be considered. The CLT states that a sum of many independent and identically dis-
tributed (IID) random variables will tend towards a Gaussian distribution as the number
of variables goes towards infinity [2]. In a more accurate and mathematical formulation,
having a set of M random variables x1, x2, ..., xM all IID with mean µ and variance σ2,
a linear combination of all M variables is given by
y =
M
X
i=1
aixi.
(2.1)
According to the CLT, the distribution of y will have a mean µy = µ PM
i=1 ai and a
variance σ2
y = σ2 PM
i=1 ai, and will be approximately Gaussian for large values of M and
tend towards a Gaussian distribution for M →∞. Further, the theorem states that this
will hold regardless of the distribution of the original variables xi, why the assumption is
often satisfied. A common assumption in structural dynamics, is that a response y(t) is
the convolution integral between an input force x(t) and an Impulse Response Function
(IRF) h(t)
y(t) =
Z ∞
−∞
h(t −τ)x(τ)dτ.
(2.2)
As a measured signal in practice cannot be measured continuously, but instead sampled
with time step ∆t, the expression above may be reformulated into
y(n) =
∞
X
k=−∞
h(n −k)x(k)∆t.
(2.3)
As the IRF h(n −k) becomes vanishing for sufficiently large |n −k|, it allows for the
above to be approximated by
y(n) =
n
X
k=n−N
h(n −k)x(k)∆t,
(2.4)
Master thesis
Page 6 of 152
==PAGE:19==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
where N is the number of sample points required to reasonably reflect the dynamic system
memory. From eq. (2.4) it may then be realized, that if the input into the system x(k) is
IID, the distribution of the output y(n) will approach a Gaussian, for increasing N. Note
specifically, that if the input force x(k) is a white noise signal, it will by definition be
IID, and the response y(n) will approach a Gaussian distribution for increasing N. Also
of worth noting, is the fact that lightly damped structures, will have a large N. In turn,
the response is more likely to have approached a Gaussian distribution, as opposed to a
stronger damped structure in which N is smaller. This turns out to have a significant
impact on the effectiveness on OMA methods, as this relation between damping and N
results in the expectation, that OMA should perform better on lightly damped structures.
While the CLT shows that a response y(n) approaches a Gaussian distribution for suffi-
ciently large N, its utility is revealed through the Gaussian distribution itself. As shown
by Brincker et al. [2] a Gaussian probability density function of a zero-mean multivariate
signal x(t) ∈RNo, depends only on its correlation matrix R,
p(x) =
1
(2π)
No
2 |R|
exp

−xTR−1x
2

.
(2.5)
As such, the correlation function thus holds all valuable information about the system.
It will later in this report be presented, how this is exploited in many OMA methods.
2.1.2
Mean and Mean Square
The mean or expected value of a continuous signal may be defined as [18]
E[x] =
Z ∞
−∞
xp(x)dx,
(2.6)
where E[x] is the expected value of x, and p(x) is the probability density function of x.
The probability density function is rarely known in practice, and as such the expectation
(mean) of x may instead be estimated over time
E[x] = 1
T
Z T
0
x(t)dt,
(2.7)
with T being the total length of the measured signal. As previously mentioned, mea-
sured signals arrive in discrete time steps, resulting in the mean value in practice being
estimated as
E[x] = 1
N
N−1
X
k=0
x(k),
(2.8)
with N being the total number of samples. The expected value of the signal squared, or
the mean square value, can be similarly estimated as
E[x2] =
Z ∞
−∞
x2p(x)dx.
(2.9)
Master thesis
Page 7 of 152
==PAGE:20==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
Once again, it can be estimated over time, replacing the need for a probability density
function,
E[x2] = 1
T
Z T
0
x2(t)dt,
(2.10)
and considering discrete time signals, it may be estimated as
E[x2] = 1
N
N−1
X
k=0
x2(k).
(2.11)
Before moving on, one important comment needs to be made regarding the replacement
of the ensemble-averages (mean using probability density functions) with time-averages
(mean over time). This replacement only holds true if the original signal is ergodic and
stationary. Further, the substitution of ensemble-averages with time-averages will also
only be valid,for sufficiently large T, or N in the discrete case, even for ergodic and
stationary signals.
2.1.3
Correlation Functions
Section 2.1.1 rounded off by presenting that the correlation matrix for a signal of Gaus-
sian distribution will hold all valuable information about the system. This warrants an
introduction of the subject of correlation. Within signal processing, the study of cor-
relation will generally revolve around two terms, cross-correlation and autocorrelation.
Autocorrelation is a measure of how a signal correlates with itself, and cross-correlation
is a measure of how different signals correlate with each other. Correlation between sig-
nals can vary between -1 and 1, where -1 indicates a perfect inverse correlation, and 1
indicates a perfect correlation between the two signals. Values inside this range, indicate
lower levels of correlation (or inverse correlation), with 0 indicating completely uncorre-
lated signals.
Correlation functions may be estimated using different types of methodology, such as
the biased and unbiased Welch estimate, by random decrement and the unbiased direct
method. This report will utilize the unbiased direct method. As shown by Brincker et
al. [2], the cross-correlation functions Rxy and Ryx of two random signals x(t) and y(t)
are given as
Rxy(τ) = E[x(t)y(t + τ)] = E[x(t −τ)y(t)]
(2.12)
Ryx(τ) = E[y(t)x(t + τ)] = E[y(t −τ)x(t)].
(2.13)
The autocorrelation functions Rxx and Ryy are then simply found as the special case of
the cross-correlation functions with x(t) = y(t).
Considering experimentally obtained data, the finite number M of measured channels,
may be ordered into a response signal vector y(t) ∈RM,
y(t) = {y1(t),
y2(t),
...,
yM(t)}T.
(2.14)
Master thesis
Page 8 of 152
==PAGE:21==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
Using the autocorrelation and cross-correlation functions from eq. (2.12) and (2.13) on
the response vector y(t) ∈RM, will then result in a correlation function (CF) matrix R,
RM×M(τ) = E[y(t)yT(t + τ)].
(2.15)
From eq.
(2.15) it becomes apparent that the diagonal elements of R(τ) will corre-
spond to autocorrelation functions, and the off-diagonal elements will correspond to
cross-correlation functions. In practice, noise will often be present in the random sig-
nals. When this is the case, the true CF matrix cannot be calculated. Instead, it needs
replacing by an estimate. Assuming that the random signals are ergodic and stationary,
the expected value in eq. (2.15) may be replaced by a time average, as was done in eq.
(2.7),
ˆR(τ) = 1
T
Z T
0
y(t)yT(t + τ)dt,
(2.16)
where T is total measurement time and ˆR(τ) is the estimated CF matrix. As the random
signals may not fully satisfy the aforementioned assumptions, ˆR(τ) is not necessarily
the true CF matrix. Brincker et al. [2] points out how the integration clearly cannot
be performed for any τ, if the signal is only known in the measured time interval t ∈
[0, T]. This may be remedied by restricting the time lag to be only positive values, and
additionally reducing the integration interval to a maximum of T −τ. This results in the
estimated CF matrix becoming
ˆR(τ) =
1
T −τ
Z T−τ
0
y(t)yT(t + τ)dt,
τ ≥0.
(2.17)
Once again, this estimate is for continuous signals, but measured signals will be in discrete
time samples. Using the same methodology as in eq. (2.8) to replace the integral with a
summation, the CF matrix becomes
ˆR(k) =
1
N −k
N−k
X
n=1
y(n)yT(n + k),
k ≥0,
(2.18)
where N is the total number of measured samples and k is the time lag τ = k∆t.
Rewriting the above summation into vector notation yields
ˆR(k) =
1
N −kY(1:N−k)YT
(k+1:N),
k ≥0,
(2.19)
where Y is the full data matrix. The full data matrix contains all response vectors at
each measurement and as such is defined as
Y = [y(1),
y(2),
...,
y(N)] .
(2.20)
Master thesis
Page 9 of 152
==PAGE:22==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
2.1.4
Fourier Transform
To perform a Fourier Transformation, is to take a periodic signal in the time domain
and transform into and represent it in the frequency domain.
As per Newland [18],
any periodic function x(t) of time t, with a period T, can be expressed as an infinite
trigonometric (Fourier) series. Newland [18] presents how this can be utilized to express
x(t) in the frequency domain by using the complex Fourier transform
X(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
x(t) exp(−iωt)dt.
(2.21)
This formulation once again assumes a continuous function x(t), which needs to be re-
formulated to consider data in discrete time steps. As shown by Newland [18], the above
can be discretized to obtain the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
X(k) = 1
N
N−1
X
r=0
x(r) exp(−i2πkr/N),
k = 0, 1, 2, ..., (N −1).
(2.22)
For large samples of data, utilizing the DFT may take a considerable amount of com-
putational time. To mitigate this, the so called Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is most
often utilized in practice. As per Newland [18], the FFT works by partitioning the full
data sequence x(r) into shorter ones. The DFT is then applied to each of the shorter
sequences, before combining each of the calculated DFTs for the shorter sequences into
one total DFT. As computational resources are greatly reduced using this method, the
FFT is used much more than the original DFT, and will also be used in this report.
2.1.5
Spectral Densities
Performing Fourier transforms on the auto- and cross-correlations respectively yields
Gxx(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
Rxx(τ) exp(−iωt)dτ
(2.23)
Gxy(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
Rxy(τ) exp(−iωt)dτ
(2.24)
where Gxx(ω) and Gxy(ω) are defined as the Power Spectral Density (PSD) and Cross
Spectral Density (CSD) respectively, and are both functions of frequency ω. As described
in Section 2.1.1, the correlation functions of random signals will hold all valuable infor-
mation about the signals, given the specified assumptions. As the spectral densities are
calculated through the use of correlation functions, the spectral densities will then hold
all valuable information about the signals in the frequency domain. For multivariate sig-
nals, where correlation functions are assembled into a CF matrix, as described in Section
2.1.3, a Fourier transform can be performed on the CF matrix, to yield a Spectral Density
Master thesis
Page 10 of 152
==PAGE:23==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
(SD) matrix G(ω),
G(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
R(τ) exp(−iωτ)dτ.
(2.25)
It may then be recognized that the diagonal will consist of PSD and off-diagonal CSD.
Considering discretely measured data once again, performing a DFT on the CF matrix,
yields a discrete SD matrix
G(k) = 1
N
N−1
X
r=0
R(r) exp(−i2πkr/N),
k = 0, 1, 2, ..., (N −1).
(2.26)
Using the above relation, the estimation of the SD matrix works well under the crucial
assumption, that the correlation functions has completely decayed to zero within the
considered time window. As described by Damsgaard [13], for systems with insufficient
damping or correlation functions exhibiting a significant noise-tail, the estimate of the
SD will show a so-called side-lobe noise. Different methodologies may be used to mitigate
this. One such option is a tapering window, which forces the CF to zero. In OMA a
flat-triangular window is often chosen as the window type, as it reduces the side-lobe
noise, without the introduction of a large bias at spectral peaks. A different methodology
to mitigate side-lobe noise is to estimate the SD matrix using Welch’s method. Using
this method, the signal is segmented into blocks, and averaging is applied with a Han-
ning window and an overlap between blocks (commonly 50%), in order to reduce leakage.
Leakage cannot be wholly avoided, and blunting of the spectral peaks is expected, which
will likely lead to an overestimation of modal damping. If there is random undesired noise
present in the system, the goal of the averaging is to remove such noise. Further, if the
noise is uncorrelated, averaging will completely remove the noise and the SD estimation
will be perfect for sample sizes approaching infinity. This reveals a trade-off between the
accuracy of the SD estimates and the computational resources associated with large data
sets.
In random vibration theory, spectral densities are considered very important. The rea-
soning for this, is because they are able to describe input-output relations in a very simple
way. This relation is called the fundamental theorem. It is referred to as perhaps the
most important equation in all of random vibration theory by Brincker et al. [2], and is
given as
Gx(ω) = H∗(iω)Gf(ω)HT(iω),
(2.27)
where Gf(ω) and Gx(ω) are input and output spectral densities and H(iω) is the system
frequency response function (FRF) matrix.
2.1.6
Modal Parameter Estimation Models
The modal analysis methods to be used in this report, are developed based on mathe-
matical models for modal parameter estimations. As such it is appropriate to introduce
the main mathematical models, utilized for modal parameter estimation. As the modal
Master thesis
Page 11 of 152
==PAGE:24==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
analysis taking place in this report is performed on a dynamical structure, the models
are considered from a structural dynamics point of view.
Within structural dynam-
ics, the underlying model is often assumed to be a system of Nd.o.f degrees of freedom,
linear-time-invariant (LTI) and viscously damped. Such a system may be described by a
second-order ordinary differential equation (ODE)
M¨y(t) + C ˙y(t) + Ky(t) = x(t),
(2.28)
where y(t) ∈RNd.o.f and x(t) ∈RNd.o.f are the input and output vectors respectively,
M, C, K ∈RNd.o.f×Nd.o.f, are the mass, damping and stiffness matrix respectively, and ˙[ ]
denotes derivative with respect to time.
The modal model
As the modal parameters are what is of interest when performing modal analysis, the
model in which these are defined, is first presented. The modal model of the system
in eq. (2.28) can be derived as the FRF H(jω), of the input-output relation Y(jω) =
H(jω)X(jω). As per Damsgaard [13], this relation can be presented in terms of the
modal parameters
H(jω) =
Nd.o.f
X
n=1
 ψnγT
n
jω −λn
+
ψ∗
nγH
n
jω −λ∗
n

,
(2.29)
where ψn and γn are the mode shape and modal participation vectors and λn the system
pole of the n’th mode, while [ ]T denotes the transpose, [ ]∗the complex conjugate and
[ ]H the complex conjugate transpose (Hermitian transpose), j is the imaginary unit and
ω the frequency variable.
Mode shape vectors relate to the system response at each
degree-of-freedom, participation vectors relate to input forces, and as such describe the
excitation efficiency at each degree of freedom, while the system poles yield the undamped
natural frequency and damping ratio of each mode. Rewriting the modal model FRF in
eq. (2.29) in matrix notation yields
H(jω) = Ψ(jωI −Λ)−1L,
(2.30)
where Ψ is the modal matrix holding mode shapes in the columns, L is the modal
participation matrix with modal participation vectors in the columns, I is the identity
matrix and Λ is a diagonal matrix consisting of the system poles λn. As the system
in eq. (2.28) is a discretized system with Nd.o.f degrees of freedom, the modal analysis
cannot estimate the full frequency response matrix H(jω). In practice, the matrix will
be limited by the number of input points Ni and measured output points No. As such the
size of the estimated frequency response matrix will be limited to H(jω)No×Ni through
the expression
H(jω)No×Ni = ΨNo×2Nm(jωI −Λ)−1
2Nm×2NmL2Nm×Ni,
(2.31)
Master thesis
Page 12 of 152
==PAGE:25==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
where Nm is the number of modes, and 2Nm appears due to modal parameters coming in
complex conjugate pairs. As the system in eq. (2.28) is a linear ODE, a linear combination
of modal contribution constitutes a general homogeneous solution x(t) = 0,
y(t) =
X
cnψneλnt,
(2.32)
with cn being constants determinable via an initial condition. From the above solution, it
is revealed that a general free decay is found as the product of a complex exponential and
the mode shapes. This realization is particularly important, as the correlation functions
represent free decays in OMA when the system is excited by white noise. This will be
further expanded upon in later sections.
The state space model
As presented by Hendricks et al. [20] a continuous linear and time-invariant state space
model including process and measurement noise, can generally be defined as
z(t + 1) = Az(t) + Bu(t) + w(t)
(2.33a)
r(t) = Cz(t) + Du(t) + v(t),
(2.33b)
where z(t) ∈Rn is a state vector containing the values of all n states, u(t) ∈RNi is the
vector of Ni inputs, r(t) ∈RNo is the vector of No outputs, w(t) ∈Rn and v(t) ∈RNo are
the process and measurement noise respectively, both modeled as stochastic processes.
Lastly, A ∈Rn×n is a continuous time system matrix, which describes the dynamics of the
states, B ∈Rn×Ni, C ∈RNo×n and D ∈RNo×Ni respectively are input, output and feed-
through matrices. To be able to work with this model, it is often assumed that the state
space equations presented above, are observable and controllable, such that all modes can
be observed at output r(t), and that all modes can be excited, either deterministically at
input u(t) or stochastically at input w(t). These assumptions will also be made in this
report.
Defining a state space vector representing the displacement and velocities of the system
z(t) =
(
y(t)
˙y(t)
)
,
(2.34)
allows for the rewriting of the EOM in eq. (2.28) into a system of first order differential
equations in state space form. This will yield the state space matrices
A =
"
0
I
−M−1K
−M−1C
#
,
B =
"
0
M−1
#
,
C =
h
I
0
i
.
(2.35)
Note, that different state space formulations are possible for the same dynamical system,
but all are equivalent in modal space. The interpretation of the output vector r(t) in the
above formulation is that of the measured quantities by use of sensors, i.e. accelerometers.
Master thesis
Page 13 of 152
==PAGE:26==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
Performing eigenvalue decomposition of the system matrix, transforms the system into
the modal space
A = Ψ′Λ(Ψ′)−1,
(2.36)
where
Ψ′ = [Ψ, ΨΛ]T
(2.37)
contains the eigenvectors in state space coordinates. The mode shapes in terms of mea-
sured coordinates, can be found via the output matrix and state space coordinate modal
matrix Ψ = CΨ′. Note, that as in previous sections, the above is formulated in con-
tinuous time, but data is sampled in discrete time steps.
As such, the above needs
reformulating into a discrete time representation. As shown by Hendricks et al. [20], a
discrete time representation of the state space model from eq. (2.33) may be found as
z(k + 1) = Adz(k) + Bdu(k) + w(k)
(2.38a)
r(k) = Cz(k) + Du(k) + v(k),
(2.38b)
where k comes from replacing the continuous time t with discrete time instances k∆t,
and Ad and Bd are the system and input matrix in discrete time respectively, and are of
the same sizes as in the continuous time representation.
If the process and measurement noise, w(t) and v(t), are ignored, the general solution to
a system such as the one in eq. (2.33) (continuous, linear and time invariant) is known,
as shown by Hendricks et al. [20]
z(t) = eAtz(0) +
Z t
0
eA(t−τ)Bu(τ)dτ,
(2.39)
where the first term is known as the homogeneous solution, the second term the particular
solution, and z(0) the initial condition of the states. The homogeneous solution may
also be known as the zero input solution, and the particular solution as the zero state
solution. For a discretized state space such as the one in eq. (2.38), there is a similar
known solution, as shown by Hendricks et al. [20]
z(k) = Ak
dz(0) +
k−1
X
i=0
Ak−1−i
d
Bdu(i),
(2.40)
where the first and second term are once again the homogeneous and particular solutions,
respectively. Hendricks et al. [20] further shows that the discrete time system matrix Ad
is the discrete counterpart to the continuous matrix A via the expression
Ad = eAk∆t.
(2.41)
Different OMA methodologies will be presented later in this report, and when utilizing
these methods, the correlation functions will represent free decays, which correspond to
the transient homogeneous solution. As such the output may be described assuming no
Master thesis
Page 14 of 152
==PAGE:27==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
input u(i) = 0 for i = 0, 1, 2, ..., k −1. By inserting the discrete solution in eq. (2.40)
into the discrete system in eq. (2.38b), the discrete output then becomes
r(k) = CAk
dz(0).
(2.42)
The Auto Regressive Moving Average (ARMA) model
The Auto Regressive Moving Average (ARMA) model is a model that has seen wide use
across many fields, and is often used to predict or describe time varying signals. The
model contains two parts, the auto regressive (AR) and the moving average (MA) part.
It models the discrete time signal output r(n) at time sample n via
r(n) =
NA
X
k=1
Akr(n −k) +
NM
X
k=0
Bkx(n −k),
(2.43)
where Ak ∈CNo×No, k = 1, 2, ..., NA and Bk ∈CNo×Ni, k = 0, 1, 2, ..., NM are the AR
and MA matrices respectively, and x(n) is the input vector. The ARMA model is often
referred to be of AR order NA and MA order NM. The first term relates output r(n)
to the previous NA time steps of outputs via the AR matrices. As the AR matrices
multiply the signal of previous time steps, it may be interpreted as an approximation to
the homogeneous solution to the general state space model, and as such will describe the
physical properties of the system. The second term relates the output r(n) to the input
x(n) at sample n as well as to the previous NM time steps of the input. With the MA
matrices multiplying the input, they may be interpreted as the particular solution to the
general state space model. In that case, they represent the external forces and noise in
the system. As shown by Damsgaard [13], one may perform a Z-transform on the ARMA
model in eq. (2.43) using the time shift property r(n −m) ↔z−mY (z) along with some
rearranging, in order to obtain the transfer function
H(z) = R(z)
X(z) =
 
I −
NA
X
n=1
Anz−n
!−1  NM
X
n=1
Bnz−n
!
= A−1(z)B(z).
(2.44)
Damsgaard [13] further presents that evaluating the above eq. (2.44) on the unit circle
z = eiωk∆t, the FRF is obtained. It turns out, that the transfer function in eq. (2.44) is a
matrix fraction polynomial, where the AR and MA coefficients describe the denominator
and numerator polynomials respectively. This will in turn yield NM system zeros, and
NA system poles containing the undamped natural frequencies and damping ratios.
2.1.7
Modal Parameter Post Processing
Using any identification technique, whether EMA or OMA, results in the return of a set
of eigenvalues in complex conjugate pairs and corresponding eigenvectors. From these,
the modal parameters of the system may be calculated. As shown by Hendricks et al.
[20], the Frobenius’ theorem can be used to transform discrete eigenvalues/time poles
Master thesis
Page 15 of 152
==PAGE:28==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
into continuous ones
λn = ln(µn)
∆t
,
(2.45)
where λn and µn are the continuous and discrete time poles respectively, and ∆t once
again the sampling time. The modal parameters can then be retrieved from the complex
conjugate time poles, by representing the poles as
λn = −ζnωn ± jωn
p
1 −ζ2
n = −ζnωn ± ωn,d,
(2.46)
with ωn and ωn,d being the undamped and damped natural frequencies respectively, and
ζn being the damping ratio, all of mode n. Lastly, these modal parameters can then
obtained from eq. (2.46) via
ωn = |λn|,
(2.47)
ζn = −Re(λn)
|λn| ,
(2.48)
ωn,d = ωn
p
1 −ζ2
n = Im(λn).
(2.49)
2.1.8
Modal Decomposition
As briefly mentioned in Section 2.1.6, the correlation functions represent free decays of
systems excited by white noise within OMA. The realization behind why this interpreta-
tion is fitting, is presented by Brincker [21], who shows that the modal decomposition of
the CF matrix assuming white noise input, for positive times R+(τ) and negative times
R−(τ) is given by
R+(τ) = 2π
Nm
X
n=1
(γnψT
n eλnτ + γ∗
nψH
n eλ∗
nτ)
(2.50)
R−(τ) = 2π
Nm
X
n=1
(ψnγT
n e−λnτ + ψ∗
nγH
n e−λ∗
nτ),
(2.51)
where ψn ∈CNi is the mode shape, γn ∈CNo the modal participation vector and λn the
continuous eigenvalue, all of mode n. Brincker [21] importantly notes, that the negative
time part of the CF matrix R−(τ) is a free decay, as it is written as a linear combination
of modal contributions, i.e. terms proportional to the mode shape is multiplied a complex
exponential, as in eq. (2.32). Further, the positive time part R+(τ) is only a free decay if
used in its transposed form (γnψT
n )T = ψnγT
n . As such, when using the positive time part
of the CF matrix the rows represent the free decays, and must be transposed, whereas
when using the negative time part the columns make up the free decays. Note, that the
CF matrix in eq. (2.19) is only estimated for positive time lags, and as such needs to be
transposed bR
T(k) when interpreting the columns as free decays. With this interpretation,
a response matrix Y(k) may be defined with stacked free decays in the columns, to be
Master thesis
Page 16 of 152
==PAGE:29==
2
THEORY
2.1
Fundamental Theory and Equations for Modal Analysis
directly interpreted from the transpose of the estimated CF matrix
bR
T(k) = Y(k) = [y1(k), y2(k), ..., yNo(k)],
(2.52)
where yn(k) ∈RNo is the n free decay at time instant k.
Brincker [21] also notes that the definition of the CF matrix in eq. (2.15) is important
for the above interpretation. A different definition of the CF matrix as R′(τ) = E[y(t +
τ)yT(t)] is also common in the literature. Using this alternative definition swaps the time
solutions of the CF matrix, resulting in the positive time part now having the free decays
in the columns, without the need of transposing.
Performing the modal decomposition in the frequency domain may be done by Fourier
transforming eq. (2.50)-(2.51), as presented by Brincker [21]
G(ω) =
N
X
n=1

ψnγT
n
−jω −λn
+
ψ∗
nγH
n
−jω −λ∗
n
+
γnψT
n
jω −λn
+
γ∗
nψH
n
jω −λ∗
n

,
(2.53)
where ω is the frequency and j the imaginary unit. It may be noted from eq. (2.53),
that some terms are proportional to the mode shapes and some terms are proportional to
the modal participation vectors. As such, the modal decomposition cannot be considered
as a linear combination of the free decays of the system, in the frequency domain. This
occurs as the positive and negative time lag terms from eq. (2.50)-(2.51) get mixed when
taking the Fourier transform. The result is that the two first terms in eq. (2.53) are
from the negative time lags, and the last two are from the positive time lags. Extracting
correct modal parameters from the SD matrix then becomes challenging. As presented by
Brincker et al. [2], this challenge has resulted in the popularization of using an alternate
version of the SD matrix, the so-called half spectra. This version of the SD matrix is
achieved by only taking the Fourier transform of the positive part of the CF matrix from
eq. (2.50). This result in the SD matrix being directly proportional to the mode shapes,
Gyy(ω) =
N
X
n=1
 γnψT
n
jω −λn
+
γ∗
nψH
n
jω −λ∗
n

.
(2.54)
Similarly to the positive time part R+(τ) of the CF matrix, it is noticed here that the
transpose of the half spectra GT
yy(ω) is represented by linear combinations of free decays.
As such, the columns of the transposed half spectra can be interpreted as free decays in
the frequency domain.
Brincker [21] notes that using the transposed CF matrix from eq. (2.52) or SD matrix
from eq. (2.54) in any identification technique, there will be as many free decays as
sensors.
Further, Brincker [21] shows the relation between the input and output SD
matrices, revealing that a reduced rank of the input SD matrix, will lead to reduced
rank of the output SD matrix in eq. (2.53) or eq. (2.54). Therefore, it is a common
assumption in OMA that the excitation of the structure is multiple input, i.e. many
independent excitation sources.
Master thesis
Page 17 of 152
==PAGE:30==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
2.1.9
Measurement Specifications
When conducting experimental measurements, it is necessary to create a plan, that se-
cures measurements are carried out well and that the collected data have the required
quality. The upper limit of the frequency band, which is the range of frequencies at which
information about the structure can be determined, is defined by the Nyquist frequency
fNyq = fs
2 ,
(2.55)
where fs is the sampling frequency. As per Brincker et al. [2], data acquisition systems
often contain anti-aliasing filters, that have an effect on frequencies near the Nyquist
frequency. In practice it is there recommended to use
fs > 2.4fmax
(2.56)
to choose the sampling frequency, where fmax is the highest frequency of interest. Utilizing
a higher sampling frequency than in eq. (2.56) is called oversampling. The influence of
oversampling may be realized by considering the measurement noise as a white noise
process. This has the implication, that its spectral density can be assumed flat, within
the Nyquist band, Gn(ω) = Gn0. Then, utilizing Parseval theorem stating that the noise
variance σ2
n must equal the area under the spectral density, one obtains
σ2
n = 2Gn0fnyq.
(2.57)
As Gn0 is the flat spectral density coming from the measurement noise, it is interpreted
as the noise floor. From eq. (2.57) it becomes apparent, that increasing the sampling
frequency must reduce the noise floor, if the noise variance is independent of the sampling
frequency. For the types of data acquisition systems used in this project, σ2
n is indeed
independent of sampling frequency, and as such oversampling will lead to a lower noise
floor.
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
Experimental modal analysis (EMA) is a set of methodologies and tools utilized to identify
modal parameters, i.e. natural frequencies, damping ratios and mode shapes, of a struc-
tural system using experimentally obtained input-output data. EMA is generally per-
formed by exciting a structure, with a known input, and measuring the dynamic response
of the system (output). The input and output data is most often relayed via frequency
response functions (FRF), or occasionally via impulse response functions (IRF). EMA
presents many different methodologies to identify modal parameters. These methodolo-
gies can be divided into two subcategories, frequency and time domain methods. The
frequency domain methods utilize the FRF, while the time domain utilize the IRF, how-
ever in this project, only frequency domain methods are considered.
EMA methods
Master thesis
Page 18 of 152
==PAGE:31==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
typically require that the system is removed from its operating state, in order to fully
control and measure the input forces. This presents a significant disadvantage for EMA,
as operational down-time is typically required for testing. Before presenting parameter
estimation methods, it is appropriate to briefly cover the main underlying assumptions
required for EMA.
2.2.1
Assumptions
The most important assumptions associated with EMA are:
• Linearity. The considered system is assumed to behave linearly, with the response
being directly proportional to input excitation. Following this assumption, the use
of superposition will also be allowed.
• Time invariance. The properties of the system, such as mass, stiffness, etc., are
assumed to be independent of time. This in turn, results in the estimated modal
parameters also being independent of time.
• Reciprocity. The system is assumed to have reciprocal behavior. Thus, the re-
sponse at point i to an excitation at point j, is the same as the response at point
j to an excitation at point i.
• Observability. The measured data is assumed to contain enough information to
allow for estimation, that will give an adequate model of the structure. Several as-
pects are contained in this assumption, such as accurate measurements, relatively
low noise level and sufficient excitation, both in frequency and magnitude. This as-
sumption is not always included among EMA assumptions, as it may be considered
implicit, however it does deserve mentioning.
While other assumptions may be additionally involved, the above listed are the only ones
required.
2.2.2
Frequency Response Function Estimation
The EMA method used in this report is a frequency domain method, and as such the
steps involved in estimating a FRF is first presented.
The simplest case possible, is
considering a system that is excited by a single input excitation, and has one single
output measurement.
2.2.2.1
Single input-single output FRF
Given an input u(t) into a single input-single output (SISO) system, the output v(t),
under the assumptions presented in Section 2.2.1, may be defined as a convolution integral
between the IRF of the system h(t) and its input, as presented by Damsgaard [13],
v(t) =
Z t
0
h(t −τ)u(τ)dτ.
(2.58)
Master thesis
Page 19 of 152
==PAGE:32==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
As shown by Brincker et al. [2], performing a Fourier transform on a convolution integral
will yield the product
V (ω) = H(ω)U(ω),
(2.59)
where U(ω) and V (ω) are Fourier transforms of the true in- and output respectively, and
thereby the true in- and output spectra, and H(ω) is the system FRF. Thus the FRF is
simply given as
H(ω) = V (ω)
U(ω).
(2.60)
The above presents the true FRF, as the true input and output spectra are used in the
estimation. However, in practice the measured data will never be completely free of noise.
Instead, an approximation of the FRF may be estimated by assuming that the measured
signals contain the sum of the true signal and a measurement error. As an example, the
measured input signal is given as f(t) = u(t) + du(t). The approximated FRF may then
be found as
ˆH(ω) = V (ω) + Dv(ω)
U(ω) + Du(ω) = X(ω)
F(ω) ,
(2.61)
where ˆH(ω) is the estimated approximation of the true FRF, X(ω) is the frequency
spectrum of the measured output, F(ω) is the frequency spectrum of the measured input,
and Du(ω) and Dv(ω) are the frequency spectra of the measurement error of input and
output respectively. As noted by Damsgaard [13], estimating the FRF using eq. (2.61)
runs the risk of the measured input F(ω) = 0. As an alternative, the estimated FRF is
often found by utilizing the spectral densities. Two different estimates of the FRF can
be obtained by postmultiplying eq. (2.61) by the complex conjugate of the input and
output respectively
H1(ω) = ˆH(ω)F ∗(ω)
F ∗(ω) = X(ω)F ∗(ω)
F(ω)F ∗(ω)
(2.62)
H2(ω) = ˆH(ω)X∗(ω)
X∗(ω) = X(ω)X∗(ω)
F(ω)X∗(ω) ,
(2.63)
where it is recognized that
H1(ω) = Gxf
Gff
(2.64)
H2(ω) = Gxx
Gfx
,
(2.65)
with Gfx, Gxf and Gff, Gxx being the cross and power spectral densities respectively, of
the measured input and output signal. The estimates H1 and H2 are more robust than
the one in eq. (2.61) according to Damsgaard [13]. This is because averaging and Welch’s
method can be used when estimating the spectral densities, which leads to a reduction
in the uncorrelated noise as presented in Section 2.1.5. Inserting the original estimate in
Master thesis
Page 20 of 152
==PAGE:33==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
eq. (2.61) into eq. (2.62) and (2.63) yields
H1(ω) = H(ω)

1 + GDu(ω)
Gu(ω)
−1
(2.66)
H2(ω) = H(ω) + GDv(ω)
Guv(ω) .
(2.67)
Studying these two terms, it becomes apparent that if the spectral density of the in-
put measurement error GDu(ω) approaches zero, the FRF estimate H1(ω) will converge
towards the true FRF H(ω). Similarly, if the spectral density of the output measure-
ment error GDv(ω) approaches zero, the FRF estimate H2(ω) will converge towards
the true FRF H(ω).
Further, it may also be recognized that it must be true that
H1(ω) ≤H(ω) ≤H2(ω), from which it can be reasoned out, that the estimators may
perform differently at different frequencies. Most notably, it should be realized that near
resonances, the input force is relatively small and the measured signal is potentially de-
graded by measurement noise, whereas the output force is large and expectedly larger
than the measurement noise. As such, the H2(ω) estimator is expected to perform much
better near resonances. Conversely, near antiresonances the output force is relatively
small and potentially degraded by measurement noise, and the input force much larger.
As a result, the H1(ω) estimator is expected to perform much better near antiresonances.
As the aforementioned FRF estimators are only approximations, introducing a quality
measure for the estimated FRF is of high interest. Perhaps the most commonly used qual-
ity measure for a SISO system FRF, is the squared coherence γ2. The squared coherence
is defined as the ratio between the two estimators
γ2 = H1(ω)
H2(ω) =
|Gxf(ω)|2
Gxx(ω)Gff(ω).
(2.68)
As may be noted, the squared coherence (or just coherence), can vary between 0 ≤γ2 ≤1.
If the coherence is equal to 1, the two estimators are identical H1(ω) = H2(ω), which
can only be the case if the measurements are noise-free. Conversely, if the coherence is
equal to 0, there is no relationship between the two estimators, and the measurements
must be pure noise. As such, the coherence can be used as a measure of the noise in
the measurements. However, it should be noted that other factors may also result in the
coherence having a value less than one, such as non-linearities or leakage issues.
The phase of the FRF estimators H1 and H2 turns out to be identical, as presented by
Ewins [1]. The phase is calculated using the arccos function, and restricting the phase
within ϕ(ω) ∈[0, 180]◦[13],
ϕ(ω) = 180◦
π
arccos
Re(H(ω))
|H(ω)|

,
(2.69)
where H(ω) may be replaced with either of the two H1 or H2, yielding the same result.
Master thesis
Page 21 of 152
==PAGE:34==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
2.2.2.2
Multiple input-multiple output FRF
Expanding the above method to multiple input-multiple out (MIMO) systems, is ad-
vantageous as SISO systems have few real world applications. Generalizing the above
method to have Ni inputs f(t) ∈RNi and No outputs x(t) ∈RNo, the relation in eq.
(2.59) becomes
X(ω) = H(ω)F(ω),
(2.70)
where X(ω) ∈CNo×1 is the frequency spectrum of the measured output x(t), H(ω) ∈
CNo×Ni is the FRF matrix and F(ω) ∈CNi×1 is frequency spectrum of the measured input
f(t). Both f(t) and x(t) represent their true counterparts, the true input and output u(t)
and v(t) respectively.
For MIMO systems, as was the case for SISO, H(ω) is approximated by two estimators
H1(ω) and H2(ω). Similarly to the SISO case, H1(ω) is estimated by assuming no input
noise, and uncorrelated output noise do(t) ∈RNo. Adding the output noise to eq. (2.70)
yields
X(ω) −Do(ω) = H(ω)F(ω),
(2.71)
with Do(ω) being the frequency spectrum of the measured output noise. Postmultiplying
the Hermitian transpose of the input frequency spectrum F(ω) to both sides of eq. (2.71)
yields
X(ω)FH(ω) −Do(ω)FH(ω) = X(ω)F(ω)FH(ω)
⇒
Gxf(ω) −Gdof(ω) = H(ω)Gff(ω).
(2.72)
Assuming that the output noise is uncorrelated with the input, the CSD between the two
becomes zero, Gdof(ω) = 0. The H1(ω) estimator then becomes
H1(ω) = Gxf(ω)G−1
ff (ω),
(2.73)
with H1 ∈CNo×Ni, Gxf ∈CNo×Ni and Gff ∈CNi×Ni.
From eq.
(2.73) one may
note, that the PSD Gxx has to be non-singular, otherwise H1 does not exist.
This
in turn necessitates that the input signals are uncorrelated. Considering the physical
interpretation, this turns out to be unsurprising. If input signals are correlated, it would
not be possible to distinguish their individual effects on the response.
To gain an estimate of the H2(ω) estimator, similar steps are taken as above, and assuming
uncorrelated input noise and no output noise, yielding
H2(ω)Gfx(ω) = Gxx(ω),
(2.74)
with H2 ∈CNi×No, Gfx ∈CNo×Ni and Gxx ∈CNo×No. Investigating eq. (2.74) reveals,
that only the case of No = Ni will result in a unique estimate of H2(ω). In the case
of No > Ni, a generalized inverse will be required, which will result in a non-unique
estimate. As No > Ni is often the case in real world applications, the H2(ω) estimator
Master thesis
Page 22 of 152
==PAGE:35==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
is often not utilized in MIMO cases [13]. Accordingly, the H1(ω) will be used for FRF
estimation in this thesis.
Having established FRF estimates for the MIMO case, the quality of these estimates
can once again be evaluated via a coherence function. In the MIMO case, outputs will
have contributions from multiple inputs, leading to a small coherence, and as such the
ordinary coherence will not have much meaning.
Instead, as shown by Ewins [1], a
multiple coherence function γ2
M, can be found by comparing the measured and estimated
power spectrum Gxx,
γ2
M(ω) = G−1
xx(ω)Gxf(ω)G−1
ff (ω)Gfx(ω),
(2.75)
where γ2
M ∈RNo×1 is a quality measure of how well all Ni inputs predict the response.
As for the SISO case where the two estimators H1(ω) and H2(ω) performed better at
antiresonances and resonances respectively, the same reasoning is present for the MIMO
case, leading to H1(ω) performing better near antiresonances, and H2(ω) better near
resonances.
In this project, SIMO testing will be consistently used. FRF in the SIMO case can be
obtained simply, by either repeating the SISO FRF estimation for each output, or by
using the MIMO formulation for a single input.
2.2.3
Single Degree of Freedom Identification
Having estimated one or more FRFs, whether it be with the SISO or MIMO estimator,
the next step is to utilize the FRFs to extract the modal parameters of the system. The
simplest and one of the first developed modal parameter identification techniques, is the
single degree of freedom (SDOF) technique. Unlike what the name suggests, this is not
a technique limited to SDOF systems, but rather it considers just one resonance peak at
a time, and thus goes through the systems modes sequentially. This approach assumes
that in the vicinity of a resonance, the system is dominated by a single mode. This has
the consequence, that the technique works poorly for modes that are not well separated
or lightly damped. Multiple SDOF techniques exist, several are described by Ewins [1].
The SDOF technique presented in this thesis, fits the measured FRFs by a SDOF model.
Performing a Laplace transform of a SDOF version the EOM in eq. (2.28) yields
X(s) = (ms2 + cs + k)−1F(s)
(2.76)
⇒
X(s) = Hx(s)F(s),
(2.77)
where m, c and k are respectively the modal mass, damping and stiffness. By replacing
s = iω the SDOF compliance FRF is obtained:
Hx(iω) = X(iω)
F(iω) =
1
−ω2m + iωc + k.
(2.78)
Master thesis
Page 23 of 152
==PAGE:36==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
Mobility Hv(s) and accelerance Ha(s) may be similarly obtain via differentiation
Hv(s) = V (s)
F(s) = sX(s)
F(s)
(2.79)
Ha(s) = A(s)
F(s) = s2X(s)
F(s) ,
(2.80)
with V (s) and A(s) being the Laplace transforms of the velocity v(t) and acceleration
a(t) respectively. Once again, the FRFs are obtained by s = iω. FRFs will then exist
at discrete frequencies ωk, k = 1, 2, ..., N.
From this two least-squares problems can
be defined for the modal mass and stiffness from Re(H(ωk)) and modal damping from
Im(H(ωk)) respectively. Since the aim is to only extract the modal parameters for a
single mode, it is customary to only use data points within the half-power points of a
considered resonance peak, which helps to avoid modal coupling. The half-power points
ωa and ωb are then defined by limits of frequency, where the frequency amplitude crosses
the peak amplitude divided by
√
2, i.e. |H(ωn)|/
√
2, where wn is the peak resonance
frequency. As such only FRF points above this threshold is included in the least-squares
fit. An example of a least squares problem for the accelerance is shown by Damsgaard
[13] as


−ω2
a
1
−ω2
a+1
1
...
...
−ω2
b
1


"
m
k
#
=


Re(Ha(ωa)−1)
Re(Ha(ωa+1)−1)
...
Re(Ha(ωb)−1)


(2.81)


−ωa
−ωa+1
...
−ωb


h
d
i
=


Im(Ha(ωa)−1)
Im(Ha(ωa+1)−1)
...
Im(Ha(ωb)−1)


.
(2.82)
These both pose overdetermined problems of the form Ax = b, which has the well known
solution of x = A+b, with [ ]+ being the pseudo inverse. Having determined the modal
mass, damping and stiffness for a given n’th mode, the undamped natural frequency ωn
and damping ratio ζn can be calculated from
ωn =
r
k
m
(2.83)
ζn =
c
2
√
k · m
.
(2.84)
Doing this for all modes, will then extract all modal parameters. To estimate the mode
shapes, a method is used which utilizes the imaginary part of the FRF (or real part for
mobility), as a direct approximation to the modal coordinate. As shown by Damsgaard
[13], the idea behind this is illustrated by evaluating the compliance FRF in eq. (2.78),
Master thesis
Page 24 of 152
==PAGE:37==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
at a resonant frequency ωn =
p
k/m,
Hx(ωn) =
1
ic
p
k/m
.
(2.85)
As the compliance here becomes fully imaginary, it can be used as a direct measure of
the n’th modal amplitude. For the mobility and accelerance FRFs, similar expressions
to the one above can obtained, resulting in them either becoming fully real or imaginary
respectively.
In this project, the SDOF approach is mainly utilized to gain quick baseline estimates of
modal parameters, before utilizing a more advanced technique, presented below.
2.2.4
Poly-Reference Least Squares Complex Frequency Identification Tech-
nique
Applying the simple SDOF peak-picking and fitting, to multiple FRFs across multiple
channels and resonances is a monotonous and slow procedure. Additionally this method
is also limited in dealing with closely spaced modes, as previously mentioned. As such
a different approach is taken in this project. The specific technique chosen is the Poly-
Reference Least Squares Complex Frequency-domain (pLSCF). The pLSCF identification
technique developed by Guillaume et al. [22], as a MIMO extension to the Least Squares
Complex Frequency-domain (LSCF) technique. The method assumes that in the fre-
quency domain, the relationship between an output o (o = 1, 2, ..., No) and all inputs Ni
can be modeled through means of right matrix-fraction description [22]
Ho(ωk) = No(ωk)D−1(ωk),
(2.86)
with No ∈C1×Ni being the numerator row-vector polynomial, which is defined as
No(ωk) =
p
X
r=0
Ωr(ωk)Bor,
(2.87)
D(ωk) ∈CNi×Ni being the denominator matrix polynomial, which is defined as
D(ωk) =
p
X
r=0
Ωr(ωk)Ar,
(2.88)
and Ho(ωk) ∈C1×Ni the FRF row-vector from all Ni inputs to the output o. Bor ∈
R1×Ni and Ar ∈RNi×Ni are polynomial parameter matrices to be estimated, Ωr(ωk) are
polynomial basis functions, and p is the polynomial order. Ho(ωk), No(ωk) and D(ωk) are
all defined at discrete frequencies ωk, k = 1, 2, ..., Nf. In this project, a z-domain model
is used (a frequency domain method derived from a discrete time model), resulting in the
basis functions being [23]
Ωr(ωk) = e±iωk∆tr,
(2.89)
Master thesis
Page 25 of 152
==PAGE:38==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
where ∆t is the sampling time, and i the imaginary unit. The (±) impacts the stability of
the estimated poles. It is used as a modeling tool, to distinguish between mathematical
poles created by noise and actual physical poles [24]. The coefficients of the polynomial
parameter matrices Bor and Ar can be grouped together into a single matrix θ
θ =


β1
...
βNo
α


,
βo =


Bo0
...
Bop

,
α =


A0
...
Ap

.
(2.90)
The matrix coefficients can then be estimated by minimizing a non-linear least square
(NLS) cost function, with respect to the full grouped matrix θ
lNLS(θ) =
No
X
o=1
Nf
X
f=1
tr
 (εNLS
o
(ωk,θ))HεNLS
o
(ωk,θ)

,
(2.91)
where tr(·) is the trace operator and εNLS
o
(ωk,θ) is a weighted error function. The error
function is defined as
εNLS
o
(ωk,θ) = Wo(ωf)(No(ωk,βo)D−1(ωk,α) −Ho(ωk)),
(2.92)
with Wo(ω) being an arbitrary weighting function. Guillaume et al. [22] shows that a sub-
optimal linear least square problem can be used to approximate the NLS problem in eq.
(2.91). The sub-optimal linear least square problem can then be minimized with respect
to the coefficients βo and α. The derivative can then be taken of the new cost function,
a few substitutions are performed, and the result is the so-called normal equations [22]
0 = Mα =
 
2
No
X
o=1
(To −ST
o R−1
o So)
!
α,
(2.93)
where
Ro = Re(XH
o Xo),
So = Re(XH
o Yo),
To = Re(YH
o Yo),
(2.94)
and
Xo =


(Wo(ω1)[Ω0(ω1)
· · ·
Ωp(ω1)]) ⊗INi
...
(Wo(ωNf)[Ω0(ωNf)
· · ·
Ωp(ωNf)]) ⊗INi

∈CNf×(p+1)
(2.95)
Yo =


−(Wo(ω1)[Ω0(ω1)
· · ·
Ωp(ω1)]) ⊗Ho(ω1)
...
−(Wo(ωNf)[Ω0(ωNf)
· · ·
Ωp(ωNf)]) ⊗Ho(ωk)

∈CNf×Ni(p+1),
(2.96)
Master thesis
Page 26 of 152
==PAGE:39==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
where INi is an identity matrix and ⊗is the Kronecker tensor product. The square matrix
M ∈RNi(p+1)×Ni(p+1) can be computed directly from the estimated FRFs. Eq. (2.93) can
then be solved to find α. The solution α = 0 is trivial, and to avoid finding this the p’th
matrix coefficient of α is constrained to the identity matrix
Ap = INi.
(2.97)
The solution to the least square problem of order p is then
ˆαLS =
"
−M−1
[1:pNi,1:pNi]M[1:pNi,pNi+1:Ni(p+1)]
INi
#
.
(2.98)
Finding the coefficients ˆβLS,o is then easily done by solving βo = −R−1
o Soα. Having esti-
mated M for model order pmax, problems of lower order are easily solved by considering
sub-matrices according to eq. (2.98) of order p < pmax. During construction of stabiliza-
tion diagrams, this will turn out to be highly convenient.
With the coefficients Ar estimated, participation vectors and poles can be estimated as
explained by Cauberghe [24], by means of the formation of a companion matrix Ac. A
slightly reformulated, although equivalent, method is given as [13]
Ac =


0
INi
· · ·
0
...
...
...
...
0
0
0
INi
−AT
0
· · ·
−AT
r−2
−AT
r−1


.
(2.99)
Determining the system poles λn and participation vectors γn ∈RNi is then done by
finding the eigenvectors of the companion matrix Ac
(Ac −λnI)Vn = 0.
(2.100)
A right matrix-fraction model of order p will then yield pNi poles. Thus pNi poles will be
yielded from a model of order p. The eigenvector Vn relates to the modal participation
vector γn via
Vn =


γn
λnγn
...
λr−1
n
γn


.
(2.101)
Finally, the poles λn found should then be converted to continuous time poles, through
the method presented in Section 2.1.7.
Before the final step of finding the mode shapes, it is first desired to find the global, un-
biased modal parameters and independent of signal noise, i.e. it is desired to distinguish
the physical poles from the mathematical noise ones. A common way of doing this, is
Master thesis
Page 27 of 152
==PAGE:40==
2
THEORY
2.2
Experimental Modal Analysis
to overspecify the model and create a stabilization diagram. Stabilization diagrams are
created by plotting estimated poles as a function of model order. When properly inter-
preted the stabilization diagram makes it possible to separate physical modal parameters
from spurious ones, and the physical poles and participation vectors are obtained.
Assuming that the stabilization diagrams have been properly utilized to sort away spuri-
ous poles, mode shapes may then be found by using the Least Squares Frequency Domain
(LSFD) estimator. This estimator is given as [24]
[H(jωk)]Ni×No =
Nm
X
n=1

ψnγT
n
jωk −λn
+
ψ∗
nγH
n
jωk −λ∗
n

−LR
ω2
k
+ UR,
(2.102)
where LR, UR are lower and upper residues respectively. The lower and upper residues
model the influence from lower and higher band poles.
The model in eq.
(2.102) is
a so-called pole residue model for a receptance FRF. Eq. (2.102) is solved using least
squares, and if poles and participation vectors found from the stabilization diagram are
consistent, eq. (2.102) will also yield consistent estimates [24]. The mode shapes ψn may
be directly estimated, if the participation vectors ψn are known from previous steps. In
the case that only the poles λn are known, the residues Rn = ψnγT are estimated, and
the modal participation vectors are obtained by means of a singular value decomposition
of the residues, yielding both the mode shapes and the participation vectors. However,
this is only possible if the residue matrix Rn is of rank 1. If the rank is not 1 (i.e. pole
with multiplicity of 2 or more) the corresponding mode shape and participation vector
becomes impossible to uniquely derive.
Implementation of pLSCF
This thesis utilizes the same semi-automatic implementation as developed and presented
by Damsgaard [13]. To see a full extent of the method see [13], but the workflow may be
summarized into 6 points:
1. A 3D FRF HNf×No×Ni (2D in the SIMO case) is estimated and used as input into
pLSCF identification routine.
2. For the highest model order pmax, the normal equation system matrix Mpmax in
eq. (2.93) is built, and considering sub-matrices of Mpmax for all p ∈[pmin, pmax],
denominator coefficients α are determined. From α, poles and participation vectors
are then obtained using eq. (2.100).
3. Building and interpreting stabilization diagrams. Stabilization diagram are built
by estimating the poles λi,p and participation vectors γi,p. Each set of λi,p−1 poles,
and γi,p−1 participation vectors are then compared to the one order higher poles λi,p
and vectors γi,p. First, if an estimated damping ratio ζi,p−1 is not between 0 and
1, the pole is deemed unstable. If not the case, the relative differences in natural
frequency, damping ratio and MACX of participation vectors between p and p −1
Master thesis
Page 28 of 152
==PAGE:41==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
are calculated. The user has then previously set tolerance levels εf, εζ and εγ, and
only if the relative differences fall below these levels, are the poles deemed stable.
4. Using the stable poles, global modal parameters are found using either simple fre-
quency picking, or agglomerative hierarchical clustering. The hierarchical clustering
returns a weighted mean of the Nclust (chosen by user) highest populated clusters.
The clustering uses dMACXP = 1 −MACXP as a distance measure, and the re-
turned clusters uses MACXP as a weighting, as shown by Paulsen [8], and will be
discussed further in Section 2.5.
5. Mode shapes are estimated utilizing the LSFD method from eq. (2.102).
6. Validate the modal model by comparison of measured modal model fitted FRFs.
2.2.5
Shaker Excitation
The main external excitation source used within this project will be an electrodynamic
shaker. This method works by sending an given electric signal to the shaker, via an am-
plifier, which then mechanically excites the structure through a shaker-stinger-structure
connection, as laid out by Cauberghe [24]. The stinger is a thin metal rod and it ensures
that the force is only applied in the longitudinal direction. While the electric signal sent
to the shaker is known, it is important to measure the force between the structure and
stinger. If the signal sent to the shaker is used as the input force when estimating FRFs,
the resulting FRFs will be of the system which contains both the structure, stinger and
shaker. Instead, using the actual measured force, will lead to correct estimates of the
FRF [24]. Further, by utilizing a stinger-shaker connection for excitation, the interaction
between structure and shaker typically results in a drop in signal amplitude of transmit-
ted force near resonant frequencies of the structure. This in turn will often lead to drops
in the coherence near resonant frequencies, which should be expected when performing
FRFs with shaker excitation.
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
As presented in Section 2.2, the utilization of EMA requires the estimation of one or
more FRFs (or IRFs), and doing so requires knowledge about the input into the system.
Such input knowledge is not always available, as it may not be possible to completely
isolate the system from noise outside the control of an experiment, or the structure may
be of a significant scale, making excitation very difficult. To circumvent this lack of input
knowledge, a set of methodologies have been developed, to perform modal analysis even
in the lack of input information. This is known as Operational Modal Analysis (OMA).
In this project, five different OMA methods will be utilized for modal parameter estima-
tion. These methods are the Ibrahim Time Domain, Eigensystem Realization Algorithm,
Stochastic Subspace Identification, Poly Reference and Frequency Domain Decomposi-
tion techniques.
Master thesis
Page 29 of 152
==PAGE:42==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
As opposed to EMA, the general idea behind OMA is that the dynamic (modal) pa-
rameters of a system is contained in, and may be extracted from, the systems auto- and
cross-correlation. In the same manner, that the IRF of a system will hold dynamic in-
formation about a given system, the correlation functions will also contain information
about that given system. However, while the IRF is not impacted by external signals
outside of the initial impulse, that is not necessarily the case for correlation functions. If
for example a system is excited by a periodic signal, that will also be contained in the cor-
relation functions. As such, utilizing OMA methods require a specific set of assumptions
to be fulfilled, to gain reliable modal parameter estimates.
2.3.1
Assumptions
• White noise. The input excitation forces are assumed to be Gaussian white noise
signals, exciting a wide frequency band, resulting in a flat spectral density.
• Linearity and time invariance.
The system is assumed to linear and time
invariant (LTI). These assumptions were also present for EMA, and are explained
in further detail in Section 2.2.1.
• Ergodicity and stationarity. The system is assumed to be an ergodic and sta-
tionary system. These two assumptions allow for time-averages to replace ensemble-
averages.
• Lightly damped.
Damping in the system is assumed to be sufficiently light.
This was touched upon in Section 2.1.1, with too strong damping resulting in the
response not approaching Gaussian, which would lead to the CF matrix not holding
all information about the system.
• Zero-mean Gaussian response. Expanding upon the above, the response signals
of the system are assumed to be zero-mean Gaussian, or at least approximately so.
This allows them to be described by their second order properties, CF and SD.
• Multiple input excitation. There are multiple inputs, i.e. many independent
excitation forces on the system.
While the final assumption is often included, it is in fact not a requirement for all OMA
methods.
However, it is still often included as the methods work much better with
multiple-input data, as discussed by Brincker et al. [2]. Further, the dynamics of a LTI
system may be described by a linear combination of many independent input forces. As
such, the response will be approximately Gaussian according to the CLT in Section 2.1.1,
which would lead the second last assumption being automatically fulfilled, if the last one
is. Note that a single electrodynamic shaker excitation is used in this study, and as such
the final assumption is indeed violated.
Master thesis
Page 30 of 152
==PAGE:43==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
2.3.2
Rank of the Problem
When designing test setups for OMA methods, such as choosing the number and place-
ment of sensors, an important concept to consider is the “rank of the problem”. As
explained by Brincker et al. [2] the rank of the problem is most easily understood in
connection with the Frequency Domain Decomposition (FDD) technique, which will be
presented in a later section. In this technique a SD matrix is estimated, and its physical
rank is defined to be the maximum number of modes contributing to the response in a
frequency band. For example, if a frequency band with two closely spaced modes is con-
sidered, the physical rank is then two. While this defines the rank of the physical matrix,
the rank of the testing problem must also include the influence of noise always present.
As such, the number of noise sources is added to the rank of the physical matrix, to yield
the rank of the problem. Assuming two closely spaced modes and three noise sources, the
rank of the problem is Rp = 2 + 3 = 5. Turning back to the design of the test setup, the
number and placement of sensors should be chosen, as to be able to identify noise sources
and physical responses in such a manner that the measurement system does not limit the
rank of the problem. The maximum rank of the estimated SD matrix, is limited by the
number of sensors Nr, as the SD matrix is of size Nr × Nr. However, the rank of the SD
matrix is not restricted to a rank equal to the number of sensors. Adding an additional
sensor to a test setup, in the same position as another sensor, it will portray the same
information as the already existing sensor. As such, it will in practice not contribute to
the rank of the SD matrix, despite the number of sensors Nr increasing. The rank of the
SD matrix is known as the “rank of measurement system”. In order to assure that the
measurement system is able to describe all noise sources and physical responses, the rank
of the measurement system should be larger than the rank of the problem. The rank of
the problem is unknown, but Brincker et al. [2] recommends never assuming it to be less
than four, and as such recommends always using at least four measurement points.
2.3.3
Shaker Excitation
The number and placement of measurement points is an important factor to consider,
when designing a test setup. It turns out, that an equally important factor to consider is
the number of input loading sources, as it will limit the rank of the measurement system.
Brincker et al. [2] defines the number of independent inputs, to be that of the practical
rank of the correlation matrix of the inputs. The rank is estimated as the number of
non-zero singular values, and the practical rank means excluding singular values related
to noise. This practical rank may also be estimated in practice via the FDD technique, by
plotting the singular values of the SD matrix as a function of frequency, and then checking
how many singular values are separated from the noise floor, in a given frequency range.
To see how the number of input sources limit the rank of the measurement system, one
may consider the input-output relation
X(ω) = Hxf(ω)F(ω),
(2.103)
Master thesis
Page 31 of 152
==PAGE:44==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
where X(ω) and F(ω) are the frequency spectra of input f(t) and output x(t) respectively,
and Hxf(ω) is the system FRF matrix. As explained by Brincker et al. [2] the input
loading f(t) may be considered as an output of a linear filter loaded by an independent
white noise source e(t)
F(ω) = Hfe(ω)E(ω),
(2.104)
where E(ω) is the frequency spectrum of the white noise e(t), and Hfe(ω) is a loading
filter FRF matrix, describing the coloring of the loading, i.e. the deviation from white
noise, and the geometrical force distribution. If the white noise source E(ω) only contains
a single source, then the resulting loading vector F(ω) and its time domain equivalent
f(t), are governed by a single source, and the covariance matrix must then be of rank one.
As such it may in fact be possible to have many acting loads on a structure, but only one
independent input. Utilizing the fundamental theorem in eq. (2.27) on eq. (2.103) and
(2.104) results in the response spectral matrix Gx as
Gx(ω) = H∗
xf(ω)H∗
fe(ω)Ge(ω)HT
fe(ω)HT
xf(ω).
(2.105)
It is here realized, that if there is only one source in the white noise vector E(ω), all
elements in its spectral density matrix Ge(ω) will be zero, except for a single diagonal
element, and as such its rank will be one. As the rank of a matrix product cannot be
larger than the minimum rank of any matrix in the products, the response spectral matrix
Gx(ω) will be limited to one as well.
In this project the main excitation source will be a single electrodynamic shaker. From
the above, it is a natural conclusion, that a single shaker will limit the rank of the
measurement system. This must be kept in mind while performing the analysis. Further,
Brincker et al. [2] advises against using shakers for excitation, even when multiple are
used, as the shaker may increase the mass and damping of the system. As explained
in Section 2.2.5, measuring the actual input force when performing EMA, allows for
estimating modal parameters with the exclusion of dynamics from shaker and stinger,
while only utilizing the input signal to the shaker, would result in the parameters including
said dynamics. As such, EMA makes it possible to investigate the shaker’s impact on the
dynamics.
Nonetheless, while Brincker et al.
[2] advises against the use of shakers for OMA, a
practical substitute for the shaker in a lab environment is not proposed. As such, without
a viable alternative to the shaker, it will be utilized in this project, however the potential
shortcomings of the single loading source shaker remains under consideration during the
upcoming analysis.
2.3.4
Ibrahim Time Domain
The Ibrahim time domain technique was originally introduced by Ibrahim [25] and has
seen use for many years.
It has since its development seen further development and
modernization, as presented by Brincker et al. [2], which is the version which will be
Master thesis
Page 32 of 152
==PAGE:45==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
presented and utilized in this thesis. The ITD utilizes the fact that any free decay can be
expressed as a linear combination of mode shapes and exponential decays. As presented
in Section 2.1.8, the columns of the transposed estimated CF matrix may be interpreted
as free decays. Thus, a transposed CF matrix column y(t) can be expressed as
y(t) = y(k∆t) = c1ψ1eλ1k∆t + c2ψ2eλ2k∆t + . . .
= c1ψ1µk
1 + c2ψ2µk
2 + . . . ,
(2.106)
where ψi is the mode shape, λi is the continuous time pole, µi is the discrete time pole
and ci is the initial modal amplitude at time t = k = 0, all of mode i. The ITD technique
then forms a block Hankel matrix with four block rows, using four time delays
H =


y(1)
y(2)
· · ·
y(Np −3)
y(2)
y(3)
· · ·
y(Np −2)
y(3)
y(4)
· · ·
y(Np −1)
y(4)
y(5)
· · ·
y(Np)

=
"
H1
H2
#
,
(2.107)
where Np is the number of points in the free decay, and where the block Hankel matrix has
been split into a top H1 and bottom Hankel matrix H2. Both top and bottom matrices
are of size 2No×Np−3, where No is the number of measured output channels. Considering
the expression of the free decay in eq. (2.106), the matrix H1 can be expressed as
H1 = ΨΛ,
(2.108)
where Ψ is a matrix containing the mode shapes
Ψ =
"
ψ1
ψ2
· · ·
µ1ψ1
µ2ψ2
· · ·
#
(2.109)
and Λ is a matrix containing the discrete time poles raised to different times, multiplied
by the corresponding initial modal amplitude
Λ =


c1µ0
1
c1µ1
1
· · ·
c1µNp−3
1
c2µ0
2
c2µ1
2
· · ·
c2µNp−3
2
...
...
...
...

.
(2.110)
From eq. (2.107) it is recognized that the bottom Hankel matrix H2 is simply the top
Hankel matrix H1 delayed with two time steps, and as such can be expressed as
H2 = Ψ[µi]2Λ,
(2.111)
where [µi]2 is a diagonal matrix containing discrete eigenvalues. Using eq. (2.108) and
(2.111) Λ can be eliminated, and following this with a premultiplication of Ψ[µi]2 and
Master thesis
Page 33 of 152
==PAGE:46==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
isolating H2 yields
H2 = Ψ[µi]2Ψ−1H1 = AH1,
(2.112)
where A is the system matrix and is estimated from eq. (2.112). The system will be
overdetermined if Np −3 > 2No, and may be solved by SVD or regression, but the way
usually chosen for ITD technique is regression [2]. Premultiplication of either HT
1 or HT
2
on both sides of eq. (2.112), yields two estimates
ˆA1 = H2HT
1 (H1HT
1 )−1 = T21T−1
11
(2.113)
ˆA2 = H2HT
2 (H1HT
2 )−1 = T22T−1
12 ,
(2.114)
where Tij are so-called Toeplitz matrices. Both estimates estimates ˆA1 and ˆA2 are weakly
biased [2], and to mitigate this an average of the two is created and referred to as the
unbiased estimate
ˆA =
ˆA1 + ˆA2
2
.
(2.115)
This formulation is developed for single input multiple output (SIMO) systems. However,
it can be expanded to also work for MIMO systems. This is performed by calculating the
Toeplitz matrices as summations, using the information from all Nr free decays
T11 =
Nr
X
r=1
H1,rHT
1,r,
(2.116a)
T12 =
Nr
X
r=1
H1,rHT
2,r,
(2.116b)
T21 =
Nr
X
r=1
H2,rHT
1,r,
(2.116c)
T22 =
Nr
X
r=1
H2,rHT
2,r,
(2.116d)
where H1,r and H2,r are the top and bottom Hankel matrices from the r’th free decay.
One may note, that the CF matrix holds as many free decays as there are measurement
output channels, Nr = No. The estimates of the system matrices corresponding to eq.
(2.113) and (2.114), is obtained by
ˆA1 = T12T−1
11
(2.117)
ˆA2 = T22T−1
21 ,
(2.118)
through the use of the Toeplitz matrices in (2.116). Using eigenvalue decomposition of
the unbiased estimated system matrix ˆA in eq. (2.115), the mode shapes and discrete
eigenvalues may be found, using ˆA = Ψ[µi]2Ψ−1. The ITD will have as many eigenvalues
as the dimension of the system matrix, and as the system matrix is of size 2No ×2No, the
ITD will have 2No, and thereby No modes. This reveals that the number of measurement
Master thesis
Page 34 of 152
==PAGE:47==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
channels will determine the number of estimated modes for this technique. It is possible
to extend the technique to include more modes, by adding “pseudo measurements” i.e.
using some channels of data of the same free decays but delayed in time [2].
2.3.5
Eigensystem Realization Algorithm
The eigensystem realization algorithm (ERA) technique was initially introduced by Juang
and Pappa [26] relating to control theory, and Brincker et al. [2] presents the main ideas
from an OMA point of view. The ERA technique is derived from the discrete time state
space formulation in eq. (2.38). As shown in Section 2.1.6 the homogeneous solution to
the discrete time state space formulation (i.e. the system free decay) was found in eq.
(2.42), and repeated here (replacing r(k) with y(k) for consistency)
y(k) = CAk
dz(0),
(2.119)
where y(k) is the free decay, C the observation/output matrix, Ad the discrete time
system matrix, and z(0) is the state space initial conditions. Similarly to how free decays
was stacked in the columns of the transposed CF matrix in eq. (2.52) to yield the matrix
Y(k), the corresponding state space initial conditions of the No free decays can be stacked
in columns
Z(0) = [z1(0), z2(0), ..., zNo(0)].
(2.120)
A combined expression for all free decays Y(k) is then given by
Y(k) = CAk
dZ(0).
(2.121)
Using the expression for all free decays Y(k), two block Hankel matrices are created that
only differ by one time step, and both have s block rows
H(0) =


Y(0)
Y(1)
. . .
Y(1)
Y(2)
. . .
...
...
Y(s −1)
Y(s)
. . .


,
(2.122)
H(1) =


Y(1)
Y(2)
. . .
Y(2)
Y(3)
. . .
...
...
Y(s)
Y(s + 1)
. . .


.
(2.123)
Using eq. (2.121), the two block Hankel matrices may be defined as
H(0) = ΓΛ,
H(1) = ΓAdΛ,
(2.124)
Master thesis
Page 35 of 152
==PAGE:48==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
where
Γ =


C
CAd
CA2
d
CAs−1
d


(2.125)
is defined as the observability matrix, and
Λ =
h
Z0
AdZ0
A2
dZ0
. . . As−1
d
Z0
i
(2.126)
is defined as the controllability matrix. Taking the SVD of the first block Hankel matrix
H(0) in eq. (2.122)
H(0) = USVT,
(2.127)
and using the expression in eq. (2.124), the observability and controllability matrix can
be estimated as
bΓ = U
√
S,
(2.128)
bΛ =
√
SVT.
(2.129)
Having created estimates of the observability and controllability matrices, the discrete
time system matrix can then be estimated by using the expression for H(1) in eq. (2.124)
bAd = bΓ
+H(1)bΛ
+,
(2.130)
where [ ]+ indicates the Penrose pseudo inverse. Performing the above pseudo inverse and
the SVD in eq. (2.127) may be done in a simple way, by restricting the diagonal matrix S
to the first n singular values, which corresponds to first n/2 modes. The singular vectors
U and V should then be correspondingly restricted, to yield the n’th-order realization
SVD matrices Un, Sn, Vn [2][26].
These can then be used to create the n’th-order
realization system matrix estimate of eq. (2.130)
bAd = S−1/2
n
UT
nH(1)VnS−1/2
n
.
(2.131)
To find the modal parameters, eigenvalue decomposition is performed on the discrete
time system matrix
bAd = Ψ′[µn]Ψ′−1,
(2.132)
where [µn] is a diagonal matrix containing the discrete time eigenvalues, which can be
used to find the continuous time ones through eq. (2.45). The eigenvectors in eq. (2.132)
are not direct estimates of the mode shapes, and thus need to be transformed back into
physical coordinates through the observation matrix C
Ψ = bCΨ′
(2.133)
Master thesis
Page 36 of 152
==PAGE:49==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
with the observation matrix being estimated through
bC = UnS1/2
n .
(2.134)
As mentioned above the number of singular values kept n, determines the number of
resulting estimated modes.
Determining the number n may be done by solving the
problem for a range of n and hereafter analyzing the quality of the estimates. Another
alternative is to plot the singular values from eq. (2.127), and approximating n to where
a significant drop in the singular values is observed [13].
2.3.6
Stochastic Subspace Identification
The stochastic subspace identification (SSI) technique is a collection of time domain
identification techniques. Similarly to the ERA technique, it was originally formulated
in control theory terminology as described by Overschee et al. [27]. As was the case for
the ERA, Brincker et al. [2] also presents the main ideas from an OMA point of view,
for the SSI technique.
Generally, two main types of SSI formulations exist, known as the correlation-driven and
data-driven SSI. The correlation-driven formulation, uses the CF matrix as input while
the data-driven utilizes the measured system response directly, and the estimation of the
CF matrix is integrated into the identification algorithm. The correlation-driven is similar
to the ERA technique presented in Section 2.3.5, however the one presented and used in
this project is the data-driven SSI. Specifically the approach presented as algorithm 2 by
Overschee et al. [27] will be followed.
The technique assumes an LTI model of a general process is described as the discrete
time state space model in eq. (2.38). Generally subspace identification may be applied
for stochastic systems with no external input u(k) = 0, or deterministic systems w(k) =
v(k) = 0 with external input. For OMA applications only the former is relevant as no
external input is available while the system is assumed to be excited by white noise w(k),
and measured output may be affected by measurement noise v(k). The aim of the SSI
technique is then the determination of the state space matrices given the measurements
y(k) ∈RNo, k = 1, 2, ..., Np, where No is the number of measurement channels and Np
number of samples. Specifically, the system matrix Ad from which modal parameters
may be obtained, is the state space matrix of particular interest in OMA, as was also the
case for the ERA technique.
The initial part of the SSI technique is to form a block Hankel matrix based directly on
Master thesis
Page 37 of 152
==PAGE:50==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
the shifted measured responses y(k) with 2s block rows
H =


y(1)
y(2)
· · ·
y(Np −2s + 1)
y(2)
y(3)
· · ·
y(Np −2s + 2)
...
...
...
...
y(s)
y(s + 1)
· · ·
y(Np −s)
y(s + 1)
y(s + 2)
· · ·
y(Np −s + 1)
...
...
...
...
y(2s)
y(2s + 1)
· · ·
y(Np)


=
"
Hp
Hf
#
.
(2.135)
The formed block Hankel matrix is of size 2sNo ×N −2s+1 and is split in the middle to
form a top and bottom block Hankel matrix. The top matrix is called the “past” Hankel
matrix Hp and the bottom is called the “future” Hf Hankel matrix. The past and future
Hankel matrices are then used to calculate the projection of the future onto the past,
defined as
O = E[Hf|Hp].
(2.136)
The expectation is operating on the future Hf, and is considered stochastic, given the past
Hp which is treated as deterministic [2]. Overschee et al. [27] shows that the projection
may be estimated as
O = TfpT+
ppHp
(2.137)
Tfp = HfHT
p ,
Tpp = HpHT
p ,
(2.138)
where [ ]+ indicates the Penrose pseudo inverse, Tfp and Tpp are Toeplitz matrices,
and the projection O is of size sNo × sNo. Note, that while Overschee [27] introduces
the projection matrix as a geometrical tool, when dealing with stochastic processes the
expectation in eq. (2.136) is defined as a conditional mean. A conditional mean like this
one can, for Gaussian processes, be completely described by its covariance. Further, as the
measured responses y(k) is assumed to be a zero-mean Gaussian process, the conditional
mean and therefore the projection matrix O will represent stacked free decays of the
system, given initial conditions specified by Hp [28]. It may be noted, that the size of
the Hankel matrices may become large to a point, such that the direct estimation of the
projection matrix, through the use of the Toeplitz matrices becomes unfeasible. Instead,
the projection can be carried out by QR factorization, where only part of the R matrix
is needed for the projection, as shown by Overschee et al. [27].
Once again utilizing the discrete zero input solution, as was also utilized in the ERA
technique,
y(k) = CAk
dz(0),
(2.139)
with y(k) being the free decay, C the observation/output matrix, Ad the discrete time
system matrix, and z(0) the state space initial conditions. Further utilizing that the
columns of the projection matrix O represent free decays from an initial condition z(0),
Master thesis
Page 38 of 152
==PAGE:51==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
a column o may be expressed as a homogeneous solution to an initial condition
o = Γsz(0),
Γs =


C
CAd
CA2
d
...
CAs−1
d


,
(2.140)
where Γs is referred to as the extended observability matrix of the pair {Ad, C}. In-
troducing the Kalman states, which is a matrix containing initial conditions of the free
decays in the projection matrix Z0 = [z1(0), z2(0), ..., zn(0)]. The projection matrix may
then be written as
O = ΓsZ0.
(2.141)
In a similar manner to the solution idea in the ERA technique, the SVD is taken of the
projection matrix
O = USVT,
(2.142)
with U and V once again being unitary orthogonal matrices with singular vectors in the
columns, and S being a diagonal matrix containing 2sNo singular values corresponding
to sNo modes. The number of non-zero singular values n will determine the number of
n/2 modes estimated by the technique. Choosing the number of singular values n needed
for the model to describe all dynamics of the system, is done in the same manner as for
the ERA technique, described in Section 2.3.5. Having chosen n, the SVD matrices are
then restricted to the first n entries, similar to the ERA technique, Un, Sn and Vn. The
extended observability matrix and the initial Kalman states, are then estimated via
bΓs = Un
p
Sn
(2.143)
bZ0 =
√
SVT
n.
(2.144)
The procedure for the estimation of bΓs and bZ0 is not unique. It can be shown, that a
similarity transform can influence the individual matrices, however it can also be shown
not to influence the estimates [28].
From eq. (2.143) it is realized, that removing the first and last row from the estimated
observability matrix, can be used to find the system matrix bAd
bΓ(1:s−1) bAd = bΓ(2:s),
(2.145)
which is then determined through regression
bAd = bΓ+
(1:s−1)bΓ(2:s),
(2.146)
Master thesis
Page 39 of 152
==PAGE:52==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
with [ ]+ denoting the Penrose pseudoinverse. From eq. (2.140) it can also be realized,
that the estimated output matrix can be found as
bC = bΓ(1:1).
(2.147)
With an estimation of the discrete system matrix bAd achieved, the modal parameters
can once again be found via SVD, similar to previously presented techniques
bAd = Ψ′[µi]Ψ′−1,
(2.148)
where once again [µn] is a diagonal matrix containing the discrete time eigenvalues, from
which the continuous time ones are found through eq. (2.45). The eigenvectors in eq.
(2.132) are similarly to the ERA not direct estimates of the mode shapes, and need to be
transformed back into physical coordinates through the estimated observation matrix bC
Ψ = bCΨ′.
(2.149)
Using this technique, the maximum number of modes returned is sNo, and as such the
value of s must be chosen to sufficiently include the number of modes required for mod-
eling the system. Overschee et al. [27] recommends choosing the number of block rows
used in the block Hankel matrices via s = 2MaxOrder
No
, where the maximal order is user
estimated, but should not be too large as computational time is proportional to s2.
It is worth noting, that many different techniques may be formulated in the SSI. This
is done by using a generalized projection matrix, which is achieved by multiplying real-
valued weight matrices W1 and W2 on each side of the projection matrix. SVD is then
performed on the resulting matrix
W1OW2 = USVT.
(2.150)
Different SSI algorithms known as the principal component (PC) algorithm, the un-
weighted principal component (UPC) algorithm and the canonical variate algorithm
(CVA) are formed from different forms of the weight matrices. In this project, the CVA
is always used when using the SSI technique.
2.3.7
AR Models and Poly Reference
One of the simpler ways to perform OMA, is to use auto regressive (AR) models on the
free decays from the correlation functions. This is obtained by only considering the AR
part of the ARMA model, presented in Section 2.1.6. While the full ARMA model can
also be utilized by applying it directly to the measured signal, this is not often done in
OMA, as explained by Brincker et al. [2]. Instead, it is seen as preferable to use models
which first estimate the correlation functions, and then fit a free decay model, why the
MA part is often excluded.
The poly reference (PR) technique, presented by Brincker et al. [2], and to be used in
Master thesis
Page 40 of 152
==PAGE:53==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
this thesis, is an AR model-based identification approach. As such, the first step is taking
the ARMA model in eq. (2.43), and ignoring the MA part, yielding a general AR model
y(n) =
NA
X
k=1
Aky(n −k),
(2.151)
(2.152)
where y(n) ∈RNo, n = 1, 2, ..., Np is the free decay, with No measurement channels and
Np samples and Ak, k = 1, 2, ..., NA is the AR matrices. The above may also be expressed
equivalently as
y(n) −A1y(n −1) −A2y(n −2) −... −ANAy(n −NA) = 0.
(2.153)
Estimating the AR matrices, which is referred to as polynomial coefficient matrices within
poly reference, a block Hankel matrix with NA + 1 block rows is formed, and split into a
large H1 block Hankel matrix with NA block rows and a smaller H2 block Hankel matrix
with 1 block row.
H =


y(1)
y(2)
. . .
y(Np −NA)
y(2)
y(3)
. . .
y(Np −(NA −1))
...
...
...
...
y(NA)
y(NA + 1)
. . .
y(Np −1)
y(NA + 1)
y(NA + 2)
. . .
y(Np)


=
"
H1
H2
#
(2.154)
Formulating the general AR model in eq. (2.153) for all possible Np −NA values of n, a
system of equations can then be described using the block Hankel matrices
H2 −AH1 = 0 ⇔AH1 = H2,
(2.155)
where A contains the polynomial coefficient matrices
A = [ANA, ANA−1, ..., A1].
(2.156)
Eq. (2.155) is called the least squares estimation for estimation of the matrix polynomial
in PR. It can be transposed into an overdetermined problem for the determination of the
polynomial coefficient matrices. It is solved by using least squares, to obtain an estimate
bA for the A matrix
HT
1 AT = HT
2
⇔
bA = (HT
1 + HT
2 )T = H2H+
1 .
(2.157)
This system will be overdetermined for Np −NA > NANo. However, due to noise always
being present in free decays from measured data, Brincker et al. [2] recommends that
Master thesis
Page 41 of 152
==PAGE:54==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
the system be well overdetermined Np −NA >> NANo. Having found the polynomial
coefficient matrices Ak, modal parameters may be estimated by forming a companion
matrix
AC =


0
I
0
0
...
0
...
...
0
...
I
ANp
ANp−1
. . .
A1


.
(2.158)
As shown by Brincker et al. [2], the companion matrix forms an eigenvalue problem
(EVP), holding modal parameters as
ACψn = µnψn,
(2.159)
with µn and ψn being discrete time poles and mode shapes respectively, and as such
discrete time poles and mode shapes can be achieved from the companion matrix, and
by extension from the polynomial coefficient matrices.
While the above formulation of the PR technique is presented for a single free decay y(n),
it will also hold in the case of several responses. This is done by replacing y(n) with a
multi input formulation Y(n) in eq. (2.154),
Y(n) = [y1(n), y2(n), ..., yNr(n)],
(2.160)
where Nr is the number of responses. In this case, the condition for the system to be
well overdetermined is (Np −NA)Nr >> NANo. It is worth noting, that the CF matrix
is generally used as free decays, and as such the number of responses will equal number
of outputs Nr = No, as seen in eq. (2.52). In this case the well overdetermined condition
becomes Np −NA >> NA. Finally, the number of obtained eigenvalues and modes are
limited to NANo and NANo/2 respectively, from the size of AC.
2.3.8
Frequency Domain Methods
The previous sections presented multiple OMA techniques that are all categorized as time
domain methods. These are characterized by interpreting the correlation functions as
free decays. An alternative approach is to utilize the spectral densities to perform modal
parameter estimation, as these should hold the information from the CF in the frequency
domain. Methods utilizing this approach are known as frequency domain methods. In
this project, a single frequency domain method will be utilized for modal parameter
estimation, namely the Frequency Domain Decomposition (FDD) technique.
2.3.8.1
Basic Frequency Domain
As the FDD technique is an extension of the Basic Frequency Domain (BFD) technique,
it is appropriate to first present the basic technique. In the BFD technique, a single
frequency line at a resonant peak in the SD function is considered. At this resonant
Master thesis
Page 42 of 152
==PAGE:55==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
frequency, the system response y(t) is assumed to be described by a 1-DOF system
y(t) = ψq(t),
(2.161)
where ψ is the mode shape of a considered mode, and q(t) the corresponding modal
coordinate. Using the definition of the CF matrix in eq. (2.15), the CF matrix of the
response y(t) becomes
Ry(τ) = E[y(t)y(t + τ)T] = ψE[q(t)q(t + τ)T]ψT = Rq(τ)ψψT.
(2.162)
As the mode shape is not dependent on time, it is moved outside of the expectation,
resulting in the CF matrix of the response becoming the CF of the modal coordinate
Rq(τ) multiplied by the mode shape and mode shape transposed. The above may be
transformed to frequency domain via Fourier Transform
Gy(ωk) = Gq(ωk)ψψT,
(2.163)
where Gy(ωk) is the SD matrix of the response y(t) and Gq(ωk) is the SD function of
modal coordinate q(t), both functions of ωk. As the mode shape ψ is a column vector, the
multiplication with itself transposed results in an outer product, where each column and
row will be estimates of the mode shape. Further, as the SD matrix is proportional to this
outer product, the SD matrix will be of rank one and all columns and rows will be linearly
independent. Brincker et al. [2] claims that taking the average over all columns of Gy
yields improved mode shape estimates. The damping ratio estimate may be performed
by utilizing the half-power bandwidth [2]
ζn = B
2fn
,
(2.164)
where B is the selected band, and fn is the natural frequency of interest.
Although the BFD technique may be useful in certain situations, one should take special
consideration in its application. The technique assumes that only a single mode is active
at the frequency of interest. In reality however, this is often not the case, and the resulting
estimates may become very biased in the case of closely spaced modes [2]. Further, finding
all resonances and validating that no closely spaced resonances exist, requires the analysis
of all spectral densities. With the number of SD functions being equal to the number
of responses squared, this process will quickly become very time-consuming for larger
problems. As a result of these limitations, a more general frequency domain technique
may be proposed.
Master thesis
Page 43 of 152
==PAGE:56==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
2.3.8.2
Frequency Domain Decomposition
Extending the response y(t) to be modeled as a linear combination of Nm modal coordi-
nates, as opposed to the previous 1-DOF system via peak picking, yields
y(t) = ψ1q1(t) + ψ2q2(t) + ... + ψNmqNm(t) = Ψq(t),
(2.165)
where Ψ is a modal matrix of size No × Nm holding mode shapes in the columns and
q(t) = {q1(t), q2(t), ..., qNm(t)}T the modal coordinate vector. As it was done for the
1-DOF system, the CF matrix can be similarly calculated and transformed into the
frequency domain from the above linear combination, yielding the SD matrix of the
response y(t) to become
Gy(ω) = ΨGq(ω)ΨT.
(2.166)
Assuming that the modal coordinates are uncorrelated results in all off-diagonal elements
of the CF matrix of q(t) being equal to 0. Due to Parseval’s theorem this will result in
the SD matrix Gq becoming diagonal and positive. As the SD matrix is Hermitian and
that mode shapes often contain complex quantities, the Hermitian replaces the transpose
[2]. This leads to eq. (2.166) becoming
Gy(ω) = Ψ[g2
n(ω)]ΨH,
(2.167)
where g2
n(ω) are the diagonal elements of the SD matrix Gq(ω) and as such the power
spectral densities. Getting the form of the SD matrix in eq. (2.167) is done via SVD of
Gy(t). As Gy(t) is positive definite, complex and hermitian, the SVD becomes
Gy(ω) = USUH = U[s2
n]UH,
(2.168)
where [s2
n] is interpreted as the power spectral densities, and U as the modal matrix Ψ.
As the SVD in eq. (2.168) does not correspond completely to the theoretical spectral
density in eq. (2.53), the FDD will always be an approximate solution. As a result of
the decomposition being approximate, the FDD will introduce bias into the parameter
estimates, that do not disappear even for vanishing noise [2]. The approximation can
be studied from the perspective of either general decomposition in the frequency domain
under white noise input assumption or the assumption of uncorrelated modal coordinates.
Brincker et al. [2] shows via the perspective of general decomposition in the frequency
domain and assumed white noise input, that the SD matrix in eq. (2.53) cannot be
expressed in the form of eq. (2.168), or even the more general SVD formula Gy(ω) =
USVH. However, in the case of well-separated modes and lightly damped structures, the
modal participation vector becomes proportional to the mode shape γ ≈c2
nψ, with cn
being a positive constant. In that case, the modal decomposition of the SD matrix in eq.
Master thesis
Page 44 of 152
==PAGE:57==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
(2.53) reduces to
Gy(ω) ≈
Nm
X
n=1
 c2
nψ∗ψH
−iω −λn
+ c2
nψψT
iω −λn

≈
Nm
X
n=1
2c2
nRe
 ψψT
iω −λn

.
(2.169)
The form above can indeed be expressed by the SVD in eq. (2.168) and as such the FDD
is a good approximation when modes are well-separated and lightly damped, assuming
white noise input. Brincker et al. [2] also shows that assuming uncorrelated inputs will
lead to a similar decomposition of the SD matrix, where the FDD is again considered a
good approximation. The main obstacle then becomes evaluating the level of correlation
between modal coordinates. Brincker et al. [2] shows that for vanishing damping or for
well-separated modes, the modal coordinates will be perfectly uncorrelated. As such even
in cases where the white noise assumption is not valid, lightly damped and well-separated
modes may be sufficient for providing good FDD approximations.
The SVD of the SD matrix Gy(ωk) can be found at every frequency ωk. As such, the task
becomes to evaluate at which frequencies to estimate the mode shapes. It is possible to
estimate all mode shapes at each frequency, however this approach is not used in prac-
tice. Instead, Brincker et al. [2] suggests that any mode shape estimated using the FDD
technique, should be estimated as the first singular vector, at a frequency at which the
corresponding singular value is dominating. Doing so in practice, involves plotting the
singular values of the SD matrix at all discrete frequencies, and the dominant frequency
peaks are then chosen from visual investigation by the user. Using this method will then
yield estimates of the natural frequencies at the picked peaks and their corresponding
mode shapes. The method will not yield damping ratio estimates, and the natural fre-
quency estimate will be limited by the frequency resolution, as the natural frequency
is picked from a peak in the singular value plot. To not restrict the natural frequency
estimate to the frequency resolution, and to also yield a damping ratio estimate, a nar-
row frequency band around a mode of interest may be chosen, to approximate a 1-DOF
response of the mode. An inverse Fourier transform is performed on the frequency band,
and a SDOF time domain technique is applied to the band. The previously described
1-DOF ITD technique in Section 2.3.4 will be used for this purpose in this report. To
mitigate the risk of including frequency components of closely spaced modes in the narrow
band, leading to poor estimates, a modal filter can be applied to isolate the frequency of
interest. Expanding eq. (2.166) yields
Gy(ω) = ψ1g2
2ψH
1 + ψ2g2
2ψH
2 + ...
(2.170)
Assuming a specific frequency band with a set of active modes within the band, and
striving to isolate the modal spectral densities g2
n, a matrix V = [v1, v2, ...] may be
defined, to obtain the orthogonal set of vectors
VHΨ = I.
(2.171)
Master thesis
Page 45 of 152
==PAGE:58==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
As such V = (Ψ+)H and the vectors v1, v2 are orthogonal to the mode shapes ψ1, ψ2,....
As a result of this, a mode shape obtained at the frequency where the singular value is
dominant, may be used as a modal filter by
vH
n Gy(ω)vn = g2
n(ω).
(2.172)
Transforming the SD matrix back into the time domain, after having removed contribu-
tions from other potential modes, will then obtain much improved estimates from the
1-DOF fits. Note that as the SVD of the SD matrix is of size No, the limit of the modal
filtering will equal the number of measurement channels.
2.3.9
Modal Participation
The presented identification techniques will all yield estimates of system poles and corre-
sponding mode shapes, from the interpreted modal decomposition shown in Section 2.1.8.
As such, all the identification techniques lack the modal participation vectors Γ for the
determination of the modal decomposition. The participation vectors can be interpreted
as a measure of each modes’ sensitivity to excitation at each excitation DOF. Further,
knowing the participation factor is also useful when analyzing whether a specific mode
is physical or computational, as physical modes should have higher participation factors.
Brincker et al. [2] shows how modal participation vectors can be determined in both
time and frequency domain. As it turns out, this requires fitting measured correlation
functions and spectral densities. Comparing the fitted correlations/spectral densities, to
the measured results may provide an additional layer of model validation.
Fitting correlation functions
To obtain the modal participation vectors, one of the two techniques, is to fit the modal
model to the correlation functions used for identification. Doing so, requires first ar-
ranging an identified set of poles in a diagonal matrix [λn], as well as arranging the
corresponding mode shapes as columns in the modal matrix Ψ = [ψn]. Assuming that the
matrix Ψ contains complex conjugate pairs of mode shapes, and that the summation of
the modal decomposition of the CF eq. (2.50)-(2.51) can be extended to the set of 2Nm
modal parameters, the CF matrix can be sampled at discrete (and restricted to positive)
time lags τ = k∆t which yields [2]
Ry(k) = 2π
2Nm
X
n=1
γnψT
ne−λnk∆t.
(2.173)
As this is a series of outer products, the above can be expressed by the matrix equation
Ry(k) = 2πΓ[µn]kΨT,
(2.174)
Master thesis
Page 46 of 152
==PAGE:59==
2
THEORY
2.3
Operational Modal Analysis
where the diagonal matrix [µn] contains the discrete time poles µn = e−λn∆t and Γ = [γn]
is the matrix containing the modal participation vectors. Both matrices hold a set of
complex conjugate pairs for each mode. Next, a single block row Hankel matrix is created
by arranging the CF matrix
H = [Ry(0), Ry(1), Ry(2), ...],
(2.175)
as well as a modal information matrix M
M =

[µn]0ΨT, [µn]1ΨT, [µn]2ΨT, ...

.
(2.176)
Eq. (2.174) can then be expressed as
H = 2πΓM.
(2.177)
This can be solved via either SVD or by regression, to yield an estimate of the modal
participation vectors
bΓ = 1
2HM+.
(2.178)
The resulting fitted CF matrix then becomes
bRy(k) = 2πbΓ[µn]kΨT.
(2.179)
Taking the n’th modal participation vector bγn from the estimated bΓ, the modal partici-
pation can be defined in an absolute scalar measure pn as
pn =
p
bγH
n bγn.
(2.180)
A relative modal participation factor πn, can then be defined as
πn = p2
n
pTp,
(2.181)
where pT =
n
p1, p2, ...
o
is a vector containing the absolute modal participation vectors.
Note, that the relative modal participation factors must per definition sum up to 100%,
PNm
n=1 πn = 1.
Fitting spectral density functions
A different but similar approach to obtaining the modal participation vectors, is to fit
the modal model to the spectral density functions. However, as the SD matrix is not
proportional to the mode shapes, as explained in Section 2.1.8, the half-spectra (eq.
(2.54)) is utilized instead, due to its proportionality to the mode shapes. Identically to
the time-domain approach, an identified set of poles and corresponding mode shapes are
arranged in [λn] and Ψ = [ψn]. Similarly assuming that the half spectrum of the SD
Master thesis
Page 47 of 152
==PAGE:60==
2
THEORY
2.4
Modal Assurance Criterion
matrix contains complex conjugate pairs of both mode shapes and poles, the half spectra
summation in eq. (2.54) is extended to the set of 2Nm, and the SD matrix is sampled at
discrete frequencies ω = k∆ω [2]
Gyy(ω) =
2Nm
X
n=1
γnψT
n
ik∆ω −λn
,
(2.182)
which is once again a series of outer products, that may be expressed as
Gyy(ω) = Γ[ik∆ω −λn]−1ΨT,
(2.183)
where Γ = [γn] contains the modal participation vectors. Once again arranging into a
single block row Hankel matrix, with the frequency interval k = k1, k1 + 1, ..., k2,
H = [Gyy(k1), Gyy(k1 + 1), ..., Gyy(k2)],
(2.184)
and likewise for the modal information matrix M
M =

[ik1∆ω −λn]−1ΨT, [i(k1 + 1)∆ω −λn]−1ΨT, ..., [ik2∆ω −λn]−1ΨT]

.
(2.185)
Eq. (2.183) may then be expressed as
H = ΓM.
(2.186)
Once again, this equation may be solved via SVD or regression, to yield an estimate of
the modal participation vectors
bΓ = HM+.
(2.187)
The resulting fitted half spectra is then given as
bGyy(k) = bΓ[ik∆ω −λn]−1ΨT.
(2.188)
The absolute and relative modal participation vectors are then found identically as for
the time-domain fitting, using eq. (2.180) and (2.181).
2.4
Modal Assurance Criterion
Having used the different methods presented in previous sections to perform modal anal-
ysis, yielding sets of modal parameters, it is appropriate to present a method of which
modal vectors and poles may be compared. The perhaps most common method of com-
parison between two sets of modal vectors, is the Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC).
Multiple expansions have been developed as described by Vacher et al. [29], to the orig-
inal and simplest MAC which measures the degree of linearity between two vectors v1
Master thesis
Page 48 of 152
==PAGE:61==
2
THEORY
2.4
Modal Assurance Criterion
and v2
MAC(v1, v2) =
|vH
1 v2|
||v1|| ||v2||.
(2.189)
The MAC(v1,v2) ∈[0, 1], where a value of 1 implies equivalence between the two vectors,
and a value of 0 implying that the vectors are orthogonal. As such, the MAC may then
be used for measuring the degree of linearity between mode shapes. It is worth noting,
that the above MAC only applies to monophase vectors.
A natural extension of the above MAC is to extend it to be able to handle vectors that
are non-monophase. This is done via phase normalization as described by Vecher et al.
[29]. This MAC is referred to as MACX
MACX(v1, v2) =
(|vH
1 v2| + |vT
1 v2|)2
(vH
1 v1 + |vT
1 v1|)(vH
2 v2 + |vT
2 v2|),
(2.190)
and it is equivalent to the original MAC when the vectors v1 and v2 are monophase or
completely real.
The MACX may be further extended to also include a comparison of the corresponding
poles (λ1, λ2). This extension is called the MACXP
MACXP(v1, λ1, v2, λ2) =

|vH
1 v2|
|λ∗
1+λ2| + |vT
1 v2|
|λ1+λ2|
2

vH
1 v1
2Re(λ1) + |vT
1 v1|
2|λ1|
 
vH
2 v2
2Re(λ2) + |vT
2 v2|
2|λ2|
.
(2.191)
This method may be additionally useful when spatial resolution is lacking, as it gains
extra information provided by the poles. An additional extension to the MACXP, is the
MACXPnD. This method is equivalently calculated to the MACXP, but utilizing the
eigenvalues neglecting damping λnD = ωn,d [8].
Throughout this thesis MAC analysis and comparison will be broadly used, for multiple
applications. These include:
• Comparison of sets of modal parameters with each other. This can be done both
across experimental setups, modal identification techniques, user input parameters,
or between theoretical and experimental results.
• Stabilization diagram matching.
• Generating weighting vectors w for calculation of mean and standard deviation of
modal estimates (see Section 2.5).
• Comparison between different modes from the same estimation method, also re-
ferred to as AutoMAC.
• Weighting global parameter estimates from hierarchical clustering, and distance
measuring to create clusters.
Master thesis
Page 49 of 152
==PAGE:62==
2
THEORY
2.5
Accuracy and Automation of OMA
2.5
Accuracy and Automation of OMA
Having used one or multiple of the previously presented methods, several sets of modal
parameter estimates may have been obtained. In order to evaluate the accuracy and
uncertainty of these estimates, or to create a global set of modal parameters a weighted
mean µ and standard deviation σ will be utilized
µ(ω) =
1
Pn
i=1(wi) ·
n
X
i=1
(ωi · wi)
(2.192)
σ(ω) =
v
u
u
t
1
Pn
i=1(wi) −1 ·
n
X
i=1
((ωi −µ(ω))2 · wi),
(2.193)
where wi are the weights. Note, that while the above is presented for natural frequency,
the same equations may be used for all modal parameters.
In this thesis the weighting to be used will be the modal assurance criteria, following
the approach shown by Paulsen [8]. Assuming n different sets of modal parameters, the
MAC xj,i for j = 1, 2, ..., n, i = 1, 2, ..., n can be estimated, yielding an n×n matrix. The
weights are then calculated using the expression











w1
w2
...
wn











=











Pn
i=1(x1,i)
Pn
i=1(x2,i)
...
Pn
i=1(xn,i)











,
max

















Pn
i=1(x1,i)
Pn
i=1(x2,i)
...
Pn
i=1(xn,i)

















.
(2.194)
This method may be used for any of the previously presented MAC in Section 2.4.
2.5.1
Automation of OMA
One of the potential advantages of OMA methods, are their application during opera-
tion, given the proper conditions (white noise excitation). As such, automation of OMA
methods is desired, in order to obtain continuous modal parameters without the require-
ment of user interaction. In this thesis, three AOMA methods, A-ERA, A-SSI and A-PR
developed and presented by Damsgaard [13] will be utilized repeatedly. The routine is
similar to the pLSCF routine described in Section 2.2.4, with the main difference being
swapping the participation vector tolerance εγ with the mode shape tolerance εψ. A full
description of the routine is presented in [13], but the workflow may be summarized into
the following 4 points:
1. Estimate modal parameter estimates using the ERA, SSI or PR technique for model
orders n ∈[nmin, nmax].
2. Building and interpreting stabilization diagrams. This follows the same logic as
explained in the third step of the pLSCF routine, Section 2.2.4.
Master thesis
Page 50 of 152
==PAGE:63==
2
THEORY
2.5
Accuracy and Automation of OMA
3. Using the stable identified poles, global modal parameter estimates are identified
using agglomerative hierarchical clustering. The clustering returns a weighted mean
(the MACXP mean presented above) of the Nclust highest populated clusters, which
is chosen by the user alongside a cluster cutoff dMACXPcut.
dMACXP = 1 −
MACXP is used as distance measure for the clustering.
4. If two clusters are within a frequency tolerance εf,c, only the top populated cluster
is retained. This is applied to avoid sub-clusters caused by parameter variation
through different model orders. The value of εf,c must be chosen carefully as to
properly remove sub-cluster duplicates while not removing physical closely-spaced
modes.
This routine holds advantages even when OMA automation (AOMA) is not required.
One advantage is the fact that the OMA techniques require the user to input the number
of poles requested. However, as the number of poles within a given frequency band is
not always known a priori, it is advantageous to have the model order vary, and create
a stabilization diagram. A second advantage, is that spurious poles may occur for any
given model order. This may not be realized if the technique is only used for that given
model order. However, by utilizing stabilization diagrams, the risk of claiming spurious
to be physical poles decreases significantly. Due to these advantages, the A-ERA, A-SSI
and A-PR will generally be used in this thesis, over their non-automated counterparts.
2.5.2
Dynamic Time Warping AOMA
The above AOMA technique only becomes automated after defining user input parame-
ters, typically requiring either expertise knowledge or prior analysis of the system. Such
parameters may be the number of lags in the CF matrix. For the non-automated ERA,
SSI and PR it is also the number of s or NA block rows. While expertise knowledge
and prior analysis should never be disregarded entirely, it is of interest to investigate if
even such factors may be automated. To do so, a new AOMA technique is developed
during this project, which will be referred to as Dynamic Time Warping OMA Automa-
tion (DTW-AOMA). The technique takes inspiration from Paulsen [8], who estimated
weighted global modal parameter estimates and uncertainty by varying the signal length
or signal block lengths of different OMA methods. Further, Paulsen [8] concluded that
increased accuracy was reached when combining the estimates and weighting across dif-
ferent OMA methods.
Instead of varying signal or signal block length, the routine proposed in this thesis may
vary any user input parameter. The user input parameter may vary between technique,
such as the number of CF matrix lags in the ITD technique and block rows in the SSI
technique, and some techniques may have multiple user input parameters, such as the
PR technique. Modal parameters can be estimated for each input parameter for differ-
ent methods, and global modal parameters can be estimated using MAC weighting as
described above. The global estimates can either be calculated for a given method, or
Master thesis
Page 51 of 152
==PAGE:64==
2
THEORY
2.5
Accuracy and Automation of OMA
across methods.
The above proposed method faces one significant obstacle. In order to create global es-
timates, the MAC weighting needs to be performed for each mode separately. However,
each estimate may not identify the same number of modes (especially if the user input
parameter relates to the number of identified modes). Even for non-full automation, sort-
ing through modes and ensuring these are accurately matched before calculating global
weighted estimates can be tiresome, especially for larger number of modes. As such, a
sorting algorithm based on Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is introduced. The DTW
works by comparing two sequences of numbers, and measures their similarity by finding an
optimal alignment between points. The optimal alignment of points is considered the one
that minimizes the euclidean distance between points. Algorithm 1 presents the DTW in
pseudo code. The algorithm takes two vectors A = {a1, a2, ..., an} and B = {b1, b2, ...bm}
as inputs, and outputs the accumulated distance matrix D and index vector W. The
Algorithm 1 Dynamic Time Warping Algorithm
Input: A = {a1, a2, ..., an} and B = {b1, b2, ...bm}
Output: D and W
for i = 1 to n, j = 1 to m do
C(i, j) =
p
(ai −bj)2
end for
D(1, 1) = C(1, 1)
for i = 2 to n do
D(i, 1) = D(i −1, 1) + C(i, 1)
end for
for j = 2 to m do
D(1, j) = D(1, j −1) + C(1, j)
end for
for i = 1 to n, j = 1 to m do
D(i, j) = C(i, j) + min{D(i −1, j), D(i, j −1), D(i −1, j −1)}
end for
accumulated distance matrix represent the optimal path’s cumulative distance to that
point. The index vector W gives the index changes required for the vector B, to achieve
the optimal path.
The indexing vector holding the optimal path is of high value, and will be used for sorting
modes. For each set of estimated modal parameters, a vector of natural frequencies ω
may be obtained. Applying the DTW algorithm on vectors of natural frequencies, will
produce an index vector, that sorts modes based on the minimized distance between nat-
ural frequencies. The practical implementation of the DTW-AOMA routine thus works
using the following steps:
1. Perform modal parameter estimates, for an arbitrary number of OMA techniques
and range of input parameters, giving N total models, and sets of estimates. Ensure
modal estimates are sorted increasing order.
Master thesis
Page 52 of 152
==PAGE:65==
2
THEORY
2.5
Accuracy and Automation of OMA
2. Identify the model with the highest K number of modal parameter estimates. This
will be the reference model A.
3. Apply the DTW algorithm (Algorithm 1) between the natural frequencies of each
of the remaining N −1 models, and the reference model A.
4. For each of the remaining N−1 models, sort them with their corresponding indexing
vector W. As the DTW algorithm also stretches the vector B post indexing, each
of the remaining N −1 models, will now also contain the maximum K number
of modal parameter estimates, or K modes. If they originally contained L < K
estimates, the newly sorted model now contains K −L duplicates.
5. Duplicates are handled in the following manner. Each model is tested for dupli-
cates. If duplicates are identified, the DTW algorithm is applied to the natural
frequencies of all models, at the duplicate modes. The mode containing the lowest
total accumulated distance is kept, and the rest of the duplicates of that model is
deleted.
6. Having sorted each mode, one or multiple MAC’s are estimated for each of the
modes.
7. Lastly, the estimated MAC’s are used for MAC weightings to create global modal
parameter and uncertainty estimates.
An example of the sorting part of the above steps is shown in Figure 2. The values
represent natural frequency estimates, the rows are models and the columns are modes.
The first matrix in the figure is after step 1. The second matrix is after step 4, and the
final matrix is after step 5.
Master thesis
Page 53 of 152
==PAGE:66==
2
THEORY
2.5
Accuracy and Automation of OMA
Figure 2: A practical example of the sorting steps in the DTW-AOMA routine. The
first matrix is after the step 1 in the routine, the second is after step 4, and the last is
after step 5.
Master thesis
Page 54 of 152
==PAGE:67==
3
EXPERIMENTAL FACILITIES
3
Experimental Facilities
In this section the experimental facilities utilized during this project will be presented.
The simplified 2D model of a “floating” wind turbine test rig and its components will be
presented. Further, the instrumentation used for experiments, more specifically the data
acquisition system and components will additionally be presented.
The test rig was purposefully created for this project, and the construction was completed
just prior to the project initiation. It is located at the Technical University of Denmark
in the laboratories of building 414. All design considerations and construction obstacles
is presented by Trolle [17], but the main features will be presented again in this thesis,
in addition to a few changes made to the test rig, during the project period.
3.1
Test Rig
Figure 3 shows an image of the test rig, with indices descriptions presented in Table 1.
The test rig is the “finished product” of the conceptual idea of a FOWT presented in
Section 1.2 and Figure 1c. The test rig is made up by a “tower” which consists of three
masses, 6 , 11 and 17 , connected by a ruler in each side 2 . The masses consist of “mass
plates” that are all equivalent in size and weight, and are clamped fixed to the rulers.
The bottom mass (mass 2) 17 , consist of 1-3 mass plates. This allows for variation of the
center of mass (COM) relative to the central rotation axis (the central axis of rotation,
is the axis of rotation for the shaft). The shaft 8 is mounted to the middle mass (mass
1) 11 , and connected to the bearing hubs 7 in the other end, which are mounted to a
platform 10 supporting the weight of the turbine model. In the original construction of
the test rig, brass bushings were mounted in the bearing hubs.
However, these resulted
Table 1: Description of components in the test rig. Numbers: Components, Letters:
Instrumentation
Index
Component
Index
Component
1
Upper wing mass (mass 5)
10
Platform
2
Rulers
11
Middle tower mass (mass 1)
3
Wing mount
12
Spring holder
4
Motor mount
13
Spring
5
DC Motor
14
Platform stand
6
Upper tower mass (mass 3)
15
DC Power supply
7
Bearing & bearing housing
16
Bottom wing mass (mass 4)
8
Shaft
17
Bottom tower mass (mass 2)
9
Shaft hub
18
Base plate
A
Accelerometers
D
Force transducer
B
Shaker mount
E
Stinger
C
Electrodynamic shaker
in excessive dry friction when the shaft was rotating in the bushing. This resulted in a
significant amount of noise in the acquisitioned data. This is shown in Appendix B. This
was realized during the project period, and was mitigated by replacing the bushings with
Master thesis
Page 55 of 152
==PAGE:68==
3
EXPERIMENTAL FACILITIES
3.1
Test Rig
Figure 3: Image of the test rig. Numbers: Components, Letters: Instrumentation. See
Table 1 for description.
needle roller bearings.
On the top mass (mass 3) 6 , a mount is placed 4 , holding a DC motor 5 , to which the
“wings” are mounted, 1 , 2 , 3 and 16 . The current motor/wing setup allows for two
configurations. The first is “under operation” where the DC motor is turned on, causing
the wings to rotate. The second is a static configuration, where the motor is off, and
the wings are locked from rotation. In the initial design phase, it was expected that the
wings could be positioned in any angle φ and the motor would lock them from rotation.
However, there was a slight degree of unexpected slack in the motor, which was enough
to spoil the data. A bolt hole was drilled into the wing and motor mount allowing for
the wings to be locked, but only in the vertical position seen in Figure 3, φ = 0. The
motor is controlled by a power supply 15 , also seen in the figure.
The rotational stiffness conceptualized to model the stiffness of the surrounding water
and the anchors on the FOWT, are modelled by placing two “spring holders” 12 beneath
the middle mass, which can hold 0-4 springs 13 each, and placing springs inside of them.
A closeup is seen in Figure 4. The free length of the springs, are of a length that ensures
Master thesis
Page 56 of 152
==PAGE:69==
3
EXPERIMENTAL FACILITIES
3.1
Test Rig
that they are always in compression, and thus are always in contact with mass 1, avoiding
non-linearities. In its equilibrium position, the force of the compressed springs cancel out
Figure 4: Closeup image of springs and spring holder on test rig
(assuming the same number of springs in each side). However, when the shaft rotates, the
springs on one side will further compress, and the other slightly extend, resulting in more
force being applied to one side of the mass. This provides the stiffness to rotation. Note,
that the design assumes relatively small rotations, in order for the rotational stiffness to
be linear.
In Table 2 the most significant dimensions from the test rig is presented. The free ruler
Table 2: Test rig dimensions
Description
Value
Mass plates
(150 × 166 × 20 mm)
Wing masses
(38 × 60 × 60 mm)
Rulers
(335 × 25 × 1 mm)
Top of mass 1 to shaft axis
24 mm
Top of mass 3 to motor axis
45 mm
Wing mount
(30 × 40 × 70 mm)
Free ruler length, mass 1 to 2
217 mm
Free ruler length, mass 1 to 3
254 mm
Free ruler length, wing mount to mass 4
213 mm
Free ruler length, wing mount to mass 5
213 mm
Horizontal distance, shaft axis to spring center
55 mm
length is the length of the ruler between masses, i.e. the part of the ruler that is not
clamped. This length is of importance in Section 4, where mathematical models of the
test rig are developed. The horizontal distance from shaft axis to spring center is also of
importance, as it determines the moment exerted on the mass. All parts of the test rig
are made of aluminum, with the exception of springs, bolts and rulers, which are made of
steel. The spring constant of the springs mounted in the spring holders is k0 = 2.3 kN/m.
Master thesis
Page 57 of 152
==PAGE:70==
3
EXPERIMENTAL FACILITIES
3.1
Test Rig
3.1.1
Data Acquisition
To capture the dynamics of the test rig, accelerometers A are placed on mass 2, 3, 4
and 5. Accelerometers, all from Br¨uel & Kjær, of type 4382 are used on mass 2 and 3,
type 4366 is used on mass 4 and type 4397A is used on mass 5. The accelerometers are
all piezoelectric, and have a lower frequency limit of 1 Hz. The signal of the two type
4382 accelerometers are amplified through a Br¨uel & Kjær charge amplifier of type 2635,
which has a built in high-pass analog filter of 1 Hz, and an adjustable low-pass analog
filter set to 100 Hz. The remaining two accelerometer signals are amplified via a Metra
Mess- und Frequenztechnik charge amplifier of type M68D1, with a high and low-pass
filter of 0.1 Hz and 100 Hz respectively.
To capture the excitation force, a Br¨uel & Kjær force transducer D of type 8230-002
(sensitivity of 2.2 mV/N) is mounted between the bottom mass and the shaker-stinger
E . The signal is amplified by a Metra Mess- und Frequenztechnik charge amplifier of
type M68D1, with a high and low-pass filter of 0.1 Hz and 100 Hz respectively.
The excitation of the structure is performed by sending a signal to a Br¨uel & Kjær power
amplifier of type 2706. The amplified signal then goes to a Br¨uel & Kjær electrodynamic
shaker C of type 4809.
Monitoring and control of the force and acceleration is done through a dSPACE-ControlDesk
environment, running on a computer in the near vicinity of the test rig. The computer
connects to a CP1104 analog-to-digital (ADC) and digital-to-analog (DAC) controller
panel. Digital signal from the computer is sent and converted via the controller panel to
the power amplifier connected to the shaker, while amplified analog signals are sent and
converted from accelerometers and force transducer to the computer via the controller
panel. The dSPACE environment has been programmed through the use of a Matlab
Simulink model, which defines how input and output signals are processed.
Master thesis
Page 58 of 152
==PAGE:71==
4
THEORETICAL MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
4
Theoretical Mathematical Modelling
In addition to EMA and OMA being applied to the test rig described in the previous
section, three theoretical mathematical models will also be developed and presented in this
section. These will be compared to the results obtained via the experimental methods,
with the aim of gaining further insights into the dynamics of the test rig. The types of
models to be used are: a point mass model, a rigid body model and a Finite Element
model.
While there are significant differences between the models, the one common
characteristic across all three, is that all displacements and deformations are assumed to
be occurring in the 2D plane, that the test rig dynamics are designed to occur in.
4.1
Rigid Body
Assumptions
In order to develop the mechanical and mathematical model a few assumptions need to
be established:
• The rulers between mass plates and wing masses are assumed to be massless.
• The mass plates and wing masses are assumed to be rigid bodies, that are perfectly
rigid (no deformation), equal mass distribution and idealized geometry.
• Small deformations along the rulers between masses. This allows for modelling the
stiffness created by the rulers using Bernoulli-Euler beam theory.
• Small translational and rotational mass displacements, resulting in y-direction (di-
rection parallel to the tower) displacement being neglected.
• No friction or internal material damping.
• The forces required to move masses are proportional to its rotation and its x-
direction translation, multiplied by a spring constant, determined from Bernoulli-
Euler beam theory.
Mechanical model
Having established a set of assumptions, a mechanical model of the structure can be
developed, and a sketch is shown in Figure 5.
Reference frames
In establishing the mathematical model, one inertial reference frame, I, is created with
coordinates XY Z, and 7 moving reference frames B1, B2, ..., B5, Bα, Bβ with coordi-
nates X1Y1Z1, X2Y2Z2, ..., X5Y5Z5, XαYαZα, XβYβZβ and with corresponding unit vectors
Master thesis
Page 59 of 152
==PAGE:72==
4
THEORETICAL MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
4.1
Rigid Body
Figure 5: Mechanical rigid body model
(i, j, k), (i1, j1, k1), (i2, j2, k2), ..., (i5, j5, k5), (iα, jα, kα), (iβ, jβ, kβ). Each moving reference
frame is defined relative to a previous reference frame, so that B1 is relative to I, B2 and
B3 is relative to B1, B4 and B5 is relative to B3, and Bα and Bβ are relative to B4 and
B5 respectively. The reference frames are shown in Figure 5.
Transformation matrices
The relation between reference frames may be defined using transformation matrices.
Between two reference frames I and B1, the transformation matrix will have the notation
TI1, and defined as
B1S = TI1 · IS.
(4.1)
For moving reference frames that only exhibit translational movement, the transformation
matrices are equal to the identity matrix
T12 = T13 =


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1

.
(4.2)
Master thesis
Page 60 of 152
==PAGE:73==
4
THEORETICAL MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
4.1
Rigid Body
The remaining reference frames are solely rotational and thus given as
TI1 =


cos(θ)
sin(θ)
0
−sin(θ)
cos(θ)
0
0
0
1


T34 = T35 =


cos(φ)
sin(φ)
0
−sin(φ)
cos(φ)
0
0
0
1


(4.3a)
T4α =


cos(α)
sin(α)
0
−sin(α)
cos(α)
0
0
0
1


T5β =


cos(β)
sin(β)
0
−sin(β)
cos(β)
0
0
0
1


(4.3b)
Position vectors
The distance between the reference frames is defined as position vectors r. The position
vector in the inertial reference frame I between points O (origin of inertial frame) and 1
(origin of moving frame B1) is denoted IrI1. All position vectors are defined as
B1rI1 = Bαr4α = Bβr5β =


0
0
0

,
B2r12 =


x2
−L2
0

,
(4.4a)
B3r13 =


x3
L3
0

,
B4r34 =


x4
−L4
0

,
B5r35 =


x5
L5
0

.
(4.4b)
Velocity and acceleration vectors
The velocity and acceleration of mass 1 in the inertial reference frame, can be calculated
easily, by simply differentiating the position vector IrI1 = B1rI1 with respect to time, one
and two times respectively
IV1 = d
dt(IrI1) =


0
0
0

,
(4.5a)
Ia1 = d2
dt2(IrI1) =


0
0
0

.
(4.5b)
For the remaining masses, the velocities and accelerations in a reference frame Bi can
then be found using the relations presented by Santos [30]
BiVj = BiVk + Biω × Birjk + d
dt(Birjk)
(4.6)
Biaj = Biak + Bi ˙ω × Birjk + Biω × (Biω × Birjk) + 2 Biω × d
dt(Birjk) + d2
dt2(Birjk), (4.7)
Master thesis
Page 61 of 152
==PAGE:74==
4
THEORETICAL MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
4.1
Rigid Body
where j indicates the point of interest/mass and k indicates the previous one, which j is
defined relative to. So for mass 2 and 3, j = 2, 3, the previous one will be mass 1, k = 1.
Biω is absolute angular velocity of the moving reference frame Bi.
Forces and moments
The forces and moments acting on the masses are sketched in free body diagrams shown
in Figure 6. Ry indicates a reaction force in the y-direction and g is the gravitational
constant. The forces and moments acting on the masses due to displacement are given
Figure 6: Rigid body model free body diagrams
by the following constitutive relations (from Bernoulli-Euler beam theory)
k2 = 212EI
L3
f2
,
k3 = 212EI
L3
f3
,
k4 = 212EI
L3
f4
,
k5 = 212EI
L3
f5
,
(4.8)
Mx2 = 26EI
L2
f2
,
Mx3 = 26EI
L2
f3
,
Mx4 = 6EI
L2
f4
,
Mx5 = 6EI
L2
f5
,
(4.9)
kM4 = 6EI
L2
f4
,
kM5 = 6EI
L2
f5
,
M4 = 4EI
Lf4
,
M5 = 4EI
Lf5
,
(4.10)
where E and I is the Young’s modulus and area moment of inertia respectively, of the
rulers, and Lf indicate free length of a ruler.
Dynamics Equilibrium
Having established the acceleration as well as the forces and moments, the dynamics
equilibrium equations can be found via Newton-Euler’s method for all i = 1, 2, ..., 5
Master thesis
Page 62 of 152
==PAGE:75==
4
THEORETICAL MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
4.1
Rigid Body
bodies [30]
NF
X
j=1
BiFj = mi · Biai
(4.11)
NM
X
j=1
BiMOij = IOi · d
dt(Biωi) + BiΩi × (IOi · Biωi) + mi · BirOi × BiaOi,
(4.12)
where F and M are the forces and moments on body i, NF and NM are the total number
of forces and moments on body i, IOi is the area moment of inertia matrix of body i at
point Oi and BiΩi is the absolute angular velocity of the moving reference frame Bi.
The above yields 15 equation (3 for each mass) and can be expressed in matrix form Ac =
b, where cT =
n
¨x
R
o
where ¨xT =
n
¨x2
¨x3
¨x4
¨x5
¨θ
¨α
¨β
o
are the accelerations
and RT =
n
Rx1
Ry1
Ry21
Ry22
Ry31
Ry32
Ry4
Ry5
o
the reaction forces. The set
of equations can then be divided into sub matrices and vectors
Ac = b ⇔
(
A11
A12
A21
A22
) (
¨x
R
)
=
(
b1
b2
)
.
(4.13)
From the bottom part of the sub matrices and vectors an expression for R is found
A21¨x + A22Ry = b2
⇔Ry = A−1
22 (b2 −A21¨x),
(4.14)
which can be inserted into the upper part of the sub matrices and vectors
A11¨x + A12Ry = b1
(4.15)
⇔(A11 −A12A−1
22 A21)¨x = b1 −A12A−1
22 b2.
(4.16)
Which may be recognized is of the form
M(t)¨x(t) + K(t)x(t) = f(t),
(4.17)
where M(t) = (A11 −A12A−1
22 A21), and K(t) is found by evaluating which parts of
b1 −A12A−1
22 b2, is multiplied by an element of x, and the remaining is f(t).
An important reason for the assumption of the small displacements, is that it allows
for linearization of the system. This is done around the equilibrium position x(t) = 0.
As such, it is assumed that sin(θ) ≈θ and cos(θ) ≈1 for all angles. Further, a linear
approximation results in higher-order terms being neglected. This is the reason for the
damping matrix not being included in eq.
(4.17), as all velocity terms ˙x present in
b1 −A12A−1
22 b2, are second-order terms.
This also results in the mass and stiffness
matrix no longer being time dependent M(t) = M, K(t) = K.
Master thesis
Page 63 of 152
==PAGE:76==
4
THEORETICAL MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
4.2
Point Mass
Modal parameters
Retrieving the modal parameters from the above is done by creating a state space vector
z(t)T =
n
˙x(t)
x(t)
o
, which allows for expressing the EOM in eq. (4.17) in a set of first
order differential equations
"
M
0
0
M
# (
¨x(t)
˙x(t)
)
+
(
0
K
−M
0
) (
˙x(t)
x(t)
)
=
(
f(t)
0
)
⇔A˙z(t) + Bz(t) = f,
(4.18)
which is equivalent to eq. (4.17). The poles and mode shapes are found from the ho-
mogeneous solution to this, f = 0.
The solution is then assumed to be of the form
zh = P7
i=1 Ciuieλit, where λi is pole i and ui the corresponding mode shape, which are
found as the non-trivial solution to the eigenvalue problem (λA + B)u = 0.
4.2
Point Mass
The methodology of developing the point mass model is equivalent to the rigid body
model, but with stricter assumptions, resulting in a simpler model (no Euler’s rotation
equations). As such, the steps will not be repeated, but only the assumptions and the
mechanical model is presented. Further, during the modelling process it was revealed,
that the point mass model mass and stiffness matrices were equivalent to submatrices
of the rigid body model mass and stiffness matrices, only considering the translational
parts.
Assumptions
• The rulers between mass plates and wing masses are assumed to be massless.
• The mass plates and wing masses are assumed to be point masses, and as such have
no moment of inertia around their own axis.
• Small deformations along the rulers between masses, allowing for modelling the
rulers’ stiffness using Bernoulli-Euler beam theory.
• Due to the small deformations along the rulers, only x-direction displacement of
the masses are assumed, neglecting y-direction displacement.
• No friction or internal material damping.
• The force required to move the masses are strictly proportional to its x-direction
displacement, multiplied by a spring constant k, determined via Bernoulli-Euler
beam theory.
Mechanical model
With the above presented assumptions, a mechanical model of the structure is developed
and a sketch is shown in Figure 7.
Master thesis
Page 64 of 152
==PAGE:77==
4
THEORETICAL MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
4.3
Finite Element Method
Figure 7: Mechanical point mass model
4.3
Finite Element Method
The final mathematical model of the test rig is built using the Finite Element Method
(FEM). The model is developed using the software Ansys Mechanical APDL. The few
assumptions made in the development of the FE model are:
• Displacements and deformations only occur in a single plane, and as such, the
structure can be modelled in 2D.
• The structure is assumed to be in a plane stress condition. The plane stress condi-
tion is typically valid for structures loaded in a single plane, with a small thickness
out-of-plane. While this structure does not have a small thickness out-of-plane, the
loading only occurs in a single plane, and there are generally not any experiments
that will be conducted, which should result in any significant out-of-plane stresses.
• No friction or internal damping.
• No gravity.
• The physical springs can be modelled as 1 dimensional spring elements.
With the above assumptions, the element type chosen for the entirety of the structure
(with the exception of the springs) is the PLANE183 element. PLANE183 is a 6- or
8-node 2D element with quadratic displacement behavior. In this project the 8-node
version is chosen, as it is well suited for the geometry, and the additional computational
time required for the extra nodes, is not expected to have a significant impact, as it is a
2D model. For the springs the COMBIN14 element is chosen. The COMBIN14 element
is a 1D element with 2 nodes, with a longitudinal or torsional spring-damper option.
For finding the natural frequencies of the FE model, the modes are extracted using the
Master thesis
Page 65 of 152
==PAGE:78==
4
THEORETICAL MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
4.3
Finite Element Method
Block Lanczos mode-extraction method as the modal analysis solver. For FRF estimation
the harmonic analysis solver is used.
Mesh refinement
The mesh is established by choosing a global parameter for all PLANE183 elements,
which dictates the maximum side length of an element h.
The mesh quality will be
evaluated by estimating the relative change in the first 7 natural frequencies
εi,n = fi,n −fi,m
fi,m
for
i = 1, 2, ..., 7,
(4.19)
due to a halving of the maximum global element side length hn = hm
2 . Note, that the
first 7 natural frequencies are chosen as they relate to rigid body motions of the masses,
with flexible modes occurring at higher frequencies. Additionally, the mesh quality will
also be evaluated by estimating the MAC between the same mode shapes from the two
different values of h. The mesh refinement will be done for the case of 3 bottom mass
plates, and 2 springs in each spring holder.
An initial value of h = 0.01 mm is chosen, leading to a maximum aspect ratio of 10, along
the rulers. First halving the initial maximum element side length to h = 0.005 mm and
then again to h = 0.0025 mm, leads to the relative change in estimated natural frequencies
shown in Table 3. As apparent from the table, halving the maximum element length twice
Table 3: Changes in natural frequency due to increase in mesh refinement
hn
hm
ε1 [%]
ε2 [%]
ε3 [%]
ε4 [%]
ε5 [%]
ε6 [%]
ε7 [%]
0.01
0.005
0,000
-0.025
-0.038
-0.028
-0.021
-0.041
-0.041
0.005
0.0025
-0.015
-0.049
-0.029
-0.040
-0.058
-0.044
-0.046
from the initial value of h = 0.01 mm, only results in very minor changes in the natural
frequencies, with no absolute change being larger than 0.1%. Further the minimum MAC
value for any of the natural frequencies in both steps of the halving were 0.999999 and
0.999984 respectively. Overall this shows that the results which are to be found and used
in the upcoming analysis are not mesh dependent. As such any of the three used meshes
may be used, but for this project a maximum element length of h = 0.005 mm is chosen.
It is worth noting, that the results found here do not necessarily carry over, into modes
higher than the first 7. The flexible beam bending modes occurring at higher frequencies
may require a higher level of mesh refinement, specifically along the rulers. However, as
these modes are not of interest in this analysis, there is no need to evaluate this. The
final mesh for the wing angle φ = 0◦is shown in Figure 8.
Master thesis
Page 66 of 152
==PAGE:79==
4
THEORETICAL MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
4.3
Finite Element Method
Figure 8: Mesh with maximum element side length h = 0.005 mm and wing angle φ = 0◦
Master thesis
Page 67 of 152
==PAGE:80==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5
Analysis and Results
Before conducting the analysis on the fully assembled test rig, containing the theoretical
mathematical models, and conducting the experiments for both EMA and OMA, a sim-
pler case will first be studied. This simpler case, will consist of the same structure shown
in Section 3.1, but with the wings, motor and motor mount dismounted. As such, the
structure will solely be consisting of the 3 first masses, and the rulers connecting them.
This will be done to build initial confidence in the mathematical models, as the dynamics
should be easier to model. Further, due to the simpler nature of the structure, fewer rigid
body modes will be present, and thus there should be fewer modes in the experimental
results, making initial comparison and analysis between theory and experiment easier.
This may in turn provide valuable insights into any possible discrepancies between theory
and experiment, as well as potential EMA-OMA differences, before analyzing the fully
assembled test rig. Note again, that the aim of the analysis is to analyze rigid body
modes. The frequency spectrum analyzed for all configurations, will reflect this.
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
5.1.1
Theoretical analysis
5.1.1.1
The spring free case
Having removed the wings, the motor and the motor mount, the simplicity of the structure
is significantly increased. However, despite this increase in simplicity, there are still some
choices to be made in regards to state of the test rig. Namely, the number of mass plates
in the bottom mass, and the number of springs mounted in each spring holder need to
be chosen. For the initial analysis, the case of nm = 2 bottom masses and no springs in
either side NKL = NKR = 0 is chosen (NKL and NKR indicating the number of springs
in left and right spring holder respectively, from the view the test rig has been presented
previously).
Point mass
Considering first the point mass model, the natural frequencies and mode shapes are
found, as presented in Section 4. This model find two modes, the mode shapes of which
are shown in Figure 9.
Note, that the damping ratio will equal 0, and thus not be
commented on for all mathematical models, as no damping has been assumed. In both
modes, there is only displacement in a single mass, either mass 2 or 3 (bottom or top),
while the other one exhibits no displacement. This is not surprising, as the mass and
stiffness matrices for this model are both diagonal matrices. As such the movements of
either of the two masses, are completely decoupled. This is a result of the point mass
assumption. The masses having no moment of inertia around their own axis, results
in the rotation around the center axis θ disappearing from all equations of the model.
Combined with no x- and y-direction displacement possible in mass 1, the system becomes
Master thesis
Page 68 of 152
==PAGE:81==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
(a) Mode 1: f1 = 3.00 Hz
(b) Mode 2: f2 = 3.35 Hz
Figure 9: Point mass isolated tower modes
completely decoupled. This is also seen in the FRFs in Figure 10, that shows the response
Yi/Xj at DOF i = 1, 2 from excitation at DOF j = 1, 2. The FRFs clearly show, that
there is no response at a given mass, as a result of excitation at the other mass. The
Figure 10: Point mass isolated tower FRF
modes and natural frequencies are thus only going to be functions of their respective
masses and stiffness, with no dynamic coupling present.
Rigid body
Utilizing now the rigid body model, the mode shapes and natural frequencies are found.
With the rigid body model allowing for masses to have moments of inertia, the center
axis rotation θ will now also be a DOF in the model alongside x2 and x3. As such, the
model will have 3 × 3 mass and stiffness matrices, and thus result in 3 rigid body modes.
Before presenting the mode shapes, the interpretation of the mode shape obtained from
the model is worth briefly discussing. As the displacement vector for the system xT =
Master thesis
Page 69 of 152
==PAGE:82==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
n
x2
x3
θ
o
are of different units, the resulting mode shapes, while dimensionless, will
not be directly comparable. Instead, the DOFs of the mode shapes relating to transla-
tional displacement can be directly compared, and DOFs of the mode shapes relating to
rotation can be directly compared. As an example, if a mode shape is arbitrarily given
as uT =
n
1
0.5
1
o
, then the local displacement of x2 will be twice the displacement of
x3 when excited by the corresponding natural frequency. However, the displacement of
x2 and θ are not directly comparable although equal in size.
This fact may lead to further implications when presenting the modes. Assuming a mode
shape with a positive rotation in θ and a positive translation in x3. These two “pull”
mass 3 in opposite directions, and there is no final answer as to whether the total impact
will be positive, 0 or negative. The mode shapes can be presented in a manner, which
visually mitigates this, showing that these displacements pull in opposite directions, as
is done in Figure 11.
The larger obstacle however, will relate to the comparison to the experimental results.
While the mode shapes from the rigid body model includes rotations, only translational
displacement of the masses are captured by the accelerometers, which thus includes both
displacement caused by translation and rotation. One way to attempt mitigating this,
is to reduce the theoretical mode shapes via characteristic lengths. The 3 DOF mode
shapes yielded from the rigid body model would thus reduce to 2 DOF, but still keeping
the same number of modes. The characteristic lengths used in this project, will simply
be the lengths between reference systems. The original mode shape uT =
n
u1
u2
u3
o
would thus reduce to uT
reduced =
n
u1 + L2 · u3
u2 −L3 · u3
o
. Note, that this reduction
still does not necessarily solve the problem of rotation and translation potentially having
opposite effects, the magnitude of which is unknown. Thus, while the reduction allows
for better comparison to experimental results, typical MAC comparison between theoret-
ical and experimental mode shapes may incorrectly yield low similarity for some mode
shapes, and visual comparison may be able to explain discrepancies.
Figures 11 and 12 show the mode shapes and reduced mode shapes respectively, with
the corresponding natural frequencies for the rigid body model. The first thing of note is
that unlike for the point mass model, there is displacement in both masses for all modes.
Hence displacement in any of the DOFs is coupled to displacement in a different DOF.
Looking at the mode shapes in Figure 11, it appears that the first and second modes
are identical. However, as aforementioned this is a result of the presentation. As may
be noticed from the figures, the rotational displacement in the first mode is larger than
for the second mode. This should not be surprising, as the first mode is expected to be
reminiscent of a rigid body mode for the entire structure as a whole, around its point of
rotation. Due to gravity being included in the model, the rotation will lead to displace-
ment in mass 2 and 3 via the coupling. As such, when removing gravity from the model,
this mode has a natural frequency of 0 Hz, and the translational displacement in mass 2
and 3 disappears. This mode will be referred to as the “pendulum” mode. The second
Master thesis
Page 70 of 152
==PAGE:83==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
mode is more likely to exhibit larger translational displacements relative to rotation. As
such, while the two modes look very alike in Figure 11, they may not do so in practice.
This is also why the first two reduced mode shapes in Figure 12, do not look identical at
all, but instead the first and third mode look alike. While neither portrayal is incorrect,
(a) Mode 1:
f1 = 0.59 Hz
(b) Mode 2:
f2 = 3.22 Hz
(c) Mode 3:
f3 = 12.94 Hz
Figure 11: Rigid body isolated tower modes
providing both seems useful, as it provides additional insight into the presentation of
mode shapes, the interpretation of which is not necessarily straightforward.
Moving on from the mode shapes it is also worth noting that the natural frequencies
are more spread out, as the coupling between masses leads to changes in the dynamics,
compared to the natural frequencies of the point mass model. The “pendulum” mode is
(a) Mode 1:
f1 = 0.59 Hz
(b) Mode 2:
f2 = 3.22 Hz
(c) Mode 3:
f3 = 12.94 Hz
Figure 12: Rigid body isolated tower (reduced) modes
dominated by the rotational DOF, and as such was naturally not present in the point
mass model. While the point mass model had two modes with natural frequencies very
close to each other, due to the comparable stiffness between mass 1 and 2, and 1 and 3
respectively, the second and third mode in the rigid body model are much more spaced
out. This is a result of the masses having a moment of inertia. As such, a translation
in either mass 2 or 3, results in a moment being applied around the shaft axis, via the
constitutive equations presented in Section 4.
The dynamic coupling occurring in the rigid body model, may also be found in the sys-
tem FRFs. Figure 13 shows the response Yi/Xj at DOF i = 1, 2, 3 from excitation at
Master thesis
Page 71 of 152
==PAGE:84==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
Figure 13: Rigid body isolated tower FRF
DOF j = 1, 2, 3 (remember from x that θ is the third DOF). It is quickly noticed from
the figure, that all FRFs show peaks at the previously found natural frequencies, once
again showing the complete coupling of the system. Unlike the point mass model, the
rigid body model also predicts five anti-resonances.
Several of these are very closely
located to the first two natural frequencies. This may be considered when conducting
EMA experiments, as a too quick sweep over these frequencies, may result in spill-over
between the resonance and anti-resonance. A final note on the FRFs, including the point
mass ones, is that the relative difference in magnitude between peaks should not be given
too much consideration. As no damping is assumed, the magnitude of the peaks, are
solely a function of the frequency resolution, and will go towards infinity, as resolution is
increased.
FEM
Finally, considering the FE model, the natural frequencies and mode shapes are found and
presented in Figure 14. It is quickly noted, that the first natural frequency is very close to
0 Hz. This is in line with expectations, as gravity is not included in this model. With zero
springs, the first mode should thus be a rigid body mode of the full structure, equivalent
to the “pendulum” mode described for the rigid body model, which is indeed what can be
seen in Figure 14a. Since gravity is present in practice, the natural frequency of this mode
is not expected to align well with experimental results. The second and third mode shape
are very similar to the rigid body modes previously presented, indicating a generally good
alignment between these two models. The second natural frequencies are very close, with
a difference of only 0.02 Hz. For the third mode, the natural frequency deviates a bit more,
with the FE model estimating a natural frequency 0.75 Hz higher, which is a difference
of around 5-6%. As introduced when discussing the rigid body model, the constitutive
equations included as a result of the masses having moment inertia, have a significant
Master thesis
Page 72 of 152
==PAGE:85==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
(a) Mode 1: f1 = 0.0041 Hz
(b) Mode 2: f2 = 3.24 Hz
(c) Mode 3: f3 = 13.69 Hz
Figure 14: FEM isolated tower modes
impact on this mode. Specifically Mx2 and Mx3 in eq. (4.9), relating translation in x2 and
x3 to moments in the rulers, which transfers to a moment around the shaft axis, impacts
this mode. Indeed, increasing the values of the rotational stiffness Mx2 and Mx3 leads
to an increase in the third natural frequency of the rigid body model, with virtually no
impact on the other natural frequencies. This suggests, that either the rigid body model
underestimates the rotational stiffness of the rulers, or the FE model overestimates their
rotational stiffness, relative to the other model. It should also be made clear, that both
models may misestimate the stiffness when compared to the experimental results.
Figure 15 presents the FRF responses of excitation at mass 2 and 3 respectively, using
the same notation as for the point mass. The FRFs show the x-direction response, to an
x-direction excitation at the two masses. While the FE model allows for also capturing
y-direction displacement, this representation is more in line with what will be measured
experimentally. Additionally, the FE model does not allow for excitation of the θ DOF,
in the same way the rigid body model did, and as such, there are fewer FRFs presented
for this model.
Looking at the FRFs in Figure 15, only two peaks are present, as the “pendulum” mode
has a natural frequency at almost 0 Hz. From the figure, it stands out that the resonance
peak of the third mode is quite small. This is explained by the discussion about mode
shapes, where a translational in x2 or x3 alongside a rotation in θ, may result in the global
x-direction displacement in mass 2 or 3 being very small. As such, a small peak here is not
in disagreement with the rigid body results. Such modes are more likely to produce poor
estimates using the experimental methods, due to the potentially small amplitudes. The
largest discrepancy between the two models (disregarding the first natural frequency),
is the discrepancies between anti-resonances. The rigid body model predicts 5, while
the FE model predicts 4, and the frequencies at which they occur, are also not in very
good agreement. The presence of more anti-resonances in the rigid body model is not
surprising, as there are more DOFs included in the FRFs. However, the difference in
Master thesis
Page 73 of 152
==PAGE:86==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
Figure 15: FEM isolated tower FRF
placement cannot be explained by this, and may instead be related to the differences in
geometries assumed by the two models.
5.1.1.2
Varying physical properties
The initial analysis included the isolated tower with two bottom mass plates nm = 2 and
no springs NKL = NKR = 0. It is of interest so see how the models predict changes in the
modal parameters as a result of changes in physical properties. As such 6 total variations
(including the original) are established and the modal parameters are compared. The
physical properties are solely changed via the number of bottom mass plates nm and
springs NKL, NKR. The 6 variations are shown in Table 4. As the point mass model
stands out from the other two, this will be considered separately, and the rigid body and
FE model will be studied jointly.
Table 4: Physical property variations
Variation, v
nm
NKL, NKR
1
1
2
2
2
0
3
2
2
4
2
4
5
3
0
6
3
2
Master thesis
Page 74 of 152
==PAGE:87==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
Point mass
Natural frequencies and mode shapes are found for each of the 6 variations in Table 4.
Figure 16 shows MACXP plots of the two modes, for a comparison across the variations
(these are equivalent to MACXPnD as there is no damping). The plots clearly show a
very high level of agreement across the variations, with the exception of the first vari-
ation (nm = 1, NKL = NKR = 2). The high level of agreement is fully in line with
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 2
Figure 16: Point mass MACXP for 6 isolated tower physical variations (see Table 4)
expectations, as the two modes are decoupled with isolated movement in either mass 2
or 3. The discrepancy in the first variation can quickly be explained by looking at Figure
17, which shows both natural frequencies for each of the variations. The figure shows
Figure 17: Point mass natural frequencies for 6 isolated tower physical variations.
that changing the number of springs have no impact on the natural frequencies of the
isolated tower according to the point mass model. Further, as the system is dynamically
decoupled, changing the number of mass plates in mass 2, only impacts the mode relating
to movement in this mass. As such, the other mode remains constant across variations.
However, for the first variation, the natural frequency of the mass 2 mode increases above
the other natural frequency, resulting in the two modes being swapped in the MACXP
Master thesis
Page 75 of 152
==PAGE:88==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
comparison. Indeed swapping these leads to complete agreement across variations, but
these plots are left out for brevity.
Rigid body and FEM
Similarly as for the point mass, the natural frequencies and mode shapes across the 6
variations in Table 4 are found for the rigid body and FE model. Figure 18 shows MACXP
plots for both model types across the 6 variations v, for each of the three modes. Note,
that the rigid body mode shapes that have been used for the MACXP plots, are the
reduced mode shapes. Figure 19 shows the corresponding natural frequencies. Looking
at the plots, there is generally good agreement both across physical variations and the
two models. The main outlier is the first mode, where the two no spring variations in the
FE model are completely orthogonal to all other variations. This is a result of the lack of
gravity in the FE model, resulting in a natural frequency of ≈0. If instead the MAC or
MACX is plotted, there is perfect agreement in the first mode. Similarly for the second
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 2
(c) Mode 3
Figure 18: MACXP for 6 isolated tower physical variations (see Table 4), for rigid body
model (RBM) and FE model
mode, the largest deviation occurs in the first variation, which is mainly driven by the
difference in the natural frequency (for both models) as seen in Figure 19. For the third
mode, there appears to be slight difference in the MACXP of the variations containing
nm = 3 bottom mass plates. Plotting the physical mode shapes, it appears to likely be a
result of the mode shape reduction for the rigid body model.
Comparing the natural frequencies across the two models for the different variations,
it appears that the two models make similar predictions for changes in the physical
properties. Adding/removing masses and springs lead to similar increases/decreases for
both models. As was the case for the studied nm = 2 bottom mass and NKL = NKL = 0
springs, the rigid body model predicts a slightly higher first natural frequency, while the
FE model predicts slightly higher third natural frequency.
From Figure 19, it also becomes apparent how the different modes are differently affected
by the different variations. The second mode shows very little response to changes in the
number of springs, whereas changes to the bottom mass is clearly reflected. Oppositely,
changes to the bottom mass appears to have a larger impact for the first mode, compared
Master thesis
Page 76 of 152
==PAGE:89==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
Figure 19: Natural frequencies for 6 isolated tower physical variations (see Table 4) for
rigid body model (RBM) and FE model.
to changes in the number of springs. The third mode appear to show notable response
to both type of changes.
Overall, from both analyzing the MACXP and the natural frequencies across variations,
the rigid body model and the FE model appear to be aligned well, and makes similar
predictions about the structure. The point mass model aligns very poorly with the other
two, and is not expected to produce results that can be found experimentally, for this
type of structure.
5.1.2
EMA
In the same manner as it was done for the theoretical case, for the EMA an initial analysis
will be conducted on the case of nm = 2 bottom mass plates, and NKL = NKR = 0 springs,
before considering multiple physical variations.
The excitation used for the EMA experiments, are bi-directional chirps of 0-40 Hz with
a duration of 27s, in each direction, and a sampling rate of fs = 100 Hz. A total of
218 samples are used for each analysis, corresponding to a duration of 2621.44 s for each
experiment. The structure is excited at the bottom mass (mass 2). FRFs are calculated
using the H1-estimator using 28 block averages with a 50% overlap. This results in a
frequency resolution of fres = 12.8 Hz. The duration of the experiment, the duration of
the chirp, the excitation amplitude, as well as the number of block averages were all found
through vigorous testing, with the aim of getting the most useful data. In addition to
the analog filters introduced by the amplifiers, a digital low-pass 5th order Butterworth
filter, with a cutoff at 49.5 Hz is also applied to the signals as anti-aliasing protection,
and to reduce potential high frequency noise.
5.1.2.1
The spring free case
Figure 20 shows the FRFs of mass 2 and 3, due to excitation at mass 2. An initial
inspection of the FRFs reveal that there appear to be two resonance peaks, although
Master thesis
Page 77 of 152
==PAGE:90==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
the peak around ≈13 Hz appear quite small. The smaller peak is not unexpected, as
the resonance peak around this mode in the FE model in Figure 15, also showed a quite
small peak, due to the rotation and translation canceling each other out in global terms.
Although 3 modes are expected in this frequency range from the theoretical results, the
first “pendulum” mode is also expected to be at a frequency below 1 Hz, which is below
the lower cutoff frequency of the accelerometers, and thus cannot be captured. Aside
Figure 20: FRF for isolated tower with nm = 2 and NKL = NKR = 0.
from the low end of the spectrum, the coherence level is also high except around reso-
nance peaks, as expected.
Before obtaining the modal parameters, a moment may be taken to highlight the impor-
tance of utilizing the measured force for EMA when conducting shaker experimentation,
as opposed to the input signal sent to the shaker. Figure 21 shows the FRF for the bottom
mass, calculated using the measured force from the force transducer and the input signal
sent to the shaker respectively. Inspecting the figure shows that using the input signal
instead of the measured force, results in something resembling a highly damped resonance
peak around ≈8 Hz. The differences in the two FRFs should reflect the differences in the
dynamics of the isolated tower, and the dynamics of the isolated tower coupled with the
shaker-stinger connection. As such, this damped peak may likely be a natural frequency
of the combined system, with a high level of damping, as the energy dissipates out into the
surroundings. The figure is a good example of how the shaker-stinger connection impacts
the dynamics, and highlights the importance of measuring the input force. However, the
figure also forebodes potential difficulties for the OMA methods, as the input force will
not accounted for in those.
Modal parameters are now obtained using the pLSCF EMA method. Figure 22 shows
a stabilization diagram and a LSFD fit for the isolated tower with nm = 2 and NKL =
NKR = 0. The stabilization diagram in Figure 22a shows what appears to be two modes
Master thesis
Page 78 of 152
==PAGE:91==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
Figure 21: FRF mass 2, using measured force vs input signal
that can be considered stable with a model order above 60. Using a slightly lower model
order, one might also consider a third mode stable at ≈15 Hz, however the stability
disappears for higher model orders. Figure 22b shows the LSFD fit using the 2 identi-
fied poles. Note, that as the lower bound of the considered spectrum is 0 Hz, the lower
residuals LR has been left out of the LSFD estimator in eq. (2.102). A quick inspection
of the figure shows a quite poor fit, between the measured and fitted values. While the
fits tend to agree on where the resonance peaks should be, they generally do not follow
the measured FRFs very well. One possible explanation behind the poor fit, may be that
the data used for the model fit is purely translational but there is an additional layer of
rotational dynamics behind it. However, it should also be noted, that in the SIMO case,
the modal participation vectors turn into scalars, and after phase normalization (which
is used in the estimator), they become equal between modes. As such the weighting of
(a) Stabilization diagram
(b) LSFD fit
Figure 22: Stabilization diagram and LSFD fit for isolated tower
the modes in the LSFD estimator disappears, which was introduced to improve efficiency
and produce a maximum likelihood estimation. Due to this poor fit, the mode shapes
are likely to be poor estimates of the true mode shapes.
Global modal parameters are found by averaging the stabilized poles across an appro-
priate range of model orders, and are presented in Table 5. Inspecting the table shows
Master thesis
Page 79 of 152
==PAGE:92==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
that the estimated parameters have a low standard deviation, indicating a high degree of
certainty about the estimates. The estimated relative modal participation factors show
that the first mode contributes vastly more to the system’s overall response, compared to
the second mode. This high of a relative modal participation may suggest some energy
leakage coming from the “pendulum” mode going into the first estimated mode. Such
leakage may also help explain the poor fit of the LSFD estimator. However, the difference
also indicates that the higher mode shows much less of a response to the given excitation,
which would also lead to poorer mode shape estimates.
To not just assume that a “pendulum” mode exists from the theoretical results, a simple
experiment is conducted to confirm the hypothesis. The simple experiment is conducted
Table 5: pLSCF modal parameters of isolated tower, nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 0
Mode, n
fn (σ) [Hz]
ζn (σ) [%]
πn [%]
1
2.63 (0.042)
2.51 (0.21)
99.71
2
13.41 (0.011)
3.11 (0.11)
0.29
by disconnecting the shaker-stinger connection from the structure, rotating the tower
slightly by hand and releasing. The tower then exhibits the typical rigid body pendulum
motion, as shown in Figure 23, a full period of which is timed. The full period is timed to
be T ≈1.80 s, which yields a frequency of f ≈0.56 Hz. While this cannot be used in the
Figure 23: Pendulum motion of isolated tower
EMA analysis, it supports the results from the theoretical models, that a low frequency
Master thesis
Page 80 of 152
==PAGE:93==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
mode exists (especially the rigid body model, which found the first natural frequency to
be f1 = 0.59 Hz).
Further comparing to the theoretical results, the second found mode of f2 = 13.41 Hz is
between the two third mode estimates of the rigid body and FE models respectively, with
quite low relative deviation from either. The natural frequency at f1 = 2.63 Hz however,
is quite a bit lower than the theoretical results of 3.22 −3.24 Hz. The theoretical models
may overestimate the stiffness related to this mode, but a more likely cause of the dif-
ferences, is that the theoretical models are highly idealized. The friction and asymmetry
in the system not included in theory, will naturally impact the natural frequencies. As
the “pendulum” mode is not captured in the FRFs, but the relative modal participation
is potentially quite high, there may also be residual effects from the “pendulum” mode
that leaks into the measurement and causes the pLSCF to estimate the mode at a lower
frequency, or at the very least, there may be some energy leakage going from the “pen-
dulum” mode into the first pLSCF identified mode. However, it appears more likely,
that friction explains the difference, than leakage causing a shift in natural frequency
estimates.
In Figure 24 the two estimated mode shapes are shown. While they appear to be some-
what similar to the comparable modes from the theoretical models, once again this com-
parison should be made with caution.
(a) Mode 1: fn = 2.63 Hz
(b) Mode 2: fn = 13.41 Hz
Figure 24: pLSCF estimated mode shapes for isolated tower
To show the similarity between the mode shapes, the AutoMACX and -MACXP are plot-
ted in Figure 25. The AutoMACX shows a relatively high degree of similarity between
the two modes. The masses in the first mode in Figure 24a have displacements in the
same direction, while the opposite is the case for the second mode. This should lead to
a low degree of similarity, however the small level of displacement in the bottom mass
in the first mode, leads to a higher degree of similarity. With the accelerometers only
capturing a superposition of the translation and rotation, the AutoMACX for this type
of experiment is likely to show higher levels of similarity, as pure rotational and trans-
lational information about the structure is missing. Instead plotting the AutoMACXP,
which also considers the poles of the modes, the level of similarity drops drastically, as
shown in Figure 25b.
Master thesis
Page 81 of 152
==PAGE:94==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
(a) AutoMACX
(b) AutoMACXP
Figure 25: AutoMACs of mode shapes for isolated tower, nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 0
5.1.2.2
Varying physical properties
Identically to the theoretical models, 6 experimental variations of different physical prop-
erties are conducted for the EMA analysis. The 6 variations are identical to the ones
from the theoretical analysis from Table 4.
Natural frequencies and damping ratios
Figure 26 shows natural frequencies and damping ratios for the two modes for all 6 vari-
ations. The error bars show two times the standard deviation. Note, that when the error
bars are not visible, they are smaller than the dot. Table 6 presents the same modal
parameters, as well as the relative modal participation. From inspection of the figure
Figure 26: pLSCF estimated natural frequencies and damping ratios for 6 isolated tower
physical variations (see Table 4), with 2 times std. deviation as error bars.
and table, a few observations may be made. First, for a given number of bottom mass
plates nm, increasing the number of springs NKL, NKR, increases the natural frequency of
both modes. This is an interesting difference to the theoretical results of the comparable
Master thesis
Page 82 of 152
==PAGE:95==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
modes. In the theoretical results increasing the number of springs only increased the nat-
ural frequency of the higher of these two modes. There may be one or multiple reasons
for this difference. The first may simply be, that the theoretical models are idealized
symmetric models, and the imperfections and slight asymmetries in the practical experi-
ments cause this. Another explanation may relate to the previously discussed possibility
of residual effects from a not identified “pendulum” mode spilling over into this mode.
However, a third and quite likely explanation is that the small amount of friction in the
bearings and the springs, which is not included in the theoretical model, has an impact
on the natural frequencies.
The “pendulum” mode was not identified via the pLSCF technique for any of the varia-
tions. However, the theoretical results showed that the natural frequency of such a mode
Table 6: pLSCF modal parameters for 6 variations (see Table 4) of isolated tower
nm
NKL, NKR
Mode n
fn (σ) [Hz]
ζn (σ) [%]
πn [%]
1
2
1
2.92 (0.041)
1.91 (0.19)
99.81
1
2
2
18.02 (0.050)
2.18 (0.23)
0.19
2
0
1
2.63 (0.042)
2.51 (0.21)
99.71
2
0
2
13.41 (0.011)
3.11 (0.11)
0.29
2
2
1
2.93 (0.009)
1.73 (0.13)
99.88
2
2
2
16.54 (0.040)
3.16 (0.33)
0.12
2
4
1
3.16 (0.004)
1.86 (0.11)
99.94
2
4
2
21.45 (0.019)
1.02 (0.08)
0.06
3
0
1
2.64 (0.030)
2.31 (0.35)
99.19
3
0
2
12.43 (0.038)
5.01 (0.35)
0.81
3
2
1
2.91 (0.017)
1.84 (0.13)
98.91
3
2
2
14.97 (0.054)
3.23 (0.13)
1.09
also increases with the number of springs, even to a level which should be detectable by
the accelerometers. If indeed there are residual effects from an unidentified “pendulum”
mode, or some degree of modal coupling, this could also be the explanation for the in-
crease in natural frequency of the first pLSCF identified mode. However, it again appears
more likely that the friction from the springs, the number of which change, has an impact
on natural frequency.
Another likely explanation for the lacking presence of a “pendulum” mode, is that the
stinger-shaker connection is very likely to add significant damping to any modes associ-
ated with rotation around the central (shaft) axis. Thus, if this first “pendulum” mode
becomes highly damped by the stinger-shaker connection, and a different and much less
damped mode is closely spaced to it, it is unlikely for the “pendulum” mode to be iden-
tified. Especially if it is also close to the lower frequency cutoff from the measurement
system. This may be of importance to keep in mind, going into the analysis of the fully
assembled test rig.
The natural frequency increases with the number of springs for the highest mode for both
the pLSCF estimates and the theoretical models. However, the increases are larger for
Master thesis
Page 83 of 152
==PAGE:96==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
pLSCF estimates, specifically for the nm = 2 case. This may once again relate to the
friction associated with adding springs to the system. Another potential reason for this
deviation between theoretical and pLSCF results, may be that the theoretical models
assume that the springs only act in the vertical y-direction. Although the springs are
indeed mounted and designed to act in this way, the pretension allows the springs to have
friction with the bottom of mass 1, and as the mass rotates, the springs will bend, and
also apply a force in the x-direction. This should lead to increased stiffness and thus a
higher natural frequency, not captured in the theoretical models. Note, that if this is
indeed the case, and the springs actually provide a significant force in the x-direction,
this would break the assumption of linearity, impacting the performance of both EMA
and OMA methods.
The damping ratios deviate less between variations, and especially for the first mode,
the majority of the damping ratios fall within two standard deviations of each other.
For the second mode, there is a slightly bigger difference. Theoretically the damping
ratios should remain the same, as no damping is introduced by adding mass or stiffness.
The disassembly and assembly required between variations, could have minor impacts
on things like friction in the system, which in turn would impact the estimated damping
ratio, leading to the results shown in the figure and table. The modal participation varies
very little across the different variations, with the first mode explaining the vast majority
of the response dynamics across all variations.
Mode shapes
Figure 27 shows the MACXPnD for the two pLSCF modes respectively, across the 6
variations.
As small deviations are expected in the damping ratios between physical
variations, the MACXPnD are chosen, as they will otherwise result in high levels of dis-
similarity. The plots show a very high degree of similarity across the variations for the
first mode. For the second mode, there is a much higher level of dissimilarity across the
variations. There is also a larger variation in the natural frequency and damping ratio,
however plotting the MACX, shows an almost identical result, showing that the dissimi-
larity is also found in the isolated mode shapes. This result may once again be explained
by the potential opposing effects of rotation and translation. The corresponding theoret-
ical mode to the first identified pLSCF mode, showed rotation having a relatively smaller
impact compared to the other found modes. If the mode is dominated by translation,
it is more likely to be consistent across variations. For the second identified mode, with
both rotation and translation having a significant impact, changing the bottom mass or
number of springs, may impact either rotation or translation relatively more than the
other, and thus potentially changing the mode shape in the “reduced” sense, discussed
earlier. It is suspected, that having access to pure rotational and translational displace-
ment would result in a larger degree of similarity, however this cannot be confirmed. It
should also be noted, that the modal participation is much lower for the second mode,
which is reflected in the data, and the mode shapes may thus be poorer estimates.
Master thesis
Page 84 of 152
==PAGE:97==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 2
Figure 27: pLSCF MACXPnD for 6 isolated tower physical variations (see Table 4)
5.1.3
OMA
The OMA analysis will similarly to the theoretical and EMA analysis, be split into an
initial analysis on the case of nm = 2 bottom mass plates and NKL = NKR = 0 springs,
and an analysis of varying the physical properties. However, first a brief preliminary
signal analysis is conducted.
5.1.3.1
Preliminary signal analysis
The excitation used for the OMA analysis is created by a pseudo-random white noise
signal, to the bottom mass (mass 2). The experiments are conducted with a sampling
rate of fs = 100 Hz, using a total of 218 samples. As the OMA methods assume Gaussian
distributed noise excitation, it is important to validate this assumption. Figure 28 shows
the input signal sent to the electrodynamic shaker as well as the actual measured force
on the excited mass. The input signal appears to resemble a Gaussian distribution, and
Figure 28: Density and probability plot of input signal and measured force
the probability plot shows a linear curve with a slope of unity, which is completely as
Master thesis
Page 85 of 152
==PAGE:98==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
expected.
The measured force signal, appears to have a slight negative skew as well
as slightly heavier tails. While the measured force does not exhibit a perfect Gaussian
distribution, the overall deviation from a Gaussian signal does not appear to be large
enough to cause significant issues.
The CF matrix is calculated using the direct method, using 211 discrete time lags, and
the first lag is removed to reduce accumulated noise. The two autocorrelation functions
R11, R22 are shown in Figure 29, relating to mass 2 and 3 respectively. The figure shows
a large difference in number of lags, before oscillations disappear. The large discrepancy
is likely due to the fact, that mass 2 is mounted to the shaker-stinger connection. Due
to the fact that the system is very little damped, the first autocorrelation would likely
show a similar trend, if not connected directly to the stinger. As such the number of
lags is chosen to be 211, as this appears to be the number of lags needed for the second
autocorrelation function to converge reasonably close to 0.
Figure 29: Autocorrelation functions of isolated tower
5.1.3.2
OMA Setup
The utilization of the previously presented OMA methods, requires the specification of
a variety of input parameters chosen by the user. Some parameters are recurring, while
others will be unique to specific methods. Table 7 shows the general data and signal
properties and processing steps that have been taken prior to further analysis. The num-
ber of samples and the sampling frequency matches that of the EMA experiments. In
addition to the previously presented analog filters on the amplifiers, a 5th order low-pass
Butterworth filter, with a cutoff at 49.5 Hz (right below the Nyquist frequency) is intro-
duced as anti-aliasing protection, and to reduce potential high frequency noise, as was
done during the EMA. The 5th order is chosen to provide a relatively sharp cutoff, while
not being too computationally expensive. A digital high-pass filter of 0.5 Hz is applied
Master thesis
Page 86 of 152
==PAGE:99==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
Table 7: Data & signal processing properties for OMA, isolated tower
Description
Value
Samples
218
Sampling rate
100 Hz
Digital high-pass filter
0.5 Hz
Digital low-pass filter
49.5 Hz, 5th order Butterworth
CF Matrix lags (method)
211 (Direct)
Removed initial time lags
1
SD Matrix method
Welch
SD Matrix window size
211, 50% Hanning overlap
slightly above the lowest analog high-pass filter, to remove some additional low frequency
noise.
In addition to the general data and signal processing, a variety of input parameters are re-
quired for the individual OMA techniques. Table 8 presents these, while Table 9 presents
the parameters relevant for evaluation of pole stability for the three AOMA methods.
As explained in Section 2.3.4, the number of estimated modes by the ITD technique is
Table 8: OMA parameters for isolated tower
Description
Value
A-ERA
Block rows
s = 26
Order range
n ∈[22,26] ⇒[21,25] modes
A-SSI
Block rows
s = 26
Order range
n ∈[22,27] ⇒[21,26] modes
A-PR
AR-coefficients
NA ∈[21,25] ⇒[21,25] modes
ITD
Max. identified modes
2
FDD
Number of picked peaks
2
1DOF ITD-fit points
210
limited by the number of measured responses. As such, it will be limited but is not guar-
anteed to a maximum of 2. Given a collected dataset, this is out of the hand of the user,
and the only way to impact the estimates, is via the CF matrix directly, i.e. number of
time lags, tapering windows, etc.
The FDD utilizes manual peak picking. These are manually chosen by visually inspect-
ing the singular values of the spectral density plot. The picked peaks will vary between
experiments, as the peaks may shift. Note, that a degree of bias is inevitable in this type
of analysis, where the interpretation of peaks may be affected by poles found via other
estimation methods. The number of chosen peaks may also be interpreted as biased. As
Master thesis
Page 87 of 152
==PAGE:100==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
will be seen, the singular values plot, will show a highly damped peak at ≈8 Hz. During
the EMA, this damped peak was found in the FRF when not accounting for the measured
force, and thus deemed to be related to the stinger-shaker coupling to the system. There-
fore this peak will not be manually picked. Further, as will be seen, the other methods
generally do not find stabilized poles at this frequency.
The automation of the ERA, SSI and PR methods is done via the explained steps in
Section 2.5.1, and using this method, will be referred to as A-ERA, A-SSI and A-PR,
following the notation by Damsgaard [13]. The AOMA parameters are shown in Table
9. Stabilization accuracy parameters εf, εζ and εψ are chosen via visual inspection of
stabilization diagrams, with the aim of obtaining stabilized and distinct modal parame-
ters. The accuracy parameters are identical for A-ERA and A-SSI, but the A-PR MACX
Table 9: Automation of OMA parameters chosen for isolated tower
A-ERA
A-SSI
A-PR
fn accuracy, εf [%]
0.1
0.1
0.1
ζn accuracy, εζ [%]
5
5
4
MACX mode accuracy, εψ
0.99
0.99
0.92
Cluster cutoff, dMACXPcut
0.01
0.001
0.01
Returned clusters, Nclust
2
2
2
accuracy had to be lowered in order to gain any sort of stabilization. This also led to
more spurious poles, which was mitigated by a slight decrease in the damping accuracy.
The order range for each of the three methods in Table 8 are also chosen considering the
stabilization diagrams. The SSI benefits from a high over-specification, as some quasi-
stable spurious modes appear stabilized for low model orders, but lose stability for higher
orders. This may be because it better models the signal noise for higher model orders
[13]. The PR method exhibits opposite behavior, where higher model order leads to the
spectrum becoming flooded with stabilized poles, and therefore a lower model order range
is chosen. The ERA appear to exhibit a mix of these two, where the spectrum become
flooded with seemingly spurious stabilized poles, that lose stability again at higher orders.
The clustering parameters are chosen to retrieve the top Nclust = 2 most populated clus-
ters/modes. The cluster cutoff dMACXPcut was chosen individually for each method.
Before presenting the analysis and results, it should quickly be mentioned that as there
are only two accelerometers, the rank of the measurement system is limited to 2. Further,
as there is only one excitation source, this rank is further theoretically limited to 1. This
may provide potential difficulties for the OMA methods. However, this should not be a
significant issue, as problems should mostly relate to closely spaced modes, which are not
expected from the EMA and theoretical analysis.
5.1.3.3
The spring free case
Utilizing the processing specifications and parameters presented above, modal parameters
may be estimated using the various techniques. For the A-SSI, A-ERA and A-PR tech-
Master thesis
Page 88 of 152
==PAGE:101==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
niques, stabilization diagrams are shown in Figure 30. Different patterns are visible in
the stabilization charts for the different techniques. For the A-ERA there appear to be 2
stabilized modes across the range of model orders. Interestingly for this technique, in the
model order range between ≈40 and 60, a significant amount of stabilized lines appear.
Due to the amount of poles, the fact that they all appear within a specific range of model
orders, combined with the prior knowledge about the system, these are clearly spurious
modes. The A-SSI also show 2 stabilized modes across the range of model orders, as well
as some lines of poles, that while appearing at the same frequencies repeatedly, never
appear to become stabilized. It also shows a mode near ≈8 Hz, which was previously
(a) ERA, n ∈[22, 26]
(b) SSI, n ∈[22, 27]
(c) PR, NA ∈[21, 25]
Figure 30: ERA, SSI and PR stabilization diagrams, plotted with singular values of SD
matrix, for isolated tower, nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 0.
argued to be a mode relating to the stinger-shaker connection, that is stable up until
order ≈60, before it becomes unstable. Thus the overall trend is that only 2 modes
are stable. The A-PR technique shows many fewer identified modes. This is partly due
to the lower number of model order, but many of the identified poles are found to be
unstable (or new). There appear to be two poles, that are somewhat stabilized, but they
suffer from often finding unstable mode shapes. Note that the condition of Np >> 2NA
from Section 2.3.8, is clearly valid for all model orders, thus not being the cause of the
unstable mode shapes. Damsgaard [13] finds similarly that most of the identified poles,
in the A-PR stabilization charts have unstable mode shapes, however he finds that the
identified poles appear much more scattered across the frequency spectrum, only yielding
few stable poles. While the study by Damsgaard [13] uses a fluid-film perturbation on
a rotor-bearing-foundation test rig, which is quite different from tests conducted in this
study, the fact that the A-PR method struggles to find stable mode shapes, suggest that
it may generally perform poorly at estimating consistent mode shapes.
Natural frequencies and damping ratios
After the establishment of the stabilization charts, following the methodology of Dams-
gaard [13], the top Nclust = 2 populated clusters are identified and global parameter
estimates are created through MACXP weighting. An example of a dendogram showing
the distance between clusters is presented in Figure 31, including the cutoff separating
clusters.
Master thesis
Page 89 of 152
==PAGE:102==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
Figure 31: Dendogram of distance between A-ERA clusters from hierarchical clustering
with cutoff separated clusters in colors, for isolated tower, nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 0.
Table 10 shows the global parameter estimates for all models. The first noticeable thing
is that the global estimates for all three AOMA methods, are remarkably similar. The
FDD estimates are also quite close to these estimates, however the second natural fre-
quency is slightly higher than the other three, and the second damping ratio is much
lower. Considering how close the three AOMA estimates are, this deviation of the FDD
indicates a potential bias in the FDD estimates. The ITD technique stands out as the
clear outlier among the five techniques. Both the natural frequencies are different from
the other methods, and the damping ratios higher, especially the first one. These are
poor estimates, as a damping ratio above around 10% is far too high, for a system with
as little damping as this one. Interestingly the second natural frequency found via the
ITD technique is much closer to the one found via EMA.
Overall, it is quite interesting and a solid support of the techniques how close the esti-
mates across the three AOMA techniques are. If the three methods were used for only
Table 10: Global OMA parameter estimates for isolated tower nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 0
f1 (σ) [Hz]
ζ1 (σ) [%]
f2 (σ) [Hz]
ζ2 (σ) [%]
ITD
3.64 (-)
13.39 (-)
13.33 (-)
5.22 (-)
A-ERA
2.59 (0.01)
1.05 (0.001)
14.11 (0.49)
4.20 (0.057)
A-SSI
2.58 (0.02)
1.06 (0.027)
14.10 (0.97)
4.24 (0.094)
A-PR
2.59 (0.00)
1.04 (0.000)
14.10 (0.035)
4.22 (0.21)
FDD
2.59 (-)
1.39 (-)
14.57 (-)
1.70 (-)
a single arbitrary model order, they would likely not estimate the same modes, as can
be seen in the stabilization diagram in Figure 30. Utilizing the stabilization diagram
and the following hierarchical clustering appear to provide much more consistent results,
regardless of estimation method. It is noteworthy however, that the while the estimates
are consistent, the second natural frequency is notably higher than was found via the
pLSCF technique. Going back to the FRFs in Figure 21, showing the measured force
vs input signal, there appears to be a slight shift in the small peak near 13-14 Hz. This
suggests that the difference in natural frequency between the EMA and OMA methods,
Master thesis
Page 90 of 152
==PAGE:103==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
are likely a result of the stinger-shaker connection.
Mode shapes
Figure 32 shows the MACX and MACXP for the two identified modes across the five
OMA techniques. Looking at the MACX plots shows that there is high degree of similarity
between the estimated mode shapes. The only outlier is the first estimated mode from
the A-PR method. As discussed above, the stabilization diagram appeared to indicate
that the A-PR method did not estimate the mode shapes consistently, and this result is
therefore of little surprise.
The MACXP plot shows a higher degree of dissimilarity. This is mostly driven by the
(a) Mode 1 MACX
(b) Mode 2 MACX
(c) Mode 1 MACXP
(d) Mode 2 MACXP
Figure 32: MAC’s for the two identified modes via 5 OMA techniques, for isolated
tower, nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 0.
ITD, which produced natural frequency and especially damping ratio estimates, notably
different from the other methods. The difference in the damping ratio does indeed explain
the dissimilarity, as plotting the MACXPnD produces a plot more or less identical to the
MACX plots. This plot has been left out but can be found in Appendix A.
Figure 33 shows the mode shapes estimated via the A-SSI technique. As seen in the
MACX plots, these are representative of the OMA estimated mode shapes, except for
the A-PR technique. These mode shapes appear similar to the mode shapes that have
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 2
Figure 33: A-SSI estimated mode shapes for isolated tower, nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 0.
Master thesis
Page 91 of 152
==PAGE:104==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
previously been found via the theoretical models and EMA technique. Comparison to
theoretical mode shapes should be done cautiously, as previously discussed. However,
comparing the mode shapes visually to the EMA mode shapes, the first mode shape
appear very similar.
For the second mode shape the OMA methods predict a larger
relative displacement in the bottom mass. This difference may be a result in the stinger-
shaker connection, which is not taken into account for OMA analysis, and which also
appears to have shifted the natural frequency of the mode slightly. Further, the EMA
results showed a much lower modal participation for this second mode, and differences in
mode shape estimates may be a result of this.
During OMA estimation, it is often sensible to fit the estimated model, to estimations
from measured quantities such as correlation functions and spectral densities. This has
been done continuously through this study, and examples of a correlation function (the
same as in Figure 29) and a fit from the A-ERA technique, and half spectrum with a
fit from the FDD technique is shown in Figure 34. The correlation function fit appears
(a) Correlation function, ERA fit
(b) Half spectrum, FDD fit
Figure 34: Correlation function and half spectrum, plus fits for isolated tower,
nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 0.
to fit very nice with the real world data. This is generally the case across the multiple
models, and across the different correlation functions, which is a good indicator that the
methods are able to model the dynamics in time fairly well. The estimated half spectrum
however, does not fit as well with the real world data. This is less of a surprise however,
especially for the FDD method, which relies on manually picked peaks. As the peak
near ≈8 Hz is deemed to be related to the stinger-shaker coupling, it was chosen to not
include this mode, as it does not represent the dynamics of the isolated system being
considered. This has the effect, that the mode related to this peak will not appear in the
model fits, and may be viewed as a benefit or drawback. In case it is aimed to also model
this peak, different input parameters could have been chosen in the setup, which may
have allowed potential poles associated with this peak to be stable. From the fitted half
spectrum, it should also be apparent that the second peak appears quite a bit narrower
Master thesis
Page 92 of 152
==PAGE:105==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
than measured one. This combined with the FDD’s lower damping ratio, suggests that
it underestimates damping of this mode.
5.1.3.4
Varying physical parameters
Similarly to the theoretical model analysis and EMA, the physical properties of the system
are varied during multiple experiments. The same variations are conducted as for the
other models. The variations are repeated here in Table 11. During the modal parameter
estimations of the various experiments, the input parameters described in Tables 7, 8
and 9 are utilized for all variations. The only change made, was a single ITD estimation,
Table 11: Physical property variations (repetition of Table 4)
Variation, v
nm
NKL, NKR
1
1
2
2
2
0
3
2
2
4
2
4
5
3
0
6
3
2
where removing the first CF matrix lag, resulted in errors, and in this one case, the first
lag was included.
Natural frequencies and damping ratios
Figure 35 shows the estimated natural frequencies and damping ratios for the five OMA
methods across the 6 physical variations.
The A-SSI, A-ERA and FDD estimated 2
modes through all variations. The ITD estimated only a single mode for three of the
variations, and the A-PR estimated a single mode for one variation.
Figure 35a shows a few general trends.
First, is that the two estimated modes are
generally the same across the different OMA techniques, with the ITD being the single
outlier. The ITD tend to generally estimate the first mode at a higher frequency, and
the second at a lower, compared to the other methods. It also estimates much higher
damping ratios. Note, that one of its second mode damping ratios, was left out of Figure
35c, as it was above 30%, and thus distorted the figure excessively. The ITD was also
the only method to estimate the stinger-shaker coupled mode, around ≈8 Hz. For the
physical variation where it identified this mode, it did not identify any other modes.
The other methods are generally in much better agreement. The first natural frequency
is close to identical for these four methods, and additionally, they coincide very well with
the EMA estimate. The first damping ratio estimates are also well aligned across the four
methods, with the FDD yielding slightly higher estimates for all variations, which may
be explained by the blunting of spectral peaks caused by the usage of Welch’s method for
SD matrix estimation. However, note that across the variations the OMA estimates are
lower than the corresponding EMA estimate. This difference in damping ratio may be
Master thesis
Page 93 of 152
==PAGE:106==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
(a) Natural frequencies
(b) First damping ratio
(c) Second damping ratio
Figure 35: OMA estimated modal parameters for isolated tower across varying physical
properties (see Table 11)
related to the stinger-shaker connection, or bias in the OMA estimates. The mode shape
for the first mode, shown back in Figure 33, shows relative much larger displacement for
the top mass than the bottom one. As the autocorrelation for this mass has a much
longer tail than the bottom mass, modes with more displacement in the top mass should
exhibit relatively lower damping ratios. A possible explanation between the EMA and
OMA estimate may then be, that the OMA estimates measures less displacement in the
bottom mass at this mode, due to the stinger-shaker connection, which the EMA takes
into account, and causing the OMA methods to underestimate the damping.
For the second mode, the OMA methods estimate slightly higher natural frequencies than
the EMA. As presented previously, this may once again be explained by the stinger-shaker
connection, which appeared to shift the resonance peak to a slightly higher frequency.
The damping ratios for this mode are less consistent. While the AOMA methods yield
estimates that are somewhat comparable, they both over- and underestimate the damping
compared to EMA, for different physical variations. The FDD yields estimates of the
natural frequency that are higher and damping ratio estimates that are lower, compared
to the other methods across variations for the second mode. This indicates a potential
Master thesis
Page 94 of 152
==PAGE:107==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
bias in the FDD estimates. This was discussed as a possibility in Section 2.3.8, however
the spacing between modes and light damping should minimize the FDD bias.
Mode shapes
The mode shapes were also estimated across the different variations, and are compared
via MAC plots. Figure 36 shows an explanation of the MAC plots. The pattern shown
Figure 36: Explanation of MAC plot by zooming in on lower left corner, of mode 1. (see
Table 11 for v = 1, 2, ..., 6 explanation)
in the explanation figure, repeats for each of the six variations.
Figure 37 shows the MACX and MACXP plots of all OMA methods across the six
variations for both modes. A grey line indicates a lacking estimate. The plots show
overall a very high degree of similarity between the mode shapes.
Described in the
previous section, it was suspected that the A-PR method may produce inconsistent mode
shapes. However, only in one of the six variations did it produce a mode dissimilar to the
other techniques for the first mode (and in one variation it failed to identify this mode),
while showing a high similarity across all variations for the second mode.
Differences in physical variations should lead to changes in the modal parameters, and
as such it is most appropriate to compare within variations, when comparing different
OMA methods to each other. From the MAC plots, these are found as 5 × 5 squares
going through the diagonal. These are not easily distinguishable in the MACX plots, as
the cross variation similarity is so high. Instead, investigating the MACXP plots, these
diagonal 5×5 squares become more noticeable. The plots show that there is a reasonably
high similarity between the methods within a variation, even when poles are included.
For a given variation, the plots show that there are never more than two out of the
five methods, that exhibit a high degree of dissimilarity. This suggests that significant
benefit may be obtained by utilizing multiple estimation methods, instead of relying upon
a single method.
Master thesis
Page 95 of 152
==PAGE:108==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
(a) MACX, Mode 1
(b) MACX, Mode 2
(c) MACXP, Mode 1
(d) MACXP, Mode 2
Figure 37: MACX and MACXP plots of OMA mode shapes for varying physical
properties of isolated tower (see Table 11)
5.1.4
Summary Analysis and Discussion of Isolated Tower
From the analysis of the isolated tower, a series of observations have been made, which
may be beneficial to consider, going in to the analysis of the fully assembled test rig:
• The point mass model provided very poor estimates. The point mass model is much
too simplified to be utilized on even the just isolated tower. It should thus perform
even worse for the fully assembled test rig, when two additional rotational DOFs
are added.
• Both the rigid body and FE model provide results close to experimental estimates,
however with some deviations likely explained by simplified assumptions, such as
perfect symmetry and no friction.
• None of the experimental methods were able to capture the first “pendulum” mode.
Master thesis
Page 96 of 152
==PAGE:109==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
Both observation and theory showed that this first mode was below what the ac-
celerometers can capture, in the spring free case. However, according to the theo-
retical models, with the inclusion of springs, the natural frequency should cross this
lower threshold. None of this was visible in the data. There may be a few possible
explanations for this. The first is errors or faults in the data acquisition system,
present at low frequencies. The second is that the techniques struggle to estimate
these types of “pendulum” modes. This explanation would be worrisome, as these
are easily excitable modes with large displacements. However, this explanation also
seem unlikely, as there does not appear to be any reason why these modes should
be difficult to estimate, as long as the data is captured correctly. Further, as pre-
sented in Section 1.1, other OMA studies have been able to identify low frequency
rigid body modes of floating structures. Another explanation is that the stinger-
shaker connection interferes so much with the structure, that this mode shifts to a
different frequency, or becomes difficult to measure. A final explanation, and the
one suspected by the author, is that the stinger-shaker connection provides a very
high level of damping to the “pendulum” mode, making it much more difficult to
identify.
• The lack of information regarding translation vs rotation of masses, likely provides
obstacles to parameter estimation, and these obstacles are likely to intensify on
the fully assembled test rig. While not commented on during the analysis, initial
experiments were conducted with an accelerometer placed at a corner on top of mass
1, in an attempt to acquire information solely related to rotation. These attempts
did not prove useful, providing no additional information, and it was thus not used
for the presented experiments.
• The stinger-shaker coupling to the system cannot be disregarded, especially in re-
gards to OMA. The coupling appeared to both create a damped resonance peak,
only related to the coupling, as well as slightly increasing the natural frequency
of the highest identified mode.
While the OMA methods fortunately generally
avoided the damped peak related to the coupling, the highest natural frequency
became slightly overestimated compared to EMA. To this point, it may also be
worth considering, that while EMA does mostly account for the coupling, the ex-
periments are not done on an uncoupled system. If there are any effects not fully
accounted for, this coupling could explain why the EMA estimates of the highest
mode is slightly higher than the theoretical, when springs are included.
• OMA methods compared well. While a single OMA estimate may be erroneous,
the final MACXP plots in Figure 37, showed that the mode shapes and poles across
methods compared well, for a given physical variation. An important conclusion
from this, is that significant benefit may be gained from the utilization and combi-
nation of multiple OMA methods.
Master thesis
Page 97 of 152
==PAGE:110==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Having performed an initial analysis on the simplified wing-less test rig, a complete
analysis is now conducted on the fully assembled test rig.
5.2.1
Theoretical Analysis
5.2.1.1
Baseline configuration: Aligned COM and balanced stiffness
Similar to the initial analysis of the isolated tower, an in-depth analysis and presentation
of a baseline configuration will first be performed, before introducing physical variations
to the test rig. In the fully assembled test rig, the baseline configuration will also be the
case of nm = 2 bottom masses, but unlike the isolated tower, the baseline configuration
will now have NKL = NKR = 2 springs on both sides. With the current setup of the test
rig, nm = 2 bottom masses, results in the center of mass (COM) being at the same point,
as the central axis of rotation θ. This will better resemble a real life floating turbine, as a
free floating structure like this, will rotate around its COM. As a real life floating turbine
also experiences stiffness to rotation around this axis, from the water and anchors, the
baseline configuration includes springs in both sides.
Point mass
Once again the point mass model is first considered. The natural frequencies and mode
shapes are presented in Figure 38. Once again, due to damping not being included in
the theoretical models, they will equal 0 for all modes, and are thus not presented. The
introduction of two additional masses, results in two more modes being identified by this
model. Unlike the isolated tower, the point mass system is now no longer fully uncoupled.
(a) Mode 1:
f1 = 2.26 Hz
(b) Mode 2:
f2 = 3.00 Hz
(c) Mode 3:
f3 = 6.03 Hz
(d) Mode 4:
f4 = 7.09 Hz
Figure 38: Point mass modes
The top mass and the two wing masses are coupled, while the bottom mass dynamics
are uncoupled from the remaining system. As such the second mode found, where only
the bottom mass is moving, has the same natural frequency as in the isolated tower case.
As was previously concluded in the isolated tower case, and will become apparent again
in the following analysis for the fully assembled test rig, the point mass model is far too
Master thesis
Page 98 of 152
==PAGE:111==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
simplistic to model the test rig dynamics. As such, no further time will be spent going
over the results of this model.
Rigid body
The rigid body model is once again utilized and the natural frequencies are presented
in Table 12.
The rigid body model yields 7 modes, three more than the point mass
model, which come from the three extra DOFs, the central rotation θ and the two wing
mass rotations α and β.
The considerations in Section 5.1.1 regarding the presenta-
tion of mode shapes are still present for the fully assembled test rig. With the rigid
body displacement vector being xT =
n
x2
x3
x4
x5
θ
α
β
o
, the mode shape vec-
tor uT =
n
u1
u2
u3
u4
u5
u6
u7
o
will be reduced using the lengths between
reference systems as characteristic lengths, yielding the reduced mode shapes uT
reduced =
n
u1 + L2 · u5
u2 −L3 · u5
u3 + L4 · u6
u4 + L5 · u7
o
. The mode shapes and re-
Table 12: Rigid body model natural frequencies
Mode, n
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
fn [Hz]
1.06
2.50
2.95
3.72
14.9
36.4
36.5
duced mode shapes are shown in Figure 39 and 40 respectively. As apparent from Ta-
ble 12, the system contains four modes below a frequency of 4 Hz, one mode separated
from the others at 14.9 Hz, and two closely spaced modes at a much higher frequency of
≈36.5 Hz. From the mode shape figures, the first mode once again appear to be a full
structure rigid body or “pendulum” mode, and the experimental methods may struggle
to capture this, if the results are similar to the isolated tower case. The results from
the rigid body model shows a large amount of relatively closely spaced modes. As the
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Mode 6
Mode 7
Figure 39: Rigid body model mode shapes
experimental methods generally struggle to capture closely spaced modes, it may result
in not all modes being identified in both EMA and OMA. Especially the OMA methods
are likely to do poorly, given the rank of the measurement system deficiencies previously
discussed. However, even EMA methods may perform poorly.
Master thesis
Page 99 of 152
==PAGE:112==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Figure 41 shows the FRF for each DOF, for an excitation to the first DOF (which is
translational excitation to the bottom mass), which is intended to model the FRFs of
the experiments. It is clear from the figure, that using traditional peak picking methods
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Mode 6
Mode 7
Figure 40: Rigid body model reduced mode shapes
may result in one of the two higher frequency modes not being identified. However, more
advanced methods, such as the pLSCF should hopefully perform better. Should the EMA
Figure 41: Rigid body model FRF
or OMA methods fail to capture all modes, it may be of interest to identify which modes
they fail to identify. While identification of super-positioned closely spaced modes is a
possibility, especially for the two higher frequency modes, it is also possible that some
modes are simply lost in the identification, especially for the lower frequency modes. In
that case comparing the physical mode shapes may help to find out which modes have
been identified. However, as seen in Figures 39 and 40 there appear to be a high degree
similarity between certain modes. This is indeed confirmed by the AutoMACX plot of
the rigid body model modes in Figure 42. The AutoMACX plot shows that there is a
significant level of similarity across modes, with only the first mode not exhibiting high
levels of similarity with any other modes. These levels of similarity may become further
exacerbated by the spatial aliasing issues related to the lack of separation between rota-
tional and translational acceleration in the measurements. One factor that makes this
issue slightly less worrisome, is that all modes appear to show a relatively high level of
dissimilarity, compared to the closest modes “next” to it according to the AutoMACX
plot.
Master thesis
Page 100 of 152
==PAGE:113==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Figure 42: Rigid body model AutoMACX
FEM
The natural frequencies of the full FE model established in Section 4.3 are found and
shown in Table 13. The identified natural frequencies are generally quite close to the ones
found using the rigid body model. There are once again four very low natural frequen-
cies, two much higher, and one separated in the middle of the remaining six. The largest
Table 13: FEM natural frequencies
Mode, n
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
fn [Hz]
1.05
2.14
2.54
3.27
15.1
36.6
36.9
discrepancies between the two models, are natural frequencies 2-4, where the FE model
estimates 0.4-0.5 Hz, or ≈14%, lower natural frequencies than the rigid body model. The
remaining estimates are much closer, with deviations of only ≈1%.
The mode shapes estimated using the FE model are shown in Figure 43. Visual compari-
son between these and the ones estimated by the rigid body model reveals, that the mode
shapes of each mode are quite similar. This also holds true for modes 2-4 with the larger
natural frequency discrepancies. The modes 2-4 do not appear to relate to displacement
in any isolated masses, that are not displacing in other modes. However, the translation
of either one or both wing masses, do appear to be dominant in these modes. Slightly
decreasing the stiffness k4 and k5 in the rigid body model, lowered the model’s estimate of
these three modes, without having a notable impact on the remaining modes, and as such
decreases the discrepancy between the two models. This reveals that the discrepancies
mostly relate to different wing stiffness according to the two models.
Figure 44 shows the FRF of the four masses due to excitation at the bottom mass, accord-
ing to the FE model. Even though the FE model predicts a slightly larger gap between
the two highest natural frequencies, the FRF once again shows why these may be hard to
separate. Similarly, the modes at the low end of the frequency spectrum are quite closely
spaced, and modal coupling is to be expected, making it harder to separately identify
them. Overall, the FRFs of the rigid body and the FE model appear quite similar. Even
Master thesis
Page 101 of 152
==PAGE:114==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Mode 6
Mode 7
Figure 43: FEM mode shapes
the anti-resonances appear similar, with the largest discrepancy being the one between
10-15 Hz. For both model types, the FRFs for each of the masses appear to show at least
slight peaks for most, if not all peaks. However, looking at the mode shapes, appear to
Figure 44: FEM FRF
indicate that the largest displacements will occur at the wing masses, while only very
minor displacement occur in the larger masses for multiple of the mode shapes. As such,
data from the accelerometers placed on the wing masses, are expected to carry much of
the information regarding the system dynamics.
Especially the mode shapes of mode 6 and 7 for both the FE and rigid body model
(back in Figure 39), show that displacement in these relate almost entirely to rotation
in one of the two wing masses. With very little displacement in the bottom mass of
Master thesis
Page 102 of 152
==PAGE:115==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
these two modes, these modes may be difficult to excite, due to the placement of the
electrodynamic shaker. While the FRFs show clear peaks for these modes, the damping
apparent in the real world test rig (although light), may make these modes more difficult
to experimentally identify.
5.2.1.2
Parametric Variation Analysis
Having studied the baseline configuration of nm = 2 bottom masses and NKL = NKR = 2
springs on both sides, it is now again of interest to study the potential change in dynamics,
to changes in rotational stiffness, and changes in the COM. The same variations are used,
Table 14: Physical parameter variations
Variation, v
nm
NKL, NKR
1
1
2
2
2
0
3
2
2
4
2
4
5
3
0
6
3
2
as for the isolated tower. Note, however that
for this configuration, where the motor and
wings are mounted, the number of masses will
have further implication. In this fully assem-
bled configuration, the number of masses will
also determine, whether the COM is above
(nm = 1), equal to (nm = 2) or below (nm = 3)
the central axis of rotation θ. The physical pa-
rameter variations are repeated again here in
Table 14.
Figure 45 presents the estimated natural frequency for both models across all six varia-
tions. From inspection of the figure, it becomes apparent that the natural frequencies for
all modes across variations are generally very close. Inspecting the figure will also reveal,
that changes to the physical parameters of the structure has similar effect to the natural
frequencies of the two models. The main outlier to this, is the second and third mode.
In the second mode, increasing the number of bottom masses nm leads to decreases in
Figure 45: Rigid body and FE model estimated natural frequencies across 6 physical
parameter variations (see Table 14)
the natural frequency, but does so at a higher rate for the rigid body model, compared
to the FE model. The opposite is the case for the third mode.
Master thesis
Page 103 of 152
==PAGE:116==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
The figure also show, that only two modes appear to be significantly impacted by changes
in the number of springs, mode 1 and 5. Lastly, the two highest modes appear to be af-
fected very little by the number of bottom masses nm and springs NKL, NKR. From the
above presented mode shapes, these relate almost entirely to the wing masses, and as
such physical changes to the wings are much more likely to impact these estimates.
Figure 46 shows the MACX plots for each of the seven modes, across variations and
models. Only the MACX is plotted to compare the physical similarities between mode
shapes. Note, that the rigid body model (RBM) mode shapes that have been used, are
the reduced mode shapes, to enable comparison. The plots show a general high degree
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 2
(c) Mode 3
(d) Mode 4
(e) Mode 5
(f) Mode 6
(g) Mode 7
Figure 46: Rigid body and FE model MACX for six physical parameter variations (see
Table 14).
of similarity between the two model types, and different physical variations. The first
mode, which is the full structure rigid body mode exhibits a more or less perfect degree of
similarity across all variations and models. The two highest modes also show a very high
Master thesis
Page 104 of 152
==PAGE:117==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
degree of similarity, which is expected, as their natural frequencies were very little im-
pacted by changes in physical parameters. For the second and third mode, the variation
containing only one bottom mass show a high level of dissimilarity to the other variations,
but a high level of similarity between the two models. This indicates that the physical
change has an impact on the actual mode shape. Mode 4 and 5, most significantly mode
5 shows a high level of similarity within a model type, but a low level of similarity across
model types. This appears to mostly be an issue related to the reduced mode shape
representation. Looking at the fifth original rigid body mode shape in Figure 39 and the
fifth FE model mode in Figure 43, these two modes shapes are very similar. However,
due to the linearization utilized in the reduced mode shapes, this is not fully captured,
as visualized when comparing to the reduced mode shapes in Figure 40.
Noting this, the overarching conclusion must be that outside of slight discrepancies, the
two models generally produce very similar results, both in terms of natural frequencies
and mode shapes.
5.2.2
EMA
The EMA conducted for the fully assembled test rig, will similarly to the theoretical
Table 15: Experimental parameters EMA
Description
Value
Excitation
Chirp [0, 40] Hz
Type and duration
Bi-directional, 27 s
Sampling rate, fs
100 Hz
Samples, N
218
FRF Estimator
H1, 28 averages, 50% overlap
Digital low-pass filter
49.5 Hz, 5th order Butterworth
case, first be conducted on
the
baseline
configuration,
before varying physical prop-
erties.
The parameters uti-
lized for conducting the ex-
periments for all physical pa-
rameter variations are the ex-
act same, as used for the
isolated tower experiments.
They are presented in Section 5.1.2 and repeated here in Table 15.
5.2.2.1
Baseline Configuration: Aligned COM and balanced stiffness
Figure 47 shows the FRFs for the fully assembled test rig. Inspecting the figure reveals a
few peaks in the low end of the frequency spectrum. It also reveals something resembling
peaks in the high end of the spectrum. Lastly, an isolated peak around ≈17 Hz and
perhaps a peak around ≈25 Hz. Most of these except for the one around 25 Hz is in line
with the expectations from the theoretical model, with minor frequency deviations. At
the higher end of the spectrum, there appears to be an increase in the noise level. This is
specifically visible in the phase and coherence plot of the accelerometer placed on mass
4 (the bottom wing).
Similarly to how the FRF was estimated using the measured input force and the input
signal respectively for the isolated tower in Section 5.1.2, to show the coupling effect from
the shaker-stinger connection, it is also performed for the fully assembled test rig. The
coupling has an almost identical effect, showing a damped peak at around 8-9 Hz, as well
Master thesis
Page 105 of 152
==PAGE:118==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Figure 47: FRF for fully assembled test rig, baseline configuration
as causing a slight shift in the peak at ≈17 Hz. An example of the measured force vs
input signal FRF is shown Appendix B.
Natural frequencies and damping ratios
Using the measured FRFs as input, a stabilization diagram is created for model orders
p ∈[20, 300], and is shown in Figure 48a. The chart shows two stabilized poles in the
very low end of the frequency spectrum, one around ≈17 Hz, one around ≈25 Hz, and
multiple above 30 Hz. While the four lowest stabilized poles are very clearly stabilized,
it is a bit less clear at the higher end of the spectrum. The stabilized pole at the very
end of the spectrum, ≈40 Hz, is an artifact from the chirp ending at 40 Hz, and will thus
be disregarded. From visual inspection, approximately 7 stable poles are found. Using
(a) Stabilization diagram
(b) LSFD fit
Figure 48: Stabilization diagram and LSFD fit for baseline configuration
hierarchical clustering, the Nclust = 7 most populated clusters are found, with a cutoff
of dMACXPcut = 0.01, yielding the modal parameters shown in Table 16. Note, that
Master thesis
Page 106 of 152
==PAGE:119==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
increasing Nclust, still only yields 7 clusters, as it results in an already identified cluster
being split into sub-clusters.
Inspecting the global modal parameter estimates in Table 16, reveals a few things. First,
it is noticed quickly, that the estimated damping ratios generally are smaller than for the
isolated tower configuration. This suggests that displacement in wing masses is associ-
ated with low damping. Secondly, comparing the natural frequencies to the theoretical
estimates, there are a few significant differences. First, while the theoretical models find
four low frequency modes (below 5 Hz), the pLSCF routine finds only two. Second, the
mode at 24.86 Hz, is quite far from any modes found in the theoretical models. Lastly,
the theoretical models find two modes between 36-37 Hz, while the pLSCF routine iden-
tifies three modes between 31-36 Hz. The two “missing” modes at the low end of the
Table 16: pLSCF modal parameters for baseline configuration
Mode, n
fn [Hz] (σ)
ζn % (σ)
πn %
1
1.58 (0.0023)
1.33 (0.16)
86.35
2
2.96 (0.0086)
1.62 (0.19)
13.55
3
17.18 (0.0055)
0.74 (0.052)
0.1000
4
24.86 (0.016)
0.78 (0.059)
0.0000
5
31.42 (0.023)
0.63 (0.089)
0.0000
6
33.78 (0.14)
0.63 (0.22)
0.0001
7
35.68 (0.058)
0.68 (0.088)
0.0001
spectrum, is likely explained by three factors. The first being that, as discussed for the
isolated tower configuration, the accelerometers struggle to capture data below 1 Hz. The
second factor being, that the theoretical modes are very closely spaced, and as such one
of the low frequency pLSCF estimates, may contain multiple modes in one. The third
factor, relates to the damping likely caused by the stinger-shaker connection, specifically
affecting “pendulum” modes, as brought up in the analysis for the isolated tower. In the
“pendulum” mode, the top and bottom tower masses are in anti-phase. According to the
theoretical mode shapes, for two of the four lower frequency modes, the top and bottom
mass are in anti-phase. As will be shown in the following section, the two identified lower
frequency modes, are both modes where the top and bottom masses are in phase. This
may suggest, that the stinger-shaker connection dampens the anti-phase modes to an
extent that they become difficult to identify, when as closely spaced as is the case here.
The three instead of only two modes being found above 30 Hz, may be a result of the
increased noise in the system, as was previously discussed and shown in the FRF in
Figure 47. Another potential explanation for the difference, is the assumed symmetry
in the theoretical model. This assumption is violated to a much higher extent for the
fully assembled test rig, than it was for the isolated tower configuration. If the wings
are not mounted perfectly vertical, or if there is a slight bend in the upper wing ruler,
the dynamics may change. This is further exacerbated, by mounting the accelerometers
on the wing masses, which per definition will result in the violation of the symmetry as-
sumption, and create an unbalance. Further, the very low energy associated with all the
Master thesis
Page 107 of 152
==PAGE:120==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
higher frequency modes, according to the relative modal participation in Table 16, will
also result in increased difficulty achieving good estimates. This was expected, especially
for the modes above 30 Hz from the mode shapes found via the theoretical models.
While the above reasoning may explain deviations in the modes above 30 Hz, the 24.86 Hz
mode appears too far away from any theoretical modes, for these explanations to hold
any water. Instead, it may be related to the stinger-shaker connection, and to investigate
this, a simple test is conducted. The stinger is disconnected from the test rig, and an
accelerometer is placed on the shaker mount. The shaker mount is then slightly tapped
at a “random” pacing, using the handle of a screw driver. This data is collected, and the
PSD is estimated (using Welch’s method). The PSD is shown in Figure 49. Inspecting
Figure 49: PSD of shaker and shaker mount, disconnected from test rig
the figure, it quickly becomes apparent, that the energy is higher between 20-25 Hz. This
reveals that the shaker and shaker-mount, likely has a natural frequency in this range.
When connecting this to the test rig, this natural frequency then interferes with the sys-
tem, resulting in the identification of a mode. Note that a similar peak in the PSD is
not found at ≈8 Hz. This indicates that the ≈8 Hz damped peak, only occurs for the
coupled system. The high damping associated with the coupled ≈8 Hz mode, compared
to the one identified at 24.86 Hz, may be explained by the shaker and test rig being in
anti-phase, and phase in these two modes respectively.
Using the global parameter estimates, a LSFD fit is performed and shown in Figure 48b.
As apparent from the figure, once again the LSFD estimator does not perform very well,
resulting in a very poor fit, specifically towards the higher end of the frequency spectrum.
From this poor fit, it is once again expected that the mode shapes are likely to be poor
estimates of the true mode shapes.
Mode shapes
The LSFD estimated mode shapes are shown in Figure 50. The mode shapes reveal a
high degree of similarity in the high end of the frequency spectrum. Looking at the figure,
it becomes apparent modes 3-7 all show the overall same mode shape, with just slight
changes in relative displacement among the masses. Figure 51a shows the AutoMACX
Master thesis
Page 108 of 152
==PAGE:121==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
of the mode shapes, which confirm the very high level of similarity of the majority of
the modes.
While this high degree of similarity for such closely spaced modes, may
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Mode 6
Mode 7
Figure 50: pLSCF estimated mode shapes for baseline configuration
sometimes be used to conclude that one or of more the estimated modes are misidentified
sub-clusters, and thus spurious modes, in this case it is hard to do so. Firstly, due to
the prior theoretical analysis, closely spaced modes in the upper range of the frequency
spectrum are expected. Secondly, due to the very poor LSFD fit, the mode shapes are
likely to be very poor estimates as well, with the real mode shapes showing a higher level
of dissimilarity.
From the mode shape plots, it may be recognized that the mode shapes do not appear
very reminiscent of the theoretically obtained mode shapes. This is confirmed in the
MACX plot in Figure 51b, comparing pLSCF modes on the horizontal axis against rigid
body model modes on the vertical axis. As the modes are not aligned to correspondingly
match, it is not expected to see a high levels of similarity through the diagonal. The figure
(a) AutoMACX of pLSCF
(b) MACX, pLSCF vs RBM
Figure 51: AutoMACX of pLSCF modes for baseline configuration
shows very low levels of similarity, at comparable frequencies, except for the second mode
shape. The degree of similarity between the second mode shapes, and the first and second
mode shapes, may indicate that there is some modal coupling at the lower end of the
frequency spectrum, making them hard to separately identify, as previously suspected.
For the remaining of the comparable modes there is no significant level of similarity.
While this may suggest poor performance of the theoretical model, it appears much more
Master thesis
Page 109 of 152
==PAGE:122==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
likely that the pLSCF mode shapes are poor estimates.
The first two pLSCF identified mode shapes, while looking different show the same overall
shape, which also indicate poor mode shape estimates. To further investigate the mode
shape estimation performance of the pLSCF, brief experiments are conducted on the test
rig, using sinus excitations with the first two identified natural frequencies respectively.
At these low frequencies, the mode shapes can still be identified visually. From visual
inspection, the two mode shapes look identical to the second and fourth theoretically
obtained modes in Figure 39 (the two lower modes where mass 2 and 3 are in phase). The
fourth theoretical mode, is similar to the pLSCF identified modes one and two, but the
second theoretical mode do not look like either. The visual inspection appear to support
the theory that the “anti-phase modes” are the ones mostly affected by the stinger-shaker
damping. However, it also reveals that the mode shapes are quite poor estimates, even at
the low end of the frequency spectrum. This is likely caused by interference from closely
spaced modes that are unidentified.
When looking at the theoretically estimated mode shapes back in Section 5.2.1, it becomes
clear that the two highest mode shapes estimated at ≈36.5 Hz, are dominated by rotation
in either of the two wing masses. Assuming this translates to reality, this will explain
the difficulties estimating the highest modes. If assuming that the real world mode shape
look like the theoretical ones, excitation of the bottom mass should struggle to excite
these modes. This may explain both the poor mode shape estimates, and may also be a
factor in why more modes than expected are found in this end of the spectrum, as the
signal/noise ratio is very low.
Lastly, a brief comment should be made regarding the fourth mode shape. As this mode
turns out to likely be caused by a natural frequency of the shaker and shaker mount,
there is no actual mode shape to identify. As such, the mode shape could just be a linear
combination of neighboring mode shapes, and from Figure 50, it is indeed very reminiscent
of mode shapes 3 and 5 (although all the higher frequency modes are similar).
Block averaging sensitivity
As the above mode shapes are potentially poor estimates, it is of interest to evaluate
the robustness of the estimates to changes in user input parameters. One such param-
eter is the number of block averages used when estimating the FRFs. Figure 52 shows
MACXPnD plots for each of the 7 identified modes, for the same dataset but varying the
number of block averages ∈[25, 211] increasing in powers of 2. The MACXPnD is plotted
rather than MACXP, as it is more of interest to evaluate inaccuracies in mode shapes
and natural frequencies, and even small deviations in damping ratios tend to distort the
image. The plots show, that the results are quite robust to changes in the number of
block averages used. No modes were identified for 210 block averages, but note that at
this level, the frequency resolution has decreased quite significantly, and thus it is not
surprising. For 26 and fewer block averages, the noise level becomes too high in the high
end of the spectrum, and the 3 highest modes are not identified.
Master thesis
Page 110 of 152
==PAGE:123==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
(a) Mode ≈1.5 Hz
(b) Mode ≈3 Hz
(c) Mode ≈17 Hz
(d) Mode ≈25 Hz
(e) Mode ≈31 Hz
(f) Mode ≈34 Hz
(g) Mode ≈36 Hz
Figure 52: pLSCF MACXPnD for block averages ∈[25, 211], for baseline configuration
Overall, the plots indicate that the parameter estimates are robust, and not just a result
of a specific user input parameter. While this does add some additional confidence to the
otherwise suspected poor mode shape estimates, it may also merely be the case that no
good estimates can be procured with the given dataset, and the current test setup.
5.2.2.2
Dynamic Sensitivity to Physical Parameters
Once again the impact on varying physical parameters will be analyzed. However, the
increased complexity in dynamics compared to the isolated tower configuration, results
in the number of modes being estimated not being consistent across physical variations.
This makes cross comparison more difficult. For ease of comparison and interpretation,
the physical parameter variations will be divided into two parts. The first will hold the
number of bottom masses nm = 2, and thus holding the test rig’s COM constant, while
varying the number of springs. The second will hold the number of springs constant
NKi = 2, for i = L, R, while varying the number of bottom masses and thus the COM.
The variations are shown in Table 17, where the variation number v refers to the original
variation in Table 14. Note, that the baseline configuration v = 3 is present in both parts.
Lastly, while the variation v = 5 experiments have been conducted, they have been left
out of this analysis.
Table 17: Physical parameter variations (see Table 14 for all variations)
Varying rotational stiffness
Varying COM
v
nm
NKL, NKR
v
nm
NKL, NKR
2
2
0
1
1
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
4
2
4
6
3
2
Master thesis
Page 111 of 152
==PAGE:124==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Varying rotational stiffness
Figure 53 shows the pLSCF estimated modal parameters across the three spring variation
experiments, with 2 times standard deviation as error bars. The first thing to note, is
that in the two variations containing springs, 7 modes were identified, whereas 8 were
identified in the spring free variation. The additional mode is identified at the high end of
the frequency spectrum, where the signal-to-noise ratio appear to be much lower than the
lower part of the spectrum, as previously discussed. Therefore, it is uncertain whether
(a) Natural frequencies
(b) Damping ratios
Figure 53: pLSCF modal parameters for varying number of springs NKi
or not this is real pole, but the fact that 4 modes were identified in the spring free varia-
tion in the range 31-38 Hz, while the theoretical models suggest only 2 modes (not easily
excited via the bottom mass) exist in this range, indicate that not all of these poles are
real. The natural frequencies of the three modes in the range 31-36 Hz, identified for all
three variations, appear to vary with the number of springs. However, they do not do
so in a consistent manner, first increasing and then decreasing. It may be possible, for
the natural frequencies to have such a non-linear dependency on the number of springs.
However, it once again appears more likely that it relates to poor estimates due to the
low energy in that part of the spectrum.
For the lowest three modes the natural frequencies increase with increasing springs. The
theoretical mode comparable to the third mode (frequency wise) also strictly increases
with number of springs, and as such this is in line with the theory. The natural frequency
of the theoretical “pendulum” mode also increases with number of springs, but the re-
Master thesis
Page 112 of 152
==PAGE:125==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
maining low frequency modes do not. However, the two pLSCF estimated low frequency
modes both have increasing natural frequencies with increasing springs. As explained
above these do not appear to be modes related to “pendulum” motion, and as such dis-
agrees with the theoretical results. Interaction associated with friction from springs and
bearings may be causing this, or energy leaking in from unidentified closely spaced modes
may also be a factor, as previously discussed.
The damping ratios are all at a relatively low level, and the estimates across varia-
tions generally fall within two standard deviations. The only outlier to this is the first
estimate. This further supports the combined hypothesis that, 1: low frequency “pendu-
lum” modes become significantly damped by the stinger-shaker connection, and 2: that
energy leaks from low frequency unidentified modes into closely spaced identified ones.
In the spring free case, the “pendulum” mode should be very dominant in the dynamic
response. Combining this with the assumption that the stinger-shaker connection damp-
ens “pendulum”/anti-phase modes more significantly supports the above hypothesis, and
could explain what is seen in the figure.
Figure 54 shows the MACXPnD plot across the three variations for all 8 identified modes.
The 8’th mode is only identified for one variation, and as such is left out. The first three
modes show a very high level of similarity. From the higher relative modal participation
and the better LSFD fits in the lower end of the spectrum, better estimates are expected,
and as such this similarity is unsurprising. As such, it is also not unexpected to see a
lower level of similarity for the remaining modes. For the higher frequency modes, there
is some high similarity for a few of the modes, but generally the dissimilarity is much
higher at higher frequencies. As per previous discussions about the higher frequency
modes, these results are not unexpected.
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 2
(c) Mode 3
(d) Mode 4
(e) Mode 5
(f) Mode 6
(g) Mode 7
Figure 54: pLSCF MACXPnD for varying number of springs NKi
Master thesis
Page 113 of 152
==PAGE:126==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Varying COM
Figure 55 shows the pLSCF estimated modal parameters across the three nm mass varia-
tion experiments, showing 2 standard deviations in the error bars. Through these exper-
iments more modes were identified, as seen in the figure. The nm = 3 experiment yielded
4 modes above 30 Hz, similarly to one of the spring variation experiments. However, more
interestingly is that the nm = 1 experiment yields three modal estimates below 3 Hz, as
the only one of all the experiments. Looking back at the MACX plots for the theoretical
model variations in Figure 46, two of the four low frequency modes show a high dissimi-
larity between the nm = 1 mass variation and the remaining variations. This dissimilarity
could explain why another mode becomes identifiable for this variation. If the change
(a) Natural frequencies
(b) Damping ratios
Figure 55: pLSCF modal parameters for varying number of masses nm
in a mode shape is such, that it becomes more easily excitable at the bottom mass, or
less damped by stinger-shaker connection, it would become more easily identifiable. The
nm = 1 mass variation also identifies a mode at 7.7 Hz, as the only variation. No clear
peaks are seen in the FRFs, and it is likely related to the stinger-shaker connection as
previously discussed.
An additional mode is also identified around ≈20 Hz for the nm = 1, 3 mass variations.
Investigating the FRFs do not show any apparent peaks. With the large difference in
damping ratio, and large uncertainty around the nm = 1 estimate, combined with no
estimate being identified for nm = 2, this suggests it likely is a spurious pole, or stinger-
shaker related.
Master thesis
Page 114 of 152
==PAGE:127==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Trends across variations are not as present as for the variation of rotational stiffness.
The most apparent trend is that the 7’th mode appears to increase in natural frequency
for increasing nm. However, as was previously concluded, this mode likely relates to a
natural frequency in the shaker and shaker mount. Thus, seeing an increase in this nat-
ural frequency for increasing nm, does not reveal anything about the actual test rig. The
fifth mode is also seen to be decreasing in frequency with increasing number of masses,
which is in line with the theoretical mathematical results. The theoretical results also
predicted decreases in the low frequency modes for increases in nm (with the exception
of the “pendulum” mode), however this is not seen in the EMA results.
Figure 56 shows MACXPnD plots across the nm mass variations, for each of the modes
where at least two of the variations identified modes. The first mode shows high sim-
ilarity between the nm = 2, 3 mass variations but a high dissimilarity to the nm = 1
variation. This could be explained by the identification of the third low frequency mode
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 3
(c) Mode 5
(d) Mode 6
(e) Mode 7
(f) Mode 8
(g) Mode 9
(h) Mode 10
(i) Mode 11
Figure 56: pLSCF MACXPnD for varying number of masses nm
for this variation. If the hypothesis that energy leaks into the modal estimates in the low
frequency modes, being able to identify an additional mode should reduce the leakage
and impact the estimate.
The modes at higher frequencies appear to have a somewhat high level of similarity across
the variations. As previously stated, the number of bottom masses should in theory not
affect these modes. However due the expected poor mode shape estimates, one might
expect to find more dissimilarity, as was more so the case for the spring variations.
Master thesis
Page 115 of 152
==PAGE:128==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
5.2.3
OMA
As with the analysis using EMA, the OMA is once again split into an analysis of a baseline
configuration with nm = 2 bottom masses, and NKL = NKR = 2 springs, followed by an
analysis where physical parameters are varied.
5.2.3.1
OMA Setup
As was the case for the isolated tower configuration, the various OMA methods once
again requires the specification of a variety of parameters. Table 18 shows the general
data and signal properties and processing steps utilized before further analysis. The only
difference to the same parameters for the isolated tower configuration, is the number of
lags in the CF matrix, which has been increased from 211 to 212. This was determined in
Table 18: Data & signal processing properties for OMA, fully assembled test rig
Description
Value
Samples
218
Sampling rate
100 Hz
Digital high-pass filter
0.5 Hz
Digital low-pass filter
49.5 Hz, 5th order Butterworth
CF Matrix lags (method)
212 (Direct)
Removed initial time lags
1
SD Matrix method
Welch
SD Matrix window size
211, 50% Hanning overlap
a preliminary signal analysis, which showed a slower convergence of the CFs. A few of the
CFs had still not completely converged within 212 time lags. However, further increasing
the number of time lags, or using a tapering window did not impact the results, and
as such 212 with no tapering was utilized, for computational efficiency. The preliminary
signal analysis also investigated the density and probability plots of the input force. The
conclusions were much the same, as for the isolated tower case, and as such the discussion
is left out for brevity. The autocorrelation functions as well as density and probability
plots, may be found in Appendix C.
The input parameters required for the individual OMA techniques are presented in Table
19. The parameters are generally similar to the isolated tower configuration parame-
ters. The few differences are the number of block rows for the A-ERA, the number of
AR-coefficients for the A-PR, the maximum number of identified modes for the ITD
(determined by number of sensors), and the number of picked peaks for the FDD. The
number of picked peaks for the FDD may appear low, considering the theoretical and
EMA results. However, as it will later become apparent, there are only 3 distinct peaks
(disregarding the damped peak caused by the stinger-shaker connection) on the first sin-
gular value plot of the spectral density matrix. While minor peaks are present on the
lower singular values, as per Brincker et al. [2] these should not be picked. Further, in
practice attempting to perform the 1DOF ITD-fit on these non-first singular value peaks,
Master thesis
Page 116 of 152
==PAGE:129==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Table 19: OMA parameters for fully assembled test rig
Description
Value
A-ERA
Block rows
s = 27
Order range
n ∈[22,26] ⇒[21,25] modes
A-SSI
Block rows
s = 26
Order range
n ∈[22,27] ⇒[21,26] modes
A-PR
AR-coefficients
NA ∈[21,26] ⇒[21,26] modes
ITD
Max. identified modes
4
FDD
Number of picked peaks
3
1DOF ITD-fit points
210
often lead to estimates far away from the picked peak, and thus the peak picking becomes
useless. As such it is chosen to only use these three clear peaks.
The AOMA parameters utilized for the fully assembled test rig for the A-ERA, A-SSI
and A-PR methods are shown in Table 20. As seen in the table, there is more deviation
between the chosen parameters for each of the techniques, as they are chosen to achieve
the best possible stabilization diagrams, and have the clustering achieve the outcomes
expected from visual inspection of the stabilization diagrams. Note, that the values in
Table 20: AOMA parameters for fully assembled test rig baseline configuration
A-ERA
A-SSI
A-PR
fn accuracy, εf [%]
0.02
0.1
0.2
ζn accuracy, εζ [%]
5
5
4
MACX mode accuracy, εψ
0.90
0.95
0.92
Cluster cutoff, dMACXPcut
0.01
0.1
0.01
Returned clusters, Nclust
4
7
7
the table are the ones used for the baseline configuration, and serves as baseline values
for when varying the physical parameters. However, in some cases these values will be
slightly changed, if leading to better results. As an example the number of returned
clusters Nclust will not be fixed to the table values, if the number of stabilized poles
change.
5.2.3.2
Baseline Configuration: Aligned COM and Isolated stiffness
With the above presented processing specifications and parameters, modal parameter
estimates are performed using the various techniques. For the three AOMA techniques,
stabilization diagrams are presented in Figure 57.
The A-ERA stabilization diagram
Master thesis
Page 117 of 152
==PAGE:130==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
looks the “cleanest” with very few stable poles identified outside of the stabilized ones.
However, only 4 four stabilized poles appear, despite expecting more to be present within
the spectrum. The A-SSI and A-PR stabilization diagrams appear similar, and stabilized
poles appear at the same frequencies.
The stabilized poles of the A-PR once again
(a) ERA, n ∈[22, 26]
(b) SSI, n ∈[22, 27]
(c) PR, NA ∈[21, 26]
Figure 57: ERA, SSI and PR stabilization diagrams, plotted with singular values of SD
matrix, for baseline configuration
appears to have a lot of unstable mode shapes, which as commented on when discussing
the isolated tower configuration, appears to be recurring for the A-PR technique.
Natural frequencies and damping ratios
After retrieving the most populated clusters from the stabilization diagrams, global modal
parameter estimates are established for the AOMA techniques, as well as for the ITD and
FDD. The estimated modal parameters are shown in Figure 58. Error bars have been
left out of the natural frequency plot, as they are smaller than the markers. As apparent
from the figure, the ITD performs quite poorly, only estimating two out of the maximum
four poles, with one of the two, being the highly damped stinger-shaker coupled pole at
≈8 Hz, which none of the other techniques identified. Surprisingly, the second identified
mode by the ITD technique, is one at around ≈17 Hz. Due to the high relative modal
participation factors at the low end of the frequency spectrum found for the EMA esti-
mates, it might have been expected, that these modes would be most easily identifiable.
Looking at the results of the remaining techniques, do indeed suggest that the higher
energy level associated with the lower frequency modes, makes identification more con-
sistent, as both the AOMA and FDD techniques, all estimate the first two low frequency
modes more or less identically to the EMA estimate, in terms of natural frequency. The
fourth mode at ≈17 Hz is identified by all techniques, and the estimates are quite similar,
all slightly below the EMA estimate. Interestingly, the FRF investigation of input signal
vs measured force, indicated that the OMA methods should overestimate the natural
frequency of this mode, but the opposite appears to be the case.
The A-SSI and A-PR technique identify a mode slightly below 20 Hz, which was not
identified by any of the other techniques. This mode was not identified by EMA (for the
baseline configuration) or theoretical analysis, and it is therefore suspected that it relates
Master thesis
Page 118 of 152
==PAGE:131==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
(a) Natural frequencies
(b) Natural frequencies
Figure 58: OMA modal parameters for baseline configuration
to the stinger-shaker coupling, or is simply spurious.
The OMA techniques only identify two modes at the high end of the spectrum, with
one of them perfectly coinciding with an EMA estimate. The single excitation source,
limiting the rank of the measurement system, may explain why only two and not three
modes are identified in this end of the spectrum, as it limits the techniques’ ability to
identify closely spaced modes. However, note that the two identified OMA modes at this
end of the spectrum are spaced less than 1 Hz apart, and are more closely spaced than
the EMA estimates. This suggests that the rank deficiency is not as significant an issue
as first expected. The A-SSI and A-PR stabilization diagrams in Figure 57 both show
lines of poles, that do not become fully stabilized near the two identified ones around
≈33 Hz. The techniques are thus close to the identification of a third pole in this end of
the spectrum. However the low energy level at these frequencies are likely the explana-
tion, as to why a third mode cannot be identified. It does deserve a mention however,
that only two identified modes is more in line with the theoretical results, compared to
the EMA estimates.
The damping estimates shown in Figure 58b are quite consistent across the various tech-
niques. The FDD estimates higher damping for the first two low frequency modes, similar
to its higher low frequency estimate in the isolated tower configuration, which may again
be a result of the SD matrix estimation method, or potential bias, the latter of which is
a large factor in this case, due to the presence of closely spaced modes. The damping
ratio of the third mode only identified by the ITD technique is very high, but this is un-
Master thesis
Page 119 of 152
==PAGE:132==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
surprising, as it relates to the stinger-shaker connection, where energy dissipates out into
the surroundings. The damping estimates are also generally lower than their comparable
EMA counterparts. As previously mentioned, the averaging used in Welch’s method for
SD matrix estimation, also affects the H1 FRF estimator. The lower OMA damping may
thus be a result of EMA overestimating the damping.
Once again, to validate the model, fitted CFs and half spectrum are compared to the
measured data. Some of the fitted CFs converge slightly quicker than the measured ones,
suggesting that damping may be overestimated.
However, the already relatively low
damping estimates, suggests the overestimation is likely not too significant, especially
when compared to the EMA estimates. The CFs and half spectrum plus fits, are shown
in Appendix C.
Mode shapes
The mode shapes are estimated across the different OMA techniques and MACXP plots
are plotted and shown in Figure 59 for each mode, except the third, of which there was
only one estimate. The MACXP plots show a general high level of similarity, with the
single outlier being the A-SSI, which shows high dissimilarity with the other methods,
for all but the fourth and eighth mode. This is quite different from the isolated tower
configuration, where the A-PR technique, was the one that showed a high level of dissim-
ilarity to the other techniques. The A-PR technique may therefore not be as inconsistent
at estimating mode shapes, as previously assumed. Figure 60 shows the A-PR estimated
(a) Mode ≈1.5 Hz
(b) Mode ≈2.9 Hz
(c) Mode ≈16 Hz
(d) Mode ≈19 Hz
(e) Mode ≈25 Hz
(f) Mode ≈33 Hz
(g) Mode ≈34 Hz
Figure 59: OMA MACXP for baseline configuration
mode shapes, which according to the MACXP plots should be a fair representation of
the general OMA mode shape estimates. One thing that quickly stands out is the high-
est mode. The theoretical high frequency modes relate mostly to motion in the wing
masses. This should lead to difficulty in exciting these modes, which would explain the
poor LSFD fits for the EMA pLSCF, and the corresponding mode shapes which did not
Master thesis
Page 120 of 152
==PAGE:133==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
resemble the theoretical ones, as was discussed in the EMA section. However, the highest
frequency OMA mode shape turns out to better resemble the expectation from the the-
oretical results. As the OMA methods are not expected to produce better mode shape
Mode
≈1.5 Hz
Mode
≈2.9 Hz
Mode
≈16 Hz
Mode
≈19 Hz
Mode
≈25 Hz
Mode
≈33 Hz
Mode
≈34 Hz
Figure 60: A-PR estimated mode shapes for baseline configuration
estimates than EMA, it is a possibility that these are also poor estimates, but one just
happen to resemble a theoretical one better. Nonetheless, it is noteworthy that the OMA
techniques yield mode shapes with less similarity compared to EMA, where most mode
shapes were the same.
The mode shape around ≈25 Hz looks different from any mode shape seen from theory
or EMA. This is the mode that has been previously been deemed to relate to a shaker
mount natural frequency, and as such there is no true mode shape to identify here.
The MACXP plots also compare the modes to the EMA estimated ones. Generally, there
appear to be a high level of dissimilarity. While this indicates that the OMA techniques
produce poor mode shape estimates, it should not be disregarded, that the EMA mode
shape estimates are also likely poor estimates. Overall, this general lack of similarity
between OMA and EMA is an unsatisfying result. One likely explanation for these dif-
ferences, is the stinger-shaker connection. While it certainly impacts the EMA results, as
previously discussed, the measured force at least allows for it to be taken into account,
when performing EMA. For the OMA methods, it could easily be imagined, that the
mode shapes will underestimate the movement in the bottom mass, as it has been fixed
to the shaker during experimentation.
5.2.3.3
Dynamic Sensitivity to Physical Parameters
The impact of varying the number of NKL, NKR springs and nm bottom masses, and in
turn changing the rotational stiffness and location of the COM, is analyzed in this section.
For the same reasons as the EMA, the analysis is split into a case where the COM is kept
constant, using nm = 2 bottom masses, while varying the number of NKL, NKR, followed
by the a case where the rotational stiffness is kept constant using NKL = NKR = 2, while
varying the number of nm bottom masses. The variations are repeated here in Table 21.
Master thesis
Page 121 of 152
==PAGE:134==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Table 21: Physical parameter variations (see Table 14 for all variations)
Varying rotational stiffness
Varying COM
v
nm
NKL, NKR
v
nm
NKL, NKR
2
2
0
1
1
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
4
2
4
6
3
2
Varying rotational stiffness
Figure 61 shows the estimated modal parameters across the three variations for the vari-
ous OMA methods. The EMA estimated natural frequencies using the pLSCF technique
are also shown for comparison. Inspecting Figure 61a reveals a relatively high level of
consistency across the various techniques. The only outliers are the ≈25 Hz mode, where
the A-SSI and A-PR results in slightly different estimates, which is not surprising as this
mode relates to a mode from the shaker and shaker mount coupling. Also notable, is that
FDD generally appear to overestimate the third identified mode.
The second thing which stands out from the figure, is that the OMA techniques as a
collective are generally able to identify the same modes as the pLSCF technique. Only in
(a) Natural frequencies
(b) Damping ratios
Figure 61: OMA modal parameters for varying number of springs NKi
the high end of the frequency spectrum is an EMA mode not identified. The third EMA
mode, the one with the most significant increases for increasing the number of springs,
is slightly misidentified in terms of natural frequency, by the OMA techniques. As dis-
Master thesis
Page 122 of 152
==PAGE:135==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
cussed previously, this natural frequency is affected by the stinger-shaker connection,
which should explain the difference. At the high end of the frequency spectrum, where it
has previously been concluded, that the energy levels are low, and the modes are likely
not very excitable, the OMA techniques perform quite well, despite a few unidentified
modes. For NKi = 0 and NKi = 4 three EMA modes are identified between 30-35 Hz,
but only one for NKi = 2. As these modes theoretically should not be affected by the
number of springs, there may be a third unidentified mode by EMA in this range. If that
is the case, then the OMA estimate, may not be a poor estimate of the EMA identified
modes, but instead be an estimate of a mode which EMA did not identify. Indeed, theory
does not predict the number of modes which have been identified in the high end of the
spectrum, and analysis indicate low energy in this end, and as such one should be wary
of concluding that OMA may outperform EMA based on these results.
Once again the OMA techniques identify the stinger-shaker coupling mode at ≈8 Hz.
The ITD technique identifies this mode at every variation while also only identifying two
total modes for each variation, despite having the capability of identifying four. In gen-
eral, the ITD technique has produced quite poor results, especially considering that the
two first modes are very impactful on the response, according to the modal participation
factors found by EMA.
The damping ratios in Figure 61b estimated by the various OMA techniques are also
once again quite consistent across techniques. They generally appear close, and unsur-
prisingly, show a larger standard deviation in the higher end of the frequency spectrum.
The estimated damping ratios of the two modes that are suspected of being influenced by
the stinger-shaker connection ζ3 and ζ4, are notably higher than the remaining damping
ratios. For the ≈8 Hz mode this is very apparent, but the higher damping of the fourth
mode also supports the thesis, that the coupling affects the OMA estimate of this mode.
Once again the OMA damping estimates are notably lower than the EMA estimates at
the low end of the spectrum, which may again be attributed to the blunting of peaks in
the SD matrix.
The higher damping estimate from the FDD of the first two modes, was also found by the
Enhanced FDD utilized on FOWT data by Ruzzo et al. [10] [11]. They found that the
damping ratio was overestimated for low frequency modes, when the signal length was
too short. This suggests a similar result could be found in this case. However increasing
the signal length did not appear to significantly affect the damping estimates of the FDD
technique. Naturally, it is a possibility that the signal length was not increased enough
in this case, however if the technique requires that much more data to get comparable
results to the other techniques, the applicability of the technique would surely come into
question.
Figure 63 shows the MACXPnD plots of the OMA estimates of the three stiffness varia-
tions, as well as the pLSCF estimate. Figure 62 shows an explanation of the MACXPnD
plots, where each of the five OMA techniques plus the pLSCF technique are collected
within one spring variation. The pattern is then repeated for the remaining variations.
The MACXPnD plots show an overall trend, that there is a relatively high level of simi-
Master thesis
Page 123 of 152
==PAGE:136==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
larity between the various OMA models for the lower frequency (higher energy modes).
Figure 62: MAC plot
explanation
The similarity to the EMA modes is low for the first
mode, high for the second mode and somewhere in be-
tween for the fourth one. The remaining ones are a bit
mixed, and the similarity varies from variation to vari-
ation within the same mode.
The OMA similarity is
also mixed for the higher modes, but tending towards a
higher level of dissimilarity. This once again shows an
overall trend of less consistent estimates at higher fre-
quencies, across both EMA and OMA. This same trend
was also the case for the EMA estimates, however these
MACXPnD plots appear to indicate a higher level of
dissimilarity among OMA methods, indicating slightly less consistent results compared
to EMA.
Mode ≈1.5 Hz
Mode ≈2.9 Hz
Mode ≈8 Hz
Mode ≈14 −21 Hz
Mode ≈25 Hz
Mode ≈31 Hz
Mode ≈32.5 Hz
Mode ≈33.7 Hz
Figure 63: OMA MACXPnD for varying number of springs NKi
Master thesis
Page 124 of 152
==PAGE:137==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Varying COM
Figure 64 shows the estimated modal parameters across the three bottom mass variations
for the various OMA methods, along with the pLSCF estimates. Very similarly to the
variations of the number of springs, the figure shows a relatively good level of agreement
between the OMA and EMA estimates. The overall picture is pretty similar to the case of
varying rotational stiffness. The OMA methods estimate the mode at ≈15-18 Hz slightly
off compared to EMA, the low frequency modes appear to be almost identical to the EMA
estimates, and at high frequencies, the estimates also coincide well with EMA estimates,
although the OMA techniques identify fewer modes at this end of the spectrum. Across
(a) Natural frequencies
(b) Damping ratios
Figure 64: OMA modal parameters for varying number of bottom masses nm
the OMA techniques, the picture is also much the same as when varying the number of
springs.
The OMA techniques also identify a third mode in the low end of the spectrum for
nm = 1, similar to the EMA results. It may be worth noting however, that some of the
AOMA techniques were close to identifying this mode, even for other physical variations.
Lines were forming in the stabilization diagram, however they could never become fully
stabilized, even by adjusting the tolerance parameters.
The damping ratios also show similar trends to what have been identified previously. The
only thing that stands out is ζ7 which appears relatively high. This is not surprising,
given that it has been found to likely be caused by vibrations in the shaker mount.
Master thesis
Page 125 of 152
==PAGE:138==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Figure 65 shows MACXPnD plots across the three variations, for the five OMA tech-
niques, as well as the corresponding EMA estimates. The plots follow the same expla-
nation of the axis, as for the spring variation MACXPnD plots, which was presented in
Figure 62. Investigating the MACXPnD plots reveal what appears to be an overall higher
level of similarity across the different OMA techniques as well as across variations. The
similarity appears high even in the higher end of the frequency spectrum. Except for the
very first mode, the similarity between OMA estimates and the EMA estimate also ap-
pears high, even at higher frequencies. The first mode shows a high level of dissimilarity
Mode ≈1.5 Hz
Mode ≈2.2 Hz
Mode ≈2.9 Hz
Mode ≈8 Hz
Mode ≈15 −18 Hz
Mode ≈23 −27 Hz
Mode ≈32.8 Hz
Mode ≈33.7 Hz
Mode ≈33.7 Hz
Figure 65: OMA MACXPnD for varying number of bottom masses nm
between the nm = 1 variation and the remaining two. Due to the third low frequency
mode being identified for this variation, and due to previous analysis, both theoretical
and EMA showing similar results, this is not unexpected. The nm = 1 variation leads
to the COM being above the central axis of rotation, and as such low frequency modes
relating to “pendulum” motion, is certainly expected to be affected.
This overall higher level of similarity across variations, compared to the spring variations,
appears to indicate that the location of the COM relative to the central axis of rotation
Master thesis
Page 126 of 152
==PAGE:139==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
has less of an impact on the test rig dynamics, compared to the number of springs (out-
side of the dissimilarity of the first mode for nm = 1 and the identification of a third low
frequency mode).
5.2.3.4
Baseline Configuration: DTW-AOMA
Having conducted an extensive analysis on the test rig, the results of the proposed DTW-
OMA automation routine from Section 2.5.2 is now presented. The routine is performed
on the baseline configuration, and it requires a range of user input parameters to vary
over. The user input parameters chosen, and the range at which they vary over are shown
in Table 22. Note that only powers of two are used within the ranges. The input param-
eters were chosen, so as to keep the number of identified poles consistent when possible.
As an example, this is the reason the number of CF lags are chosen for the PR routine,
Table 22: Range of values used for DTW-AOMA estimation
Model
User input parameter
Range
SSI
Hankel block rows
[23,28]
ERA
Hankel block rows
[23,28]
PR
CF lags
[29,214]
ITD
CF lags
[29,214]
FDD
SD Matrix window size
[29,214]
instead of number of AR-coefficients. The parameters chosen and their respective ranges,
could easily be replaced with other parameters, such as the signal length.
For the techniques that has the number of estimated modes as an input, the SSI, ERA
and PR, this was specified to be 10 for all estimations. As this routine is designed to
be automated, potentially for use in on-line monitoring, the chosen number of possible
modes to identify, should be higher than the expected number of modes in the system, so
as to account for changes in dynamics. As such, the number of modes to identify should
be overspecified. Spurious poles should show low MAC values, leading to low accuracy
estimates, on which basis they may be disregarded.
As the routine utilize the MAC as weights it is of interest to inspect different MAC’s. Fig-
ure 66 shows the MACXP plots of the various OMA techniques varying over the ranges
presented in Table 22. The plots show the OMA techniques separated, with the user
input parameter ranges in increasing order from left to right. Note, that even for analysis
not utilizing the DTW routine, inspecting such plots may be of significant value, as they
show estimated parameter sensitivity and robustness to decisions made by the user.
The figure shows a relatively high similarity within modes for a given OMA technique, but
with a higher level of dissimilarity across OMA techniques. The ERA technique appears
to be the outlier, as it outside of the first two modes, shows significant dissimilarity to its
own estimates. The plots also shows a higher level of dissimilarity occurring at the “ends”
of the chosen user input parameter ranges. As the original parameter values used for the
previous analysis, were chosen so as to achieve the cleanest most consistent results, it is
Master thesis
Page 127 of 152
==PAGE:140==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 2
(c) Mode 3
(d) Mode 4
(e) Mode 5
(f) Mode 6
(g) Mode 7
(h) Mode 8
(i) Mode 9
(j) Mode 10
Figure 66: OMA MACXP for baseline configuration, varying input parameters (see
Table 22)
of little surprise that deviating significantly from the values, result in dissimilar results.
Plotting the MACXPnD values reveal a much higher level of similarity across the differ-
ent OMA techniques. The MACXPnD plots also show much higher similarity within the
ERA technique estimates. First, this indicates that the dissimilarity across the methods
are mostly associated with differences in damping estimates. Second, it also reveals that
the damping estimates of the ERA technique are heavily influenced by the number of
block Hankel rows used during the estimation. The MACXPnD plots are presented in
Appendix A. Plotting the MACX values achieve results that are virtually identical to
the MACXPnD plots.
Using the MACX, MACXP and MACXPnD as weights, mean and standard deviations of
the modal parameters are estimated, and distributions are presented in Figure 67. The
mean values of the EMA and three AOMA techniques are also presented in the figure.
The distributions of these technique are very narrow, making in difficult to make any
interpretation of the DTW-AOMA results, and thus are left out. However, they may be
found in Appendix E.
First thing to note, is that using MACXP as modal weights generally leads to narrower
distributions, and therefore more accurate results, compared to MACX and MACXPnD.
As such, the lower similarity seen in the MACXP plots, appear to be beneficial, by plac-
Master thesis
Page 128 of 152
==PAGE:141==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
(a) Natural frequencies
(b) Damping ratios
Figure 67: Comparison of probability density functions from different weightings on
modal parameter estimates
ing lower weights on estimates that deviate from the estimate mean. The second thing
to note is that some of the natural frequency estimates, have very wide distributions,
most notably the 6’th and 10’th mode. For the 10’th mode this is explained by the very
few estimates identifying this mode. It is of worth noting, that none of the three original
AOMA techniques identified this, while EMA did. For the 6’th mode, there are more
estimates, but the estimates are more spread out, leading to a wider distribution.
The routine identified all modes that were identified by either the EMA or AOMA tech-
niques, and even identified the damped stinger-shaker coupling mode at ≈8 Hz. However,
this is not a surprise as the number of wanted modes were overspecified. Further, simply
identifying more modes is not a goal in itself, as more of them are likely to be spurious.
In practice, the physicality of poles may be evaluated by the wideness of the distribution.
A measure of this is the standard deviation as a fraction of the mean. This is shown for
the MACXPnD estimated natural frequencies of the DTW-AOMA routine, in Table 23.
Inspecting the table, mode 3, 6 and 10 stand out as having much wider distributions.
The third and sixth mode have been identified to be associated with dynamics outside
Master thesis
Page 129 of 152
==PAGE:142==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
Table 23: Standard deviation as ratio of mean for DTW-AOMA estimated fn
Mode, n
σ(fn)
µ(fn) [%]
1
1.62
2
0.717
3
9.73
4
1.31
5
3.15
6
10.9
7
2.01
8
0.39
9
0.278
10
9.52
the system. The tenth mode also shows up sporadically in estimates, and is the fourth
high frequency mode identified, while only two are expected to be found at these fre-
quencies, according to theory. In practice, a threshold would be set, discarding identified
modes with too wide a distribution. The threshold should be defined for the given use
case, depending both on the system dynamics, and the total number of methods and user
input parameters.
As previously mentioned the distributions of the three AOMA techniques are much nar-
rower, and the results are thus much more accurate compared to the DTW-AOMA re-
sults. The reader may thus reasonably question the benefit of the DTW-AOMA routine.
However, the routines have different use cases. The AOMA techniques are expected to
produce more accurate results, due to the nature of the techniques. However, they do
require user interaction to interpret stabilization diagrams. Further when used for on-
line monitoring, changes to the system caused by wear-and-tear, may require changes to
tolerance parameters, requiring additional user interaction. Further, significant changes
to the system, which may occur near operational failure, may result in changes to the
number of stable poles in the stabilization diagrams, which again requires user interpre-
tation. As such these techniques, as originally stated by Damsgaard [13] are best defined
as semi-automatic.
In contrast, the DTW-AOMA routine is intended to work with a higher level of automa-
tion. All that is required, is the determination of the user input parameters and their
ranges. Thus for automation in practice, the peak picking FDD technique would not be in-
cluded, as it requires user interaction. As long as the number of modes are over-specified,
the routine should also be able to handle changes to dynamics. Further, throughout this
thesis, modal parameters have been identified using various techniques and compared.
As the identified modal parameters and the number of modes are not consistent across
estimates, the modes have manually been sorted for appropriate comparison, which is a
time consuming and tedious process. However, the compared estimates in this section,
in Figure 66 and 67 were automatically sorted as part of the routine, saving significant
amounts of time. Note, that the chosen user input parameters do result in the DTW-
Master thesis
Page 130 of 152
==PAGE:143==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
AOMA being somewhat computationally expensive. However, for an automated system
requiring no user interaction, computational time may be less of a hindrance.
From the advantages and disadvantages of the DTW-AOMA routine, the use case of the
DTW-AOMA technique seems most appropriate for an on-line monitoring system, which
can produce warnings and alarms, requiring the attendance of an expert user, who can
then employ the more accurate AOMA techniques.
5.2.4
Summary Analysis and Discussion of Fully Assembled Test Rig
From the analysis of the fully assembled test rig, the following observations and conclu-
sions have been identified:
• While there were overall similarities between theoretical and experimental results,
significant deviations were simultaneously identified. Both theory and experiment
identified closely spaced modes in both ends of the spectrum, but they generally
disagreed about the number in both ends. Further, experimental results identified
a mode in the 20-25 Hz, not explained by theory.
This mode was identified to
be related to dynamics in the shaker and shaker mount. Unlike a similar mode
previously identified around ≈8 Hz, this mode was much less damped, resulting in
it being identified in both EMA and OMA methods.
• EMA results showed the response was dominated by the low frequency modes,
indicating much higher energy levels. The low energy levels at the high end of
the spectrum, is likely explained by the theoretical mode shapes, which showed
relatively low coupling between the wings and the excited bottom mass. This likely
lead to poor experimental mode shape estimates.
• There were significant differences in the estimates achieved by the OMA techniques.
The A-SSI and A-PR produced estimates close to the EMA results, while the re-
maining three generally produced fewer estimates. The FDD was limited by the
visually identified peaks on the first singular value curve of the SD matrix. More
curves are likely to appear, when the rank of the measurement system is not limited
to 1. The low energy in the high end of the spectrum may have been the reason
why no more peaks were identifiable. As a fourth peak did show up in the low end
of the spectrum, in the case of a single bottom mass, the rank limitation did not
appear to be as big on an obstacle as feared. Thus, higher frequency modes may
be identified by exciting the test rig at a different mass. However, there were peaks
visible on the lower singular value curves, and these are more likely to show up at
the first curve, when the rank is increased.
• The ITD technique once again performed quite poorly, never identifying more than
2 modes, despite being limited to a maximum of 4, and it did not identify the two
highest energy modes.
Master thesis
Page 131 of 152
==PAGE:144==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.3
The Test Rig During Operation
• Considering the OMA techniques as a collective, they performed quite well consider-
ing the previously discussed rank limitations. Despite the rank of the measurement
system limitations, either one or more of the OMA techniques were generally able
to identify the same modes as EMA, even closely spaced ones. Brincker et al. [2]
discuss how a single electrodynamic shaker excitation can be detrimental to OMA
estimates. It is likely, that individual methods may perform better, under different
excitation. However, despite OMA methods not yielding perfectly aligned estimates
with EMA, no results appear to indicate that the excitation type was much more
detrimental to OMA estimates than EMA.
• The proposed DTW-AOMA routine showed an effective way to potentially au-
tomate OMA. The results were much less accurate than the A-SSI, A-ERA and
A-PR, but may be utilized for automated on-line monitoring in lieu of frequent
expert supervision and user interaction. However, the routine still requires more
testing before practical application. Further improvements should be required to
bring down accuracy of the estimates, before relying on a fully automated routine.
5.3
The Test Rig During Operation
After an extensive analysis of the static test rig, a brief introduction into the test rig
“during operation” is now presented. During operation is intended to reflect the real life
structure, that the test rig is a simplified model of. A real world FOWT will have its
blades rotating, and thus be under operation as often as possible, to maximize its energy
output. Simulating the dynamics of the wind induced rotating blades, is done by turning
on the DC motor, on the test rig and letting the wings rotate.
For the experiments, the motor will rotate with Ω= ˙φ = 117 rpm = 1.95 Hz.
The
rotations are expected to induce harmonic disturbances to the frequency spectrum. De-
pending on the amplitude of these, they may make it impossible to identify any other
dynamics from the system. To mitigate this, a harmonic filter developed for OMA intro-
duced by Peeters, et al. [3] is applied to the signal. The method is summarized using the
following three steps:
1. Upsample the data and resample it in the angle domain.
2. Apply a sliding window synchronous averaging to separate discrete (harmonic) and
random components.
3. Restore the signal in the time domain.
The above harmonic filter was designed to be used in OMA, where the structure under
analysis is excited by random noise while simultaneously being under operation, the latter
causing the harmonics.
Experiments were conducted on the baseline configuration (nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 2)
with the motor turned on, combined with the same white noise signal input exciting
Master thesis
Page 132 of 152
==PAGE:145==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.3
The Test Rig During Operation
the bottom mass of the test rig. Due to the rotation of the wings, accelerometers were
removed from the wing masses, and thus only the bottom and top mass dynamics are
captured. Figure 68 shows spectrograms of the measured signal at the top mass, before
and after applying the harmonic filter. The spectrogram before the filter shows clear
high energy levels at the first few harmonics. In the spectrogram from after the filter,
the harmonics appear to have been mostly removed. However, it is also apparent, that
energy is removed from all harmonics throughout the spectrum. Thus a lot of energy is
(a) Before
(b) After
Figure 68: Spectrogram of top mass signal under white noise and during operation,
before and after applying harmonic filter
removed from the signal, which is bound to affect any attempt at analyzing the signal.
Performing modal analysis on the signal either before or after the application of the
harmonic filter did not provide any consistent estimates, and the results (or lack thereof)
have been left out. Figure 69 showing the singular values of the SD matrix may be used
to understand the lack of any meaningful results. Before applying the harmonic filter,
there are massive peaks present at the harmonics.
There is a slight peak present at
(a) Before
(b) After
Figure 69: Singular values of SD matrix under white noise and during operation, before
and after applying harmonic filter
≈17 Hz, which is reminiscent of the one seen in the static analysis. However outside of
this, the signal is dominated by harmonics, and since the static structure had several low
Master thesis
Page 133 of 152
==PAGE:146==
5
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
5.3
The Test Rig During Operation
frequency modes, it is of interest to be able to analyze the system free of the dominating
harmonic peaks.
The signal after having applied the harmonic filter becomes even harder to analyze, as
signified by the singular value of the SD matrix plot. As the rotational speed (or the
fundamental frequency), is at such a low frequency, the filter ends up removing energy
from the entire spectrum. This is thus not an applicable use case of the harmonic filter.
For future work with the test rig under operation, one or more of the following potential
solutions are proposed:
• Alternative filtering options. While the chosen filter may work well for high fre-
quency harmonics, it does not work well under these conditions. Further, any type
of harmonic filtering that removes all harmonics, will likely reach the same results.
Utilizing non harmonic filters may be a solution, such as a notch filter, targeting
only specific determined frequencies. However, if there are any modes near these
targeted frequencies, they will similarly be affected by the filters. Thus, the low
frequency modes are not likely to be identified, regardless of the filter.
• Reducing the harmonic amplitude. This will require making physical changes to
the test rig. One simple approach may simply be to move the wing masses closer
to the point of rotation, and thus reducing the length of the wings. The harmonics
will not be removed, but the amplitude will be reduced, potentially making the
underlying dynamics more identifiable.
• Increasing the wing balancing. This approach requires even further physical changes
to the test rig. The balancing of the wings under rotation should theoretically be
increased by utilizing a three wing design.
This should also have the effect of
reducing the harmonic amplitude, even for the existing wing length. This has the
additional advantage of increasing the similarity to the real world structure, that
the test rig is modeling. However, it has the disadvantage of causing changes to
the dynamics of the static test rig, requiring revised theoretical and experimental
analysis.
Master thesis
Page 134 of 152
==PAGE:147==
6
CONCLUSION
6
Conclusion
The main objectives of this thesis were to investigate the performance of OMA compared
to EMA methods on a simplified 2D FOWT model test rig, to compare the effectiveness
of different OMA methods and to analyze if the combination of multiple methods could
provide benefits in modal parameter estimations.
To achieve the objectives, a theoretical basis for performing EMA and OMA was studied,
analyzed and presented in the thesis. This was followed by the presentation and imple-
mentation of one EMA technique, the pLSCF method, and five different OMA techniques,
the ITD, the ERA, the SSI, the PR and the FDD technique. Further, semi-automatic
routines of the ERA, SSI and PR techniques were implemented, and a proposal for a new
automatic OMA routine, combing multiple OMA methods and Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW-AOMA) was developed, presented and implemented.
Three mathematical models, a point mass, rigid body and FE model, of the test rig was
developed and implemented, to test the efficacy of different model types on modelling the
test rig dynamics. Most importantly the mathematical models were developed to provide
insights into the dynamics of the test rig, to support the analysis and interpretation of
the following experimental analysis.
Changes were made to the test rig during the project period, due to non-linearities present
in the test rig dynamics, caused by slack and friction. Specifically, changes were made to
fix the wings in place, and brass bushings were replaced with needle roller bearings.
Two main studies were conducted and presented in the thesis, both applying the theo-
retical models, EMA and OMA. The first study was conducted on the isolated tower, by
having the wings removed from the test rig. The OMA estimates of the isolated tower,
were generally in very good agreement with the EMA results, with the exception of the
ITD technique, which generally proved to be performing poorly on test rig data. Devi-
ations between OMA and EMA estimates were concluded to largely be a result of the
stinger-shaker coupling to the system, a factor which was expected to have a potential ef-
fect on OMA estimates. The rigid body and FE model were generally in good agreement
with the experimental estimates, with minor differences, likely caused by asymmetry and
friction in the test rig. The largest deviation between theory and experiment, was a low
frequency rigid body “pendulum” mode, which was not identified by any experimental
technique. The most likely explanation appear to be damping caused by the stinger-
shaker connection, significantly affecting this mode, making it difficult to identify. A
total of six variations, changing the COM and the rotational stiffness were implemented,
and the efficacy of the OMA techniques were not affected by these physical changes.
The second main study was performed on the fully assembled test rig. Once again, the
OMA methods as a collective performed well and were generally able to perform similar
estimates to the EMA technique. The A-SSI and A-PR techniques were deemed to be
Master thesis
Page 135 of 152
==PAGE:148==
6
CONCLUSION
the most proficient methods, as they were the only ones to reliably produce the same es-
timates as the EMA technique. The remaining three produced fewer estimates, and once
again the ITD technique performed extraordinarily poor. Except for a few modes, there
was a general high level of similarity between EMA and OMA mode shapes, although the
A-SSI technique generally produced mode shape estimates with high dissimilarity from
the remaining techniques. During the analysis, it was revealed that the stinger-shaker
coupling also affected the EMA estimates. Both EMA and OMA identified a mode at
≈25 Hz, which was not found in theory. It turned out to likely be a natural frequency
of the shaker mount. The OMA estimates were expected to be affected by the stinger-
shaker, but EMA less so.
The rigid body and FE model once again provided results with high similarity. The over-
all trend of the experimental results is similar to the theoretical model results, but there
are notable differences. The theoretical results identified more closely spaced modes at
low frequencies than the experimental results, while the opposite was the case at high fre-
quencies. Some deviations can be explained by asymmetry and friction, and the damping
of the lowest rigid body “pendulum” mode caused by the stinger-shaker connection. How-
ever, a large factor appear to relate to the mode shapes at different frequencies, resulting
in the location of excitation only resulting in a minor response at higher frequencies. This
was backed up by very high relative modal participation factors for the low frequency es-
timates, as well as higher noise levels at high frequencies. Adding physical changes to the
system, did generally not affect the efficacy of specific techniques. However, the case of a
single bottom mass resulted in a third low frequency mode being identified. This result,
combined with prior analysis and knowledge of both experimentally and theoretically
estimated mode shapes, reveal that both EMA and OMA appear to struggle capturing
low frequency modes, where the top and bottom masses are in anti-phase. As it occurred
across techniques, it is likely explained by higher damping associated with these types of
modes, caused by the stinger-shaker connection.
An automatic OMA routine combining multiple methods, and using Dynamic Time Warp-
ing to sort modes (DTW-AOMA) was presented and implemented. The routine resulted
in less accurate results compared to the A-SSI, A-ERA and A-PR techniques. However,
the routine did prove useful in modal parameter identification, and showed how large
uncertainty may be utilized to identify and remove spurious poles. Further, the routine
provides a framework for implementation of an automatic OMA routine, that requires no
user interaction, and has the necessary flexibility for handling changes to the dynamics
of a structure. As a part of the routine, modal parameters are estimated for a range of
different user input parameters. Creating MACXP plots enables a sensitivity study, to
changes in a chosen input parameter, and performing such a study is thus prudent. The
results showed a general high robustness to changes, except for the ERA technique, which
appeared to be quite sensitive to changes in the number of block Hankel rows used for the
estimation. A similar study was conducted for the EMA estimates, varying the number
of block averages for FRF estimation. The EMA results showed a very high robustness
Master thesis
Page 136 of 152
==PAGE:149==
6
CONCLUSION
6.1
Future Research
to changes in number of block averages.
Lastly, a brief introduction into the test rig during operation was presented. The results
showed that the harmonic disturbances from the wing rotations are of an amplitude re-
quiring filtering, but due to the low frequency of rotation, the harmonic filter applied in
this thesis, resulted in too much of the spectrum being filtered out. Several proposals for
the mitigation of these issues have been presented.
6.1
Future Research
Following the completion of this thesis, a range of topics for potential improvement, future
research or further analysis has become apparent. A non-exhaustive list of such topics
are presented below:
• Excitation at different points of the structure, which may result in a higher signal-
to-noise ratio at the higher end of the spectrum.
• Excitation from non-connected source for OMA, and investigate if the small dif-
ferences between EMA and OMA remain or disappear. Similar studies, using one
vs multiple excitation sources can also be performed. Lastly, the current study
could be repeated, but using a free hanging shaker to reduce coupling to the shaker
mount.
• Developing and implementing a technique to measure rotational displacement. Ro-
tation and translation cannot not be separated in the measured data in the current
setup, and attempts made to capture only rotation during this project proved un-
successful.
• Further developing and testing the DTW-AOMA routine. This may include utiliz-
ing more or fewer OMA methods in the routine, changing the types of user input
parameters, or applying the routine to a test rig simulating real life scenarios, thus
tracking changes to dynamics over time.
• Conducting additional analysis to the test rig under operation. While introductory
analysis was conducted in this thesis, much more has yet to be performed. The
first steps should probably be to implement different types of filters, to remove the
harmonic disturbances. Next suggested steps would then be the potential changes
to the test rig, presented in Section 5.3.
Master thesis
Page 137 of 152
==PAGE:150==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
References
[1] D. J. Ewins. Modal Testing: Theory, Practice and Application. Research Studies
Press Ltd., second edition, 2000.
[2] Rune. Brincker and Carlos. Ventura.
Introduction to operational modal analysis.
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2015.
[3] Bart Peeters, Bram Cornelis, Karl Janssens, and Herman Van Der Auweraer. Re-
moving Disturbing Harmonics in Operational Modal Analysis.
Technical report,
LMS International, Leuven, 2007.
[4] Peter Kjaer Svendsen. Combining Operational Modal Analysis and Active Lubrica-
tion Techniques to Perform Rotordynamic Testing. PhD thesis, DTU, 2016.
[5] Mads Damgaard. An Introduction to Operational Modal Identification of Offshore
Wind Turbine Structures. Technical report, Aalborg University, Department of Civil
Engineering, 2011.
[6] Oscar Ramirez Requeson. Identification of Modal Parameters Applying Operational
Modal Analysis on a Full Scale Operating Vestas V27 Wind Turbin´e. PhD thesis,
DTU, Kgs. Lyngby, 2014.
[7] Daan Willem Berend ter Meulen, Alessandro Cabboi, and Alessandro Antonini.
Hybrid operational modal analysis of an operative two-bladed offshore wind turbine.
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 223, 8 2024.
[8] Thomas Thougaard Paulsen. On the accuracy of the modal parameter estimates in
OMA. In iomac, Vancouver, 7 2022. iomac.
[9] Francisco Pimenta and Filipe Magalh˜aes. First Results from Operational Modal
Analysis of a Floating Offshore Wind Turbine. In Lecture Notes in Civil Engineering,
volume 432 LNCE, pages 111–120. Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland
GmbH, 2023.
[10] C. Ruzzo, G. Failla, M. Collu, V. Nava, V. Fiamma, and F. Arena. Output-only
identification of rigid body motions of floating structures: A case study. In Procedia
Engineering, volume 199, pages 930–935. Elsevier Ltd, 2017.
[11] Carlo Ruzzo, Giuseppe Failla, Maurizio Collu, Vincenzo Nava, Vincenzo Fiamma,
and Felice Arena. Operational modal analysis of a spar-type floating platform using
frequency domain decomposition method. Energies, 9(11), 2016.
[12] Jens Kristian Mikkelsen, Esben Orlowitz, and Peter Møller Juhl. Automated Oper-
ational Modal Analysis on a Full-Scale Wind Turbine Tower. In Conference Proceed-
ings of the Society for Experimental Mechanics Series, pages 1–8. Springer, 2024.
Master thesis
Page 138 of 152
==PAGE:151==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
[13] Sebastian Vikaer Damsgaard.
A Novel and Non-Invasive Rotordynamic Testing
Combining Operational Modal Analysis and Active Lubrication Techniques-Theory
and Experiments. PhD thesis, DTU Construct, 2023.
[14] Filipe Magalh˜aes, ´Alvaro Cunha, and Elsa Caetano. Online automatic identification
of the modal parameters of a long span arch bridge. Mechanical Systems and Signal
Processing, 23(2):316–329, 2 2009.
[15] Marco Martino Rosso, Angelo Aloisio, Jafarali Parol, Giuseppe Carlo Marano, and
Giuseppe Quaranta. Intelligent automatic operational modal analysis. Mechanical
Systems and Signal Processing, 201, 10 2023.
[16] Keunhee Cho and Jeong-Rae Cho. Stochastic Subspace Identification-Based Auto-
mated Operational Modal Analysis Considering Modal Uncertainty. Applied Sci-
ences, 13(22):12274, 11 2023.
[17] Andreas Windfeldt Trolle. Design and dynamic testing of a prototype ”floating”
wind turbine - Special Course. Technical report, DTU, Kgs. Lyngby, 8 2024.
[18] D.E. Newland. An Introduction to Random Vibration Spectral and Wavelet Analysis.
Newland-Prentice Hall, 1996.
[19] Randall J. Allemang and A. W. Phillips. Experimental Modal Parameter Evaluation
Methods. In Handbook of Experimental Structural Dynamics: With 667 Figures and
70 Tables, pages 615–680. Springer New York, 1 2022.
[20] Elbert Hendricks, Ole Jannerup, and Paul Haase Sørensen. Linear Systems Control
- Deterministic and Stochastic Methods. Springer, 2008.
[21] Rune Brincker. Some elements of operational modal analysis. Shock and Vibration,
2014, 2014.
[22] Patrick Guillaume, Herman Van Der Auweraer, Bart Peeters, Peter Verboven, and
Steve Vanlanduit.
A poly-reference implementation of the least-squares complex
frequency-domain estimator. Proceedings of International Modal Analysis Confer-
ence, 21:183–192, 2003.
[23] Bart Peeters, Herman Van Der Auweraer, Patrick Guillaume, and Jan Leuridan.
The PolyMAX frequency-domain method: a new standard for modal parameter
estimation? Shock and Vibration, 11:395–409, 2004.
[24] Bart Cauberghe.
APPLIED FREQUENCY-DOMAIN SYSTEM IDENTIFICA-
TION IN THE FIELD OF EXPERIMENTAL AND OPERATIONAL MODAL
ANALYSIS. PhD thesis, VRIJE UNIVERSITEIT BRUSSEL, Brussels, 2004.
[25] S. R. Ibrahim and E. C. Mikulcik. A method for the direct identification of vibration
parameters from the free response. Shock and Vibration, 47(4):183–199, 9 1977.
Master thesis
Page 139 of 152
==PAGE:152==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
[26] Jer Nan Juang and Richard S. Pappa. An eigensystem realization algorithm for
modal parameter identification and model reduction. Journal of Guidance, Control,
and Dynamics, 8(5):620–627, 1985.
[27] Peter Van Overschee and Bart De Moor. Subspace Identification for Linear Systems.
Springer US, 1996.
[28] Rune Brincker and Palle Andersen. Understanding Stochastic Subspace Identifica-
tion. In IMAC-XXIV : A Conference & Exposition on Structural Dynamics. Exper-
imental Mechanics, 2006.
[29] P Vacher, B Jacquier, and A Bucharles. Extensions of the MAC criterion to complex
modes. Proceedings of the international conference on noise and vibration engineer-
ing, pages 2713–2726, 2010.
[30] Ilmar Ferreira Santos. DYNAMICS OF MACHINES - Part I. In DYNAMICS OF
MACHINES - IFS, pages 1–96. 2015.
Master thesis
Page 140 of 152
==PAGE:153==
A
MAC PLOTS
Appendix
A
MAC Plots
A.1
Isolated Tower Configuration
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 2
Figure 70: MACXPnD for the two identified modes via 5 OMA techniques, for isolated
tower, nm = 2, NKL = NKR = 0.
A.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
(a) MACXPnD, Mode 1
(b) MACXPnD, Mode 2
Figure 71: MACXPnD plots of OMA mode shapes for varying physical properties of
isolated tower (see Table 11)
Master thesis
Page 141 of 152
==PAGE:154==
A
MAC PLOTS
A.2
Fully Assembled Test Rig
(a) Mode 1
(b) Mode 2
(c) Mode 3
(d) Mode 4
(e) Mode 5
(f) Mode 6
(g) Mode 7
(h) Mode 8
(i) Mode 9
(j) Mode 10
Figure 72: OMA MACXPnD for baseline configuration, varying input parameters (see
Table 22)
Master thesis
Page 142 of 152
==PAGE:155==
B
FRFS
B
FRFs
Figure 73: FRF of mass 2, using the measured input force and input signal respectively
Master thesis
Page 143 of 152
==PAGE:156==
B
FRFS
B.1
Dry Friction FRFs
B.1
Dry Friction FRFs
(a) Bottom mass (mass 2)
(b) Top mass (mass 3)
Figure 74: FRFs of the bottom and top mass of the test rig, before the brass bushings
were replaced with needle roller bearings. The dry friction induced non-linearities result
in significant noise as seen in the figure.
Master thesis
Page 144 of 152
==PAGE:157==
C
SIGNAL ANALYSIS
C
Signal Analysis
Figure 75: Density and probability plot of input signal and measured input force for
fully assembled test-rig OMA experiment
Master thesis
Page 145 of 152
==PAGE:158==
C
SIGNAL ANALYSIS
Figure 76: Autocorrelation functions for fully assembled test-rig with nm = 2 bottom
masses and NKL = NKR = 2 springs (Baseline Configuration)
Master thesis
Page 146 of 152
==PAGE:159==
C
SIGNAL ANALYSIS
(a) Half spectrum, FDD fit
(b) Correlation functions, SSI fit
Figure 77: Correlation functions and half spectrum plus fits for baseline configuration of
fully assembled test-rig
Master thesis
Page 147 of 152
==PAGE:160==
D
FORCE AND MOMENT EQUATIONS
D
Force and moment equations
The below shows the force and moment equations used for the rigid body model. These
are the same equations used for the point mass model, except that the moment equations
are excluded.
Accelerations
Ia1 =





0
0
0





(D.1)
B2a2 =





¨θL2 −˙θ2x2 + ¨x2
¨θx2 + ˙θ2L2 + 2 ˙θ ˙x2
0





(D.2)
B3a3 =





−¨θL3 −˙θ2x3 + ¨x3
¨θx3 −˙θ2L3 + 2 ˙θ ˙x3
0





(D.3)
B4a4 =





cos(φ)(¨x3 −˙θ2x3 −L3¨θ) + sin(φ)(¨θx3 + 2 ˙θ ˙x3 −L3 ˙θ2)
−sin(φ)(¨x3 −˙θ2x3 −L3¨θ) + cos(φ)(¨θx3 + 2 ˙θ ˙x3 −L3 ˙θ2)
0





+





¨x4 + (¨θ + ¨φ)L4 −( ˙θ + ˙φ)2x4
(¨θ + ¨θ)x4 + ( ˙θ + ˙φ)2L4 + 2( ˙θ + ˙φ) ˙x4
0





(D.4)
B5a5 =





cos(φ)(¨x3 −˙θ2x3 −L3¨θ) + sin(φ)(¨θx3 + 2 ˙θ ˙x3 −L3 ˙θ2)
−sin(φ)(¨x3 −˙θ2x3 −L3¨θ) + cos(φ)(¨θx3 + 2 ˙θ ˙x3 −L3 ˙θ2)
0





+





¨x5 −(¨θ + ¨φ)L5 −( ˙θ + ˙φ)2x5
(¨θ + ¨θ)x5 −( ˙θ + ˙φ)2L5 + 2( ˙θ + ˙φ) ˙x5
0





(D.5)
Bαa4 = T4α · B4a4
(D.6)
Bβa5 = T5β · B5a5
(D.7)
Master thesis
Page 148 of 152
==PAGE:161==
D
FORCE AND MOMENT EQUATIONS
Force and moment equilibrium
Mass 1:
Force:
m1 B1a1 = TI1





Rx1
Ry1 −m1g
0





+





−(−k2x2 −k3x3)
Ry31 + Ry32 −Ry21 −Ry22 + FKL(θ) + FKR(θ)
0





(D.8)
Note that the spring forces are given as, FKL(θ) = NKLk0(x0 + sin(θ)Lk) and FKR(θ) =
NKRk0(x0 −sin(θ)Lk) where x0 is the pre-compression of the springs, and Lk is the
horizontal distance from shaft axis to spring center.
Moment:





0
0
Iz1¨θ





=





0
0
LR(Ry32 + Ry21 −Ry31 −Ry22) + Lk(FKR(θ) −FKL(θ))





+





0
0
−d1(−k2x2 −k3x3) −sin(θ)d1m1g + Mx2x2 −Mx3x3





(D.9)
LR is the horizontal distance from the center of the mass plate to the clamping point of
the rulers, and d1 is distance between COM and reference frame origin.
Mass 2:
Force:
m2 B2a2 = TI2





0
−m2g
0





+





−k2x2
Ry21 + Ry22
0





(D.10)
Moment:





0
0
Iz2¨θ





=





0
0
LR(Ry22 −Ry21) + Mx2x2





(D.11)
Mass 3:
Master thesis
Page 149 of 152
==PAGE:162==
D
FORCE AND MOMENT EQUATIONS
Force:
m3 B2a3 =TI3





0
−m3g
0





+





−k3x3
−Ry31 −Ry32
0





(D.12)
+T T
34





k4x4 + kM4α
−Ry4
0





+ T T
35





k5x5 + kM5β
Ry5
0





(D.13)
Moment:





0
0
Iz3¨θ + d3m3(¨x3 −L3¨θ −˙θ2x3)





=





0
0
Mx4x4 −M4α −Mx5x5 −M5β





+





0
0
−Mx3x3 −sin(θ)d3m3g −d3k3x3LR(Ry31 −Ry32)





(D.14)
d3 is the distance between the COM and the reference frame origin.
Mass 4:
Force:
m4 Bαa4 = TIα





0
−m4g
0





+





0
Ry4
0





+ T4α





−k4x4 + kM4α
0
0





(D.15)
Moment:





0
0
Iz4(¨θ + ¨φ + ¨α)





=





0
0
Mx4x4 −M4α





+





0
−d4
0





×


TI4





0
−m4g
0








(D.16)
d4 is the distance between the COM and the reference frame origin.
Mass 5:
Force:
m5 Bβa5 = TIβ





0
−m5g
0





+





0
−Ry5
0





+ T5β





−k5x5 −kM5β
0
0





(D.17)
Master thesis
Page 150 of 152
==PAGE:163==
D
FORCE AND MOMENT EQUATIONS
Moment:





0
0
Iz5(¨θ + ¨φ + ¨β)





=





0
0
Mx5x5 −M5β





+





0
−d5
0





×


TI5





0
−m5g
0








(D.18)
d4 is the distance between the COM and the reference frame origin.
Master thesis
Page 151 of 152
==PAGE:164==
E
ACCURACY PLOTS
E
Accuracy Plots
(a) Natural frequencies
(b) Damping ratios
Figure 78: Comparison of probability density functions from different weightings on
modal parameter estimates, see Section 5.2.3.4
Master thesis
Page 152 of 152
==PAGE:165==
 
 
DTU Construct 
Section of Solid Mechanics 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
 
Tlf.: +45 4525 4250 
Fax.: +45 4525 1961 
 
https://www.construct.dtu.dk 
 
February 2025 
