==PAGE:1==
Ned
Master Thesis
Experimental evaluation of Sti↵ness Damage
Testing for estimating alkali-silica reaction in-
duced prestressing in concrete slabs
text
Joakim B. Mørk
26.01.2025
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Experimental evaluation of Sti↵ness Damage Testing for estimating alkali-
silica reaction induced prestressing in concrete slabs
Danish title:
Eksperimentel evaluering af Sti↵ness Damage Testing til estimering af alkali-
silika reaktion induceret forspænding i betonplader
Author:
Joakim Bonde Mørk - s193849
Degree:
Master of Science in Civil Engineering - M.Sc. Civ. Eng
Project Period:
26.08.2024
til
26.01.2025
Extend of Thesis:
30 ECTS
University:
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
Supervisors:
Kurt K. Hansen,
Søren Hansen,
Christian Von Scholten
Signature:
.
Joakim B. Mørk - s193849
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Alkali-silica reaction (ASR) is a critical issue a↵ecting the shear capacity of concrete bridges, particularly in 2D-
restrained slab bridges without shear reinforcement. This thesis evaluates the Sti↵ness Damage Test (SDT) as a non-
destructive method to estimate ASR-induced prestressing in concrete slabs, addressing its practical application and
reliability. Experimental studies were conducted on horizontally drilled cores extracted from an ASR-damaged bridge in
Denmark. The SDT output indices SDI was compared with the direct methods of measuring prestressing, implementing
cutting of the reinforcement. Digital Image Correlation (DIC) was further employed to monitor deformations and crack
progression.
Key ﬁndings reveal that the SDT have a signiﬁcant correlation with ASR-induced prestressing, although with an inverse
relationship, implying reduction of SDI with increasing ASR-induced prestessing, contradicting initial hypotheses.
Observations further highlight anisotropic compressive behavior and the occurrence of load-induced cracks even at
reduced test loads (0.32fc), challenging the assumed non-destructive nature of the SDT at 0.4fc. Recommendations
include optimizing test parameters, integrating DIC for improved surface deformation analysis, and further reﬁning
the method for practical ﬁeld application.
This study underscores the potential of SDT as a alternative tool for assessing ASR-induced prestressing, while also
identifying limitations and pathways for further research to enhance its applicability in structural evaluations.
I
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement
A master’s thesis in civil engineering is more than a technical document or a collection of analyses; it is a profound
intellectual journey, where knowledge, creativity, and precision converge to shape a bridge between the theoretical
order and safety of the university with the with the practical, often chaotic, reality of engineering challenges. To be
fair, this journey have not been without small nor large obstacles on the way, but have also opened doors and provided
new insight into a ﬁeld i most over-conﬁdently thought i knew all about.
My deepest gratitude is, above all, dedicated to my patient wife, who has been my anchor since the beginning of my
university journey. I could not have completed this endeavor without your unwavering support and love.
Secondly, I would like to extend my heartfelt thanks to my supervisor, Kurt Kielsgaard Hansen, for his tireless ded-
ication to this project. Your invaluable guidance, enthusiasm, and availability—whether for reﬂection or practical
matters—have been a huge help. Thank you.
I also wish to express my gratitude to Søren Gustenho↵Hansen for his exceptional commitment to this project and for
the inspiring conversations at ICAAR, along with Ricardo Antonio Barbosa, which sparked the initial idea for this work.
Special thanks go to Christian von Scholten and The Danish Road Directorate for granting access to conduct sampling
on a real structure and for generously sponsoring this project.
I am especially grateful to Marko Ivkovi´c for his relentless e↵orts in assisting with strain measurements. Your help
saved me a signiﬁcant amount of time—thank you.
Thank you, Rikke Kofoed, for your invaluable advice on the practicalities of testing and extracting samples from live
structures. Additionally, I am grateful to Ramboll for providing test equipment and arranging transportation for the
bridge testing.
I extend my thanks to the DTU technicians Troels Vestergaard Kristensen, Mads Boje Rode, and Christian Peter
Rasmussen for their support in setting up all the equipment and for patiently answering my endless stream of questions.
Finally, a special thanks goes to Malte and Ole from Christiansen
Essenbæk for handling the challenging task of
preparing the sample areas and for keeping me company during the long winter nights on the bridge.
II
==PAGE:5==
Symbol list
Symbol
Beskrivelse
Enhed
ASR
Alkali-Silica Reaction
-
CaCl2
Calcium chloride
-
fc
Compressive strength of concrete
MPa
fc,SDT
Compressive strength of concrete after conducting the SDT
MPa
"
Strain
mm/mm
⌘"
Micro strain
" · 106
"s,ASR
ASR-induced tensile strain acting on the reinforcement
mm/mm
"c,ASR
"s,ASR equilibrant compressive strain acting on the concrete
mm/mm
σc,ASR
ASR-induced prestressing of the concrete
MPa
δy
Axial deformation
mm
δx
Lateral deformation
mm
SDT
Sti↵ness Damage Test
-
SDI
Sti↵ness Damage Index
-
SI
Dissipated energy for SDT cycle n
N/mm2
SII
Total energy applied in the SDT cycle n
N/mm2
PDI
Plastic Deformation Index
-
DI
Plastic deformation for cycle n
mm/mm
DII
Total deformation for cycle n
mm/mm
NLI
Non-Linearity Index
-
HA
Hysteresis Area
J/m3
E
E-modulus
MPa
E1
Secant E-modulus of the ﬁrst SDT cycle at maximum load
MPa
E1,50%
Secant E-modulus of the ﬁrst SDT cycle at 50% maximum load
MPa
III
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of the Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Approach and Reading Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Study
2
2.1
The Sti↵ness Damage Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
ASR-induced expansion in 2D-restrained structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Experiments
5
3.1
Sti↵ness Damage Test (SDT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Bridge description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Measuring Prestressing In Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.5
Digital Image Correlation (DIC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Results
7
4.1
Sti↵ness Damage Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Prestressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Digital image correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Discussion
11
5.1
Sti↵ness Damage Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Digital Image Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.3
Concrete Prestressing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.4
Correlation with SDT and Prestressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
6
Conclusions and suggestions for further research
13
References
14
IV
==PAGE:7==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Alkali-Silica Reactions (ASR) was initially discovered and
described by Thomas Stanton in California in the early
1940s.
It wasn’t until the early 1950s that P. Nerenst
introduced the concept of ASR to Denmark. Despite sig-
niﬁcant e↵orts, numerical requirements for the alkali-silica
reactivity of aggregate materials were ﬁrst implemented
in 1986, with the introduction of the Basic Concrete De-
scription (BCD, or BBB in Danish)[1]. With a big amount
of critical structures being build in the 1960 to 1980, a
large part of the danish bridges and tunnels build before
1986 contain a critical amount of ASR reactive aggre-
gates. In 2012 The Danish Road Directory estimated an
approximate 600 state bridges and an unknown amount
of municipality bridges have the potential of developing
ASR[2].
Although signiﬁcant progress has been made in under-
standing ASR, much of the research has focused on its
pathological e↵ects, leaving its broader impact on struc-
tural performance still debated and, in some cases, un-
known.
Of particular concern are failure mechanisms
that heavily depend on mechanical properties, such as
the shear capacity of slabs without shear reinforcement
(e.g., 2D-restrained slabs). In recent time, a large amount
of ASR-damaged Danish bridges have been demolished,
highlighting the critical need for reliable assessments of
residual capacity.
It is well documented in the literature that ASR-induced
cracking patterns vary with restraint conditions. When
ASR occurs under unrestrained conditions, anisometric
crack patterns emerge. Conversely, under restrained con-
ditions, anisotropic crack patterns develop, often oriented
parallel to the restraint direction. However, most of this
evidence is based on laboratory specimens. Barbosa et
al.[3] conducted visual inspections and compressive tests
on three ASR-a↵ected bridges, identifying a distinct ASR-
induced cracking pattern in slabs without shear rein-
forcement. Similar observations were reported by Hobbs
(1988)[4] and Swamy (1995)[5]. Barbosa et al. further ob-
served that horizontally drilled cores (coresH) exhibited
up to 61% higher compressive strength than vertically
drilled cores (coresV ).
Hansen et al.[6] attributed this
variation in strength to the anisotropic compressive be-
havior of ASR-a↵ected concrete, linking it to failure mech-
anisms where macro-cracks in coresV tend to close but
remain open in coresH. This closure propagates cracks,
reducing both compressive strength and sti↵ness.
During the early stages of ASR, crack formation imposes
tensile stresses on reinforcement bars perpendicular to the
direction of expansion. With continued expansion, these
tensile stresses may induce a ”prestressing e↵ect” in the
reinforcement bars. Experimental studies suggest that the
reduction in shear capacity, inﬂuenced by this prestress-
ing e↵ect, may not be as severe as initially feared [7, 8, 9,
10].
This inﬂuence is also reﬂected in models used for design-
ing new structures and assessing ASR-a↵ected structures.
Consequently, accurately determining the level of ASR-
induced prestressing is crucial for reliable structural eval-
uations.
Danay et al. (1994)[11] proposed that the ASR-induced
prestressing could be estimated directly by measuring the
contraction of reinforcement bars upon cutting.
While
reliable, this method presents two main issues; a) it is
costly and time-consuming due to the subsequently re-
pairs of the cut bars b) The beneﬁcial prestressing e↵ect
in the cut bar is lost.
Alternatively, Jones and Clark
(1994)[12] proposed the non-destructive ”Crack Width
Summation” method, which quantiﬁes ASR-induced pre-
stressing by accumulating crack widths.
However, the
authors acknowledged that measuring cracks is extremely
challenging. Additionally, this method is limited to ana-
lyzing vertically oriented cracks, making it inapplicable to
2D-restrained slabs. These limitations highlight the need
for improved or entirely new assessment methods.
Smaoui et al. (2004)[13], building on the work of Danay et
al. (1994)[11], suggested that the Sti↵ness Damage Test
(SDT) could serve as an indirect method for estimating
ASR-induced prestressing in concrete. The SDT method,
later reﬁned by Sanchez et al.[14, 15, 16], provides a more
reliable means of assessing ASR-induced damage in con-
crete. It involves cyclic compression testing up to 40%
of the 28-day compressive strength of coresV , with dam-
age quantiﬁed via the indices ”Sti↵ness Damage Index”
(SDI). Studies on free-expanding samples by Sanchez et
al. have shown a correlation between the SDI and mea-
sured expansion, o↵ering a potential method for estimat-
ing ASR-induced prestressing.
However, because the SDT is primarily based on free-
expanding samples, its applicability to full-scale struc-
tures under 2D-restraint conditions is less certain. Given
the anisotropic compressive behavior of ASR-a↵ected con-
page 1 af 15
==PAGE:8==
2
LITERATURE STUDY
1.1
Aim of the Project
crete, minor adaptations to the SDT could make it a
viable alternative for estimating prestressing in concrete
slabs. Such an approach could minimize the need for the
more invasive direct procedure proposed by Danay et al.
[11] or the less reliable non-destructive Crack Width Sum-
mation method proposed by Jones and Clark[12].
1.1
Aim of the Project
The aim of this master thesis is to (i) investigate the cor-
relation between prestressing estimated using the direct
method and the SDT method proposed by Sanchez et al.,
in alignment with the theory of anisotropic compressive
behavior proposed by Hansen et al. (2021)[17], (ii) assess
the non-destructive nature of the SDT method, and (iii)
provide guidance on the practical application of the SDT
method for estimating prestressing.
To achieve these objectives, core samples from a severely
ASR-damaged four-lane slab bridge in Denmark will be
tested using the SDT method. The specimens will be ex-
tracted parallel to the crack orientation from the under-
side of the bridge slab. During testing, deformations and
crack development will be closely monitored using Digital
Image Correlation (DIC) to assess the non-destructive na-
ture of the method. Simultaneously, the actual degree of
prestressing will be measured using the direct method on
an equivalent number of reinforcement bars located within
the same area of core sample extraction points. The po-
tential correlation between the SDT parameters and the
measured prestressing will then be evaluated based on
these results.
1.2
Approach and Reading Guide
This thesis is organized as follows: Based on a two-part
literature study, the history and parameters of the SDT
method are reviewed and discussed in subsection 2.1.
Subsequently, the concept of ASR-induced prestressing
in 2D-restrained slab structures is explained in subsec-
tion 2.2. This section also discusses how DIC can be em-
ployed to assess the non-destructive nature of the SDT
method.
The experimental setup and details, along with the DIC
analysis, are described in section 3, and the correspond-
ing results are presented in section 4.
The correlation
between the degree of prestressing and SDT parameters
is analyzed in section 5, which also includes a discussion
on the practical application of the method for assessing
prestressing in 2D-restrained slab structures. The study
concludes with overall ﬁndings and recommendations in
section 6.
Further notes and detailed project documentation are pro-
vided in an additional experimental report, available upon
request.
2
Literature Study
2.1
The Sti↵ness Damage Test
The Sti↵ness Damage Test (SDT) was ﬁrst introduced
by J.B. Walsh (1965) as a method to assess the hystere-
sis of rocks under uniaxial elastic compression.
Walsh
reported a strong correlation between crack density and
the number of loading/unloading cycles in rock specimens
(stress/strain relationship). Based on these ﬁndings, R.S.
Crouch [18] proposed a revised procedure, called Sti↵ness
Damage Testing (SDT), applying cyclic loading in com-
pression to concrete cylinders. Chrisp et al. (1993)[19]
adapted this approach to assess ASR-related concrete
damage, employing cyclic loading from 0.5 MPa to 5 MPa
on specimens with a 72 mm diameter and 180 mm length,
using a load rate of 0.1 MPa/s. This range was chosen
to avoid inﬂuencing internal damage while maintaining
a slow load rate to minimize dynamic e↵ects and avoid
creep.
Chrisp et al.[19] observed that the hysteresis area in the
ﬁrst cycle was signiﬁcantly larger than in subsequent cy-
cles, which they attributed to an initial sliding across open
crack surfaces. Consequently, they proposed omitting the
results from the ﬁrst cycle. The primary outputs of the
method were:
1. Hysteresis Area (HA) [J/m3]: The hysteresis loop
area averaged over the last four cycles, representing
total energy loss due to ASR-related compression.
2. Modulus of Elasticity (ME): The secant modulus
averaged over the last four cycles.
3. Nonlinearity Index (NLI): The ratio of the loading
response slope at half the maximum load to EM,
providing insights into the extent of damage and/or
crack patterns in the sample.
From their studies, the authors found that the modulus
of elasticity (Ec) is the most sensitive indicator for low-
page 2 af 15
==PAGE:9==
2.1
The Sti↵ness Damage Test
2
LITERATURE STUDY
deterioration concrete, while hysteresis (H) becomes in-
creasingly inﬂuential as deterioration progresses. Speci-
mens with a primary cracking pattern perpendicular to
the loading direction exhibited low EM, high HA, and a
NLI above unity, while specimens with cracking parallel
to the loading showed the opposite trend. However, the
authors did not further discuss the implications of this
di↵erence.
Smaoui et al.
(2004)[13] further evaluated the SDT
method’s reliability on samples cast from a single con-
crete mix design of 35 MPa, stored at 38°C and 100%
RH. They found that increasing the maximum applied
load from 5 MPa to 10 MPa improved experimental
precision without causing additional damage to speci-
mens. The authors noted that the original 5 MPa stress
level did not fully re-close ASR-induced micro-cracks.
In modifying the method, they also proposed that the
most valuable parameter of the SDT test lies in the ﬁrst
loading-unloading cycle, contradicting previously estab-
lished parameter limits.
They found that the primary
micro-crack closure occurs in the ﬁrst cycle due to the
higher stress levels, hence providing essential insight to
the damage extend.
Sanchez et al. (2014)[20] conducted an extensive study
on SDT input/output parameters, testing over 700 spec-
imens, including lab-made samples with varying aggre-
gate types, mix designs, sizes, and ages under free ex-
pansion conditions, as well as cores from a severely ASR-
a↵ected bridge. They found the most reliable results oc-
curred with loading at 40% of the compressive strength
of the tested structure. Additional key speciﬁcations in-
cluded: (i) a specimen size with a length/diameter ratio
of 2.0, ideally 100x200 mm; (ii) careful control of speci-
men moisture levels, per the CSA23.2-14C protocol; (iii)
measuring hysteresis area, plastic deformation across ﬁve
loading/unloading cycles, and the average Ec from cycles
two and three; and (iv) determination of the 28-day com-
pressive strength must be found from una↵ected concrete
samples.
Sanchez et al. suggests that the ”damage degree” in ASR-
a↵ected concrete can be described with three indices: the
Sti↵ness Damage Index (SDI), Plastic Deformation Index
(PDI), and Non-Linearity Index (NLI) (1-3). The SDI is
calculated as the ratio between the dissipated energy (SI),
represented by the hysteresis area, and the total energy
applied to the system (SI + SII) over the ﬁve cycles (see
Figure 1). Similarly, the PDI indicates the proportion of
dissipated energy or plastic deformation (DI) to the total
energy or deformation in the system (DII).
The NLI is deﬁned as the ratio between the secant modu-
lus of elasticity at 50% of the load (E1,50%) and the modu-
lus at the maximum load (E1) during the ﬁrst cycle. This
parameter provides insights into the extent of damage and
the crack patterns in the samples.
SDI =
P5
i=1 SI
P5
i=1(SI + SII)
(1)
PDI =
P5
i=1 DI
P5
i=1(DI + DII)
(2)
NLI = Ec,1,50%
El1
(3)
The SDT method, as proposed by Sanchez et al.[14, 15,
16], is presented as a reliable and non-destructive method
for assessing the degree of damage in ASR-a↵ected con-
crete structures.
Studies, primarily conducted on free-
expanding samples, have shown a relationship between
the output parameter, the ”Sti↵ness Damage Index”
(SDI), and the measured expansion.
However, due to the complex restraint conditions in real-
life structures, the reliability of expansion measurements
derived from SDT when applied to live structures is not
well documented. Since the method is largely based on
free-expanding samples, the correlation between SDT-
determined expansion and the actual expansion in real-
life structures could be too vague for practical applica-
tion. Further questions are raised on the non-destructive
nature of the test regarding the determination of the com-
pressive strength. Sanchez et al. (2016)[16] suggest the
compressive strength is determined from the sound con-
crete, though considering the reduction of material prop-
erties of 30-40%[21] this could invoke a compression of up
to 70% of the compressive strength exceeding the linear-
elastic compression zone, thus making the test results un-
reliable.
page 3 af 15
==PAGE:10==
2
LITERATURE STUDY
2.2
ASR-induced expansion in 2D-restrained structures
Figure 1: Deﬁnition of the SDT output parameters
2.2
ASR-induced expansion in 2D-restrained structures
Several researchers have investigated the crack propaga-
tion of ASR-a↵ected slab elements under di↵erent re-
straint conditions. Consistent is the principle that when
ASR-induced tensile forces is build up and exceeds the
tensile strength of the concrete, cracks are formed in or-
der of the structural restraint conditions. Only few ex-
perimental studies exist which investigates slab elements
under 2D-restraint conditions [3, 4, 5, 6, 22] a characteris-
tic horizontal crack pattern have ben idealized from both
laboratory specimens and live specimens. Figure 2 show
the resulting horizontal crack propagation in 5 phases cf.
[17]. The considered slab is isotropic reinforced (i.e. mesh
in top and bottom acting in x and y-direction with equal
reinforcement ratio) with absolute anchorage of the mesh
and without any external force acting on it. The phases
are as follows:
a) ASR is initiated as a chemical reaction between al-
kali hydroxides and silica minerals in the reactive
aggregates. The reaction causes precipitates ASR
products in thin cracks and cavities. The ASR prod-
ucts reacts with CaCl2 forming solid ASR products,
building up pressure in the aggregate (6-13 MPa)
[23].
b) The increasing solidiﬁcation pressure can lead to
cracking of the aggregate immediately distributing
the pressure and inducing tensile stresses to the sur-
rounding cement paste. When the tensile stresses
exceeds the tensile strength of the cement, paste
micro-cracks will develop randomly in all directions
around the reactive aggregate [24].
c) The formation of micro-cracks will result in out-
ward expansion on a structural level. This expan-
sion causes tension in the horizontal reinforcement
inducing a prestressing e↵ect "s,ASR and resultant
equilibrating compressive strains "c,ASR and stress
in the surrounding concrete.
d) As the x and y-direction is restrained by the rein-
forcement the unrestrained z-direction is less resis-
tant to further expansion. As a result the major-
ity of the subsequent expansion will occur in the
z-direction due to the anisotropic sti↵ness, leading
to the opening of horizontal cracks [17] also known
as ”expansion transfer” [22].
e) With further increasing expansive pressure, com-
pressive pressure in the restraint plane forms bridges
between the micro-cracks parallel to the restraint
plane growing into macro-cracks [17]. As a result
the slab now consist of a system of randomly ori-
ented micro-cracks and horizontally oriented macro-
cracks.
The crack formation illustrated in Figure 2 is unique to
the 2D-restrained elements. Elements with further or less
restraint conditions will typically have a crack pattern
oriented more randomly.
The increasing expansion of the concrete induces ten-
sile strain in the reinforcement.
To maintain equilib-
rium, compressive stresses develop in the surrounding
page 4 af 15
==PAGE:11==
3
EXPERIMENTS
concrete, thereby inducing a prestressing e↵ect on the
concrete element.
At small levels of expansion (micro-
cracking), the strain in the reinforcement is negligible
and does not impose any signiﬁcant restraint on ASR
expansions in the horizontal direction.
At a certain
”transition point,” as suggested by Multon and Tout-
lemonde (2006) [22], the cracks grow suﬃciently to ac-
tivate the reinforcement, inducing an anisotropic re-
straint condition.
This signiﬁcantly reduces expansion
in the horizontal direction, forcing the expansion to de-
velop predominantly perpendicular to the restraint.
Figure 2: Phases of ASR-induced crack propagation in
isotropic 2D-restrained slab element cf. [17]
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
At this stage, the development of prestressing slows, but
the vertical expansion increases dramatically. Since the
cracks are not perfectly straight, some expansion contin-
ues to develop slightly in the horizontal direction. Con-
sequently, the development of prestressing does not cease
entirely.
As the SDT evaluates the degree of damage based on
the work required to close ASR-induced cracks, there is a
strong basis to believe that the SDI value and the mea-
sured steel strain "s,ASR exhibit a correlation consistent
with the theory of the ”transition point” [22]. This rela-
tionship is hypothesized to follow the trend illustrated in
Figure 3.
Figure 3: Relationship between ASR induced strain in the
vertical and horizontal direction under 2D-conditions sug-
gested by Multon and Toutlemonde [22] (left) and the cor-
responding relationship between SDI and "Reinforcement.
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
3
Experiments
3.1
Sti↵ness Damage Test (SDT)
The test consists of ﬁve cycles of compressive loading,
starting from 0.5 MPa and increasing to 40% of the com-
pressive strength (0.4fc), applied at a loading/unload-
ing rate of 0.10 MPa/s as described in subsection 2.1.
The compressive strength of the samples fc was deter-
mined from one sample ”B3B” taken from an equally
ASR-a↵ected part of the bridge, following the ASTM C
39 standard [25]. The compressive strength is corrected in
relation a standard cylinder with a size of Ø150x300 mm
deﬁned in the Design guide by the Danish Road Direc-
torate (2017)[26] with reference to Eurocode 2 (EN 1992-
1-1)[27].
It should be noted that the compressive strength is de-
termined from a sample drilled in the ASR-a↵ected area,
parallel to the crack orientation. This is done in order
minimize the risk of exceeding the 0.4fc as the inﬂuence
of both direction and ASR degradation have a huge im-
pact on the compressive strength cf. [28, 21].
The SDT was conducted using an MTS Criterion Model
C45 with a compressive load cell capacity of 600 kN. The
machine is equipped with compression platens, featuring
a spherical platen on top to improve alignment and en-
page 5 af 15
==PAGE:12==
3
EXPERIMENTS
3.2
Bridge description
sure uniform pressure distribution across the surface. To
compensate for the unevenness of the loading surfaces 3
mm thick high-density wood ﬁber boards were placed be-
tween the cores and steel loading platens. For measuring
the vertical strain a HBM double extensometer, with a
gauge length of 100 mm and a travel range of ± 2.5 mm
is utilized. The extensometer computes the average lon-
gitudinal strain between the two measuring probes.
3.2
Bridge description
The specimens where cut from a ASR-a↵ected four-lane
overpass (1972) located in Ølstykke, Denmark.
The
bridge is constructed as a prestressed (longitudinal direc-
tion) concrete bridge deck with passive reinforcement on
the top and bottom. The bridge deck is weight-reduced
with Ø250 mm void tubes placed every 640 mm, with
two prestressed tendons positioned between each void, as
shown in the cross-section in Figure 4. The bridge deck is
simply supported on four parallel beams, each supported
by six columns.
3.3
Samples
In total six Ø100x200 mm core samples have been ex-
tracted from the bridge ﬁve for testing with SDT and one
for establishing the compressive strength of the damaged
concrete.
All samples have been drilled parallel to the
crack orientation from Ø250 mm cores extracted verti-
cally from the bridge underside as illustrated in Figure 4-
5.
This in order to investigate the compression of the
vertically aligned cracks which induces the prestressing.
180mm
180mm
180mm
460mm
460mm
 
250mm
300mm
57.53mm
Figure 4: cross section of the bridge with annotation of
the placement of the Ø250 core (red)
Figure 5: visualization of the sample orientation and def-
inition of applied coordinate system.
The hollow blue
arrows indicate direction of the bridge top side
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
3.4
Measuring Prestressing In Concrete
The ASR-induced tensile strain was measured as the axial
strain resulting from the contraction of the reinforcement
when cut. The strain was recorded using pre-wired HBM
K-CLY41 6/120 bonded resistance strain gauges, cali-
brated for the thermal expansion of steel.
The gauges
were connected to a data logger using a simple three-wire
Wheatstone quarter-bridge conﬁguration to compensate
for the e↵ects of temperature on the lead wires connected
to the gauges. Two strain gauges were positioned on each
bar (see Figure 6) along the axial line of the bar min. 15
cm from the cut to ensure no inﬂuence of generated heat.
The measurements were conducted during winter due to
delays in the project schedule. Consequently, the test en-
vironment was suboptimal due to cold and humid condi-
tions. To mitigate these e↵ects, the tested reinforcement
bars were heated to approximately 20◦C prior to adhering
the gauges to the bars, ensuring good conditions for the
adhesive.
Figure 6: Position of gauge B2E before cutting of the
reinforcement
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
At the completion of the testing phase, the reinforcement
bars were carefully cut from the bridge without damaging
the strain gauges that were still mounted. The bars were
subsequently transported to the laboratory to perform
tensile tests for determining their E-modulus. The tests
were conducted using an Instron 8502 Servo Hydraulic
testing machine with a force capacity of 250 kN. The
reinforcement bar was ﬁtted with an Instron 2620-601
strain gauge extensometer to measure the tensile strain.
The resulting prestressing in the concrete was determined
under the assumptions of full anchorage of the reinforce-
page 6 af 15
==PAGE:13==
3.5
Digital Image Correlation (DIC)
4
RESULTS
ment, that the cross-sectional area of the polished tentor
steel was equivalent to that of a smooth Ø14 bar, and
that the e↵ective concrete area resided beneath the void
tubes.
3.5
Digital Image Correlation (DIC)
To validate the non-destructive nature of the SDT
method, Digital Image Correlation (DIC) was utilized to
generate strain and deformation ﬁelds, facilitating the de-
tection of test-induced cracks and the measurement of rel-
ative deformations throughout the sample surface. DIC
is an optical measurement technique that monitors the
specimen during testing using two cameras to create a
3D tracking ﬁeld. This ﬁeld is calculated from gray-scale
variations in the images captured by the cameras. DIC
o↵ers strain and deformation data for the entire surface
visible to the cameras without requiring physical contact
with the specimen.
In this study, a 12M ARAMIS stereo system, comprising
two 12-megapixel cameras with an adjustable base, was
employed. During the tests, an extensometer featuring a
cross-acting bar was also applied. However, the presence
of the bar caused a shadow, leading to missing or inac-
curate data in the a↵ected region of the DIC analysis.
Consequently, this error ﬁeld was excluded from the ﬁnal
analysis.
4
Results
Figure 7 show cylinders B2A-B2E before loading.
The
ASR-induced cracks are marked with grey lines and the
thickness of the lines roughly indicates the crack widths.
The following is observed:
• B2A has few coarse cracks in both horizontal and
vertical directions, with a prominent horizontal
crack in the lower part.
• B2B shows a ﬁne, systematic inclined crack pattern,
without any prominent cracks.
• B2C resembles B2B but has a thick inclined crack
in the lower half.
• B2D has a pattern similar to B2C.
• B2E is missing part of the upper left corner. Few
cracks resembling B2A, a thick horizontal crack in
the lower half and a large vertical crack in the mid-
dle.
Cylinder B2B, B2D and B2C show similar damage degree
with few or no larger cracks, but large amount of ﬁne
diagonal cracks. B2A and B2E is less cracked but have
a higher density of wider cracks with occuring through-
going horizontal cracks.
Figure 7: Cylinder B2A-B2E before testing with marking
of ASR-induced cracks
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
4.1
Sti↵ness Damage Testing
Table 1 shows the the main test results of the SDT con-
ducted on the bridge samples B2A-B2E. The applied SDT
maximum load 0.4fc have been based on the compressive
strength of one sample ”B3B”.
By accident this value
was taken as 24.9 MPa instead of the corrected value of
31.5 MPa. The applied maximum load 0.4fc instead cor-
responds to a load of approximate 32% of the true com-
pressive strength.
Figure 8 shows the stress-strain curves obtained from
the SDT of selected samples B2A and B2B. The ﬁgures
show increasing strains, hysteresis and SDI with decreas-
ing measured steel strain "s,ASR.
Table 1: Main SDT results for the samples B2A-B2E.
Sample
SDI
PDI
NLI
fc,SDT [MPa]
B2A
0.130
0.055
1.11
30.4
B2B
0.160
0.086
1.07
28.5
B2C
0.126
0.056
1.10
32.9
B2D
0.137
0.052
1.17
29.0
B2E
0.132
0.066
1.10
28.1
page 7 af 15
==PAGE:14==
4
RESULTS
4.2
Prestressing
(a) Core B2A with "steel = 1703 [µ"]
(b) Core B2B with "steel = 1342 [µ"]
Figure 8: Hysteresis curves for samples a) B2A b) B2B
4.2
Prestressing
Table 2 shows the main results from the strain measure-
ment conducted on the bridge. The table shows the re-
sults from both strain gauges shown with the di↵erence
between the local gauge outputs, the local average strain
and the resulting concrete prestressing σc,ASR. It is noted
that the application of the gauges was conducted under
cold and humid condition, though only few issues with
the adhesive bond was noted. Gauge B2B-G101 was after
mounting discovered to have been placed approximately
20% of axis of the expected force direction as can be seen
from. All other gauges was placed parallel to the force
direction ±2°.
The estimated ASR-induced strain are computed as the
average value of the strain curve plateau. Figure 9 show
the strain output of both gauges from cutting the rein-
forcement bars. The variation in the ﬁrst 10-15 second
of the measurement is due to the cutting of the bar. A
partial release occoured for B2B at 15 seconds hence the
long cutting time. The curvature of B2A and B2B has a
slight jump before settling the plateau, this is attributed
a slight whip in the bar when the tensile strain is re-
leased. B2E has a signiﬁcantly larger deviation between
the gauge output compared with the rest
σc,ASR is based on the average E-modulus of 198 ± 11
[GPa] of the reinforcement bars. The E-modulus was de-
termined after the strain measurement and is computed as
the average of the E-modulus determined from the gauges
still ﬁtted to the reinforcement bar and a extensometer
ﬁtted to the bar.
Figure 9: Strain output for both gauges "s,ASR of the reinforcement bars when cut for bar B2A-B2E
page 8 af 15
==PAGE:15==
4.3
Digital image correlation
4
RESULTS
Table 2: Main results from the strain measurements of the bridge reinforcement bars when cut, G101 is placed closest
to the point of cutting
Sample
Strain G101
[µ"]
Strain G102
[µ"]
Average
strain [µ"]
σc,ASR [MPa]
B2A
1629
1778
1703 ± 74
1.63 ± 0.12
B2B
1255⇤
1428
1428⇤± 74
1.36 ± 0.10
B2C
1687
1752
1720 ± 33
1.64 ± 0.10
B2D
1642
1446
1544 ± 98
1.47 ± 0.13
B2E
1834
1338⇤⇤
1834⇤⇤± 74
1.75 ± 0.12
⇤Strain gauge B2B-G101 have been placed o↵axis. ⇤⇤Strain gauge B2E-G102 is suspected of slippage, hence excluded from the series.
4.3
Digital image correlation
For the analysis of the compression mechanism in the
SDT, three load stages I-III have been selected; 6 MPa
(0.19fc), 8 MPa (0.25fc), and 10 MPa (0.32fc) respec-
tively. The load stages are evaluated for the ﬁrst cycle
only, as cracks induced by the compression will primarily
occur here. Figure 11 presents the axial and lateral strain
plots for cylinder B2A at these respective load stages,
where grey corresponds to no strain, blue corresponds to
compressive strains and red corresponds to tensile strains.
For the load stages is observed:
0) The ﬁgure shows the prism before loading with
marking of visual ASR-induced cracks.
I) The axial strain plot show closing of the ASR-
induced cracks with the lateral strain plot showing
only noise.
II) The axial strain plot show further closing of the
ASR-induced cracks. The lateral strain plot show
slight opening of the vertical cracks marked with
arrows.
III) The axial strain plot show in addition to closing
of the ASR-induced cracks, inducing of new cracks
marked with black arrows at the tips and bends
of the ASR-induced cracks. The lateral strain plot
show that the vertical cracks are growing.
Figure 10 show the lateral strain plots for B2A for the
cycle load peak (0.32fc) for cycles 1, 3 and 5. The plots
show increasing opening and propagation of the vertical
cracks over the ﬁve cycles.
The same response is also
observed for the axial strain, showing increasing com-
pression of the ASR-induced cracks over the ﬁve cycles.
The same trend is seen for all cylinders.
l l l l l l l l l l l l l l
Figure 10: Lateral strain plot of cylinder B2A at cycle
load peak (0.32fc) for cycle 1, 3 and 5.
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
Figure 12-13 illustrates the axial displacement measured
along the length of the cylinder B2A and B2B. The dis-
placement is recorded as the relative displacement of the
surface element at three distinct vertical lines: the left
side (green), the middle (red), and the right side (blue).
The displacement is evaluated for the three load stages
I-III of the ﬁrst cycle. Observed from the plots is:
I) The displacement δy variates almost linear for all
three sections for B2A and B2B, though a large dif-
ference between the sections of B2B is observed. A
small jump in δy is observed at y ⇡70mm and
at y ⇡130mm for B2A. The large drop in δy at
y ⇡90mm on B2A is caused by shadows from
the extensometer cross bar not being suﬃciently re-
moved and is excluded.
II) Ampliﬁcation of the responses for stage I, with in-
creasing amount of smaller jumps.
page 9 af 15
==PAGE:16==
4
RESULTS
4.3
Digital image correlation
III) Increasing di↵erence in displacement δy for B2E is
observed with larger jumps at y ⇡[10, 80, 140]mm
for the blue section of B2B, inducing skewness in the
cylinder. B2A is further ampliﬁed of the responses
observed for stage I.
In summary the axial displacements for cylinder B2A and
B2B show closing of the ASR-induced macro-cracks, lin-
ear variation of the displacement between the ASR-cracks
and ASR-induced skewness of the cylinders. Similar re-
sponses are seen for the remaining cylinders with B2D
having almost no deviation between the sections, and
B2E having the largest deviation, primarily caused by the
none-uniform loading surface.
Figure 11: Sample B2A Axial and lateral strain plots for the three load stages.
Figure 12: The relative axial displacement over the height of prism B2A, in three analysis sections at three load stages.
The corresponding axial strain plot are shown.
Figure 13: The relative axial displacement over the height of prism B2B, in three analysis sections at three load stages.
The corresponding axial strain plot are shown.
page 10 af 15
==PAGE:17==
5
DISCUSSION
5
Discussion
5.1
Sti↵ness Damage Test
For the maximum load of 0.4fc, a compressive strength of
24.9 MPa was mistakenly used instead of the actual value
of 31.5 MPa. This resulted in a 0.4fc load of 9.96 MPa,
corresponding to 32% of the load rather than the intended
40%. Despite this discrepancy, the resulting stress-strain
curves for B2A–B2E show good agreement with specimens
of approximately the same damage degree as reported in
the literature [14, 29, 30].
Concave progression of the loading curve indicates that
the compression has transfered from the linear-elastic de-
formation to plastic deformation. This is due to forma-
tion of load-induced cracks. The stress-strain curves for
all cylinders exhibit more or less linear-elastic behavior
during the ﬁrst loading cycle hence no indication of in-
duced cracks is shown. Cylinder B2B exhibits the largest
hysteresis, indicating the highest damage degree, while
B2C shows the smallest hysteresis.
As large cracks develop in the concrete, the precipitation
of ASR gel into smaller cracks slows down. This buildup
of ASR products in the larger cracks slows down the total
expansion, as less pressure is generated during crystalliza-
tion [23]. Based on the surface crack patterns identiﬁed in
Figure 7, samples B2B, B2C, and B2E, which exhibit high
crack density with fewer large cracks, would be expected
to achieve the highest scores. With the observed SDI and
PDI values aligning with this mechanism, the results of
the test can be deemed successful, even when using 0.32fc
as the maximum load.
5.2
Digital Image Correlation
One of the key factors inﬂuencing the SDT parameters is
the presence of non-linear behavior in the loading curves.
Non-linear progression indicates the inducement of cracks,
which distorts the SDT output as the parameters become
partially inﬂuenced by test-induced damage. Therefore, it
is crucial that the transition from the linear to non-linear
compression is not exceeded during the test. Sanchez et
al. [14, 15, 16, 31] assert that the SDT method is non-
destructive and reliable within 40% of the compressive
strength. However, other projects [30, 29] suggest that
damage also occur below 40%.
As described by Hansen et al.
[17], the initiation of
cracks originates from the tips and bends of ASR-induced
cracks when signiﬁcant compressive strain is applied to
the sample. This is evident as the axial strain plot show
compressive strains in new places compared with the ini-
tial compression state. The mechanism also involves the
induction of lateral strains on these new cracks, visible
as the opening of cracks in the lateral strain plots. This
behavior is attributed to the bridging of weak interfaces
caused by dynamic segregation and ASR-induced micro-
cracks.
Figure 12 illustrates the axial and lateral strain plots
for sample B2A. The axial strain plots clearly show the
closing of horizontal cracks, which aligns with the crack
pattern observed prior to testing.
However, at loading
stage III (10 MPa, 0.32fc), load-induced cracks begin to
appear at crack tips and bends.
This, along with the
opening and further propagation of vertical cracks, sup-
ports the theory by Hansen et al. [17] and indicates that
load-induced damage occurs even at 0.32fc. Sanches et
al. suggests that the method is reliable within a range of
30-40% of the compressive strength, hence an adjustment
down to 0.3fc might be suﬃcient to prevent signiﬁcant
inducement of cracks.
The sectional analysis of cylinders B2A and B2B, pre-
sented in Figure 12–13, shows a linearly varying defor-
mation over the height of the prisms, with jumps in dis-
placement corresponding to the closing of ASR-induced
cracks.
However, B2B exhibits signiﬁcant variation in
the sectional deformations, indicating skewed compres-
sion of the cylinder.
With the utilization of a double
extensometer uniform compression of the tested cylinders
is assumed for the SDT. The test is therefore particularly
vulnerable to skewness, as only two 100 mm sections of
the sample are evaluated. As shown in Figure 12–13, the
ASR-induced skewness varies signiﬁcantly depending on
the sample’s damage degree and material composition.
Consequently, assuming uniform compression may over-
simplify the assessment and fail to capture the full extent
of ASR-induced damage.
5.3
Concrete Prestressing
The tensile strain measurements were conducted using
two strain gauges to reduce the likelihood of rejecting the
entire measurement. The use of two gauges also provided
valuable insights into the considerable variations observed
page 11 af 15
==PAGE:18==
5
DISCUSSION
5.4
Correlation with SDT and Prestressing
between gauges on the same medium. These variations
can be attributed to factors such as temperature, align-
ment, and bond strength. As mentioned in subsection 3.4,
the gauges were placed 15 cm from the cut. While initial
tests indicated that a distance of 20 cm was optimal to
avoid the inﬂuence of heat generated during cutting, prac-
tical constraints necessitated a 15 cm placement.
This
may have introduced minor heat-related e↵ects, though
the resulting strain curves show no evidence of such inﬂu-
ences.
Correct alignment of the gauges is critical to minimize
the impact of Poisson e↵ects. Unfortunately, gauge B2B-
G101 was placed approximately 20◦o↵-axis, likely causing
it to underestimate the compressive strain a↵ecting the
bar after cutting. Since B2B-G101 recorded the small-
est measurement in the series, this explanation is highly
plausible. The remaining gauges did not show signiﬁcant
deviations in orientation.
Another key factor is the adhesive bond between the
gauge and the medium.
If the bond is insuﬃciently
strong, deformation could result in slippage of the gauge,
leading to an underestimation of strain.
The adhesive
is particularly sensitive to moisture; therefore, signiﬁcant
precautions were taken to prevent this, as detailed in sub-
section 3.4. The strain curve progression for B2E-G102 in
Figure 14 terminates earlier than for B2E-G101 and dis-
plays a slight concave relaxation plateau. This behavior
may indicate slippage caused by a weak bond.
Figure 14: Strain gauge output over time for reinforce-
ment bar B2E when cut
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
Although good results were obtained for most gauges, the
uncertainties associated with gauges B2B-G101 and B2E-
G102 are too signiﬁcant to be reliable. Therefore, these
measurements were excluded from the ﬁnal evaluation of
the parameters.
5.4
Correlation with SDT and Prestressing
If the stated hypothesis is valid, the relationship between
the SDI and ASR-induced strain in the reinforcement
("s,ASR) should align with the theory of anisotropic com-
pressive behavior in ASR-a↵ected, 2D-restrained concrete
slabs. Speciﬁcally, the development of SDI with respect
to "s,ASR should approximately follow the trend described
by Multon and Toutlemonde (2006) [22].
In Figure 15, the SDI values of the samples are plotted
against their respective gauge strain outputs ("s,ASR). A
possible trend between SDI and "s,ASR can be observed.
Assuming a t-distribution for the SDI values, a linear re-
gression was computed at a signiﬁcance level of 5%. The
regression analysis yields an R2 value of 0.52 and a p-value
of 0.0423 for the linear ﬁt:
"s,ASR = 0.296 −0.974 · SDI
This indicates a good and statistically signiﬁcant model,
and thus the correlation must be considered valid. How-
ever, what stands out is the inverse proportionality be-
tween SDI and "s,ASR, contradicting the initial hypothe-
sis. This discrepancy could suggest that the hypothesis is
incorrect or that certain factors remain unaccounted for.
Despite this, the p-value of 0.0423 indicates that the re-
gression cannot be rejected altogether on the grounds of
the data being randomly distributed.
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
Strain
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
SDI
Linear Fit
Figure 15: Linear regression analysis of the correlation
between SDI and the strain in the reinforcement ("s,ASR)
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
page 12 af 15
==PAGE:19==
6
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH
The correlation between the other two SDT indices, NLI
and PDI, was also investigated. However, no signiﬁcant
linear or polynomial relationships were identiﬁed for these
indices.
Kongshaug et al.
(2020) [30] and Stemland (2024)
[29] have explored the correlation between SDT output
parameters and measured expansion ("c,ASR) in ASR-
a↵ected laboratory samples under varying restraint condi-
tions, including 2D-restrained blocks. These blocks were
subjected to an initial load of 3 MPa, aligning with the
”transition point” deﬁned by Multon and Toutlemonde
(2006) [22]. This load condition triggers mechanisms be-
yond the transition point, leading to horizontal cracking
that corresponds to observations in live structures un-
der similar restraint conditions. Stemland further exam-
ined the role of reinforcement in cubes without applied
stress. Both studies found strong polynomial correlations
between SDI and measured expansion, with SDI increas-
ing proportionally to the expansion. Additionally, both
studies demonstrated a strong linear correlation between
NLI and expansion.
Interestingly, both studies conducted on lab made samples
indicate a direct proportionality between SDI and expan-
sion, in contrast to the inverse proportionality observed
in this thesis. This discrepancy suggests that some pa-
rameters inﬂuencing the correlation remain unaccounted
for. While empirical di↵erences between laboratory-made
samples and live structures may partly explain this incon-
sistency, they are unlikely to account for the full picture.
As previously discussed, the test in this thesis was con-
ducted using a double extensometer, which measures only
two 100 mm sections of the sample, rendering the results
more susceptible to ASR-induced skewness. In compari-
son, Stemland and Kongshaug et al. used a triple exten-
someter setup, reducing the coverage per extensometer
to 33%, as opposed to 50% for the double extensome-
ter. This setup minimizes errors from skewness. However,
both approaches only measure surface deformations, leav-
ing valuable information about the internal compression
of the sample unaccounted for.
As outlined in 2.2, the transition point deﬁned by Mul-
ton and Toutlemonde occurs at a compressive stress of
2–3 MPa.
From the concrete stresses (σc,ASR) listed
in Table 2, the highest stress observed for sample B2E
is 1.75 ± 0.12 MPa.
This indicates that the transition
point has not yet been reached for the tested cylinders.
Before this transition point, ASR-induced expansion is
highly isotropic, making its development diﬃcult to pre-
dict. Consequently, there is still potential for further de-
velopment of the correlation in line with the project hy-
pothesis.
Given the uncertainties introduced by the extensometer
setup, the use of 3D Digital Image Correlation (DIC) is
recommended. This technique allows for a more compre-
hensive analysis of surface deformations, reducing errors
caused by ASR-induced skewness. While DIC also focuses
on surface deformation, it could provide a more accurate
approximation of the compressive mechanism and exclude
the e↵ects of load-induced cracks.
Another potential approach involves adapting the ”Crack
Width Summation Method” proposed by Jones and Clark
(1994) [12] with the SDT. This method estimates ASR-
induced expansion by summing the widths of ASR-
induced cracks along a line.
Based on the section de-
formation curves shown in Figure 12–13, the widths of
ASR-induced cracks could be estimated from measuring
the displacement of the linear compression curve over the
sample height. Evaluating this expansion at the peak of
the ﬁnal loading cycle could yield a reliable estimate of
ASR-induced expansion, assuming that no load-induced
cracks were formed during the test.
Both alternatives could provide a promising and more re-
liable method of estimating the ASR-induced prestressing
although remains out of the scope of this thesis.
6
Conclusions and suggestions for further
research
The main object of the test program in this thesis was
to investigate a correlation between SDT output param-
eters and measured ASR-induced prestressing.
This in
order to break the ground for a new method of determin-
ing ASR-induced prestressing in 2D-restrained slab struc-
tures without shear reinforcement. The main conclusions
of the above investigation are:
• There is a signiﬁcant correlation between the com-
puted SDI and ASR-induced prestressing measured.
Though found with a inverse relationship contra-
dicting the project hypothesis and known literature.
Concluding whether the hypothesis is true or not is
not possible at this stage.
page 13 af 15
==PAGE:20==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
• The compression of the cylinder follow the theory
of anisotropic compressive behavior suggested by
Hansen et al. (2021)[17]
• Indications of load-induced cracks are found for sev-
eral samples, this even at a maximum load of 0.32fc
implying that the SDT at 0.4fc is not as non-
destructive as ﬁrst assumed.
• The 28-day compressive strength fc applied for the
test should be based on the compressive strength of
the damaged concrete instead of the sound concrete.
• ASR-induced skewness have a possible impact on
the SDT output hence the use of extensometers to
capture the deformation might be to simpliﬁed.
If a correlation between SDT output indices are to be ac-
cepted or rejected, more testing must be conducted, this
on both lab made samples under di↵erent sustained stress
states, ASR-induced expansions and with di↵erent con-
crete recipes. The continued evaluation must also be ac-
companied by further investigations on live samples from
ASR-a↵ected bridges in order to maintain the connection
between theory and practical application.
Further investigation of the non-destructive nature of
SDT must be conducted to evaluate the applied maximum
load likely reducing the maximum load down to 0.3fc or
lower.
The use of DIC for determining the surface deformation
in relation to an extensometer have a good potential to
compensate the error relating to ASR-induced skewness
and should be further investigated. The adapting of the
”Crack Width Summation Method” by Jones and Clark
(1994)[12] have some theoretical potential but evaluation
on both procedure and possible correlation with the mea-
sured ASR-induced strain in the reinforcement "s,ASR
must be conducted.
References
[1]
Basisbetonbeskrivelsen
for
bygningskonstruktioner.
1986.
url: https : / / danskbyggeskik . dk / Publikationer /
1369
%
20
-
%20Basisbetonbeskrivelsen
%
20for
%
20bygningskonstruktioner.pdf.
[2]
Nicolai Østergaard. Aggressiv betonsygdom angriber 600
danske broer — Ingeniøren. 2012. url: https://ing.dk/
artikel/aggressiv- betonsygdom- angriber- 600- danske-
broer-0.
[3]
R.A. Barbosa. “Inﬂuence of alkali-silica reaction on the phys-
ical, mechanical, and structural behaviour of reinforced con-
crete”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
2017. isbn: 9788778774576.
[4]
D.W. Hobbs. Alkali–silica reaction in concrete. Thomas
Telford, London, UK, 1988.
[5]
R.N. Swamy. “E↵ects of alkali aggregate reactivity on mate-
rial stability and structural integrity.” In: Proceedings of the
CANMET/ACI International Workshop on Alkal-Aggregate
Reactions in Concrete. 1995.
[6]
S.G. Hansen. “Inﬂuence of Alkali-Silica Reaction on the
Shear Capacity of Reinforced Concrete Slabs Without Shear
Reinforcement”. PhD thesis. University of Southern Den-
mark (SDU), 2019. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.35845.50402.
[7]
S.G. Hansen et al.
“Shear capacity of ASR damaged
structures-in-depth analysis of some in-situ shear tests on
bridge slabs”. In: Proceedings - 15th International Con-
ference on Alkali-Aggregate Reaction in Concrete (2016).
url:
https : / / findit . dtu . dk / en / catalog /
582c9098103ac05b3e000124.
[8]
The Bridge Department The Danish Road Directorate.
“Load carrying capacity of members subjected to alcali silica
reactions”. In: (1990).
[9]
P.S. Chana and G.A. Korobokis. Structural Performance
of Reinforced Concrete A↵ected by Alkali Silica Reaction:
Phase I. 1991.
[10]
J.A. Den Uijl and N. Kaptijn. “Shear tests on beams cut
from ASR-a↵ected bridge decks”. In: Large-scale Structural
Testing, ACI Special Publication 211 (2003), pp. 115–133.
[11]
A. Danay. “Structural Mechanics Methodology in Diagnos-
ing and Assessing Long-Term E↵ects of AAR in R/C Struc-
tures”. In: ACI Materials Journal (1994). doi: 10.14359/
4450.
[12]
A Jones and L Clark. “The practicalities and theory of using
crack width summation to estimate ASR expansion”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the ICE-Structures and Buildings, 104(2). 1994,
pp. 183–92. doi: 10.1680/istbu.1994.26327.
[13]
N. Smaoui et al. “Evaluation of the expansion attained to
date by concrete a↵ected by alkali-silica reaction. Part I: Ex-
perimental study”. In: Canadian Journal of Civil Engineer-
ing 31 (5 2004), pp. 826–845. doi: 10.1139/L04-051.
[14]
L.F.M. Sanchez et al. “Evaluation of the sti↵ness damage
test (SDT) as a tool for assessing damage in concrete due to
ASR: Test loading and output responses for concretes incor-
porating ﬁne or coarse reactive aggregates”. In: Cement and
Concrete Research 56 (2014), pp. 213–229. doi: 10.1016/j.
cemconres.2013.11.003.
[15]
L.F.M. Sanchez et al. “Evaluation of the Sti↵ness Damage
Test (SDT) as a tool for assessing damage in concrete due to
alkali-silica reaction (ASR): Input parameters and variability
of the test responses”. In: Construction and Building Mate-
rials 77 (2015), pp. 20–32. doi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.
2014.11.071.
page 14 af 15
==PAGE:21==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
[16]
L.F.M. Sanchez et al. “Practical use of the Sti↵ness Dam-
age Test (SDT) for assessing damage in concrete infrastruc-
ture a↵ected by alkali-silica reaction”. In: Construction and
Building Materials 125 (2016), pp. 1178–1188. doi: 10.1016/
j.conbuildmat.2016.08.101.
[17]
S.G. Hansen and L.C. Hoang. “Anisotropic Compressive Be-
haviour of Concrete from Slabs Damaged by Alkali-Silica Re-
action”. In: Construction and Building Materials 267 (2021).
doi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2020.120377.
[18]
R.S. Crouch. Speciﬁcation for the Determination of Sti↵ness
Damage Parameters from the Low Cyclic Uniaxial Compres-
sion of Plain Concrete Cores. Rev A. Mott, Hay and Ander-
son. Special services division. Internal technical note. 1987.
[19]
T.M. Chrisp, P. Waldron, and G.M. Wood. “Development
of a non-destructive test to quantify damage in deteriorated
concrete”. In: Magazine of Concrete Research 45 (165 1993),
pp. 247–256.
[20]
L.M.F. Sanchez. “Contribution to the assessment of dam-
age in aging concrete infrastructures a↵ected by alkali-
aggregate reaction.” PhD thesis. Quebec, Canada: NUniver-
sity of Laval, 2014.
[21]
R.A. Barbosa et al. “Inﬂuence of alkali-silica reaction and
crack orientation on the uniaxial compressive strength of con-
crete cores from slab bridges”. In: Construction and Build-
ing Materials 176 (2018), pp. 440–451. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
conbuildmat.2018.03.096.
[22]
St´ephane Multon and Fran¸cois Toutlemonde. “E↵ect of ap-
plied stresses on alkali-silica reaction-induced expansions”.
In: Cement and Concrete Research 36 (5 2006), pp. 912–
920. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2005.11.012.
[23]
A. Leemann et al. “Alkali silica reaction in concrete - Re-
vealing the expansion mechanism by surface force measure-
ments”. In: Cement and Concrete Research 176 (2024). doi:
10.1016/j.cemconres.2023.107392.
[24]
L.M.F. Sanchez. Internal Swelling Reactions in Concrete,
Mechanism and Condition Assesment. CRC Press, 2024. doi:
10.1201/9781003188155.
[25]
Standard Test Method for Compressive Strength of Cylin-
drical
Concrete
Specimens.
ASTM
C39/C39M21.
DOI:
10.1520/C0039 C0039M-21. 2021.
[26]
The Danish Road directory. Designguide for Load and Cal-
culation Basis for Bridges. 2017.
[27]
CEN. Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures, Part 1-1:
General rules and rules for buildings. 2004.
[28]
R.A. Barbosa et al. “Residual shear strength of a severely
ASR-damaged ﬂat slab bridge”. In: Engineering Structures
161 (2018), pp. 82–95. issn: 18737323. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
engstruct.2018.01.056.
[29]
K. Stemland. “Doctoral thesis”. In: (2024).
[30]
Simen Sørgaard Kongshaug et al. “Experimental investiga-
tion of ASR-a↵ected concrete – The inﬂuence of uniaxial
loading on the evolution of mechanical properties, expansion
and damage indices”. In: Construction and Building Materi-
als 245 (2020). doi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2020.118384.
[31]
L. F.M. Sanchez et al. “Overall assessment of Alkali-
Aggregate Reaction (AAR) in concretes presenting di↵erent
strengths and incorporating a wide range of reactive aggre-
gate types and natures”. In: Cement and Concrete Research
93 (2017), pp. 17–31. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2016.12.
001.
page 15 af 15
