==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Analysis of the floating offshore wind turbine 
foundation OPTIFLOAT concept using the 
Juncheng Jiang
DTU Wind-M-0875 
January 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0875
January 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Nenad Mijatovic
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for graduation in the 
above education at the Technical 
University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Juncheng Jiang
Title:
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor 
driver
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for five months, Department of Electrical Engineering, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
3
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
Juncheng Jiang - s222473
.............................
signature
.............................
Date
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Brushless DC (BLDC) motors are often used in many applications due to their
high efficiency. Only accurate electronics control can driver BLDC motors, which can
be achieved by motor driver that manages the commutation process and regulates
the current flow.
The goal of this project is to design a desired three phase BLDC motor driver.
There are some key functionalities of motor driver design, such as, inverter switching
correctly, phase to phase voltage output and protection mechanisms to ensure safe
operation under different load conditions. Some design steps that will also be made
throughout the thesis, such as system level design, circuit design and simulation of
the circuit, PCB layout, assembly of the hardware, and comprehensive performance
testing to validate the design.
Keywords: Three phase BLDC motor driver, Hardware design, Power electronics
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
4
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to everyone who has supported me through-
out this project.
First and foremost, I sincerely thank my supervisor, Nenad, and Solar car team
project leader, Claus, for their guidance, support, and feedback throughout this thesis.
I would also like to thank DTU and the Solar car team for providing the necessary
resources and facilities to work on high power electronics.
5
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Literature Review
10
2.1
Overview of BLDC Motor Characteristics and Control Requirements . . .
10
2.2
Power Electronics and Circuit Design for BLDC Motor Drivers . . . . . .
10
2.3
Control Strategies for BLDC Motor Drivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Simulation and Modeling in BLDC Driver Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
PCB Design and Layout for BLDC Motor Drivers
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Performance Testing and Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Theory and Design
12
3.1
Motor fundamentals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.1
Structure of a BLDC motor: Stator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
Structure of a BLDC motor: Rotor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Sensors and Sensorless . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
BLDC motor driver system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Control Strategies and System level design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.1
BLDC Motor driver with PID Controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.2
Filed-Oriented Control (FOC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Motor driver circuit design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.1
Gate driver selection and its circuit design & simulation . . . . . .
40
3.4.2
Inverter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4.3
Decoupling capacitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.4.4
Consideration of design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Circuit simulation
54
4.1
Power stage of motor driver circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
Buck converter simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Hardware Implementation
62
5.1
Components selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2
PCB design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3
Hardware assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
6
==PAGE:7==
6
Hardware testing and verification
73
6.1
Buck converter output voltage verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2
Mosfet switching testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.3
Three phase output voltage and current verification
. . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.3.1
Square wave pwm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.3.2
Sine wave pwm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
6.4
Thermal performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
References
102
A Appendix A: circuit calculation in maple
103
B Appendix B: Shunt resistors calculation in maple
116
C Appendix C: Motor driver circuit in LTspice
118
D Appendix D: Buck converter circuit in LTspice
119
E Appendix E:Simulink model
120
F Appendix F:Simulinl model2
121
G Appendix G:PCB layout
123
H Appendix H:BOM RS and mouser
124
7
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Nowadays, the demand for renewable energy has been increasing, thus sustainable trans-
portation has made innovation in electric vehicle (EV) technology. Solar car, in partic-
ular.
The thesis I decided to work with was inspired by DTU Solar Car team. The team
started on a project to develop a solar powered vehicle, therefore, as part of this program,
they provided a chance to design and implement a high power motor driver, the project
aligns with my interest in power electronics and motor control systems, so I chose to
work with the project.
The initial problem addressed in this thesis is the design of a high power motor
driver that is capable of meeting the demanding requirements of the solar car. Such as
the motor speed controller can be able to fulfill the basic functionality, and handle high
power. The challenges make the project technically and practically important, as it is
part of solar car system.
1.2
Objectives
Designing, implementing, and verifying a high power motor driver is the object of this
thesis. This work can be divided into the following steps.
First, design a motor driver that can handle voltage up to 120V DC and current up
to as high as possible depending on what Mosfet can be purchased.
And learning some control strategies, for instance, Field-Oriented Control (FOC) or
six-step commutation, which can achieve an efficient operation for the BLDC motor and
will be studied in a later section of the thesis.
Next, build a simulation model using tools of Simulink to simulate system level design
by applying FOC commutation control strategy and Six step commutation.
Then design and select components, and use LTspice tool to simulate the circuit level
design get the output results of the three phase motor driver, and validate it against
experimental results.
And Next create a printed circuit board (PCB) layout that considers factors such as
thermal management, signal integrity, minimizing impedance and parasitic capacitance.
Assemble the hardware part by soldering every component manually.
Eventually, performance testing and validation, connecting the motor driver to RL
load and performing a series of tests to evaluate the performance.
1.3
Scope
Design, implementation, and validation of a three phase BLDC high power motor driver
are what this thesis is going to show.
However, this thesis does not address the design and optimization of the BLDC
Motor itself, the focus remains on the motor driver.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
8
==PAGE:9==
The thesis is about designing the power stage of hardware and control algorithms
but it does not focus on the programming of the controller, for example, microcontroller.
Instead, the controller is treated as a functional block with capabilities for PWM gener-
ation, signal processing, and communication.
At the same time, the thesis does not focus on thermal management solutions such
as liquid cooling, as air cooling suffices for the current application.
1.4
Summary
There are several chapters. The contents are structured as follows:
Chapter 1: Introduction. This chapter outlines the motivation for the project, the
work that needs to be done of the thesis, and its scope.
Chapter 2: Literature Review. A review of existing motor driver technologies and
their applications in electric vehicles. This chapter also discusses BLDC motor control
methods, it mentions Field-Oriented Control (FOC). As well as the simulation methods,
the importance of pcb layout and real world performance testing.
Chapter 3: Theory and Design. This chapter shows the theory and design of the
motor driver(motor speed controller), it contains the control strategies and simulation in
Simulink, the gate driver circuit design, inverter stage design, and circuit consideration.
Chapter 4: Motor driver circuit simulation. This chapter shows the results of motor
driver circuit simulation in LTspice and its discussion.
Chapter 5: Hardware Implementation. This chapter contains how some key compo-
nents are selected, PCB design and its consideration, and hardware assembly including
the mechanical design part.
Chapter 6: Hardware testing and verification. This chapter presents the motor driver
testing results by dividing the testing process into different steps.
9
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:10==
2
Literature Review
In today’s electronics systems, the development of three phase Brushless DC (BLDC)
motor drivers is important. Especially for some applications that need high efficiency
and accurate motor control. There are a lot of areas like motor control algorithms, power
electronics circuit design in the literature.
2.1
Overview of BLDC Motor Characteristics and Control Require-
ments
BLDC motor’s advantages are higher efficiency, better speed control, and longer life use.
However, BLDC motors require a more advanced control system, typically a three phase
inverter and its corresponding driver circuits, to ensure correct commutation and good
operation.
The control of BLDC motors is often achieved by detecting the rotor position, ei-
ther through sensor based or sensorless methods. Sensor based control needs hall effect
sensors or encoders to provide rotor position feedback to the controller, while sensor-
less methods detect position from back-electromotive force (back-EMF) measurements.
Thus, when deciding how to control bldc motor can make a difference in the complexity,
cost, and performance of drivers.
2.2
Power Electronics and Circuit Design for BLDC Motor Drivers
The core of a BLDC motor driver is the power electronics circuitry that includes a three
phase inverter stage.
The inverter typically uses MOSFETs or Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistors (IGBTs)
to switch high currents and voltages efficiently. A lot of research focuses mainly on how
to reduce switching losses and improve the thermal performance of driver circuit.
When designing the power stage, one challenge is that the circuit and components
should handle the high current and voltage requirements, therefore the selection of main
components decides how much voltage and current the circuit can handle.
Different inverter circuit topologies, such as full bridge and half bridge configurations,
are studied very often in the literature. Full bridge inverters, for instance, are known
for their higher control flexibility, but the complexity of design will also be increased. In
addition, inductance and capacitance affect parasitics.
2.3
Control Strategies for BLDC Motor Drivers
One of the main steps in BLDC motor driver design is how to implement a control
strategy. A commonly used approach is Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) control, where
the duty cycle of the applied voltage is modulated to control motor speed and torque.
People have come up with many modulation techniques for example sinusoidal PWM
and trapezoidal PWM.
If the purpose of control strategy requires the best performance. A control tech-
nique called Field-Oriented Control (FOC) is introduced, which has been used for high
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
10
==PAGE:11==
performance BLDC applications. FOC uses mathematical transformations to separate
the control of torque and magnetic flux so that there is a more accurate control of the
motor’s operation in the motor driver. FOC provides better motor control but FOC also
needs more complex commutation.
2.4
Simulation and Modeling in BLDC Driver Design
Simulation is one of the steps in the design and development of BLDC motor drivers.
Simulation tools such as MATLAB/Simulink, and LTspice allow people to model the
whole control system and the power stage circuit of motor driver, analyze switching
behavior, and test control strategies in a virtual environment.
Using these tools when designing the circuit is that they provide a way to verify
designs before actually making hardware prototypes.
Therefore this thesis is also going to implement this step.
2.5
PCB Design and Layout for BLDC Motor Drivers
Printed Circuit Board (PCB) design is also important during the development of motor
driver. The physical layout of the components on the PCB directly affects motor driver’s
performance, and electromagnetic compatibility (EMC).
People also focus on how to make PCB layout better to reduce impedance and
inductance, select the proper trace thickness for high current path, and ensure correct
thermal dissipation for components like Mosfet and gate driver.
Some research shows that when doing the PCB layout of motor driver circuit, trying
to use advanced PCB materials, multi-layer designs, and heat sinks can improve thermal
management.
2.6
Performance Testing and Validation
After the design and hardware assembly step, performance testing is also important
to validate the BLDC motor driver in real world conditions. Some important factors
are identified by literature for testing, for example, switching behavior and its losses,
thermal performance, and response to fault conditions.
There has been a lot of research that shows efficiency of BLDC motor drivers can
be improved by reducing switching losses and selecting better power stage components.
Additionally, circuit protection features are also being used when designing circuits, for
example, there are some gate driver that has overcurrent protection and fault detection.
2.7
Conclusion
Starting from this literature review will guide the proposed thesis to design a three phase
BLDC motor driver, and the thesis work involves system simulation, circuit design,
circuit simulation, PCB layout, and hardware verification.
11
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:12==
3
Theory and Design
This section explains the structure of a BLDC motor and what a general system of motor
driver is. It will also discuss the principles and methods on how to operate Brushless
DC (BLDC) motors.
3.1
Motor fundamentals
The BLDC motor consists of two primary components which are the Stator and the
Rotor[1], and each one of them has its functionality during the motor’s operation, to
ensure energy conversion and accurate motor control.
3.1.1
Structure of a BLDC motor: Stator
Stator forms the stationary part of the motor and is responsible for generating the
rotating magnetic field that drives the rotor. Its main component is Windings.
For windings, the stator windings are made of copper coils and can be arranged in
one of two configurations[1]:
Star (Y) Configuration: In this arrangement, one end of each winding is connected
together and create a common neutral point.
Delta (∆) Configuration: In this setup, the windings are connected in a closed loop.
3.1.2
Structure of a BLDC motor: Rotor
Rotor is the rotating component of the motor and it contains the permanent magnets
that can be able to interact with the magnetic field generated by the stator.
3.1.3
Sensors and Sensorless
Hall Effect Sensors or Sensorless operation, for hall effect sensors, these sensors detect the
magnetic field of the rotor’s permanent magnets to determine its position[2]. Typically,
three Hall sensors are placed 120° apart around the stator.
In sensorless configurations, rotor position is estimated using the motor’s back-EMF
(electromotive force). This approach does not require sensors, however, it may have
challenges at low speeds where back-EMF is weak.
3.2
BLDC motor driver system
The motor driver known as motor speed controller, which belongs to the category of
Electronic Speed Controller, it tells the motor how fast to drive according to signals
received from the controller.
The motor driver manages the flow of power between the power supply and the
motor. Through generating timed electrical pulses, it can control the rotation and speed
of the motor. Through its switching pattern, it converts the direct current supplied by
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
12
==PAGE:13==
the power supply into a three phase oscillating current, which is then delivered to drive
the motor.
A typical motor driver system contains a controller, gate driver, and inverter circuit.
Controller can send signals to gate driver and achieve the command that is needed as
well as track the position of motor. Gate driver can receive a low voltage signal from the
controller, make the signal amplified, and then it delivers a high voltage signal to the
inverter. The inverter consists of mosfets which are switches that give motor the power
it needs.
3.3
Control Strategies and System level design
For a better understanding of how motor driver works with motor, in this section, I will
discuss the system level design of motor speed controller by firstly using PID controller
to achieve motor speed controller system in simulink, and secondly using Filed-Oriented
Control (FOC) method in simulink.
3.3.1
BLDC Motor driver with PID Controller
The PID controller is used to regulate the motor speed by continuously comparing
the actual value (measured by a sensor or estimated via back-EMF) with the desired
speed(reference speed) and adjusting the control output.
Figure 1: Motor driver with hall effect sensor
Figure 1 shows the system of motor driver with hall effect sensor by using PID
controller, from left to right which indicates a control system that contains a controller,
inverter and motor. Notice that there is no gate driver due to the focus of this section
being how control algorithms work and assuming the pwm signals generated by controller
are a perfect gate driver for ideal switches.
Here is the breakdown of the control system below.
A PID controller is a control loop feedback mechanism. It continuously calculates an
error value as the difference between a reference motor speed and an actual motor speed
13
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:14==
that is feedback from sensors and then applies correct actions based on proportional,
integral, and derivative terms.
The standard mathematical representation of a PID controller is [3]:
u(t) = Kp · e(t) + Ki ·
Z t
0
e(t) dt + Kd · de(t)
dt
(1)
Where
u(t) = Control output (PWM signal to the motor driver)
e(t) = Error at time t (difference between desired speed and actual motor speed)
Kp = Proportional gain (Provides immediate response proportional to the error. It
adjusts the motor speed based on the current deviation.)
Ki = Integral gain (Eliminates steady-state error by accumulating past errors.)
Kd = Derivative gain (Predicts future error based on the rate of error change and
reduces overshoot.)
The manual way on how to tune the parameters P, I, D. Start with I = 0 and D = 0.
Adjust the P value, increase the proportional gain until the system responds quickly but
without excessive oscillation. Then tune the I value, slowly increase the integral gain to
eliminate steady-state error. Finally adjust the D value, increase the derivative gain to
reduce overshoot and oscillations.
Overall, PID controller’s primary function is speed regulation.
A square wave generator is used in the simulink model. Square wave generator and
PID controller output pass through a relational operator for comparing the control signal
with a reference value, the result of the comparison is a logical signal (1 or 0), which
forms the PWM signal to drive the gate of the inverter. For example, if PID controller
output is greater than pwm generator Signal, the relational operator outputs 1, turning
the gate of the mosfet ON.
Furthermore, the AND gate ensures that the PWM signal is only passed to the
inverter when the commutation logic enables the phase, for example, if the commutation
logic block output pin1 = 1 and the PWM signal is 1, then the AND gate outputs H1=1,
turning ON the high side mosfet for Phase A. If commutation logic block output pin1 =
0, the AND gate outputs H1=0 regardless of the PWM signal, ensuring Phase A is not
energized.
The purpose of using NOT gates gate is to be sure that the same phase’s the high
side mosfet and low side mosfet will not be turned on at the same time to prevent the
shoot through also known as a short circuit that can damage the whole circuit.
A DC voltage source provides a constant voltage to the three phase inverter, which
converts the DC power to three phase currents to energize motor, the inverter topology
will be discussed in a later section.
For the setting of Permanent Magnet Synchronous Machine shown in figure 2, back
emf form set as trapezoidal indicates a bldc motor.
‘Figure 3 shows the commutation block of six step commutation. The logic circuit
shows input signals A,B,C from hall effect sensors that determine rotor’s position in bldc
motor.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
14
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2: Motor block in simluink
Figure 3: Six-step commutation block
AND Gate 1, Input 1 is the Hall signal from Phase A. Input 2 is the inverted Hall
signal from Phase B.
AND Gate 2, Input 1 is the Hall signal from Phase B. Input 2 is the inverted Hall
signal from Phase C.
AND Gate 3, Input 1 is the Hall signal from Phase C. Input 2 is the Inverted Hall
signal from Phase A.
The inverters (NOT gates) create complementary signals of the Hall inputs.
The outputs of the three AND gates are fed back to the outside control system. And
outputs 1,2,3 are used to generate the six control signals H1, L1, H2, L2, H3, L3 for the
gates of inverter.
Therefore, the circuit implements the six step commutation logic for the BLDC
motor. The rule of six step commutation for BLDC Motor is that in a three phase BLDC
motor, only two phases are active at any moment, while the third phase is unenergized.
Further explaination is that six step commutation process involves energizing one phase
to a high state (H1, H2, or H3), at the same time energizing another phase to a low
15
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:16==
state (L1, L2, or L3), and leaving the third phase floating.
This requires detecting the rotor position (via hall sensors) and generating the correct
control signals. Each Hall signal indicates the state of one phase. The NOT gates ensure
that the correct complementary signal is used. The AND gates ensure that only the
desired combination of high and low states is output based on the rotor’s position.
The commutation block allows, firstly, AND Gate 1 output a signal only when Phase
A is active and Phase B is inactive,
Secondly, AND Gate 2 is active when Phase B is active, and Phase C is inactive.
Thirdly, AND Gate 3 outputs a signal when Phase C is active, and Phase A is
inactive.
Every NOT gate ensures that three AND gates receive the inverted signal to ensure
proper logic.
For example, Hall signals: A = 1, B = 0, C = 1 (Rotor Position Step 1)
AND Gate 1: Input 1: A = 1. Input 2: NOT(B) = 1. Output = 1 (Phase A active).
AND Gate 2: Input 1: B = 0. Input 2: NOT(C) = 0. Output = 0 (Phase B inactive).
AND Gate 3: Input 1: C = 1.
Input 2: NOT(A) = 0.
Output = 0 (Phase C
inactive).
Output are Phase A = High (H1). Phase B = Low (L2). Phase C = Floating.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
16
==PAGE:17==
After running the simulation, we can see that the plot of three phases hall effect
signal shown on figure 4. All three signals are square waves. The signals have a 50%
duty cycle, which is expected for Hall effect signals. The signals are shifted relative to
each other, with each signal leading or delaying by 120 electrical degrees (1/3 of the
electrical cycle).
Figure 4: Three phases hall effect signal
17
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:18==
Voltage measurement of three phase shown on figure 5 we can see that the max and
min voltage are 120 volts and -120 volts same as the dc voltage supply value of 120 volts.
Waveforms oscillates between high(+120V), low (−120V), and intermediate states (0V).
The waveforms are square shaped, which is typical for a six step commutation drive and
the signals are shifted by 120◦relative to each other when one waveform is at its positive
peak (+120V), the next waveform starts transitioning state(0V), and the third is at its
negative peak (−120V).
Figure 5: Voltage of three phases
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
18
==PAGE:19==
Figure 6 shows the current measurement, current value is constant because the con-
troller signal is square wave PWM signal that generates a constant voltage pulse with a
fixed duty cycle for a given phase, by using ohm’s law
V
RL, the current can be calculated
as a constant value eventually.
There is also a small spike current during the start of the motor.
The noise in current plot due to current measurement filter is not sufficient, it could
be fix by adding RC filter.
And the reason of low value of current beacause of the realtion between motor torque
and current [4] shown in equation 2, and figure 7 shows the torque plot of motor, therefore
small value of torque leads to small value of current.
Torque = kt × current
(2)
where ktis the motor torque coefficient
Figure 6: Current measurement of three phases
19
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:20==
Figure 7: Torque plot of motor
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
20
==PAGE:21==
Finally, figure 8 shows the speed of the rotor whose stable value is 20 rad/s after
initial oscillation, which is the same as the reference speed value.
Figure 8: Rotor speed
21
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:22==
3.3.2
Filed-Oriented Control (FOC)
Field-Oriented Control, also known as vector control[5], it is an advanced method in
controlling BLDC motors.
Unlike six step commutation, FOC generates sinusoidal
waveforms and dynamically controls the motor’s electromagnetic field.
In the thesis
only sensor based FOC also know as Indirect FOC (IFOC) simulink will be introduced.
Based on [6], the motor speed controller simulink models below are modified.
Figure 9: BLDC motor speed controller using IFOC
Figure 9 shows that a system of a motor speed controller using IFOC. There are
reference speed block, controller block, plant(system) block including inverter and motor
model, and comparison block which will display the comparison of reference speed and
measured speed.
Working princlpe: FOC requires converting the three phase motor currents (A, B,
C) to a two axis system (d, q) using Clarke and Park transforms.
Clarke Transform: Convert three phase currents (IA, IB, IC) into two elements (Iα,
Iβ) in the stationary reference frame.
Park Transform: Convert (Iα, Iβ) to (Id, Iq) using the rotor’s electrical angle. This
converts the currents to the rotating reference frame.
In the rotating reference frame, control the current along the d-axis (Id) and q-axis
(Iq) using two independent PI controllers . The d-axis typically controls the flux, and
the q-axis controls the torque, which corresponds to the speed of the motor.
Once the controlled Id and Iq currents from the PI controllers are generated, convert
them back to three phase voltages using inverse Park Transform: Convert Id, Iq back
to Iα, Iβ and inverse Clarke Transform will convert Iα, Iβ back to three phase voltages
(VA, VB, VC).
Figure 10 shows the Inverter stage and motor model, as well as its measurements.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
22
==PAGE:23==
Figure 10: Inverter and motor
Figure 11: Controller Block
Figure 12: Park Transformation
23
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:24==
Figure 13: Speed controller
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
24
==PAGE:25==
Figure 11, Figure 12 and Figure 13 show how to build blocks with FOC control
strategy, firstly, measured current Iabc from PMSM(motor) and converted to (d,q) frame
by Park-Clarke transformation, at the same time the measured rotor position is applied
to measured currents to transform them into the d-q frame for control purpose.
The measured speed from motor goes to the speed controller by using a PI controller,
which will output current Iq ref, Id ref is set to zero because the desired speed can be
lower than the nominal speed of motor.
Figure 14: Current controller Id and Iq
Then, two currents Id and Iq go to PI controller, compare with Idref, Iqref and export
two stator voltages Vdref, Vqref shown in figure 14
Figure 15: Inverse park Transformation
Two stator voltages Vdref, Vqref go to inverse Park-Clark transformation, which
gives out three phase voltages Vabc shown in figure 15.
At the same time the measured rotor position being feedback to Inverse Park-Clarke
block which is essential to generate appropriate PWM signals to drive the inverter based
25
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:26==
on the control effort.
Figure 16: PWM block
After that, Vabc go to PWM block, generate PWM pulse to 6 gates of Mosfets of
the Inverter block shown in figure 16
The gain of 1/(Vdc/2) after Vabc is used to normalize the voltage commands for
the PWM generator because of PWM generator typically expects input values that are
normalized within the range of [-1,1] due to the use of 2 level PWM, the reason 2 level
PWM is used because in a 2 level inverter, each output phase can be connected to either
the high side(+Vdc) or low side(0/-Vdc) that are two levels.
And the actual phase voltages Vabc generated by the control system are typically in
the range of [-Vdc/2,+Vdc/2].
Therefore, when Vabc=+Vdc/2, through a gain block of
1
V dc
2
the normalized input
becomes +1, when Vabc=-Vdc/2, the normalized input will always be -1, in this case,
the low side Mosfets of inverter connected to ground, thus it will be 0V when low side
is on.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
26
==PAGE:27==
Before running the simulation, there are some parameters need to be calculated
and obtained, such as the Proportional term parameter and Integral term parameter of
three PI controllers, the number of pole pairs of motor, switching frequency, and rotating
speed.
First, from motor 7040/16 datasheet that is being used by Solar car team, shown
on figure 17 below, the parameter KV can be obtained as 126, therefore the maximum
motor rotating speed can be calculated below:
Rotatingspeed = DCvoltage × KV = 120V × 126 = 15120RPM
(3)
By knowing the maximum motor rotating speed and motor pole pairs, fundamental
frequency can be now calculated:
Ff = RPM × polepairs
60
= 15120 × 10
60
= 2520Hz
(4)
Thus fundamental frequency of 2.5khz can be obtained, Switching frequency of at
least 25KHz need to be chosen due to consideration of sufficiency.
27
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:28==
Figure 17: Motor datasheet
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
28
==PAGE:29==
Figure 18: Motor simulink block
29
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:30==
When creating the Simluink motor mode, parameters of motor should be filled up,
as shown in figure 18.
First, Phase resitance Rs needs to be calculated, by reading the motor datasheet
shown in figure 17, Internal resistance (Ri) calue can be read as 24.7 mΩwhich is also
the line to line resistance.
Rs = Rlinetoline
2
= 12.35mΩ
(5)
Then Phase inductance Ls can be obtained from manufacturer which is 8.5 mH
Next parameter is flux linkage λ, according to [7] by using formula:
λ =
Vrated
Speedrated
(6)
Where rated voltage is 88.8V according to datasheet, and rated speed according to
datasheet is chosen of 10462 rpm due to nominal speed reason, then convert rated speed
to angular speed by using:
ωrated = 2 × π × 10462rpm
60
= 1095.57rad/s
(7)
Therefore by using formula 6, the flux linkage λ can be calculated as 0.0832 rad/s
Eventually inertia, viscous damping, pole pairs and static friction need to be clarify.
Inertia (J) refers to the motor’s rotational movement. It depends on the distributed
mass and geometry of the rotating components [8]by using formula:
J = 1
2 × m × r2
(8)
Where m is mass of rotor(kg), r is radius of the rotor(m), according to website of
motor, the weight is 1.5 kg and radius of rotor is 0.0225m shown in figure 19, thus inertia
J is calculated as 3.8 ×10−4kg · m2
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
30
==PAGE:31==
Figure 19: Schematic of rotor [9]
Next Viscous damping coefficient Dm need to be calculated, when calculate Viscous
damping coefficient, Damping Torque Td is introduced, In systems with viscous damping,
Td is proportional to the angular velocity ω, as shown in [10, page 189, Eq. (2.101)]
Td = −ct × θ
(9)
Where −ct is viscous damping coefficient indicates parameter Dm from motor block,
and θ is angular velocity indicates angular speed ω that is calculated in equation 7.
Thus it can be rewritten as
Td = Dm × ω
(10)
According to [11] power loss due to viscous damping is given by:
Ploss = Td × ω
(11)
Combine equation 10 and equation 11, Viscous damping coefficient Dm can be cal-
culated as:
Dm = Ploss
ω2
(12)
From motor datasheet, at 10,462 RPM, power loss information can be obtained shown
in table 1.
31
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:32==
Table 1: Power and Efficiency Data
Input power
Pin = 3686.98 W
Efficiency
η = 91.7%
Output power
Pout = 3380.77 W
Power loss
Ploss = 306.2 W
Therefore by using equation 12, Dm can be calculated as 2.55×10−4Nm · s/rad.
Pole pairs is 10 and static friction set to 0 to make system behaves more linearly and
it is easy to analyze abd design.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
32
==PAGE:33==
From the previous calculation, all motor’s parameters are cleared, and they can be
written in Matlab script section, as shown in figure 20,
Figure 20: Motor data in matlab
And the parameters of inverter stage shown in figure 21, the sampling time can
be calculated by using equation 13, because for accurate current and speed control, the
sampling time must be much smaller than the switching time which means that sampling
time is made 100 times faster than the switching time.
Ts =
1
fc × 100
(13)
Figure 21: Inverter parameter in matlab
Next, the values of Ki and Kp of two current controllers need to be calculated,
thus firstly, both values are related to target time constant τ of a control system that
defines how quickly the system responds to changes [12], and τ is typically related to
the bandwidth or crossover frequency of the control loop as follows:
33
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:34==
τ =
1
ωcc
(14)
τ is also related motor’s electrical time constant τe need to use, which defines how
quickly the current reaches its steady state when a voltage is applied [13]. According to
[13]. It can be calculated as:
τe = Ls
Rs = 0.688s
(15)
And the current control loop is designed to be much faster than the motor’s natural
electrical response. A common way is to set the current loop time constant τ to be
normally 10 times smaller than motor’s nature(electrical) time constant that is calculated
in equation 15. In my case it needs to be 100 times smaller for speed to reach to the
desired speed.
Therefore
τ = τe
100 = 0.00688s
(16)
According to equaiton 14 crossover frequency can be calculated as 147, and the actual
value used as ωcc = 170
According to [14, page 409, Eq. (39, 40)] Kp, and Ki can be calculated by using
equation 17 and equation 18
Kp = L × bandwidth
(17)
Where L=Ls, and bandwidth indicates crossover frequency ωcc
Ki = R
L
(18)
Where R=Rs
Therefore current controller parameters can be written in matlab shown in figure 22
Figure 22: Current controller in matlab
Eventually, parameters of speed controller need to be clarify, and speed controller
related to motor’s mechanical system, thus, firstly, time constant need to be calculated.
In mechanical equation, torque drop is promotional speed derivative times Jm( Mo-
ment of inertia of the motor’s rotor) while Dm or B (viscous Damping coefficient) pro-
vides such drop only as proportional to speed[15], therefore, the time constant of motor
mechanical system is calculated by using equation 19
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
34
==PAGE:35==
τm = Jm
Dm
(19)
Where Jm and Dm are calculated previously.
And the target response time constant is chosen 330 times faster than motor me-
chanical system’s time constant in my case for the final speed to reach the desired speed,
and the crossover frequency can be calculated as:
ωcs =
1
τtarget
(20)
Similar to how ki and kp of current controller are calculated, ki and kp of speed
controller can be obtained, and parameters of speed controller can be written in matlab
shown in figure 23
Figure 23: Speed controller parameters in matlab
Eventually, the motor speed controller by using IFOC simulink model can be simu-
lated.
Here a step signal block is being used to generate a reference motor speed shown
in figure 24, the final value is 10462 rpm, and through a gain block of 2×π
60
converter
parameter in RPM to parameter in rad/s.
When plotting the speed measure result, unit rad/s needs to convert back to RPM
again, block shown in figure 25
Figure 24: Reference speed generator block
35
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:36==
Figure 25: Speed measurement block
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
36
==PAGE:37==
Figure 26: Plot of measured speed
Figure 26 shows the plot of the measured speed compared to the reference speed.
Where blue is the target speed, and red plot is measured speed.
Initially, there is a large overshoot in the speed. After the overshoot, the motor
speed shows oscillations, which slowly decay over time, and eventually it is stable near
reference speed.
The initial overshoot might be due to a large control gain in the speed PI controller,
and high proportional or integral gains can also result in a faster response but it will
cause overshoot.
The oscillations might be due to system inertia not properly accounted for in the
controller tuning or high PI controller gains.
37
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:38==
Figure 27: Three phase voltage measurement
Figure 27 shows the voltage measurement of three phase inverter, each phase volt-
age appears as a square wave signal that oscillates between positive(+120 volts) and
negative(-120 volts) voltage levels
And the modulation leads to phase voltages generating sine waves with 120° phase
shifts from phase to phase.
The sine wave like plot is because the dc voltage is modulated to produce sinusoidal
phase voltage by using FOC control algorithm
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
38
==PAGE:39==
Figure 28: Three phase current measurement
Figure28 shows the three phase current measurement.
The current is stabilizes after some time and shows significant ripple at high frequency
which because of high switching frequency of the PWM signals and signal filtering is not
perfect.
The sinusoidal nature indicates transformation between the dq and abc reference
frames and there is phase shift between the waveforms
Current value is small because of small torque, which shows in figure 29
Figure 29: FOC torque of motor
39
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:40==
3.4
Motor driver circuit design
This section elaborates on the key components such as gate driver, bootstrap compo-
nents, decoupling capacitors, design considerations of the gate driver circuit, and inverter
topology with its circuit design. And in later section will contain the circuit simulation
in LTspice.
3.4.1
Gate driver selection and its circuit design & simulation
Because of the design specifications, the motor should be able to handle high side floating
voltage at least 120 volts and drive three phase inverter.
Therefore the gate driver is chosen Infineon IR2130J[16], the output channels can
be used to drive N-channel power Mosfets in the high side configuration which operate
up to 600 volts. The inverter topology is full-bridge, which provides full control over all
three phases of a three-phase motor.[16]
Additionally, IR2130J has overcurrent protection configuration and shoot-through
protection which can make driver circuit operate safely without damaging the circuit if
high side and low side mosfet of one phase being turned on at the same time.
IR2130J symbol schematic shown in figure 30, its lead definitions shown in table 2
and its funcitonal block diagram shown in figure 31
Table 2: Lead definitions
Symbol
Description
HIN1,2,3
Logic inputs for high side gate driver outputs (HO1,2,3), out
of phase
LIN1,2,3
Logic inputs for low side gate driver outputs (LO1,2,3), out
of phase
FAULT
Indicates over-current or undervoltage lockout (low side) has
occurred, negative logic
VCC
Low side and logic fixed supply
ITRIP
Input for over-current shutdown
CAO
Output of current amplifier
CA-
Negative input of current amplifier
VSS
Logic ground
VB1,2,3
High side floating supplies
HO1,2,3
High side gate drive outputs
VS1,2,3
High side floating supply returns
LO1,2,3
Low side gate drive outputs
VS0
Low side return and positive input of current amplifier
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
40
==PAGE:41==
Figure 30: IR2130J symbol schematic
41
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:42==
Figure 31: Functional block diagram
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
42
==PAGE:43==
Each pin of IR2130J design explanation will be introduced in order based on the
schematic.
Firstly, pin 3 Vcc, it is recommended that a 1 µF bypass capacitor be used for now
at the stage of design and simulation, it prevents noise from entering the system by
bypassing it to the ground. For the actual capacitance of bypass capacitor used in real-
world hardware test will be discussed later. Therefore the bypass capacitor is connected
between Vcc pin of gate driver and circuit ground.
Pins 3,4,5 HIN123 are used for controller to send signals that control high side mosfets
on and off of the inverter stage. They are connected to a connector that can interact
with controller.
Pins 8,9,10 LIN123 are used for controller to send signals that control low side mosfets
on and off of the inverter stage. They are also connected to a connectot that can interact
with controller.
Pin 12 Fault pin for detecting overcurrent and under voltage, it is connected to a
connector.
Pin 14 ITRIP is used for over current protection, once it detects an over current event
through the ITRIP pin ,the outputs are shut down. According to the datasheet[16], the
how much current at which the over current protection is initiated is determined by the
resistor network shown in figure 32, the relation between three resistors are are shown
in equation 21
[VIT,TH+ = R0IDC −
 R1

(R1 + R2)

]
(21)
Where VIT,TH+ is over-current threshold voltage which is 0.5V according to datasheet,
IDC is the maximum current that shunt resistor R0 will draw, in my design which is
130A maximum(based on the selection of Mosfet), R1 connected between ground and
ITRIP pin, R2 connected between ITRIP pin and COM pin(source of low side Mosfets)
Shunt resistor R0 can be calculated using equation 22
R0 = VIT,TH+
Idc
= 0.0038Ω
(22)
Where Idc is max(peak) current that is 130Amps.
And power dissipation can be calculated by using equaiton 23
P0 = I2
rms × R0 × margin = 80W
(23)
Where Irms is max current, margin choose as 1.2 for safety reason.
R1 is chosen as 1200Ω, by using equaiton 21, R2 can be calculated as 15Ω
Overall, R1=1200Ω, R=151200Ω, and R0=0.0038Ω
43
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:44==
Figure 32: ITRIP pin typical connection from datasheet
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
44
==PAGE:45==
Pin 16 CAO, Pin 18 CA- and Pin 22 VSO together are used for DC-bus current
sensing circuit shown in figure 33, and the circut design of pins are according to design
tip 92-6[17].
From datasheet of IR2130J, the data below can be obtained
VS(positive input of current amplifier): -5 to 5 A;
VCA-(Amplifier negative input Voltage): 0 to 5 A;
VCAO(Amplifier Output Voltage): 0 to 5 A;
ISRC(Amplifier Output Source Current):2.3 mA;
ISINK(Amplifier Output sink Current): 1mA;
Therefore the ouput current limlt is 1mA, and R2 is limited to 47Ω, based on DT92-6,
The 1mA current limit sets a minimum for the resistance sum R1 + R2.[17] This limit
is defined by:
Ilimit = VCAO(max)
R1 + R2
(24)
Therefore R1+R2 can be calculated as:
5V
1mA = 5kΩ
(25)
R2 limited to 47Ωthen R1 lager than 4953Ωso here we choose R1 as 5kΩ,
Thus R1 feedback resitor is 47Ω, R2 input resistor is 5kΩ.
45
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:46==
Figure 33: Current sensing typical configuration [16]
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
46
==PAGE:47==
Pin 23,24,25 LO123 are low side output pins connected to the gates of low side
Mosfets.
Pin 29,30,31 together works as a bootstrap circuit for phase C high side Mosfet,
similarly, Pin 35,36,37 and Pin 41,42,43 are bootstrap circuits work for high side Mosfets
of phase B and phase A respectively.
VS pins are high side floating power supply returns that are connected to bootstrap
capacitors and motor driver three phases output.
HO pins are gate driver high side output, they are connected to the high side gate
of Mosfets
VB pins are high side floating power supply that are connected to bootstrap capaci-
tors.
Therefore, bootstrap is one of the most important design step for both gate driver and
inverter stage.
The reason why the bootstrap circuit needs to be introduced is that, firstly, there is
a PIN called VCC on the gate driver which is specified as low side supply for gate driver,
which means that Vcc(15V) is supplied to power the internal logic of the gate driver and
to drive the low side MOSFETs. However, Vcc pin does not power the internal logic
of gate driver so it can not driver high side Mosfets, therefore, the gate charge of high
side Mosfets are provided by the external supply circuit which is Bootstrap circuit often
consists of bootstrap diode and bootstrap capacitor.
Next step is to select a proper bootstrap diode that has short recovery time since the
circuit switching frequency is 25kHz. The purpose of using diodes as part of bootstrap
circuit is to allow the capacitor to charge when the low side Mosfets is on and prevent
reverse current from discharging bootstrap capacitors back into Vcc or low side circuit
when low side Mosfet is off.
Therefore VISHAY UF4004[18] is selected with 50ns recovery time, 400V reverse
voltage and 1A forward current.
Finally is to size the bootstrap capacitor based on Infineon design tip 04-4[19].
The first step is to be sure that when high side mosfets are on, voltage drop between
capacitor (∆VBS) is minimum. Since the minimum gate source voltage VGSmin should
be kept, the voltage drop according to design tip must be:
∆VBS < Vcc −VF −VGSmin −VDSon
(26)
Under condition VGSmin > VBSUV −
Where Vcc=15V,
VF is bootstrap diode forward voltage which is 1V
VBSUV −is VBS supply undervoltage negative going threshold which is 8.8V
VGSmin is minimum gate source voltage of Mosfet, chosen as 10V
VDSon is drain source voltage of low side Mosfet
The Mosfet used is IPF067N20NM6[20] (Reason of selection will be discussed later).
When doing the calculation of VDSon, from IPF067N20NM6 datahsheet Diagram 6 shown
in figure 34, VGS is 15V which should be close to Vcc and Id is 130 A which is maximum
47
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:48==
current, Rds(on) is read as 5mΩ, Vds(on) can be calculated as:
VDSon = RDS(On) × ID
(27)
Figure 34: Rds(on)
Next is to consider what can affect VBS to decrease, according to the design tip, the
factors are:
QTOT = QG + QLS +
 ILK Gs + IQBS + ILK + ILK DIODE + ILK CAP + IDS

× THON (28)
Where QG is gate charge of mosfet,
QLS is charge required by the internal level shifters of mosfet
ILK GS is gate source leakage current of mosfet
IQBS is floating section quiescent current of gate driver,
ILK is Floating section leakage current of gate driver,
ILK DIODE is Bootstrap diode leakage current,
ILK CAP is equal to 0 since ceramic capacitor is being used as bootstrap capacitor,
IDS is Logic “0” Input Bias Current (OUT = LO) according to gate driver datasheet
THON is High side on time
Therefore minimum bootstrap capacitor value can be calculated by using formula 29
that is combined with equation 26 and equation 28:
CBootstrap ≥QTOT
∆VBS
= 2.956390977 × 10−8F
(29)
And value of 30nF(0.03 µF) bootstrap capacitor is selected for theoretical design.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
48
==PAGE:49==
3.4.2
Inverter
As being mentioned before, the topology of inverter is full bridge, and it is to convert
DC power to drive a three phase motor. The consideration of selecting Mosfet should
contain that it is N-channel Mosfet which compiles with gate driver, DC bus voltage
should be above 120 volts, and with low gate charge that can fit into high frequency
switching like 25KHz.
Therefore IPF067N20NM6 from Infineon is being selected since its ds voltage is
200V, and its Max ID current is 138A so the maximum dc current for motor driver can
be chosen as 130A
The main design of inverter is Mosfet gate resistor and pull down resistors for low
side mosfet.
First of all, the reason a gate resistor need is to protect the low current device like
gate driver, because when the gate to source of mosfet is like a capacitor when the mosfet
turned on there will be much current that is drawn, so the gate resistor can limit the
current.
Therefore when size the gate resistor, it depends on the gate charge of mosfet because
there should be enough current that flows through the gate to source of Mosfet for it to
be turned on properly and fully. Due to basic electrical principles:
I = dQ
dt
(30)
Where Q is charge, t is time and I is current
The current that is being needed by mosfet can be calculated as:
I = QGmax
Tr
(31)
Where QG is the maximum gate charge of Mosfet can be read as 108nc from datasheet,
and Tr is the rise time of Mosfet.
The gate resistance can be calculated as:
Rgate = Voutput
I
= 3.9Ω
(32)
Where Voutput is the maximum output voltage from the gate driver that can be read as
20 volts from the gate driver datasheet. Finally, the gate resistor is chosen as 3.9Ω. And
the gate resistor should be connected between output pins of the gate driver and the
gates of Mosfets.
Pull down resistor sizing for low side mosfet, the reason pull down needed is to ensure
when there is no voltage applied to the gate of Mosfet, the gate can discharge through
a high value resistor then turn off the channel between drain and source, the pull down
resistor can pull the gate low to the cutoff region.
Since the purpose of pull down is resistor is for discharging, therefore, the formula
that calculates the resistance can be found from RC discharging circuit[21], the relation
between time constant and RC can be expressed as:
49
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:50==
τ = R × C
(33)
Where τ =
1
Fs =
1
25KHz, R is pull down resistance, and C is the input capacitance
of Mosfet due to it being directly related to Mosfet gate that can be read from Mosfet
datasheet.
Therefore pull down resistor can be calculated as 5.49KΩ, and the standard value
of 7.5KΩis chosen. Pull down resistor will be connected between gate of Mosfets and
source of Mosfets
3.4.3
Decoupling capacitors
Decoupling capacitor is to decouple one part of the circuit from another and reduces the
noise effect.
And according to[22], capacitor current–voltage relation is:
I(t) = C dV (t)
dt
(34)
Therefore, decoupling capacitance can be calculated as:
C = I × T
∆V
=
I
∆V × Fs
(35)
Where I is the peak current during startup, Fs is switching frequency, ∆V is voltage
ripple.
When calculating the peak current, firstly, load current needs to be known, thus from
load datasheet which is motor datasheet is shown in figure 17, when it is at 10462Rpm
the rated power is 3380,77W, and load current can be calculated as
Iload = Prated
V
(36)
Where V is 120V
Thus the peak current can be 50% more than load current which is often chosen, so
peak current is calculated as:
I = 1.5 × Iload = 42.259A
(37)
Voltage ripple can be chosen 5% of DC voltage which is:
∆V = 5% × 120
(38)
Finally, decoupling capacitance can be calculated as 0.000352 F, and a standard value
of 400µF will be chosen.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
50
==PAGE:51==
3.4.4
Consideration of design
Review the whole main motor driver circuit design, there are something important and
necessary that need to be considered.
Firstly, the power supply for gate driver is not being mentioned, so there is nothing
to supply Vcc pin, and the power supply voltage already being decided to be 15 volts,
next by which way how this 15 volts can be applied to the Vcc pin is necessary, at the
beginning, the choice is to just use an external power supply set 15 volts and apply it
to Vcc pin, but there will be a lot noise that can affect the performance of circuit and
inconvenient to operate when it comes to test stage.
Therefore a step down buck converter is chosen, which can be used as a power supply.
In this way, the input of the buck converter can be supplied by the main power supply
of 120 volts which is the same one that supplies the driver circuit, and the output of the
buck converter can be set as 15 volts which is exactly what the gate driver needs, this
way can remove the external factors that affect motor driver circuit.
Next step is to find a buck converter that can step down the input voltage from 120
Volts to 15 volts, and the buck converter Texas Instruments LM5168[23] is selected, it
can step down the input voltage from any value between 15 volts and 120 volts, which is
extremely helpful for testing because when if use 15 volts or 30 volts DC power supply,
the output from buck convert will always be 15 volts, and the gate driver will be always
working, so it is helpful to do some test when only applying low voltage power supply.
According to buck converter datasheet, the typical circuit is shown in figure 35
Figure 35: Buck converter schematic [23]
For the input capacitor, which is a bypass capacitor for filtering noise, a value of
51
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:52==
CIN=2.2µF is recommended to use.
Use desired switching frequency to calculate RT resistor, the range of switching
frequency for buck converter is from 50KHz to 1MHz, here the maximum switching
frequency is chosen, by using equation
RT KΩ= Vout × 2500
Fsw(KHz) = 37.5KΩ
(39)
where Vout=15v is output voltage, Fsw(KHz)=1000KHz.
According to the datasheet, CBST is bootstrap capacitor connected between the BST
pin and the SW pin. A ceramic capacitor of 2.2 nF is required.
For RFB1 and RFB2, first select RRFB2=39.2KΩ(10KΩ-1MΩ) using equation:
RFB1 = RFB2 × (Vout
Vref
−1) = 453KΩ
(40)
Where Vref=1.2V(typical)
A type 3 ripple injection network is selected, which consists of RA, CA and CB can
be calculated by using:
CA ≥
10
FSW · RFB2 ∥RFB1
= 277pF
(41)
RA ≥(VIN −VOUT) · VOUT
0.02 · VIN · FSW · CA
= 198KΩ
(42)
CB ≥
TR
3 · RFB1
= 36pF
(43)
Where TR=50 µs(typical), input voltage is 120V, ouput voltage is 15V
Therefore, CA chosen as 3300pF, RA chosen as 200KΩ, and CB chosen as 75pF.
Buck inductor can be calculated by:
L =
VOUT
FSW · ∆IL
·

1 −VOUT
VIN

= 0.00009943H
(44)
Where ∆IL= is inductor ripple current chosen as 44% of output current 0.3A. There-
fore inductor chosen as 100µ H
Finally the output capcitance COUT can be calculated by using;
COUT > L · (IOUT + ∆IL
2 )2
2 · ∆V · VOUT
= 8.93µF
(45)
Where ∆IL can be recalculated by using equation 44 after a new inductance of 100µH
being chosen, ∆V is the change in output voltage during load transient that is chosen
as 0.05V.
Eventually standard value of COUT chosen as 15µF
Overall, all parameters can be found from table 3
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
52
==PAGE:53==
Table 3: Parameters of Buck converter
CIN
2.2µF
RT
37.5KΩ
CBST
2.2nF
RFB1
453KΩ
RFB2
39.2KΩ
CA
3300pF
RA
200KΩ
CB
75pF
L
100µH
COUT
15µF
53
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:54==
4
Circuit simulation
4.1
Power stage of motor driver circuit
This section focuses on the power stage of the motor driver circuit simulation which
means that the controller such as MCU will not be involved, instead, the input pins of
the gate driver are given pulse voltage signals.
Figure 36: Motor driver circuit
The whole circuit is shown in figure 36, firstly, implement every component and
its value, insert the gate driver and Mosfet model. Because there is no UF4004 diode
LTspice model, the text editor is being used. And the power supply for Vcc pin is a
voltage source, the buck converter circuit simulation will be introduced in later section.
As mentioned before, the input pins of gate driver are given pulse voltage signal,
shown in figure 37, this is the HIN1 pin signal configuration as an example, to simulate
the controller, six pulse voltage signal source are needed, and the dead time between
high side signal and low side signal needs to be considered.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
54
==PAGE:55==
Figure 37: Configuration of pulse voltage
Below is the sequence of six pulse voltage signal sources, from HIN1,2,3 to LIN1,2,3,
high level voltage is 5V, low level voltage is 0V, T=50us, Duty cycle is 50%, deadtime
is 2us
High-Side:
Phase A High: PULSE(0 5 0 1n 1n 25u 50u) (Starts at 0µs, 50% duty cycle)
Phase B High: PULSE(0 5 16.67u 1n 1n 25u 50u) (Starts at 16.67µs, 50% duty cycle)
Phase C High: PULSE(0 5 33.33u 1n 1n 25u 50u) (Starts at 33.33µs, 50% duty cycle)
Low-Side:
Phase A Low: PULSE(0 5 27u 1n 1n 24.8u 50u) [Starts at 27µs(25+2)us, after dead
time 2us]
Phase B Low: PULSE(0 5 43.67u 1n 1n 24.8u 50u) [Starts at 43.67µs(16.67+25+2)us,
after dead time 2us]
Phase C Low: PULSE(0 5 8.13u 1n 1n 24.8u 50u) [Starts at 10.33µs(33.33+25+2-
50)us, after dead time 2us]
55
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:56==
Figure 38: LTspice pulse voltage signal
Figure38 above shows the example of one phase high side and low side input signal,
the 2us deadtime can be observed.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
56
==PAGE:57==
Figure 39: Inverter
According to datasheet, the inverter stage should be connected as shown in figure
39, for a better view, the EDA schematic is being used here. The drain of high side
Mosfets connects to the positive rail of DC bus voltage supply, the source of high side
Mosfets connects to the drain of low side Mosfets which creates point where is three
phase inverter output, the source of low side Mosfets connects to the shunt resistor of
overcurrent protection, here named as COM.
Eventually, in LTspice model, the three phase output connects to RL loads with Y
configuration.
After running the simulaiton:
57
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:58==
Figure 40: Vgs of low side mosfet
Firstly, Mosfets switching needs to be verified, as shown in figure 40, it is the plot of
gate source voltage of low side Mosfets by giving 50% duty cycle.
When Vgs is 15V, mosfet is on, it is at high voltage level same as Vcc value(also
verify that Vcc power supply is for low side mosfet to be turned on), and when Vgs is
0V, it is at low voltage level. Therefore for low side mosfet to be turned on fully and
properly, Vgs should be above the threshold vgs voltage of mosfet.
Figure 41: Vgs of high side mosfet
Figure 41 shows the plot of high side mosfet Vgs, the difference can be observed,
when mosfet is on, the high level volage is around 12V, which indicates the difference
between vcc power supply for low side mosfets and bootstrap circuit power supply for
high side mosfets.
The voltage drop is because when the bootstrap capacitor is being charged, the
charging path includes the bootstrap diode which has forward voltage and is also affected
by the capacitance of bootstrap capacitor.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
58
==PAGE:59==
Next is to verify the three phases’ output. What actually can driver a motor is the
mosfets switching between phase to phase, therefore plots between phase A and Phase
B, phase A and phase C, and phase B and phase C shows in firgure 42
Figure 42: Voltage difference between phase to phase
From the figure, blue plot is VAB, green plot is VAC, and red plot is VBC.
Normally, If the PWM signals for Phase and Phase are perfectly synchronized which
means that if they have the same frequency, same duty cycle, and no phase shift, the
phase voltage will be in identical at every moment, as a result, voltage difference is
0 everywhere. However, from the plot, the phase-to-phase voltages oscillate between
+120V, 0 and -120V is because phases are delayed by 16.67us relative to each other
according to the sequence of signal source.
And the reason the voltage difference oscillates is because for example:
For phase A and Phase B,
High Side ON for Both Phases: VA=120V, VB=120V, VAB=0V
High Side ON for Phase A, Low Side ON for Phase B: VA=120V, VB=0V, VAB=120V
Low Side ON for Phase A, High Side ON for Phase B: VA=0V, VB=120V, VAB=-
120V
Low Side ON for both phases: VA=0V, VB=0V, VAB=0V
59
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:60==
Figure 43: Three phase current plot
Figure43 shows that the plot of the current flow through RL loads.
The currents appear sinusoidal might be due to motor load winding acting like a low
pass filter so it filters high frequency and leaves fundamental frequency. And there is
120° phase shift between the currents
4.2
Buck converter simulation
Figure 44 shows the schematic of buck converter in LTspice
Figure 44: Buck converter circuit
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
60
==PAGE:61==
When input voltage V1=30V, the output voltage plot shows in figure45, and when
input voltage V1=120V, the output voltage plot shows in figure 46.
Figure 45: Ouput voltage when 30V input voltage
Figure 46: Output voltage when 120V input voltage
From both output voltage plots, the final output voltage is stable and reaches 15V.
61
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:62==
5
Hardware Implementation
In addition to the selection of gate driver, power Mosfet, and buck converter in previous
sections, there are still some key components that are used in the circuit, therefore in
this section, components selection is going to be mentioned, also including the PCB
schematic and layout details, and hardware assembly
5.1
Components selection
Figure 47 shows the schematic of gate driver.
All input signal pins are connected to a 2.54mm connector J1.
All resistors with standard value are SMD 0603 footprint, except, shunt resistor for
current sensing is used SMD3921 footprint.
And shunt resistor for over current protection is used four 15mΩThick Film power
resistor in parallel 0.015Ω
4
= 0.00375Ωto get R0 of 0.0038Ωthat is calculated in equation
22, the total power rating is 400w which is satisfied.
Figure 48 shows the schematic of the inverter stage.
Gate resistors use SMD 1210 footprint, pull down resistors use SMD 0603 footprint,
bootstrap capacitors use SMD ceramic capacitors with C1812 footprint.
Bootstrap capacitors are chosen SMD 1812 footprint with voltage rated above 15V
Three motor phases are connected to three 2.54mm pin headers.
Decoupling capacitance is chosen as 400uF in section 3.4.3, and normally 80 % of
capacitance is used as Aluminium Electrolytic capacitor with 160 VDC rated voltage to
provide the bulk of capacity, and 20% chosen as ceramic capacitors in parallel as they
are much faster and can handle voltage transient. Therefore, as shown in the schematic,
88µf as ceramic capacitors SMD C2220 footprint, 330µf as AEC in parallel to make
full decoupling capacitors.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
62
==PAGE:63==
Figure 47: Gate driver schematic
63
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:64==
Figure 48: Inverter schematic
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
64
==PAGE:65==
Figure 49 shows the buck converter schematic.
The output voltage label as Vcc as it provides the supply voltage to gate driver.
Input capacitor is chosen as SMD 2220 footprint ceramic capacitor with 450 VDC
rated voltage.
Output capacitor is chosen as SMD Tantalum Capacitor, inductor is chosen as 100µH
coupled Inductor.
The rest of the capacitors and resistors are chosen as SMD 0603 footprint with proper
rated voltage.
Figure 49: Buck converter schematic
65
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:66==
5.2
PCB design
Figure 50 shows the layout of motor driver circuit, there are 4 layers with top layer,
bottom layer, and two inner layers. Three high side power mosfets are placed on top
layer, and the other three power mosfets are placed on bottom layer shows in figure 51
and figure 52.
When doing layout, few things need to be considered.
Vcc bypass capacitor needs to be as close as possible to Vcc pin of gate driver and
ground plane on pcb to reduce noise.
The bootstrap capacitors should be placed as close as possible to the VB and VS
pins of gate driver. .
According to gate driver datasheet, the bootstrap circuit current path is: GND →
bypass capacitor of vcc pin→bootstrap diode →VS pin →drain of low side MOSFET
→source of low side Mosfet →GND. The total length of this loop should be small, and
the area enclosed by this loop should be small. Both of ways help to keep impedance
low that can help reduce voltage drop of bootstrap capacitors VBS.
Next is to place decoupling capacitors as close as possible to positive DC power plane
and Ground plane.
Another important thing is to make the current drawing path(trace) which is the
path that is connected to COM pin as thick as possible, because the shunt resisors
from overcurrent protection circuit will draw dc current through the path and it will get
heated up. Here on PCB, the current drawing path is being copper exposed, thus later
when doing hardware assembly, more solder can be put on to make the trace thicker to
increase the thermal performance when power up.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
66
==PAGE:67==
Figure 50: PCB layout
67
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:68==
Figure 51: Top of pcb
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
68
==PAGE:69==
Figure 52: Bottom of pcb
69
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:70==
5.3
Hardware assembly
Because of the manual soldering, the difficult part of component soldering is Mosfet and
driver IC soldering with hot air gun and regular solder tool.
Figure 53 and figure 54 show the top and bottom side of PCB, the power supply
connection is used an xt90 connector with 10AWG wireS soldered to the power supply
plane and ground plane.
The three phase outputs are soldered with three banana cables that will be connected
to motor or any load that is going to test, shown in figure 54, yellow is Phase A, purple
is Phase B, and white is Phase C.
Figure 53: Top side of pcb
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
70
==PAGE:71==
Figure 54: Bottom side of pcb
71
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:72==
Because of it is double side PCB, it needs to be held stably when testing, therefore a
mechanical design needs to be done, the model shown in figure 55. And use 3D printer
from DTU skylab to build it out.
Figure 55: PCB holder 3D model and prototype
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
72
==PAGE:73==
6
Hardware testing and verification
This section will show how hardware testing results are compared to those of the simu-
lation. Figure 56 shows the set up and its connection.
Figure 56: Set up
6.1
Buck converter output voltage verification
Firstly, the output from the buck converter needs to be troubleshoot, so that it can
supply the correct voltage to gate driver.
According to the buck converter datasheet, the minimum input voltage should be
above the output voltage that is designed. Therefore, the input voltage needs to start
from at least 15V to 120V, when testing, use voltage differential probe measurement and
connect red probe to Vcc pin(output of buck converter) and black probe to the ground
of the circuit.
Figure 57 shows the output voltage of buck converter, when increasing the input
supply voltage from 15V to anywhere below 120V, the output voltage always maintains
at 15 volts which is expected as simulation results.
73
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:74==
Figure 57: Ouput voltage from buck converter
6.2
Mosfet switching testing
When testing the high side and low side Mosfets switching, there are two situations
experienced.
The first situation, only one waveform signal generator is used, which means that
only one of six inputs can send a signal which also means only one mosfet of six high and
low Mosfets can be tested, the fact that when using this strategy, three low side Mosfets
can work with no problem during test, when signal generator sends a square wave signal
with 50% duty cycle, 25KHz switching frequency, and 0-5V voltage level shows in figure
58, due to noise, there is overshoot.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
74
==PAGE:75==
Figure 58: Signal
75
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:76==
Then giving a proper dc power supply, and use voltage differential probe measurement
connect red probe to the gate of mosfet and black probe to the source of mosfet, both
three low side Mosfets can switch properly, and the gate source voltage of low side
Mosfets is as expected shown in figure 59, high voltage level is 15V, due to noise, the
low voltage level is around -1 volts, duty cycle is 50% with 25kHz, generally, the low side
Mosfets are working.
Figure 59: VGS of low side Mosfets
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
76
==PAGE:77==
However, when troubleshooting the high side Mosfets, some issues occurred.
Firstly, when giving the same signal to high side inputs, when testing the gate source
voltage of high side Mosfets, the vgs plot shows in figure 60, when the voltage reaches
high voltage level it suddently drops, clearly means that the Mosfets does not fully turn
on.
It might because of the current limit since current that is needed by the gate charge
of mosfet can not match the output current from gate driver so that the gate resistance
could be the issue, therefore if the gate resistance can be higher, the requirement of
current by gate charge might be lower, the cost of this is that Mosfet turns on speed
can be really slow but it will be functional correctly, however by using this way can not
address the issue, so current limit reason is eliminated.
Figure 60: VGS of high side mosfet with 0.03uf bootstrap capacitor
77
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:78==
When thinking of the high side mosfets, the bootstrap circuit is always related to it,
so the bootstrap capacitor could be the key problem since the capacitance is only 0.03µf
which is relatively small.
Therefore first thing is to replace bootstrap capacitance of 0.03 µF with 22 µF, and
also replace 1µF bypass capacitor with 10µF
When test it again, the vgs plot of high side Mosfets shows in figure 61, from the
direct observation, high side mosfets are switching as expected, with correct 50% duty
cycle and 25Khz Fs.
Figure 61: VGS of high side Mosfets
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
78
==PAGE:79==
However, when scaling longer time period, the voltage polt shows in figure 62, it is
not consistent at all. The maximum voltage is only 8 volts which is too low compare
to simulation, this is because the voltage bootstrap capacitor is not sufficient enough to
provide enough power supply to gate driver and then ouput enough power to the gate
charge of the high side mosfet.
When measuring the voltage between bootstrap capacitor, VBS is as expected only
8V. According to the gate driver datasheet, the 8v voltage is almost at UVLO(under
voltage lock out). which means that it can not supply high switching frequency appli-
cation, this assumption can be verified when the signal frequency(switching frequency)
is lowered, the plot becomes more consistent as shown in figure 63.
Figure 62: VGS of high side Mosfet with longer time period
79
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:80==
Figure 63: VGS of high side Mosfet with lower Fs
On how to address the problem without lower switching frequency, firstly, think of
the bootstrap circuit charging path(current path), the low side mosfets are involved, and
the bootstrap cap is being charged when low side mosfets are on, here is the key point
on how to fix the issue.
The first thing is to make sure when test mosfets, low side mosfets need to be switched
first to make sure the bootstrap capacitors are being charged fully, and bootstrap ca-
pacitors can provide enough power when switching the high side mosfets.
The second thing is to use multiple signal channels to connect to three high and
three low inputs at the same time. When testing high side, an additional signal should
be always given to the low side Mosfets. Therefore the second situation is going to be
introduced.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
80
==PAGE:81==
Figure 64: dSPACE connection
81
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:82==
In the second situation, with the help of my supervisor Nenad, a dSPACE controller
is used for testing, shown in figure 64, dSPACE can work with Simulink to generate the
complementary PWM signal.
The first thing is still to generate the square wave PWM signal, the Simulink model
shown in figure 65, ABC represents the phase ABC for both high side and low side
inputs. Constant block 1 means for high side input the duty cycle is 100% and for low
side the duty is 0%, this will adjust later.
Figure 65: dSPACE square wave controller
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
82
==PAGE:83==
Figure 66 shows the configuration of PWM block, showing that it is complementary
pwm signal with 2µs dead time between high side and low side input.
Figure 66: PWM block settings
After generating the code of simulink, next open the dSPACE control desk software,
load the code file, and the duty cycle of ABC can be adjusted now.
Figure 67: Controldesk setting
Figure 67shows that giving a value of 0.5 for A means that the duty cycle of high
side input is 50%, and low side is 50% as well.
Giving a value of 0.3 for B means that the duty cycle of high side input is 30%, and
low side is 70%.
Giving a value of 0.4 for C means that the duty cycle of high side input is 40%, and
low side is 60%.
This can be verified by connecting the outputs of dSPACE to the scope shown in
figure 68 figure 69 and figure 70, due to noise, there is overshoot
83
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:84==
Figure 68: Phase A input signals, HIN left, LIN right
Figure 69: Phase B input signals, HIN left, LIN right
Figure 70: Phase C input signals, HIN left, LIN right
Connecting the input signals to the inputs of motor driver, power up the motor
driver, measure the gate source voltage Vgs of high and low side Mosfets again, the
results are shown in figure 71, figure 72, and figure 73.
Notice that for phase B, when giving the 30% duty cycle for high side input and 70%
for low side input, the VGS of high side mosfet duty cycle is actually 70%, and VGS of
low side mosfet duty is 30%, it is becasue the gate driver IR2130J is active low input,
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
84
==PAGE:85==
when giving logic 1 input signal it will turn off mosfet, when giving logic 0 signal it will
turn on mosfet. Same as Phase C mosfets.
Figure 71: Phase A mosfets Vgs, High side left, Low side right
Figure 72: Phase B mosfets Vgs, High side left, Low side right
Figure 73: Phase C mosfets Vgs, High side left, Low side right
85
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:86==
Figure 74 shows three bootstrap capacitors voltage plot, and 14V is perfectly above
UVLO voltage, which can supply enough power for gate driver high side input then
output enough power to the gates of high side Mosfets.
Figure 74: Bootstrap capacitor voltage VBS
Overall when using multi-channel signals, bootstrap capacitors can be charged more
sufficiently and fully which makes gate source of high side Mosfets voltage higher, and
high side Mosfets switching results get well consistent.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
86
==PAGE:87==
6.3
Three phase output voltage and current verification
BLDC motor is typically driven by phase to phase voltages, the voltage difference be-
tween two phases creates the current that flows through the windings and then it will
drive the motor.
Therefore phase to phase voltage difference is the key to measure whether a motor
driver works or not.
When verifying the three phase outputs from motor driver, connecting three RL
loads to motor driver three phase outputs as Y configuration and running driver in an
open loop.
Figure 75 shows the RL loads, three resistors with 40Ωeach, and three inductor with
2.2mH each.
Figure 75: RL loads
87
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:88==
6.3.1
Square wave pwm
Firstly, dSPACE still gives square wave PWM signals to the inputs of the motor driver,
the three phase complementary pwm duty cycle shows in figure 76.
Figure 76: Duty cycles of Phase ABC first test
By setting 1 for phase A input, means HIN A is 100% duty cycle and LIN A is
0% duty cycle, the active low inputs for gate driver IR2130J is still applied, therefore,
HOUT A is 0% duty cycle and LOUT A is 100% duty cycle.
By setting 0.2 for phase B, HOUT B is 80% and LOUT B is 20%.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
88
==PAGE:89==
Figure 77: first test: Voltage difference between phase A output and phase B output
Power driver up giving dc voltage of 30V, red probe connects to phase A, black
probe connects to phase B, figure 77 shows the voltage difference output plot between
phase A to phase B. Duty cycle is 20%, high voltage level is at 0V (due to noise there is
overshoot), low voltage level is at -VDC.
This is because for phase A. High side mosfets are at 0% and low side mosfets at
100% duty cycle means that for phase A is always pulled to ground, thus phase A is 0
volts.
However, for phase B, high side mosfets are at 80% duty cycle, low side mosfets are
at 20% duty cycle, which means that for phase B 80% time is at high voltage level, and
20% time is at low voltage level.
Therefore, phase A is always off, so VA=0V, and when phase B high side mosfets on
VB=30V, low side mosfets on VB=0V
Now VAB can be calculated as VAB=0-30=-30V (phase B high side mosfet on),
VAB=0-0=0V (phase B low side mosfet on), so the VAB plot oscillates between 0V and
-30V, and the duty cycle 20% matches the phase B low side mosfet on time is because
the scope measurement is set as +Duty, so 0V is high voltage level and -30V is low
voltage level, and 0V is when low side mosfets of phase B on, so the duty cycle is 20%.
89
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:90==
For the second test, phase A value is set as 0.5, phase B is set as 0.3 shown in figure
78.
Figure 78: Duty cycles of Phase ABC second test
Power up the driver giving 30V dc supply voltage, red probe connects to phase A
output, black probe connects to phase B output, the voltage difference between two
phases are shown in figrue 79 and figure 80, as expected, the VAB voltage oscillates
between +VDC and -VDC.
For phase A, high side Mosfet is at 50%, Low side Mosfets is at 50%, means that
phase A oscillates between high voltage level(+VDC) and low voltage level (0V) with a
50% duty cycle.
For phase B, high side Mosfet is at 70 %, low-side mosfet is at 30%, means that
phase B oscillates between high voltage level (+VDC) and low voltage level (0V) with
a 70% duty cycle.
Notice that when phase A on, phase B on, if two phases has same duty cycle, VAB
should be equal to 0V due to VAB=+VDC-(+VDC)=0V, however as shown in the plot,
VAB under this situation is not 0V instead VAB=8V, it might be because phase A and
phase B has different on time(duty cycle), one is 50% another one is 70%.
When phase A is on, phase B is off, VAB=+VDC-0=+VDC,
When phase B is on, phase A is off, VAB=0-(+VDC)=-VDC.
And the VAB duty cycle is always 30% which matches phase B low side mofset on
time (0V), as shown in plot it makes sense that when phase B is on, phase A is off, as
calculated before, voltage level is at -VDC, and duty cycle should equal to phase B low
side mosfet on time 30%(low voltage level) since the scope measurement is set as +Duty.
However when phase A is on, and phase B is off, voltage level is at +VDC, but duty
cycle does not match phase A high side mosfet on time 50%, instead it is still 30%, the
reason might be because the two signals are not perfectly aligned since two phases have
different duty cycle.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
90
==PAGE:91==
Figure 79: Second test: Voltage difference between phase A output and phase B output
Figure 80: Second test: Voltage difference between phase A output and phase B output
scaled plot
91
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:92==
For the third test, phase A value is set as 0.7, phase C is set as 0.4 shown in figure
81
Figure 81: Duty cycles of phase ABC third test
Power up the driver giving 30V dc power supply, red probe connects to phase A
output, black probe connects to phase C output.
Voltage difference plot between the two phases is shown in figure 82, 83, VAC voltage
oscillates between +VDC and -VDC.
For phase A, high side Mosfet is at 30%, Low side Mosfets is at 70%, means that
phase A oscillates between high voltage level(+VDC) and low voltage level (0V) with a
30% duty cycle.
For phase C, high side Mosfet is at 60 % low-side mosfet is at 40%, means that phase
C oscillates between high voltage level (+VDC) and low voltage level (0V) with a 60%
duty cycle.
When phase A is on, phase C is off, VAC=+VDC-0=+VDC,
When phase C is on, phase A is off, VAC=0-(+VDC)=-VDC.
Duty cycle of VAC matches the phase B low side mosfet on time that is 40%, which
is correct as expected when phase A is off and phase B on, however when phase A is on
and phase B is off, the duty cycle is still 40% instead of phase A high side mosfet on
time 30% might still because two signals can not be aligned perfectly due to different
duty cycles of phase A and phase B.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
92
==PAGE:93==
Figure 82: Third test: Voltage difference between phase A and phase C output
Figure 83: Third test: Voltage difference between phase A output and phase C output
scaled plot
93
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:94==
Next use current measurement probe to measure the current that flows through the
three RL loads of phase A B C shown in figure 84, figure 85, and figure86. The currents
still appear sinusoidal which matches the simulation, small harmonics appear due to
nosie from signal and long connection wires.
Figure 84: Phase A current plot
Figure 85: Phase B current plot
Figure 86: Phase C current plot
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
94
==PAGE:95==
6.3.2
Sine wave pwm
For a motor to be driven, the sinusoidal pwm signal is needed, therefore, the Simulink
model needs to be changed, shown in figure87, with the help of my supervisor Neand, a
sine wave pwn block is built.
Figure 87: Sinewave pwm in Simulink
Next generate the simulink code, use dSPACE control desk load the code, and
dSPACE controller can be able to send sine wave signal.
The configuration in con-
trol desk shown in figure 88, set gain of each phase as 1, and fundamental frequency is
20Hz, and switching frequency set as 10Kz.
And one of the six input signals directly from dSPACE is displayed on scope shown
in figure 89,
Figure 88: Configuration
95
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:96==
Figure 89: Phase input signal
Next connect the controller to motor driver, power up with dc power supply, the
voltage between phase A to B, phase A to C, and phase B to C, shows the same pattern
of voltage dfference polt shown in figure 90 and figure 91. The phase to phase voltage
oscilates between +VDC and -VDC, which is expected the same as FOC simulink sim-
ulation, because the dc power supply voltage is modulated to produce sinusoidal phase
voltage by sinewave pwm signal.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
96
==PAGE:97==
Figure 90: Phase to phase voltage difference plot
Figure 91: Phase to phase voltage difference scaled plot
The currents that flow through RL loads on three phases shown in figure 92, figure
93, and figure 94, Which match the simulink simulation, the sinusoidal nature due to
the giving sine wave pwm signal that aims to produce sinusoidal phase voltage and then
produce sinusoidal current.
97
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:98==
Figure 92: Phase A current plot
Figure 93: Phase B current plot
Figure 94: Phase C current plot
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
98
==PAGE:99==
6.4
Thermal performance
Figure 95: Thermal performance
When powering up the motor, the thermal performance shown in figure 95, buck
converter and gate driver got heated up. Due to the limitation of resistance load with
40Ωand 4KW, no significant current is allowed to be drawn, therefore, therefore there
is no significant temperature increase on mosfets and current drawing path.
99
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:100==
6.5
Conclusion
This section presents the entire hardware power stage verification, including buck con-
verter and driver circuits, by using the dSPACE controller and RLloads running it in an
open loop, the three phase output results can be obtained.
Unfortunately, due to lack of time and devices such as load, sensor based BLDC
motor and more convenient controller like micro controller, the testing setup can only
stay at laboratory stage.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
100
==PAGE:101==
References
[1]
Wikipedia contributors. Brushless DC electric motor — Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. [Online; accessed 20-January-2025]. 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=Brushless_DC_electric_motor&oldid=1264042704.
[2]
Wikipedia contributors. Hall effect sensor — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 20-January-2025]. 2025. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Hall_effect_sensor&oldid=1269791107.
[3]
Wikipedia contributors. Proportional–integral–derivative controller — Wikipedia,
The Free Encyclopedia. [Online; accessed 16-January-2025]. 2024. url: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proportional%E2%80%93integral%
E2%80%93derivative_controller&oldid=1265194949.
[4]
Lauren Nagel. How to Calculate Electric Motor Torque 2025. [Online; accessed 13-
January-2025]. 2025. url: https://www.tytorobotics.com/blogs/articles/
how-to-calculate-electric-motor-torque?srsltid=AfmBOoq1S3UVQ5Uzcc6m-
0kRK12MKytkQ4jZdJpoTV4yIgglr7NPOlSl.
[5]
Wikipedia contributors. Vector control (motor) — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo-
pedia. [Online; accessed 13-January-2025]. 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=Vector_control_(motor)&oldid=1255099512.
[6]
Keiichi Fukui. Demonstration about the design of FOC (Field Oriented Control
or Vector Control) of BLDC (PMSM). [Online; accessed 10-January-2025]. 2024.
url: https://ww2.mathworks.cn/matlabcentral/fileexchange/67172-dc-
foc-of-bldc-pmsm?s_tid=srchtitle.
[7]
. How to calculate max permanent flux linkage and rotor angle over which back emf
is constant for a BLDC? [Online; accessed 10-January-2025]. 2024. url: https:
//ww2.mathworks.cn/matlabcentral/answers/2092156-how-to-calculate-
max-permanent-flux-linkage-and-rotor-angle-over-which-back-emf-is-
constant-for-a-bl.
[8]
Wikipedia contributors. Moment of inertia — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 10-January-2025]. 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Moment_of_inertia&oldid=1265269229.
[9]
Lehner Motoren Technik. Torqstar 2 (7040). [Online; accessed 10-January-2025].
url: https://www.lehner-shop.com/en/outrunner/torqstar-70/torqstar-
2-7040.
[10]
Singiresu S. Rao. Mechanical Vibrations. 5th. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 2011.
[11]
Ashika. Rotational work
power: Aqa A level physics revision notes 2015. [On-
line; accessed 10-January-2025]. 2024. url: https://www.savemyexams.com/a-
level/physics/aqa/17/revision-notes/11-engineering-physics/11-1-
rotational-dynamics/11-1-8-rotational-work-and-power/.
101
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:102==
[12]
Wikipedia contributors. RC time constant — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 11-January-2025]. 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=RC_time_constant&oldid=1263450631.
[13]
Danielle Collins. Why is the electrical time constant important for stepper motors?
[Online; accessed 11-January-2025]. 2017. url: https://www.motioncontroltips.
com/why- is- the- electrical- time- constant- important- for- stepper-
motors/#:~:text=The%20electrical%20time%20constant%20is,by%20dividing%
20inductance%20by%20resistance.&text=The%20time%20constant%2C%20%
CF%84%2C%20is,of%20its%20maximum%20rated%20value..
[14]
Ti. User’s Guide. [Online; accessed 11-January-2025]. 2021. url: https://www.
ti.com/lit/ug/spruhj1i/spruhj1i.pdf?ts=1734011915030.
[15]
Khalid Qamar. Can anyone tell me how to calculate mechanical time constant of
PMSM. Whether the formula is J/B or any other related to terminal resistance?
Oct. 2020.
[16]
Datasheet IR2130-IR2132(J) (S) (PbF). PD60019. Rev.P. Infineon Technologies
AG. June 2001.
[17]
Jamie Catt. Design Tip92-6. [Online; accessed 14-January-2025]. 1999. url: https:
//www.irf.com/technical-info/designtp/dt92-6.pdf.
[18]
UF4001, UF4002, UF4003, UF4004, UF4005, UF4006, UF4007. 88755. Vishay
General Semiconductor. Apr. 2020.
[19]
A. Merello, A. Rugginenti and M. Grasso. Using Monolithic High Voltage Gate
Drivers. [Online; accessed 15-January-2025]. url: https://www.infineon.com/
dgdl / Infineon - Using _ Monolithic _ Voltage _ Gate _ Drivers - AN - v01 _ 00 -
EN.pdf?fileId=5546d462584d1d4a01585242c11947b1.
[20]
IPF067N20NM6. Rev.2.0. infineon. Dec. 2023.
[21]
Wikipedia contributors. RC circuit — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [Online;
accessed 16-January-2025]. 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?title=RC_circuit&oldid=1261917605.
[22]
Wikipedia contributors. Decoupling capacitor — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. [Online; accessed 16-January-2025]. 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/
w/index.php?title=Decoupling_capacitor&oldid=1234659025.
[23]
LM516x, 0.65A/0.3A, 120V Absolute Maximum, Step-Down Converter With Fly-
Buck™Converter Capability. Rev.B. TI. Dec. 2024.
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
102
==PAGE:103==
A
Appendix A: circuit calculation in maple
103
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:104==
( 2 )
( 2 )
( 3 )
( 3 )
( 4 )
( 4 )
( 1 )
( 1 )
design tip  04-4:
==PAGE:105==
( 1 3 )
( 1 3 )
( 8 )
( 8 )
( 1 6 )
( 1 6 )
( 1 1 )
( 1 1 )
( 1 4 )
( 1 4 )
( 1 2 )
( 1 2 )
( 7 )
( 7 )
( 5 )
( 5 )
( 6 )
( 6 )
( 9 )
( 9 )
( 1 5 )
( 1 5 )
( 1 7 )
( 1 7 )
( 1 0 )
( 1 0 )
3.325
5.142857143
3.888888889
==PAGE:106==
( 1 8 )
( 1 8 )
==PAGE:107==
( 1 9 )
( 1 9 )
( 2 0 )
( 2 0 )
( 2 1 )
( 2 1 )
28.17308333
==PAGE:108==
( 2 3 )
( 2 3 )
( 2 5 )
( 2 5 )
( 3 0 )
( 3 0 )
( 2 7 )
( 2 7 )
( 2 2 )
( 2 2 )
( 3 1 )
( 3 1 )
( 2 6 )
( 2 6 )
( 2 8 )
( 2 8 )
( 2 9 )
( 2 9 )
( 2 4 )
( 2 4 )
RT
==PAGE:109==
( 3 3 )
( 3 3 )
( 3 4 )
( 3 4 )
( 3 2 )
( 3 2 )
( 3 5 )
( 3 5 )
==PAGE:110==
( 3 9 )
( 3 9 )
( 3 7 )
( 3 7 )
( 4 0 )
( 4 0 )
( 3 6 )
( 3 6 )
( 3 8 )
( 3 8 )
==PAGE:111==
( 4 2 )
( 4 2 )
( 4 1 )
( 4 1 )
==PAGE:112==
( 4 4 )
( 4 4 )
( 4 6 )
( 4 6 )
( 4 5 )
( 4 5 )
( 4 7 )
( 4 7 )
( 4 3 )
( 4 3 )
==PAGE:113==
( 4 9 )
( 4 9 )
( 4 8 )
( 4 8 )
( 5 0 )
( 5 0 )
==PAGE:114==
( 5 2 )
( 5 2 )
( 5 1 )
( 5 1 )
( 5 3 )
( 5 3 )
==PAGE:115==
( 5 8 )
( 5 8 )
( 5 4 )
( 5 4 )
( 5 7 )
( 5 7 )
( 5 6 )
( 5 6 )
( 5 9 )
( 5 9 )
( 5 5 )
( 5 5 )
==PAGE:116==
B
Appendix B: Shunt resistors calculation in maple
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
116
==PAGE:117==
( 1 )
( 1 )
( 2 )
( 2 )
( 7 )
( 7 )
( 5 )
( 5 )
( 3 )
( 3 )
( 4 )
( 4 )
( 6 )
( 6 )
1 5 .
0.003703703704
101.2500000
0.004166666667
0.005000000000
==PAGE:118==
R1
0.0002
R2
5k
R3
0.015
R4
47
D2
UF4004
R5
1200
R6
15000
C1
1µ
V1
120
LO1
LO2
LO3
HO1
HO2
HO3
NLIN1
NLIN2
NLIN3
NHIN1
NHIN2
NHIN3
VCC
VSS
VS0
VB1
VB2
VB3
VS1
VS2
VS3
ITRIP
NFAULT
CA-
CAO
U1
IR2130J
C2
30n
C3
30n
C4
30n
V2
PULSE(0 5 0 1n 1n 25u 50u)
V3
PULSE(0 5 16.67u 1n 1n 15u 50u)
V4
PULSE(0 5 33.33u 1n 1n 25u 50u)
V5
PULSE(0 5 27u 1n 1n 25u 50u)
V6
PULSE(0 5 33.67u 1n 1n 35u 50u)
V7
PULSE(0 5 10.33u 1n 1n 25u 50u)
R7
3.9
R8
3.9
R9
3.9
R22
3.9
R12
3.9
R13
7k
R14
7k
R15
7k
V8
15
D3
UF4004
D4
UF4004
drain
gate
source
U2
IPF067N20NM6_L1
dVth=0 dRdson=0 dgfs=0 dC=0 Ls=1.9n Ld=0.1n Lg=6.5n
drain
gate
source
U8
IPF067N20NM6_L1
dVth=0 dRdson=0 dgfs=0 dC=0 Ls=1.9n Ld=0.1n Lg=6.5n
drain
gate
source
U9
IPF067N20NM6_L1
dVth=0 dRdson=0 dgfs=0 dC=0 Ls=1.9n Ld=0.1n Lg=6.5n
drain
gate
source
U3
IPF067N20NM6_L1
dVth=0 dRdson=0 dgfs=0 dC=0 Ls=1.9n Ld=0.1n Lg=6.5n
drain
gate
source
U4
IPF067N20NM6_L1
dVth=0 dRdson=0 dgfs=0 dC=0 Ls=1.9n Ld=0.1n Lg=6.5n
drain
gate
source
U10
IPF067N20NM6_L1
dVth=0 dRdson=0 dgfs=0 dC=0 Ls=1.9n Ld=0.1n Lg=6.5n
R222
3.9
R10
40
R11
40
R16
40
L1
0.0085
L2
0.0085
L3
0.0085
VS1
VS2
VS3
VS1
VS2
VS3
VB1
VB2
VB3
VB1
VB2
VB3
com
com
.MODEL UF4004 D(IS=10n RS=0.01 BV=400 IBV=10u CJO=17p TT=75n)
.tran 0 5m 0 5u startup uic
.options cshunt =10f gshunt=1n abstol=1n vntol=1m
---  C:\Users\姜俊成\Desktop\Thesis\Simulation2_2.asc  --- 
C
Appendix C: Motor driver circuit in LTspice
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
118
==PAGE:119==
C1
2.2µ
R1
37.4k
C2
2.2n
R2
200k
C3
3.3n
C4
75p
L1
100µ
R3
453k
R4
39.2k
C5
15µ
V1
120
BST
EN_UVLO
FB
GND
PAD
PGOOD
RT
SW
VIN
U2
LM5168F-Q1_TRANS
STEADY_STATE=0
.tran 0.5
---  C:\Users\姜俊成\Desktop\Thesis\Draft2.asc  --- 
D
Appendix D: Buck converter circuit in LTspice
119
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:120==
m
A
B
C
Tm
PID(s)
+−
Discrete
5e-05 s.
powergui
Vabc
Iabc
A
B
C
a
b
c
g
D
S
g
D
S
g
D
S
g
D
S
g
D
S
g
D
S
1
HB
3
1
2
3
<Stator back EMF e_a (V)>
<Stator back EMF e_b (V)>
<Stator back EMF e_cV)>
<Hall effect signal h_a>
<Hall effect signal h_b>
<Hall effect signal h_c>
<Rotor speed wm (rad/s)>
<Electromagnetic torque Te (N*m)>
E
Appendix E:Simulink model
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
120
==PAGE:121==
MotCmds
MeasSigs
Plant
TestSigs
TestSignals
TestSigs
MeasSigs
Evaluation
TestSigs
MeasSigs
MotCmds
Controller
F
Appendix F:Simulinl model2
121
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:122==
2
wm
4
thetam
3
Iabc
1
wmref
wmref
wm
Iqref
VelocityController
Idref
Iqref
Id
Iq
we
Vdref
Vqref
CurrentController
Idref
Iabc
thetae
Id
Iq
abc2dq
Vd
Vq
thetae
Vabc
dq2abc
1
Vabc
thm
the
thm2the
wm
we
wm2we
==PAGE:123==
G
Appendix G:PCB layout
123
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
==PAGE:124==
H
Appendix H:BOM RS and mouser
Design of a three-phase BLDC motor driver
124
==PAGE:125==
RS Stock NQuantity
Cost CentrDescriptio ManufactuManufactuUnit Price Total Price
1228782
20
TE ConnecCPF0603B TE Connec
2.039
40.78
6289805
10
Vishay UF4UF4004-E3Vishay
1.975
19.75
2132272
50
TE ConnecCRG0603FTE Connec
0.105
5.25
566456
5
AEC-Q200ERJL03KF5Panasonic
3.98
19.9
1360090
5
KYOCERA TPSE156K0KYOCERA 
16.83
84.15
1939786
1
STMicroeleNUCLEO-GSTMicroele
110.7
110.7
8354055
5
KEMET C KC1812C27KEMET
11.19
55.95
2644573
25
KEMET C KC0603C22KEMET
0.023
0.575
7087653
5
AEC-Q200ERA3AEB5Panasonic
2.364
11.82
5328482
5
Vishay 15mLTO100FR Vishay
114.97
574.85
1228843
20
TE ConnecCPF0603B TE Connec
1.96
39.2
1228877
20
TE ConnecCPF0603B TE Connec
1.78
35.6
8015243
25
KEMET C KC0603C10KEMET
1.101
27.525
6789715
50
AEC-Q200CRCW060 Vishay
0.235
11.75
2430613
50
RS PRO Modstand, TRS PRO
0.758
37.9
2430583
50
RS PRO Modstand, TRS PRO
0.758
37.9
6789800
50
AEC-Q200CRCW060 Vishay
0.023
1.15
2637479
30
ROHM MoESR25JZPFROHM
2.117
63.51
6790702
50
AEC-Q200CRCW060 Vishay
0.121
6.05
6789967
50
AEC-Q200CRCW060 Vishay
0.023
1.15
9155519
2
TDK CGA CGA9P3X7TDK
31.68
63.36
147279
50
KEMET C KC0603C33KEMET
0.208
10.4
2427439P
6
TDK KeramC5750X7S TDK
32.16
192.96
9163197
6
TDK CKG KCKG57NX7TDK
36.2
217.2
==PAGE:126==
SHOPPING BASKET
This is not an invoice
21-Oct-24 08:47:18
Mouser No
Mfr. No
Manufacturer
Customer No
1 942-IR2130JTRPBF
IR2130JTRPBF
Infineon
2 726-IPF067N20NM6ATMA IPF067N20NM6ATMA1
Infineon
3 81-GRM185C1H750GA01DGRM1885C1H750GA01D Murata
4 78-LL4151
LL4151-GS08
Vishay
5 80-C1812C303KDGLAUTO C1812C303KDGLCAUTO KEMET
6 80-T495X156K50ATE200
T495X156K050ATE200
KEMET
7 200-HTSW10107GS
HTSW-101-07-G-S
Samtec
8 661-EKXJ161ELL331MK5
EKXJ161ELL331MK50S
Chemi-Con
9 595-LM5168FDDAR
LM5168FDDAR
Texas Instruments
10 755-PSR400ITQFF0L50
PSR400ITQFF0L50
ROHM Semiconductor
11 652-SRF1260-101M
SRF1260-101M
Bourns
12 667-ERJ-P03F3742V
ERJ-P03F3742V
Panasonic
By submitting your order you agree to these terms and conditions.
Prices are reflected at the date and time shown.
==PAGE:127==
Description 
Gate Drivers 3 PHASE DRVR INVERTING INPUT
MOSFETs TRENCH >=100V
Multilayer Ceramic Capacitors MLCC - SMD/SMT 75 pF 50 VDC 2% 0603 C0G (NP0)
Small Signal Switching Diodes 75 Volt 50mA
Multilayer Ceramic Capacitors MLCC - SMD/SMT 1000Vol 0.03uF 1812 C0G w/KONNEKT AECQ2
Tantalum Capacitors - Solid SMD 50V 15uF 2917 10% ESR=200mOhms
Headers & Wire Housings High Temperature PCB Header Strips, 0.100" pitch
Aluminium Electrolytic Capacitors - Radial Leaded 160VDC 330uF Tol 20% 12.5x50mm AEC-Q200
Switching Voltage Regulators 6-V to 120-V wide VIN, 300-mA DC-DC converter with Fly-Buck™ capabil
Current Sense Resistors - SMD 3921 0.0005ohm 1% Shunt Res AEC-Q200
Coupled Inductors 100uH 20% SMD 1260
Thick Film Resistors - SMD 0603 37.4Kohms 0.2W 1% AEC-Q200
==PAGE:128==
RoHS
Lifecycle
Order Qty. Price (DKK)
Ext.: (DKK)
RoHS Compliant
2 54,90 kr.
109,80 kr.
RoHS Compliant
New Product
6 62,67 kr.
376,02 kr.
RoHS Compliant
2 0,837 kr.
1,67 kr.
RoHS Compliant By Exemption
2 0,762 kr.
1,52 kr.
RoHS Compliant
4 36,30 kr.
145,20 kr.
RoHS Compliant
2 37,87 kr.
75,74 kr.
RoHS Compliant
5 1,11 kr.
5,55 kr.
RoHS Compliant
2 18,30 kr.
36,60 kr.
RoHS Compliant
2 15,99 kr.
31,98 kr.
RoHS Compliant
4 17,03 kr.
68,12 kr.
RoHS Compliant
2 9,34 kr.
18,68 kr.
RoHS Compliant By Exemption
2 2,57 kr.
5,14 kr.
Merchandise:
876,02 kr.
Delivery Charge:0,00 kr.
