==PAGE:1==
Strategic Analysis of Electricity Supply 
and Demand on the European market
the Effect of Decreasing Flexible Production Capacity
Authors: Andreas Christian Beck-Bang & Simon Bay Overgaard
Supervised by: Dogan Keles & Ioannis Kountouris
Start date - 26th of August 2024
Hand-in date - 10th of January 2025
==PAGE:2==
I Abstract
As the focus on the security of electricity supply increases in accordance with the recent energy
crisis and uncertainty in reaching net-zero ambitions, there is an immediate need to identify risks
in the current electricity mix and the planned future developments. This includes assessing the
generation adequacy for the expected future scenario of electricity capacities. The purpose of
this thesis was to investigate three scenarios for the 2035 electricity mix in 11 selected European
countries and assess the generation adequacy in each scenario including the expected energy
not served (ENS) and loss of load expectancy (LOLE).
In this research, a baseline is established from a historical analysis of the electricity system’s vul-
nerabilities. This baseline assesses periods wherein the electricity system is strained based on
the ability of flexible capacities to satisfy the peak residual demand in Norway, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom and the 27 EU member states. Furthermore, the flexibility provided by inter-
connections between countries was considered to ensure a holistic analysis. From this analysis,
it was evident that while the countries generally have sufficient capacity to cover unexpected
demand spikes, there were potential vulnerabilities in their planned developments, given the
reliance on non-flexible wind and photovoltaic production.
To assess the 2035 scenario, a worst-case ’dunkelflaute’ two-week period was determined based
on the highest residual demand given the renewable production and the 2035 scenario electric-
ity demand. The production from non-flexible assets was simulated from capacity factors calcu-
lated over eight climate years, as inclusion of several years aligns with state-of-the-art method-
ologies in the electricity sector. The 2035 demand was estimated from the Ten Year Network
Development Plan scenarios, wherein electrification of sectors results in a demand increase.
The dunkelflaute period and the three 2035 scenarios were modeled individually in a deter-
ministic dispatch optimization model to estimate ENS, LOLE, utilization of storage capacities,
cross-border transmission, and dispatch of flexible production assets. From the results, it was
concluded that most of the countries’ electricity systems were vulnerable as ENS was observed
in all scenarios. Germany’s power system was found to be particularly at risk as they had an
hourly average ENS ranging from 10.8-60.7 GWh in the two-week period, depending on the
scenario. Furthermore, all 11 countries were expected to experience ENS in the scenario only
containing currently planned outbuild of electricity assets.
The three 2035 scenarios represent potential future electricity mix compositions, which carry
an uncertainty given the time horizon. Alternate investments in flexibility enhancing measures
such as energy storage, transmission, and flexible production capacities can reduce vulnerability
to dunkelflaute periods. Furthermore, daily demand profiles can develop differently given the
uncertain development of sector electrification. For example, increased electric vehicle adoption
or additional use of electricity for heating may impact demand.
i
==PAGE:3==
II Abbreviations
CO2
Carbon dioxide
DE
Distributed Energy
EASE
The European Association for Storage of Energy
EENS
Expected energy not served
ENS
Energy not Served
ENTSO-E
European Network of Transmission System Operators for electricity
ENTSOG
European Network of Transmission System Operators for gas
ERAA
European Resource Adequacy Assessment
EU
European Union
EU27+
EU27, Norway, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom
EV
Electric vehicle
FOR
Forced outage ratio
GA
Global Ambition
GEM
Global Energy Monitor
GW(h)
Gigawatt (hour)
IEA
International Energy Association
IRENA
International Renewable Energy Agency
JRC-IDEES
Joint Research Center: integrated database of the European energy system
LOLE
Loss of load expectation
LOLP
Loss of load probability
LP
Linear programming
MILP
Mixed-integer linear programming
MW(h)
Megawatt (hour)
NECP
National Energy and Climate Plan
NT+
National Trends
NTC
Net transfer capacity
O&M
Operations and maintenance
PV
Photovoltaic
RCM
Residual capacity margin
TSO
Transmission system operator
TW(h)
Terawatt (hour)
TYNDP
Ten Year Network Development Plan
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Motivation
1
2
Problem statement
2
3
European electricity composition
3
3.1
Current European electricity supply
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.2
Electricity demand and market dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Planning for future developments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Literature study
8
4.1
Conducting generation adequacy assessments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Generation adequacy under volatile supply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3
Residual load patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Electrification impact on electricity demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Methodology
14
5.1
2035 Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Historical generation adequacy assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
2035 Scenario generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.4
Dispatch optimization model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Data
22
6.1
Conducting generation adequacy assessments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.2
2035 capacities and demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Historical generation adequacy assessment
25
7.1
Analysis of worst-case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.2
Deep dive of selected countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.3
Geographical smoothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.4
Sub conclusion historical generation adequacy assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8
2035 scenario generation
31
8.1
Capacity factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
8.2
Determining the dunkelflaute period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8.3
Modeling input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
9
Dispatch optimization model
36
9.1
Dispatching results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
9.2
Deep dive of selected countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
9.3
Energy not served and impact on cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
9.4
Sub conclusion dispatch optimization model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
10 Discussion
44
10.1 Modeling Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
10.2 Consumer price calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
10.3 Dunkelflaute duration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
10.4 Flexibility levers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
10.5 Sector electrification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
11 Result comparison
51
12 Conclusion
53
13 Appendix
55
References
66
Disclaimer
This thesis is written without the use of generative artificial intelligence. Generative artificial intelligence
has exclusively been used to assist in compiling the output of the Julia model.
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
MOTIVATION
1
Motivation
The previous decade of political uncertainty and increasing focus on low-carbon electricity gen-
eration have created the need for a reliant and stable electricity infrastructure. The recent Energy
Crisis in 2022, triggered by the Russian invasion of Ukraine, was for many European countries
a turning point in the realization of the value and need for constructing new electricity gen-
eration capacity. In addition, the Energy Crisis highlighted the vulnerabilities of relying on
energy sources outside national borders, thereby providing an increasing incentive to become
self-sufficient (“Global Energy Crisis - IEA”, n.d.).
With the global need for low-carbon electricity and the focus on climate change, the expected
expansion of available electricity production facilities is primarily driven by plans to build pho-
tovoltaic (PV) parks and wind turbines, both providing sustainable generation to the electricity
mix. The composition of the national electricity mix is influenced by various factors, with po-
litical stance and legislation being among the most impactful. Even though the development
of electricity capacities is liberalized in the European market, political actions can promote cer-
tain technologies by providing subsidies, investments, or reductions in tariffs (Branding, 2024).
Currently, national support schemes target the goal of having net zero carbon emissions across
Europe by 2050. Furthermore, these carbon neutrality ambitions rely upon increased electrifica-
tion of sectors with substantial carbon emissions (“Electrification - Energy System - IEA”, n.d.).
This requires the European Union (EU) member states to ensure sufficient electricity capacity
to cover the resulting expected increase in consumption. However, this should be approached
carefully and strategically, as expanding weather-dependent electricity sources brings uncer-
tainty regarding production levels, creating a need for electricity storage or flexible generation
options.
The increase of renewables in the electricity mix entails a higher share of non-flexible capacities,
as wind and PV production are typical examples of non-flexible technologies due to their de-
pendence on meteorological conditions. Based on this dependence, flexible sources of electricity
need to be available on the grid to ensure electricity availability during all types of weather.
Without sufficient flexibility in the electricity system, prices will be volatile as price spikes can
occur when the non-flexible supply is insufficient to cover demand, while prices are low when
more electricity is produced than can be utilized (Eurelectric, 2025). A lack of flexible capacities
can thereby create a increased uncertainty in the electricity market and, in the worst case, result
in sustained inflated prices resembling those experienced during the Energy Crisis.
Page 1 of 71
==PAGE:7==
2
PROBLEM STATEMENT
2
Problem statement
How will the generation adequacy in the European Union be affected by the future composition
of flexible and non-flexible electricity supply?
• What is the expected development of electricity supply in the European Union?
• Is the planned 2035 electricity mix sufficient to ensure security of electricity supply, given
the volatility of electricity production from renewables?
• How are electricity prices impacted during peak residual load?
• How might the expected sector electrification and system flexibility measures impact fu-
ture electricity demand and -supply?
Page 2 of 71
==PAGE:8==
3
EUROPEAN ELECTRICITY COMPOSITION
3
European electricity composition
This paper assesses the generation adequacy across the EU member states, and it is therefore
necessary to establish an initial theoretical understanding of the topic. The following sections
will outline the electricity market dynamics in the EU, the flexibility levels of electricity sources,
and an insight into how future development is planned in practice.
3.1
Current European electricity supply
The European countries’ electricity mix spans several technology types and capacities, which are
influenced by multiple factors such as environmental aspects, climate goals, coastal lines, and
the availability of fuels (European Council, 2024). Countries with ocean access and coastal lines
can benefit from offshore electricity generation while nations, such as Norway, with mountains,
lakes, and rivers can benefit from hydroelectric power. EU countries utilize a mix of renewable
energy sources, fossil fuels, and nuclear power (European Council, 2024). To analyze the future
developments in the electricity mix and the consequences of increased renewables, it is necessary
to first assess the current electricity supply and the historical development across Europe.
Figure 1: Total net nominal capacities (left) and net nominal share of capacities (right) of EU member states, 2010-2024 (JRC-IDEES, 2024)
Figure 1 shows the development of electricity sources across all EU countries since the year
2010. The overall development shows an increased net nominal capacity in these years, with an
increase of approximately 200 GW from 2010 to 2024. Furthermore, it is seen that wind and PV
power plants are the main contributors to the overall growth as they have risen by almost 400
GW in the period. In contrast, the capacity of conventional thermal power plants has steadily
declined in the period. Both of these developments are linked to the climate goals set within the
EU. Nuclear power has a gradually decreasing tendency across the period, indicating that only
Page 3 of 71
==PAGE:9==
3
EUROPEAN ELECTRICITY COMPOSITION
a few new nuclear power plants have been commissioned (“Nuclear power in the European
Union - World Nuclear Association”, 2024). As thermal power plants include various electricity
generation technologies it is relevant to further investigate the mix of these plants.
Figure 2: Total net nominal thermal plant capacities of EU member states, 2010-2024 (JRC-IDEES, 2024)
Analyzing the development of conventional thermal power it is seen in figure 2 that even though
the total net nominal capacity has not decreased significantly, the composition of technology
types has changed. Electricity from coal plants has almost halved in the period, in line with
the UN Paris Agreement, which requires that all coal-fired power plants be shut down or re-
purposed in Europe by 2030 (“Europe’s coal exit - Beyond Fossil Fuels”, 2024). This decrease
is seen despite countries such as Poland and Germany which currently are not on track for the
phase-out plan (“Europe’s coal exit - Beyond Fossil Fuels”, 2024). In conclusion, the observed
trend shows that the EU member states replace high-emission plants with inexpensive lower-
emission technology types.
3.1.1
Flexibility levels
An electricity system’s flexibility refers to its ability to continually adjust the total power output
to satisfy the demand. Individual electricity sources have different levels of flexibility, deter-
mined by their fuel type and dependency on external factors, such as meteorological conditions
(National Grid ESO, n.d.). This is relevant for this generation adequacy study as the ability to
control the power output of production sources provides insight into the vulnerability of an
electricity system.
Page 4 of 71
==PAGE:10==
3
EUROPEAN ELECTRICITY COMPOSITION
Figure 3: Interpretation of the flexibility of electricity supply types
Figure 3 illustrates the flexibility classification of the electricity sources used in this study. Tech-
nologies relying on meteorological factors are considered non-flexible, as their production out-
put at a given time is dependent on weather conditions. Thermal power plants, nuclear and hy-
droelectric are defined as flexible electricity sources given their ability to control the power out-
put to the needed electricity supply at a given time (“Dispatchable and non-dispatchable sources
of electricity”, 2023). Furthermore, electricity storage solutions such as batteries, pumped stor-
age or power-to-x, can increase flexibility as they are fully controllable. Using these technologies,
makes it possible to store excess electricity produced for usage during peak demand hours.
A diversified electricity mix with the availability of flexible power generation is particularly
valuable for ensuring electricity production, especially during periods of low output from non-
flexible sources due to unfavorable weather conditions. In electricity modeling, these weather
conditions are referred to as ’dunkelflaute’ and are defined as cold spells with low wind loads
and solar radiation (TYNDP, 2024b). To compensate for a decreased supply of wind and PV
electricity, countries rely on flexible electricity sources or increased imports from neighboring
countries. A dunkelflaute period can be analyzed to evaluate a country’s security of electricity
supply and vulnerability. This is particularly relevant for countries expanding wind and PV
capacity while phasing out flexible power sources, which further increases their reliance on
non-flexible electricity sources. Battery storage systems are an alternative solution to address
the challenge arising from the dunkelflaute periods and decrease the probability of blackouts by
ensuring a balanced electricity supply and demand (“What is the dunkelflaute?”, n.d.). Utilizing
stored electricity is not necessarily enough to avoid energy not served (ENS) in the period, but
it can prevent short-term price spikes.
3.2
Electricity demand and market dynamics
Understanding the factors that influence electricity demand is required for energy system plan-
ning, market forecasting, and policy-making. Electricity demand is driven by technological,
economic, demographic, and environmental factors (Hafner and Luciani, 2022). Through this
section, the electricity demand patterns and market dynamics are assessed along with the ex-
pected future development.
The electricity demand is described by a load curve, which shows the electricity load for each
Page 5 of 71
==PAGE:11==
3
EUROPEAN ELECTRICITY COMPOSITION
hour of the period. The load curve can be modeled on a national or area level, to determine the
base load, peak load, and intermediate load (“Intermediate load Energy KnowledgeBase”, n.d.).
The base load is the minimum level of electricity demand over a time span and describes the least
amount of electricity needed in that area, while the peak load is the maximum level of electricity
demand in that time span. The intermediate load is defined as the operating hours between base
load and peak load (Hafner and Luciani, 2022). Depending on the length of the peak, it is likely
necessary to rely on flexible electricity generation to ensure an adequate electricity supply.
Figure 4 shows the electricity demand for one day with a typical pattern of base load throughout
the night, a peak in the morning around 8-9, an intermediate period until 17, and a peak from
18-21. This is the expected electricity demand pattern seen in most areas and can be explained
by the work hours of private residents and the operating hours of companies. However, the
electricity demand also shows a yearly pattern, illustrated in figure 4, which can differ from
country to country. In the northern countries, the yearly peak load is from December to February,
where more time is spent indoors, in contrast to southern European countries, which have a
yearly peak load in the summer months due to the use of air conditioning (Kan et al., 2021).
Figure 4: European daily demand pattern of Feb. 1st 2023 (left), European yearly demand pattern of 2023 (right) (ENTSO-E, 2024)
Electricity, like many other undifferentiated commodities, is sold within its own market (Pritchard
et al., 2010). However, unlike other undifferentiated commodities like oil or gas, electricity re-
quires an extensive distribution network to reach consumers. Ongoing system balancing, con-
ducted by a transmission system operator (TSO), ensures electricity supply to consumers who
are willing to pay the market-determined price. Electricity prices in Europe are determined on
a country level on the day-ahead market through an auction held at noon the day before. Dur-
ing the auction, electricity suppliers can offer a specified quantity of electricity at a set price
point (“Electricity balancing”, n.d.). Suppliers submit bids with specified quantities and prices,
forming a supply curve, while consumers are ranked by willingness to pay, forming a demand
curve. The market equilibrium, where these curves intersect, sets the hourly price. Suppliers
Page 6 of 71
==PAGE:12==
3
EUROPEAN ELECTRICITY COMPOSITION
with bids at or below this price are paid equally (Nord Pool, n.d.-b). However, as the demand
and production from non-flexible sources can vary, the supply of electricity needs to be contin-
ually balanced on an hourly basis. The availability of reserve capacities is auctioned separately,
in a similar manner to the day-ahead market, to maintain grid stability (“Electricity balancing”,
n.d.).
While electricity prices are set by balancing supply and demand, consumers respond to price
changes. This is known as demand elasticity. Since electricity is a necessary commodity, the
electricity market is insensitive to price changes in the short run (Lanot and Vesterberg, 2021).
However, prolonged periods with high electricity prices can encourage consumers to adopt
energy-efficient technologies or change use habits. This low short-term elasticity often leads
to price volatility, particularly during peak demand. To manage this, markets can implement
demand response programs, providing incentives to shift or shed electricity demand for whole-
sale or ancillary markets, and thereby stabilize prices and maintain grid reliability (“Demand
response - IEA”, n.d.). This will become important as more of the European electricity mix will
comprise a increased share of non-flexible production sources (“Demand response - IEA”, n.d.).
The electricity demand, given its many dependencies, is complex to model and predict. External
factors have a massive impact and from assessing last year’s electricity demand development, it
is seen that in the EU-27 countries, electricity demand fell by 3.4% (-94 TWh) in 2023 compared
to 2022. Meanwhile, 2022 was 6.4% (-186 TWh) lower than 2021 levels when the energy crisis
began (Ember, 2024). However, given the increased demand for data warehouses and utilization
of artificial intelligence technologies, a significant increase in electricity demand is expected in
the coming years. Furthermore, this demand increase is driven by the electrification of sectors,
such as transportation, and the potential of using electricity to create hydrogen which could
be used for industrial processes and heating (IEA, 2024). Given these demand impacts, the
International Energy Association (IEA) predicts that the global electricity demand will rise more
than 3.6% every year until 2027 (IEA, 2024).
3.3
Planning for future developments
When planning the electricity infrastructure in the future multiple factors have to be consid-
ered. One of the most important factors is that the electricity system has to be adequate to
meet the expected growth in demand while considering outages of system components and the
constraints imposed by operations and maintenance (O&M) (EU Commission, 2016). The term
generation adequacy refers to a power system’s capability to meet consumption demands. The
optimal level of generation adequacy is achieved through a cost-benefit analysis, which finds
the optimum trade-off between new investment costs and costs of ENS (EU Commission, 2016).
Absolute adequacy cannot be obtained as it would require substantial investments to be able to
meet the demand in all extreme situations. National TSOs are responsible for making adequacy
Page 7 of 71
==PAGE:13==
4
LITERATURE STUDY
calculations and can use several metrics to evaluate their development plans. The TSOs will
thereby have to consider expected electricity demand, including electrification of sectors and
expected transmission capacities, to accurately plan for sufficient future generation adequacy.
3.3.1
Political strategies
Once the appropriate generation adequacy level has been determined, it is essential to consider
the mix of electricity-producing technologies. The development of the electricity market is in-
fluenced by various stakeholders, including developers, investors, TSOs, manufacturers, and
governments, each holding different levels of influence in shaping the future of electricity pro-
duction. However, in the context of ensuring national generation adequacy, the governmental
institutions and electricity producers hold the main responsibility (TenneT, n.d.-b). Legislation,
governmental investments, and support schemes have a substantial influence on which electric-
ity capacities are being developed. An example of a national initiative is Denmark’s national
ambition to become independent from fossil fuels by 2050 (IEA, 2023). Additionally, monetary
support schemes are in place to promote the development of sustainable electricity production
capacities, thereby directing the market towards specific technologies (IEA, 2023). However, na-
tional initiatives are generally not binding by law and can thereby be amended if a country is
not on track.
Political schemes can be implemented at an overarching level, such as the EU, where cooperation
is key. EU member states have all agreed to several regulatory principles, such as the Paris
Agreement and the European Green Deal (European Commission, n.d.). These include the EU
Regulation on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action, wherein one of the key
elements is that member states must develop an integrated national energy and climate plan
(NECP) for the period 2021-2030 (European Commission, n.d.).
4
Literature study
This paper and the developed electricity dispatch model are based on established research that
provides definitions and the modeling methodologies utilized. This section provides an under-
standing of the concepts used throughout the report and establishes a baseline for the theoretical
and analytical framework used to develop the model and assess the results.
4.1
Conducting generation adequacy assessments
Generation adequacy assessments can be carried out and measured in multiple ways. How-
ever, the main purpose is to determine the security of electricity supply within a given network.
Security of Electricity Supply is one of the three pillars of the EU climate and energy policy in
Page 8 of 71
==PAGE:14==
4
LITERATURE STUDY
relation to the power sector (EU Commission, 2016). This concept has several dimensions, one of
which is system adequacy, referring to the systems of sufficient generation and transmission ca-
pacity to meet the load. This should be maintained under normal and unusual conditions, such
as those caused by unavailability of facilities, unexpectedly high demand, or low availability of
renewable resources (EU Commission, 2016).
In the report Identification of Appropriate Generation and System Adequacy Standards for the
Internal Electricity Market by the EU Commission, two assessment methodologies are outlined,
being a deterministic- and a probabilistic approach (EU Commission, 2016). Deterministic ap-
proaches are scenario-based approaches that evaluate specific system conditions, such as peak
demand or outage scenarios, while a probabilistic methodology, such as the utilization of Monte
Carlo simulations, accounts for the stochastic randomized outcomes of generation, demand,
and transmission availability. These two approaches are outlined in research conducted across
multiple universities, which finds that a deterministic approach is suited to optimization prob-
lems, for example, to minimize system costs, while probabilistic methods are better at captur-
ing dynamic statistically probable states (Haugen, 2024). Furthermore, the study describes that
deterministic and linear models can be solved with linear programming (LP) methods, which
include integer and noninteger variables to represent operational constraints in the system and
are, therefore, solved with mixed integer linear programming (MILP) methods (Haugen, 2024).
Several metrics are commonly used to quantify generation adequacy. Loss of load expectation
(LOLE) measures the expected number of hours per year during which the system cannot meet
demand, while loss of load probability (LOLP) calculates the likelihood of such an event oc-
curring at any given moment (EU Commission, 2016). Another key metric is, as previously
described, ENS, which quantifies the volume of energy shortfall during events of inadequacy.
ENS is a particularly important metric as it enables cost-benefit analyses by comparing the cost
of unsupplied energy to the investment required to mitigate such risks (EU Commission, 2016).
ENS can be expanded to expected energy not served (EENS) if multiple simulations are carried
out, as EENS, similar to LOLP, calculates the probable quantity of ENS (EU Commission, 2016).
The four metrics are also outlined by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory as the most
important and commonly used metrics for assessing generation adequacy (NREL, 2014). The
National Renewable Energy Laboratory further elaborates that ENS and LOLE are used for de-
terministic approaches, while EENS and LOLP are used for probabilistic approaches (NREL,
2014).
An overview of the characteristics of the probabilistic and deterministic models is outlined in
figure 5. From this the main differences found in this literature review can be seen.
Page 9 of 71
==PAGE:15==
4
LITERATURE STUDY
Figure 5: Overview of probabilistic and deterministic modeling utilization, tools and metrics (Haugen, 2024)
4.2
Generation adequacy under volatile supply
As Europe transitions to a carbon-neutral energy system, the share of renewable energy in the
electricity mix is increasing rapidly (IEA, 2024). Wind and PV power are expected to dominate
the future electricity mix and are characterized by their variability and dependence on weather
conditions, which pose significant challenges to ensuring generation adequacy.
Recent research has therefore focused on modeling and assessing generation adequacy in sys-
tems with an increase in renewable capacity. Probabilistic approaches, such as those employed
by ENTSO-E’s European Resource Adequacy Assessment (ERAA), have been used to capture
uncertainties in renewable output and demand. The transition to renewable electricity sources,
particularly wind and PV, has introduced new challenges in combination with the planned re-
duction in thermal capacity. Reports like Energinet’s Electricity Supply Security highlight the
direct consequences of this shift, leading to increased variability and unpredictability in energy
systems (Energinet, 2020). The Ten Year Network Development Plan (TYNDP) highlights that
this transition necessitates flexible demand-side technologies and increased opportunities for
cross-border transmission to balance the system during peak demand periods or low renewable
output to ensure adequacy sharing (TYNDP, 2024a).
ERAA captures the uncertainty in renewable electricity production by constructing capacity fac-
tors for wind and PV generation, found by dividing the observed electricity generation by the
available generation capacity based on 30 climate years (ERAA, 2023). Each of these climate
years represents a simulated scenario that can be used for future production levels. A study
conducted at the Technical University of Berlin supports this approach as they conclude that
including multiple weather years is required for weather-resilient energy system modeling, par-
ticularly those with pronounced renewable electricity droughts (Kittel et al., 2024).
Monte Carlo simulations are employed in electricity modeling to analyze varying scenarios of
statistically likely asset availability and to identify periods where adequacy shortfalls may oc-
Page 10 of 71
==PAGE:16==
4
LITERATURE STUDY
cur. This is, for example, carried out to determine forced outages of production assets. These
forced outage ratios (FOR) are probabilities based on the expected distribution of random forced
outages for each type of generation unit (ERAA, 2023). This approach is widely recognized and
used in both the ERAA- and TYNDP projects, as it enables the estimation of EENS from simu-
lated stochastic forced outages. In the ERAA study, the Monte Carlo realizations of the FOR are
performed for all climate years, and a total ENS value is calculated for each realization, which is
plotted in appendix 13.1 (ERAA, 2023). After each realization, a coefficient tracking the variance
of the ENS is computed, enabling the Monte Carlo simulation to be terminated once conver-
gence on this coefficient is achieved. In an example provided in the ERAA methodology report,
convergence was achieved after almost 700 Monte Carlo simulations for each of the 30 simulated
climate years (ERAA, 2023).
System-wide analyses, such as those presented in ERAA, have been complemented by targeted
research focusing on storage technologies and demand-side flexibility as solutions to adequacy
risks. For example, a study by the National Technical University of Athens assessed the effec-
tiveness of battery storage during peak residual load periods. The findings revealed that energy
storage enhances system reliability, reduces generation costs, and supports renewable electricity
integration, provided it is effectively managed (Dratsas et al., 2021). Similarly, research con-
ducted by the Technical University of Berlin analyzed storage technologies’ role in addressing
renewable energy droughts in Europe. Sensitivity analyses showed that while zero-emission
generation technologies might reduce long-duration storage needs, the rapid expansion of long-
duration storage remains essential to the renewable energy transition (Kittel et al., 2024).
4.2.1
Research gaps
While current research uses probabilistic modeling of forced outages on flexible technologies,
the ERAA project is focused on reporting long-term investment planning and lacks analyses
on the short-term dynamics such as hourly energy flows, battery operations, and the real-time
balancing of supply and demand (ERAA, 2023). Furthermore, the ERAA project focuses on
assessing generation adequacy under volatile supply in a most likely scenario, and a worst-
case scenario is not considered separately. By incorporating features like battery dynamics and
transmission flows at an hourly resolution, this study aims to address a worst-case scenario on
a European scale to assess the security of supply.
4.3
Residual load patterns
Residual load, defined as the difference between electricity demand and renewable electricity
production, exhibits significant variability due to changing weather conditions (EU Commis-
sion, 2016). During periods of peak residual load, when demand is high and renewable output
Page 11 of 71
==PAGE:17==
4
LITERATURE STUDY
is low, electricity prices tend to increase, as described in section 3.2. Thus, analyzing electricity
price fluctuations provides valuable insights into residual load patterns. Price spikes during
these periods often indicate underlying inadequacies in generation capacity or insufficient grid
flexibility.
For example, a study from Wroclaw University in Poland demonstrates how wind generation
interacts with residual load (Maciejowska, 2020). It finds that wind electricity increases price
variability during periods of low demand, likely to result in low residual load, but reduces
price variability during periods of high demand, potentially resulting in high residual load (Ma-
ciejowska, 2020). This underlines the role of electricity prices as a key indicator of residual load,
reflecting the balance between demand and renewable supply. Similarly, the Elpris Outlook re-
port from Green Power Denmark highlights that while increasing integration of wind and PV
is expected to stabilize electricity prices over time, periods of high residual load, such as during
dunkelflaute events, will continue to drive significant price volatility (Green Power Denmark,
2023).
Several studies have further explored the relationship between residual load and electricity
prices in systems with significant shares of renewable energy in their electricity mix. The El-
pris Outlook 2023 report analyzes electricity price developments in Denmark and Northwest-
ern Europe, emphasizing how renewable electricity expansion and market dynamics can sta-
bilize prices (Green Power Denmark, 2023). Meanwhile, a study from Comenius University in
Bratislava concludes that residual load explains electricity price movements significantly better
than hourly demand data alone, further highlighting the importance of this metric in under-
standing market dynamics (Comenuis University in Bratislava, 2017).
A study conducted at the Technical University of Wien adds that the construction of PV and
wind capacities will not necessarily increase electricity price fluctuations if the system incorpo-
rates flexibility measures such as flexible power supply, demand-side management tools, and
enhanced import- and export capacities (Schöniger and Morawetz, 2022). These findings align
with the broader understanding of the important role of electricity system flexibility when man-
aging high residual load periods and maintaining grid stability.
4.3.1
Research gaps
While existing studies provide modeling and analyses of price impacts during peak residual
load, gaps remain. There is limited exploration of how electrification trends, the outphase of
flexibility capacities, and the increase of renewables influence residual load patterns. This study
seeks to address these gaps by conducting a residual load analysis, estimating the production
of non-flexible capacities, and determining potential ENS under various future scenarios. The
potential ENS value is evaluated on a country-specific level, by considering the imposed impact
on the price paid for electricity by end-consumers.
Page 12 of 71
==PAGE:18==
4
LITERATURE STUDY
4.4
Electrification impact on electricity demand
The electrification of sectors, including transportation, heating, and industry, is reshaping elec-
tricity demand patterns across Europe. These sectoral developments are driven by ambitious
climate targets, such as the EU’s Fit-for-55 package and the goal of achieving carbon neutrality
by 2050 (Eurostat, 2024). As electric vehicles (EVs), heat pumps, and industrial electrification
become more widespread, electricity demand is expected to increase, impacting peak load and
daily demand profiles (IEA, 2024).
Research has analyzed the impacts of sectoral electrification on electricity demand. For exam-
ple, the TYNDP project, which provides detailed projections of electricity demand and supply,
employs both bottom-up data from TSOs and top-down methodologies, ensuring consistency
with national and EU climate policies (TYNDP, 2024b). The TYNDP scenarios highlight how
electrification in sectors like heating and transport could impact demand patterns. For example,
the report projects increasing adoption of heat pumps and EVs, emphasizing their potential to
drive electricity demand growth (TYNDP, 2024a).
A study conducted by The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) examined how
combined electrification of sectors could impact peak loads, concluding that with electrification,
global electricity demand would triple by 2050, compared to 2020 (IRENA, 2023). However, the
study further concludes that this electrification also comes with increased flexibility, given the
potential for industrial demand response to mitigate the demand peaks. The TYNDP scenarios
also provide insight into how electrification trends across sectors align with EU climate goals,
projecting substantial demand growth but emphasizing the need for flexibility to avoid over-
loading the grid (TYNDP, 2024a). These aforementioned two studies outline slightly different
arguments for flexibility effects as a result of sector electrification, as IRENA sees electrifica-
tion as an opportunity for demand-side response flexibility, while TYNDP argues for required
flexibility through alternate measures.
4.4.1
Research gaps
Electrification of sectors is researched through projects such as TYNDP and IRENA highlighting
the need for increased electricity capacity. However, limited studies are showing the electrifi-
cation trends’ direct impact on residual load in combination with the expected composition of
electricity capacities, specifically in a worst-case scenario. This study seeks to bridge this gap by
integrating hourly demand modeling into a generation adequacy assessment, which can evalu-
ate the effects of the projected demand growth as sectoral electrification.
Page 13 of 71
==PAGE:19==
5
METHODOLOGY
4.5
Summary
While research has explored generation adequacy, price impacts, and sectoral electrification,
several gaps remain. This study aims to address these gaps by employing a modeling framework
that integrates demand projections, planned outbuilding of electricity production capacities, and
cross-border transmissions specifically in a dunkelflaute scenario. This includes assessing the
ENS across countries and its impact on electricity prices along with a discussion of how ENS
can be mitigated.
The model will rely on the proven methodologies, outlined in the literature study, but will ad-
dress the gap of having an accessible and adaptable model which can be utilized to model any
global generation adequacy scenario, provided that the corresponding input data are collected.
This will include modeling of multiple scenarios wherein a scenario of only currently planned
outbuild of electricity capacity is included.
The methodologies identified in this literature study, and how these will be leveraged to gen-
erate meaningful findings, that can identify vulnerabilities in the electricity system and guide
market decision-making processes, have been outlined in figure 6.
Figure 6: Overview of literature study, current research and how findings from this study can influence the market
5
Methodology
The following section outlines the approach used to prepare the data, calculate the key measures,
and evaluate the results. This study is divided into three analyses: A historical generation ade-
quacy assessment, the development of scenarios for model input, and an optimization model for
analyzing future generation adequacy. The input data, methods, and software or programming
languages used for each of those three analyses can be seen in figure 7. The following sections
contain a description of the 2035 scenarios, followed by a section for each of the three analyses.
Page 14 of 71
==PAGE:20==
5
METHODOLOGY
Figure 7: Overview of analyses and methodology in this study
5.1
2035 Scenarios
To address the uncertainty inherent in long-term forecasting, three distinct scenarios for 2035 are
considered. Each scenario contains country-specific production capacities, demand, production
cost, and transmission capacities. The non-flexible production is estimated separately and is
described in section 4.2.
Two of the scenarios are the Global Ambition (GA) and Distributed Energy (DE) scenarios de-
veloped by TYNDP for 2035. The DE scenario is focused on decentralized, prosumer-driven
energy solutions, whereas centralized, large-scale energy production has been prioritized in the
GA scenario (TYNDP, 2024b). These scenarios are defined as deviations from the TYNDP Na-
tional Trends scenario (NT+), which is a 2030 scenario based on the National Energy and Climate
Plans (NECP). The GA and DE scenarios are developed for 2040 and 2050 with 2030 as the base-
line, covering all sectors and energy suppliers to assess EU target compliance. For 2035, a pro-
jection based on the 2030 targets has been used (TYNDP, 2023c). The 2035 GA and DE scenarios
are based on the input and output data downloaded from TYNDP’s scenario overview(TYNDP,
n.d.-a) (TYNDP, n.d.-b).
The third scenario, referred to as the Pipeline scenario, is based on currently available capacities
and the planned commissioning and decommissioning activities from 2024 to 2035. These ca-
pacities and the expected outbuild are based on the Global Energy Monitor (GEM) database and
are described in section 6.2. The Pipeline scenario incorporates decommissioning assumptions
for plants lacking planned dates based on industry-standard lifetimes for each technology (Tri-
nomics, 2020). Additionally, the 2035 capacities are aligned with the coal phase-out plan outlined
Page 15 of 71
==PAGE:21==
5
METHODOLOGY
in the NECP. A timeline of current commitments to coal phase-outs by country is visualized in
appendix 13.2.
The hourly demand is included in the TYNDP scenarios GA and DE, respectively, and does not
include losses. The Pipeline scenario uses demand from the DE scenario as its baseline due to
similarities in flexible capacity. However, the prosumer PV production is subtracted from the
demand in the Pipeline scenario as it does not include prosumer PV capacities. As prosumer PV
production from the DE scenario is weather-dependent and not based on the same climate years,
this can result in minor discrepancies as the data used from TYNDP is based on the climate year
2009. For all scenarios, the demand from CH4 and H2 heat pumps is added to account for the
electrification of the private heating sector.
The net transfer capacities (NTC) and production costs are the same in all scenarios. NTC is
based on the transmission lines currently planned to be built before the 2035 target year, as
outlined by TYNDP (TYNDP, 2023b). The production costs of the technologies are based on
the cost of CO2 emission and the material and fuel costs similarly defined by TYNDP (TYNDP,
2023a).
5.2
Historical generation adequacy assessment
This analysis section addresses the current and historical generation adequacy across Europe.
The initial generation adequacy is, therefore, assessed for Norway, the United Kingdom, Switzer-
land, and the EU27 member states. This group of countries will be referred to as EU27+. How-
ever, given the scope and limitations of this study, it has been deemed necessary to focus further
work and deep-dives on a selection of countries to ensure detailed insights. This selection of
countries covers the diversity of the European electricity landscape, representing a variety of
regional characteristics, electricity mixes, and market dynamics. The choice of countries reflects
their strategic importance in the European power system and the unique challenges and oppor-
tunities they face in transitioning towards a sustainable and secure energy future. Addition-
ally, the selection of countries is based on adjacency and cross-border transmission capacities
to model international electricity trading. The selected countries, therefore, include: Austria,
Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland,
and the United Kingdom. Figure 8 shows the EU27+ and selected countries to clarify the terms
used in this report.
Page 16 of 71
==PAGE:22==
5
METHODOLOGY
Figure 8: Map of selected and EU27+ countries (“Europe, Create a custom map”, n.d.)
This historical analysis is based on data described in section 6.1 and includes historical sup-
ply capacities, hourly production, demand, and net transfer capacities. From these data points,
the current and historical generation adequacy is assessed based on the methodology from the
EU Commission generation adequacy assessment report and the studies described in section
4.1. The assessment includes determining the residual demand to define the peak load hours
in each country, which is utilized to find periods with high demand and low non-flexible elec-
tricity production. Residual demand is defined as the share of demand to be covered by flexible
production sources and is calculated as follows (EU Commission, 2016):
ResidualDemandh,l = Demandh,l −PVprodh,l −Windprodh,l
The capability of flexible capacities to cover the residual demand is assessed in this study by
a metric, indicating the relationship between the residual demand and the flexible production
capacity. This metric is defined for this report as the residual capacity margin and is calculated
as follows:
ResidualCapacityMarginh,l = ResidualDemandh,l
FlexibleCapacityh,l
The residual demand and residual capacity margin are calculated for every hour (h) and every
country (l) in the timespan 2016-2023 given the data limitations, which are described in section
6.1. If the residual capacity margin exceeds one, it means that there is insufficient flexible ca-
pacity to cover the remaining demand. However, as demand could be covered by cross-border
Page 17 of 71
==PAGE:23==
5
METHODOLOGY
transmission or stored electricity, it does not necessarily mean that there will be ENS. If the value
is equal to or less than zero, it means that all demand is met by non-flexible production sources
and that there is potentially surplus renewable electricity to be transferred across borders or
stored for later use.
The day with the highest average residual demand across the EU27+ countries will be compared
to the current and future flexible capacities in the three 2035 scenarios, serving as a baseline of
the historical generation adequacy. Furthermore, these analyses allow for an initial understand-
ing of the country’s security of supply, electricity mix, demand patterns, and dependency on
favorable weather conditions while aligning with the methodologies described in section 4.
5.3
2035 Scenario generation
The scenario generation analysis covers the development of the dunkelflaute scenarios needed
for the 2035 modeling period.
This analysis will, therefore, be used to determine weather-
dependent input. This entails simulating the output of non-flexible production capacities for
each climate year to facilitate the selection of the dunkelflaute period. These inputs are esti-
mated as they are required for the dispatch optimization model.
Adopting the ERAA methodology, capacity factors for PV and wind are derived from eight
climate years (2016-2023). These are used to estimate capacity utilization profiles for the non-
flexible electricity sources, PV, and wind production. Using historical production values and the
contemporary available capacities, an hourly capacity factor for PV and wind is calculated by
dividing actual production by the capacity for each selected country for every hour. Data on
historic PV and wind capacities are provided by each country’s TSO. An hourly granularity is
needed to estimate hourly capacity factors, which reflects the methodology used in the ERAA
project (ERAA, 2023). This approach accounts for outages, as capacity factors are based on actual
output and reflect the proportion of electricity produced relative to installed capacity. Future
production for 2035 is estimated by scaling historical capacity factors to the projected PV and
wind capacities in each scenario. With this approach, it is assumed that historical patterns can
represent future non-flexible production.
As described in section 4.5 this study focuses on assessing the generation adequacy in a dunkelflaute
scenario. Therefore, when determining a climate year to use for the 2035 scenario, the focus is to
determine the period with the highest residual demand being a worst-case scenario across the
selected countries. The dunkelflaute period spans two-weeks given the definition by TYNDP:
’[...] the Dunkelflaute case is defined as the 2-week period of highest residual electricity demand’ (TYNDP,
2024b). The period is found by calculating an hourly average of residual demand for each day
across all countries in the simulated climate years to ensure that 14 full days are selected for the
scenarios. This prevents the selection of fractional days. From this, a moving sum is calculated
Page 18 of 71
==PAGE:24==
5
METHODOLOGY
for a two-week period by calculating a sum of the average residual demand values for the cur-
rent day, and the previous 13 days. The dunkelflaute period is thereby found by determining
the day with the highest moving sum considering all climate years.
Modeling limitations
• Capacity factor profiles for Poland and use monthly capacities, the United Kingdom uses
quarterly capacities, while Austria, Belgium, and the Netherlands rely on yearly capacities.
This is due to limited data availability and can potentially result in a lower capacity factor
and, therefore, a lower simulated production in 2035.
• PV production for 2035 in Sweden and Norway is estimated using Denmark’s capacity fac-
tor profile due to minimal PV capacities in the modeled climate years. Similarly, Poland’s
2016-2020 PV production is based on Germany’s profiles, and the Netherlands uses Bel-
gium’s data due to TenneT’s lack of accurate hourly PV production. Denmark, Germany,
and Belgium were chosen given similar climates and solar radiation, as defined in the
Global Solar Atlas (Solargis, n.d.).
5.4
Dispatch optimization model
The optimization model is a demand driven minimum cost dispatch model, with aspects of a
minimum cost flow problem as cross border transmission is incorporated (“EUPowerDispatch
Model | JRC SES”, n.d.). The output can be used to determine the cost of electricity and ENS
on a national level at an hourly resolution. The dispatch model is a deterministic model based
on the findings in the literature study, as the aim is to model a specific scenario. The model is
developed using Julia and carried out based on the methodologies found in the literature study.
The model minimizes total system cost given the following objective function:
min Z =
∑
h∈H,l∈L,t∈T
ct · x fh,l,t +
∑
h∈H,l∈L
pmax · xENS
The objective function is subject to a number of constraints, which adhere to the modeling be-
havior defined throughout this section. The full model and explanation of variables can be found
in appendix 13.3.
The energy balance constraint ensures that electricity demand is fulfilled either by electricity
from production, import, discharging or energy not served and is constructed as follows:
Dh,l ≤Pwh,l + Psh,l + x fh,l,t + xensh,l + ximph,l + xdischargeh,l −xexph,l −xchargeh,l,
∀h ∈H, l ∈L
Page 19 of 71
==PAGE:25==
5
METHODOLOGY
The estimated 2035 PV and wind production, based on the calculated capacity factors, are in-
cluded as inputs for the model (Pw and Ps). These are kept separate for transparency in the
results. In addition, the model tracks curtailment, which can occur in instances wherein the
total non-flexible production in a given hour exceeds the demand, electricity storage capacities
and cross-border transmission capacities. The energy balance constraint is relaxed, allowing the
model to resolve periods when curtailment of PV or wind production is required.
The model dispatches electricity based on the cost of material, fuel, and CO2 emissions as de-
scribed in section 5.1. Non-flexible production sources are given a cost of zero as these technolo-
gies do not have costs related to fuel or CO2 emissions during operation (Joint Research Center
and European Commission, 2022). The flexible technologies will be dispatched in ascending or-
der of cost and resulting in the dispatch order. An example of dispatch ordering is displayed in
figure 9, as can differ between countries (appendix 13.4 contains a list of the specific technology
costs used in the model).
Figure 9: Example of dispatch order of electricity generation sources
Each technology is subject to a constraint ensuring that the dispatched electricity for a given
technology does not exceed the scenario and country-specific capacity. The dispatch order ac-
counts for batteries and pumped storage by shifting the demand curve forwards if charging, or
by adding a source of electricity if discharging (“Merit order”, n.d.). Vehicle-to-grid and pro-
sumer battery storage are excluded, as prosumer behavior is deemed to be misaligned with
system needs, often prioritizing personal demand during peak prices. Batteries start with a 0%
state-of-charge, unlike the ERAA study’s 50%, reflecting assumed limited storage opportunities
preceding the dunkelflaute period due to low non-flexible production or high demand. The
model allows for perfect information for batteries, enabling optimal charging and discharging
decisions.
An efficiency rate of 92% for batteries, per round-trip cycle of charging and discharging, is used
as defined in the ERAA study (ERAA, 2023). The efficiency of the charging and discharging cycle
of pumped storage is set to 77.5%, as defined by the European Association for Storage of Energy
(EASE) (European Association for Storage of Energy, 2016). Consequently, utility scale batteries
Page 20 of 71
==PAGE:26==
5
METHODOLOGY
will be charged before pumped storage as these have a higher efficiency rate, thereby incurring
lower electricity loss. Figure 10 displays an example of the pumped storage and battery charging
cycle.
Figure 10: Charging and discharging cycle of batteries and pumped storage
The storage capacity of pumped storage is set to ten hours of discharge time, provided by EASE
(European Association for Storage of Energy, 2016). The storage capacity of utility-scale batteries
is based on three hours of discharging time, as defined in the TYNDP scenario building report
(TYNDP, 2022). Charging and discharging for both storage types have no fuel, material costs,
or emissions, with costs indirectly arising from electricity losses. The model constrains storage,
charge, and discharge capacities separately and includes a battery dynamics constraint that en-
sures that the state of charge matches the previous day while accounting for previous charging
and discharging activities.
The model allows for transmissions of electricity to be transferred between countries to ensure
that the lowest cost is found and to capture the flexibility of an electricity system with trading
enabled. The transmission of electricity in a given hour is subject to an NTC constraint, wherein
the capacities between all selected countries are defined and set to zero if no transmission line
exists. Notably, this allows for electricity to be sent through another country if surplus import
and export transmission capacity is available in an intermediary country. The selected countries
are modeled in a closed system, wherein no transmission capacities exist to countries outside
of the 11 selected countries. This is implemented as the dispatch of electricity and demand in
the non-selected countries was not modeled, and therefore it is unknown whether electricity is
available in a given hour. The model determines ENS in the period for each country by im-
plementing a slack variable that captures the load that is not covered by electricity production,
import, or discharge of stored electricity. The price of ENS is set at 3000 Euro/MWh based on
the TYNDP project (TYNDP, 2024b). ENS is considered one of the main metrics for assessing
the generation adequacy along with LOLE as described in section 4.1.
Forced outages are implemented in the model as a reduction in capacity resulting from un-
planned production stops. As described in section 4.2, ERAA implements FOR using Monte-
Carlo simulation of randomized stochastic outage events (ERAA, 2023). However, given that
the input data for flexible production capacities in the GA and DE scenarios are aggregated as
totals by technology rather than as a set of individual unit capacities, these simulations are not
Page 21 of 71
==PAGE:27==
6
DATA
performed for this study. The FOR defined by ERAA is directly applied in three sub-scenarios,
based on the average, 10th, and 90th quantile FOR, to evaluate the ENS across different scenar-
ios (ERAA, 2023). As the ERAA project data does not cover FOR for hydroelectric power plants,
these are estimated separately using data on forced outages in Norway in 2024 downloaded
from the Transparency platform. The value was calculated using a methodology described in a
study on FOR, given the formula (Hossain et al., 2021):
FOR =
∑Downtime
∑Downtime + ∑Uptime
The FOR calculated based on Norway’s actual forced outages in 2024 has been used as the FOR
for all hydroelectric power in the model. A table of the FOR used in the model can be seen in
appendix 13.5.
6
Data
This research and model is based on electricity data spanning several countries. To ensure a
validity of data, the amount of data sources has been minimized to only rely upon official EU in-
stitutions, or TSO verified data. The following sections explain the validity of the data providers
and the specific use of their data.
6.1
Conducting generation adequacy assessments
For the generation adequacy assessment of the current and historical electricity network in Eu-
rope, multiple data sources have been used. Figure 11 provides an overview of these data points,
while the following text will describe each data provider.
Figure 11: Overview of data and sources
6.1.1
Electricity production and demand
ENTSO-E has developed the Transparency Platform, which is a central collection and publi-
cation of electricity generation, transmission, and consumption data and information for the
Page 22 of 71
==PAGE:28==
6
DATA
pan-European market (“ENTSO-E Transparency Platform”, n.d.). The Transparency Platform
was redeveloped and made publicly available in 2015 with the implementation of EU regulation
No. 543/2013, also known as the Transparency Regulation, which focuses specifically on trans-
parency in electricity markets within the EU. The Transparency Regulation required TSOs to
report and publish data on electricity generation, load, and installed capacity (European Union,
2013). Following this regulation, ENTSO-E has collected and presented the data from its mem-
bers on the Transparency Platform.
The Transparency Platform provides extensive data across all European TSOs and therefore
ensures broad geographical coverage (“ENTSO-E Transparency Platform”, n.d.).
This stan-
dardized approach across countries makes it easier to compare and analyze electricity data for
trends, patterns, and anomalies. Furthermore, the data published on the Transparency Platform
includes information on generation, load, and transmission capacities, making it relevant for
studies requiring up-to-date information (“ENTSO-E Transparency Platform”, n.d.). The plat-
form operates without influence from individual market participants and must comply with
the Transparency Regulation, ensuring that the data is collected systematically. These factors
enhance the reliability of the Transparency Platform’s data, making it the source of historical
electricity generation and load data used for analysis and modeling in this research. However,
the Transparency Platform does not include data on transmission capacities or future outbuild-
ings, which is the reason for the inclusion of other data sources.
6.1.2
Electricity
The Joint Research Centre’s Integrated Database of the European Energy System (JRC-IDEES)
compiles information on the dynamics of the European energy system (JRC-IDEES, 2024). This
includes data on the historical electricity capacity on a national and technological-specific level.
This data is compiled with Eurostat energy balances and uses a vintage-specific approach which
means that it takes the age of the facilities into consideration (JRC-IDEES, 2024). This compliance
with EU standards ensures that the data is reliable, consistent, and comparable across EU coun-
tries, which is needed for this academic analysis. Furthermore, the granularity of the energy
capacity data by JRC-IDEES enables increased details in the analysis. This data was therefore
used in the following research to determine the electricity capacity level from 2015-2024.
6.1.3
Transmission capacities
To assess the current interconnection in Europe, the NTCs need to be considered. This data has
been mapped as part of the ERAA project, which is a project carried out by ENTSO-E ensuring
a coherent data collection approach (“Preliminary ERAA”, 2024). The interconnection between
some countries was not found in this data. In those instances, the highest amount of electricity
Page 23 of 71
==PAGE:29==
6
DATA
transmitted in the last year, based on data from the Transparency Platform, was defined as the
available capacity (“ENTSO-E Transparency Platform”, n.d.).
6.2
2035 capacities and demand
The data sources used for the 2035 scenarios mostly originate from the same data provider. The
data needs and the sources can be seen in figure 12 and will be described further in the following
section.
Figure 12: Overview of data and sources
As the dispatch optimization model produces 2035 scenarios, there is a substantial data require-
ment regarding electricity capacities, demand, expected production, and transmission capaci-
ties. ENTSO-E and ENTSOG have developed multiple scenarios used for the TYNDP, which
is the EU’s reference for the future European electricity system (“Entso-e | Planning the future
grid - TYNDP”, n.d.). The output is based on one million hours of simulations and involvement
from more than 100 countries and experts within the field of electricity modeling (“Entso-e |
Planning the future grid - TYNDP”, n.d.). The data from TYNDP is considered reliable, making
it widely recognized as the best source for modeling the future electricity system in Europe.
TYNDP relies on future national electrical capacity projections based on national development
plans established following the implementation of the Regulation on the Governance of the
Energy Union and Climate Action (EU) 2018/1999 (TYNDP, 2024b). This regulation mandates
that all EU countries develop energy and climate action plans for 2030 (“Regulation - 2018/1999
- EN - EUR-Lex”, 2018). As TYNDP models scenarios for 2035, 2040, and 2050 they develop
their projections after 2030 (TYNDP, 2024b). This process involves significant uncertainty, which
has been reduced through the development of the two scenarios described in section 5.1: the
Distributed Energy- and the Global Ambition scenario.
As mentioned previously, this study includes a Pipeline scenario wherein only the actual planned
capacities are considered. The planned capacities are compiled in Global Energy Monitor’s
Global Integrated Power Tracker which is a multi-sector dataset of power stations and facili-
ties worldwide. The tracker provides unit-level information on thermal power (coal, oil, gas,
Page 24 of 71
==PAGE:30==
7
HISTORICAL GENERATION ADEQUACY ASSESSMENT
nuclear, geothermal, bioenergy) and renewables on plants above the capacity thresholds speci-
fied in table 1 (Global Energy Monitor, 2024).
Technology
Capacity Threshold
Coal
30 MW
Oil and Gas
20 MW
Solar
1 MW
Wind
10 MW
Nuclear
No threshold applied
Hydropower
75 MW
Bioenergy
30 MW
Geothermal
1 MW
Table 1: Global Energy Monitor database minimum threshold, by technology (Global Energy Monitor, 2024)
The tracker includes data on unit capacity, status, ownership, fuel type, start year, retirement
date, geolocation, and more. The most recent release of this integrated database was in Septem-
ber 2024 (Global Energy Monitor, 2024).
7
Historical generation adequacy assessment
With changing compositions and patterns in electricity supply and demand, it is necessary to
first analyze the historical generation adequacy, and establish a baseline for comparison, before
assessing the future security of supply. To achieve this, the years 2016 to mid-2024 are analyzed
in terms of electricity production, capacities, and demand to identify the period with the most
severe generation adequacy challenges at both national and European levels. The following
sections provide an analysis of the worst-case scenarios along and an in-depth look at selected
countries.
7.1
Analysis of worst-case
To establish an initial understanding of the EU27+ countries’ generation adequacy, a quantitative
assessment has been conducted. This includes mapping the hourly load and production in every
country and determining the residual capacity margin (RCM) on a daily level in the period 2016-
2024. The period wherein the residual capacity margin is the highest, on average, is thereby
interpreted as the worst-case scenario, as this is the period wherein the load on flexible capacity
is the highest. These results can be seen in appendix 13.6. From this, it is seen that apart from
Cyprus and Luxembourg, all member states have an average residual capacity margin below
one, showing an adequate flexible capacity. Furthermore, it is seen that the largest gaps between
the average generation adequacy and the day with the worst generation adequacy are found in
countries with significant amounts of non-flexible production capacities and with fluctuations
in weather throughout the year. This can be observed in Denmark, which has the lowest average
Page 25 of 71
==PAGE:31==
7
HISTORICAL GENERATION ADEQUACY ASSESSMENT
residual capacity margin of 0.24. However, it’s worst RCM reaches 0.77, exceeding the values
of many countries with higher flexible capacity and a greater average RCM. In contrast, Poland
demonstrates a smaller gap between its average and worst RCM, with an average of 0.47 and a
worst daily value of 0.74. From this analysis, a plot of the day with the highest residual capacity
margin across all EU27+ countries, on the 10th of January 2024, has been plotted in figure 13.
Figure 13: Day with highest residual demand, compared to historical- and future flexible capacities (ENTSO-E, 2024) (ENTSO-E, n.d.) (JRC-
IDEES, 2024) (TYNDP, n.d.-a) (TYNDP, n.d.-b) (Global Energy Monitor, 2024)
From the plot, it is seen that the current flexible capacity level exceeds the residual demand by
more than 200 GW. By comparison, the flexible capacities utilized in the 2035 DE and GA sce-
narios are approximately 50-100 GW lower than the present time, while the Pipeline scenario is
around 420 GW lower. Furthermore, it is observed that the flexible capacity in the GA and DE
scenarios are closely aligned, while the flexible capacity in the Pipeline scenario is significantly
lower. The flexible capacity in the Pipeline scenario is below the peak residual demand on this
day which would have potential to result in ENS. The available flexible capacities in 2035 indi-
cate a potential risk of inadequate security of supply in the electricity system in the future and
particularly in the countries projected to outphase a significant portion of their thermal, nuclear
or hydroelectric production facilities.
7.2
Deep dive of selected countries
Assessing a country’s generation adequacy depends on the national electricity mix and electric-
ity production capacities. As mentioned previously, a availability of thermal power plants or
hydroelectric power leads to more flexibility in the grid, while a reliance on PV and wind leads
to a less flexible electricity system. Figure 14 provides an overview of the electricity mix of the
Page 26 of 71
==PAGE:32==
7
HISTORICAL GENERATION ADEQUACY ASSESSMENT
11 selected countries defined in section 5.2. Germany has Europe’s largest electricity production
capacity with close to 200 GW of capacity, with coal-fired power plants being the main capac-
ity driver. France and the United Kingdom have comparable amounts of installed capacity, but
France relies mainly on nuclear power while the United Kingdoms main capacity is gas-fired
plants. This plot creates an understanding of the main capacities of the European power grid
but also supports the previously mentioned observation that the electricity mix differs between
the selected countries.
Figure 14: Total electricity capacities by technology, for selected countries (JRC-IDEES, 2024)
As mentioned in section 5.2, these 11 countries are in scope for further modeling and analy-
sis, and it is therefore of interest to further analyze their generation adequacy. The following
analyses were conducted for all 11 countries, but only four are discussed. These countries were
selected to represent a range of electricity mixes and significantly different electricity capacities,
providing a comprehensive understanding of how the electricity mix affects generation ade-
quacy. Plots of the remaining seven countries can be found in appendix 13.7. The countries
plotted in figure 15 are Denmark, Germany, France, and Norway.
Page 27 of 71
==PAGE:33==
7
HISTORICAL GENERATION ADEQUACY ASSESSMENT
Figure 15: Hourly average demand, residual demand and flexible capacities, for sub-selected countries (JRC-IDEES, 2024) (ENTSO-E, 2024)
Figure 15 shows the average daily demand and residual demand over the period. It is seen that
all four countries have a residual demand, which is significantly less than their flexible capacity.
These plots show that, on average, the residual demand is unlikely to exceed the available flex-
ible capacity in any of the four countries. However, due to the limited storage capacity in the
current electricity system, surplus electricity generated on an average day cannot be stored for
peak demand hours later in the year. This necessitates maintaining excess capacity during most
hours of the year.
Page 28 of 71
==PAGE:34==
7
HISTORICAL GENERATION ADEQUACY ASSESSMENT
Figure 16: Day with highest residual capacity margin, for sub-selected countries (ENTSO-E, 2024) (ENTSO-E, n.d.) (JRC-IDEES, 2024)
(TYNDP, n.d.-a) (TYNDP, n.d.-b) (Global Energy Monitor, 2024)
Figure 16 shows the demand, residual demand, and flexible capacity on the worst day in the
period in scope, along with the flexible capacity for the 2035 scenarios. From the plots, it can be
seen that Denmark’s peak load did not exceed the flexible capacity throughout the day but there
were hours when the residual demand could lead to strain on the electricity system. Further-
more, Denmark’s ambition to expand PV and wind buildout while phasing out flexible capacity
can be a risky strategy, as the residual demand is significantly higher than the flexible capacity
in 2035 in all three scenarios.
Germany has a fairly diversified electricity mix and therefore does not have the same amount
of strain when comparing residual demand to flexible capacity in 2023. However, the residual
demand exceeds the 2035 flexible capacities, which may pose a threat to European electricity
adequacy due to the potential reliance on the availability of flexible production capacity in Ger-
many that may no longer be available (Eckert and Sims, 2023). A similar trend is observed in
France, where only the GA scenario provides enough flexible capacity to meet demand at all
hours. However, despite this surplus of flexible capacity, France may still face periods of stress
on the transmission grid. Furthermore, France’s flexible capacity in 2035 is projected to remain
nearly unchanged compared to the present. This stability is partly due to the long operational
lifetimes of its nuclear plants, which comprise the majority share of France’s electricity mix, as
Page 29 of 71
==PAGE:35==
7
HISTORICAL GENERATION ADEQUACY ASSESSMENT
shown in figure 14. Therefore, given the balance of expected decommissioning and commission-
ing, the total amount of flexible capacity is expected to only experience minor changes compared
to the present day.
Norway differs from the other countries given its substantial surplus capacity, even when ac-
counting for the worst day within the time-span. Norway’s substantial availability of hydro-
electric capacity and limited non-flexible capacity is shown by their residual demand being al-
most equal to their actual demand. Furthermore, Norway’s projected 2035 flexible capacities are
significantly above the residual demand in the GA and DE scenario, while the capacity in the
Pipeline scenario is close to the residual demand.
7.3
Geographical smoothing
Resource adequacy should not be assessed in isolation, as transmission capacities from other
countries are an important factor, that is necessary to consider (Statnett et al., 2017). Figure 17
shows the import capacities in the 11 selected countries. Transmission capacities can produce
geographical smoothing effects, which is a term describing the smoothing of peak- and base
load by reducing volatility through transmission between countries without correlated demand
or supply patterns (Statnett et al., 2017). As weather patterns are less likely to persist over the
entire European continent for an extended period, surplus production could thereby be supplied
from countries with more favorable weather conditions for PV and wind production.
Figure 17: Net transfer import capacity for selected countries (“Preliminary ERAA”, 2024)
From this plot, it is evident that Germany has various potential import and export countries with
almost 30 GW of import capacity. Assessing this import capacity in connection with the residual
Page 30 of 71
==PAGE:36==
8
2035 SCENARIO GENERATION
demand plot in figure 16, it is seen that the sum of import capacity will make it possible for Ger-
many to meet demand if connected countries have surplus production capacity. The availability
of import capacities increases the flexibility of electricity supply. However, it will not necessarily
be beneficial in a dunkelflaute scenario, as the neighboring countries could experience similar
inadequacy simultaneously. Germany’s massive import capacity is mainly due to its size and
centralized geographical location. A diverse electricity mix of interconnected countries can lead
to increased security of supply, as decreased electricity production of individual technologies
can be covered by electricity sourced from alternative technology types elsewhere (Statnett et
al., 2017).
7.4
Sub conclusion historical generation adequacy assessment
The analyses above indicate that the electricity supply in the EU27+ countries is moving towards
an increased reliance on renewable energy sources in the electricity mix, particularly PV and
wind, which can reduce system flexibility. This development is expected to challenge generation
adequacy, as total available flexible capacities are projected to be reduced in the three modeled
scenarios. It is shown that specifically for Denmark, France, and Germany, residual demand
may be expected to exceed the available flexible capacities in a worst-case scenario, such as
dunkelflaute.
Despite these challenges, certain countries, such as Norway, are expected to maintain strong gen-
eration adequacy due to their continued availability of hydroelectric power capacity. Thereby,
reliance on geographical smoothing and interconnectivity between countries will become in-
creasingly important for covering national electricity shortages, supported by the use of elec-
tricity storage solutions for storing surplus production for use in peak load hours.
8
2035 scenario generation
To account for the uncertainty in predicting electricity capacities, three scenarios for 2035 have
been developed using the methodology outlined in section 5.1. These scenarios include Global
Ambition, Distributed Energy, and the Pipeline scenario. For each scenario, three variations
have been created by applying different realizations of the forced outage rate (FOR), based on
the average and quantile rates defined in the ERAA report (ERAA, 2023). Figure 18 illustrates
the available capacities for each scenario before considering the impact of FOR.
Page 31 of 71
==PAGE:37==
8
2035 SCENARIO GENERATION
Figure 18: Electricity capacities in the three 2035 scenarios (TYNDP, n.d.-a) (TYNDP, n.d.-b) (Global Energy Monitor, 2024)
The available flexible and non-flexible capacities for the GA and DE scenarios are similar, as
there are only minor differences in nuclear and non-flexible capacity. These two scenarios differ
significantly from the Pipeline scenario. While there are only minor differences in the available
flexible capacity between countries, the Pipeline scenario features considerably less investment
in non-flexible technologies. The TYNDP model used to develop the GA and DE scenarios
for 2035 incorporates investments, which are aimed at meeting the projected demand for that
year, choosing the most cost-effective options available (TYNDP, 2022). The plots indicate that
the majority of investments in PV and wind production capacity have been prioritized in the
GA and DE scenarios. As outlined in section 5.1, the Pipeline scenario does not include small-
scale PV capacities, thereby excluding prosumer production and these are therefore displayed
separately in figure 18.
The following sections will assess the results from estimating the non-flexible electricity pro-
duction in 2035. Furthermore, the selection of the two-week period to be used for input in the
dispatch optimization model will be determined.
8.1
Capacity factors
As described in section 5.3, the hourly PV and wind production for 2035 is estimated based
on capacity factors calculated over eight climate years. In figure 19, the climate year with the
lowest capacity factors is plotted, showing an example load profile for wind and PV production
in Denmark.
Page 32 of 71
==PAGE:38==
8
2035 SCENARIO GENERATION
Figure 19: Utilization profiles of non-flexible capacities in Denmark 2021 (Energistyrelsen, 2024) (Energinet, 2020)
As seen from the plot, the capacity increases over time, reflecting the mapped commissioning
dates of individual wind turbines and PV installations. Furthermore, the utilization of available
capacities for these two technologies varies significantly, and their utilization rate is far below
100% due to their reliance on meteorological conditions across a country-wide geographical
area. Furthermore, it is observed that PV production has a yearly seasonality pattern, given
increased solar radiation intensity around the summer period. It can therefore be presumed that
the selected two-week period of high residual demand is likely found within a winter period in
a climate year with low wind production.
8.2
Determining the dunkelflaute period
The dunkelflaute period is determined, using TYNDP’s definition, as the two-week period with
the highest residual demand (TYNDP, 2024b). For this study the climate years 2016-2023 have
been used, and each of the years’ worst two-week periods have been found and shown in table
2.
Climate Year
Start/End Date
Avg. Hourly Residual Demand (GWh)
Two-week Period
RCM*
Avg Hourly Residual Demand (GWh)
Climate Year
2016
8th - 21st Jan
283.2
0.76
130.9
2017
15th - 28th Jan
283.9
0.76
117.5
2018
2nd - 15th Jan
250.8
0.67
114.9
2019
20th Jan - 2nd Feb
267.9
0.72
112.6
2020
5th - 18th Dec
242.3
0.65
106.9
2021
2nd - 15th Jan
297.2
0.80
128.3
2022
5th - 18th Dec
281.1
0.76
114.0
2023
16th - 29th Jan
262.3
0.71
113.0
Table 2: The two-weeks of highest residual demand in each climate year
Page 33 of 71
==PAGE:39==
8
2035 SCENARIO GENERATION
By comparing these dunkelflaute periods to specific dates analyzed in a report published by
General Electric, based on data from German TSOs, it can be seen that they outline a similar
period of low wind and PV production which is the same as the determined December 2020 pe-
riod. They specifically highlight three days with less than 10% utilization of available capacity
(Frontier Economics, 2022). From estimating the capacity factors for all climate years, as seen in
table 2, it was found that the winter months have the periods with the highest residual demand.
This trend can be caused by the low availability of renewable production, as shorter daylight
hours and increased cloud cover result in reduced PV output. Additionally, electricity demand
is higher during winter in the selected countries, which are predominantly located in north-
western Europe, where additional heating is required (“Europe’s Energy Crisis - IEA”, 2023).
Furthermore, it is seen that 2021 has the two-week period with the highest residual demand,
wherein the total residual demand was equal to 297.2 GWh. Therefore, the dunkelflaute period,
which will be modeled in this study, is based on the climate year period from 02-01-2021 to 15-
01-2021. The capacity factors estimated for this specific period are therefore used to determine
the 2035 non-flexible power production. Furthermore, it is seen that the residual capacity mar-
gin in the period is 0.8, meaning that the flexible capacity, on average, is sufficient to cover the
demand but may still exceed the available capacity in individual hours or countries. To gain an
understanding of this climate year and specifically the selected two-week period, the 2035 de-
mand and the resulting residual demand from the climate year 2021 have been plotted in figure
20 based on the GA scenario.
Figure 20: 2035 Demand and residual demand for the selected countries in the selected climate year (TYNDP, n.d.-b)
Page 34 of 71
==PAGE:40==
8
2035 SCENARIO GENERATION
From the plot, it is seen that the residual demand within the selected two-week scenario is above
the average residual demand, except for the final few days wherein production from PV and
wind increases. The plot confirms that residual demand tends to be higher in the winter, caused
by increased demand and significantly lower non-flexible production. In contrast, the summer
months exhibit lower demand on average, and increased PV and wind production, which results
in frequent hours with negative residual demand.
For further examination of the selected two-week dunkelflaute period, the demand, residual
demand, and flexible capacity in the four sub-selected countries have been plotted in figure 21.
The values are based on the GA scenario to ensure consistency. Similar plots from the other two
scenarios can be found in appendix 13.8.
Figure 21: Day of highest residual demand compared to Global Ambition 2035 flexible capacity (TYNDP, n.d.-b)
The plots show that Denmark, with its substantial non-flexible production capacity, experiences
an average negative residual demand, indicating a surplus of electricity available for export
or storage. In contrast, Germany’s residual demand is, on average, higher than its available
flexible capacities. This gap would need to be addressed through cross-border transmission or
the dispatch of stored electricity to prevent energy shortfalls. The plots for Norway and France
show that their investments, particularly in hydroelectric and nuclear power, provide excess
flexible capacity to cover residual demand, while enabling surplus electricity to be transmitted
internationally or stored.
Page 35 of 71
==PAGE:41==
9
DISPATCH OPTIMIZATION MODEL
8.3
Modeling input
As the dunkelflaute period and capacity factors have been determined, all the required input for
the dispatch optimization model has been found. Table 3 shows an overview of the scenarios
and their key differences.
Input measure
Global Ambition
Distributed Energy
Pipeline
Period
2nd - 15th Jan 2035
2nd - 15th Jan 2035
2nd - 15th Jan 2035
Avg. hourly demand (GWh)
424.8
445.2
426.4
Avg. hourly non-flexible production (GWh)
127.6
129.0
75.2
Sum of Flexible Capacity (GW)
371.7
347.5
279.8
Charging capacities (GW)
102.6
102.6
30.8
Discharging capacities (GW)
104.0
104.0
30.8
Maximum storage capacity (GWh)
547.5
547.5
307.9
Table 3: Input for the three 2035 scenarios (TYNDP, n.d.-a) (TYNDP, n.d.-b) (Global Energy Monitor, 2024)
The table highlights differences across the three scenarios. The GA scenario exhibits the high-
est sum of flexible capacity, and the lowest average hourly demand thereby providing the best
conditions of the three scenarios for avoiding ENS. Similarly, the DE scenario has a consider-
able amount of flexible capacity, charging and discharging capacities, and storage capacity, but
slightly higher average hourly demand compared to GA. In contrast, the Pipeline scenario has
substantially lower values for flexible capacity, charging, and discharging capacities. Moreover,
it has the lowest average hourly non-flexible production given reduced PV and wind capacity,
as only currently planned developments are included. The Pipeline input data is thereby the
scenario with the smallest capacities in all aspects, increasing the probability of observing ENS.
9
Dispatch optimization model
As presented in the methodology section 5.4, a dispatch optimization model has been developed
to interpret the impact of dunkelflaute in 2035. The results span three scenarios with each of
them having three sub-scenarios to model various forced outage rates. The following sections
will consist of a deep dive into the results generated from the dispatch optimization model,
along with key findings based on the results.
9.1
Dispatching results
From the dispatch optimization model, the amount of dispatched flexible production capacity,
ENS, and battery decisions has been determined. The production from non-flexible production
capacities and the quantity of demand to be satisfied were predetermined for the model devel-
opment and used as input with the use of the capacity factor estimated in section 8.1 and the
2035 capacities.
Page 36 of 71
==PAGE:42==
9
DISPATCH OPTIMIZATION MODEL
Figure 22: Dispatched electricity in each of the 2035 scenarios
Figure 22 shows an overview of dispatched- and input electricity production as a sum of the 11
selected countries for the three described scenarios. From this figure, it is seen that the DE and
GA scenarios share similarities, as expected, although there is more ENS in the DE scenario. This
difference can primarily be explained by the GA scenario having a lower demand. Furthermore,
it is seen in both the GA and DE scenarios that there are 14 demand spikes throughout the period,
which corresponds to the peak demand hours of the 14 days. In these hours, stored electricity is
dispatched to avoid or minimize the ENS. The Pipeline scenario shows a significantly different
output with a significant amount of ENS across most hours. This ENS can be explained by the
lower amount of available production and storage capacities across the 11 selected countries.
For all scenarios, it is seen that there are periods of ENS and that the system in the selected coun-
tries is strained as a result of the meteorological conditions with limited PV and wind production
from the selected climate year. While there is close to 300 GW of available PV capacity in the
DE and GA scenario they only produce electricity in a limited amount of hours throughout each
day, at reduced output as outlined in section 8.1. From the model input, it could be observed that
some countries have hours wherein the non-flexible production exceeds their national demand,
Page 37 of 71
==PAGE:43==
9
DISPATCH OPTIMIZATION MODEL
export, and charging of storage capacity, which results in curtailment of non-flexible produc-
tion. This happened particularly for Denmark in the GA and DE scenario, and Sweden in the
Pipeline scenario, which could indicate that an increase of national storage capacity and NTC
to neighboring countries could decrease the total ENS experienced in the modeled system. An
overview of the curtailment in the scenarios can be found in appendix 13.9.
The transmission between countries provides an insight into which countries potentially have a
lack or surplus of production capacity compared to their demand. The country-specific NTCs
are the same for all scenarios, however, the resulting amount of transmission throughout the
period can differ.
Figure 23: Net export/import in the three 2035 scenarios
Figure 23 shows the total amount of imports and exports in the dunkelflaute period. In the
GA and DE scenarios, the Scandinavian countries, France, Poland, and the United Kingdom
are net exporters, responsible for supplementing electricity to support the insufficient national
supply in Germany, Netherlands, and Belgium, which are net importing countries. The Pipeline
scenario exhibits similar transmission patterns despite the total amount of transmission being
significantly lower, given a decreased supply in almost all countries. Germany’s substantial
need for imports from other countries indicates a severe need for increased national electricity
production capabilities.
As mentioned in section 3.1.1, electricity storage in batteries and pumped storage can dimin-
ish electricity price spikes. As this model has perfect information for the batteries the storage
capacity will be used in any chance possible to diminish ENS. Figure 24 shows a plot of the
state of charge for the stored capacities for each country in each scenario, which provides an
understanding of each country’s ability to store electricity in periods of low residual demand.
Page 38 of 71
==PAGE:44==
9
DISPATCH OPTIMIZATION MODEL
Figure 24: Electricity storage utilization in the three 2035 scenarios
From the plot, it is clear that in the GA scenario, the countries use their storage potential when-
ever possible, particularly in the low-demand and higher non-flexible production periods. Al-
most 500 GWh of electricity is stored in either pumped storage or batteries across the selected
countries. The DE scenario has a similar state of charge throughout the period, however, the DE
scenario does not have the ability to store as much electricity in the first 150 hours. This is partly
caused by lower demand in the GA scenario, which allows for increased utilization of storage
capabilities and discharge of stored capacity to diminish ENS. In the Pipeline scenario, there
is clearly a lack of production capacity, and storage capacities, resulting in lower utilization of
storage during the 14 days.
9.2
Deep dive of selected countries
As in the analysis of historical generation adequacy, a deep dive into the four sub-selected coun-
tries (Germany, Denmark, France, and Norway) has been carried out to examine and understand
underlying results, which can not be seen from the overview of all countries.
Page 39 of 71
==PAGE:45==
9
DISPATCH OPTIMIZATION MODEL
Figure 25: Dispatched electricity and import in the four sub-selected countries
Figure 25 shows the plot for the dispatch, ENS, and transmission for the four countries in the GA
scenario, while the other scenarios can be found in appendix 13.10. Export is added to the de-
mand line for this plot. From the conclusions in the historical generation adequacy assessment,
it was presumed that Denmark could experience poor security of supply caused by the depen-
dence on non-flexible capacity. However, Denmark, France, and Norway do not exhibit ENS in
this scenario as Denmark’s substantial wind capacity sufficiently covers the national demand.
Denmark experiences significant imports due to its substantial NTC capacity with Germany, en-
abling increased transmission to the German grid. Germany has large spikes of ENS, peaking at
78.6 GWh in the GA scenario, 98.6GWh in the DE scenario, and 120.4 GWh in the Pipeline sce-
nario. This means that if Germany would need to cover demand in all hours of the dunkelflaute
period, in the Pipeline scenario, they would need to increase their available dispatchable electric-
ity with 120 GW either through added flexible capacity, transmission, or demand side response.
This will be further discussed in section 11.
Page 40 of 71
==PAGE:46==
9
DISPATCH OPTIMIZATION MODEL
Figure 26: Flexible production in the four sub-selected countries in each 2035 scenario
Looking into each of the countries usage of flexible capacity, it is seen in figure 26 how flexible
production differs between the three scenarios. From the plot, it is evident that the first 200
hours require all four countries to use all of their capacity, while the decreased demand from
hour 200 to 300 allows for less flexible production in the GA and DE scenarios. In the Pipeline
scenario, the flexible capacity is required to be fully utilized in the four countries throughout the
entire period.
9.3
Energy not served and impact on cost
Given the output from the model, it is possible to provide an estimation of how the national
prices of electricity could be affected in 2035. Table 4 contains a breakdown of the system cost
in each country in the dunkelflaute period, only considering the emission- and fuel costs for
production.
Page 41 of 71
==PAGE:47==
9
DISPATCH OPTIMIZATION MODEL
Global Ambition
Hourly average (1000 Euro)
AT
BE
CH
DE
DK
FR
NL
NO
PL
SE
UK
Production cost
24.71
45.48
3.90
290.12
24.45
117.80
101.03
0.00
97.84
2.53
168.14
Import cost
77.90
152.09
65.99
124.86
17.94
79.88
74.39
0.00
1.83
0.00
58.67
ENS cost
1593.34
1512.77
0.00
32526.22
0.00
0.00
3794.92
0.00
0.00
0.00
1239.03
Export revenue
145.28
121.91
82.65
78.00
118.87
146.02
272.41
0.00
129.69
3.21
137.65
Total cost
1550.67
1588.43
-12.75
32863.20
-76.48
51.66
3697.93
0.00
-30.02
-0.69
1328.18
Distributed Energy
Hourly average (1000 Euro)
AT
BE
CH
DE
DK
FR
NL
NO
PL
SE
UK
Production cost
26.10
48.09
4.07
298.96
25.69
113.45
110.88
0.00
111.13
3.90
179.53
Import cost
72.16
190.07
104.40
123.72
20.74
173.38
74.15
0.00
2.30
1.79
55.69
ENS cost
3091.82
5847.52
1.66
56599.38
217.33
914.73
11872.21
0.00
371.34
15.76
5282.21
Export revenue
135.90
129.32
63.56
90.09
126.71
185.84
248.96
0.00
124.07
12.30
187.32
Total cost
3054.18
5956.36
46.58
56931.97
137.06
1015.72
11808.29
0.00
360.70
9.14
5330.11
Pipeline
Hourly average (1000 Euro)
AT
BE
CH
DE
DK
FR
NL
NO
PL
SE
UK
Production cost
74.53
50.92
5.24
405.93
15.90
156.07
107.08
9.18
173.77
26.58
241.06
Import cost
58.62
268.63
193.79
134.23
54.75
279.83
57.69
49.95
6.83
18.69
82.12
ENS cost
13191.61
21196.19
646.13
182215.39
1767.74
8100.10
26302.30
1657.94
10982.07
527.29
24199.58
Export revenue
76.82
89.71
115.30
185.91
104.65
274.63
194.94
28.30
109.61
40.04
198.54
Total cost
13247.94
21426.03
729.87
182569.64
1733.74
8261.38
26272.13
1688.77
11053.06
532.53
24324.22
Table 4: Overview of cost in each country in the three 2035 scenarios
The table underlines that the countries relying on renewables have a lower cost compared to the
countries that rely on flexible technologies. From the tables, it is evident that the main share of
the cost comes from ENS, given the price of 3000 Euro/MWh. For example, 98.8% of Germany’s
total cost stems from ENS in all scenarios, providing an economic incentive for investment in
the expansion of electricity production capacity.
To further analyze the ENS pattern and its impact on consumer prices, figure 27 presents the
results of the hourly average ENS along with the three sub-scenarios incorporating forced outage
rates.
Figure 27: Average daily energy not served pattern for all selected countries
Page 42 of 71
==PAGE:48==
9
DISPATCH OPTIMIZATION MODEL
From the plot, it is seen that the pattern of ENS follows the daily demand pattern described
in section 3.2, with peak loads in the morning and afternoon hours. As ENS contributes to
the majority share of the total cost, this ENS pattern is also relevant for electricity prices, as
it shows that the peak hours will become significantly more expensive, considering that the
Pipeline scenario has a peak ENS of 160 GWh. In evaluating the FOR quantiles, it is seen that
the 90th quantile scenarios have more ENS in all hours, especially in the GA scenario. The 10th
quantile is very similar to the average scenarios as there are only a few hours with less ENS
compared to the average. A full overview of the results estimated for each of the sub-scenarios
can be seen in appendix 13.11.
Although the ENS patterns are similar in the three scenarios, the quantity of ENS varies sig-
nificantly. To address the amount of ENS and research it further, the key metrics for assessing
generation adequacy have been detailed in table 5.
Global Ambition
AT
BE
CH
DE
DK
FR
NL
NO
PL
SE
UK
Sum of ENS (GWh)
178.5
169.4
0.0
3642.9
0.0
0.0
425.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
138.8
Hourly avg. ENS (GWh)
0.5
0.5
0.0
10.8
0.0
0.0
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4
Peak ENS (GWh)
6.14
8.65
0.00
78.62
0.00
0.00
15.89
0.00
0.00
0.00
25.01
Avg. hourly ENS price impact (Euro/GWh)
107.51
85.99
0.00
297.81
0.00
0.00
155.16
0.00
0.00
0.00
18.76
LOLE
53
47
0
116
0
0
71
0
0
0
19
Demand fulfilled
96.5%
97.2%
100.0%
91.0%
100.0%
100.0%
95.1%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
99.4%
Distributed Energy
AT
BE
CH
DE
DK
FR
NL
NO
PL
SE
UK
Sum of ENS (GWh)
346.28
654.92
0.19
6339.13
24.34
102.45
1329.69
0.00
41.59
1.77
591.61
Hourly avg. ENS (GWh)
1.03
1.95
0.00
18.87
0.07
0.30
3.96
0.00
0.12
0.01
1.76
Peak ENS (GWh)
8.00
16.57
0.19
98.64
3.04
11.04
18.46
0.00
6.90
0.55
33.84
Avg. hourly ENS price impact (Euro/GWh)
196.43
320.53
0.17
525.02
33.84
10.31
488.81
0.00
12.14
0.61
81.03
LOLE
101
117
1
167
17
17
145
0
28
4
55
Demand fulfilled
94%
90%
100%
85%
99%
100%
86%
100%
100%
100%
97%
Pipeline
AT
BE
CH
DE
DK
FR
NL
NO
PL
SE
UK
Sum of ENS (GWh)
1477.5
2374.0
72.4
20408.1
198.0
907.2
2945.9
185.7
1230.0
59.1
2710.4
Hourly avg. ENS (GWh)
4.4
7.1
0.2
60.7
0.6
2.7
8.8
0.6
3.7
0.2
8.1
Peak ENS (GWh)
11.95
21.56
1.96
120.42
7.37
19.01
23.05
4.93
17.51
6.64
43.44
Avg. hourly ENS price impact (Euro/GWh)
1264.00
1811.54
67.79
3044.67
308.10
98.37
1497.11
68.82
420.46
21.30
421.70
LOLE
296
265
93
331
69
127
294
77
205
25
180
Demand fulfilled
70.4%
62.4%
97.8%
49.6%
90.7%
96.8%
66.7%
97.8%
87.7%
99.3%
87.7%
Table 5: Overview of energy not served and generation adequacy for each country in the three 2035 scenarios
The table reveals notable differences in system performance across the three scenarios. The GA
scenario is seen as the most reliable option, with consistently low ENS values, minimal Loss of
Load Expectation (LOLE), and demand fulfillment nearing 100% across most countries. In con-
trast, the Pipeline scenario struggles significantly, particularly in Germany, where ENS reaches
20408 GWh, LOLE is 331 hours, and only 49.6% of demand is fulfilled. This highlights severe
system reliability issues. The DE scenario offers moderate performance but faces challenges in
countries like the Netherlands, where demand fulfillment decreases by an additional 9% com-
pared to the GA scenario. It is clear from the ENS in the Pipeline scenario, where only planned
Page 43 of 71
==PAGE:49==
10
DISCUSSION
investments are considered, that Germany and the Netherlands are poorly equipped to handle
periods of extreme demand and low non-flexible production. A measure of the price impact of
ENS has been calculated, as the average cost of ENS divided by the average quantity of demand
fulfillment. This measure defines how much the resulting end price to consumers would be af-
fected by ENS, if these ENS costs were imposed on them. This cost value can be compared across
countries, as it has been scaled to represent the cost of ENS per GWh of electricity supplied. The
price impacts once again indicate that Germany is most affected, followed by the Netherlands
and Austria.
9.4
Sub conclusion dispatch optimization model
The results from the dispatch optimization model show vulnerabilities in the modeled electricity
system in all three scenarios. In the GA and DE scenarios, the flexible capacities are dispatched
to cover demand in a majority of hours and utilize the transmission capacities frequently to
transfer electricity from countries with surplus capacity. Electricity storage capabilities are simi-
larly utilized to reduce ENS in peak-load hours, by charging and discharging whenever possible
and economically optimal. The Pipeline scenario has significantly more ENS, primarily due to
the difference in available non-flexible capacities and storage capabilities. However, as further
development of electricity assets can still be planned in the coming ten years, particularly for
non-flexible capacities, there is a potential for further capacity to be added in the Pipeline sce-
nario, which would diminish the resulting ENS. Furthermore, the results show a possibility
of further increasing storage capabilities in all three scenarios to decrease LOLE and ENS as
it would allow for increased dispatching of electricity in peak load hours and thereby reduce
consumer prices.
The Netherlands, Germany, and Belgium are, in all of the three scenarios, the countries with
the lowest demand fulfillment, highlighting a need for the development of flexibility measures
in their power system. This would require strategic planning to ensure that investments and
improvements of flexibility enable demand fulfillment in a dunkelflaute period.
10
Discussion
Constructing a model to predict ten years ahead has an inherent uncertainty, especially in a
market as complex as the electricity market. There are multiple variations of models, which can
be used to assess future generation adequacy, all with endless setup configurations. Some of
these include the incorporation of consumer flexibility, removing perfect information for battery
dispatch, inclusion of more countries, bidding zones, variable flexible capacities or longer time
horizons. Similarly, there are various metrics to assess the security of supply and generation
adequacy, which depend on the type of model and its capabilities. The primary goal of a future
Page 44 of 71
==PAGE:50==
10
DISCUSSION
dispatch model is to accurately reflect reality and capture intrinsic dependencies. However,
when modeling far into the future, the objective is to provide the best possible estimate of the
electricity landscape, enabling the assessment and discussion of various scenarios. While it is
impossible to precisely model future capacities and the development of each technology, this
study employs state-of-the-art estimations and techniques to incorporate as much realism as the
scope of the study permits. The impact of the aforementioned configurations and topics most
relevant to this study will be discussed in the following sections.
10.1
Modeling Techniques
The developed dispatch optimization model is based on standardized methodologies for as-
sessing generation adequacy, as described by similar studies from section 4.1. However, some
alternative approaches have been identified, which could be used to further enhance the realism
and accuracy of the developed model. The implementation of these and the potential impact on
the result are discussed in the following sections.
10.1.1
Simulation of forced outage
As described in the methodology section, the forced outage values used for defining the range
of ENS outlined in section 5.4 are based on statistical probabilities of forced outages provided by
the ERAA report (ERAA, 2023). Using Monte-Carlo simulation in this study for computing mul-
tiple realizations of forced outages would enable the calculation of a measure of the EENS within
the selected dunkelflaute period, rather than a range of ENS values. As EENS is a standard met-
ric used within the industry, the results obtained within this report could be validated further by
implementing this approach and benchmarked against historical or other future-generation dis-
patch models (EU Commission, 2016). However, given the running time of the developed model
and the time constraint on this study, it was not feasible to perform the number of Monte-Carlo
simulations to achieve convergence of the coefficient for the variance of ENS. Additionally, the
capacities of individual generation plants are not known in the DE and GA scenarios, which
would have to be ascertained to simulate the forced outage using stochastic events. To accu-
rately perform the Monte-Carlo simulation, the distribution of expected forced outages would
also have to be determined since this was not described in the ERAA report beyond the average
and quantile values provided. This distribution could be determined based on the historical dis-
tribution of forced outages, which is reported for electricity plants on ENTSO-E’s Transparency
platform (“ENTSO-E Transparency Platform”, n.d.). If this methodology was incorporated into
the developed model, a measure of EENS could be calculated, and a realistic simulation of vari-
able outages on power production capacities could be modeled. Moreover, the resulting model
would instead have a probabilistic approach rather than a deterministic approach, as described
Page 45 of 71
==PAGE:51==
10
DISCUSSION
in section 4.1, as the resulting dispatch of electricity would be dependent on the randomized
stochastic forced outages.
Forced outages on transmission lines could also have been included in the model, as in the ERAA
project, using similar Monte Carlo simulations. In the model created and presented in section
5.4, the cross-border transmission lines between countries are summarized as a total connection
capacity and treated as if it were one transmission line. Therefore, the resulting amount of lost
transmission capacity resulting from a forced outage could not be modeled, without knowing
the capacity of the individual lines and the fraction of capacity lost on a transmission line from
a forced outage. Including these in the model would have enabled a more realistic simulation of
the available transmission capacity by accounting for stochastic forced outages on specific lines.
This would reduce the quantity of electricity that could be sent between countries, and could
thereby lead to ENS in countries that rely on that electricity for satisfying demand.
10.1.2
Day-ahead forecasting
An alternative approach for modeling the dispatching of electricity on a system-wide scale
would be to emulate how electricity is dispatched on the electricity market as described in sec-
tion 3.2. To implement this in the dispatch optimization model it would require the inclusion
of additional functionalities. Since the initial dispatch level of electricity would be defined on
the day-ahead market, a methodology for forecasting both demand and non-flexible produc-
tion would have to be implemented. For increased accuracy, this forecasting step would have
to be performed for each day to include the most recent day’s data. Using forecasting meth-
ods like time-series models, seasonality, or exogenous variables with forecasted meteorological
conditions could be included to increase forecast accuracy.
To balance electricity supply with demand, a separate auction for balancing reserve capacity
is conducted on the intra-day market. This capacity is dispatched on an hourly basis to cover
the difference between forecasted and actual demand (Nord Pool, n.d.-a). Using this approach
would affect how storage capacities would function. Since a model with this setup would no
longer have perfect information, the charging and discharging of electricity could no longer
be performed at the economically optimal time to reduce system cost. Planned charging and
discharging would therefore have to be based on the day-ahead horizons, depending on whether
the forecasted development of the electricity price is going to be higher or lower in the coming
period.
In conclusion, a model with this setup would have a increased degree of complexity due to
the implementation of forecasting, balancing reserve, and underlying model modifications, but
could capture a higher degree of realism from the electricity pricing market. This modeling setup
was not used due to the complexity and increased model runtime when adding intermediate
forecasting. Furthermore, it was important to retain accurate utilization of available production
Page 46 of 71
==PAGE:52==
10
DISCUSSION
capacities and electricity storage mechanisms to cover demand for mitigating ENS, which would
have been difficult when considering potential forecasting inaccuracy.
10.2
Consumer price calculation
In the developed dispatch optimization model, the production cost defined for each technology
is solely based on the fuel- and carbon emission cost for each of the utilized flexible technolo-
gies. Based on these, a lower bound for the production price could be found by setting the
price as the cost of the most expensive activated technology, using the merit order principle. In
the input, the most expensive technology possible to activate, light oil, has a combined fuel and
emission cost of 74.12 EUR/MWh. This maximum price per MWh is significantly lower than the
expected price to be paid by consumers, as prices in Germany, for example, were approximately
395.1 EUR/MWh on average in the first half of 2024 (Eurostat, 2024). This difference between
the lower bound production price and the observed consumer price is caused by the inclusion
of taxes, surcharges, network charges, and fees (Eurelectric, 2024). For example, only 31% of the
final consumer price of electricity in Europe was the cost of production, with a minor share of
this covering fuel and emission prices, whereas the remaining 69% was the various aforemen-
tioned charges (Eurelectric, 2024). The modeled costs do therefore only cover a minor share of
the production costs, as they do not include variable operation and maintenance costs, coverage
of fixed operational costs, and transmission losses. Without further data and insights into how
marginal cost calculations are carried out for 2035, including the aforementioned costs, an ac-
curate measure of expected commodity price can not be calculated. Although the calculation of
the remaining costs could have been useful for comparison against historical prices observed, it
was deemed of lesser relevance for the assessment of overall generation adequacy, which is the
defined purpose of this study.
10.3
Dunkelflaute duration
This study has used the definition of dunkelflaute provided by TYNDP, which defines the du-
ration as two weeks. However, there are various durations of a dunkelflaute that could have
been selected given the uncertainty of future meteorological conditions. An analysis conducted
by Germany’s Meteorological Service found that there are, on average, two periods each year
where weather conditions reduce renewable power output from PV and wind power to less
than 10% of the nominal output for a duration of 48 hours (Deutscher Wetterdienst, 2018). If this
shorter period coincides with high demand, there would be significant strain on the electric-
ity grid. The two-day duration could, therefore, be used as an alternate dunkelflaute scenario,
with a increased probability of occurrence compared to the two-week scenario. The selected
two-week scenario does have a higher nominal output than 10%, on average, as observed in the
48-hour scenario. Prolonged periods with electricity output below this threshold are less likely
Page 47 of 71
==PAGE:53==
10
DISCUSSION
to occur over two weeks, particularly when modeling 11 countries. However, if the model de-
veloped in this study would only consider 48 hours, it would be difficult to assess the overall
national generation adequacy given the limited time span, as it would make the output much
more sensitive to minor model input modifications. For example, the starting state of charge of
batteries, as it would be able to cover a significant portion of peak load for two days in many
countries if the batteries were fully charged.
In figure 28, an extract of the two days with the highest total ENS from the model results has been
highlighted to assess how the dispatching of electricity could be displayed in such an alternate
time frame.
Figure 28: 48 hours with highest energy not served in the three 2035 scenarios
This plot shows that this duration is, on average, worse than the two-week period, as these 48
hours exhibit ENS in every hour across all three scenarios. In these 48 hours, there is dispatch-
ing of stored electricity charged in the preceding days, which would not have been available
given a starting state-of-charge at zero. However, to evaluate generation adequacy on a system
level, utilization of storage capabilities is an important tool for minimizing ENS, making a two-
week period better suited. Additionally, the longer time frame provides a more comprehensive
evaluation of the system’s ability to handle prolonged stress periods and fluctuating renewable
generation rather than an analysis of a short duration of unexpectedly high residual demand.
10.4
Flexibility levers
There are multiple ways of achieving increased flexibility, as elaborated in section 3.2, among
these is consumer flexibility. This study does not take into account that ENS can be decreased
through demand-side response programs or other initiatives to increase flexibility, as the value
of lost load is unknown. Consumer flexibility would impact the electricity dispatch, as the load
Page 48 of 71
==PAGE:54==
10
DISCUSSION
curve would be laterally shifted, changing the intersection with the supply curve and thereby
reducing the amount of ENS and decreasing system costs. The GA and DE scenarios do have a
defined available demand-side response capacity, equal to 62.5 GW, across all 11 selected coun-
tries (TYNDP, n.d.-a) (TYNDP, n.d.-b). This demand-side response could be incorporated into
the model as demand elasticity to reduce the total demand in peak load hours resulting in less
ENS across the 11 countries. However, there would still be ENS in the scenarios as the peak ENS
in the DE scenario is 176.5 GWh and 116.4 GWh in the GA scenario. Since the model does not
determine a consumer price, and demand-side response is presumed to follow these, it was not
included in the model.
In addition to demand-side response programs, increased flexibility can be achieved through
further investment in storage capabilities. There is currently extensive research and develop-
ment in electrolyzers and power-to-x technologies, which would enable the storage of electricity
as combustible gasses or liquids and thereby increase flexibility (“Electrolysers - Energy Sys-
tem - IEA”, n.d.). The inclusion of electrolyzer and power-to-x technologies would require the
expected gas grid to be implemented in the model and therefore deemed out of scope for this
study. These technologies would have an impact on ENS especially in scenarios with high de-
mand volatility and with periods of surplus electricity production to be stored. Electrolyzer stor-
age capabilities are one of the goals set in the RePower Plan developed as part of the Fit-for-55
goals set in the EU (“Water Electrolysis and Hydrogen”, 2023). Furthermore, it is currently being
researched how the projected growth in the adoption of EVs can be used to increase flexibility
through vehicle-to-grid storage and transmission. Vehicle-to-grid would mean that consumers
with an EV capable of discharging to the grid would indirectly become prosumers (Virta Ltd.,
2024). This would enable grid operators to dispatch stored electricity, particularly outside nor-
mal commuting hours, wherein the EVs might be connected to a discharging-enabled station
(Virta Ltd., 2024).
There are many potential routes to implement new flexibility features to the model but the sim-
plest approach would be through an increase in flexible production capacity. If countries were
to invest in new flexible capacities, it would likely result in a decrease in LOLE as the supply
would be able to cover demand in periods with low non-flexible production. However, this
would result in increased production costs given the zero marginal production cost approach
for non-flexible production. In contrast, there is also a possibility of countries not delivering
on their climate plans and thereby having less available non-flexible capacity than expected. A
decrease in non-flexible capacities or reallocation of political ambitions for decommissioning of
flexible assets would have a substantial impact on the modeling results and could be considered
a realistic future, as indicated by some of the latest developments seen in the wind industry.
For example, Denmark’s latest offshore wind auction of 3 GW concluded without any bids from
any developers, which could delay the currently estimated capacity ambitions (Santaella, 2024).
This would potentially result in a decreased power output from zero-cost non-flexible produc-
Page 49 of 71
==PAGE:55==
10
DISCUSSION
tion while forcing stakeholders to withhold plans for the decommissioning of flexible production
assets.
Transmission may also be considered an important tool for mitigating the risk of significant re-
liance on non-flexible production sources. As described in section 7.4, patterns of sustained low
PV and wind production are less likely to persist across a geographical area, as meteorological
conditions may vary in different regions of the European continent. To leverage the variation in
non-flexible supply, sufficient cross-border transfer capacities need to be available, enabling the
transmission of production from regions with surplus to regions with insufficient supply. How-
ever, it should be considered that in the dispatch optimization model created for this study, the
selected 11 countries were modeled as a closed system, wherein electricity could only be traded
among these. This means that if additional countries were modeled, including countries outside
of the European continents with connections to a European nation, electricity could have been
supplied from these regions to cover ENS, or to provide electricity at a lower cost than those
dispatched in the three scenarios. Although adding additional countries could decrease ENS
for some of the modeled countries, a cut-off was decided at 11 countries due to the complexity
of gathering sufficient data, particularly on the historic non-flexible production and capacities
used to construct the capacity factor profiles.
10.5
Sector electrification
The demand input used for the three scenarios is all based on the 2035 scenarios developed by
TYNDP, wherein hourly load profiles were constructed based on various input data (TYNDP,
2024b). These forecasted demand profiles use a target demand estimate, which is a defined
yearly total target demand that the forecast seeks to satisfy. In the 2035 GA and DE scenarios, the
target demand is based on an average between the expected demand in the 2030 NT+ scenario
and the corresponding GA and DE 2040 demand, visualized by sector in appendix 13.12. It is
seen that compared to the reference year, 2019, the total demand has increased in both scenarios.
This increase in demand is caused by electrification, predominantly within the transport and
industry sectors. The plot also shows that the DE scenario has higher demand than the GA
scenario, caused by further electrification, particularly in the industry sector.
Given the impact on demand, it is relevant to discuss how different sectoral electrification as-
sumptions might affect the modeled scenarios. The electrification of the transport sector pro-
posed in the TYNDP scenarios is primarily caused by the adoption of EVs (TYNDP, 2024a). If
this sector were to experience further electrification compared to the current scenarios, changes
to the resulting demand patterns might occur depending on which branch of the transportation
sector is electrified. These changes can be described by the charging behavior of EV users, as they
are dependent on whether the EV is primarily charged at home, at public charging stations, or
businesses (Sæle, 2024). Based on a survey performed in Norway, at-home charging is generally
Page 50 of 71
==PAGE:56==
11
RESULT COMPARISON
performed during night time, during base load hours, which would contribute to load shifting
away from peak load hours (Sæle, 2024). If the utilization of standalone charging stations, or
stations located at businesses, increased further, wherein charging usually occurs during the
daytime, it would increase the peak load and negatively impact generation adequacy. How-
ever, if vehicle-to-grid was implemented, the problem of increased peak load from increased EV
adoption would be remedied by discharging, particularly in peak hours, given the tendency of
higher prices.
Demand-side response initiatives targeting electricity-heavy industries could encourage shifting
of demand to base load hours. Increasing the electrification of the heating sector would simi-
larly increase demand at all hours of the day but would further increase the yearly seasonality
of electricity demand, as more heating is required in the winter. Given that the dunkelflaute
periods occur in the winter months, for the eight climate years analyzed for this study, it would
further increase the vulnerability to periods with low non-flexible production.
11
Result comparison
The results obtained within this study will, in this section, be compared to analyses and conclu-
sions found in other relevant studies to assess how the results align. The results from the DE
and Pipeline scenarios showed that most countries, except Norway, had ENS at some point in
the dunkelflaute period, while approximately half of the countries had ENS at some point in
the GA scenario. However, as shown in table 5, a few countries had particularly poor genera-
tion adequacy, as indicated by the determined quantity of ENS, wherein especially Germany is
vulnerable.
The report published by General Electric in 2022, analyzed Germany’s future generation ad-
equacy in the medium-term (2030 and 2035) and the long-term (2045 and 2050) (Frontier Eco-
nomics, 2022). This report is based on an electricity plan called ’Netzentwicklungsplan 2037/2045’
created by German TSOs. The General Electric report was created shortly after the Russian inva-
sion of Ukraine, which was a period wherein the decreased supply of gas from Russia had placed
a substantial strain on Germany’s electricity production Frontier Economics, 2022). The report
highlights the same risks as found in this study regarding the security of supply as a result of the
planned decommissioning of flexible capacity and increased reliance on PV and wind capacities.
This is worsened given an expected doubling of electricity demand towards 2045. This strategy
is particularly risky as there was already an increased probability of black- and brownouts in
2022, which means that security of supply will be difficult to guarantee in the future, especially
in a dunkelflaute scenario (Frontier Economics, 2022). As mentioned in section 9.2, the maxi-
mum ENS for Germany in one hour was 78.6 GWh in GA, 98.6 GWh in DE, and 120.4 GWh in
Pipeline, which, in the simplest case, could be interpreted as the amount of additional flexible
Page 51 of 71
==PAGE:57==
11
RESULT COMPARISON
capacity needed to cover the demand in Germany, to avoid ENS. For comparison, the General
Electric report estimates that between 14-42 GW, of additional flexible production capacity is
needed in the medium term towards 2030-35, while 26-88 GW is needed in the long term to-
wards 2045-50, to ensure generation adequacy in line with the decarbonization plans (Frontier
Economics, 2022). These additional capacities are somewhat comparable. However, this study
considers a worst-case dunkelflaute scenario, and the General Electric report is assessing the
generation adequacy under normal conditions, which potentially explains the difference seen in
the results.
A report created by TenneT, specifically for the Dutch market, similarly acknowledges the risk
of electricity shortage due to increased demand and dependence on PV and wind production,
while decreasing the available gas, coal, and biomass production sources (TenneT, n.d.-a). The
Netherlands was one of the countries identified to have substantial amount of ENS in the output
of the developed model for this study. However, the Dutch TSO intend to leverage transmission
of electricity across national borders to ensure security of supply, rather than focusing on major
construction of internally controlled capacity ’[...] for the security of supply of the Netherlands and
neighboring countries, it is crucial that the Netherlands discusses and aligns policies which affect the
available production capacity for electricity with neighboring countries in order to jointly avoid shortages,
and ensure a secure supply of electricity to all consumers in the region’ (TenneT, n.d.-a). Although this
aligns with the wind construction projects underway in the North Sea region, it will further
increase reliance on weather conditions. Additionally, reliance on electricity production sources
from Germany, which, according to TYNDPs modeling shown in figure 17, will be the biggest
import capacity available in the Netherlands in 2035, could be a problem given the probability
of similar outages in Germany.
TYNDP reviews the availability of flexible technologies, and the utilization of these, under dif-
ferent climate scenarios constructed by their models (TYNDP, 2024a). Three climate scenarios
from the TYNDP report are seen in appendix 13.13, wherein a dunkelflaute scenario for the GA
and DE scenarios are shown, ranging from the 7th- to the 20th of December. This aligns with
the observations from this study, that a dunkelflaute typically occurs in the winter. The TYNDP
project includes capacities from all 27 EU member states. In this scenario, it is seen that the
flexible capacities have a larger utilization, compared to the other two presented scenarios, pri-
marily caused by the decrease in PV generation in these two weeks. However, in contrast to
the results from this study, TYNDP’s results does not have any ENS and only a small amount of
demand-side response in the last half of the selected period is observed.
The differences between the results from the TYNDP report and this study could be caused
by multiple factors. The TYNDP analysis consists of a single year, which has a set quantity
of non-flexible production derived from a predefined share of multiple representative climate
years (TYNDP, 2024b). As this study selects the worst two-week period of residual demand,
considering eight climate years, the selected period is potentially worse than the one used for the
Page 52 of 71
==PAGE:58==
12
CONCLUSION
TYNDP report. Furthermore, the TYNDP report spans more countries, resulting in a increased
capability for the transmission of electricity to cover ENS.
Based on this comparative analysis it is concluded that the findings of this study align closely
with the anticipated developments in the modeled countries. The results provide valuable in-
sights for evaluating overall generation adequacy in a period with high residual demand and
highlight improvement measures for ensuring the security of supply.
12
Conclusion
This study has provided a comprehensive analysis of future generation adequacy and dispatch-
ing of electricity production technologies, transmission- and storage mechanisms in a selec-
tion of European countries under three 2035 scenarios: Global Ambition, Distributed Energy,
and Pipeline. The results highlight significant risks to the security of supply in a two-week
dunkelflaute period, which is characterized by high electricity demand and low PV and wind
production. Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands were identified as particularly vulnerable
to energy not served (ENS), primarily driven by the decommissioning of fossil-fueled thermal
plants and investments in weather-dependent PV technologies. In contrast, countries such as
Norway, utilizing hydroelectric power, and France, relying on nuclear power plants, maintained
sufficient generation adequacy only experiencing ENS in the Pipeline scenario. These results
highlight the need for investments in grid flexibility and international political collaboration to
address future electricity system challenges.
The results from the developed dispatch optimization model indicate that investments in system
flexibility improvement measures are needed to mitigate the risks of ENS. These measures in-
clude additional flexible production capacity, storage solutions, international transmission, and
demand-side response programs. Cross-border collaboration enables enhanced grid intercon-
nectivity and sharing of surplus electricity. However, it is still important to ensure the devel-
opment of national flexible production capacity as over-reliance on weather-sensitive technolo-
gies increases vulnerability to dunkelflaute events, as demonstrated by the modeled scenarios.
Investment in these flexibility enhancement technologies enables grid operators to balance elec-
tricity supply in a future wherein PV and wind comprise a significant share of the electricity
mix.
From the results found by the model, it is seen that ENS contributes to the majority share of
the modeled system cost. For example, 98% of Germany’s total cost consists of ENS, with a
loss of load expectancy between 116-331 hours for the three scenarios. Though the estimation
of consumer prices is not included in this study, the significant quantity of ENS would impact
consumer prices, especially in peak load hours of the day wherein ENS reaches 120 GWh in Ger-
many in the Pipeline scenario. However, it is seen from the model that increased investments
Page 53 of 71
==PAGE:59==
12
CONCLUSION
in storage capabilities could mitigate a major share of ENS as it would enable countries to dis-
patch electricity in peak load hours while charging during base load hours. These investments
would have increased value in the future given the expected reliance on non-flexible production
sources without the capability of dispatching electricity in periods of unfavorable meteorologi-
cal conditions.
Studies indicate that demand in the coming years is expected to increase, given the electrification
of sectors and increased adoption of electric vehicles (EVs). With the projected increase of EVs in
transportation sectors, demand would be affected by the vehicle charging behavior of EV users.
Integration of vehicle-to-grid technologies would enable system operators to discharge stored
electricity and increase grid flexibility. However, demand-side response programs that could
target specific sectors may be leveraged to shift demand to base load hours, for example, by
using pricing incentives to reduce demand in peak-load hours.
This study provides opportunities for future research, given the electricity market’s complexity
and the limitations outlined in the report. The model assumes perfect information for battery
dispatch and cross-border transmission without losses, which contributes to overestimated sys-
tem performance. Incorporating stochastic forced outage simulations would further increase the
accuracy of modeling a realistic electricity system. Furthermore, incorporating day-ahead mar-
ket dynamics into the modeling framework would accurately replicate dispatch, storage, and
transmission decisions. Despite these limitations, the results from the dispatch model align with
similar generation adequacy studies conducted by transmission system operators and industry
market reports.
In conclusion, this study highlights the need to address generation adequacy and production
volatility risks in an electricity system reliant on renewables. Combining worst-case scenario
analysis with insights from previous research, it provides a holistic overview of system per-
formance across multiple countries with various electricity capacity compositions. Ensuring a
future with a secure and sustainable electricity supply will require increased flexibility, further
investments, and coordinated actions across the EU to meet decarbonization goals while main-
taining system reliability.
Page 54 of 71
==PAGE:60==
13
APPENDIX
13
Appendix
13.1
ENS from Monte-Carlo Simulations, FOR
Figure 29: Monte Carlo simulation of forced outages (ERAA, 2023)
13.2
Coal phaseout plan
Figure 30: Timeline of coal phase-out (“Europe’s coal exit - Beyond Fossil Fuels”, 2024)
13.3
Linear Program Formulation
Battery constraints are defined for both utility-scale batteries and pumped storage, as separate parameters, decision
variables and constraints. Only one of these are shown below.
Sets
• H: Set of hours, H = {1, 2, . . . , 336}
• L: Set of locations (countries), L = {1, 2, . . . , l}
• T: Set of technologies, T = {1, 2, . . . , t}
Parameters
• Dh,l: Electricity demand at hour h and location l.
Page 55 of 71
==PAGE:61==
13
APPENDIX
• Pwh,l: Wind production at hour h and location l.
• Psh,l: Solar production at hour h and location l.
• Kt,l: Maximum production capacity of technology t at location l.
• GL1,L2: Maximum transmission capacity between location l1 and l2.
• storage_efficiency: Efficiency of the battery/pumped storage (charge/discharge).
• storage_capacityl: Maximum storage capacity of the battery/pumped storage at location l.
• storage_charge_ratel: Maximum charging rate of the battery/pumped storage at location l.
• storage_discharge_ratel: Maximum discharging rate of the battery/pumped storage at location l.
• ct: Cost of flexible production for technology t.
• Pmax: Penalty cost for unmet demand (energy not served).
• FOR: Forced outage ratio of each technology t.
Decision Variables
• xensh,l ≥0: Unmet demand (energy not served).
• xfh,l,t ≥0: Flexible production for technology t.
• ximporth,l ≥0: Electricity imported at location l.
• xexporth,l ≥0: Electricity exported at location l.
• xflowH,l1,l2 ≥0: Flow of electricity from l1 to l2.
• x_chargeh,l ≥0: Battery/pumped storage charging at location l.
• x_dischargeh,l ≥0: Battery/pumped storage discharging at location l.
• SoCh,l ≥0: Battery/pumped storage state of charge at location l.
Objective Function
Minimize: Z =
∑
h∈H,l∈L,t∈T
ct · x fh,l,t +
∑
h∈H,l∈L
Pmax · xensh,l
Constraints
Energy Balance
Dh,l ≤∑
t∈T
x fh,l,t + Pwh,l + Psh,l + xensh,l + ximporth,l −xexporth,l + x_dischargeh,l −x_chargeh,l,
∀hϵH, lϵL
Battery Dynamics
For H = 1:
SoC1,l = 0,
∀lϵL.
For H > 1:
SoCh,l = SoCh−1,l + storage_efficiency · x_chargeh,l −x_dischargeh−1,l,
∀H > 1, ∀lϵL.
For H = 336:
SoC336,l = 0,
∀lϵL.
Page 56 of 71
==PAGE:62==
13
APPENDIX
Battery Constraints
SoCh,l ≤storage_capacityl,
∀hϵH, lϵL.
x_chargeh,l ≤storage_charge_ratel,
∀hϵH, lϵL.
x_dischargeh,l ≤storage_discharge_ratel,
∀hϵH, lϵL.
Flexible Production Capacity
x fh,l,t ≤Kt,l ∗(1 −FORt
100 ),
∀hϵH, lϵL, tϵT.
Transmission Flow Capacity
xflowh,l,l′ ≤Gl,l′,
∀hϵH, lϵL, l′ϵL′.
Import and Export Constraints
ximporth,l = ∑
l′̸=l
xflowh,l′,l,
∀hϵH, lϵL.
xexporth,l = ∑
l′̸=l
xflowh,l,l′,
∀hϵH, lϵL.
ximporth,l ≤∑
l′̸=l
Gh,l′,l,
∀hϵH, lϵL.
xexporth,l ≤∑
l′̸=l
Gh,l′,l,
∀hϵH, lϵL.
Page 57 of 71
==PAGE:63==
13
APPENDIX
13.4
Fuel and Emissions costs by technology
Global Ambition and Distributed Energy scenarios
Source
Production cost (EUR/MWh)
Nuclear
6.05
Lignite
46.27
Lignite CCS
10.60
Hard coal
44.77
Hard coal CCS
10.23
Gas
45.91
Gas CCS
24.97
Light oil
74.12
Heavy oil
66.52
Oil shale
47.52
Hydro
0
Others renewable
0
Others non-renewable
33.41
Lignite biofuel
45.91
Hard Coal biofuel
44.77
Gas biofuel
45.91
Light oil biofuel
74.12
Heavy oil biofuel
66.52
Oil shale biofuel
47.52
Hydrogen
63.50
Table 6: Production cost per technology used for DE and GA scenario (TYNDP, 2023a)
Pipeline Scenario
Source
Production cost (EUR/MWh)
Nuclear
6.05
Coal
44.77
Gas
45.91
Oil
70.32
Geothermal
0
Hydro
0
Biomass
45.91
Table 7: Production cost per technology used for the Pipeline scenario (TYNDP, 2023a)
13.5
Average, 10th percentile and 90th percentile FOR, by technology
Measure
Coal
Gas
Nuclear
Oil
Hydro
Average
7.8%
5.6%
5.6%
8.4%
1.88%
10th Quantile
4%
5%
5%
8%
1.88%
90th Quantile
10%
8%
6%
8%
1.88%
Table 8: Forced outage rates used in the 2035 scenarios (ERAA, 2024)
Page 58 of 71
==PAGE:64==
13
APPENDIX
13.6
Residual Capacity Margin, EU27+
Country
Average RCM
Worst daily RCM
Austria
0.42
0.68
Belgium
0.58
0.97
Bulgaria
0.40
0.74
Switzerland
0.76
1.08
Cyprus
1.54
3.21
Czechia
0.45
0.65
Germany
0.36
0.69
Denmark
0.24
0.77
Estonia
0.38
1.01
Spain
0.30
0.52
Finland
0.56
0.93
France
0.46
0.80
Greece
0.32
0.59
Croatia
0.49
0.74
Hungary
0.65
1.09
Ireland
0.37
0.73
Italy
0.38
0.57
Lithuania
0.59
0.96
Luxembourg
2.51
3.94
Latvia
0.28
0.38
Netherlands
0.44
0.67
Norway
0.44
0.72
Poland
0.47
0.74
Portugal
0.33
0.64
Romania
0.35
0.55
Sweden
0.40
0.70
Slovakia
0.52
0.69
Slovenia
0.44
0.60
United Kingdom
0.56
0.94
Table 9: Residual capacity margin of EU27+ countries
Page 59 of 71
==PAGE:65==
13
APPENDIX
13.7
Hourly average 2023, remaining countries
Figure 31: Flexible capacity compared to residual demand for the seven remaining countries
Page 60 of 71
==PAGE:66==
13
APPENDIX
13.8
Hourly average 2035, remaining countries
Figure 32: Hourly average of demand compared to flexible capacity, for remaining countries (2035)
Page 61 of 71
==PAGE:67==
13
APPENDIX
13.9
Total curtailment by country, for each scenario
GA scenario
DE scenario
Pipeline scenario
AT
0
0
0
BE
0
0
0
CH
0
0
0
DE
0
0
0
DK
30573 MWh
3602 MWh
1642 MWh
FR
0
0
0
NL
0
0
0
NO
0
0
0
PL
946 MWh
0
0
SE
0
0
504162 MWh
UK
0
0
0
Table 10: Overview of curtailment in the three scenarios
13.10
Pipeline and Distributed Energy, electricity production and demand
Distributed Energy
Figure 33: Dispatched electricity and import of four sub-selected countries in Distributed Energy scenario
Page 62 of 71
==PAGE:68==
13
APPENDIX
Pipeline
Figure 34: Dispatched electricity and import of four sub-selected countries in Pipeline scenario
13.11
Overview of results from scenarios and sub-scenarios
Scenario
Global Ambition
Distributed Energy
Pipeline
Sub-scenario
10th
Avg.
90th
10th
Avg.
90th
10th
Avg.
90th
Sum of flexible production (GWh)
95823
95728
95462
97489
97213
96678
86641
86081
85129
Sum of ENS (GWh)
4453
4554
4817
9166
9432
9956
32015
32568
33507
Hourly avg. ENS (GWh)
13,3
13,6
14,3
27,3
28,1
29,6
95,3
96,9
99,7
Peak ENS (GWh)
115,2
116,4
118,7
174,5
176,0
178,3
252,2
254,0
257,0
Demand fulfilled
96.88%
96.81%
96.62%
93.87%
93.69%
93.34%
77.66%
77.27%
76.61%
Page 63 of 71
==PAGE:69==
13
APPENDIX
13.12
Total electricity demand by sector, TYNDP
Figure 35: Demand by sector, TYNDP scenarios (TYNDP, 2024a)
Page 64 of 71
==PAGE:70==
13
APPENDIX
13.13
Climate scenarios, results from TYNDP project
Figure 36: Three selected climate scenarios, for Distributed Energy and Global Ambition, from the TYNDP project (TYNDP, 2024a)
Page 65 of 71
==PAGE:71==
REFERENCES
References
Branding, E. (2024, November 15). Regulation in power market economics and energy planning.
Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https://montel.energy/blog/how-regulatory-changes-
affect-power-market-economics
Comenuis University in Bratislava. (2017). The role of residual demand in electricity price anal-
ysis and forecasting. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://www.econjournals.com/
index.php/ijeep/article/download/5270/3319/14191
Demand response - iea. (n.d.). Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https://www.iea.org/energy-
system/energy-efficiency-and-demand/demand-response
Deutscher Wetterdienst. (2018). Wetterbedingte risiken der stromproduktion aus erneuerbaren
energien reduzieren. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https : / / www. dwd . de / DE /
klimaumwelt/aktuelle_meldungen/180306/ertragsausfaelle_ee_pk_2018.html
Dispatchable and non-dispatchable sources of electricity. (2023, January 17). Retrieved January
5, 2025, from https://therearchpoint.wordpress.com/2023/01/10/dispatchable-and-
non-dispatchable-sources-of-electricity/
Dratsas, P. A., Psarros, G. N., & Papathanassiou, S. A. (2021, August 20). Battery energy storage
contribution to system adequacy. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14165146
Eckert, V. E., & Sims, T. S. (2023, January 5). Even in crisis, germany extends power exports
to neighbours. https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/even- crisis- germany-
extends-power-exports-neighbours-2023-01-05/
Electricity balancing. (n.d.). Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https://www.acer.europa.eu/
electricity/market-rules/electricity-balancing
Electrification - energy system - iea. (n.d.). Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https://www.iea.
org/energy-system/electricity/electrification
Electrolysers - energy system - iea. (n.d.). https://www.iea.org/energy-system/low-emission-
fuels/electrolysers#programmes
Ember. (2024, October 23). European electricity review 2024 | ember. Retrieved January 5, 2025,
from https://ember-energy.org/latest-insights/european-electricity-review-2024/
Energinet. (2020). Security of electricity supply. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://en.
energinet.dk/about-our-reports/reports/security-of-electricity-supply-report-2020/
Energistyrelsen. (2024, October). Data for eksisterende og afmeldte anlæg. Retrieved January 8,
2025, from https://ens.dk/media/3531/download
Entso-e | planning the future grid - tyndp. (n.d.). https://tyndp.entsoe.eu/explore
Entso-e transparency platform. (n.d.). Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://transparency.
entsoe.eu/dashboard/show
ENTSO-E. (n.d.). Transparency platform. https :/ / transparency.entsoe . eu /generation / r2 /
actualGenerationPerProductionType/show
Page 66 of 71
==PAGE:72==
REFERENCES
ENTSO-E. (2024, December 11). Power statistics. https://www.entsoe.eu/data/power-stats/
ERAA. (2023). Methodology. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https : / / www. entsoe . eu /
outlooks/eraa/2023/report/ERAA_2023_Annex_2_Methodology.pdf
ERAA. (2024, April). European ressource adequacy assessment 2023: Input data and assump-
tions. Retrieved January 7, 2025, from https://www.entsoe.eu/outlooks/eraa/2023/
report/ERAA_2023_Annex_1_Assumptions.pdf
EU Commission. (2016, March). Identification of appropriate generation and system adequacy
standards for the internal electricity market. Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https://
energy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2016-07/Generation%2520adequacy%2520Final%
2520Report_for%2520publication_0.pdf
Eupowerdispatch model | jrc ses. (n.d.). Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://ses.jrc.ec.
europa.eu/eupowerdispatch-model
Eurelectric. (2024, July 19). How are eu electricity prices formed and why have they soared?
https://www.eurelectric.org/in-detail/electricity_prices_explained/
Eurelectric. (2025, January 2). Electricity in 2024: Emissions hit historic low, average prices de-
clined but demand did not pick up - eurelectric - powering people. Retrieved January
5, 2025, from https://www.eurelectric.org/news/electricity-in-2024-emissions-hit-
historic-low-average-prices-declined-but-demand-did-not-pick-up/
Europe, create a custom map. (n.d.). https://www.mapchart.net/europe.html
Europe’s coal exit - beyond fossil fuels. (2024, December 20). https://beyondfossilfuels.org/
europes-coal-exit/
Europe’s energy crisis - iea. (2023, May 9). https://www.iea.org/commentaries/europe-s-
energy-crisis-understanding-the-drivers-of-the-fall-in-electricity-demand
European Association for Storage of Energy. (2016, July). Pumed hydro storage. Retrieved Jan-
uary 6, 2025, from https://ease-storage.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/EASE_TD_
Mechanical_PHS.pdf
European Commission. (n.d.). 2050 long-term strategy. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://
climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/climate-strategies-targets/2050-long-term-strategy_en
European Council. (2024, April 4). How is eu electricity produced and sold? Retrieved January 5,
2025, from https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/infographics/how-is-eu-electricity-
produced-and-sold/
European Union. (2013). Commission regulation (eu) no 543/2013. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2013:163:0001:0012:EN:PDF
Eurostat. (2024, October). Electricity price statistics. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://ec.
europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Electricity_price_statistics#:
~:text=For%20household%20consumers%20in%20the,Denmark%20(%E2%82%AC0.
37078%20per%20KWh)
Page 67 of 71
==PAGE:73==
REFERENCES
Frontier Economics. (2022, November 14). Achieving generation adequacy within the german
power market. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://www.gevernova.com/content/
dam/gepower-new/global/en_US/downloads/gas-new-site/regions/frontier-ge-
policy-paper-power-market-design-germany.pdf
Global energy crisis - iea. (n.d.). Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https://www.iea.org/topics/
global-energy-crisis
Global Energy Monitor. (2024, September 19). Global integrated power tracker - global energy
monitor. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://globalenergymonitor.org/projects/
global-integrated-power-tracker/
Green Power Denmark. (2023). Elpris outlook 2023. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://
greenpowerdenmark.dk/files/media/document/Elpris-Outlook-2023.pdf
Hafner, M. F., & Luciani, G. L. (2022, May 28). Energy demand drivers. https://link.springer.
com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-86884-0_26
Haugen, M. H. (2024, March 1). Power market models for the clean energy transition: State of
the art and future research needs. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261923018597
Hossain, Roy, Mohammad, Nawar, & Dipta. (2021, May). Metrics and enhancement strategies
for grid resilience and reliability during natural disasters. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0306261921002294
IEA. (2023, December). Denmark 2023 energy policy review. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/9af8f6a2-31e7-4136-94a6-fe3aa518ec7d/
Denmark_2023.pdf
IEA. (2024). Analysis and forecast to 2026. Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https://iea.blob.
core.windows.net/assets/18f3ed24- 4b26- 4c83- a3d2- 8a1be51c8cc8/Electricity2024-
Analysisandforecastto2026.pdf
Intermediate load energy knowledgebase. (n.d.). Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https : / /
energyknowledgebase . com / topics / intermediate - load . asp# : ~ : text = Historically %
2C%20overall%20electric%20demand%20in, early%20afternoon%20until%20early%
20evening)
IRENA. (2023, June). Innovation landscape for smart electrification. Retrieved January 6, 2025,
from https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2023/Jun/
IRENA_Innovation_landscape_for_smart_electrification_2023.pdf
Joint Research Center & European Commission. (2022). The merit order and price-setting dy-
namics in european electricity markets. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https : / /
publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/JRC134300/JRC134300_01.pdf
JRC-IDEES. (2024, May 21). Jrc-idees-2021. https://data.jrc.ec.europa.eu/dataset/82322924-
506a-4c9a-8532-2bdd30d69bf5
Page 68 of 71
==PAGE:74==
REFERENCES
Kan, X. K., Reichenberg, L., & Hedenus, F. H. (2021, June 29). The impacts of the electricity de-
mand pattern on electricity system cost and the electricity supply mix. Retrieved January
5, 2025, from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544221015772
Kittel, M. K., Roth, A. R., & Schill, W. S. (2024, November). Coping with the dunkelflaute. Re-
trieved January 6, 2025, from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/386144301_
Coping_with_the_Dunkelflaute_Power_system_implications_of_variable_renewable_
energy_droughts_in_Europe
Lanot, G. L., & Vesterberg, M. V. (2021, December). The price elasticity of electricity demand
when marginal incentives are very large. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0140988321004692
Maciejowska, K. M. (2020, January). Assessing the impact of renewable energy sources on the
electricity price level and variability. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140988319303275
Merit order. (n.d.). https://www.kyon-energy.de/en/glossar/merit-order
National Grid ESO. (n.d.). Introduction to energy system flexibility. Retrieved January 5, 2025,
from https://www.neso.energy/document/189851/download
Nord Pool. (n.d.-a). Intraday market. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https : / / www .
nordpoolgroup.com/en/the-power-market/Intraday-market/
Nord Pool. (n.d.-b). Price formation. Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https : / / www .
nordpoolgroup.com/en/the-power-market/Day-ahead-market/Price-formation/
NREL. (2014). Comparing resource adequacy metrics and their influence on capacity value. Re-
trieved January 6, 2025, from https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/61017.pdf
Nuclear power in the european union - world nuclear association. (2024, August 13). Retrieved
January 5, 2025, from https://world-nuclear.org/information-library/country-profiles/
others/european-union
Preliminary eraa. (2024, March). https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public-
cdn- container/clean- documents/sdc- documents/ERAA/2024/ERAA2024_C4E_
Dashboard_V2.xlsx
Pritchard, G. P., Zakeri, G. Z., & Philpott. (2010). A single-settlement, energy-only electric power
market for unpredictable and intermittent participants. Retrieved January 5, 2025, from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220244402_A_Single-Settlement_Energy-
Only_Electric_Power_Market_for_Unpredictable_and_Intermittent_Participants
Regulation - 2018/1999 - en - eur-lex. (2018). Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https : / / eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2018.328.01.0001.01.ENG&
toc=OJ:L:2018:328:TOC
Sæle, H. (2024, November 28). Electric vehicles in norway and the potential for demand re-
sponse. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https : / / blog . sintef . com / energy / electric -
vehicles-norway-demand-response/
Page 69 of 71
==PAGE:75==
REFERENCES
Santaella, M. I. (2024, December 6). No offshore bids in denmark 8211; disappointing but sadly
not surprising. https://windeurope.org/newsroom/press-releases/no-offshore-bids-
in-denmark-disappointing-but-sadly-not-surprising/
Schöniger, F. S., & Morawetz, U. M. (2022, July). What comes down must go up. Retrieved
January 6, 2025, from https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0140988322002353
Solargis. (n.d.). Global solar atlas. https://globalsolaratlas.info/global-pv-potential-study
Statnett, Energinet, Fingrid, & Svenska Kraftnat. (2017). Generation adequacy â market measures
to secure it and methodology for assessment. Retrieved January 8, 2025, from https://
www.svk.se/siteassets/om-oss/rapporter/2017/generation-adequacy-report-eng.pdf
TenneT. (n.d.-a). Generation adequacy electricity. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https : / /
netztransparenz . tennet . eu / fileadmin / user _ upload / Company / Publications /
Technical_Publications/Dutch/Summary_Generation_adequacy_electricity.pdf
TenneT. (n.d.-b). Security of supply. Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https://www.tennet.eu/
security-supply
Trinomics. (2020, July 31). Final report cost of energy. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https:
//energy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2020-10/final_report_levelised_costs_0.pdf
TYNDP. (n.d.-a). Tyndp de scenario. https://2024.entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2024/draft2024-input-output/DE2035CY2009.zip
TYNDP. (n.d.-b). Tyndp ga scenario. https://2024.entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2024/draft2024-input-output/GA2035CY2009.zip
TYNDP. (2022, April). Scenario building guidelines. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://
2022 . entsos - tyndp - scenarios . eu / wp - content / uploads / 2022 / 04 / TYNDP _ 2022 _
Scenario_Building_Guidelines_Version_April_2022.pdf
TYNDP. (2023a). Commodity prices. https://2024.entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/download/
TYNDP. (2023b). Investment datasets. https://2024.entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/download/
TYNDP. (2023c, July). Scenarios storyline report. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https://2024.
entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/ENTSOs_TYNDP_2024_
Scenarios_Storyline_Report_2023-12-04.pdf
TYNDP. (2024a, May). Tyndp // 2024 draft scenarios report. Retrieved January 6, 2025, from
https://2024.entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/TYNDP_
2024_Draft_Scenarios_Report_May_2024_240708_web.pdf
TYNDP. (2024b, May). Tyndp scenarios methodology report. Retrieved January 5, 2025, from
https://2024.entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/TYNDP_
2024_Scenarios_Methodology_Report_240522.pdf
Virta Ltd. (2024). Vehicle-to-grid (V2G): Everything you need to know. Retrieved January 8, 2025,
from https://www.virta.global/vehicle-to-grid-v2g
Page 70 of 71
==PAGE:76==
REFERENCES
Water electrolysis and hydrogen. (2023, November 24). Retrieved January 6, 2025, from https:
//joint-research-centre.ec.europa.eu/jrc-news-and-updates/water-electrolysis-and-
hydrogen-growing-deployment-prospects-europe-and-beyond-2023-11-24_en
What is the dunkelflaute? (n.d.). Retrieved January 5, 2025, from https://www.next-kraftwerke.
com/knowledge/what-is-dunkelflaute
Page 71 of 71
