==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Exploring the use of model based verification of
Swarm Protocols
Udforskning af brugen af model baseret verification af Swarm
Protocols
Thor Eric Dueholm (s194589)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Swarm protocols specify the behavior of all participants in a distributed system without central coordi-
nation, known as a swarm. These participants, referred to as machines, operate based on a local-ﬁrst
principle, meaning they can perform actions without knowing the state of the swarm or even when
disconnected from all other machines. The only communication between machines is through the prop-
agation of events, which may occur at any time, potentially causing conﬂicts between their actions.
However, under a set of well-formedness conditions imposed by the formalism of swarm protocols, it is
shown that eventual ﬁdelity will always be achieved within a swarm. This ensures that all machines
will agree on the events that have transpired once every event has propagated throughout the swarm.
This thesis presents a tool capable of converting any representation of a swarm protocol into a
format accepted by the model-checking tool UPPAAL, this is done to investigate the feasibility of
model-checking swarm protocols. It then analyzes the correctness of the constructed model in terms
of its ﬁdelity to the original representation of a swarm protocol and its handling of the state explosion
problem. Additionally, it develops a CLI to facilitate access to the tool, incorporating the capability
of auto-generating queries to highlight the potential of utilizing model-checking in swarm protocols
without requiring prior knowledge of the logic or the model-checking tool.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a master’s degree
in Computer Science.
While writing this master’s thesis, AI technology such as ChatGPT was used to correct grammar and
restructure sentences to improve readability.
Kongens Lyngby, February 26, 2025
Thor Eric Dueholm (s194589)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Alceste Scalas, Florian Wayan Aaron Furbach, and
Emilio Tuosto, for their invaluable support in helping me understand the challenging subject of swarm
protocols and for their patience when I struggled. Their guidance throughout the process of writing
this master’s thesis has been indispensable. Additionally, I would like to thank Emilio Tuosto for the
opportunity to visit and collaborate with him at the Gran Sasso Institute of Science.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Swarm protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Model Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Design
21
3.1
Agile software development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Designing the automated translation tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Implementation
35
4.1
Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Implementing the automated translation tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Evaluation
58
5.1
Exploring queries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Automated Test Suite
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Veriﬁcation times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Conclusion
74
Bibliography
76
A Projections and UPPAAL representations of the running example
78
B Timing data
81
C Trace output
83
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter will ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce the context and key concepts necessary for the project, before
outlining the overarching objectives that will be addressed throughout the thesis. Finally, it will describe
how the thesis is structured into chapters addressing the diﬀerent proposed objectives and what each
chapter will include.
1.1
Context
There are multiple ways to conduct testing, the most common one being simulations or unit testing.
However, these suﬀer from the inherent problem that it is impossible to tell when a suﬃcient number
of tests have been written. In other words
“Program testing can be used to show the presence of bugs, but never to show their absence”
— Edsger W. Dijkstra
Another known way of ensuring the validity of a program is by deductive reasoning this however
suﬀers from not being automatable, and since software applications are often dynamic beings, it would
require a lot of manual labor to always ensure the proofs were reﬂecting the current system.
Finally, model-based veriﬁcation or model checking is the practice of constructing a model of the
system being designed, and then performing veriﬁcations to ensure that the model behaves in the
desired way. In this way, model checking serves as a tool capable of catching violations of safety or
liveness properties before they reach production in the actual system. Classically this involves deﬁning
the system as a form of program graph analog to a ﬁnite state automaton, from which a system can be
constructed containing all possible states the program graph may reach. This system, formally known
as a transition system, is often used with linear temporal logic (LTL) or computation tree logic (CTL)
to verify certain system properties. The diﬃculty of model checking mainly lies in the construction of
the model and ensuring that it behaves as the actual system being modeled. While this, as opposed
to deductive reasoning, is automatable, and as opposed to testing does have a clearer end goal, it is
important to note that any model checking results are only as good as the model they were performed
on.
Local-ﬁrst software is an approach created in opposition to the centralization of software largely
driven by the popularity of cloud-based services. The main concept of local-ﬁrst software is to allow
every participant of the system to keep their own data and to act autonomously. This way, the system
becomes decentralized, not relying on a centralized component such as a server in the cloud to conduct
which participant does what and when. They instead parse messages only between one another to
achieve agreement on what each participant is allowed to do.
Swarm protocols are a form of local-ﬁrst software for distributed systems that behave in the same
way as a swarm. That is to say, each part of the swarm, which could be any digitally controlled element,
known in swarm protocols as machines, are completely autonomous and hence act only in accordance
with their current view of the system. The machines of a swarm communicate exclusively through logs.
When a machine performs a new action, it will ﬁrst append this event to its local log before, at some
nondetermined point, sending the event to other machines of the swarm, doing so in any arbitrary order
with any arbitrary delays in between each machine receiving the event. This loose deﬁnition can cause
conﬂicts where two or more machines are in diﬀerent parts of the protocol at the same time. Despite
this, under a series of well-formedness conditions, a swarm protocol will still reach eventual ﬁdelity.
This means that even though each machine acts autonomously when constructed correctly, the entire
==PAGE:8==
1.2 Objectives
2
swarm will eventually exhibit the deﬁned behavior correctly. Meaning once every machine has seen
Every event they will all agree on the series of events that brought the swarm to its current state.
Combining model checking and swarm protocols, it is possible to construct a model of a swarm
protocol that can exhibit the behavior of the multiple diﬀerent machines communicating with one
another through logs and resolving conﬂicts that may arise underway.
This thesis aims to achieve
exactly that, using the model checking tool UPPAAL to do so. UPPAAL is a model checking tool
developed in collaboration between Aalborg University and Uppsala University. UPPAAL performs
model checking of timed automaton. UPPAAL can then translate the given timed automaton into a
transition system and use CTL to validate queries. Additionally, if relevant, it can generate traces
through the transition system that lead to the outcome of the query at hand.
1.2
Objectives
Given the complexity of designing a tool that automatically generates a UPPAAL model from a swarm
protocol, it is essential to establish clear objectives that encapsulate the overarching goal of this project.
To this end, the following three Objectives have been deﬁned:
1. Given a swarm protocol, investigate the necessary requirements for accurately representing it as
a UPPAAL model to enable the veriﬁcation of its behavior.
2. Design and implement a tool capable of automatically translating any swarm protocol into a
UPPAAL-compatible model suitable for model checking.
3. Assess the models constructed by the tool to validate their correctness and identify potential
limitations.
1.3
Structure
The thesis is organized into the following chapters, each contributing to the fulﬁllment of the deﬁned
Objectives:
• Background provides essential knowledge on swarm protocols, examining a subset of their funda-
mental mechanisms, introduces the principles of model checking, and presents a detailed overview
of the UPPAAL tool. All to support Objective 1.
• Design discusses the design decisions necessary for the construction of both the model and the
tool, addressing the requirements outlined in Objectives 1 and 2.
• Implementation describes the implementation process, detailing how the proposed design was
realized and the challenges encountered during development. In alignment with Objectives 1 and
2.
• Evaluation focuses on Objective 3, presenting the testing procedures applied to the tool’s code-
base and the timing analysis conducted to assess the limitations of both the tool and the model.
• Conclusion summarizes the key ﬁndings of the study and evaluates the extent to which the stated
Objectives have been achieved.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter provides foundational knowledge on several critical topics essential for comprehending
the work conducted in this project. These topics include Swarm Protocol, which represents a form of
local-ﬁrst software; model checking, a method for system veriﬁcation; and UPPAAL, a tool speciﬁcally
designed to facilitate model checking. All of these topics are crucial for building a faithful model as
stated in Objective 1.
2.1
Swarm protocols
This section explores the concept of Swarm Protocols, drawing extensively on the insights presented
in [KMT23] and [Fur24]. It begins with a brief introduction to the Actyx middleware and local-ﬁrst
software. Subsequently, it delves into the principles and applications of Swarm Protocols in greater
depth, explaining only relevant parts of both [KMT23] and [Fur24] necessary for understanding the
project.
The Actyx [Acta] middleware facilitates local-ﬁrst cooperation by enabling programs on diﬀerent
computers to collaborate directly without relying on centralized infrastructure. Instead of the tradi-
tional model, where separate applications communicate through centralized databases or brokers, Actyx
introduces the concept of autonomous local twins, which are digital representations that operate, per-
ceive, and act locally on each device. These local twins publish and consume events, evolving their states
based on the events they process. This approach allows for resilient, real-time applications across a net-
work of devices, eliminating dependence on central servers. This approach also allows for components
to go oﬄine without aﬀecting other twins in the system since they all operate autonomously. The im-
plementation of Swarm Protocols relies on the Actyx middleware, which is why the core functionality
of Swarm Protocols is much the same as that of Actyx.
Local-ﬁrst software is an approach to how distributed applications may be created, by having each
participant in the system be autonomous and in charge of its own data. This contrasts with coordination
through a centralized server that has full control of all necessary data, such as cloud solutions, and can
serve as single points of failure. A challenge of local-ﬁrst software is to ensure coordination among all
participants is correct, while there are multiple approaches to addressing this issue [KMT23] proposes
relying on the pub-sub mechanisms of Actyx to allow machines (participants in the system) to coordinate
with one another through publishing and subscribing to diﬀerent events. This, in turn, allows machines
to create conﬂicts, meaning they can temporarily disagree on what the global state of the Swarm (system)
is. However, since Actyx attaches a Lamport timestamp to every event, it becomes possible to create the
same total ordering in every machine. Once every event emitted by the machines has been published
and all relevant subscribers have received all events in the Swarm, the entire Swarm is consistent, meaning
all machines agree on the events that transpired, which is the essence of eventual consistency. In other
words, while the machines in the Swarm might not always agree, they will eventually, under a set of
well-formedness conditions. An important property of the total ordering is that it preserves causality
amongst the events, meaning newer events are ordered after older events.
To gain a better understanding of what Swarm Protocols are, an example can be seen in Figure
2.1, which is a Swarm Protocol previously introduced at CoPLaWS1. As seen in the ﬁgure, a Swarm
1Program available at:
https://coplaws.github.io/2024/.
The topic of this presentation was Compositional
Verification of Swarm Protocols.
==PAGE:10==
2.1 Swarm protocols
4
Protocol is essentially the same as a ﬁnite-state automaton being comprised of states and transitions.
Figure 2.1 represents a warehouse with three diﬀerent roles: Door D responsible for closing the warehouse
with the command Close, Transport T responsible for requesting (Request) and delivering (Deliver) parts
from the warehouse and Forklift FL which is responsible for getting (Get) the diﬀerent parts needed
by the Transport. In this way, the Swarm Protocol of Figure 2.1 represents a warehouse capable of
retrieving diﬀerent parts stored in the warehouse and delivering each retrieved part an arbitrary number
of times, before closing the warehouse, which ensures no more parts can be requested or delivered. The
machines mentioned previously would each capture the capability of exactly one role, with multiple
machines being able to represent the same role.
1
2
3
4
Request@T<partid>
Get@FL<pos>
Deliver@T<part>
Close@D<time>
Figure 2.1: Swarm Protocol of a warehouse
As seen in ﬁgure 2.1, each of the commands has an attached event which is generated locally when
a machine executes a command. In the theory of [KMT23], one command can generate multiple events.
However, since [Fur24] limits this to only one event pr. command, we will adopt this approach going
forward, and assume each executed command leads to one event, which is then added to the local log
of the machine that executed the command. Logs are essentially a series of events in the order in which
they happen. Each machine will keep a log locally where it stores all the events it has seen, either by
emitting them itself or by other machines propagating their events to it. An example of a global log
created by the Swarm Protocol in Figure 2.1 could be l = partid · pos · part · time, where a single cycle
of the loop is taken before the door is closed. Be aware that in an actual implementation of a Swarm
Protocol no such global log exists, since there is no central server or overseer who would be able to
acquire this knowledge. Only the local logs of each machine are kept, which combined could form the
notion of the global log.
As illustrated by the above example, each machine in a Swarm represents a speciﬁc role of the un-
derlying Swarm Protocol. However, to represent a role, we cannot use the entire Swarm Protocol,
but only its projection of the speciﬁc role over the protocol. While the projection could simply emit
the commands of the underlying role and subscribe to all other events, it would cause the projections
to become unnecessarily large. [KMT23] and [Fur24] present two slightly diﬀerent approaches to con-
structing projections, the main diﬀerences being whether or not all commands should be included. We
will use the notion of [Fur24]. Using this notion, we can construct the projections of all roles for the
Swarm Protocol in Figure 2.1 which can be seen in Figure 2.2.
1
2
4
PartID?
Part?
(Close / Time)
Time?
1
3
4
(Get / Pos)
PartID?
Pos?
Time?
1
2
3
4
(Request / PartID)
PartID?
Pos?
Part?
(Deliver / Part)
Time?
Figure 2.2: The projections of role D, FL and T respectively from left to right.
As can be seen from both the projections of role D and FL in Figure 2.2, there are event types they
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Swarm protocols
5
do not subscribe to at all and are therefore not included in the projections. Note that each event has a
type, for example, the event type of events generated from the execution of Close is Time, however, the
actual instances of events generated are denoted as time. As can be seen in the ﬁgure, when an event
type is excluded from a projection, the ordering of event types is preserved. As an example, when Pos
is excluded in the projection of D then the loop is still preserved. More speciﬁcally, the event types with
a source equal to the target of Pos have their source set to the source of Pos.
To know which location a machine M with log l is in, it uses the transition function given by δ(M, l)
which is unique due to machines being deterministic. δ(M, l) goes through each event in the log from
oldest to newest starting with the initial location. For each event, if the event has an outgoing transition
from the current location with the corresponding event type, then the current location is changed to
the target of that transition, otherwise, the event is skipped and the next is considered. This means if
a machine which reﬂected role D received the events of log l = partid · pos · part and its local log, for
simplicity, was previously empty, it would have the new local log lD = l after merging its old local log
with the l. While it does not subscribe to events of type Pos, it would still keep the event in its local
log, however, it would not read it. Additionally, after reading the log, it would again ﬁnd itself in the
location labeled 1.
Having introduced Swarm Protocols and their behavior conceptually, the following section will dive
into a more formal approach.
2.1.1
Formal approach
To formally introduce Swarm Protocols, several key concepts are required. A log, denoted as l, is
deﬁned as an ordered sequence of unique events, where each event is associated with a typing relation
⊢e : t that assigns it a type. In this same manner, logs can be typed with a sequence of event types
such as l ∈T ⋆where T is the set of event types. Additionally, each event can be associated with the
machine that emitted it using source(e).
To introduce the formal approach of how logs are shipped from one machine to another and how
they are merged, we must ﬁrst introduce the notion of a sublog. The deﬁnition, as per [KMT23, Def.
2.1], is as follows:
Deﬁnition 2.1.1 (Sublog relation). A log l = e1 · · · en induces a total order <l on its elements as
follows: ei <l ej
⇐⇒
i < j.
The sublog relation on logs ⊑demands an order-preserving and
downward-complete morphism from l1 into l2. Formally, l1 ⊑l2 if
1. all events of l1 appear in l2 (l1 ⊆l2) in the same order ( <l1 ⊆<l2 ); and
2. the per-source partitions of l1 are preﬁxes of the corresponding partitions of l2, i.e. for all e1 ∈
l1, e2 ∈l2 from a given source, e2 <l2 e1 implies e2 ∈l1.
In layman’s terms, the ﬁrst condition explains that if l1 ⊑l2, then l1 is a subset of l2, and they
are both ordered in accordance with the same total ordering. The second condition translates to, if
a machine emitted e2 before e1 or formally e2 <l2 e1 then a sublog cannot contain e1 without also
containing e2. Using the Swarm Protocol in Figure 2.1, if a machine contains the local log l = partidT ·
posF L · partT where the same subscript indicates an event was emitted by the same machine, then no
sublog could contain partT without containing partidT , or in other words, partidT · partT ⊑l is valid
but partT ⊑l is not.
Using the sublog relation we can now introduce how logs are merged using the shuﬄing operator ▷◁
from [KMT23]:
l1 ▷◁l2 = {l
 l ⊆l1 ∪l2
and
l1 ⊑l
and
l2 ⊑l}
(2.1)
The only extra requirement to successfully merge logs is that one of the multiple orderings ▷◁is ﬁxed
in the Swarm. As an example, given two logs l1 = partidT · posF L and l2 = timeD and l = l1 ▷◁l2, then
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Swarm protocols
6
l has multiple diﬀerent orderings such as partidT · timeD · posF L, partidT · posF L · timeD and timeD ·
partidT · posF L. These are all equally valid, however, only one will be ﬁxed for the system. The ﬁxed
one is non-deterministically selected by the total order of the Swarm, which in implementation, is handled
by the ordering imposed on events by Actyx.
To reason about all the machines in a Swarm, we must ﬁrst formally deﬁne what a Swarm is. A Swarm
of size n is a pair (S, l) where S maps indices i ∈1, . . . , n such that S(i) = (Mi, li) where (Mi, li) is the
ith machine with local log li, and l is the global log of the entire Swarm. It can then be said that S is
coherent when S
1≤i≤n li = l and li ⊑l for i ∈1, . . . , n. That is to say the Swarm is coherent when the
local logs of all machines are sublogs of the global log, which means that all of the events are ordered
according to the same total ordering and that the union of the local logs is exactly equivalent to the
global log.
We can now formalize the behavior of a Swarm into two inference rules Local and Prop from
[KMT23]. Local captures the behavior of a machine when executing a command, while Prop captures
the behavior of a log being updated, which happens when a machine receives a local log propagated
from another machine.
As mentioned previously, the state of a machine M with a local log l is given by δ(M, l). We can now
deﬁne a relation for when a machine executes a command, such that (M, l)
c / t
−−→(M, l · e) holds when
the state δ(M, l) enables the command c / t and e has type t. Be aware this is a slight change in the
notion from [KMT23], since we only look at the subset of commands that have exactly one event, and
can therefore be typed by an event type instead of a log type. The same change has been applied to
the Local rule below.
S(i) = (Mi, li)
(Mi, li)
c / t
−−→(Mi, l′
i)
source(l′
i \ li) = {i}
l′ ∈l ▷◁l′
i
(S, l)
c / t
−−→(S[i 7→(Mi, l′
i)], l′)
[Local]
S(i) = (Mi, li)
li ⊑l′
i ⊑l
li ⊂l′
i
(S, l)
τ
−→(S[i 7→(Mi, l′
i)], l)
[Prop]
The Local Rule captures what happens when a machine Mi of Swarm (S, l) can execute a command.
This command will then update the local log of the machine that executed it from li to l′
i. Additionally,
the global log will be updated with the new event by using the shuﬄe operator from Equation 2.1. For
example, if a machine MT , reﬂecting the T role, as seen in the leftmost ﬁgure of 2.2, had a local log
lT = partidT · posF L, and the global log was equivalent, meaning l = lT . Then, MT would be in the
state labeled 3, and would therefore be able to execute Deliver, which in turn would update the current
global log to l = partidT · posF L · partT = lT .
The Prop Rule ﬁnds a machine Mi of the Swarm S non-deterministically with a local log li that is a
strict sublog of the global log l. It then updates the local log of Mi to l′
i, hence introducing new events
in the local log of a machine. Building on the example from before, if another machine MF L had a local
log lF L = partidT · posF L and the global log of the Swarm was still lg = partidT · posF L · partT then a
lF L would be a strict subset of lg. It would therefore be eligible for Rule Prop with li = lF L, l′
i = lg
and l = lg, which would then update its log such that lF L = partidT · posF L · partT .
With these concepts in place, only a few more deﬁnitions from [KMT23] are needed, namely =⇒
along with Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 all from [KMT23]:
Where =⇒denotes a possibly empty sequence of reduction steps and c ranges over commands, for
swarm protocols we let:
=⇒= −→⋆
where
−→=
τ
−→
∪
[
c,l
c / l
−−→
Likewise for sequences of reduction steps of machines. The following lemmata hold for coherent swarms:
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Swarm protocols
7
Lemma 1 (Coherence preservation). If (S, l) is a coherent swarm and (S, l)
α
−→(S′, l′), then (S′, l′) is
coherent.
Lemma 2 (Eventual consistency). If (S, l) = (M1, l1) | . . . | (Mn, ln) | l is a coherent swarm, then (S, l) =⇒
(M1, l) | . . . | (Mn, l) | l.
Be aware that Local and Prop do not enforce any consistency between machines of the same
Swarm. That is to say, nothing is forcing a machine to propagate its log to other machines. Prop can
be delayed an arbitrary amount, causing a machine to sit at its initial location while the rest of the
machines carry out the Swarm Protocol. To ensure that the Swarm Protocol still reaches eventual
consistency/ﬁdelity, the set of well-formedness conditions is imposed upon them. While these are crucial
when constructing correct Swarm Protocols, they are not strictly necessary to understanding further
work done in this project, as it will assume only well-formed Swarm Protocol when considering an input.
The main reason for this is that [Actb] supplies a way of checking if a Swarm Protocol is wellformed.
Therefore, these concepts will only be covered brieﬂy and informally. To achieve well-formedness as
presented in [KMT23], the following notions are needed:
• Causal consistency: This characteristic indicates that every command will only be executed once
a machine has observed that all previous commands have been executed.
The following two
conditions must be met to achieve this:
1. Every machine must subscribe to all event types generated by commands it executes.
2. Every machine must subscribe to at least one event type of the event types generated by
each and every command that happens before its own commands in the Swarm Protocol.
• Determinancy: Requires causal consistency along with the requirement that every machine must
subscribe to the ﬁrst event type of the event types generated by each and every command that
happens before its own commands in the Swarm Protocol.
• Confusion-freeness: A Swarm Protocol is confusion-free if and only if, whenever the type of a
command is equal to that of other commands, it is because those commands belong to the same
branch. In other words, all commands of the same type originate from the same source location
in the Swarm Protocol.
Be aware that the second condition of causal consistency and determinancy are equivalent, in the
current case where commands can only generate one event and thus hold only a single event type
each. A Swarm Protocol can now be considered well-formed if it is causal-consistent, determinate, and
confusion-free, and all the subscriptions generated for projections are also well-formed. While using
these deﬁnitions, the projections presented in Figure 2.2 do not appear well-formed. This is due to each
of the three deﬁnitions being weakened in [Fur24] which is a result of the inherent concurrency introduced
when composing multiple Swarm Protocols. Composing Swarm Protocols will not be considered in
this project. However, determinancy is altered, in [KMT23], to only account for the choices or branching
events that come before an event instead of every event that comes before. This is what allows for the
construction of the projections seen in Figure 2.2. Since it still preserves well-formedness but with
potentially smaller projections this notion of projections will be used.
The projections shown in Figure 2.2 were constructed based on the theory presented in [Fur24]. More
formally, this theory dictates that the projection of a role Ra includes all events from its subscription
set σ. This subscription set includes the following:
1. All commands executed by Ra. Meaning if ci@Ra, then the event types generated by those com-
mands, ci / ti, are included in its subscription: ∀iti ∈σ(Ra).
2. All commands cj@R where the target of cj is the source of ci from 1.
Then the event types
generated by those commands, cj / tj are included in the subscription: ∀jtj ∈σ(Ra).
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Swarm protocols
8
3. All branching commands ch@R that generate event types ch / th where a path exists in the Swarm
Protocol such that commands speciﬁed in point 1 become enabled. Consequently, ∀hth ∈σ(Ra).
Be aware that this is an over-approximation of what is needed to construct a projection as following
[Fur24]. However, any subscription that holds more than strictly necessary is still valid even though it
is larger than strictly necessary.
Finally, one of the key diﬀerences between Swarm Protocols, as presented in [KMT23] and [Fur24]
is the notion of branch tracking presented in the latter. Branch tracking is necessary to keep the Swarm
Protocol faithful even with the notion of weak determinacy presented in [Fur24]. Branch tracking is
essentially attaching a pointer to each event emitted, pointing to the last valid branching event that
the machine has in its log when emitting the event.
More formally, by giving each event e a pointer to the last branching event, denoted as lbe(e), it
is possible to represent an event as e: t[lbe]? This indicates that an event e of type t is received and
references the last branching event lbe. Let lbev be a function that assigns each event type t a branching
event lbe: lbev(t) = lbe. As projections are constructed, we can apply lbev to every incoming event
type to ensure it correctly tracks the preceding branching event. Note that if no prior branch exists,
lbev will return Null.
This allows machines to skip events even if they are in the correct order since they might point to
a branching event that has been skipped. Be aware that this occasionally changes the global behavior
of the swarm. One such instance can be seen in Figure 2.3:
1
2
3
4
5
6
E12@O
E23@R
E24@R
E35@R
E45@R
E56@O
Figure 2.3: Swarm Protocol example with branching and joining events
Given the Swarm Protocol presented in 2.3 and that each command emits an event with the same
name in lowercase. Then the following global order of emitted events: e120 @O[Null] · e230 @R1[Null] ·
e240 @R2[Null] · e350 @R1[e230 ] · e450 @R2[e240 ] · e560 @O[e240 ] can be obtained. A global log containing
only valid events would therefore be: e120 @O[Null] · e230 @R1[Null] · e350 @R1[e230 ]. However, without
branch tracking the ﬁnal event e560 would still be considered valid, even though it was based on a
faulty branch event. This is because the order of events in the log would still constitute a valid run
through the Swarm Protocol.
Be aware that, since [Fur24] is still a work in progress, the concepts it presents are subject to change.
However, the fundamental idea of branch tracking, as described above, will be used throughout this
thesis. As an example, in more recent versions of [Fur24], the notion of branch tracking also includes
joining events.
As a ﬁnal point, we introduce our own notation, which will be used in some examples throughout
the thesis when discussing runs of a Swarm Protocol. This notation is similar to that of logs; however,
it represents a run through the Swarm Protocol rather than a static log. This requires introducing
a notation to signify propagation, such as prop@R, which indicates that the machine reﬂecting role R
propagates its local log at that time to all other roles.
An example of such a run, using the Swarm Protocol introduced in Figure 2.1, is as follows:
Run1 = partid1@T1 · prop@T1 · pos1@FL1 · pos2@FL2 · prop@FL1 · part1@T1 · prop@T1 · time1@D1 · partid2@T1
In Run1 a entire loop of the Swarm Protocol is completed before the warehouse is closed by D1.
Notice that a run may contain inconsistencies such as the two pos events that are emitted even though
only the initial one pos1 is valid. Additionally, a run does not have to reach eventual ﬁdelity that is to
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Model Checking
9
say all events do not have to be propagated to every other machine in the Swarm. For Run1 eventually
ﬁdelity would be reached if prop@D1 · prop@T1 · prop@FL2 were to be appended in any order. Additionally,
in the formal notion of propagation, it does not occur instantly or reach all roles simultaneously; however,
for the sake of this notation, it is suﬃcient to assume that it does. As Run1 currently is the global log
would appears as follows l = partid1 · pos1 · pos2 · part1 · time1 · partid2. While the local log of T1 would
be lT1 = partid1 · pos1 · part1 · partid2. For future examples, it will be convenient to introduce a slightly
modiﬁed notation of logs, where the log l would instead be represented as l = partid1 · pos1 ·
pos2 ·
part1 · time1 ·
partid2. Here, e indicates that, while the event remains in the log, it is considered invalid
i.e., it will be skipped when reading local logs. In contrast, the local log lT1 is unchanged lT1 = partid1 ·
pos1 · part1 · partid2 even though partid2 from a global perspective is invalid, the T1 is not aware of this
yet and will hence not invalidate the event.
2.2
Model Checking
This section is primarily based on [BK08]. It provides a concise overview of the fundamental theory
used in model checking while omitting details that are not relevant to the design and implementation
of this project.
To justify the use of model checking, it is essential to consider the issues it helps prevent.
As
shown in Figure 2.4, the cost of ﬁxing errors increases signiﬁcantly as the software lifecycle progresses,
particularly after deployment. The cost of addressing bugs during the design phase is nearly 500 times
lower than at the start of the operational phase.
Figure 2.4: Software lifecycle and error introduction, detection, and repair costs [Lig+98].
Another key observation from Figure 2.4 is that while errors are inexpensive to correct in the
Analysis and Conceptual Design stages, only a small percentage of them are detected at these early
phases. However, nearly 50% of errors are introduced during this period. This is where model-based
veriﬁcation techniques become valuable, as they can be applied during these early stages, requiring
only a precise and unambiguous description of the model. This model can then be utilized in various
ways: some model checking techniques exhaustively explore all possible states of the system based on
the given speciﬁcations, while others, such as bounded model checking, reduce the state space before
performing the search.
Succinctly, model checking is described in [BK08] as follows:
“Model checking is an automated technique that, given a ﬁnite-state model of a system and
a formal property, systematically checks whether this property holds for (a given state in)
that model.”
Thus, to perform model checking, we require a ﬁnite-state model of the given system, along with
one or more properties to verify. The system in this instance would be a Swarm Protocol.
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Model Checking
10
The properties used in model checking originate from the ﬁeld of formal methods and are often
expressed through Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) or Computation Tree Logic (CTL). The states of the
model are typically represented using a Transition System (TS).
Formally, a TS is deﬁned as the tuple (S, Act, −→, I, AP, L)[KMT23, Def. 2.1.], where:
• S is the state space, representing the set of all possible states.
• Act is the set of actions.
• −→⊆S × Act × S is the transition relation.
• I ⊆S is the set of initial states.
• AP a set of atomic propositions.
• L : S →2AP the labeling function.
The components AP and L deﬁne elementary properties of the system, allowing information to
be associated with diﬀerent states. The set AP consists of atomic propositions, which are statements
about the system’s state. For example, atomic propositions might include statements such as "The
traﬃc light is green" or "The traﬃc light is not yellow." The labeling function L maps each state to a
subset of these atomic propositions, indicating the properties that hold in that state. Intuitively, a TS
begins in one of the initial states s0 ∈I and transitions between states in S according to the transition
relation −→. If a transition is possible, the system moves from one state to another. For convenience,
a transition (s, α, s′) ∈−→is often written as s
α−→s′. If multiple outgoing transitions exist, they are
chosen non-deterministically.
As an example, Figure 2.5 illustrates a simple vending machine model. When a coin is inserted, the
machine can either dispense a beer or a soda.
Figure 2.5: A transition system of a simple beverage vending machine [BK08].
The state space of this TS is S = {pay, select, soda, beer}. The initial state is indicated by an
arrow, making I = {pay}. The set of actions is Act = {insert_coin, get_soda, get_beer, τ}, where τ
represents some internal activity of the machine. insert_coin is a user input. get_soda and get_beer is
the machine dispensing either a soda or a beer. Notably, the machine non-deterministically determines
whether the user receives a beer or a soda. For example, a transition could be represented as follows:
soda
get_soda
−−−−−−→pay.
To complete the deﬁnition of the transition system, we deﬁne the atomic propositions AP and the
labeling function L.
These can be speciﬁed as follows: AP = {paid, soda, beer} with the labeling
function:
L(pay) = ∅, L(soda) = {paid, soda}, L(beer) = {paid, beer}, L(select) = {paid}
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Model Checking
11
For this transition system, we might be interested in verifying whether it is always possible to
obtain either a soda or a beer from the vending machine, or whether it is possible to never receive a
beer. To formally express such properties, Computation Tree Logic (CTL) can be used. CTL is based
on branching time, which considers that a transition system, such as the one described above, can
be expanded into a computation tree. This computation tree can be inﬁnite if the transition system
contains cycles.
For the transition system depicted in Figure 2.5, the corresponding computation tree would be
structured as follows:
Figure 2.6: A part of the computation tree derived from Figure 2.5.
As shown in Figure 2.6, the computation tree is not merely an unfolding of the transition system;
it also incorporates the labeling function to determine the properties associated with each state. This
labeling is crucial when verifying properties, as the primary interest lies in the atomic propositions that
hold in each state of the transition system.
Considering the transition system in Figure 2.5, a possible path through the system could be:
π1 = pay select soda pay select soda ...
Following this same path in the computation tree (Figure 2.6) results in a trace, which captures the
sequence of atomic propositions associated with each state along the path. The corresponding trace is:
trace(π1) = ∅{paid} {paid, soda} ∅{paid} {paid, soda} ...
To formally deﬁne a path and a trace, we ﬁrst deﬁne the set of direct α-successors of a state s as:
Post(s, α) = {s′ ∈S | s
α−→s′},
Post(s) =
[
α∈Act
Post(s, α).
Essentially, Post(s) takes a state s and returns the set of all possible states reachable from s. For
example, using the TS in Figure 2.5 and selecting the state select, we obtain Post(select) = soda, beer.
Now, it is possible to deﬁne a path fragment as follows: a ﬁnite path fragment is a sequence of states
s0s1...sn such that si ∈Post(si−1) for all 0 < i ≤n, where n ≥0. Similarly, an inﬁnite path fragment
is a sequence of states s0s1s2... such that si ∈Post(si−1) for all i > 0. A maximal path fragment is
either ﬁnite and ends in a terminal location (a location with no outgoing transitions), or inﬁnite. A
path fragment is initial if s0 ∈I. A path of a transition system is an initial maximal path fragment.
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Model Checking
12
The trace of a transition system is then deﬁned as the labeling function L applied to each state of a
given path fragment, such that: trace(π) = L(π[i]) for all i in π where π[i] denotes the i-th state of the
path fragment π. When a model checking tool provides a trace as a counterexample to a given query,
it is this notion of a trace that is supplied.
As mentioned earlier, one way to specify the required properties of a system is through Computation
Tree Logic (CTL). Formally, CTL can be deﬁned using the state formula[BK08, Def. 6.1]:
Φ ::= true | a | Φ1 ∧Φ2 | ¬Φ | ∃ϕ | ∀ϕ
where a ∈AP and ϕ is a path formula. CTL path formulae are formed according to the following
grammar:
ϕ ::= ⃝Φ | Φ1 ∪Φ2
Some notions that are very convenient when working with CTL are the concepts of eventually (♢)
and always (□), which can be deﬁned as follows:
∃♢Φ = ∃(true ∪Φ)
∀♢Φ = ∀(true ∪Φ)
∃□Φ = ¬∀♢¬Φ
∀□Φ = ¬∃♢¬Φ
Note that it is not possible to have ♢□or □♢in CTL due to its syntax. Using this notation, many
properties can be expressed succinctly. For instance, the mutual exclusion of two diﬀerent systems
can be written as: ∀□(¬crit1 ∨¬crit2). Similarly, it is also possible to express the desired properties
discussed earlier for the transition system in Figure 2.5. Speciﬁcally, the property stating that it is
always possible to obtain either a soda or a beer from the vending machine can be formulated as:
∀□∃♢(beer ∨soda). Intuitively, this means that from every state, the system will eventually reach
a state where either beer or soda holds. Additionally, the property stating that it is possible to never
receive a beer from the machine can be expressed as the CTL formula: ∃□(¬beer). This intuitively
means that there exists a path where beer is never true.
A more intuitive understanding of the four formulas above can be illustrated using the graphs
depicted in Figure 2.7.
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Figure 2.7: From left to right: ∀□Φ, ∃♢Φ, ∀♢Φ and ∃□Φ.
In Figure 2.7, four CTL formulas are illustrated in relation to the computation tree.
The ﬁrst
formula, ∀□Φ, often called invariantly, is true if and only if every reachable state in the computation
tree satisﬁes Φ. The second formula, ∃♢Φ, often called reachable, states that at least one reachable
state must satisfy Φ.
The third formula, ∀♢Φ, often called inevitable, guarantees that the system
will eventually reach a state where Φ holds. Finally, the fourth formula, ∃□Φ, often called potentially
always, means that there exists a path through the computation tree where Φ always holds.
However, we still need to determine what makes a CTL property satisﬁed for a transition system.
This is achieved by deﬁning a satisfaction relation (|=) for CTL formulas over the atomic propositions
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Model Checking
13
AP and a given transition system T = (S, Act, −→, S0, AP, L). Let π = s0s1s2 . . . be an inﬁnite path
fragment, then:
π |= ⃝Φ
iﬀs1 |= Φ
π |= Φ1 ∪Φ2
iﬀthere exists j ≥0 such that:
sj |= Φ2
sk |= Φ1 for 0 ≤k < j
π |= ♢Φ
iﬀthere exists j ≥0 with sj |= Φ
π |= □Φ
iﬀfor all j ≥0, sj |= Φ
In the same manner, state formula can be deﬁned with the satisfaction relation |= as follows:
s |= true
s |= a
iﬀa ∈L(s)
s |= Φ1 ∧Φ2
iﬀs |= Φ1 and s |= Φ2
s |= ¬Φ
iﬀs ̸|= Φ
s |= ∃ϕ
iﬀthere is a path π ∈Paths(s) such that π |= ϕ
s |= ∀ϕ
iﬀfor each path π ∈Paths(s), π |= ϕ
It is now useful to deﬁne the set of states that satisfy a formula Φ as follows:
Sat(Φ) = {s ∈S : s |= Φ}
A transition system T satisﬁes a formula Φ if and only if:
T |= Φ
iﬀS0 ⊆Sat(Φ)
Where S0 is the set of initial states of the transition system T .
Finally, given the transition system T1 in Figure 2.5 and the formula ∀□∃♢(beer ∨soda), we can
determine whether it holds. The usual approach to verifying this is to evaluate it from the inside out.
First, we identify the states that satisfy (beer ∨soda), which are trivially the states named beer and
soda. Next, we evaluate the formula ∃♢(beer ∨soda), which corresponds to every state that can reach
either beer or soda. These states are select since it transitions only to either of the two states, and pay,
since it can only lead to select. To evaluate the entire formula ∀□∃♢(beer ∨soda), we observe that the
set of satisfying states remains the same, as the vending machine cannot transition outside these states.
Most importantly, since pay ⊆Sat(∀□∃♢(beer ∨soda)), the requirement for T1 |= ∀□∃♢(beer ∨soda) is
satisﬁed.
Similarly, ∃□(¬beer) can be seen to hold for T1. This can also be observed from the computation
tree in Figure 2.6, where, every time a ... appears, the entire tree structure repeats. This implies that
if the left branch is always taken, beer never becomes true.
To categorize properties such as those speciﬁed above, properties can generally be classiﬁed into the
following three categories:
• Reachability properties: Something good will possibly happen. More speciﬁcally, does some
property Φ hold in some state along some path? Generally expressed as ∃♢Φ.
• Safety properties: Something bad will never happen. More speciﬁcally, does some property Φ
hold in all states of all paths? Generally expressed as ∀□Φ.
• Liveness properties: Something good will eventually happen. More speciﬁcally, does some prop-
erty Φ hold in some state along all paths? Generally expressed as ∀♢Φ.
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Model Checking
14
One very important aspect to consider when creating models for model checking is the problem
outlined in [Cla+12], known as the state explosion problem. Intuitively, if the model becomes very
large, especially when multiple models are used in conjunction, the state space of the transition system
can grow exponentially. This can make the veriﬁcation of certain properties, such as safety properties,
infeasible.
The state explosion problem is inherent in all model checkers, and while signiﬁcant eﬀorts have
been made to mitigate this issue[Cla+12], the primary responsibility of the modeler is to consider it
when making design choices, aiming to keep the state space at a manageable level. With this in mind,
two overarching goals emerge when progressing with the project: To model the behavior of any given
Swarm Protocol as accurately as possible and To minimize the size of the transition system while still
preserving the accuracy of the model.
2.2.1
Model checking in UPPAAL
UPPAAL [UPPa][UPPb] is a model checking tool developed collaboratively by Uppsala University and
Aalborg University to verify the correctness of real-time systems[CN16]. Within UPPAAL, systems are
represented as networks of timed automata that interact through shared memory or communication
channels. The tool includes a graphical user interface (GUI) that facilitates the creation and analysis
of timed automata models. An example of such a model is included in UPPAAL’s distribution and is
illustrated in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: An example of the UPPAAL GUI showing an implementation of Fischer’s mutual exclusion
protocol.
The example depicted in Figure 2.8 demonstrates Fischer’s mutual exclusion protocol, which ensures
mutual exclusion through the application of time constraints. In UPPAAL, the behavior of a single node,
thread, or process is encapsulated within a template, labeled as P in this instance. The number of
template instances in the model can be conﬁgured by setting the value of id_t in the global declarations.
In this example, six instances of P are speciﬁed as follows:
typedef int[1,6] id_t;
int id;
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Model Checking
15
The system declaration includes only the template P, allowing for straightforward scalability by ad-
justing the upper bound of id_t. This ﬂexibility simpliﬁes modifying the number of template instances
in the model.
The template P also has a local declaration ﬁle, which is only visible within P. This ﬁle contains the
following:
clock x;
const int k = 2;
The declaration includes a clock variable, which, in UPPAAL, is a real-valued variable used to measure
the progression of time. Although clocks are represented as real values, they cannot be stored in or
assigned to other variables. Instead, they can only be compared to integer values. Clock constraints in
UPPAAL are expressed as conjunctions of formulas in the following forms:
x ⋊n
or
x −y ⋊n
Where x, y ∈C are clocks, ⋊∈<, ≤, =, >, ≥and n is an integer. Thus, while clocks are real-
valued, comparisons involving real numbers are not permitted; only integer-based comparisons are
valid. Despite this restriction, UPPAAL allows for high precision in time modeling since time steps are
not bound to speciﬁc units. Greater granularity can be achieved by scaling the integer values used
in constraints. Additionally, clock variables progress uniformly over time; for example, if 2-time units
elapse, all clocks in the model increment by exactly 2.
In the example shown in Figure 2.8, both guards (displayed in green) and invariants (shown in
pink) are utilized. Guards are associated with transitions and impose conditions that must be satisﬁed
for a transition to occur. Invariants, on the other hand, are linked to locations and typically enforce
constraints on clock variables, often as upper bounds. It is important to note that invariants are not
properties to be veriﬁed but intrinsic constraints of the model. Meaning the model cannot allow an
invariant to become false.
Having introduced the concept of timed automata in UPPAAL, we can now formally deﬁne them as
the tuple (Loc, Act, C, ,→, Loc0, Inv, AP, L)[BK08, Def. 9.3.] where:
• Loc is a ﬁnite set of locations.
• Loc0 ∈Loc is the initial location.
• C is a ﬁnite set of clocks.
• Act is a ﬁnite set of actions.
• ,→⊆Loc × Act × B(C) × 2C × Loc is a set of edges.
• Inv: Loc −→B(C) assigns invariants to locations.
• AP a ﬁnite set of atomic propositions.
• L : Loc →2AP the labeling function.
Additionally, B(C) denotes the set of all clock constraints that can be formed from the set of clocks
C, and 2C denotes the set of all subsets of C. Note that AP and the labeling function L are very similar
to those seen in the deﬁnition of the transition system.
An edge (,→) represented as (l, a, g, r, l′) , originates from location l and terminates at location l′,
where:
• a is an action that can modify local or global variables.
• b is a guard that must be satisﬁed for the transition to occur.
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Model Checking
16
• r is a set of clocks that are reset upon the transition.
A timed automaton (TA) can be translated into a transition system, by having each state of the
TS be both a location and an evaluation of clocks, the initial location of the TS is the initial location
of the TA with all clocks set to 0. and the clock constrains B(C) are added to the atomic propositions
(Formally [BK08, Def. 9.11]). However, the transition relation of the new TS −→is quite diﬀerent.
The transition relation −→consists of two types of transitions. The ﬁrst type is time increments,
represented as (l, v)
d−→(l, v + d) for d > 0, provided that v + d′ satisﬁes the invariant l(I) for every d′
such that 0 ≤d′ ≤d. The second type is action transitions, denoted as (l, v)
a−→(l′, v′), which require
the existence of an edge (l, a, g, r, l′) ∈E such that v satisﬁes the guard g, all clocks of r are reset
v′ = [r →0], and v′ satisﬁes the invariant Inv(l′) of the target location. Be aware that resetting a clock
in UPPAAL is simply setting it equal to 0 as can be seen with the clock x in Figure 2.8.
While guards apply to transitions and invariants apply to locations, their exact eﬀect can be some-
what subtle. To emphasize the diﬀerence, Figure 2.9 shows three diﬀerent timed automata, each with
a single clock x, a single location, and a single self-looping transition.
Figure 2.9: Some timed automata and possible evolutions of their clocks [BK08].
The diﬀerences in these timed automata lie in the use of guards and invariants. In Figure 2.9(a) and
its corresponding evolution in 2.9(b), the clock x can grow arbitrarily large; however, it must satisfy
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Model Checking
17
x ≥2 before it can be reset. In contrast, in 2.9(c) and (d), the invariant in location l enforces that x
can never exceed 3. This means that if x approaches 3, the automaton is forced to take the transition,
thereby resetting x. In the ﬁnal pair, Figures 2.9(e) and (f), there is no invariant, but the guard contains
an upper bound. As seen in the evolution, this causes the transition to become unavailable if x > 3
becomes true. This is known as a timelock and represents a deadlock in the automaton caused by
a time-increment transition. While it is not technically a deadlock, since the system can continue to
increment time, it remains stuck in terms of action transitions between locations.
A timed automaton is timelock-free if no state reachable by the transition system of the timed
automaton contains a timelock.
The example in Figure 2.8 demonstrates inter-template communication via shared memory. This
is achieved through the integer variable id, which acts as shared memory accessible for both reading
and writing by all template instances. However, communication in UPPAAL is not restricted to shared
memory. Templates can also interact using channels, which do not carry data but regulate the model’s
control ﬂow. A simple example of channel-based communication is illustrated in Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: An example of a channel in UPPAAL.
In the example shown in Figure 2.10, a channel named a is used.
Transitions marked with an
exclamation point (!) indicate the sending of a message, while transitions marked with a question
mark (?) represent the reception of that message. Standard channels in UPPAAL are blocking, requiring
synchronization between the sender and receiver. Consequently, the system cannot exist in states (l1,
s2) or (l2, s1); it must be either in (l1, s1) or (l2, s2).
Two additional keywords, urgent and broadcast, modify the behavior of channels. A broadcast
channel enables simultaneous communication with multiple receivers and is blocking only for the re-
ceiver(s). The urgent keyword pertains to the timing behavior of the system. Synchronization over
an urgent channel prevents any delay, ensuring that the associated transition is executed immediately
when enabled. In the context of UPPAAL, a delay relates to the passage of time; if no delay occurs, the
systems clock variables do not increment.
Similar to how channels can be modiﬁed with the urgent attribute, locations in UPPAAL can also
be marked as urgent or committed. An illustration of the diﬀerent types of locations is provided in
Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11:
An example of locations in UPPAAL. From left to right, they are: initial, normal,
urgent, and committed.
==PAGE:24==
2.2 Model Checking
18
In Figure 2.11, the leftmost location, represented by a circle within a circle, is the initial location,
which speciﬁes the starting point of the timed automaton. It is important to note that an initial
location can also be marked as urgent or committed. However, each template can only contain one
initial location.
An urgent location behaves similarly to an urgent channel: when the automaton reaches an urgent
location, it must transition out immediately without any delay.
Committed locations also require
immediate transitions; however, they introduce an additional constraint: transitions from a committed
location take precedence over other transitions in the system. If multiple automata are simultaneously
in committed locations, the transitions may interleave in any order.
Now in order to write queries within UPPAAL a new logic is required namely Timed CTL (TCTL),
which is very closely related to the notion of CTL presented above. Informally it simply does not allow
the next operator ⃝. The reason this is disallowed is due to the introduction of time increments as
transitions within the system as described previously. Seeing as the next state of the transition system
might be the same location but with a higher clock valuation since this in a timed automaton will be
true for almost all states the idea of ⃝loses its value. Additionally, TCTL allows clock constraints, as
described with ⋊above, to become part of the atomic formulas in the same way atomic propositions
are. The formal deﬁnition can be found in [BK08, Def. 9.27], is is not shown here since UPPAAL query
notation is slightly diﬀerent. Some of the diﬀerences in notation can be seen in Table 2.1. If it was
required to write a query including a clock value such as if it is possible in the timed automaton of
Figure 2.9(e) to never have the clock x exceed 3 it would simply be E[] x <= 3.
TCTL Formula
UPPAAL notation
∀□p
A[] p
∀♢p
A<> p
∃□p
E[] p
∃♢p
E<> p
∀□(p =⇒∀♢q)
p −→q
Table 2.1: Translation between TCTL formula and UPPAAL notation.
In UPPAAL, the −→operator provides the sole mechanism for nesting operators within one another,
otherwise nesting is disallowed in UPPAAL queries. Additionally, UPPAAL queries can incorporate several
speciﬁc keywords. One such keyword is deadlock, which denotes a property that holds only when
the model reaches a state where no action transitions are available. Another keyword is imply, which
corresponds to the logical implication operator ( =⇒), maintaining its standard logical semantics.
Lastly, UPPAAL provides forall (i:x), which deﬁnes an iterator i over the elements of a list x. This
iterator can be utilized in queries to enforce properties across all instances of a given automaton.
For example, in Fischer’s mutual exclusion protocol, illustrated in Figure 2.8, one may wish to verify
mutual exclusion. Speciﬁcally, this property ensures that for each instance of the template named P,
no two instances can simultaneously be in the critical section location cs. This can be formalized as
follows:
A[] forall (i:id_t) forall (j:id_t) P(i).cs && P(j).cs imply i == j
This query ensures that if two instances, P(i) and P(j), are both in the critical section, they must
refer to the same instance, thereby preserving mutual exclusion.
A simple way to ensure a safety property, such as deadlock freedom, is to verify a query like the
following:
A[] not deadlock
An intriguing aspect of the speciﬁed property emerges when evaluated against Fischer’s mutual
exclusion protocol, depicted in Figure 2.8. The veriﬁcation process successfully completed, which may
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Related work
19
prompt questions about how properties such as deadlock freedom can be veriﬁed. If deadlock freedom
holds, it must mean that an inﬁnite path can be constructed since deadlock freedom means, that the
system must always have at least one enabled transition, no matter which state it is in.
To handle inﬁnite transition system, in model checking, the transition system used for veriﬁcation
incorporates mechanisms to detect duplicate states. When a previously encountered state is revisited,
UPPAAL recognizes these repeating state patterns to terminate exploration eﬀectively.
When actually using queries in UPPAAL a tool named verifyta is provided. Which is a command
line tool that allows the user to pick a speciﬁc model to verify and what queries should be checked. For
each query, several diﬀerent parameters can be selected which can be found in [UPPb].
Additionally, since UPPAAL uses timed automata. As mentioned the TS includes two types of transi-
tions: action transitions and time-progress transitions. A natural question arises regarding the potential
for inﬁnite transitions due to clocks continuously increasing towards inﬁnity. This can be addressed
by partitioning the clock space into clock regions, where each region corresponds to a step or range of
clock values, ensuring that the state space remains ﬁnite, even when time progresses indeﬁnitely. For
the example in Figure 2.8 and assuming k = 2, the clock regions would be deﬁned as follows:
[x = 0], [0 < x < 1], [x = 1], [1 < x < 2], [x = 2], [x > 2]
The clock is eﬀectively bounded to six distinct regions, reducing the state space from potentially
inﬁnite to ﬁnite. The transition system alternates between action transitions, which correspond to edges
in Figure 2.8, and time-progress transitions, which move between the clock regions listed above. Thus,
a timed automaton can be viewed as comprising two interconnected transition systems2
2.3
Related work
Before exploring some of the current work related to this thesis it is important to note that as of writing
this there are currently no model checking tools available for Swarm Protocols and therefore no directly
related work to compare the work of this thesis to. Therefore this Section will instead ﬁrst shed light on
some work that also utilizes UPPAAL, before outlining some of the main papers that lead to [KMT23].
A somewhat related ﬁeld in computer science is that of cyber physical systems (CPS) where com-
putational components interact with physical components often through the use of sensors, actuators
or networking In [GK23] CPS are converted into timed automaton for the purpose of using UPPAAL to
perform veriﬁcations of the translated systems. It relies on the CPS being represented using a soft-
ware platform named RIRAS where they incorporate timing information using specialized annotated
comments. It constructs the RIAPS2UPPAAL framework which automates model generation for CPS
applications built on RIAPS. As in this project, one of the remaining challenges outlined in [GK23]
remains the state explosion problem.
Similarly [CN20] propose an approach for model checking cyber-physical systems (CPS) based on
the Theatre actor framework. The paper explores the transformation of Theatre models into timed
automata within the UPPAAL framework. Additionally, a Java-based simulation approach to analyzing
CPS is explored. It is shown that the Theatre framework is eﬀective in modeling and analyzing CPS.
In [Kul+21] a more general approach is adopted with the aim of analyzing the source code of LLVM
programs, by utilizing model checking with UPPAAL. It does so by utilizing dynamic link libraries and
continuously communicating with UPPAAL which allows UPPAAL to handle the state exploration and
timing aspects, while the discrete state space is handled externally. Since this is still preliminary work
it shows that while it is functional it requires further investigation.
To give context to [KMT23] as this thesis is mainly based on the theory outlined in it. It presents
Swarm Protocol as a type of local-ﬁrst software, which is ﬁrst presented in [Kle+19]. Where it is
discussed that a lot of modern applications, such as Google Docs, Trello, GitHub, and more, rely on
cloud based services which if they were to fail would mean the loss of both the data and the access to the
2In UPPAAL, instead of clock regions, clock zones are used. Due to a zone-based representation typically being more
compact than a region-based one.
==PAGE:26==
2.3 Related work
20
software itself. Additionally, the point is made that users no longer have ownership of their own data
since it is all stored in servers the world over. As an alternative local-ﬁrst software is exclusively based
on peer-to-peer communication allowing the user to be in charge of both the data and the software. To
allow applications of peer-to-peer networks to still reach agreement it proposes utilizing Conﬂict-free
Replicated Data Types (CRDTs) to achieve this ﬁdelity. While [Kle+19] is mainly foundational work
showcasing the viability of local-ﬁrst software without delving deeper into actual applications it is on
this foundation that [KMT23] was built.
Furthermore, the work in [KMT23] is based on behavioral types[Anc+16] or more speciﬁcally multi-
party session types[HYC16]. Which is a way of using a typing system to facilitate correct coordination
between participants of a network. In [HYC16] binary session types are extended to multiparty, asyn-
chronous session types, by global types which describe a conversation between multiple participants
from a global viewpoint by projection of the global types. However, in [KMT23] this notation of global
types had to be changed to allow participants to proceed along diﬀerent branches even if these branches
are inconsistent.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Design
This chapter discusses the design choices made and the rationale behind them. The design is structured
in two parts. First, the chapter describes how a Swarm Protocol was adapted to ﬁt as accurately as
possible into a UPPAAL program, in accordance with Objective 1. Second, it explores how the overall
program was designed and structured to convert any arbitrary Swarm Protocol into an XML ﬁle
recognizable by UPPAAL and subsequently use that XML ﬁle to execute queries in UPPAAL, as outlined
in Objective 2. Before delving into these topics, the chapter brieﬂy touches upon Agile development,
speciﬁcally the lean startup methodology.
3.1
Agile software development
Agile development was ﬁrst introduced in 2001 with the publication of the Agile Manifesto [Bec+01].
This framework was designed with several key principles in mind1. Broadly speaking, Agile development
prioritizes collaboration, ﬂexibility, and responsiveness to change. It is characterized by iterative and
incremental software deliveries, often referred to as sprints, which allow developers to continuously
evaluate progress and ensure that the correct program is being developed. This stands in contrast to
traditional methods such as the waterfall model.
The lean startup methodology falls within the Agile framework and focuses on developing a minimal
viable product (MVP) as an initial step. The goal is to validate the feasibility of the work, in this case, to
determine whether the model behaves as expected and whether queries can be correctly veriﬁed. Unlike
rigid methodologies such as the waterfall model, the lean startup approach allows for rapid pivots when
necessary. For example, if it were discovered that UPPAAL could not support this type of protocol, an
alternative approach could have been adopted. This methodology aligns with the exploratory nature
of the project, where each decision is informed by prior knowledge, but not all aspects are guaranteed
to function as expected. Therefore both the design and implementation of the project were done with
this methodology in mind, however, when multiple design choices were tested only the best found will
be presented, this is to keep it clear what is currently part of the project and what is not.
3.2
Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
As mentioned, this section details the process of converting any Swarm Protocol into an UPPAAL model,
following Objective 1. Several aspects must be considered in this process, including the handling of logs,
the delay of propagation, and ensuring that the model remains faithful to the original Swarm Protocol.
The following sections examine each of these steps and their corresponding impact on the overall
design. To illustrate the necessity of certain design choices, a simpliﬁed example is introduced.
1Some aspects of the manifesto emphasize customer-developer interaction, which is not directly relevant here.
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
22
Example 1:
This example is a slightly modiﬁed version of the Swarm Protocol depicted in Figure 2.1 and
will serve as the running example throughout the subsequent chapters. A key modiﬁcation
is that event types have been renamed to match the names of their respective commands
to eliminate ambiguity regarding which event type is emitted by each command.
This
simpliﬁcation is feasible under the assumption that each command is associated with exactly
one event type and that all command names are unique.
The Swarm Protocol used in this example is illustrated in Figure 3.1 and represents the
operation of a basic warehouse system. The warehouse model consists of three distinct roles:
Transport (T), Forklift (FL), and Door (D). The Door component is responsible for managing
the opening and closing of the warehouse. When the warehouse is open, the Transport unit
can request items, which the Forklift retrieves for subsequent delivery by the Transport.
Importantly, the Door cannot close the warehouse if a Transport unit has requested an item
that has not yet been delivered.
0
1
2
3
4
Open@D
Request@T
Get@FL
Deliver@T
Close@D
Figure 3.1: The running example of a Swarm Protocol representing a warehouse.
This speciﬁc example, shown in Figure 3.1, was selected because it succinctly incorporates
several critical features of Swarm Protocol functionality. Speciﬁcally:
• Branching: The node labeled 1 demonstrates branching behavior, which is essential
for analyzing events that may be competing during the execution of the protocol.
• Joining: The same node (1) also exhibits joining behavior, which is crucial for design-
ing backtracking mechanisms. Backtracking from node 1 could lead to either node 0
or node 3, depending on the scenario.
• Loops: The presence of looping behavior introduces the potential for an inﬁnite tran-
sition system if not carefully designed. Such a system would render certain veriﬁcation
tasks infeasible.
To model the distinct roles within this protocol, the approach utilizes projections derived
from the global protocol depicted in Figure 3.1, as explained in Chapter 2. It is important
to note that these projections may omit certain event types present in the global Swarm
Protocol. For instance, the projection of the Door role, illustrated in Figure 3.2, does not
include the event type Get. Consequently, the Door component is not designed to handle
events of that type.
0
1
3
4
Open?
(Open / Open)
Request?
Deliver?
(Close / Close)
Close?
Figure 3.2: The projection of Door from Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
23
Similar to the Door role, which does not subscribe to all event types, the Forklift role also
excludes certain events. In contrast, the Transport role encompasses all event types in the
protocol. Additional projections of the remaining roles are provided in Appendix A.
As mentioned in Example 1 commands and event names have been aligned, so event types emitted
by commands have the same exact name, and events have the same name but in lowercase. All Swarm
Protocol presented from this point on will follow the same concept.
In general, each role must be implemented as its respective projection in UPPAAL to function as a
machine within a Swarm. This approach ensures that each machine can emit the events it is supposed to,
simply by being in the correct location, without requiring any additional logic. Additionally, the design
must support scalability, allowing users to experiment with diﬀerent quantities of machines representing
each role, enabling the analysis of their impact on the outcomes of speciﬁc queries.
3.2.1
Communication through Logs
As previously mentioned, the design of the UPPAAL program incorporates a template for each individ-
ual role within the Swarm Protocol under consideration. A straightforward approach might involve
enabling roles to communicate directly through channels. For instance, the Door role, using the projec-
tion shown in Figure 3.2, could emit open by transitioning via a channel Open!. Other roles subscribing
to this event could synchronize through transitions using Open?.
However, this approach violates a fundamental property of Swarm Protocols: communication be-
tween roles must occur exclusively through the propagation of events. Direct coordination between roles
is not permitted. Instead, roles must interact indirectly by maintaining and sharing logs. To adhere to
this principle, an additional template, referred to as a log template, is introduced for each instance of
each role. The log template is responsible for managing the roles local log, which includes updating the
log when the role emits an event, propagating the updated log to other log templates, and merging its
contents with other logs when receiving propagated events. To keep the notion of event propagation
simple and in line with the introduced theory (Equation 2.1) propagation will be of entire logs between
machines. This is done to avoid the overhead of managing which events need to be propagated and
where each event has yet to propagate. While propagation must still be managed, this simpliﬁes the
logic of the implementation without sacriﬁcing functionality.
Alternatively, a single template could have been used for each machine in the Swarm. However, this
approach would have required the machine to incorporate both the functionality of the role template
and the log template. As shown later in this chapter, as well as in Chapter 4, both templates can become
quite complex on their own. Therefore, merging them would have introduced unnecessary complexity.
As highlighted in Section 2.2.1, minimizing the size of the transition system is essential to mitigate
the risk of state explosion. To achieve this, log operations, such as updating, propagating, and merging,
could be executed atomically, to prevent interleavings. For example, if a log is in the process of merging
with another log and subsequently receives a third propagated log, atomicity guarantees that the initial
merge completes before the new merge begins.
As explained in Section 2.1.1, since total ordering
is preserved when merging logs, the order in which they are merged does not aﬀect the ﬁnal result.
Allowing interleaving during merging would therefore introduce unnecessary states into the transition
system.
To properly deﬁne the structure and function of a log, it is essential to consider what a log contains.
In the formal semantics of Swarm Protocol, a log is described as an ordered list of event types. However,
since Swarm Protocols are built on the Actyx framework, which ensures a total ordering of events,
additional metadata must be incorporated into each log entry (event).
While Actyx uses Lamport
clocks to establish a total ordering, explicitly modeling this is avoided. Instead, all events are pre-
ordered correctly by assigning a sequence number to each log entry, representing the chronological
order in which events were emitted. This enables a straightforward sorting of events based on their
sequence numbers.
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
24
Each log entry must also include the event type to identify the speciﬁc event it represents. Addi-
tionally, to maintain traceability, each entry should contain information linking it to the events from
which it originated. This traceability ensures that if a branching event is invalidated, all events derived
from that branch can also be invalidated (as explained in Section 2.1.1).
Regarding log propagation, it is important to consider the communication mechanisms available in
UPPAAL. As outlined in Section 2.2.1, communication in UPPAAL is facilitated through channels. However,
channels cannot directly carry data. Instead, data transfer between templates is achieved by writing
to shared memory in one template and reading from this memory in another.
By adhering to the
design pattern illustrated in Figure 3.3, it is possible to simulate data transfer through channels while
maintaining consistency and ensuring proper synchronization.
Figure 3.3: Two templates, template A sending data to template B.
Figure 3.3 illustrates an example of data transfer between two UPPAAL templates via a channel. The
upper three locations belong to the sending template, Template A, while the lower two correspond to
the receiving template, Template B. The channel transferringData is deﬁned as a broadcast channel,
enabling Template A to send data to multiple instances of Template B simultaneously. Additionally,
this conﬁguration allows Template A to send data even when no receiving templates are present.
The intermediate location in Template A is marked as committed to ensure that the written data is
not overwritten before Template B has read it. Recall that committed locations take precedence over
non-committed ones. Since the intermediate location has only a single outgoing transition, it determin-
istically activates the transferringData channel. However, this design requires careful implementation
to prevent other templates from concurrently entering a state with a committed location, as this could
lead to data being overwritten before Template B has accessed it.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
25
Figure 3.4: A pseudo-example of the Door role template shown in Figure 3.2 in UPPAAL notation.
With a method for data transfer established, it is now necessary to implement reliable backtracking.
Backtracking occurs when a branching event is invalidated because an alternative branch event was
emitted ﬁrst. This invalidation also aﬀects subsequent events originating from the invalidated branch.
To incorporate backtracking functionality, the log template must determine whether backtracking is
required after merging a log and appropriately manage both the extent and the target of the backtrack-
ing.
Consider the example in Figure 3.4, which illustrates a potential implementation of the Door projec-
tion from Figure 3.2 as it might appear in UPPAAL. It is important to note that this is a pseudo-UPPAAL
example and would not function as intended if implemented directly in this manner. The reasoning for
keeping it in pseudo-notation is to showcase how closely the role template shown is to the underlying
projection of the Swarm Protocol.
Suppose the role template in Figure 3.4 currently holds the log open · request · deliver and resides
in location L2. If the template receives a propagated log from another Door instance indicating that a
close event occurred before the request event in its local log, it updates its log to open · close ·
request ·

deliver. Consequently, the role must backtrack two steps, as two events are now invalid in the log.
Given that the template is in location L2, it must determine whether to backtrack to L1 or L3.
To facilitate this decision, guards are employed. Before initiating the backtracking process, the ﬁeld
BTE is set to ensure that the condition BTE == Deliver evaluates to true, directing the backtracking
appropriately. This is an example of why backtracking must be controlled when considering joining
events
Attentive readers may observe that backtracking two steps from L2 to L3 and then back to L2 results
in no net change in location, rendering the backtracking unnecessary in this instance. In such cases,
backtracking could have been entirely avoided. Moreover, under standard Swarm Protocol logic, the
event open can never be invalidated, meaning the associated backtracking transition is redundant and
unnecessary.
This example is intentionally designed to illustrate a generalized backtracking approach capable of
handling all possible scenarios, even those where speciﬁc backtracking transitions are logically redundant
and will never occur.
3.2.2
Delayed propagation
When analyzing Swarm Protocol systems, it is essential to consider the propagation mechanism. Specif-
ically, propagation may occur after any ﬁnite delay and can be delivered to other machines in the system
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
26
in an arbitrary order. Although it has been proven in [KMT23] that this loose constraint on propagation
still allows the Swarm to reach eventual ﬁdelity, it presents certain challenges.
One signiﬁcant drawback arises in the context of model checking, where the unrestricted interleaving
of propagation events can lead to state explosions, particularly as the number of machines in the
Swarm Protocol system increases.
To address this, we propose bounding the propagation process
to facilitate bounded model checking.
Although imposing such constraints reduces the size of the
transition system and may allow certain queries to be veriﬁed even if invalidating states exist (but are
excluded due to propagation limitations), this approach does not alter the fundamental behavior of the
system. Therefore, any counterexample or fault trace identiﬁed through bounded propagation remains
a reachable state within the underlying Swarm Protocol.
To enable user-deﬁned control over the granularity of propagation, we propose several methods for
delaying propagation that can be employed either individually or in combination.
• Method N: This method introduces no propagation delay. That is, when this method is used, there
will be no delay between the emission of an event and its propagation.
• Method S: This method allows each machine to delay propagation by a speciﬁed number of events
it emits. For instance, if a delay of one event is permitted, the machine may either propagate
immediately after emitting an event or postpone propagation indeﬁnitely, provided it does not
emit another event. Upon emitting a subsequent event, the machine is required to propagate.
Note that methods S and N are equivalent if the propagation delay in S is set to zero.
• Method E: Similar to method S, this method considers globally emitted events rather than only
self-emitted events. Otherwise, it functions similarly to method S. Because of this, it is expected
to serve as a more granular approach in certain scenarios.
• Method T: This approach introduces timing constraints to govern propagation delays and will be
further explained in Section 3.2.3.
Additionally, all of these approaches mandate that propagation be broadcast to all other machines
in the swarm; partial propagation, where logs are sent to only a subset of machines, is not permitted.
While allowing partial propagation is not theoretically inconsistent, it introduces an additional layer of
complexity that will not be explored in this project.
3.2.3
Time constraints
An aspect we have yet to consider is that UPPAAL uses timed automata. This allows us to introduce
time constraints on events in the system through a combination of invariants and guards. For example,
if we wanted to bound the open event in the UPPAAL version of the Door role, as shown in Figure 3.4,
so that it occurs between 10 and 15-time units, this could be easily achieved by introducing a clock
variable named x in the template and adding the corresponding invariant and guard, as illustrated in
Figure 3.5.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
27
Figure 3.5: A section of the model shown in Figure 3.4, now with timing constraints on Open!.
As seen in Figure 3.5, the location L1 is constrained by the invariant x <= 15. Invariants in UPPAAL
cannot be violated without causing a deadlock, meaning the role is forced to take the transition Open!
before x reaches 16. Additionally, the guard x >= 10 has been added to the transition, preventing it
from occurring before 10-time units have passed.
The same timing constraint could have been enforced using only a guard, without an invariant,
by modifying the guard to x >= 10 && x <= 15. However, removing the invariant would allow the
transition system to reach a state in L1 where x exceeds 15. This would eﬀectively livelock the model,
as the Door role would never take the transition containing Open!.
We have chosen not to use this approach for two reasons. First, it is not intuitive for the model to
potentially deadlock in every location where a timing constraint exists. Second, allowing such behavior
prevents the veriﬁcation of upper bounds on clocks, as any role could deadlock, causing the clock values
to increase indeﬁnitely.
We must, however, consider branching events and their associated timing constraints. In this context,
we analyze two diﬀerent scenarios, as presented in Figure 3.6.
1
2
3
4
E12@O
E23@R
E24@R
1
2
3
4
E12@O
E23@R
E24@O
Figure 3.6: Two simple Swarm Protocols illustrating branching. Left: Branching within the same
role. Right: Branching across diﬀerent roles.
The two Swarm Protocols depicted in Figure 3.6 illustrate the challenges associated with enforcing
timing constraints on branching transitions. These challenges are divided into two distinct scenarios.
In the ﬁrst scenario, shown on the left, both branching events, e23 and e24 , are emitted by the same
role, namely R. In contrast, the scenario on the right demonstrates a case where e24 is emitted by a
diﬀerent role, O.
To highlight the diﬀerences between these two Swarm Protocols, the corresponding projections for
role R are provided in Figure 3.7.
==PAGE:34==
3.2 Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
28
1
2
3
4
E12?
(E23 / E23)
(E24 / E24)
E23?
E24?
1
2
3
4
E12?
(E23 / E23)
E23?
E24?
Figure 3.7: Projections of role R derived from the Swarm Protocols in Figure 3.6.
In the same way that the pseudo-example of the door role was presented in Figure 3.4, we can
construct the UPPAAL version of the two projections shown in Figure 3.6. To make this a timing-based
example, we must introduce timing constraints for the two branching events. Speciﬁcally, we set e23
to occur between 5 and 10-time units, while e24 must take place between 10 and 15-time units. The
UPPAAL versions incorporating these timing constraints are shown in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: The pseudo-code UPPAAL versions of the projections presented in Figure 3.7.
If we examine the right UPPAAL template in Figure 3.8, we can see that it closely resembles the
example presented earlier in Figure 3.5. In this case, we simply apply the upper time constraint as an
invariant and the lower time constraint as a guard on the transition. However, the left UPPAAL template
presents a more complex scenario.
First, the invariant is set to the highest of the two upper time constraints. This ensures that both
transitions remain possible. If the invariant were set to the lower of the two values, one of the guards
might never be satisﬁed, rendering part of the Swarm Protocol unreachable. Additionally, the guard
for the transition emitting e23 includes both the lower and upper limits. This prevents the transition
from occurring after the upper limit has been exceeded. Normally, as seen in the right UPPAAL template,
this would not be an issue because the invariant would force the model to take the transition.
An intuitive explanation for this necessity arises from the implications of timing constraints. The
requirement that e23 must occur between 5 and 10 time units indicates that this duration represents
the time needed to complete the action associated with the transition. However, since UPPAAL does not
allow a transition to begin and then wait before completing, the required delay is instead enforced in
the location before the transition occurs. When a role has multiple transition choices with diﬀerent
timing constraints, both must be executable.
Similar to how role templates can be constrained using invariants for upper bounds and guards
for lower bounds, log templates can also be constrained. For example, constraining a log template to
propagate only within [5, 10] time units means that if a new event is emitted, it must take at least 5
time units before propagating, while if 10 time units pass, it is forced to propagate. This introduces
the fourth propagation delay method, T, which operates in conjunction with the other three methods,
N, S, and E, as described in Section 3.2.2.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Converting Swarms to UPPAAL
29
When N,T is selected, only the time delay is eﬀective, making it the sole method to isolate the time
delay functionality introduced by T. Conversely, if S,T or E,T is selected, both methods remain active.
This means that if the number of emitted events, whether locally or globally, exceeds the speciﬁed
maximum, propagation will be enforced. Similarly, if the timing invariant is reached, propagation will
also be triggered. Moreover, regardless of the number of emitted events remaining below the speciﬁed
maximum, propagation can only occur once the minimum timing constraint has been exceeded.
3.2.4
Capturing looping behaviour
An important consideration when accurately capturing the behavior of Swarm Protocols is the handling
of loops within a Swarm Protocol, such as the one depicted in the running Example 1. While UPPAAL
traditionally captures looping behavior by identifying identical states, this approach requires the system
to return to a state identical to that before the loop was initiated. However, since each role in the
system maintains its own log, some logs will inevitably diﬀer after the loop compared to their state
before it. Consequently, the transition system reaches a new state after the loop. As a result, loops in
Swarm Protocols are not traditional loops, and allowing UPPAAL models to incorporate them without
addressing this issue would lead to inﬁnite transition systems.
One potential solution is to reset the system state so that, after a loop, the logs and system conﬁg-
uration match their pre-loop conditions. However, this approach necessitates precise detection of loop
completion, which can be challenging. As outlined in Section 3.2.1, a loop might appear to complete
even if it is invalid due to an alternative branching event. Ensuring that all roles agree on the completion
of a valid loop would require continuously verifying that each role has observed every loop event. Once
a loop is detected, it would be necessary to reset each role’s log by removing all events generated during
the loop. While conceptually viable, this approach could become computationally expensive and limits
the ability to verify properties related to the ﬁnal state of the logs.
A simpler solution could involve imposing a bound on the number of times the initial transition of
a loop can be executed. Implementing this bound is straightforward and requires adding a guard and
a counter to the loop’s starting transition. However, it is also necessary to address invalid transitions
arising from branching conﬂicts. For instance, consider the loop that begins with the request event in
Figure 3.2. If this event is subsequently invalidated, the loop counter must be decremented to allow the
loop to execute again under valid conditions. The speciﬁc machine that emitted the request event can
track whether it becomes invalid at any point and decrement the global counter accordingly.
While this approach might initially appear sound, it does not function as intended in several scenarios.
Nevertheless, its core idea remains valid. Namely, restricting the number of times a transition can
be taken. Rather than merely limiting the initial loop transitions, a more general solution involves
restricting all transitions that do not lead to a terminal location. A terminal location is deﬁned as a
node in the Swarm Protocol with an outdegree of 0. This ensures that transitions failing to advance
the Swarm toward termination can eventually be locked, thereby forcing the Swarm to reach completion.
However, a signiﬁcant challenge arises in combining transition locks imposed by counters with the
timing constraints outlined in Section 3.2.3. That section states that to enforce the occurrence of an
event at its maximum time constraint, an invariant with that maximum value is set at the events source.
1
2
E1@R
E2@R
E3@R
Figure 3.9: A Swarm Protocol with two single event loops.
The Swarm Protocol in Figure 3.9 contains three commands, all of which involve branching. The
two single event loops do not lead to a terminal location; therefore, they should be constrained by a
counter that remains below a speciﬁed maximum. The counter for E1 is denoted as cE1, and for E2, it
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Designing the automated translation tool
30
is cE2. Additionally, the maximum number of times a non-terminal transition, such as the two single
loop events, can be taken is set to PM. A terminal transition is the transition from a location that is
part of the shortest path leading to a terminal location.
Without any timing constraints, this is not an issue.
However, introducing timing constraints
[tmin, tmax], where it denotes a lower bound (indicating that at least tmin time units must elapse before
the command can be executed) and an upper bound (tmax), requiring execution to occur within tmax
time units, necessitates additional considerations. The following timing constraints can be introduced:
• E1: [15, 15]
• E2: [10, 10]
• E3: [5, 5]
To ensure that every command executes within its speciﬁed timing constraints, an invariant must
be introduced at location 1. However, as before, a simple invariant such as x <= 15 cannot be applied
directly, as reaching cE1 == PM would prevent E1 from executing. Therefore, the invariant should be
formulated as follows:
(x <= 15 && (cE1 < PM || (x <= 10 && (cE2 < PM || x <= 5))))
This invariant ensures that time in the state can only progress to the required value if a command
can be executed (i.e., its counter remains below PM). This illustrates that invariants can become
complex, particularly considering that if the timing constraints of E1 and E3 were swapped, the simpler
invariant x <= 15 would once again be valid.
In general, an invariant must include a clause for each counter with a maximum time greater than
that of the terminal transition in a partition of branching events. This ensures that the maximum time
of any non-terminal transition can only be reached as long as the counter, for that transition, has not
yet attained the set maximum. The implementation of this logic is detailed in Section 4.1.2.
An attentive reader may observe that if multiple instances of the role R appear in a Swarm using the
Swarm Protocol from Figure 3.9, the stated invariant could be violated. Speciﬁcally, one instance of
the role could execute E1, resulting in cE1 == PM. If another instance of the role had a local clock
value x where x > 10, the invariant could be violated, as x > 15 would then become possible.
To prevent this, instead of using a global counter for each transition, a local counter is used. This
allows each instance of a role to maintain its own counters, thereby preventing interference and avoiding
potential race conditions. However, this approach also implies that if the maximum number of times
a transition can be taken is set to two, and two instances of a role take a non-terminal transition, the
command associated with that transition could potentially be executed four times.
3.3
Designing the automated translation tool
To translate a Swarm Protocol representation, we ﬁrst need a way of representing a Swarm Protocol.
Swarm Protocol are implemented using the JavaScript framework[Actb]. In this framework, a Swarm
Protocol is represented as a JSON ﬁle. Additionally, this framework provides a method for constructing
the projection of a role into a JSON ﬁle. Since JSON ﬁles are designed for eﬃcient data transfer, we
utilize this format as the intermediary between the given repository and the automated translation tool.
Although incorporating the automated translation tool directly into [Actb] would oﬀer a more conve-
nient use case, it was not prioritized, as it does not align with any of the Objectives outlined in Section
1.2.
To automate the translation of the Swarm Protocol into a format compatible with UPPAAL, it is
essential to ﬁrst analyze the structural composition of a UPPAAL ﬁle. This analysis provides insight into
the expected output of the automated translation process. A UPPAAL program is encapsulated entirely
within a single XML ﬁle.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Designing the automated translation tool
31
Below, we present an illustrative example of such a ﬁle, abstracting away the speciﬁc x, y coordinates
of elements. These coordinates are used only in the visual representation within UPPAAL and do not aﬀect
the functional aspects of the program. Additionally, placeholders (. . . ) indicate the potential presence
of multiple instances of certain elements, such as locations, which may vary in quantity depending on
the use case.
1 <?xml
version="1.0" encoding="utf -8"?>
2 <!DOCTYPE
nta
PUBLIC
’ -// Uppaal
Team // DTD
Flat
System
1.1// EN’ ’http :// www.it.uu.se/
research/group/darts/uppaal/flat -1_2.dtd ’>
3 <nta >
4
<declaration >
5
//
Global
declarations
go here
6
broadcast
chan go;
7
8
</declaration >
9
<template >
10
<name > templateName
</name >
11
<parameter > parameters
</parameter >
12
<declaration >
13
// Local
declarations
go here
14
clock x;
15
</declaration >
16
<location
id="id0" x="_" y="_">
17
<name x="_" y="_"> locationName
</name >
18
<label
kind="invariant " x="_" y="_"> x&lt ;=10
</label >
19
</location >
20
<location
id="id1" x="_" y="_">
21
<name x="_" y="_"> secondLocationName
</name >
22
<committed/>
23
</location >
24
<location
id="id2" x="_" y="_">
25
<urgent/>
26
</location >
27
...
28
29
<init
ref="id1"/>
30
<transition >
31
<source
ref="id1"/>
32
<target
ref="id2"/>
33
<label
kind="guard" x="_" y="_"> true
</label >
34
<label
kind=" synchronisation " x="_" y="_"> go! </label >
35
<label
kind="assignment " x="_" y="_">x = 0</label >
36
</transition >
37
...
38
39
</template >
40
...
41
42
<system >system
templateName ;</system >
43
<queries >
44
<query >
45
<formula >E<> templateName . secondLocationName
46
</formula >
47
<comment >Do we reach
the
location
secondLocationName
48
</comment >
49
</query >
50
...
51
52
</queries >
53 </nta >
The initial tags of the XML ﬁle specify the version and identify the ﬁle as a product of the UPPAAL
research group. The ﬁle encapsulates the entire model, including the global declaration. It is important
==PAGE:38==
3.3 Designing the automated translation tool
32
to note that information exchange between templates must occur through shared memory, as channels
cannot transfer data. For instance, transferring an array between templates can be achieved by declaring
it in the global declaration, allowing templates to read from and write to it.
The global declaration section is followed by the templates. Each template includes a name and a
set of parameters. These parameters facilitate template instantiation with varying conﬁgurations and
represent the initial state of each template. Additionally, each template comprises a set of locations
and transitions. Locations possess the following attributes:
• ID (Mandatory): A unique identiﬁer required for each location.
• Name (Optional): Used for referencing the location in veriﬁcation queries.
• Invariant (Optional): A boolean condition that must hold while in the location.
• Tag (Optional): Speciﬁes whether the location is committed, urgent, initial, or neither, as
outlined in Section 2.2.1.
Similarly, transitions are characterized by the following attributes:
• ID (Mandatory): A unique identiﬁer required for each transition.
• Source (Mandatory): The ID of the location from which the transition originates.
• Target (Mandatory): The ID of the location to which the transition leads.
• Guard (Optional): A boolean condition that must be satisﬁed for the transition to execute.
• Synchronization (Optional): Enables coordination between template instances via channels.
• Assignment (Optional): Updates the state when the transition is taken. Additionally includes
the reset of clocks.
Both guards and assignments may invoke functions deﬁned in the local or global declarations, facil-
itating code reuse.
In the XML ﬁle format, following the deﬁnition of all templates, the system tag speciﬁes which
templates to instantiate and their corresponding parameters. This step is critical, as templates that are
not included in the system instantiation will not participate in the model.
Finally, the queries section contains formulas and comments, both of which may be left as empty
strings. When using the command-line tool Verifyta, queries can also be speciﬁed in a separate ﬁle.
To maintain simplicity, queries will therefore not be embedded within the model constructed during the
automatic translation.
With a clear understanding of the required contents of a UPPAAL ﬁle, the next step is to design a
program structure to automate the translation process. The model, composed of multiple interconnected
components, forms a complex object. To manage this complexity, the Builder pattern, a component
of the classical set of 23 design patterns, is employed [Wik]. A UML class diagram illustrating this
approach is presented in Figure 3.10.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Designing the automated translation tool
33
Figure 3.10: A class diagram of the automated translation tool.
In Figure 3.10, the classes are color-coded to represent their roles within the Builder design pattern.
In general, creation design patterns aim to decompose the construction of complex objects into smaller,
modular components to enhance ﬂexibility and scalability. The color scheme is as follows: red represents
the director, responsible for orchestrating the construction process; blue indicates the builders; green
signiﬁes the modular building blocks utilized by the builders; and yellow denotes static utility functions
employed across the application.
The CLI class acts as the director, serving as the command-line interface between the user and the
system. It determines the protocol to be used, the number of instances of each role required in the
model, along with their delay type, delay amount, and more. Additionally, the CLI class contains the
main method, which serves as the program’s entry point. The reason for choosing a CLI is that it
requires little eﬀort while still granting the user full control of the application. Additionally, building
any form of GUI would fall beyond the scope of the Objectives listed in Section 1.2.
The yellow classes consist of static utility functions and global methods, summarized as follows:
• Utils: This class provides global utilities, such as generating unique IDs for locations to ensure
consistency across roles and logs. It may also include static methods for operations like calculating
distances between locations, which can be utilized throughout the program.
• Functions: This class encapsulates reusable functions both the local declarations as well as
the global declaration. For instance, it may include a function to merge two logs and return
==PAGE:40==
3.3 Designing the automated translation tool
34
the resulting log. These functions return strings, representing the UPPAAL function, to facilitate
seamless integration into the resulting XML ﬁle.
The building blocks, represented in green, enhance the modularity and maintainability of the model-
building process. These classes include:
• UppaalPart: An interface ensuring that each component is responsible for its XML translation.
Classes implementing this interface are denoted by <UppaalPart> immediately after the class
name.
• Event: Represents Swarm Protocol events, characterized by a source, target, and event type,
which is represented by the ﬁeld name.
• JsonTransfer: Stores data extracted from JSON ﬁles, containing projections of roles in the orig-
inal Swarm Protocol, or from the JSON ﬁle containing the overall view of the Swarm Protocol.
• Channel: Represents UPPAAL channels, with attributes indicating their quantity (it will be an
array of channels if amount > 0), as well as whether they are broadcast or urgent.
• Declaration: Decomposes UPPAAL declarations into manageable components, including statements
(e.g., int x = 2;), channels, and functions.
• Location: Represents locations as they appear in the UPPAAL XML format, the type of the
location is kept using the enum LocationType.
• Transition: Corresponds to transitions in the UPPAAL XML format, including source, target,
guard conditions, synchronizations, and assignments.
• Template: Combines locations, transitions, and declarations to ensure correct XML generation.
The classes Role and Log, depicted in both green and blue, function both as components of complex
objects and as constructors of complex objects. These classes create Template instances and inherit
the ToXML() method from the Template class to allow templates to be converted to XML notation in
a general way. They serve as components of the ModelBuilder since the entire model may contain
any number of templates. Although the functionality of both role templates and log templates can
vary depending on the presence of timing constraints or the type of delay mechanism used, their core
functionality remains unchanged. Therefore, their construction is not separated into multiple classes.
In the original Builder design pattern, an explicit builder class would typically be responsible for
constructing a model while implementing a model builder interface.
However, in this instance, we
have opted not to create a model builder interface, as there is currently only a need for one model
builder, eliminating the need for an interface to enforce a speciﬁc build method across multiple builders.
Nonetheless, we have separated the construction of a model, given its complexity, from its representation.
This is achieved by deﬁning the ModelBuilder class, with the BuildModel method as the sole means
of constructing a model.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
This chapter provides a detailed description of the steps taken to implement the UPPAAL model, designed
to replicate the behavior of the Swarm Protocol as accurately as possible, in accordance with Objective
1. Subsequently, an explanation of the ﬁnal version of the automated codebase, developed to translate
Swarm Protocol speciﬁcations into UPPAAL models, is presented, following speciﬁcations of Objective
2.
4.1
Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
The ﬁrst step in converting the Swarm Protocol speciﬁcation into a UPPAAL model involves deﬁning
role templates that accurately represent the projections of the corresponding roles. To illustrate this
process, the projection of the Door role, depicted in Figure 3.2 from the running Example 1, has been
translated into a UPPAAL representation, as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The UPPAAL representation of the Door role as a role template.
Although the UPPAAL template in Figure 4.1 may initially appear complex, it closely resembles
the pseudocode template shown in Figure 3.4. The primary diﬀerence lies in the treatment of role-
emitted events. In the UPPAAL model, instead of representing these events as transitions with identical
source and target states, they are directly modeled. For instance, the transition synchronized with
do_log_update_Door[id]! now targets L1 instead of L0. As outlined in Chapter 2, when a machine
emits an event, it immediately appends the event to its log before proceeding to the next state. To
avoid unnecessary transitions that ﬁrst add the event to the log and then ensure the machine moves to
the corresponding state, we model this as a single step in the role template. As seen in the template
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
36
the locations that act as sources for the events the Door role emits are marked as urgent. This is to
ensure no unnecessary delay transitions are allowed when there are no timing constraints in the model.
Another notable distinction is the representation of the two events emitted by the Door role, open
and close. Both events are synchronized via the same channel, do_log_update_Door[id]!. This design
choice is motivated by the fact that data communication between templates in UPPAAL relies on shared
memory. Instead of using separate channels, the method SetLogEntryForUpdate is employed to create
a log entry, which is then processed by the log template to append it to the log.
To understand this mechanism, it is necessary to deﬁne the concept of a log entry. In the context of
Swarm Protocol, a log entry corresponds to an event, which, apart from an event type, may carry arbi-
trary data. However, only metadata related to its relationship with other events and the emitting role
template is modeled. In the UPPAAL model, log entries are implemented using the following structure:
1 typedef struct {
2
int eventID;
3
int emitterID;
4
int orderCount;
5
int basedOnOrderCount;
6
int tiedTo;
7
bool ignored;
8 } logEntryType;
Listing 4.1: The costume structure for log entries in UPPAAL.
The ﬁeld eventID represents the type of an event and serves as a mechanism for distinguishing
between diﬀerent events. It is also utilized in backtracking transitions, as illustrated in Figure 4.1. The
details of backtracking will be elaborated later in this section. For the role template in Figure 4.1, the
possible event types (or eventID values) can be deﬁned as follows:
1 const int Request_ID = 0;
2 const int Close_ID = 1;
3 const int Deliver_ID = 2;
4 const int Open_ID = 3;
5 const int Get_ID = 4;
Listing 4.2: The unique event types represented as integers in UPPAAL.
Note that although the role template in Figure 4.1 does not use Get_ID, it is still deﬁned globally,
as other role templates will require it. The projections and their corresponding UPPAAL representations
can be found in Appendix A.
This implementation functions similarly to an enumeration. However, since enumerations are not yet
supported in UPPAAL, this approach serves as a viable alternative. It facilitates easier development by
allowing the use of descriptive constants (e.g., Request_ID) to reference events of type Request instead
of relying on raw numeric values such as 0.
The emitterID ﬁeld, of Listing 4.1, identiﬁes the speciﬁc template that emitted the event, enabling
diﬀerentiation between templates that model the same role. This value is directly assigned during the
SetLogEntryForUpdate call, as shown in Figure 4.1, using the templates unique id ﬁeld. The id ﬁeld
is one of the parameters of the door template. The parameter Door_t id has a custom-deﬁned type,
which determines the number of instances for each role in the model. To facilitate easy modiﬁcation, it
has been deﬁned as follows:
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
37
1 const int NUMBER_OF_Door = 1;
2 typedef int[0,NUMBER_OF_Door-1] Door_t;
3 const int NUMBER_OF_Forklift = 1;
4 typedef int[0,NUMBER_OF_Forklift-1] Forklift_t;
5 const int NUMBER_OF_Transport = 2;
6 typedef int[0,NUMBER_OF_Transport-1] Transport_t;
By adjusting a single variable for each role, the number of instances participating in the model can
be easily modiﬁed. Similarly, the log templates use these deﬁned types, as their parameters, ensuring
that each role template has a corresponding log template with the same id. Additionally, the channel
arrays, as seen in Figure 4.1, utilize these types to determine the number of channels created at compile
time.
However, this alone is not suﬃcient to create a unique ID for each role, as the diﬀerent typedef
deﬁnitions overlap. In other words, with the code above, both the Door role and the Forklift role would
have an instance with id = 0. To fully distinguish them, each role and its corresponding log template
pair are assigned a variable named id_start, which must be added to their respective id to produce a
globally unique identiﬁer. The id_start simply oﬀsets the id value to ensure no overlap occurs among
diﬀerent role-log template pairs. For example, if the Door role had id_start = 0, then for the Forklift
role, it can be deﬁned as id_start = NUMBER_OF_Door, and correspondingly for the Transport role it
would become id_start = NUMBER_OF_Door + NUMBER_OF_Forklift ensuring its unique ID does not
conﬂict with others.
The orderCount ﬁeld, of Listing 4.1, serves two primary purposes. First, it guarantees a consistent
total ordering of events, regardless of how they propagate among templates. In actual swarm protocols,
the Actyx middleware achieves this using Lamport clocks. While a similar mechanism could be imple-
mented in UPPAAL using timed automata, it would introduce unnecessary complexity without oﬀering
signiﬁcant advantages over the current solution, which employs a global counter. Speciﬁcally, each time
a role template emits an event, the orderCount is incremented and assigned to the event before it is
stored in globally accessible memory. This enables logs to eﬃciently sort events in descending order
simply by comparing the orderCount values of the given logEntryType.
Second, orderCount acts as a unique identiﬁer for each event. While eventID speciﬁes the event
type, it does not distinguish between multiple occurrences of the same event type, such as two separate
request events. By incrementing orderCount for every new event, each event is guaranteed a unique
identiﬁer.
The basedOnOrderCount ﬁeld records the orderCount of the event immediately preceding the current
event. This information is essential for tracking dependencies between events, allowing the system to
discard an event and all subsequent dependent events if necessary.
The tiedTo ﬁeld establishes relationships between events by identifying the orderCount of the event
to which the current event is associated. This mechanism is the implementation of the branch tracking
approach described in Section 2.1.1. By linking each event to a speciﬁc prior event, this ﬁeld enables
the modeling of event dependencies. For the running example 1 and the event IDs in Listing 4.2, the
relationship can be captured by the following mapping:
1 const int eventsTiedTo[amountOfUniqueEvents][maxAmountOfTied] = {{Request_ID},
{Request_ID}, {Request_ID}, {-1}, {Request_ID}};
To create a mapping such as this, a static analysis of the Swarm Protocol is performed to identify
all possible branching events that can precede each event. A mapping is then created, associating the
integer value of each event type with a list of event types to which it can be tied, as can be seen in the
above mapping.
In this mapping, each index corresponds to a speciﬁc eventID, such as Deliver_ID = 2, as deﬁned
previously. This approach is necessary because UPPAAL does not support dynamic lists or dictionaries.
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
38
Additionally, an index such as −1 is assigned to Open_ID = 3, as it cannot be tied to any preceding
event. Since UPPAAL does not support a null value, −1 is generally used as a substitute. The function
responsible for determining event ties iterates through the log in descending order, associating the
current event with the most recent permissible event.
Another important function of both the basedOnOrderCount and tiedTo ﬁelds is to determine
whether events are in competition. Speciﬁcally, if two branching events occur in close succession, they
are likely in competition, and the latter should be discarded. An example of this is presented in Figure
4.2, where a Swarm Protocol with two diﬀerent roles is depicted. While the exact functionality of the
swarm is not crucial for this example, it is important that the swarm protocol contains single loops, as
these can exhibit interesting behavior.
Consider the following global log: e120 · e220 · e221 . Referring to Figure 4.2, this log appears valid.
However, when branch tracking is enabled, two diﬀerent interpretations emerge regarding how this
sequence unfolded:
1. e120 @O[Null] · e220 @R1[Null] · e221 @R2[Null], where the second occurrence of e221 is invalid be-
cause e22 is a branching event not tied to e220 .
2. e120 @O[Null] · e220 @R1[Null] · e221 @R2[e220], where e221 is correctly tied to e220 .
To distinguish between these two cases, the tiedTo ﬁeld is essential, as it enables branch tracking.
By using the tiedTo ﬁeld, the system can determine whether role R2 had the event e220 in its log before
emitting e221 . This ensures proper event tracking and allows the discovery of competition between
branching events.
1
2
3
E12@O
E22@R
E23@O
Figure 4.2: Swarm Protocol with a self-loop.
As previously described, a mapping can be created to deﬁne the relationship between events and the
events to which they are allowed to be tied to for branch tracking. For the Swarm Protocol presented
in Figure 4.2, this mapping is as follows:
1 const int e11_ID = 0;
2 const int e01_ID = 1;
3 const int e12_ID = 2;
4 const int amountOfUniqueEvents = 3;
5 const int maxAmountOfTied = 1;
6 const int eventsTiedTo[amountOfUniqueEvents][maxAmountOfTied] = {{e11_ID}, {-1},
{e11_ID}};
From eventsTiedTo, we observe that both e12 and e11 can only be tied to e11 , whereas e01 cannot
be tied to any event since no branching events precede it. This is indicated by a value of −1, as no
event type (eventID) can have an integer value lower than 0.
The reason eventsTiedTo is structured as a list of lists is to accommodate more general cases in
which a given Swarm Protocol may have events where multiple branching events precede a single event.
In such cases, the event may be tied to any of several possible event types.
Additionally, maxAmountOfTied is deﬁned as a variable so that it can be utilized in the UPPAAL
function responsible for determining which event in the current local log of a given machine a new event
should be tied to:
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
39
1 int findTiedTo(logEntryType currentLogEntry, logEntryType &tempLog[logSize]) {
2
int j;
3
int i;
4
for(i = currentLogEntry.orderCount-1; i >= 0; i--) {
5
if (tempLog[i].orderCount != 0) {
6
for (j = 0; j<maxAmountOfTied; j++) {
7
if (tempLog[i].eventID == eventsTiedTo[currentLogEntry.eventID][j]
8
&& tempLog[i].orderCount < currentLogEntry.orderCount) {
9
return tempLog[i].orderCount;
10
}
11
}
12
}
13
}
14
return -1;
15 }
This way, it becomes straightforward in UPPAAL to ﬁnd the relevant branching event by simply
iterating over the local log and the events in the eventsTiedTo array until a match is found. This
function is used in two cases. In the ﬁrst case, it is used when a new event is emitted to ensure that
its tiedTo ﬁeld is set correctly. In the second case, it is used when merging logs to ensure that an
event is tied to the correct branching event by using findTiedTo and checking whether its return value
matches the tiedTo ﬁeld of the event. Note that it returns −1 if it cannot ﬁnd any event to tie to.
This is important, for the Swarm Protocol depicted in Figure 4.2, because, for an event such as e12 , it
is possible that no e11 event has been emitted beforehand. Therefore, it would be the ﬁrst branching
event in the run of the Swarm Protocol and would have no other event to tie to.
Considering the event e22 in the Swarm Protocol depicted in Figure 4.2, if multiple instances
of the role O exist, we could obtain a global log such as e120 @O1[Null] · e121 @O2[Null] · e220 @R[Null].
Inspecting this log, it is not possible to ascertain whether e121 propagated to R prior to the emission
of e220 using branch tracking alone, since neither event ties to any branching event due to the absence
of previous branching events. However, the basedOnOrderCount ﬁeld, which records the orderCount
of the last event in the local log, enables diﬀerentiation. Speciﬁcally, it indicates whether the preceding
event in the local machines log was e120 or e121 . While the standard approach, as described in Section
2.1 might accept both scenarios, an alternative model could impose stricter constraints, highlighting
the necessity of the basedOnOrderCount ﬁeld for such cases.
4.1.1
Implementing communication through log templates
Ensuring that the UPPAAL model faithfully replicates the functionality of the Swarm Protocol is crucial
for performing meaningful model checking. This ﬁdelity necessitates modeling communication through
logs rather than direct interactions between role templates. As discussed in Chapter 3, the approach
involves creating a dedicated log template for each role template. Roles communicate exclusively with
their respective logs, which handle the propagation of events.
With the structure of log entries deﬁned, we can now examine the implementation of the log in
UPPAAL. While role templates closely resemble the projections and thus require minimal design adjust-
ments, the log templates needed to be developed from scratch. An example of a log template for the
Door role, following the running Example 1, is presented in Figure 4.3:
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
40
Figure 4.3: The UPPAAL representation of the Door log using delay type S, from Section 3.2.2. A log
template.
While the log presented in Figure 4.3 might initially seem complex, it essentially captures three
main functionalities. The ﬁrst is receiving propagated logs, merging them with the locally held log,
and adjusting the role template through channel calls to ensure it adheres to the updated contents of
the log. The second functionality is determining when propagation should occur and propagating the
updates to other log templates. The ﬁnal functionality involves handling events produced by the role
template connected to the log template.
The last functionality is the simplest and consists of the transition from initial to
accepting_emitted_1. Notably, this transition can only occur when the channel do_log_update_Door[
id] is invoked. Since do_log_update_Door[id] is not a broadcast channel, synchronization is required,
eﬀectively ensuring that the role template can only emit events when the log is ready to receive them.
Recall that the role template in Figure 4.1 does not wait for the log to update its position when it
emits an event. This in turn enables this functionality to be captured by a single transition. When this
transition is ﬁred the correct tiedTo ﬁeld of the log entry is set and it is appended to the local log of
the log template.
The ﬁrst mentioned functionality is merging logs and updating the role template accordingly. This
functionality is captured by the transitions and locations to the left of initial, meaning all the
transitions between initial, merge_log, backtracking_1, backtracking_2, updating_role_1, and
updating_role_2. This process can only begin once propagate_log is received.
The attentive reader may have noticed that the transition from initial to merge_log also includes
a guard, speciﬁcally currentLogToPropagate == id_start + id. While this might initially seem coun-
terintuitive, as it could prevent the log template from receiving propagated events, this is intentional.
Instead of propagating to every other log simultaneously, propagation occurs in a round-robin fashion.
Each log template ﬁrst merges the propagated log and ensures that the corresponding role template is
in the correct location before passing control to the next log template. This next log template then
begins by merging the propagated log into its own local log, continuing the process sequentially. Since
all locations in the log templates, apart from the initial one, are marked as committed, multiple log
templates receiving a propagated log simultaneously would allow transitions such as merging logs, back-
tracking, and updating the role template’s location to interleave. Given that a propagated log could
signiﬁcantly alter a local log, this could result in a large number of interleavings, causing the state
explosion problem.
The reason every location is marked as committed is to ensure that logs complete their tasks before
any role template can execute a transition. Without this constraint, a log template might attempt to
propagate to another log template while the latter is still backtracking. In such a scenario, the second
log template would be unable to receive the new log, introducing an additional layer of complexity
regarding how to handle the failed propagation. To avoid this, each location is marked as committed,
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
41
eﬀectively assuming that all log template behavior occurs instantly and atomically.
The behavior
consists of multiple transitions and is therefore not truly atomic; however, from the perspective of the
role templates, it appears to be. Additionally, in terms of time, it is instantaneous.
The ﬁnal functionality, which controls when propagation should occur in the log template shown in
Figure 4.3, is primarily managed by the incoming and outgoing transitions from the locations l_prop1
and l_prop2. By utilizing a local counter, updatesSincePropagation, and a globally deﬁned maximum,
maxUpdatesSincePropagation_Door, the log template is only forced to propagate once this maximum
is reached. Otherwise, it remains in initial, allowing propagation as long as new events are present
in its log. This design eﬀectively permits all interleavings between propagation occurring instantly,
immediately after an event emission, or at any point until the maximum is reached.
The log template in Figure 4.3 employs delay type S, as described in Section 3.2.2. Since delay type N
can be simply deﬁned as S with a maximum value of 0, it does not require further explanation. However,
delay type E introduces additional scenarios, and a part of its corresponding solution is illustrated in
Figure 4.4. The entire log template can be found in Figure A.5 in Appendix A.
Figure 4.4: The partial UPPAAL representation of the Door log using delay type E from Section 3.2.2.
In Figure A.5, the guards and synchronizations for the three transitions from updating_role_1 to
initial have been moved up and to the left for clarity. Note that they all use the same assignments,
located directly to the right of updating_role_1. Aside from this modiﬁcation, the most signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between Figure A.5 and Figure 4.3, which uses delay type S, is the right side of the ﬁgure,
where three new locations named forced_prop_n have been introduced, which is visible in Figure 4.4.
The reason for this change is that propagation can now be forced by other log templates, whereas
previously, a log template could only force its own propagation. This introduces two diﬀerent scenarios
when emitting a new event. The ﬁrst scenario occurs when the log template forces its own propagation as
well as that of other logs. In this case, it ensures that its own propagation completes before forcing other
log templates to propagate. This is handled using the locations forced_prop_1 and forced_prop_2.
The guard on the transition from forced_prop_1 to forced_prop_2 ensures that only when the round-
robin scheduling attempts to propagate back to the log template that originally propagated its log, it
can proceed and potentially force other log templates to propagate. Recall that merging logs always
==PAGE:48==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
42
preserves the total order, as described by the shuﬄe operator (Equation 2.1) in Section 2.1.1. Therefore,
the order of propagation when multiple propagations occur does not matter.
The second scenario occurs when the log does not force itself to propagate but may still force others.
To enforce propagation, the channel force_propagate is used. Since multiple log templates could be
forced to propagate due to a single event emission, force_propagate is deﬁned as a broadcast channel.
A guard on the transition from initial to forced_prop_3 ensures that only log templates requiring
propagation can synchronize with force_propagate?.
The location forced_prop_3 includes a self-
looping transition that iterates through all machines in the model. This mechanism prevents multiple log
templates from attempting to propagate simultaneously and enforces sequential propagation. However,
as mentioned, the order of propagation is insigniﬁcant.
The ﬁnal reason for the increased complexity in the model is that when multiple log templates are
forced to propagate, only one can do so at a time, while the others must return to initial and remain
ready to receive the propagated log. To ensure this behavior, the channels abandon_propagation and
attempt_propagation are used, along with a boolean array forcedToPropagate[] that tracks whether
a log template is being forced to propagate. Once a log has fully propagated through the Swarm, the
remaining log templates return to forced_prop_3, given their id is set to True in forcedToPropagate[],
allowing them to propagate immediately afterward.
While this approach may seem overly complex, it is crucial to ensure that only one log template
executes a transition at a time, preventing unexpected behavior.
Finally, the location overflow can only be reached once the global log is full. At this point, it
forces all other log templates in the model into their respective overflow locations, causing the entire
model to deadlock. This approach is used because the behavior of the system once the log is full is
undeﬁned. Speciﬁcally, it is unclear where new log entries should be stored, as they would have to
overwrite previous ones, potentially causing the model to fail when attempting to access older entries.
A feature that has yet to be described in detail is backtracking. Backtracking occurs when a log
template receives a propagated log, merges it with its own log, and discovers that one or more previously
valid events have been invalidated. This can happen, for instance, when a branch event is received that
renders another branch event invalid, requiring every event following the faulty branch event to also
be invalidated. To recover, the log template must ensure that the role template backtracks for each
invalidated event.
In the role template (Figure 4.1) and the corresponding log template (Figure 4.3), this is achieved
using the channel backtrack_Door[id]. The log template iterates through a list of newly invalidated
events and invokes backtrack_Door[id]! for each of them. A simple count of invalidated events is
insuﬃcient due to the presence of joining events. Consider l1 in Figure 4.1: if backtracking is required
from this position, there are two possible destinations either l0 or l2. Therefore, it is imperative to
track which speciﬁc events were discarded.
To facilitate this, the log template maintains an array named discardedEventIDs[logSize], which
is populated when the function findAndSetDifferenceInLogs is executed. This function compares the
local log before and after the merge, identiﬁes diﬀerences, and determines the necessary backtracking
steps, including which events need to be reverted and how many new events must be processed. The
discardedEventIDs[logSize] array is then used to set the current event being backtracked via the
global variable currentEventResetID. This variable serves as a guard in the role template. For example,
in Figure 4.1, if backtracking from l1 to l0 is required, the guard currentEventResetID == Open_ID
must be satisﬁed, since the open event originally transitioned the role template from l0 to l1.
Additionally, the function findAndSetDifferenceInLogs determines the number of new events that
need to be processed after backtracking. This is achieved using the advance_Door_eventName channels,
where eventName is replaced with the corresponding event type, such as advance_Door_Open. This
mechanism enables the log template to correctly reposition the role template by sequentially invoking
these channels for each new event.
This approach to backtracking is, of course, not the only one. An alternative would be to completely
reset the role template to its original location whenever a change in the log occurs and then iterate
through each entry in the log, updating the role template in the same manner as the current approach
does after backtracking. However, given the nature of the project, which involves a model with propa-
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
43
gation occurring in a bounded manner, it is assumed that when a log propagates, it does not drastically
alter other local logs. Consequently, only a few backtracking calls are typically required.
This assumption ensures that even if logs grow signiﬁcantly in size, they can still propagate and
merge eﬃciently without necessitating an excessive number of transitions. Avoiding an overabundance of
transitions prevents unnecessary bloating in the transition system, thereby maintaining model eﬃciency.
Previously, we introduced the concept of log merging but have yet to describe it in detail. Merging a
local log with one received through propagation is a relatively straightforward process. It is performed
by iterating over both logs and examining the orderCount ﬁeld of each log entry. The entry with
the lowest orderCount must appear ﬁrst and is therefore placed in the merged log. However, before
inserting an entry into the new local log, we must ensure that it is valid, that is, that the resulting log
remains consistent after insertion.
Building on this functionality, it is necessary to establish a method for determining which events
should be invalidated and which should remain in the log. Drawing from the methodology presented
in [KMT23] for swarm protocols, the principle can be summarized as the events skipped by δ(M, l), as
described in Section 2.1.
For instance, in the Door projection from the running example shown in Figure 3.2, both open ·
request and open · close are valid logs. This validity arises because, by sequentially consuming events
from the start of the log, each event must have a corresponding transition from the current location. If
such a transition exists, the event is valid, and the current location is updated to the target of the event.
Conversely, if an event lacks a corresponding outgoing transition at any point, it is deemed invalid and
excluded from the log. For example, in open1 · open2, the event open2 is invalid (
open2) as it has no
associated outgoing edge from state 2 in the projection of the Door role in Figure 3.2.
The role template illustrated in Figure 4.1 inherently enforces this approach by restricting transitions
to those deﬁned by the underlying projection. In contrast, the log template cannot directly access the
state of the role template, as communication between them is limited to shared global state and channels.
Consequently, the log template must maintain some representation of the projections structure. Since
log merging involves examining each log entry, this validity check must be optimized to minimize its
impact on the performance of model checking, as it occurs frequently.
To achieve this, the following approach is employed: each log template is instantiated with three
additional variables, the initial location, the current location, and an array mapping events to their
corresponding location transitions. Continuing with the running example 1 both of the log templates
(Figure 4.3 and 4.4) would require variables deﬁned as:
1 int initialLocation = 0;
2 int currentLocation = 0;
3 const int eventLocationMap[amountOfUniqueEvents][2] = {{1, 2}, {1, 4}, {2, 1}, {0,
1}, {-1, -1}};
The eventLocationMap, although not a traditional map structure, functions as one by utilizing the
integers deﬁned in Listing 4.2. For instance, using Open_ID = 3, the location transition {0, 1} is re-
trieved. This corresponds to the location change of the transition performed by advance_Door_Open[id]?
in the Door role template of Figure 4.1. Leveraging this array, each log entry considered for inclusion
in the merged log can be validated as follows:
1
if (eventLocationMap[newLogEntry.eventID][0] != currentLocation) {
2
// Not a valid event, can be discarded.
3
} else {
4
// A valid event can be kept and currentLocation updated.
5
currentLocation = eventLocationMap[newLogEntry.eventID][1];
6
}
==PAGE:50==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
44
Before merging logs, we simply reset currentLocation = initialLocation. This ensures that the
log created during the merge remains valid. However, additional cases must be considered.
One such case arises when analyzing the possible runs of the extended warehouse Swarm Protocol
presented in the running Example 1. The run notation, as described in Section 2.1.1, will be used.
Given the Swarm Protocol in Figure 3.1 and assuming that two machines as T, one as D, and one as
FL participate in the Swarm Protocol, it is possible to obtain the following run:
Runa =
open1@D1 · prop@D1 · request1@T1 · close1@D1 · request2@T2 ·
prop@T2 · get1@FL1 · prop@FL1 · deliver1@T2 · prop@T2
Assuming branch tracking is not enabled Runa yields the global log la = open1 · request1 ·
close1 ·

request2 · get1 · deliver1. However, an issue arises when examining the local log held by D1 after Runa.
This local log is: lD = open1 · close1 ·
request2 ·
get1 ·
deliver1. Log lD is not incorrect with respect
to the run, as D1 has yet to encounter request1 and therefore does not recognize that close1 is invalid.
However, an issue in the implementation arises when prop@T1 eventually takes place. Since D1 previously
discarded deliver1 as it appeared invalid at the time, it must now recover that event and reintegrate it
into its local log. Ordinarily, this would not pose a problem. However, as part of a fail-fast heuristic,
discarded events are stored in the following two lists:
1
int discardedEvents[logSize];
2
int discardedDueToCompetionEvents[logSize];
The discardedEvents list holds the orderCount of events that were discarded, while the
discardedDueToCompetitionEvents list stores the orderCount of events discarded due to an invalid
competing branch event. The distinction between these two lists is crucial, as an event whose tiedTo
ﬁeld corresponds to a value in discardedDueToCompetitionEvents can be discarded immediately,
with its orderCount added to discardedDueToCompetitionEvents. Additionally, any event with an
eventID matching those in either list is ignored during log merging. This method allows for more
eﬃcient log merging.
As a result, D1 would ordinarily not reconsider get1 and deliver1, since it would already be present
in the discardedDueToCompetitionEvents list, along with any preceding events. To address this issue,
a global log is introduced in the UPPAAL model. The global log is split into two, the ﬁrst works as a
global log in the same sense as that presented in Section 2.1, and is named globalLog, while the other
only contains the valid events and is named trueGlobalLog.
Unlike the local log of D1, which might prematurely discard deliver1, the trueGlobalLog classiﬁes
events as valid or invalid based on the complete event history, and contains only the valid events. When
accepting branching events while merging a local log with a propagated log, it becomes possible to
verify whether a branching event, such as request1, is part of the temporary merge result that will form
the new lD. If the process involves discarding a competing branching event, such as close1, due to the
prior acceptance of request1, then the discarded event lists of the local machine must be reviewed. This
review is conducted by comparing the local log with the trueGlobalLog and adjusting the local log by
moving events between the discarded lists and the local log accordingly.
At ﬁrst glance, allowing any role to consult the trueGlobalLog may seem unfaithful to the modeling
approach, as such access would not be possible in a real-world implementation of a Swarm Protocol.
However, this mechanism is only used to adjust the sorting of already observed and discarded events.
Since the trueGlobalLog follows the same internal event-sorting logic as local logs, any role’s local
log would arrive at the same sorting once all relevant events have been observed, if it was forced to
reconsider them all again. Additionally, both global logs serve a veriﬁcation purpose, which will be
further discussed in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
45
Coincidentally, this exact issue is resolved through the inclusion of branch tracking. As previously
described, branch tracking ensures that only events pointing to the correct branching event are accepted.
Consequently, the global log la would instead be: la = open1 · request1 ·
close1 ·
request2 ·
get1 ·
deliver1
coincidently rendering the local log of the D1 correct in discarding both get1 and deliver1.
4.1.2
Introducing timing constraints
Thus far, we have only considered the UPPAAL model without time constraints, which implicitly assumes
that every event occurs instantaneously. By keeping all events instantaneous, time delays are prevented
from occurring unnecessarily. As outlined in Section 3.2.3, incorporating timing constraints into our
model is relatively straightforward. However, an additional consideration is how to accept user-deﬁned
timing constraints, as these constraints are not inherently part of the swarm protocol but rather data
exclusively relevant for model checking.
To maintain consistency with other input formats, a JSON-based input format was designed, as
illustrated below:
1 {
2
"events": [
3
{
4
"logType": "Open",
5
"min_time": 10,
6
"max_time": 12
7
},
8
{
9
"logType": "Request",
10
"min_time": 5
11
},
12
...
13
],
14
"logs": [
15
{
16
"role_name ": "Door",
17
"min_time": 12,
18
"max_time": 21
19
},
20
...
21
]
22
}
The purpose of this format is to provide the user with as much ﬂexibility as possible, while still
keeping the input format simple. The ﬁrst key, "events", allows an entry for each type of event, where
both the minimum and maximum time constraints are considered inclusive. A shorthand notation for
specifying the timing of Open could be expressed as [10, 10]. It is important to note that any event can
be omitted from the input ﬁle; in such cases, it is assumed that the event has no timing constraints and
is therefore instantaneous, defaulting to a timing constraint of [0, 0].
Similarly, either the minimum timing constraint ("min_time") or the maximum timing constraint
("max_time") can be omitted. If "min_time" is excluded, it is equivalent to the constraint [0, max_time
]. Likewise, if "max_time" is excluded, it is equivalent to [min_time, ∞[.
Additionally, the JSON format includes the key "logs", which allows the user to specify timing
constraints on the propagation of logs for any or all roles in the model. Given the example timing
constraints, this would mean that all instances of the Doors log template can only propagate their
respective local logs after at least 12 time units have passed since the ﬁrst local event was emitted,
which has yet to propagate. However, once the local time of the log template reaches 21 time units,
propagation is forced.
In the same way that "min_time" or "max_time" can be excluded for events, the same applies to
the timing constraints for log templates. However, the default assumption for logs diﬀers from events:
==PAGE:52==
4.1 Implementing Swarms in UPPAAL
46
if a role_name is not included in the JSON ﬁle, it is assumed that the timing constraints for that role
are [0, ∞[. This design choice ensures that timing constraints on propagation can work with other
forms of bounded delay propagation, as described in Section 3.2.2.
For example, if a log template is using delay type S and is conﬁgured with a maximum of two local
events, then once two events have been emitted without propagation occurring in between, propagation
is forced, even if the minimum time constraint has not yet been met. Likewise, if only one local event
has occurred but the maximum time constraint would be exceeded, propagation is also forced. This
functionality applies to both delay type S, as shown in Figure 4.3, and delay type E, as shown in Figure
4.4. It is implemented by simply setting an invariant: x <= max_time || !newUpdates on the location
initial, along with a guard: x >= min_time on the transition from initial to l_prop1.
When introducing these timing constraints into both the role templates and log templates, each
has been extended with a new variable, clock x. By using this local clock variable and resetting it at
relevant points, both role templates and log templates can enforce the imposed timing constraints. The
clock must be reset at appropriate points: for log templates, this means resetting x when a new event
is emitted unless a previously emitted event has yet to be propagated. For role templates, it involves
resetting x whenever a change in location occurs. However, since these local clocks are reset throughout
the execution of the model, they do not retain information about the total time elapsed in reaching a
given state in the model.
To maintain this information, a global clock variable, clock globalTime, has been added to the
global declarations. This allows for veriﬁcation queries such as the following:
E<> roleName(0).locationName imply globalTime == x
This query veriﬁes whether there exists a state in which a role named roleName is in location
locationName and the time that has passed since the model execution began is exactly x. Similarly,
any queries that could previously be performed can now incorporate the variable globalTime to verify
time-dependent properties.
Additionally, the keyword bounds can be used to determine the time bounds of a given location in
the following manner:
bounds{roleName(0).locationName}: globalTime
(4.1)
Query 4.1, like other queries, does not return a fault trace or a direct indication of whether the query
was satisﬁed. Instead, it returns a bound using the notation [tmin, tmax], where tmin is the smallest
value globalTime assumes while roleName is in location locationName, and tmax is the largest value it
assumes.
In Query 4.1, the role template is referenced as roleName(0), which speciﬁcally denotes the role
template with id = 0. However, even if multiple instances of the same role exist in the model, they are
identical in behavior. This means that if, in a particular execution trace, one role template diverges from
the others, an equivalent trace must exist where a diﬀerent role template over the same role diverges in
the same manner. Consequently, the choice of role template does not aﬀect the outcome. Nonetheless,
since at least one instance of each role is always present in the model, the role template with id = 0 is
guaranteed to exist.
It is important to note that using the bounds property, as demonstrated in Equation 4.1, is only
supported in the 5.1 beta version of UPPAAL. Therefore, this or a newer version is required to utilize
bounds. If bounds is unavailable, an alternative query can be formulated as follows:
A[] Transport(0).l3 imply globalTime >= t_min and globalTime <= t_max
However, this query requires prior knowledge of the values tmin and tmax, it functions as a standard
veriﬁcation query. Instead of computing an interval, it simply determines whether the speciﬁed time
bounds are satisﬁed.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
47
As mentioned in Section 3.2.3, the invariant of the location must be considered when handling timing
constraints. To correctly construct these invariants, the timing constraints of each set of branching
events with the same start location are ordered based on the maximum tmax of each event.
The
invariant is then constructed one event at a time until the transition leading to a terminal location is
reached, at which point its maximum time is set as the ﬁnal part of the invariant, as shown in the code
snippet below.
1 ...
2 if
sorted_time [0]. event_name
!=
exit_path_event . event_name :
3
for
time_data_branch
in
sorted_time :
4
own_and_branching .append( time_data_branch . event_name )
5
if
time_data_branch .event_name
!=
exit_path_event . event_name :
6
if
time_data_branch .max_time
!= None:
7
invariant_result
+= f"x <= { time_data_branch .max_time} && (
nonExitCounterMap [id + id_start ][{ Utils. get_eventtype_UID (
time_data_branch . event_name )}] < { path_bound } || ( "
8
parenthesis_counter
+= 2
9
else:
10
invariant_result
+= f"( nonExitCounterMap [id + id_start ][{ Utils.
get_eventtype_UID ( time_data_branch . event_name )}] < { path_bound } ||
( "
11
parenthesis_counter
+= 2
12
else:
13
if
exit_path_time_data_event .max_time
!= None:
14
invariant_result
+= f"x <= { exit_path_time_data_event .max_time}" + (")"
* parenthesis_counter )
15
else:
16
invariant_result = ""
17
break
18 ...
However, there are several edge cases to consider. One such case occurs when timing data exists
for the exit event, but it does not have a maximum time. In this scenario, the invariant is deleted,
as no invariant is needed. To simplify this logic, if an event is not included in the timing constraints
of the input, it is set to [0, 0], meaning it is considered instantaneous.
This distinction allows for
diﬀerentiation between an event not being set as input and only part of its data being undeﬁned,
as both would otherwise result in the ﬁeld being None.
Additionally, the counter is replaced with
nonExitCounterMap[role_ID][event_ID], which is an array of arrays mapping each role index and
the unique integer value of each event type to a counter.
There are additional edge cases beyond those shown in the code snippet above; however, they have
been omitted for clarity.
4.2
Implementing the automated translation tool
This section details the implementation of the tool that automatically translates any Swarm Protocol
into a UPPAAL-compatible model suitable for model checking, in accordance with Objective 2. It will
thoroughly describe where and why the implementation deviates from the design outlined in Section 3.3.
Additionally, it will provide a comprehensive explanation of the command-line interface built to interact
with the tool, along with a complete example demonstrating its usage. However, before addressing
these aspects, this section ﬁrst examines how projections of Swarm Protocols were constructed to aid
a possible integration with the original codebase [Actb] and to allow users to input a single Swarm
Protocol instead of requiring separate projections for each role.
==PAGE:54==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
48
4.2.1
Implentation of projections
The projections used in this implementation are based on the methodology described in [Fur24]. Con-
sequently, the Swarm Protocol JSON input must include exactly one event for each command. Each
role’s projection contains the necessary events, as detailed in Section 2.1.1.
To construct the projections, all events from the JSON input are ﬁrst loaded into a class to fa-
cilitate programmatic manipulation. The JSON format speciﬁes the initial location, along with every
command’s log type (event type), the role responsible for emitting it, and its source and target locations.
For example, the JSON representation of the running Example 1 presented in Figure 3.1 would be
structured as follows:
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
49
1 {
2
"initial": "l0",
3
" transitions ": [
4
{
5
"label": {
6
"cmd": "Open",
7
"logType": ["Open"],
8
"role": "Door"
9
},
10
"source": "l0",
11
"target": "l1"
12
},
13
{
14
"label": {
15
"cmd": "Request",
16
"logType": ["Request"],
17
"role": "Transport "
18
},
19
"source": "l1",
20
"target": "l2"
21
},
22
{
23
"label": {
24
"cmd": "Get",
25
"logType": ["Get"],
26
"role": "Forklift"
27
},
28
"source": "l2",
29
"target": "l3"
30
},
31
{
32
"label": {
33
"cmd": "Deliver",
34
"logType": ["Deliver"],
35
"role": "Transport "
36
},
37
"source": "l3",
38
"target": "l1"
39
},
40
{
41
"label": {
42
"cmd": "Close",
43
"logType": ["Close"],
44
"role": "Door"
45
},
46
"source": "l1",
47
"target": "l4"
48
}
49
]
50 }
Using a JSON ﬁle such as the one described above, we load its contents into a similar structure in
Python, enabling easy parsing and the creation of necessary projections. The structure consists of two
classes, as shown below:
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
50
1 @dataclass
2 class
Edge:
3
name: str
4
source: str
5
target: str
6
role: str
7
8 class
Graph:
9
def
__init__(self):
10
self.edges = set ()
11
self.initial = ""
12
13
def
set_edges(self , edges: Set[Edge ]):
14
self.edges = edges
15
16
def
add_edge(self , edge: Edge):
17
self.edges.add(edge)
18
19
def
remove_edge (self , edge_name: str):
20
if
edge_name
in self.edges:
21
edge_for_removal = next(edge
for
edge in self.edges
if edge.name ==
edge_name)
22
for
edge_new
in self.edges:
23
if
edge_new.target ==
edge_for_removal .source:
24
edge_new.target = edge_for_removal .target
25
self.edges.remove( edge_for_removal )
This approach allows the Graph class to encapsulate all the information encoded in the Swarm
Protocol JSON by storing each transition as an instance of the Edge class while also maintaining the
initial location. Additionally, while loading the JSON into the Graph class, we keep track of each
unique role name.
To construct the projection for each role, we must ﬁrst identify three diﬀerent types of transitions
that must be included as described in 2.1.1.
After identifying these transitions, we combine all relevant edges, ensuring duplicates are removed,
to form the list of projected edges. By taking a deep copy of the original Graph, we can iterate through
each edge and remove those not present in the projected edges list. However, simply removing an edge
may leave an unreachable state at its target or create a new unintended end state at its source, which
would alter the projections behavior compared to its function within the Swarm Protocol. This would
be incorrect.
To address this issue, when removing an edge, we reassign the target of any remaining edges
that originally pointed to the removed edges source, ensuring the connectivity of the graph remains
intact. This exact functionality is implemented in the code listing above, where edge removal has been
embedded in the Graph class as the function remove_edge. This ensures that the removal of an edge
never leaves a gap in the Graph.
It is important to note that this approach works because, in every case, either all events of a
branch are retained, or they are all removed. If only a subset of branching events were to be removed
while others remained, additional complexity would be required to handle such cases. Furthermore, if
a branch that is not included in a projection leads to multiple terminal locations, only one of these
terminal locations will be a part of the projection.
To illustrate this process, Figure 4.5 depicts the projection of a simple Swarm Protocol.
1
2
3
4
5
e12@R
e23@O
e34@O
e45@R
1
3
4
5
(E12 / E12)
E34?
(E45 / E45)
Figure 4.5: A swarm (Left) and the pseudo projection created of the role R (right).
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
51
The projection shown on the right in Figure 4.5 is not a well-formed projection in the sense of either
[Fur24] or [KMT23]. However, since we are not reintroducing it into the Swarm Protocol repository,
it does not need to adhere strictly to these deﬁnitions. Recall that when creating the role templates,
as described in Section 4.1, we omit self-looping emitting events to prevent unnecessary transitions. In
this way, a pseudo projection is created internally in the program before being translated into a UPPAAL
role template.
4.2.2
Python code base
This section provides an overview of the Python code base
https://github.com/Thor-E-D/SwarmProtocolVeriﬁcation and how it diverges from the original design.
Presented in Section 3.3.
Python was chosen as the implementation language primarily for its ease of use. Speciﬁcally, Python
excels as a tool for rapid prototyping, which is particularly advantageous in an exploratory project such
as this. Another key reason for selecting Python is its widespread adoption, which provides access to
a vast array of well-established libraries for JSON ﬁles, which were chosen as the input format for this
application. Additionally, as demonstrated in this section, the Graphviz library was utilized to aid the
development of the code base.
The main drawback of Python, as many developers are aware, is its relatively slow execution time.
Under normal circumstances, this might be a cause for concern. However, as discussed in Chapter 2,
model checking inherently suﬀers from the state explosion problem, which signiﬁcantly impacts veriﬁca-
tion speed. Given this, it is expected that while Python may be slower in execution, its contribution to
overall computation time would remain negligible when performing complex queries. This hypothesis
was further examined in Chapter 5.
To gain an overview of the codebase constructed for the project, a UML diagram of its ﬁnal imple-
mentation is shown in Figure 4.6. While it diﬀers from the initial design presented in Figure 3.10, the
overall structure remains consistent between the two diagrams. However, the color scheme has been
slightly adjusted to accommodate new classes introduced during the implementation process. As in
Figure 3.10, the color scheme is interpreted as follows:
• Red represents the director, responsible for orchestrating the construction process.
• Blue indicates the builders.
• Green signiﬁes the modular building blocks used by the builders.
• Yellow denotes static utility functions used throughout the application.
• Purple has been added to signify helper classes that assist either the director or the builders.
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
52
Figure 4.6: A class diagram of the automated translation tool.
One notable diﬀerence in the implementation is the addition of the graphViz_helper method to the
Role class. This method utilizes the GraphViz library [Gra] to space out the locations and transitions
of the role template.
It was created exclusively to aid development since, without it, all locations
and transitions would default to coordinates (0, 0) in UPPAAL’s coordinate system. The impact of this
function can be observed in Section A of the Appendix, where Figure A.3 is automatically generated
with the aid of this function, whereas Figure A.4 has been manually structured for improved clarity.
In Figure 4.6, some lines have been omitted for better readability. For instance, the GraphAnalyser
class interacts with the EventData class, using it as a data transfer object to store events while checking
for loops, branches, and other structural properties. However, some interactions such as these have been
excluded from the diagram to prevent excessive clutter.
Similarly, some methods and variables have been omitted to enhance diagram clarity.
In cases
where a large number of methods are omitted, the notation · · · has been used. For example, while the
Functions class contains more than 20 functions, only three are shown in the diagram. One of the
displayed methods, generate_function_handle_log_entry, takes one argument because the UPPAAL
method it generates is used in log templates. Although much of the functionality across log templates
remains consistent, they do have diﬀerent subscriptions and thus must know what events to accept and
what to discard based on these subscriptions.
Many green classes were added primarily to improve data management. For example, the ModelSettings
class was introduced to reduce the number of arguments passed to the buildModel method in ModelBuilder.
Similarly, the TimeJSONTransfer class was created to facilitate the handling of JSON ﬁles used for spec-
ifying timing constraints, as discussed in Section 4.1.2.
Since the JSON input format can store timing constraints for both events and logs, the corresponding
data was split into two classes: EventTimeData and LogTimeData. Both classes inherit from TimeData,
which includes ﬁelds for min_time and max_time. However, as previously mentioned, either of these
ﬁelds can be omitted when deﬁning timing constraints. To enable this behavior, the Python Optional
keyword is used, allowing a ﬁeld to be omitted during class construction. If either ﬁeld is absent, it
defaults to None.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
53
The two JSON transfer classes, TimeJSONTransfer and JSONTransfer, are both generated by the
JSONParser class. The primary function of this class is to process the input JSON ﬁles comprising the
Swarm Protocol JSON, projection JSON, and time constraint JSON. It will then transform them into
structured transfer classes for ease of passing between classes.
However, when only a Swarm Protocol JSON is provided and no projections of the Swarm Protocol
are given, the Swarm Protocol JSON must ﬁrst be converted into the relevant projections before being
passed to the CLI, as described in Section 4.2.1. Alternatively, it is possible to pass all the projections
of a Swarm Protocol to the CLI, in which case no additional projections will be created. Additionally,
a subset of the required projections can be provided, and any missing projections will be generated
automatically.
The other purple class, GraphAnalyser, is responsible for extracting relevant information from
the projection, which is provided as a list of EventData. This information includes which events are
terminal transitions, branching events, and the preceding branch events for each event. The latter is
used exclusively for branch tracking and is returned as a map from an event to a list of branch events
it may potentially track. This list may be empty if no branches appear before the event in the Swarm
Protocol, or it may even include the event itself if it is a looping branch event.
The ﬁnal purple class, QueryGenerator, is responsible for generating automatic queries accessi-
ble through the CLI. Some queries are generic, while others are based on the structure of the Swarm
Protocol or its projections.
Compared to the original design, numerous new functions have been added to the CLI class. The
addition of methods is exclusively to allow for code to be reused and keep the overall class more readable.
It will be discussed in detail in Section 4.2.3.
Compared to the original design, numerous new functions have been added to the CLI class. These
methods have been introduced exclusively to facilitate code reuse and improve the overall readability
of the class. A detailed discussion of the CLI is provided in Section 4.2.3.
4.2.3
Command line interface
We chose to implement a command-line interface (CLI) for this project, as it is the most lightweight
interface that can still showcase all system behaviors. The CLI provides the following commands:
• build: Constructs the UPPAAL XML ﬁle of the model based on the current settings, unless other
settings are provided.
• setArgs: Sets relevant settings based on the speciﬁed ﬂag(s).
• showArgs: Prints all stored lines from the state ﬁle.
• writeState: Write the state ﬁle to the given path
• loadState: Loads the speciﬁed state ﬁle, overwriting the local state.
• verify: Veriﬁes the given UPPAAL XML ﬁle using all speciﬁed queries, printing a formatted trace
when relevant.
• autoVerify: Veriﬁes a given UPPAAL XML ﬁle using auto-generated queries based on the initial
JSON representations of the Swarm Protocol.
• verifyLog: Veriﬁes whether a given log can be achieved, given a UPPAAL XML ﬁle and a text ﬁle
containing a comma-separated list of event types as strings.
These commands were designed to provide users with easy access to the tool and a way to conﬁgure
all relevant arguments. To streamline the process, the CLI includes a built-in JSON ﬁle for storing
the latest settings, allowing users to specify the path to the Verifyta distribution only once without
re-entering this argument each time the application is started. This is represented in the class diagram
in Figure 4.6 by the white note labeled state.json.
==PAGE:60==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
54
The state.json ﬁle can be written to any folder using the writeState command. Once written, it
can be modiﬁed to include new settings before being used either directly with the build command or
by using loadState to overwrite the current state.json ﬁle.
Two methods of specifying settings are provided to facilitate user interaction with the application.
The setArgs command includes explanatory text for each setting and checks the validity of each
argument, enabling users to conﬁgure settings one at a time. Once familiar with the application, users
can quickly modify settings directly in a local state ﬁle before using it with the CLI. While this approach
is faster, it lacks explanations and only veriﬁes the presence of the required keys in the provided ﬁle.
The verify command takes an XML ﬁle generated by the build command and a text ﬁle containing
line-separated queries. It uses Verifyta to verify each query. If a query produces a trace, either to
demonstrate how the query was satisﬁed or not satisﬁed, the trace is formatted to include only the
parts relevant to the original Swarm Protocol. The types of UPPAAL queries that generate traces are
listed in Table 4.1. Formatting the trace involves shortening it to display only relevant transitions, such
as events being emitted and propagation occurring. It also includes changes in the locations of role
templates but excludes log templates. If timing constraints are present, the trace will indicate when
transitions occur and the cumulative global time elapsed.
To determine when propagation occurs, it is necessary to track the location of the log template.
Consequently, the channel call propagate_log! is triggered only when exiting a location named l_prop
#, as illustrated in Figures 4.3 and 4.4.
UPPAAL notation
Not satisﬁed
Satisﬁed
A[] ϕ
✓
A<> ϕ
✓
E[] ϕ
✓
E<> ϕ
✓
p −→q
✓
Table 4.1: Diﬀerent UPPAAL queries and whether they generate a trace.
If we once again return to the running example 1, note that we ﬁrst and foremost require the Swarm
Protocol JSON, which can be found in Section 4.2.1. Since UPPAAL does not accept locations with
names that can be interpreted as numbers, any input JSON ﬁles containing locations named solely
with numbers will have an "l" prepended to ensure compatibility with the UPPAAL model. However,
this means that when referencing these locations in queries, the "l" must also be included. To keep the
transition system small, we use the following settings:
1
{
2
" verifyta_path ": "...\ verifyta.exe",
3
"base_path ": "...",
4
"delay_type ": {
5
"Door": "E",
6
"Forklift": "E",
7
"Transport ": "E"
8
},
9
"path_bound ": 1,
10
" branch_tracking ": true ,
11
"log_size": 20,
12
" delay_amount ": {
13
"Door": 2,
14
"Forklift": 2,
15
"Transport ": 2
16
},
17
" role_amount ": {
18
"Door": 1,
19
"Forklift": 1,
20
"Transport ": 2
21
}
22 }
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
55
To maintain simplicity, the form of propagation delay is set uniformly across all roles using the
propagation delay type E, meaning that propagation delay is determined by the number of global
events emitted. Additionally, the path bound is kept low to minimize the transition system size.
To illustrate the timing aspects, we can also include speciﬁc timing constraints, such as the following:
1 {
2
"events": [
3
{
4
"logType": "Close",
5
"max_time": 17
6
},
7
{
8
"logType": "Request",
9
"min_time": 3,
10
"max_time": 8
11
},
12
{
13
"logType": "Get",
14
"min_time": 17,
15
"max_time": 48
16
},
17
{
18
"logType": "Deliver",
19
"max_time": 13
20
}
21
],
22
"logs": [
23
{
24
"role_name ": "Door",
25
"min_time": 2,
26
"max_time": 2
27
},
28
{
29
"role_name ": "Transport ",
30
"min_time": 2,
31
"max_time": 12
32
},
33
{
34
"role_name ": "Forklift",
35
"min_time": 7,
36
"max_time": 12
37
}
38
]
39
}
Given the above timings, it can be challenging to determine exactly how they aﬀect certain properties
of the model, as some events do not have a deﬁned min_time, and open is not included in the timing
constraints at all. When investigating speciﬁc timing aspects, we might, for example, focus on the
Transport role and ensure that it does not remain in l2 for too long. To test this, we could use the
query A[] Transport(0).l2 imply globalTime <= 75, which veriﬁes whether, in every state where
Transport(0) is in l2, the global time never exceeds 75. Running this query using the CLI would yield
the following output:
==PAGE:62==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
56
1 Verifying
query 0: A[]
Transport (0).l2 imply
globalTime
<= 75
2 Query
not
satisfied
3 State: [’Transport (0).l0 ’, ’Transport (1).l0 ’, ’Door (0).l0 ’, ’Forklift (0).l1 ’]
4 globalTime =0
5 Transition:
Door (0).l0 ->Door (0).l1
Open
6 State: [’Transport (0).l0 ’, ’Transport (1).l0 ’, ’Door (0).l1 ’, ’Forklift (0).l1 ’]
7 Delay: 2
globalTime =2
8 Role
Door (0)
propagated
to all
other
roles
9 State: [’Transport (0).l1 ’, ’Transport (1).l0 ’, ’Door (0).l1 ’, ’Forklift (0).l1 ’]
10 State: [’Transport (0).l1 ’, ’Transport (1).l1 ’, ’Door (0).l1 ’, ’Forklift (0).l1 ’]
11 Delay: 8
globalTime =10
12 Transition:
Transport (0).l1 ->Transport (0).l2
Request
13 State: [’Transport (0).l2 ’, ’Transport (1).l1 ’, ’Door (0).l1 ’, ’Forklift (0).l1 ’]
14 Transition:
Transport (1).l1 ->Transport (1).l2
Request
15 State: [’Transport (0).l2 ’, ’Transport (1).l2 ’, ’Door (0).l1 ’, ’Forklift (0).l1 ’]
16 Delay: 7
globalTime =17
17 Role
Transport (0)
propagated
to all
other
roles
18 State: [’Transport (0).l2 ’, ’Transport (1).l2 ’, ’Door (0).l3 ’, ’Forklift (0).l1 ’]
19 State: [’Transport (0).l2 ’, ’Transport (1).l2 ’, ’Door (0).l3 ’, ’Forklift (0).l2 ’]
20 Delay: 5
globalTime =22
21 Role
Transport (1)
propagated
to all
other
roles
22 Delay: 43
globalTime =65
23 Transition:
Forklift (0).l2 ->Forklift (0).l1
Get
24 State: [’Transport (0).l2 ’, ’Transport (1).l2 ’, ’Door (0).l3 ’, ’Forklift (0).l1 ’]
25 Delay: 11
globalTime =76
A portion of the actual trace produced can be found in Appendix C for reference. As observed in
the appendix, it was necessary to format the output for improved readability. The trace reveals that
the global log is open1 · request1 ·
request2 · get1, suggesting that Transport(0) could be in l2 while
the global time was signiﬁcantly higher as an additional loop might be completed after the trace seen
above.
Furthermore, the formatted trace makes it evident that the extended time in l2 is due to the
Forklift role having a very large max_time when emitting events of type Get. This, in turn, causes
Transport to remain in l2 while waiting for Forklift. Notably, Transport(0) actually reaches l2
immediately after emitting the ﬁrst request1 event. However, the model cannot simply delay until the
time limit is reached in this state due to the maximum timing constraints imposed on other events
and logs. Recall that maximum timing constraints introduce invariants on relevant locations in the
model, eﬀectively forcing role and log templates to take transitions when the time limit is reached.
Interestingly, this explains why the second request event was emitted. The second request2 event occurs
because Transport(1) also emitted a request event. Given the max_time constraint of 8-time units set
on request after a delay of 8 as shown in the trace it would have no choice but to emit request. However,
the second request event is invalid, which can be inferred indirectly from the trace. Speciﬁcally, when
Transport(1) propagates at line 21, the absence of a subsequent state print indicates that none of
the other machines changed state. This demonstrates how timing constraints can signiﬁcantly alter
the underlying transition systems, as some transitions can no longer interleave due to the constraints
imposed by invariants and guards within the model.
From the transition analysis, it is evident that the time Transport can spend in l2 exceeds 75.
However, this does not provide precise information on the maximum duration that can be spent in l2.
To generalize this analysis, the autoVerify command can be used with the –type timebound option
to determine the possible time values each machine can reach in each location for any given Swarm
Protocol and corresponding UPPAAL model. Running this command with the settings speciﬁed above
produces the following result:
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Implementing the automated translation tool
57
1 Forklift
has the
following
time
bounds
2 Location
l1: [0 ,20] ,[22 ,217]
3 Location
l2: [5 ,161]
4 Location
l4: [2,INF]
5 Transport
has the
following
time
bounds
6 Location
l0: [0 ,2]
7 Location
l1: [2 ,20] ,[29 ,217]
8 Location
l2: [5 ,173]
9 Location
l3: [29 ,186]
10 Location
l4: [2,INF]
11 Door
has the
following
time
bounds
12 Location
l0: 0
13 Location
l1: [0 ,20] ,[31 ,215]
14 Location
l3: [5 ,198]
15 Location
l4: [0,INF]
16 ---------------------------
From this output, it is clear that the Transport role in l2 can reach timings as high as 173. Ad-
ditionally, the results indicate that all roles can reach l4, the end state, within 2-time units and can
remain there indeﬁnitely (denoted by INF), meaning that once the system reaches this state, it can
deadlock, with the only possible transition being an indeﬁnite increase in clock values. Another impor-
tant observation is that any instance of the Transport role takes at least 29-time units to reach l3,
implying that a minimum of 29-time units must elapse before an item can be delivered (deliver).
The autoVerify command has three additional –type options: validity, sizeBound, and fidelity.
Each generates one or more queries and veriﬁes their correctness. The validity option ensures that a
deadlock occurs only when all roles have reached a terminal location. The sizeBound option determines
the smallest possible log size that does not reduce the number of states in the explored state space, pro-
vided that the veriﬁed model does not overﬂow its logs. The fidelity option veriﬁes eventual ﬁdelity
between the local logs of all machines and the global log of the system. Both validity and fidelity
are discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.1
As previously mentioned, we aimed to reduce the output by ﬁltering for key transitions, particularly
those involving propagation. To achieve this, we used the following regex pattern:
1
propagation_pattern = re. compile (r"log \(\d+\).l_prop [1-9]->")
This pattern relies on the fact that locations in the log templates, such as those shown in Figure 4.3,
are named l_prop1 and l_prop2, which is captured by the ﬁnal part of the regex. The numeric range
extends up to 9 to allow for future expansion of log templates without requiring modiﬁcations to the
output formatting code. Using similar regex patterns or simple string-splitting techniques, the output
was formatted into a structured version similar to the one presented above.
1For a more in depth example refer to the README of the code base.
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5
Evaluation
This chapter discusses the testing process conducted throughout the development of the code base
outlined in Chapter 4.
It ﬁrst explains how diﬀerent queries were constructed to verify important
accepts of correctness in Swarm Protocol. It then explains how the veriﬁcation component of UPPAAL
was utilized to validate the system and how the symbolic simulator was employed to analyze error
traces and identify ﬂaws step by step, using the constructed queries. It then describes how this process
was transformed into an automated test suite using Pytest, along with the criteria for query selection.
Finally, it examines the performance of auto-generated models when verifying queries and analyzes the
impact of diﬀerent settings on performance, in order to fulﬁll Objective 3.
5.1
Exploring queries
When designing and implementing the UPPAAL model, an agile development approach was adopted,
as described in Section 3.1. To ensure that each new iteration and addition to the model functioned
as intended, testing became necessary. Conveniently, the UPPAAL GUI is equipped with a symbolic
simulator capable of exploring all possible transitions from the current state and analyzing how each new
transition aﬀects the model’s state. The symbolic simulator groups states together to form symbolic
states. The states within a symbolic state share the same values for the locations of templates and
discrete variables.
However, they capture all possible variations in clock values.
These diﬀerences
in clock values are then grouped together into a single symbolic state. This is UPPAAL’s method of
representing inﬁnitely many states in a ﬁnite manner. Using this feature, we were able to test whether
newly added behavior behaved as expected and whether the state changed as predicted when traversing
diﬀerent transitions.
However, as the UPPAAL models grew, manually exploring diﬀerent scenarios became increasingly
cumbersome. To address this, we adopted a semi-automated approach to testing behavior by introducing
queries, verifying them, and analyzing fault traces to identify erroneous behavior. Meaning queries were
utilized to verify expected properties. This approach allowed us to use reachability, safety, and liveness
properties as checks to ensure the correctness of speciﬁc behaviors.
Using the running example 1 of the extended warehouse Swarm Protocol, we could test whether
the machines operating the Door component reached each state in the projection shown in Figure 3.2
through some execution of the transition system. This resulted in queries such as:
E<> Door(0).l1
E<> Door(0).l2
E<> Door(0).l3
E<> Door(0).l4
This would at least verify that each state could be reached (making it a set of reachability properties).
Similarly, queries could be formulated for each of the diﬀerent roles in the protocol to conﬁrm that
all of their respective locations were reachable within the transition system. Another possible query
could be E[] forall(i:Transport_t) not Transport(i).l2 showing that there exists a path through
the transition system where none of the transport roles ever reach l2. The implication is that the
only events emitted would be open and close. As mentioned previously in the example outlined in
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Exploring queries
59
Section 4.2.3, each model is equipped with a true global log that records all valid emitted events,
as opposed to the global log that captures all emitted events, valid or not. Instead of inferring the
underlying true global log from the states, as discussed in relation to the previous query, we attempted
to verify the state directly from the true global log. This could be achieved using the following query:
E<> forall(i:logSize_t) (deadlock and trueGlobalLog[i].eventID != Request_ID) which more
explicitly shows that there exists a state where the model is deadlocked and no event in the log is a
request event. However, the inference has now changed, as we no longer know whether the role templates
are in their expected locations according to their local logs; we only know that the global log contains
the expected events. Therefore, to achieve better overall coverage and identify potential edge cases
missed during development, we combined veriﬁcation of both log contents and role template locations.
The keyword forall ensures that the speciﬁed property holds for all entries in the log. However,
it can only operate on a bounded integer type, which must be explicitly deﬁned. To facilitate such
veriﬁcation, the following type deﬁnition was added to the global declarations of all generated UPPAAL
models: typedef int [0, logSize - 1] logSize_t; It should be noted that using the forall key-
word can be computationally expensive, as it evaluates the query for every entry in the log, including
empty ones. In contrast, using the exists keyword allows checking for the existence of at least one
entry that satisﬁes the query, which can be signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient. For example, we could construct
a query ensuring that whenever the warehouse deadlocked, the log would always contain at least one
close event, which could be formulated as follows:
A[] exists(i:logSize_t) deadlock imply trueGlobalLog[i].eventID == Close_ID
A[] exists(i:logSize_t) deadlock imply Forklift_log(0).currentLog[i].eventID == Close_ID
The ﬁrst query ensures that the global log will always contain close, which is expected once the model
deadlocks. However, this does not guarantee that the local logs of each role log template pair contain
the correct entries. This, however, can be veriﬁed in a similar manner, as each log template includes
a variable named currentLog, which can be used in queries in the same way as the trueGlobalLog
variable. The only complication is that local logs may occasionally diverge from the trueGlobalLog if
not all events have yet propagated to every machine. An example of this is demonstrated in the second
query above, which veriﬁes the same property as the ﬁrst one but for the local log of the Forklift role
instead.
Unfortunately, there is no straightforward way to query whether the log is truly well-formed. That
is, we can directly verify whether close is always the last valid entry in the global log and whether it
appears only once, however, it is cumbersome. Especially since to determine if the log is well-formed,
we would need to verify this property for every other entry in the log. Using the running example, if
we constrained the loop to execute only once, we could check whether the true global log adhered to
the following query:
A[] deadlock imply trueGlobalLog[0].eventID == Open_ID and ( trueGlobalLog[1].eventID
== Close_ID or (trueGlobalLog[1].eventID == Request_ID and trueGlobalLog[2].eventID
== Get_ID and trueGlobalLog[3].eventID == Deliver_ID and trueGlobalLog[4].eventID
== Close_ID))
In this manner, it is possible to encode the diﬀerent expected end states of the global log, considering
the structure of the Swarm Protocol, into a format accepted by UPPAAL queries. Implementing this
process automatically would require using the given path bound to compute all possible global log states
that the Swarm Protocol could reach when all roles have arrived at any of their potential terminal
locations. It is important to note that since empty log entries contain 0 as the value for all ﬁelds, and
since event type unique numbers (captured by the eventID ﬁeld) can also be 0, most queries related to
logs should include the condition and trueGlobalLog[lastIndex].orderCount != 0 for the lastIndex
==PAGE:66==
5.1 Exploring queries
60
tested in the log. This is to ensure that the last entry tested is not empty. However, this condition has
been omitted in the above queries to reduce clutter but should be included for correctness.
As the reader may have noticed, many of the proposed queries contain the keyword deadlock. This
is because when the model is deadlocked, all propagations must have been completed, and no new
transitions are enabled.
Consequently, in a correctly modeled Swarm Protocol, the system should
have reached eventual ﬁdelity at the point of deadlock. This property allows us to query logs and
role positions across the entire swarm without the risk of machines being out of sync with one another.
Additionally, this approach conveniently enables the construction of multiple queries for both global
and local log contents, as well as the locations of role templates.
There is, however, an alternative method for constructing queries that consider only states where
eventual ﬁdelity has been achieved. This occurs precisely when all currently emitted events have been
propagated to every participant in the Swarm. By utilizing the newUpdates ﬂag of the log templates (as
shown in Figures 4.3 and 4.4), it is possible to construct a boolean condition that evaluates to true only
when there are no new updates left to propagate. For the running Example 1, this condition would be
expressed as follows:
A[] (forall(i:Door_t) (Door_log(i).initial and (!Door_log(i).newUpdates)) and
forall(j:Forklift_t) (Forklift_log(j).initial and (!Forklift_log(j).newUpdates)) and
forall(t:Transport_t) (Transport_log(t).initial and (!Transport_log(t).newUpdates)))
imply ...
(5.1)
The reason the query also ensures that each log template is in its initial location is to verify that
a log template is neither currently receiving a new event from its corresponding role template nor in
the middle of a propagation process. Eventual ﬁdelity is not guaranteed in such cases. In general, it
must be ensured that each log template is in the initial location and that newUpdates is set to False.
Using the query in Equation 5.1, it is possible to replace ... with the veriﬁcation of eventual ﬁdelity.
While reasoning about the location of the role templates is unreasonable, since they may reside in
diﬀerent locations while still preserving eventual ﬁdelity, it is instead possible to analyze the structure
of the local logs in comparison to the global log. More speciﬁcally, each local log must contain the
same log entries as the global log, in the same order, unless it does not subscribe to the event type
of a particular log entry. Since local logs consist exclusively of valid events, the comparison must be
made between the valid global log (trueGlobalLog) and the local logs, instead of the general global
log (globalLog). For instance, the veriﬁcation for the Transport log templates could be structured as
follows:
forall(i: logSize_t) forall(j: Transport_t) exists(h: logSize_t)
((trueGlobalLog[i].orderCount == Transport_log(j).currentLog[h].orderCount and
Transport_log(j).unSubCount[h] + h == i) or
!(Transport_log(j).subscriptions[trueGlobalLog[i].eventID]))
(5.2)
This ensures that the contents of the global log are also present in the local log of all instances
of machines representing the Transport role, which, as mentioned, should only occur when eventual
ﬁdelity is achieved. To fully verify ﬁdelity across all roles, this condition must be replicated for every
log template in the model.
While not strictly necessary in the above case, the unSubCount array is used when a role does not
subscribe to all events of the Swarm Protocol, as is the case for the Door and Forklift roles. The
unSubCount array acts as a counter, registering whenever a log template discards an event due to it
not being in its subscription, despite the event being globally considered valid. By adding this counter
to the event’s index in the global log, it becomes possible to determine the corresponding index of the
event in the local log.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Automated Test Suite
61
However, the above query represents only half of the query required to verify eventual ﬁdelity. The
second part, again for the Transport role, is expressed as follows:
forall(h: logSize_t) forall(j: Transport_t) exists(i: logSize_t)
Transport_log(j).currentLog[h].orderCount == 0 or
(Transport_log(j).currentLog[h].orderCount == trueGlobalLog[i].orderCount
and Transport_log(j).unSubCount[h] + h == i)
(5.3)
This is very similar to the ﬁrst part; however, the veriﬁcation is now reversed, ensuring that the
global log contains the same events as the local log and in the same order. The ﬁrst part of Query 5.3
ensures, that empty entries of the local log are not considered.
By combining these conditions, eventual ﬁdelity can be veriﬁed using a query structured as follows:
5.1
imply
5.2
&&
5.3
(5.4)
Query 5.4 must then be replicated for every unique role in the given Swarm Protocol to ensure that
all roles adhere to eventual ﬁdelity. Queries of this nature can be generated using the CLI, as described
in Section 4.2.3.
While deadlock does not cover all the cases addressed by Equation 5.1 regarding eventual ﬁdelity, it
instead captures potential errors in the model where unexpected deadlocks occur. Moreover, it enables
reasoning about the locations of role templates.
It is possible to generate a query that veriﬁes whether every role template reaches a terminal location
when the model deadlocks. Given that we assume the Swarm Protocol must have at least one terminal
location. Additionally, assuming that each projection at least contains the events as speciﬁed in Section
2.1.1, it follows that all projections must be able to reach at least one terminal location equivalent to
those found in the Swarm Protocol.
To verify this property for a protocol with N roles, denoted as rolei (i = 1, 2, . . . , N), where each
role appears in the swarm M times such that (j = 1, 2, . . . , M), a speciﬁc machine can be represented
as rolei,j. Given that the Swarm Protocol has a set K of valid terminal locations, where each terminal
location TL has an index (h = 1, 2, . . . , K), the following property is deﬁned:
AG deadlock =⇒
N
^
i=1
M
^
j=1
K
_
h=1
(rolei,j).TL(h)
(5.5)
where (rolei,j).TL(h) implies that instance j of role i is in the terminal location h, and deadlock is
a predicate that holds only when the transition system reaches a state where no outgoing transitions are
possible. Not all projections will include every terminal location of the Swarm Protocol they originate
from, therefore, missing terminal locations should be removed from the above query for it to remain
valid. Using this generalized approach, it is possible to generate an equivalent query for every UPPAAL
model created by the automatic translation tool.
5.2
Automated Test Suite
These semi-automatic tests eventually led to the development of a fully automated test suite using
Pytest[pyt]. With each new iteration of the software, it became necessary to ensure that all previously
veriﬁed functionalities remained intact.
To facilitate the addition of new test cases to the test suite as more features were introduced into the
project, the structure shown in Figure 5.1 was used. The overall structure is divided into two categories
of tests: integration and unit.
The tests in each respective directory are labeled so that either
the integration or unit tests can be executed independently using the -m ﬂag with pytest. Each
==PAGE:68==
5.2 Automated Test Suite
62
integration test covers a speciﬁc scenario, such as the extended warehouse example, which has its
own directory. Some directories contain multiple query ﬁles to account for diﬀerent tests using diﬀerent
queries. Additionally, some directories within the integration directory include multiple JSON ﬁles
containing timing information to test various edge cases. The testing was divided into two categories.
integration tests each cover an entire case, from building the UPPAAL model to verifying a series of
queries. In contrast, unit tests focus on speciﬁc functions or functionalities and are generally used to
cover parts of the codebase that integration tests do not.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Automated Test Suite
63
Root
Src
...
tests
integration
WarehouseExtended
query_file1.txt
query_file2.txt
...
SwarmProtocol.json
time.json
test_warehouse_extended.py
...
GeneratedTests
Protocols
2_max_10_roles_max_10_commands
2_max_10_roles_max_10_commands.json
4_max_5_roles_max_10_commands
4_max_5_roles_max_10_commands.json
...
test_generated.py
unit
TestCase
TestCaseFaulty
TestCaseProjection
test_CLI.py
test_JSONParser.py
conftest.py
test_utils.py
Figure 5.1: Directory structure of the test suite.
The GeneratedTests directory contains test cases of Swarm Protocol that are automatically gen-
erated, they were developed during the work of [Clo25]. Using the automatically generated queries,
generated using AutoVerify as outlined in Section 4.2.3, it is possible to fully automate the testing
process for any given Swarm Protocol. This process requires several steps. First, the projections of
==PAGE:70==
5.2 Automated Test Suite
64
the Swarm Protocol must be generated to create the role templates. Second, relevant queries speciﬁc
to the given Swarm Protocol must be created. Finally, all these queries must be veriﬁed to ensure
correctness.
To facilitate the seamless integration of new Swarm Protocol instances, the test_generated.py
ﬁle automates all of the above steps for any Swarm Protocol JSON ﬁle placed within a directory in the
Protocols directory. Only three test cases were included in the test suite, as larger test cases, where
the Swarm Protocol contains more locations and transitions, signiﬁcantly slow down testing due to
their extended veriﬁcation times.
To maximize code reuse across the integration tests, the test_utils.py ﬁle was employed. This
ﬁle provides a generalized method, do_full_test, which is capable of using verifyta to test both timed
and untimed protocols with all relevant settings. Additionally, if no queries are speciﬁed do_full_test
automatically generates a query to ensure that the model does not overﬂow and a validity query, as
deﬁned in Query 5.5. It then veriﬁes whether all given queries are satisﬁed. This allows for streamlined
test creation, enabling any Swarm Protocol run to be tested with minimal eﬀort. For example, the
following code snippet, taken from the ﬁle test_warehouse_extended.py, demonstrates how a test can
be written:
1 @pytest.mark. integration
2 def
test_warehouse_two_transports_time ():
3
name_of_query_file = " query_file_time "
4
5
name_amount_dict = {"Door": 1, "Forklift": 1, "Transport ": 2}
6
7
model_settings = ModelSettings (name_amount_dict , {"Door": DelayType.EVENTS_EMITTED ,
"Forklift": DelayType.EVENTS_SELF_EMITTED , "Transport ": DelayType.
EVENTS_EMITTED })
8
model_settings . path_bound = 2
9
model_settings . branch_tracking = True
10
model_settings . delay_amount = {"Door": 3, "Forklift": 1, "Transport ": 2}
11
model_settings .log_size = 16
12
13
base_path = os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(__file__))
14
15
do_full_test (base_path , model_settings , name_of_query_file , time_file="time")
By putting all core logic into test_utils.py, each test case only needs to specify the relevant
model settings for the speciﬁc scenario, along with any necessary ﬁle names used for model generation
or veriﬁcation. The relevant model settings include the number of instances for diﬀerent roles, the type
of propagation delay, the number of events that should be emitted before propagation is enforced, the
path bounds applied to all non-exit transitions within the model, whether branch tracking is enabled,
and the size of the log used within the model. In general, the log size is kept as small as possible to
minimize the runtime of each test while preserving its functionality. Each test case also includes its own
query ﬁle which in general contains queries such as Query 5.4 and 5.5, however, in some cases these
queries became too slow and were removed to not slow down development. Additional queries have
been included that are speciﬁc to the exact test cases, but will not be covered here.
It should be noted that while the test suite covers a signiﬁcant portion of the functionality available in
the generated UPPAAL models, it cannot guarantee that every possible functionality is accounted for. Due
to the nature of Swarm Protocols, there exist inﬁnitely many ways in which they can be constructed,
leading to an inﬁnite number of UPPAAL models to test. While the implementation described in Chapter
4 takes a general approach to address the various challenges encountered in constructing a UPPAAL
model that remains faithful to the Swarm Protocol, it is still possible that, for suﬃciently large Swarm
Protocol instances, some behaviors may emerge that are not correctly captured by the corresponding
UPPAAL model. This is why, as described, the test suite includes both automatically generated test cases
and speciﬁcally designed Swarm Protocol instances that target non-trivial behaviors. This combined
approach aims to cover as much functionality as possible.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Verification times
65
The unit tests were primarily used to verify the command-line interface (CLI) of the application.
However, to do so eﬀectively, relevant JSON ﬁles were required to test both the model-building and
veriﬁcation functionalities of the CLI. As a result, the test_CLI.py ﬁle is quite extensive, containing 21
tests to capture all possible behaviors of the CLI, including error handling when incorrect ﬁle paths are
provided or when arguments are formatted incorrectly. Additionally, ﬁles such as test_JSONParser.py
were used to address cases not covered by the general testing framework. The result of this extensive
testing eﬀort is a 99% code coverage across all lines of the project, leading to a high degree of conﬁdence
in the correctness and reliability of the implemented code.
5.3
Verification times
As mentioned previously, one of the most signiﬁcant challenges in constructing models for model check-
ing is the state explosion that can occur when verifying queries in a transition system. This section
aims to assess when state explosion occurs in the constructed UPPAAL models by analyzing how diﬀerent
settings, such as the number of role instances, the propagation delay, and log size aﬀect the veriﬁcation
time. This is done to assess the automated translation tool as stated in Objective 3.
To maintain consistency, the veriﬁcation query deﬁned in Equation 5.5 will be used as a baseline for
all veriﬁcation tests. The choice of this particular query is motivated by two key reasons. Firstly, it is
a ∀□type of TCTL query, meaning it explores every single state of the transition system (assuming the
query is satisﬁed), allowing the size of the system to be estimated. Secondly, it simultaneously veriﬁes
the validity of the UPPAAL models, eﬀectively serving as an additional test case for the system. It should
be noted that while this approach provides insight into the size of the transition system, the veriﬁcation
time also depends on the speciﬁc query used. Therefore, the size of the constructed state space and the
veriﬁcation time are not directly correlated. However, from the perspective of evaluating this project,
the overall veriﬁcation time is of greater importance. Furthermore, only the time taken by UPPAAL
to perform the veriﬁcation will be considered, excluding the time required to construct the UPPAAL
model. To ensure accurate veriﬁcation times, a new model will be generated before each veriﬁcation,
even if the change in settings between successive models is as minor as altering a variable from 1 to
2. While this approach incurs additional time to obtain veriﬁcation results, it is necessary to ensure
valid timing measurements. This is because when UPPAAL executes a veriﬁcation, it loads the states
it searches through into memory, but these states are not automatically cleared between veriﬁcations.
As a result, UPPAAL could take advantage of previously loaded states, leading to artiﬁcially reduced
veriﬁcation times for subsequent queries. By constructing a new model for each veriﬁcation, this issue
is mitigated, as the random nature of the construction process results in a new UPPAAL model with
potentially diﬀerent event_IDs, since they are not pre-ordered before being assigned integer values.
The veriﬁcation experiments were conducted on a machine equipped with an Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-9750H CPU and 16.0 GB of RAM. During the experiments, Verifyta utilized approximately 9 GB of
RAM on average, as the remaining 7 GB was unavailable.
With these considerations in mind, the following experiments were conducted using the running
Example 1. The baseline conﬁguration for these experiments was set as follows:
==PAGE:72==
5.3 Verification times
66
1 {
2
"delay_type ": {
3
"Door": "E",
4
"Forklift": "E",
5
"Transport ": "E"
6
},
7
"path_bound ": 2,
8
" branch_tracking ": true ,
9
"log_size": 20,
10
" delay_amount ": {
11
"Door": 2,
12
"Forklift": 2,
13
"Transport ": 2
14
},
15
" role_amount ": {
16
"Door": 1,
17
"Forklift": 1,
18
"Transport ": 1
19
}
20 }
Listing 5.1: Conﬁguration JSON used as a standard setting.
The settings used in these experiments were kept relatively simple to reduce veriﬁcation times,
allowing for the collection of more empirical data.
Additionally, the log_size setting was kept as
small as possible while still ensuring successful veriﬁcation. However, it remained large enough to be
consistent across all experimental settings, as log_size, as will be demonstrated later, can inﬂuence
veriﬁcation times.
The ﬁrst experiment aimed to investigate the impact of varying the number of roles and the amount
of propagation delay. This analysis also considered the eﬀect of diﬀerent types of propagation delays.
The results of this experiment are presented in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Timing experiment of the Forklift role.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Verification times
67
The legend in Figure 5.2 illustrates the changes in settings compared to the standard conﬁguration
presented in Listing 5.1. Here, r represents the number of instances of the Forklift role participating
in the Swarm Protocol, while dt denotes the type of propagation delay used. The notation E signiﬁes
that propagation is forced after a speciﬁed number of globally emitted events, whereas S indicates that
propagation is forced after a certain number of self-emitted events. As described in Section 3.2.2.
The y-axis of the plot is set to a logarithmic scale to provide a clearer view of the entire dataset, as
the diﬀerences in veriﬁcation times when varying the number of roles span several orders of magnitude.
For instance, when using a delay amount of 12, which yielded approximately the same veriﬁcation time
across diﬀerent delay types, the average veriﬁcation times were 0.18, 4.49, and 1433.61 seconds for 1, 2,
and 3 instances of the Forklift role, respectively. This corresponds to an approximate 25-fold increase
in veriﬁcation time between 1 and 2 instances and a 320-fold increase between 2 and 3 instances. These
results provide strong evidence of the state explosion that occurs as multiple instances of the same role
are added to the Swarm Protocol.
However, Figure 5.2 also suggests that at low propagation delay values, the state explosion is not as
severe. Examining the settings with 3 instances of the Forklift role and E as the delay type, we observe a
steep increase in veriﬁcation time between delay values of 1 and 4, followed by a less steep rise between
values of 5 and 9. However, since the y-axis is logarithmic, this seemingly linear increase is actually
exponential. For example, between delay values of 2 and 3, veriﬁcation time jumps from 50.7 to 356.6
seconds, which is an approximate sevenfold increase.
This behavior occurs because UPPAAL explores every possible state, including all potential interleav-
ings of actions. If a Forklift role is permitted to propagate both before and after an action, UPPAAL
must investigate both possibilities when searching for a state that violates the query. For this reason,
veriﬁcation times plateau when the delay amount becomes suﬃciently large. Eventually, no further
transitions remain except the one forcing the Forklift to propagate. At this point, increasing the delay
further does not expand the state space.
While the variation in veriﬁcation times when the number of Forklift instances is 1 may appear
chaotic, it is important to consider that these veriﬁcation times average around 0.2 seconds. Conse-
quently, even minor variations can seem signiﬁcant. These ﬂuctuations could be inherent to Verifyta
or may result from the operating system temporarily reallocating resources, thereby aﬀecting the com-
putational resources available to Verifyta. Since these variations do not persist as veriﬁcation times
increase, identifying their exact cause is left as future work.
From Figure 5.2, we observe that using E as a delay type introduces more granularity into the state
space than using S. This outcome is expected, as E includes self-emitted events when determining when
propagation is forced. The same experiment was conducted for both the Transport and Door roles.
However, since these experiments did not yield any new insights beyond those observed for the Forklift
role (Figure 5.2), they have been moved to Appendix B.
The next experiment was conducted using the standard settings from Listing 5.1, with the only
modiﬁcation being the inclusion of two instances of the Transport role. This adjustment was made
to increase veriﬁcation times slightly, as the previous experiment demonstrated that higher veriﬁcation
times lead to more stable data. Additionally, the log size was varied to examine its impact on veriﬁcation
runtime. The results of this experiment are presented in Figure 5.3.
==PAGE:74==
5.3 Verification times
68
Figure 5.3: Timing experiment concerning log size.
It is expected that as the log size increases, so too will the veriﬁcation time, since each state in the
transition system must store both global and local logs. This means that as the logs grow larger, each
state to be checked also increases in size. As observed in Figure 5.3, this relationship holds, resulting in
a linear increase in veriﬁcation time relative to log size. Calculating a linear trend line, the relationship
is given by: time = log_size · 0.276. This implies that adding a single additional entry to the log is
expected to increase veriﬁcation time by approximately 0.276 seconds. This increase occurs despite the
fact that the query used was veriﬁed even at the lowest log size setting. Since the query used, if veriﬁed,
ensures that the model only deadlocks when all roles have reached an end state, it simultaneously
guarantees that the logs do not overﬂow otherwise, the model would deadlock immediately after an
event is emitted. Therefore, while the transition system does not increase in the number of states, the
size of each state grows as the log size increases. Although this experiment was conducted only for
the running Example 1, it stands to reason that for any model, increasing the log size beyond what is
necessary to represent all states in the transition system will increase veriﬁcation time. However, the
exact increase in time per log entry (e.g., 0.276 seconds) will likely vary depending on the number of
roles in the Swarm Protocol, as each role introduces an additional local log for each state. For this
reason, using the smallest possible log size that still allows the transition system to reach all states is
recommended. This principle is precisely why one of the automatic queries included in the CLI attempts
to determine the smallest necessary log size for a given model, as described in Section 4.2.3.
One ﬁnal parameter that is essential to investigate is the path bound. As in previous experiments,
all other parameters are set according to the standard conﬁguration in Listing 5.1, with only the path
bound being varied. The results of this experiment are shown in Figure 5.4.
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Verification times
69
Figure 5.4: Timing experiment concerning the path bound setting.
Unlike the eﬀect of log size, which was found to have a linear impact on veriﬁcation time, increasing
the path bound appears to lead to an exponential increase in veriﬁcation time. It is important to note
that the only transition that is not an exit transition in the running example 1 is the command Request,
which initiates the loop. While it may initially seem counterintuitive that the path bound causes an
exponential increase in veriﬁcation time, it is crucial to recognize that the state of a transition system
is not determined solely by the locations of each participant in the system; it also includes the state
of all variables. Therefore, for each additional iteration of the loop that is allowed in the constructed
model, the number of possible transitions grows exponentially, as illustrated in Figure 5.5.
1
1
1
1
4
4
4
4
request ·
close
request
prop@D · prop@T
prop@T · prop@D
prop@T
close ·
request
close
prop@D
prop@D · prop@T
prop@T
prop@D

get
prop@D
Figure 5.5: A graphical representation of the diﬀerent possibilities when all machines are in location
l1, based on the model conﬁguration used in the experiment shown in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.5 illustrates the possible runs when all machines in the Swarm agree on a log of open and the
path bound has not yet been reached. The ﬁgure represents the diﬀerent possible execution paths, with
roles omitted from event emissions since there is only one instance of each role. In this representation,
==PAGE:76==
5.3 Verification times
70
a transition labeled with a log type signiﬁes that the corresponding events are appended to the global
log, while other transitions indicate the propagation of some roles’ local logs to all other machines in
the Swarm, following the notation of a run introduced in Section 2.1.1. Nodes labeled with a number
represent states in which all roles agree on their respective location, with node 4 being a terminal
location. It should be noted that certain events and propagations have been omitted if they would
lead to the same state. For example, the run Run1 = request · prop@T does not lead back to node 1.
However, since there is only one instance of each role, no competition occurs until all roles once again
agree on reaching location 1. The key takeaway from Figure 5.5 is that location 1 can be reached again
through three distinct paths. While all these paths lead to the roles occupying the same location (i.e.,
state 1), the global or local system state will diﬀer depending on the chosen path, resulting in diﬀerent
states within the transition system. The ﬁrst branching occurs when either request ·
close or request
is appended to the global log. Even if close is invalid, it still appears in the global log, making this
state distinct from the one where it does not appear. However, the branching that occurs after request ·

close is more intricate. If prop@T occurs before prop@D, then when D receives the request event, it will
recognize that this event precedes its own close event. Consequently, it will remove close from its local
log, leaving nothing new to propagate. As a result, the local log of FL becomes: lF L = open · request
This behavior arises from a design decision in the implementation of the machines, which allows logs to
move invalid events from their local logs to a list of discarded events to improve log-handling eﬃciency.
Conversely, if prop@D occurs before prop@T, then the local log of FL becomes: lF L = open · request ·

close While this diﬀerence does not aﬀect the node in which the machine representing FL resides, it
does impact the transition system, as these two outcomes are considered distinct states.
Since each additional path bound introduces three new possible states, it is expected that the
veriﬁcation times follow an exponential pattern of 3n. To validate this, an exponential function T(n) =
a · 3n was ﬁtted to the data using least squares regression, yielding: T(n) = 0.0162 · 2.838n. Since the
base value of 2.838 is quite close to 3, this result supports the hypothesis that the exponential increase
in veriﬁcation times is driven by the underlying transition system expansion. To improve the stability
of these results, each data point in Figure 5.4 represents an average over ﬁve diﬀerent runs. However,
the analysis is based on only ten diﬀerent path bounds. A larger dataset would be required to provide
a more deﬁnitive explanation for the observed exponential behavior.
It is important to note that this analysis applies speciﬁcally to the Swarm Protocol used in the
running Example 1 shown in Figure 3.1. However, since the results align with the way runs through
the model are expected to function as illustrated in Figure 5.5, it is reasonable to expect that a similar
state explosion would occur in the looping behavior of other models.
Previously, in Section 4.2.2, it was stated that execution speed was not a primary concern when
choosing a programming language, as veriﬁcation time would often far exceed model construction time.
The preceding experiments have demonstrated that some veriﬁcation tasks required upwards of 20
minutes. This can now be compared to the time required to construct a UPPAAL model. To obtain a
general estimate of the time taken to construct a UPPAAL model, 704 auto-generated Swarm Protocols
were analyzed. These Swarm Protocols, some of which were used for testing as described previously,
were generated as part of [Clo25]. Since the Swarm Protocols used in this experiment contain roughly
the same number of transitions as locations, transitions are used as the primary metric in the following
analysis, although it is expected that locations could be used interchangeably. The results obtained
from these Swarm Protocols are shown in Figure 5.6.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Verification times
71
Figure 5.6: Timing experiment for converting auto generated Swarm Protocol into UPPAAL models,
comparing construction time with the number of transitions (left) and the number of roles in the Swarm
Protocols (right).
In Figure 5.6, the time required to construct the models is plotted against the number of transitions
(left) and the number of roles (right) for each respective Swarm Protocol. Both plots indicate a seem-
ingly linear increase in model construction time with respect to both transitions and roles. To quantify
this relationship, a linear regression was ﬁtted to both plots using least squares regression. The intercept
was omitted, as it is impossible to have a swarm with zero transitions or zero roles. Based on these
linear ﬁts, it can be determined that, on average, each additional transition increases the construction
time by approximately 0.09 seconds, while each additional role adds approximately 0.91 seconds. The
greater impact of adding roles compared to transitions is likely due to the fact that each additional
role requires the creation and integration of two more templates within the model. Observing Figure
5.6, it is evident that even for models with over 200 transitions, the construction time remains under
40 seconds. To collect more accurate results, each model was constructed ten times, and the average of
these ten measurements was used in Figure 5.6.
When constructing UPPAAL models from the auto-generated Swarm Protocols, simply generating an
XML ﬁle that UPPAAL accepts is not suﬃcient to ensure that the model behaves correctly. As previously
stated, Equation 5.5 provides a means of generating a generalized safety property through a query
accepted by the UPPAAL models. However, as the models grew larger, verifying such queries within the
given memory and within a reasonable time became infeasible. Consequently, weaker alternatives to
this safety property were developed. This alternative involves generating a valid global log that the
given Swarm Protocol should be capable of constructing. This system execution trace was derived
solely from the JSON ﬁle of each Swarm Protocol and was therefore independent of the constructed
UPPAAL model. The property proposed here is not a safety property but a reachability property.
To facilitate veriﬁcation within a reasonable timeframe, model constraints were kept as tight as
possible. Speciﬁcally, the delay type for all roles was set to N, ensuring that propagation always occurred
instantly, and each role was limited to a single machine in the Swarm. Under these conditions, verifying
a valid global log or a global log containing all events is equivalent, as both would yield identical results.
Additionally, the path bound was set to −1 which ensures no restrictions are on any paths. Furthermore,
the log size was set to 50.
The veriﬁcation results for these queries on the UPPAAL models are presented in Figure 5.7.
==PAGE:78==
5.3 Verification times
72
Figure 5.7: Timing experiment for the veriﬁcation of auto-generated valid log entries in UPPAAL model
based on auto-generated Swarm Protocols.
When interpreting the results shown in Figure 5.7, it is important to note that all queries were based
on the existence of global logs no longer than six entries. For Swarm Protocols that did not contain
paths of six or more events, veriﬁcation was performed on the largest possible global log.
As observed in Figure 5.7, even for large models, the existence of a simple execution trace can
still be veriﬁed relatively quickly, provided the model is tightly constrained. Furthermore, for all 704
models, the generated queries were satisﬁed, indicating that each auto-generated model is capable of
producing a global log that matches the generated execution trace. To capture as much behavior as
possible, the generated execution traces were randomized to prevent any particular paths through the
Swarm Protocols from being prioritized over others.
With these results, it has been conﬁrmed that each model can exhibit expected behavior. As an
additional security measure, a safety property was also veriﬁed to ensure that erroneous global logs
cannot appear. This was attempted using a log size of six, replacing the last event, of a valid log as
the ones used for the previous experiment, with an event that no machine should be able to emit after
processing the ﬁrst ﬁve events in the log. However, this approach proved infeasible for some models,
particularly those with branching or looping transitions reachable from the initial state, as these models
exhibited extremely slow veriﬁcation times.
One speciﬁc Swarm Protocol, containing only 11 transitions and 3 roles, required nearly six hours
to complete veriﬁcation. To achieve more manageable veriﬁcation times, the log size of the models was
reduced from 50 to 8, resulting in the veriﬁcation times displayed in Figure 5.8.
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Verification times
73
Figure 5.8: Timing experiment for the veriﬁcation of auto-generated invalid log entries in UPPAAL
model based on auto-generated Swarm Protocols.
In Figure 5.8, it can be observed that veriﬁcation time continues to increase as models grow larger
in terms of transitions. However, the veriﬁcation times are shorter compared to those in Figure 5.7,
which is due to the reduced log size, which signiﬁcantly limits the number of possible executions within
the model before overﬂow occurs. Despite this diﬀerence, the overall trend remains similar to that of
Figure 5.7.
Although both a reachability property and a safety property have been veriﬁed in the auto-generated
models, it cannot be conclusively stated that they exhibit all expected behavior or that they never
exhibit unexpected behavior. Since both queries examined only a small subset of the possible global
logs that the models should be able to generate, comprehensive veriﬁcation remains an open challenge.
However, it can be argued that at least a subset of the expected behavior functions correctly and that
the models are successfully accepted by UPPAAL, regardless of the number of transitions, roles, or their
overall structure.
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
Three objectives, 1, 2, and 3, were stated in Section 1.2. This chapter will examine the extent to which
each objective was fulﬁlled and brieﬂy describe how it was achieved before outlining potential future
work that could build upon this project.
The ﬁrst objective, 1, concerned creating a faithful UPPAAL model capable of representing a Swarm
Protocol. The design of the model was divided into two main components. The ﬁrst component was
the role template, which closely resembled the projection of the corresponding role and was responsible
for emitting events.
The second component was the log template, which handled the propagation
and merging of logs while ensuring that the role template remained in the correct location according
to its log. Together, a pair consisting of one log template and one role template corresponded to a
machine within a Swarm. By restricting communication between diﬀerent machines in the model to
the propagation of logs, it was possible to faithfully represent the behavior of a Swarm Protocol. To
facilitate model checking, the model was designed to be bounded through user-speciﬁed inputs, such
as the allowed delay in propagation (with multiple options available), the size of the logs, the number
of times non-terminal transitions can be taken, and the number of machines in the swarm that reﬂect
each role. Additionally, considerations were made regarding how the timing of events within a Swarm
Protocol could aﬀect the model and, in some cases, how complex invariants were required to prevent
time locks and preserve expected behavior.
The second objective, 2, concerned the creation of an automatic translation tool capable of con-
verting any Swarm Protocol into a faithful UPPAAL model. This was achieved by developing a Python
codebase that accepts JSON representations of Swarm Protocols. Furthermore, the tool is capable of
generating projections, allowing only a single JSON ﬁle representing the Swarm Protocol as an input
when constructing a model. To bridge the gap between a Swarm Protocol and its UPPAAL representation,
the codebase was structured around an intermediary UPPAAL representation. This approach allowed for
the model to be constructed programmatically in a step-by-step manner before being combined into
a single UML ﬁle. Additionally, to allow easy access to the tool’s features, a CLI was developed that
enables users to both build models of Swarm Protocols compatible with UPPAAL and automatically
generate queries for veriﬁcation. This essentially allows users to leverage the veriﬁcation capabilities of
UPPAAL without requiring prior knowledge of the tool.
The third objective, 3, concerned evaluating the UPPAAL models generated by the automatic transla-
tion tool. To achieve this, it was ﬁrst essential to assess the correctness of the automatic translation tool
itself. This was done by constructing a test suite that provided 99% code coverage of the entire project.
Having ensured the correctness of the automatic translation tool, various properties were investigated
to verify the faithfulness of the models. Notably, a set of queries capable of checking the eventual ﬁdelity
of any Swarm Protocol was identiﬁed and integrated into the test suite, demonstrating that eventual
ﬁdelity held in all tested cases. The models and the automatic translation tool were further evaluated
through timing experiments. First, the running example 1 of a warehouse was used as a baseline to
examine how varying diﬀerent bounds aﬀected veriﬁcation times. It was observed that allowing longer
delays in propagation led to an exponential increase in veriﬁcation time up to a certain point where no
further interleaving transitions could occur before propagation, meaning further increases did not aﬀect
veriﬁcation time. Additionally, it was shown that increasing the log size beyond the minimum required
for all roles to reach terminal locations resulted in a linear increase in veriﬁcation time. The eﬀect of the
path bound was also tested, revealing an exponential increase in veriﬁcation time as it was increased.
To further evaluate the tools capability of constructing any Swarm Protocol, a set of 704 automatically
==PAGE:81==
6 Conclusion
75
generated Swarm Protocol instances were translated into UPPAAL models. The results showed that even
for models with more than 15 roles and over 200 transitions, a model could be constructed in under 40
seconds. These models were then tested against simple reachability and safety properties, conﬁrming
that they functioned as expected. Throughout all testing, clear evidence was found that if the various
model-bounding parameters were too loose, a state explosion occurred. However, when the bounds
were kept tight, even larger models could successfully complete simple queries in a reasonable amount
of time.
In essence, a tool was created that is capable of correctly converting any Swarm Protocol into
a faithful UPPAAL model, which can then be veriﬁed against any TCTL property allowed by UPPAAL.
However, the models do not cover every possible behavior of Swarm Protocol, leaving several areas for
future investigation:
• Investigate the diﬀerent settings of the UPPAAL veriﬁer to determine their usefulness in verifying
various properties.
• Allow machines in the model to propagate events only to a subset of other machines in the Swarm
and evaluate its eﬀect on the state explosion problem.
• Modify the model to more closely resemble an actual implementation of a Swarm Protocol by
introducing additional constraints.
Finally, only UPPAAL was used in this project. However, many other model checking tools, such
as SPIN (which uses LTL) and mCRL2 (which uses modal µ-calculus), exist and may be capable of
verifying additional interesting properties in Swarm Protocol.
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[Acta]
Actyx. Actyx developer website. [Online; accessed 2. feb. 2025]. url: https://developer.
actyx.com/.
[Actb]
Actyx. machines. [Online; accessed 25. Nov. 2024]. url: https://github.com/Actyx/
machines/tree/master.
[Anc+16]
Davide Ancona et al. 2016. doi: 10.1561/2500000031.
[Bec+01]
Kent Beck et al. History: The Agile Manifesto. [Online; accessed 25. Nov. 2024]. February
2001. url: https://agilemanifesto.org/history.html.
[BK08]
Christel Baier and Joost-Pieter Katoen. Principles of Model Checking (Representation and
Mind Series). The MIT Press, 2008. isbn: 026202649X.
[Cla+12]
Edmund M. Clarke et al. “Model Checking and the State Explosion Problem.” In: Tools
for Practical Software Veriﬁcation: LASER, International Summer School 2011, Elba Is-
land, Italy, Revised Tutorial Lectures. Edited by Bertrand Meyer and Martin Nordio. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pages 1–30. isbn: 978-3-642-35746-6. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-35746-6_1. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35746-
6_1.
[Clo25]
Lucas Clorius. “Methods and tools for the veriﬁcation of swarm protocols.” Used for auto-
generated swarm protocols as test cases. January 2025.
[CN16]
Franco Cicirelli and Libero Nigro. “Modelling and Veriﬁcation of Mutual Exclusion Algo-
rithms.” In: 2016 IEEE/ACM 20th International Symposium on Distributed Simulation and
Real Time Applications (DS-RT). 2016, pages 136–144. doi: 10.1109/DS-RT.2016.16.
[CN20]
Franco Cicirelli and Libero Nigro. “Model Checking Actor-based Cyber-Physical Systems.”
In: 2020 IEEE/ACM 24th International Symposium on Distributed Simulation and Real
Time Applications (DS-RT). 2020, pages 1–8. doi: 10.1109/DS-RT50469.2020.9213705.
[Fur24]
Florian Furbach. “Composing Swarm Protocols.” The theory and formal methods necessary
to compose multiple swarm protocols while preserving functionality and well-formedness.
September 2024.
[GK23]
Purboday Ghosh and Gabor Karsai. “Distributed Cyber Physical Systems Software Model
Checking using Timed Automata.” In: 2023 IEEE 26th International Symposium on Real-
Time Distributed Computing (ISORC). 2023, pages 164–169. doi: 10.1109/ISORC58943.
2023.00030.
[Gra]
Graphviz. GraphViz Documentation. [Online; accessed 17. Jan. 2025]. url: https://graphviz.
org/documentation/.
[HYC16]
Kohei Honda, Nobuko Yoshida, and Marco Carbone. “Multiparty Asynchronous Session
Types.” In: J. ACM 63.1 (March 2016). issn: 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/2827695. url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2827695.
[Kle+19]
Martin Kleppmann et al. “Local-ﬁrst software: you own your data, in spite of the cloud.”
In: Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on New Ideas, New
Paradigms, and Reﬂections on Programming and Software. Onward! 2019. Athens, Greece:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pages 154–178. isbn: 9781450369954. doi: 10.
1145/3359591.3359737. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3359591.3359737.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
77
[KMT23]
Roland Kuhn, Hernán Melgratti, and Emilio Tuosto. “Behavioural Types for Local-First
Software.” In: arXiv (May 2023). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.04848. eprint: 2305.04848.
[Kul+21]
Mitja Kulczynski et al. “Analysis of Source Code Using UPPAAL.” In: Electronic Proceedings
in Theoretical Computer Science 338 (August 2021), pages 31–38. issn: 2075-2180. doi:
10.4204/eptcs.338.5. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.338.5.
[Lig+98]
P. Liggesmeyer et al. “Qualitätssicherung Software-basierter technischer Systeme.” In: In-
formatik Spektrum 21.5 (1998), pages 249–258.
[pyt]
pytest Development Team. pytest: Python testing framework. [Online; accessed 26. feb. 2025].
url: https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/.
[UPPa]
UPPAAL. Home | UPPAAL. [Online; accessed 27. Nov. 2024]. url: https://uppaal.org.
[UPPb]
UPPAAL. UPPAAL Documentation. [Online; accessed 30. Nov. 2024]. url: https://docs.
uppaal.org.
[Wik]
Wiki. Wikipidia builder pattern. [Online; accessed 16. Jan. 2025]. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Builder_pattern.
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIX A
Projections and UPPAAL
representations of the
running example
This appendix contains the projections of the warehouse protocol not presented in the thesis alongside
their UPPAAL representations. It also contains a log template that works alongside the door role template
of the running example 1.
The following two Figures A.1 and A.2 are the projections of the swarm protocol presented in Figure
3.1. Akin to the projection presented in Figure 3.2 they are based on the same notions of projections
originally presented in [Fur24] and outlined in Chapter 2.
1
2
4
(Get / Get)
Request?
Get?
Close?
Figure A.1: The projection of the Forklift role (FL) from Figure 3.1.
0
1
2
3
4
Open?
(Request / Request)
Request?
Get?
Deliver?
(Deliver / Deliver)
Close?
Figure A.2: The projection of the Transport role (T) from Figure 3.1.
The following Figure A.3 is the UPPAAL representation of the projection seen in Figure A.1. It is left
exactly as it has been generated, by the Python code base using graphviz in order to automatically
generate the 2D positions for the locations and transitions.
==PAGE:85==
A Projections and UPPAAL representations of the running example
79
Figure A.3: The UPPAAL representation of the Forklift role as a role template.
Figure A.4 is the UPPAAL representation of the projection presented in Figure A.2 the 2D positions of
the locations and transitions have been changed by hand in order to make the template more readable.
Figure A.4: The UPPAAL representation of the Transport role as a role template.
The following page contains Figure A.5 which displays the entire log template of the Door role from
the running Example 1 utilizing delay type E.
==PAGE:86==
A Projections and UPPAAL representations of the running example
80
Figure A.5: The UPPAAL representation of the Door log using delay type E from Section 3.2.2.
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX B
Timing data
Booth Figure B.1 and B.2 are timing experiments conducted in the same fashion as described in section
5.3.
Figure B.1: Timing experiment of the Transport role.
In Figure B.2, at a delay amount of 16, there is some disparity between the two delay types with
two instances of the Door role. It is proposed that these small variations are exclusively caused by the
system allocating resources away from verifyta, causing it to spend more time searching the entire
state space. The reasoning behind this is that if it were a systematic diﬀerence, similar variations would
also have occurred between delay amounts 10 and 13. Additionally, the largest disparity observed is at
a delay amount of 16, with a diﬀerence of 13.4 seconds. This could explain why such a diﬀerence does
not appear in the experiments for Transport or Forklift, as a variation of this magnitude would not be
noticeable in the plots.
==PAGE:88==
B Timing data
82
Figure B.2: Timing experiment of the Door role.
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C
Trace output
This appendix contains the actual trace output by Verifyta when using the data outlined in Section
4.2.3.
Be aware that the trace included here only contains one snapshot of the state and a single
transition which equates to roughly 1.5% of the actual trace size. However, the actual trace can be
reproduced by following the steps outlined in Section 4.2.3.
1 Options
for the
verification :
2
Generating
some
trace
3
Search
order is
breadth
first
4
Using
conservative
space
optimisation
5
Seed is
1737128455
6
State
space
representation
uses
minimal
constraint
systems
with
future
testing
7
Using
HashMap + Compress
integers
for
discrete
state
storage
8 [2K
9 Verifying
formula 1 at C:\ Users\thore\OneDrive\Skrivebord \ MasterThesis \ TimingExample \
query_file .txt :1
10 [2K -- Formula
is NOT
satisfied.
11
-- Showing
witness
trace:
12
13 State:
14 ( Transport (0).l0
Transport (1).l0
Transport_log (0)._id169
Transport_log (1)._id169
Door
(0).l0
Door_log (0)._id220
Forklift (0).l1
Forklift_log (0)._id266 )
15 eventOrderCounter =1
tempLogEntry .eventID =0
tempLogEntry .emitterID =0
tempLogEntry .
orderCount =0
tempLogEntry . basedOnOrderCount =0
tempLogEntry .tiedTo =0
tempLogEntry .
ignored =0
propagationLog [0]. eventID =0
propagationLog [0]. emitterID =0
propagationLog
[0]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [0]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [0]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [0]. ignored =0
propagationLog [1]. eventID =0
propagationLog [1]. emitterID
=0
propagationLog [1]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [1]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [1]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [1]. ignored =0
propagationLog [2]. eventID =0
propagationLog [2]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [2]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [2].
basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [2]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [2]. ignored =0
propagationLog [3]. eventID =0
propagationLog [3]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [3].
orderCount =0
propagationLog [3]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [3]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [3]. ignored =0
propagationLog [4]. eventID =0
propagationLog [4]. emitterID
=0
propagationLog [4]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [4]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [4]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [4]. ignored =0
propagationLog [5]. eventID =0
propagationLog [5]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [5]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [5].
basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [5]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [5]. ignored =0
propagationLog [6]. eventID =0
propagationLog [6]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [6].
orderCount =0
propagationLog [6]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [6]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [6]. ignored =0
propagationLog [7]. eventID =0
propagationLog [7]. emitterID
=0
propagationLog [7]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [7]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [7]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [7]. ignored =0
propagationLog [8]. eventID =0
propagationLog [8]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [8]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [8].
basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [8]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [8]. ignored =0
propagationLog [9]. eventID =0
propagationLog [9]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [9].
orderCount =0
propagationLog [9]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [9]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [9]. ignored =0
propagationLog [10]. eventID =0
propagationLog [10].
emitterID =0
propagationLog [10]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [10]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [10]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [10]. ignored =0
propagationLog [11]. eventID
=0
propagationLog [11]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [11]. orderCount =0
propagationLog
[11]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [11]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [11]. ignored =0
propagationLog [12]. eventID =0
propagationLog [12]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [12].
orderCount =0
propagationLog [12]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [12]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [12]. ignored =0
propagationLog [13]. eventID =0
propagationLog [13].
==PAGE:90==
C Trace output
84
emitterID =0
propagationLog [13]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [13]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [13]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [13]. ignored =0
propagationLog [14]. eventID
=0
propagationLog [14]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [14]. orderCount =0
propagationLog
[14]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [14]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [14]. ignored =0
propagationLog [15]. eventID =0
propagationLog [15]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [15].
orderCount =0
propagationLog [15]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [15]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [15]. ignored =0
propagationLog [16]. eventID =0
propagationLog [16].
emitterID =0
propagationLog [16]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [16]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [16]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [16]. ignored =0
propagationLog [17]. eventID
=0
propagationLog [17]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [17]. orderCount =0
propagationLog
[17]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [17]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [17]. ignored =0
propagationLog [18]. eventID =0
propagationLog [18]. emitterID =0
propagationLog [18].
orderCount =0
propagationLog [18]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [18]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [18]. ignored =0
propagationLog [19]. eventID =0
propagationLog [19].
emitterID =0
propagationLog [19]. orderCount =0
propagationLog [19]. basedOnOrderCount =0
propagationLog [19]. tiedTo =0
propagationLog [19]. ignored =0
globalLog [0]. eventID =0
globalLog [0]. emitterID =0
globalLog [0]. orderCount =0
globalLog [0]. basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [0]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [0]. ignored =0
globalLog [1]. eventID =0
globalLog [1].
emitterID =0
globalLog [1]. orderCount =0
globalLog [1]. basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog
[1]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [1]. ignored =0
globalLog [2]. eventID =0
globalLog [2]. emitterID =0
globalLog [2]. orderCount =0
globalLog [2]. basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [2]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [2]. ignored =0
globalLog [3]. eventID =0
globalLog [3]. emitterID =0
globalLog
[3]. orderCount =0
globalLog [3]. basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [3]. tiedTo =0
globalLog
[3]. ignored =0
globalLog [4]. eventID =0
globalLog [4]. emitterID =0
globalLog [4].
orderCount =0
globalLog [4]. basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [4]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [4].
ignored =0
globalLog [5]. eventID =0
globalLog [5]. emitterID =0
globalLog [5]. orderCount =0
globalLog [5]. basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [5]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [5]. ignored =0
globalLog [6]. eventID =0
globalLog [6]. emitterID =0
globalLog [6]. orderCount =0
globalLog
[6]. basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [6]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [6]. ignored =0
globalLog [7].
eventID =0
globalLog [7]. emitterID =0
globalLog [7]. orderCount =0
globalLog [7].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [7]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [7]. ignored =0
globalLog [8].
eventID =0
globalLog [8]. emitterID =0
globalLog [8]. orderCount =0
globalLog [8].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [8]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [8]. ignored =0
globalLog [9].
eventID =0
globalLog [9]. emitterID =0
globalLog [9]. orderCount =0
globalLog [9].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [9]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [9]. ignored =0
globalLog [10].
eventID =0
globalLog [10]. emitterID =0
globalLog [10]. orderCount =0
globalLog [10].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [10]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [10]. ignored =0
globalLog [11].
eventID =0
globalLog [11]. emitterID =0
globalLog [11]. orderCount =0
globalLog [11].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [11]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [11]. ignored =0
globalLog [12].
eventID =0
globalLog [12]. emitterID =0
globalLog [12]. orderCount =0
globalLog [12].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [12]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [12]. ignored =0
globalLog [13].
eventID =0
globalLog [13]. emitterID =0
globalLog [13]. orderCount =0
globalLog [13].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [13]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [13]. ignored =0
globalLog [14].
eventID =0
globalLog [14]. emitterID =0
globalLog [14]. orderCount =0
globalLog [14].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [14]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [14]. ignored =0
globalLog [15].
eventID =0
globalLog [15]. emitterID =0
globalLog [15]. orderCount =0
globalLog [15].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [15]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [15]. ignored =0
globalLog [16].
eventID =0
globalLog [16]. emitterID =0
globalLog [16]. orderCount =0
globalLog [16].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [16]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [16]. ignored =0
globalLog [17].
eventID =0
globalLog [17]. emitterID =0
globalLog [17]. orderCount =0
globalLog [17].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [17]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [17]. ignored =0
globalLog [18].
eventID =0
globalLog [18]. emitterID =0
globalLog [18]. orderCount =0
globalLog [18].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [18]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [18]. ignored =0
globalLog [19].
eventID =0
globalLog [19]. emitterID =0
globalLog [19]. orderCount =0
globalLog [19].
basedOnOrderCount =0
globalLog [19]. tiedTo =0
globalLog [19]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog
[0]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [0]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [0]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [0]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [0]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [0].
ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [1]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [1]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [1].
orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [1]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [1]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [1]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [2]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [2]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [2]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [2]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog
[2]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [2]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [3]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog
[3]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [3]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [3]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [3]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [3]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [4]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [4]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [4]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [4].
basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [4]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [4]. ignored =0
==PAGE:91==
C Trace output
85
trueGlobalLog [5]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [5]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [5]. orderCount
=0
trueGlobalLog [5]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [5]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [5].
ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [6]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [6]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [6].
orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [6]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [6]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [6]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [7]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [7]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [7]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [7]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog
[7]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [7]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [8]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog
[8]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [8]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [8]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [8]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [8]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [9]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [9]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [9]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [9].
basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [9]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [9]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [10]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [10]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [10].
orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [10]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [10]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [10]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [11]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [11]. emitterID
=0
trueGlobalLog [11]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [11]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [11]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [11]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [12]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [12]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [12]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [12].
basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [12]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [12]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [13]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [13]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [13].
orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [13]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [13]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [13]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [14]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [14]. emitterID
=0
trueGlobalLog [14]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [14]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [14]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [14]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [15]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [15]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [15]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [15].
basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [15]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [15]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [16]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [16]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [16].
orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [16]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [16]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [16]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [17]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [17]. emitterID
=0
trueGlobalLog [17]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [17]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [17]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [17]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [18]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [18]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [18]. orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [18].
basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [18]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [18]. ignored =0
trueGlobalLog [19]. eventID =0
trueGlobalLog [19]. emitterID =0
trueGlobalLog [19].
orderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [19]. basedOnOrderCount =0
trueGlobalLog [19]. tiedTo =0
trueGlobalLog [19]. ignored =0
trueDiscardedEvents [0]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [1]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [2]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [3]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [4]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [5]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [6]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [7]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [8]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [9]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [10]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [11]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [12]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [13]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [14]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [15]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [16]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [17]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [18]=0
trueDiscardedEvents [19]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [0]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [1]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [2]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [3]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [4]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [5]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [6]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [7]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [8]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [9]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [10]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [11]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [12]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [13]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [14]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [15]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [16]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [17]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [18]=0
trueDiscardedDueToCompetionEvents [19]=0
trueCurrentIndex =-1
currentEventResetID =-1 amountOfLogs =4
currentLogToPropagate =0
amountOfPropagation =0
globalCurrentLocation =0
maxUpdatesSincePropagation_Transport
=1
loop_counter2 [0]=0
loop_counter2 [1]=0
maxUpdatesSincePropagation_Door =1
maxUpdatesSincePropagation_Forklift =1
loopCountMap [0]= -1
loopCountMap [1]= -1
loopCountMap [2]= -1
loopCountMap [3]=0
loopCountMap [4]= -1
Transport (0).id=0
Transport
(1).id=1
Transport_log (0).id=0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [0]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [0]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [0].
orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [0]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [0]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [0]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [1]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [1]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0)
.currentLog [1]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [1]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [1]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [1]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [2]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [2]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [2]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [2].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [2]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).
==PAGE:92==
C Trace output
86
currentLog [2]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [3]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [3]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [3]. orderCount =0
Transport_log
(0).currentLog [3]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [3]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [3]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [4]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [4]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [4].
orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [4]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [4]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [4]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [5]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [5]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0)
.currentLog [5]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [5]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [5]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [5]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [6]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [6]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [6]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [6].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [6]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [6]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [7]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [7]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [7]. orderCount =0
Transport_log
(0).currentLog [7]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [7]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [7]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [8]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [8]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [8].
orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [8]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [8]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [8]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [9]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [9]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0)
.currentLog [9]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [9]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [9]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [9]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [10]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [10]. emitterID
=0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [10]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [10].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [10]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [10]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [11]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0)
.currentLog [11]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [11]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [11]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog
[11]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [11]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog
[12]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [12]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [12]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [12]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [12]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [12]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [13]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [13]. emitterID
=0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [13]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [13].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [13]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [13]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [14]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0)
.currentLog [14]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [14]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [14]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog
[14]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [14]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog
[15]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [15]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [15]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [15]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [15]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [15]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [16]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [16]. emitterID
=0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [16]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [16].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [16]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [16]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [17]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0)
.currentLog [17]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [17]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [17]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog
[17]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [17]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog
[18]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [18]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [18]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [18]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [18]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [18]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [19]. eventID =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [19]. emitterID
=0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [19]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (0). currentLog [19].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (0).currentLog [19]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (0).
currentLog [19]. ignored =0
Transport_log (0). updatesSincePropagation =0
Transport_log
(0).newUpdates =0
Transport_log (0).counter =0
Transport_log (0). log_id_start =2
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [0]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [1]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [2]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [3]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [4]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [5]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [6]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [7]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [8]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [9]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [10]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [11]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [12]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts
[13]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [14]=0
Transport_log (0).
==PAGE:93==
C Trace output
87
emittedOrderCounts [15]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [16]=0
Transport_log (0)
. emittedOrderCounts [17]=0
Transport_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [18]=0
Transport_log
(0). emittedOrderCounts [19]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [0]=0
Transport_log (0)
. discardedEvents [1]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [2]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedEvents [3]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [4]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedEvents [5]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [6]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedEvents [7]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [8]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedEvents [9]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [10]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedEvents [11]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [12]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedEvents [13]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [14]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedEvents [15]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [16]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedEvents [17]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedEvents [18]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedEvents [19]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [0]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [1]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [2]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[3]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [4]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [5]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[6]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [7]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [8]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[9]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [10]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [11]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[12]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [13]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [14]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[15]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [16]=0
Transport_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [17]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[18]=0
Transport_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [19]=0
Transport_log (0).
olderEntryIgnored =0
Transport_log (0). inCompetetion =0
Transport_log (0). backTracking
=0
Transport_log (0). didLogChange =0
Transport_log (0). currentSizeOfLog =0
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [0]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [1]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [2]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [3]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [4]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [5]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [6]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [7]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [8]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [9]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [10]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [11]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [12]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs
[13]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [14]= -1
Transport_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [15]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [16]= -1
Transport_log (0)
. discardedEventIDs [17]= -1
Transport_log (0). discardedEventIDs [18]= -1
Transport_log
(0). discardedEventIDs [19]= -1
Transport_log (0).resetCount =0
Transport_log (0).
eventsToRead =0
Transport_log (0). subscriptions [0]=0
Transport_log (0). subscriptions
[1]=1
Transport_log (0). subscriptions [2]=2
Transport_log (0). subscriptions [3]=3
Transport_log (0). subscriptions [4]=4
Transport_log (0). initialLocation =3
Transport_log (0). currentLocation =3
Transport_log (1).id=1
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [0]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [0]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1)
.currentLog [0]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [0]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [0]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [0]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [1]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [1]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [1]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [1].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [1]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [1]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [2]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [2]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [2]. orderCount =0
Transport_log
(1).currentLog [2]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [2]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [2]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [3]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [3]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [3].
orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [3]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [3]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [3]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [4]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [4]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1)
.currentLog [4]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [4]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [4]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [4]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [5]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [5]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [5]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [5].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [5]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [5]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [6]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [6]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [6]. orderCount =0
Transport_log
(1).currentLog [6]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [6]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [6]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [7]. eventID =0
==PAGE:94==
C Trace output
88
Transport_log (1). currentLog [7]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [7].
orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [7]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [7]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [7]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [8]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [8]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1)
.currentLog [8]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [8]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [8]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [8]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [9]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [9]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [9]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [9].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [9]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [9]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [10]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [10]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [10]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [10]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog
[10]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [10]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog
[11]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [11]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [11]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [11]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [11]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [11]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [12]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [12]. emitterID
=0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [12]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [12].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [12]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [12]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [13]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1)
.currentLog [13]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [13]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [13]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog
[13]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [13]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog
[14]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [14]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [14]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [14]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [14]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [14]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [15]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [15]. emitterID
=0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [15]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [15].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [15]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [15]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [16]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1)
.currentLog [16]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [16]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [16]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog
[16]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [16]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog
[17]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [17]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [17]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [17]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [17]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [17]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [18]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [18]. emitterID
=0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [18]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [18].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [18]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).
currentLog [18]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [19]. eventID =0
Transport_log (1)
.currentLog [19]. emitterID =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [19]. orderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog [19]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Transport_log (1). currentLog
[19]. tiedTo =0
Transport_log (1).currentLog [19]. ignored =0
Transport_log (1).
updatesSincePropagation =0
Transport_log (1).newUpdates =0
Transport_log (1).counter =0
Transport_log (1). log_id_start =2
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [0]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [1]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [2]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [3]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [4]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [5]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [6]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [7]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [8]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [9]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [10]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [11]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [12]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [13]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts
[14]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [15]=0
Transport_log (1).
emittedOrderCounts [16]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [17]=0
Transport_log (1)
. emittedOrderCounts [18]=0
Transport_log (1). emittedOrderCounts [19]=0
Transport_log
(1). discardedEvents [0]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [1]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedEvents [2]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [3]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedEvents [4]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [5]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedEvents [6]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [7]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedEvents [8]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [9]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedEvents [10]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [11]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedEvents [12]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [13]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedEvents [14]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [15]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedEvents [16]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [17]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedEvents [18]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedEvents [19]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [0]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
==PAGE:95==
C Trace output
89
[1]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [2]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [3]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[4]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [5]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [6]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[7]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [8]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [9]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[10]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [11]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [12]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[13]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [14]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [15]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[16]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [17]=0
Transport_log (1).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [18]=0
Transport_log (1). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[19]=0
Transport_log (1). olderEntryIgnored =0
Transport_log (1). inCompetetion =0
Transport_log (1). backTracking =0
Transport_log (1). didLogChange =0
Transport_log (1).
currentSizeOfLog =0
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [0]= -1
Transport_log (1).
discardedEventIDs [1]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [2]= -1
Transport_log (1).
discardedEventIDs [3]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [4]= -1
Transport_log (1).
discardedEventIDs [5]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [6]= -1
Transport_log (1).
discardedEventIDs [7]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [8]= -1
Transport_log (1).
discardedEventIDs [9]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [10]= -1
Transport_log (1).
discardedEventIDs [11]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [12]= -1
Transport_log (1)
. discardedEventIDs [13]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [14]= -1
Transport_log
(1). discardedEventIDs [15]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [16]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [17]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [18]= -1
Transport_log (1). discardedEventIDs [19]= -1
Transport_log (1). resetCount =0
Transport_log (1). eventsToRead =0
Transport_log (1). subscriptions [0]=0
Transport_log
(1). subscriptions [1]=1
Transport_log (1). subscriptions [2]=2
Transport_log (1).
subscriptions [3]=3
Transport_log (1). subscriptions [4]=4
Transport_log (1).
initialLocation =3
Transport_log (1). currentLocation =3 Door (0).id=0
Door_log (0).id=0
Door_log (0). currentLog [0]. eventID =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [0]. emitterID =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [0]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [0]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [0]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [0]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [1]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [1]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [1]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [1]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [1]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [1]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [2]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [2]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [2]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [2]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [2]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [2]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [3]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [3]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [3]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [3]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [3]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [3]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [4]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [4]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [4]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [4]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [4]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [4]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [5]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [5]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [5]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [5]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [5]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [5]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [6]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [6]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [6]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [6]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [6]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [6]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [7]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [7]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [7]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [7]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [7]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [7]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [8]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [8]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [8]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [8]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [8]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [8]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [9]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [9]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [9]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [9]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [9]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [9]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [10]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [10]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [10]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [10]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [10]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [10]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [11]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [11]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [11]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [11]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [11]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [11]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [12]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [12]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
==PAGE:96==
C Trace output
90
currentLog [12]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [12]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [12]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [12]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [13]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [13]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [13]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [13]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [13]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [13]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [14]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [14]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [14]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [14]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [14]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [14]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [15]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [15]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [15]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [15]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [15]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [15]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [16]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [16]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [16]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [16]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [16]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [16]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [17]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [17]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [17]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [17]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [17]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [17]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [18]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [18]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [18]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [18]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [18]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [18]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [19]. eventID =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [19]. emitterID =0
Door_log (0).
currentLog [19]. orderCount =0
Door_log (0).currentLog [19]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Door_log
(0).currentLog [19]. tiedTo =0
Door_log (0). currentLog [19]. ignored =0
Door_log (0).
updatesSincePropagation =0
Door_log (0).newUpdates =0
Door_log (0).counter =0
Door_log
(0). log_id_start =0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [0]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [1]=0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [2]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [3]=0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [4]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [5]=0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [6]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [7]=0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [8]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [9]=0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [10]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [11]=0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [12]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [13]=0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [14]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [15]=0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [16]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [17]=0
Door_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [18]=0
Door_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [19]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [0]=0
Door_log (0).
discardedEvents [1]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [2]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents
[3]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [4]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [5]=0
Door_log (0)
. discardedEvents [6]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [7]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents
[8]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [9]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [10]=0
Door_log
(0). discardedEvents [11]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [12]=0
Door_log (0).
discardedEvents [13]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [14]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents
[15]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [16]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [17]=0
Door_log
(0). discardedEvents [18]=0
Door_log (0). discardedEvents [19]=0
Door_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [0]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [1]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [2]=0
Door_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [3]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [4]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [5]=0
Door_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [6]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [7]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [8]=0
Door_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [9]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [10]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [11]=0
Door_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [12]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [13]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [14]=0
Door_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [15]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [16]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [17]=0
Door_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [18]=0
Door_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [19]=0
Door_log (0). olderEntryIgnored =0
Door_log (0). inCompetetion =0
Door_log (0).
backTracking =0
Door_log (0). didLogChange =0
Door_log (0). currentSizeOfLog =0
Door_log
(0). discardedEventIDs [0]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [1]= -1
Door_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [2]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [3]= -1
Door_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [4]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [5]= -1
Door_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [6]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [7]= -1
Door_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [8]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [9]= -1
Door_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [10]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [11]= -1
Door_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [12]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [13]= -1
Door_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [14]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [15]= -1
Door_log (0).
==PAGE:97==
C Trace output
91
discardedEventIDs [16]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [17]= -1
Door_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [18]= -1
Door_log (0). discardedEventIDs [19]= -1
Door_log (0).
resetCount =0
Door_log (0). eventsToRead =0
Door_log (0). subscriptions [0]=0
Door_log (0).
subscriptions [1]=1
Door_log (0). subscriptions [2]=2
Door_log (0). subscriptions [3]=3
Door_log (0). subscriptions [4]= -1
Door_log (0). initialLocation =0
Door_log (0).
currentLocation =0
Forklift (0).id=0
Forklift_log (0).id=0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog
[0]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [0]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog
[0]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [0]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [0]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [0]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [1]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [1]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [1]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [1]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [1]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [1]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [2]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [2]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [2]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [2].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [2]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [2]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [3]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [3]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [3]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log
(0).currentLog [3]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [3]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [3]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [4]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [4]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [4]. orderCount
=0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [4]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [4].
tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [4]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [5].
eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [5]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [5].
orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [5]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [5]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [5]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [6]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [6]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [6]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [6]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [6]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [6]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [7]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [7]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [7]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [7].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [7]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [7]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [8]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [8]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [8]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log
(0).currentLog [8]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [8]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [8]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [9]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [9]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [9]. orderCount
=0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [9]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [9].
tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [9]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [10].
eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [10]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog
[10]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [10]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log
(0).currentLog [10]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [10]. ignored =0
Forklift_log
(0).currentLog [11]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [11]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [11]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [11].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [11]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [11]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [12]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [12]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [12]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log
(0).currentLog [12]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [12]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [12]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [13]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [13]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [13].
orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [13]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [13]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [13]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [14]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [14]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0)
.currentLog [14]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [14]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [14]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [14]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [15]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [15]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [15]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [15].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [15]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [15]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [16]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [16]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [16]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log
(0).currentLog [16]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [16]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [16]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [17]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [17]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [17].
orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [17]. basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [17]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [17]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [18]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [18]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0)
.currentLog [18]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0).currentLog [18]. basedOnOrderCount =0
==PAGE:98==
C Trace output
92
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [18]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [18]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [19]. eventID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [19]. emitterID =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [19]. orderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [19].
basedOnOrderCount =0
Forklift_log (0). currentLog [19]. tiedTo =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentLog [19]. ignored =0
Forklift_log (0). updatesSincePropagation =0
Forklift_log (0).
newUpdates =0
Forklift_log (0).counter =0
Forklift_log (0). log_id_start =1
Forklift_log
(0). emittedOrderCounts [0]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [1]=0
Forklift_log (0)
. emittedOrderCounts [2]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [3]=0
Forklift_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [4]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [5]=0
Forklift_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [6]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [7]=0
Forklift_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [8]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [9]=0
Forklift_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [10]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [11]=0
Forklift_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [12]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [13]=0
Forklift_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [14]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [15]=0
Forklift_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [16]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [17]=0
Forklift_log (0).
emittedOrderCounts [18]=0
Forklift_log (0). emittedOrderCounts [19]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [0]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [1]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [2]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [3]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [4]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [5]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [6]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [7]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [8]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [9]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [10]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [11]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [12]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [13]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [14]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [15]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [16]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [17]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEvents [18]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEvents [19]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [0]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[1]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [2]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [3]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[4]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [5]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [6]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[7]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [8]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [9]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[10]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [11]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [12]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[13]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [14]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [15]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[16]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents [17]=0
Forklift_log (0).
discardedDueToCompetionEvents [18]=0
Forklift_log (0). discardedDueToCompetionEvents
[19]=0
Forklift_log (0). olderEntryIgnored =0
Forklift_log (0). inCompetetion =0
Forklift_log (0). backTracking =0
Forklift_log (0). didLogChange =0
Forklift_log (0).
currentSizeOfLog =0
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [0]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [1]= -1
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [2]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [3]= -1
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [4]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [5]= -1
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [6]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [7]= -1
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [8]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [9]= -1
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [10]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [11]= -1
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [12]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [13]= -1
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [14]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [15]= -1
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [16]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [17]= -1
Forklift_log (0). discardedEventIDs [18]= -1
Forklift_log (0).
discardedEventIDs [19]= -1
Forklift_log (0). resetCount =0
Forklift_log (0). eventsToRead
=0
Forklift_log (0). subscriptions [0]=2
Forklift_log (0). subscriptions [1]=3
Forklift_log (0). subscriptions [2]=4
Forklift_log (0). subscriptions [3]= -1
Forklift_log
(0). subscriptions [4]= -1
Forklift_log (0). initialLocation =1
Forklift_log (0).
currentLocation =1
globalTime =0
Transport (0).x=0
Transport (1).x=0
Transport_log (0).x
=0
Transport_log (1).x=0 Door (0).x=0
Door_log (0).x=0
Forklift (0).x=0
Forklift_log (0)
.x=0
16
17 Transition:
18
Door (0).l0 ->Door (0).l1 { 1, do_log_update_Door [id]!, x := 0, setLogEntryForUpdate (
Open_ID , id , -2, false) }
19
Door_log (0)._id220 ->Door_log (0)._id221 { 1, do_log_update_Door [id]?, updateLogDoor (
currentLog , emittedOrderCounts , log_id_start ), updatesSincePropagation ++,
newUpdates
:= true , currentSizeOfLog ++ }
20
==PAGE:99==
C Trace output
93
21 State:
22 ...
assets/trace.txt
