==PAGE:1==
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric
Ultrasound Imaging
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Jakub Wiśniewski
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to the amazing people who made this thesis happen:
Chun Kit Wong, PhD Student, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci­
ence
Anders Nymark Christensen, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
Martin G. Tolsgaard, Professor, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet and
CAMES
Last but not least, a big thank you to all the sonographers at Copenhagen University
Hospital Rigshospitalet who helped me with data collection.
Christian Nicolai Nielsen, [DTU Civil Engineering]
Creator of this thesis template.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Navigating obstetric ultrasound requires extensive visuospatial skills, placing a high cog­
nitive burden on sonographers. Accurate fetal assessment depends on the operator’s
ability to mentally reconstruct 3D fetal anatomy from 2D ultrasound slices, which is time­
consuming and error­prone. To address this challenge, we developed an AI­based navi­
gational support system that assists fetal position estimation using blind sweep ultrasound
videos.
As part of this work, we designed and implemented a real­time data acquisition system
and conducted our own data collection, gathering blind sweep ultrasound recordings from
clinical settings. Using this dataset, we evaluated two deep learning models — SonoNet
and Progressive Concept Bottleneck Models (PCBM) — to determine their effectiveness
in detecting the fetal head position and orientation. PCBM, which provides anatomical
masks for key fetal structures, demonstrated more reliable head localization, enabling
accurate classification of fetal lie (cephalic vs. breech) and head rotation (left vs. right).
Beyond evaluating existing models, we developed two AI­driven methods for fetal position
estimation: a confidence­based classification approach for fetal lie prediction, incorporat­
ing uncertainty estimation, and a novel segmentation­based method for fetal head rotation
prediction, leveraging PCBM’s anatomical masks.
By integrating AI­driven segmentation with structured blind sweep protocols, our approach
shows the potential to reduce the mental workload for sonographers and enhance con­
sistency and efficiency in fetal assessments. These findings highlight the potential of
AI­assisted navigation to support ultrasound operators, improving workflow reliability and
prenatal imaging accuracy.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
2
Related Works
3
2.1
AI in Ultrasound
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
AI as Navigational Aid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
System Setup, Data Collection, and Software Architecture
7
3.1
System Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Blind Sweep Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Data Collection and Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Model Analysis
17
4.1
SonoNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
PCBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Summary of Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5
Prediction on blind sweeps
26
5.1
Types of prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.2
Fetal Lie Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.3
Head rotation prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6
Discussion
42
6.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7
Conclusion
45
Bibliography
47
A Supplementary Figures
51
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Ultrasound (US) is a powerful medical imaging tool with many applications. Though also
used in therapy and healing ([1]), it is now primarily known for its diagnostic capabilities.
Its non­invasive nature and ability to provide real­time imaging have made it an essential
tool for visualizing internal organs and structures [2]. Right now, ultrasound is primarily
known for its use in maternal care.
In obstetrics and gynecology, ultrasound plays a critical role, offering applications such as
harmonic imaging, Doppler­based assessment of heart and peripheral vessel pulsations,
and even 3D anatomical imaging, particularly for fetal assessments [3].
Performing ultrasound examinations effectively requires a combination of psychomotor
skills, including visuomotor and visuospatial abilities, which are crucial for navigating com­
plex anatomical structures. This is especially true in obstetric and gynecological imaging,
where ultrasound is both fundamental and highly operator­dependent ([4, 5]). Beyond
spatial orientation, sonographers must also demonstrate technical competence, apply
medical knowledge, and be proficient with the equipment they use [6].
Operating an ultrasound is an acquired skill but it requires a spatial ability that has been
shown as a good predictor of sonographers performance [7]. The complexity of fetal
anatomy, variations in fetal position, and the dynamic nature of ultrasound imaging fur­
ther can contribute to cognitive load. These difficulties are particularly pronounced among
trainees and less experienced sonographers, who must develop both the technical profi­
ciency and spatial reasoning necessary to perform accurate assessments.
To address these challenges and reduce the mental demands on sonographers in this
work, we present a pipeline for the automated prediction of fetal presentation and lie
from ultrasound videos, acquired using a simple blind sweep protocol designed to support
sonographers during routine fetal assessments.
Our work focuses on developing and evaluating an end­to­end pipeline for estimating fetal
position, specifically head position and rotation. The key components of our approach
include:
• Designing an architecture that receives an HDMI signal from an ultrasound machine
and provides a web­based interface. This interface guides users through the blind
sweep protocol and allows them to save ultrasound sweeps as MP4 files with an­
notations.
• Evaluating two different models for detecting anatomical structures from the col­
lected ultrasound data.
• Introducing techniques to determine fetal lie and head orientation based on model
outputs.
First, we review related work. Then, we discuss the implementation details, followed by
an analysis and comparison of the models. Finally, we present our approach for predicting
fetal head position and rotation.
2
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:7==
2
Related Works
2.1
AI in Ultrasound
Because of the skills, knowledge, and mental capabilities required to operate an ultra­
sound, recent research has focused on making it more accessible. Efforts include facili­
tating the acquisition of ultrasound videos [8], and leveraging artificial intelligence (AI) and
deep learning to automate image interpretation and analysis [9, 10]. Given the broad diag­
nostic applications of ultrasound and the expertise required to operate it, it is not surprising
that AI is increasingly being integrated into this field. Machine learning, in particular, has
the potential to assist in multiple aspects of ultrasound imaging, from decision­making to
result interpretation [11]. In many underdeveloped regions, it is often more practical to
design blind sweep protocols for non­expert users. These protocols allow operators to
collect video data, which AI can then analyze to assist in medical decision­making ([8],
[12]).
AI­driven ultrasound research can be grouped into three main areas: disease detection,
fetal estimation, and navigational assistance. The following sections provide an overview
of key contributions in each domain.
2.1.1
AI in Disease Detection
One of the most critical applications of AI in ultrasound is disease detection. This can
be achieved through various methods, including analyzing ultrasound videos, extracting
quantitative measures from ultrasound scans, or leveraging patient medical history and
health markers.
In [13], researchers developed a linear elastic net model using retrospective data that in­
cluded maternal characteristics, medical history, and specific factors such as medication
intake. The model was trained to predict pre­eclampsia early, achieving an AUC of 0.79.
Beyond using health markers, other researchers integrated standard demographic data
(such as age, sex, and BMI) with echocardiographic dimensions—ultrasound­derived
measurements of heart structures—and Doppler­based blood flow metrics [14]. Their
approach led to the development of a random forest model that achieved a 0.94 AUC in
predicting congenital heart disease (CHD).
AI has also been applied directly to ultrasound imaging for disease detection. In [15],
researchers developed a machine learning­based convolutional neural network (CNN)
to detect ovarian tumors during pregnancy. Their pipeline utilized logistic regression as
the final classification step after the CNN extracted high­level features. Another study
focused on detecting CHD solely from ultrasound sweep videos [16]. Using an object
detection model based on YOLOv2, the researchers trained the system to identify fetal
cardiac substructures—including heart chambers, vessels, and other relevant anatomical
features—to determine the presence of CHD.
A more advanced approach to CHD detection was proposed in [17], where scientists de­
veloped a multi­stage deep learning ensemble model. The system first classified cardiac
axial views based on established diagnostic guidelines. Then, five specialized models
analyzed these views to determine whether abnormalities were present. The final deci­
sion was made using the outputs of the deep learning classifiers, which were processed
by a separate rule­based classifier.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
3
==PAGE:8==
2.1.2
AI in Fetal Estimation
Ultrasound can detect many different diseases, which means there are plenty of ways
to test different machine­learning models, data types, and techniques. However, AI is
not limited to disease detection—it is also increasingly used for routine ultrasound­based
assessments, such as evaluating fetal anatomy and tracking development by measuring
gestational age (GA), fetal weight, and head circumference.
In [9], researchers developed three deep­learning models to predict GA, typically estimat­
ing fetal age in days or weeks—a regression problem. They trained models using two
different modalities: static images and video and a combined approach. EfficientNet was
used for image­based predictions, while a combination of I3D and LSTM was employed
for video analysis. The image model was trained on standard fetal plane images from
all trimesters, while the video model utilized blind sweeps and fly­to videos. Final GA
estimates were generated at the individual case level.
Another study [18] explored the feasibility of using AI to assist non­experts in GA esti­
mation. Researchers demonstrated that a low­cost, AI­enabled device allowed novice
operators performing blind abdominal sweeps to achieve the same accuracy levels as
experienced sonographers conducting standard fetal biometry. Similarly, researchers in
[19] developed a convolutional neural network (CNN) based on ResNet­50 to predict GA
from three standard fetal biometry planes. Their model achieved mean absolute errors of
3.0 and 4.3 days for second­ and third­trimester pregnancies, respectively, outperforming
ultrasound­based clinical biometry methods available at the time.
Beyond GA estimation, AI has also been applied to birth weight prediction. One study [20]
used a deep belief network (DBN) model to predict birth weight, addressing the health risks
associated with both low birth weight (<2500g) and high birth weight (>4000g). The model
incorporated ultrasound­derived measurements (e.g., head circumference) and maternal
metrics (e.g., abdominal circumference). To handle class imbalance, the data was aug­
mented using the synthetic minority over­sampling technique (SMOTE), and two separate
DBN models were trained for birth weights below and above 4000g.
In [10], researchers extended this approach to predict newborn BMI using ultrasound
measurements combined with maternal and delivery data. Features such as biparietal
diameter, abdominal circumference, and estimated fetal weight were used to train mul­
tiple machine learning models, including linear regression, random forest, and artificial
neural networks with varying numbers of hidden layers. In this study, linear regression
and random forest models outperformed the neural networks in predicting newborn BMI.
Different researchers have used machine learning in various ways to solve estimation
problems. One key difference between their approaches is the type of data they used.
Some relied on tabular data obtained from sonography measurements, which requires ex­
perience in identifying and measuring specific anatomical structures. Others used video
data—especially blind sweeps and fly­to videos—which allows even less­experienced op­
erators to collect useful information. This is particularly valuable in low­resource settings
since AI can assist in making critical decisions without requiring expert­level skills. Using
video may also be easier than manually measuring anatomical structures, which typically
requires first identifying a standard plane (SP).
SPs are essential for assessing fetal growth and detecting abnormalities. However, lo­
cating them is time­consuming and highly dependent on the operator’s experience. To
address this, researchers in [21] developed an ensemble CNN that automatically detects
standard planes from freehand ultrasound videos. This greatly reduces the time needed
4
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:9==
to find the correct views, especially for less­experienced users.
A similar challenge exists in fetal heart imaging. FINE (Fetal Intelligent Navigation Echocar­
diography) is a method that uses 3D ultrasound data to generate nine standard echocar­
diographic views of the fetal heart [22]. Researchers also introduced a technique to ex­
plore surrounding structures within the same scan. In a later study [23], scientists com­
pared FINE to manual navigation and found that it was significantly more effective for
non­expert sonographers in obtaining standard cardiac views.
2.2
AI as Navigational Aid
One of the biggest challenges for novice sonographers is reconstructing a 3D map of
the fetus from 2D ultrasound slices, which is essential for navigating complex anatomical
structures [24]. To address this, researchers trained a convolutional neural network (CNN)
that estimates the fetus’s 6D pose (3D translation and rotation) based on fetal brain image
slices, effectively predicting fetal position.
A more advanced guidance system was developed in [25], where researchers equipped
an ultrasound probe with a motion sensor and designed an AI model, US­GuideNet, to
provide real­time movement guidance. The model combined sensor motion, probe ori­
entation, and video signals to predict the probe’s 3D rotation and assist the operator in
locating the standard plane.
Building on previous work, [26] utilized 3D ultrasound volumes to detect 22 fetal land­
marks, enabling accurate 3D pose estimation. This approach allows for precise mea­
surements and standard plane identification. However, 3D ultrasound remains signifi­
cantly more expensive than conventional freehand 2D ultrasound.
Figure 2.1: COLPUS protocol [8] shown as an example of sweep acquisition protocol.
The transducer is marked as a rectangle, and the path is shown as arrows.
To make fetal position estimation more accessible, [27] applied the CALOPUS protocol
[8] (Figure 2.1) to acquire ultrasound video sweeps. Researchers then annotated frames
to generate heatmaps representing anatomical structures, such as the fetal head, reveal­
ing distinct patterns for breech (head­up) and cephalic (head­down) positions. A different
study [28] explored ultrasound use in resource­limited settings, where a neural network
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
5
==PAGE:10==
was trained to classify frames based on whether they contained the fetal head. The study
presented these classifications as stacked bar charts, showing that the fetus is likely in a
head­down position if the head appears at the bottom of a sweep. These findings suggest
that even a simple detection of the fetal head within ultrasound sweeps can provide valu­
able insights into whether the fetus is in a breech or cephalic position. This approach is
particularly beneficial in settings where expert sonographers are unavailable, as it allows
AI to assist in basic but clinically important assessments.
Building on the approaches in [27] and [28], this work will test and extend a similar method
for determining whether the fetal position is in breech or cephalic position. However, we
take a different approach to head rotation estimation. Unlike studies such as [24] our
method focuses specifically on head rotation by analyzing anatomical features derived
from segmentation of brain structures. This enables a direct and explainable way to de­
termine not only whether the fetus is in a breech or cephalic position but also the precise
orientation of the head. By integrating blind sweep ultrasound with segmentation­based
analysis, our approach refines existing classification techniques while maintaining sim­
plicity and clinical practicality. This balance ensures that our method can be applied in
both expert and low­resource settings, making fetal position assessment more accessible
and reliable.
The next section will present the system’s architecture and details of the data collection
process.
6
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:11==
3
System Setup, Data Collection, and
Software Architecture
This chapter provides an overview of the system architecture, detailing the hardware
setup, software implementation, and data collection. Since clinicians are not expected
to have a technical background, the system is designed to be as user­friendly as possi­
ble, requiring minimal setup—essentially a plug­and­play solution.
3.1
System Setup
The physical setup begins with capturing the US video feed via an HDMI signal, which
needs to be converted for further processing. This is achieved using a signal converter
that allows the HDMI output to be plugged into the USB port of a portable server. Once
the US feed reaches the server, it is integrated into a dashboard, which can be accessed
over an internal network created by a Wi­Fi router connected to the server (Figure 3.1).
The dashboard serves as an interface where sonographers can view the live ultrasound
feed and save video sweeps for further AI integration. The setup follows the guidelines
outlined in [29].
Figure 3.1: Physical setup of devices needed to acquire sweeps. The HDMI signal from
the US probe is converted and transmitted to a portable server, where applications are
hosted. The portable server serves the dashboard, which is accessible via an internal
network. Devices connected to the network can then view the dashboard and display the
ultrasound video output.
3.2
Blind Sweep Protocol
To acquire the sweep videos, sonographers (or less experienced users) should follow
the blind sweep acquisition protocol (Figure 3.2) derived from [30]. There are 2 kinds of
sweeps ­ vertical (starting with V1 and finishing with V5) and horizontal (starting with H1
and finishing at H6). Together, they aim to cover most of the maternal abdomen area.
The sweeps should last 10 seconds, each traversing from the pubis to the uterine fun­
dus in 10 seconds. After each blind sweep acquisition, the sonographer immediately pro­
vided annotation labels. These labels indicated fetal presentation—categorized as ’down’
(cephalic) or ’up’ (breech)—and fetus rotation classified as ’left’ or ’right.’
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
7
==PAGE:12==
Figure 3.2: Blind sweep protocol for acquiring US videos. The operators should first follow
sweeps V1 to V5 and then H1 to H6, both in numerical order. The probe should always
be perpendicular to the direction of the sweep.
The blind sweep protocol animations are shown on the dashboard to assist users in data
acquisition. A detailed description of the dashboard’s interface and functionality can be
found in Section 3.4.1.
3.3
Data Collection and Annotation
3.3.1
Data Collection
As part of this thesis, real­life data needed to be acquired. Data was collected in person at
Rigshospitalet (Copenhagen University Hospital), Denmark, using the physical setup and
implemented software. The acquisition occurred alongside routine third­trimester check­
ups and measurements, ensuring that the process was efficient and minimally disruptive
for patients and sonographers.
The entire data collection process needed to be as quick and comfortable as possible.
I was personally responsible for setting up the system before patients arrived, which,
thanks to the implemented software and pre­configured Docker containers, took only 2–3
minutes to complete. The automated startup process allowed for a seamless connection
of all components, minimizing setup time. Figure 3.3 shows the data acquisition setup.
The process of acquiring the data varied from sonographer to sonographer, as no desig­
nated individual was responsible for conducting the sweeps. Instead, data collection was
integrated into the existing internal schedules and planned patient visits. While all par­
ticipating sonographers had scheduled appointments, not all of them had third­trimester
pregnancies on their register. As a result, the availability of a sonographer to perform the
sweeps depended on their individual schedule and workload.
Data collection took place after routine checkups and measurements. To ensure patient
comfort, sonographers performed all ultrasound scans while I was responsible for operat­
8
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3.3: Data acquisition setup in the clinic. The ultrasound machine was connected
to a portable server via an HDMI cable, which was first plugged into a converter box.
A computer connected to the same private Wi­Fi network as the server accessed the
dashboard interface remotely over the network.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
9
==PAGE:14==
ing the software and managing the recording process. The sweeps were recorded using
our custom­built setup and software. At the end of each session, I asked the clinicians
to state the fetal lie (cephalic or breech) and the direction the fetus was facing (either the
mother’s left or right, which appears inverted on the ultrasound scan).
In total, during 3 full days at the clinic, I participated in 14 patient visits, though one case
was excluded due to a 20­week gestational age, which was considered too early for this
study. This left us with blind sweep videos from 13 patients, each contributing 11 blind
sweeps, all recorded at a fixed duration of 10 seconds per video. Each case also included
a clinician­provided annotation of fetal lie and head orientation.
The final dataset consisted of:
• 12 cephalic cases and 1 breech case.
• 5 left­facing and 8 right­facing head orientations.
While we acknowledge the class imbalance, particularly the limited number of breech
presentations, this distribution is similar to real­world clinical data. Cephalic presentation
is significantly more common than breech in the third trimester ([31]), making our dataset
representative of typical prenatal ultrasound cases.
3.3.2
Data Annotation
There were two types of clinical annotations: fetal lie and head rotation. Fetal lie indi­
cated whether the fetus was in a breech or cephalic position, while head rotation speci­
fied whether the fetus was facing left or right. In addition to these clinical annotations, we
annotated all frames from the vertical sweeps. In the next chapter, we will evaluate the
model’s performance in recognizing the fetal head from these frames. To achieve this,
we needed to annotate every frame. In total, 65 10­second videos (5 videos for vertical
sweeps for each of 13 patients) were annotated for the presence of the head, resulting in
approximately 19.500 annotated frames. The positive annotation labels were classified
into two categories:
• Full head present ­ A full cross­section of the skull is visible in the frame, with at
least partial brain structures.
• Partial head present ­ Either the full skull cross­section is visible without any brain
structures, or the skull is only partially visible with or without brain structures.
Below in Figure 3.4, we show a sample of annotated frames along with their labels.
10
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.4: Sample Annotated Frames The top row contains frames annotated as ”Partial
head present,” while the bottom row contains frames labeled ”Full head present. ”In the
top row, the head is either visible without any brain structures or includes brain structures
but with the skull partially cropped out of the frame. The skull and at least some brain
structures are fully visible in the bottom row.
These two labels analyze whether the models perform differently when detecting a fully
visible head versus a partially visible one. These labels will be marked with different colors
and displayed alongside the model’s predictions in the next chapter.
In the next section, the implementation process for the software that was used to acquire
data will be described in detail.
3.4
Implementation
The implemented solution consists of 2 main parts.
1. Frontend Dashboard for Data Acquisition – A clinician­facing web interface that
guides users through the blind sweep acquisition process. It includes a real­time
ultrasound feed, three control buttons, a text input field, and an annotation banner.
The frontend is designed to be minimalistic for ease of use.
2. Backend System for Process Orchestration – Handles video streaming, sweep
saving, and overall dashboard logic, ensuring seamless operation in the background.
Docker containers are used for system orchestration. The solution runs on two containers:
one for video streaming and one for the dashboard, which includes both the frontend and
backend (Figure 3.7).
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
11
==PAGE:16==
3.4.1
Frontend
Figure 3.5: Frontend dashboard. The left side of the dashboard displays the live ultra­
sound feed, with an FPS (frames per second) indicator below it, showing the received
video’s frame rate. On the right side, an animated canvas guides the user through the
data acquisition protocol, with lines representing the ultrasound probe’s movement path.
Above the canvas, an input field allows patient identification (here, we use ”test” as the pa­
tient name). Below the canvas, two navigation buttons enable movement through sweeps,
while a third button allows clinicians to add annotations. At the bottom, an indicator shows
which sweep should be performed next.
The frontend dashboard (Figure 3.5) serves multiple functions. First, it displays a live US
feed along with the frame rate. Second, it guides the user through the data acquisition
process, providing an intuitive interface for saving sweeps and timing manual acquisitions
with animations. From the user’s perspective, the dashboard is divided into two sections.
One part displays the real­time US feed, ideally with minimal or no lag, replicating what
users would see on the ultrasound machine. The other part contains three key elements:
Input Field ­ This field allows the user to enter a patient surname or an anonymized
identifier, ensuring that each patient’s videos are saved in a unique folder. By default, the
input field is pre­filled with the exact timestamp of when the page was refreshed. This
design ensures that the sonographer can refresh the page to reset the sweep counter
when a new patient arrives. Since, by design, there is no option to revert previous sweeps,
refreshing the page should be the only way to start a new session. If no name is provided,
the system will still save the sweeps using the timestamp as a unique identifier.
Blind Sweep Guide ­ This feature consists of a set of animations created using JavaScript.
The animation is triggered by clicking the buttons described in the next paragraph. The
JavaScript canvas is designed to simplify the visualization of the third­trimester pregnancy
and is initially blank before the animation begins (Figure A.8). The animation defines five
vertical sweeps and six horizontal sweeps. The remaining logic manages the behavior
12
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.6: Screen after clicking the ”Annotate all” button. After being clicked, the button
makes a pop­up appear where the user can select the position and orientation of the fetus.
After annotations are saved, an indicator ”Annotations saved” below the button appears
of various animation elements, such as line curvature, dot position, and transitions be­
tween sweeps. The animation duration is precisely 10 seconds, aligning with the required
sweep time. Each time a button is clicked, the animation shows the path for the sweep
and indicates where the ultrasound probe should be positioned. A moving dot tracks the
ultrasound device’s position along the line, while dotted lines represent the probe’s sweep
path during the animation.
Buttons ­ The dashboard includes three buttons that control the sweep process and an­
notations:
1. Next Sweep – Starts the next sweep animation and triggers a callback to the back­
end, which begins video recording. Since each sweep lasts 10 seconds, the system
automatically saves the video to disk once the sweep is complete.
2. Repeat Sweep – Allows the user to repeat the current sweep if necessary (e.g., due
to a need to add gel, a manual mistake, or a software issue). This button functions
the same way as the ”Next Sweep” button but overwrites the previous recording of
the same sweep. Since there is no option to redo a past sweep once the next one
begins, the sonographer must ensure that the current sweep is correctly acquired
before proceeding.
3. Annotate All – Becomes available only after completing all sweeps. Clicking this
button opens a pop­up where annotations can be added and saved to the same
folder as the video sweeps. The annotation panel is shown in Figure 3.6.
Apart from the 3 aforementioned elements, some parts increase the usability of the dash­
board, like the sweep number indicator or displaying the frame rate.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
13
==PAGE:18==
3.4.2
Backed
The backend is composed of two main modules: ”Video Source” and ”Dashboard” (Figure
3.7).
• Video Source – Handles the streaming and encoding of the incoming ultrasound
video signal.
• Dashboard – Receives the video stream, hosts the dashboard interface, and man­
ages system logic, including button interactions and video sweep saving.
The Dashboard backend orchestrates the overall workflow, ensuring seamless communi­
cation between components. The following sections provide a detailed breakdown of the
behavior and functionality of these modules.
Figure 3.7: Diagram of interaction between components. It shows how different processes
are connected. 2 different modules are marketed as ”Video Source” and ”Dashboard,”
respectively. A specific color for the Dash app points to the logic encapsulated inside the
Python Dash app. As can be seen, the incoming video stream is rendered onto an HTML
canvas component outside Dash so it can work independently and faster.
Video Streamer
The video streamer’s role is to capture the video input from a device connected to an
HDMI cable. Firstly, the vidgear [32] is used to capture video streams from the device.
After that, each frame is cropped to preserve privacy (sometimes, at the edges of the
screen is the patient’s personal information). Next, the frames are encoded to binary end
emitted through socketio. Flask orchestrates how the frames are emitted, handling frame
rate, which can be acquired at a separate URL to ensure the app is properly streaming
data.
14
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:19==
Video saving
Ensuring reliable video sweep saving is crucial for maintaining high data quality. The final
solution went through three iterations to improve accuracy and consistency.
1. Initial Approach ­ The first method simply saved 10 seconds of video by capturing a
frame every 1/30 seconds, using Python’s time.time(). However, this proved impre­
cise, as the final video was only about 9.5 seconds long, with some frames missing.
This issue was primarily due to the inherent imprecision of the timing method and
the overhead associated with saving frames.
2. Improved Timing Method ­ In the next iteration, the time required to save each
frame was excluded from the total wait time, and time.perf_counter() was introduced
for higher precision. This improved the accuracy, bringing the video length closer to
10 seconds—but still not perfectly (e.g., 9.85 seconds).
3. Final Solution ­ Instead of relying on a strict 10­second duration, the final approach
focused on collecting a fixed number of frames (300 total). This ensured that, re­
gardless of slight variations in frame capture timing, the final video consistently con­
tained the expected number of frames. In testing, this approach introduced only a
fraction of a second delay and did not significantly impact the process. The only
potential issue would arise if the ”Next Sweep” button was clicked immediately after
the previous sweep, but given human reaction time, this was deemed negligible.
One remaining limitation of this approach is that if the video source freezes, duplicate
frames may be saved. This occurs because the system relies on time intervals for saving
frames rather than detecting unique frames. However, after optimizing the system, this
did not present a major issue.
Dashboard backend
The backend of the dashboard acts as the central orchestrator for all server­side opera­
tions. Developed using the Dash framework, it handles:
• Receiving and processing emitted video frames.
• Making frames available in the frontend interface.
• Managing button logic for sweep recording and annotation.
• Controlling the timing of sweeps.
• Saving video sweeps as MP4 files.
Dash enables seamless integration of both the user interface and backend logic using
only Python, simplifying development.
The process of saving a sweep follows these steps:
1. The SocketIO client continuously receives the latest video frame, decoding it from
the binary stream.
2. When the ”Start Sweep” button is clicked, a callback to the server is triggered, initi­
ating frame saving.
3. Frames are stored sequentially in a designated folder (e.g., based on patient name
or timestamp).
4. The system ensures that exactly 300 frames are captured, maintaining a precise
10­second video.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
15
==PAGE:20==
5. The backend tracks the current sweep number to maintain order and prevent errors.
6. Various checks and safeguards ensure smooth operation, such as preventing users
from advancing before completing all sweeps.
The Dash framework’s callback system allows different elements to interact dynamically.
When a state change occurs (e.g., a button is clicked, a frame is received, or a sweep is
completed), the backend logic automatically responds, triggering the appropriate actions.
The overall interaction flow is illustrated in Figure 3.7.
3.4.3
Additional Assets
Several additional modules are responsible for proper rendering and have been down­
loaded and integrated into the application to enable offline access. This optimization
slightly reduces load time and allows the application to function even in networks without
direct Internet access.
A key application component is a standalone JavaScript script that handles incoming
frame loading and processing. The script first waits for the DOM to fully load before
establishing a connection with SocketIO to receive encoded frames. Once received, the
script decodes the frames and renders them onto an HTML canvas element within the
dashboard. Since the DOM may load before the canvas element is available, the script
continuously checks for its presence until it is properly initialized.
Two elements were tested for rendering: an image and canvas elements. The canvas
element was ultimately chosen as it provides faster rendering of incoming frames. This
decision significantly reduced frame lag, ensuring smoother real­time visualization.
3.4.4
Dockerization
In a clinical setting, the application must function consistently across different environ­
ments. To achieve this, containerization is essential. Containers ensure that the appli­
cation runs the same way regardless of the operating system or hardware, improving
reproducibility and minimizing downtime by providing a controlled and isolated execution
environment.
The application runs using two containers:
• Video Source – Converts the input video into encoded frames and streams them.
• Dashboard – Receives the video stream, provides the user interface, and saves
frames into a series of video files.
Both containers are managed using Docker Compose. The ”Video Source” container
exposes port 5000, where it emits encoded video frames, while the ”Dashboard” container
runs on port 8050, serving as the entry point to the application.
To enhance security, the containers include environment variables that control the crop­
ping of the incoming video feed. This is particularly important because the full ultrasound
video frame may contain sensitive patient information, such as personal identification
numbers and names. By applying a cropping mechanism, only the ultrasound scan it­
self is processed and displayed, preventing the exposure of private data.
16
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:21==
4
Model Analysis
Various deep­learning architectures have been applied to ultrasound imaging, including
CNNs, transformer­based models, and hybrid approaches. In this work, we evaluate two
models: SonoNet [33] and PCBM [34]. The dataset used for these experiments was col­
lected using the system described in the previous chapter. To ensure patient anonymity,
subjects are referred to using alphabetical identifiers.
Selecting the right AI models for fetal ultrasound analysis requires balancing accuracy,
interpretability, and practical applicability in clinical settings. The following considerations
drove our choice of Progressive Concept Bottleneck Model (PCBM) and SonoNet:
• PCBM provides structured segmentation of anatomical landmarks (e.g., thalamus
and CSP), explaining the decision­making process. This is crucial in clinical AI,
where physicians need to verify predictions visually rather than relying on opaque
neural network outputs.
• SonoNet was trained specifically for standard fetal ultrasound plane detection, mak­
ing it a clinically relevant benchmark for our task. In addition, it is considered to be
one of the most relevant and influential open­source models in the field.
Since these models have already been tested in similar applications, they proved to be
strong candidates for our task, reducing the need for extensive retraining on unrelated
datasets.
4.1
SonoNet
SonoNet is a convolutional neural network (CNN) designed for real­time detection and lo­
calization of 13 fetal standard planes during mid­term pregnancy. The model architecture
is based on VGG16 [35].
As described by Baumgartner et al. [33], SonoNet predicts standard fetal scan planes and
provides corresponding bounding boxes. However, in this study, we focus exclusively on
the model’s classification capability rather than its localization output.
The original SonoNet implementation was developed using Theano and Lasagne frame­
works. However, for this study, we utilize a more recent PyTorch implementation, avail­
able at:
https://lab.compute.dtu.dk/jakambs/SonoNet_PyTorch.
4.1.1
Pre­Processing
The images were first cropped and resized to 288 × 224 pixels. In both the original imple­
mentation and the PyTorch version, the cropping process appeared to be inverted due to
using the PIL library, which resulted in a distorted aspect ratio—applying a wider crop to
taller images and vice versa.
To assess the impact of this issue, we tested the model with both the original and a cor­
rected preprocessing method. The model demonstrated consistent performance on the
provided test images and yielded similar results on our dataset in both cases. Therefore,
we adopted the preprocessing approach that preserved the original aspect ratio without
introducing distortion.
Following resizing and cropping, the images were converted to grayscale tensors and
normalized. Figure 4.1 shows the final processed images and corresponding labels.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.1: Test images provided with the SonoNet implementation. The dataset consists
of 13 different classes. The images shown have been preprocessed, including resizing
and cropping, converted to grayscale, and normalized.
4.1.2
Testing on acquired data
To ensure optimal performance of the SonoNet model, we applied the same preprocessing
steps described in Section 4.1.1. For each patient, 11 sweeps were recorded, resulting
in 11 videos containing 300 frames (captured at 30 frames per second over 10 seconds).
Each preprocessed frame was fed into the model, and the corresponding classification
label and confidence score were extracted. Figure 4.2 presents sample images with their
respective predictions.
18
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:23==
(a) Abdominal
(b) Femur
(c) Brain­CB
(d) Brain­TV
Figure 4.2: Sample frames with predicted class from SonoNet.
Figure 4.3: Predictions for patient B. In each column, there is a classification label, and
each row denotes for which sweep it was performed. Therefore, each image in the grid
shows how the confidence changed in time for each label and sweep number.
To assess the predictive power of SonoNet, we generated predictions for each frame
across all sweeps. As shown in Figure 4.3 (and in Figures A.1 and A.1 in Appendix),
not all labels appear with significant confidence. Several labels do not exceed a confi­
dence threshold of 0.1, limiting the model’s usability for certain applications. It is evident
that certain anatomical structures are recognized more frequently than others. The brain
(Brain (Cb.) ­view at cerebellum and Brain (Tv.) ­ view at posterior horn of the ventricle),
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
19
==PAGE:24==
femur, abdomen, and RVOT (Right Ventricular Outflow Tract Tachycardia) appear with
the highest confidence. Since patient B’s fetus was in a cephalic position, this pattern is
reflected in the predictions.
For sweep 0 (first row), brain­related confidence scores peak at the start before dropping
significantly. The first five sweeps (0–4) are performed vertically from the lower abdomen
upward, meaning that if high brain confidence appears at the start of any of these sweeps,
the fetus is likely in a head­down position. The remaining sweeps (5–10) are performed
horizontally from right to left.
Having this in mind, we will focus on the first 5 sweeps when analyzing the performance,
as this allows for a rapid classification of fetal position—determining whether the fetus is
in a breech or cephalic position by identifying whether brain­related predictions peak at
the beginning or end of the first sweep.
This property could be cross­validated by examining other anatomical predictions. For
instance, if brain predictions are prominent in sweep 0 while the femur appears in sweep
9 or 10, it strengthens the conclusion that the fetus is in a head­down orientation.
4.2
PCBM
The Concept Bottleneck Model (CBM) [36] is a neural network architecture designed to
improve interpretability by incorporating intermediate ”concepts” that explicitly inform the
decision­making process. Unlike traditional deep learning models, which rely on end­to­
end mapping from input to output, CBMs first identify relevant anatomical features before
making a final prediction. This interpretability is particularly valuable in fetal US, where
clinicians must trust AI­generated outputs.
In this study, we employ Progressive Concept Bottleneck Models (PCBM) [34], which
extend CBMs by integrating a segmentation­based approach. PCBMs are particularly
useful in clinical settings, as they first extract visual concepts using a segmentation­based
CNN, mapping them into a concept space. This concept space represents the presence
and properties of anatomical structures. For instance, a femur bone may be identified as
straight, elongated, and occupying a significant portion of the ultrasound image. At the
same time, a brain structure may be recognized based on its spatial relationships with
surrounding features.
The final stage of the PCBM pipeline uses these identified concepts and their co­occurrences
to make the ultimate classification decision. The model assigns each ultrasound frame
to one of nine classes, distinguishing between standard and non­standard planes. After
merging together SP and Non­SP classes, the model ultimately classifies images into four
anatomical structures (brain, femur, abdomen, and cervix) and a background class ­ for
comparison purposes, we will focus on the first three classes.
A key advantage of PCBMs is their ability to generate segmentation masks alongside clas­
sification labels, enabling precise anatomical localization. This is particularly beneficial for
predicting fetal head rotation, as extracting segmentation masks for brain structures al­
lows a more accurate head orientation estimation. This approach enhances the model’s
clinical applicability and will be further explored in Chapter 5.
4.2.1
Pre­Processing
The preprocessing pipeline for PCBM is straightforward. Each frame is converted into a
tensor, normalized across channels, resized to 224 × 288 pixels, and finally converted to
grayscale.
20
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:25==
(a) Abdominal
(b) Femur
(c) Head Non­SP
(c) Head SP
Figure 4.4: Sample frames with predicted class from PCBM.
4.2.2
Testing on acquired data
Like in the case of SonoNet, we processed all frames from all patients and all 11 sweeps
using the methodology described in the previous section. Figure 4.4 presents sample
images after preprocessing.
To compare the PCBM model’s inference with SonoNet, we present predictions for patient
B in Figure 4.5 (with additional detailed results for patients A and C provided in Appendix
A.10, A.11).
Since PCBM differentiates between standard planes (SP) and non­standard planes (non­
SP), additional post­processing steps were required to merge these categories into a
unified format. As our primary focus is on the anatomical structures present in each frame
rather than their classification as SP or non­SP, we aggregated the predictions into three
key anatomical classes: head, abdomen, and femur.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.5: Predictions for patient B. Each column represents a classification label (dif­
ferentiating between SP and non­SP), while each row corresponds to a specific sweep.
The grid visualizes how confidence scores evolved over time for each label and sweep.
The strongest confidence spike for the head occurs in sweep 0. Unlike SonoNet, the
abdomen is detected frequently, while the femur is not predicted almost at all. Given
these results, we conclude that head detection is the most reliable for further analysis.
4.3
Comparison
As shown in the plots, PCBM detects the abdomen more frequently (Figure 4.5) com­
pared to SonoNet, while SonoNet demonstrates higher confidence in femur classification
(Figure 4.3). Additionally, PCBM predictions appear more consistent and less noisy than
SonoNet’s. However, we focus only on detecting the fetal head within each frame for our
specific use case.
To directly compare SonoNet and PCBM, we selected and merged relevant probabilistic
outputs associated with head or brain detection and analyzed them side by side (Figure
4.6). Specifically, we merged the ”Brain­CB” and ”Brain­TV” classes from SonoNet into a
22
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:27==
single category and combined the ”Head­SP” and ”Head­Non­SP” classes from PCBM.
Theoretically, PCBM should detect more frames, as it classifies both SP and non­SP
instances, whereas SonoNet is trained exclusively to recognize standard planes.
To evaluate the model predictions, we used previously annotated vertical sweep videos
from all 13 patients, labeling the presence of the fetal head in each frame. The annota­
tion process is detailed in Section 3.3.2. Frames were categorized into two types: head
partially visible (or fully visible but no brain structures), denoted as green, and head fully
visible (with at least some brain structures) marked as red.
PCBM predictions
SonoNet predictions simplified
Figure 4.6: Predictions from vertical sweeps of patient B using SonoNet and PCBM mod­
els. The background colors represent manual head annotations, with red indicating full
head visibility (including brain structures) and green indicating partial head visibility (with­
out clear brain structures). The overlaid line plots show the confidence scores for head
detection from each model.
From a visual perspective, SonoNet predicts the head with lower confidence, and its prob­
ability distribution appears noisier. While there are instances where SonoNet correctly
identifies the head, its predictions do not consistently align with the ground truth annota­
tions. The model exhibits fluctuations, occasionally predicting the head’s presence when it
is not visible and displaying low or short­lasting confidence even when the head is present.
In contrast, PCBM demonstrates more reliable head detection. When the red background
(full head visibility) is present, PCBM’s confidence is consistently high. However, the con­
fidence scores are less distinct for green­labeled frames (partial head visibility). Never­
theless, when PCBM assigns high confidence, the head is generally present in the frame.
To quantify model performance, we evaluate predictions using metrics that are well­suited
for imbalanced data, including Precision, Recall, and F1­score:
Precision =
True Positives (TP)
True Positives (TP) + False Positives (FP)
(4.1)
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
23
==PAGE:28==
Recall =
True Positives (TP)
True Positives (TP) + False Negatives (FN)
(4.2)
F1­score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(4.3)
For ground truth annotations, we consider the head visible when either a full head (red)
or a partial head (green) is present. We also introduce an extended annotation strategy
to account for discrepancies between the manual annotation process and the model’s
learned representation.
In manual annotations, the head is typically labeled as present only when both the skull
and brain structures are visible. However, the model may detect the presence of a head
based solely on a rounded skull cross­section, even if brain structures are not fully visible.
We extend the annotation window by +/­ 3 or +/­ 5 frames to address this misalignment.
For example, if the head is annotated as visible in frames 13–25, we expand the range to
frames 10–28 (+/­ 3 extension) or frames 7–31 (+/­ 5 extension) to accommodate potential
model­detected head structures beyond the original annotation window.
The quantitative results for both models are presented in Table 4.1.
Model
Annotations
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Base
0.69
0.12
0.20
SonoNet
±3 frames
0.69
0.11
0.18
±5 frames
0.69
0.10
0.17
Base
0.89
0.52
0.66
PCBM
±3 frames
0.93
0.48
0.63
±5 frames
0.94
0.45
0.61
Table 4.1: Performance comparison of SonoNet and PCBM with different annotation win­
dow extensions. The ’Base’ condition represents the original ground truth annotations,
while ±3 frames extend the annotation window by 3 frames before and 3 frames after the
original labels. Similarly, ±5 frames extend the annotation window by 5 frames before
and 5 frames after the original labels.
Given its higher precision, recall, and F1 score, these results suggest that PCBM is bet­
ter suited for detecting the head on our data. The annotation window extension strategy
proved effective, particularly for PCBM, as the model predicts the head whenever a skull
mask is present in the frame—a criterion that did not always align with the manual anno­
tation requirements for head visibility. In the next section, we leverage PCBM for fetal lie
prediction.
4.4
Summary of Analysis
In this chapter, we evaluated SonoNet and PCBM for fetal head detection using blind
sweep ultrasound videos. The models were compared based on their prediction confi­
dence, alignment with ground truth annotations, and overall reliability in detecting head
presence across frames. In particular:
• PCBM demonstrated higher confidence and consistency in detecting the fetal head
than SonoNet, which exhibited noisier predictions and occasional misclassification.
24
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:29==
• SonoNet struggled with false positives and lower confidence scores, making it less
reliable for our use case.
• Extending the annotation window (+/­ 3 or +/­ 5 frames) improved alignment with
PCBM predictions, as the model frequently identified the head based on skull pres­
ence, even when brain structures were not fully visible.
• Quantitative evaluation using Precision, Recall, and F1­score confirmed PCBM’s
advantage, leading to its selection for fetal lie prediction.
Overall, PCBM outperformed SonoNet regarding prediction stability and anatomical rele­
vance, making it the preferred model for further fetal position estimation tasks.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
25
==PAGE:30==
5
Prediction on blind sweeps
In this chapter, we examine the task of predicting fetal lie and head rotation. We present
the methodology and evaluate the approach on the previously acquired dataset.
5.1
Types of prediction
This section outlines the concepts and details of the implementation involved in detecting
fetal position in the womb. The complexity of this task arises from the fetus having three
degrees of freedom—meaning it can be oriented along any direction in the x, y, and z
axes. However, due to time constraints and the challenges of acquiring labeled data, this
study focuses on a simplified version of the problem:
1. Determining fetal head position – Classifying fetal lie ­ whether the fetus is positioned
head­up or down.
2. Estimating head orientation – Identifying whether the fetus is facing left or right, or
more generally, computing the head’s angle on a 2D plane (0° to 359° relative to a
neutral position).
The following sections describe the assumptions, implementation details, and evaluation
process for these predictions, all of which are performed using the PCBM model.
5.2
Fetal Lie Prediction
5.2.1
Approach
To predict head orientation, we focus on vertical sweeps, as they offer the highest likeli­
hood of capturing the head in a standard plane or an identifiable position. These sweeps
provide the greatest probability of detecting the head within the ultrasound frames.
Due to the limited dataset and the lack of a high quantity of diverse per­frame annotations,
training a deep­learning model for direct fetal position estimation is not feasible. However,
we leverage the fact that each frame includes a probability score for head detection.
Our approach is inspired by Gleed et al. [27], who computed statistical patterns of head
occurrence based on sweep data. Given that our sweep protocol, dataset size, and avail­
able annotations differ, we used pre­generated statistical features rather than generating
new patterns from our dataset.
Considering a central vertical scan moving from the lower abdomen upward. If the fetus
is in a head­down position, we expect to observe a spike in head prediction probability
at the beginning of the scan. This pattern is evident, for example, in the first sweep of
patient B (Figure 4.5).
The challenge lies in determining fetal head position based solely on a time­series curve
of head prediction confidence over 300 frames. A straightforward and reliable approach is
to generate a set of expected functions, modeling how head detection confidence should
behave under different fetal positions. These distributions are designed to be skewed
either left or right, reflecting different head orientations along the scan.
We categorize these patterns into three main groups:
1. Simple prediction patterns
26
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:31==
• Linear
• Quadratic
• Exponential
2. Step functions
• Function with step after 50 frames
• Function with step after 100 frames
• Function with step after 150 frames
3. Beta distribution Curves
• α = 2, β = 8
• α = 3, β = 7
• α = 4, β = 6
• The right­skewed Beta distribution curves have the parameters swapped
Figure 5.1 illustrates the three groups of generated patterns, each defined by different
parameter settings. These parameters are chosen to ensure symmetry around frame
150, meaning that the left­ and right­skewed patterns are mirrored reflections of each
other.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.1: Different prediction patterns. (a) Displays linear, quadratic, and exponential
patterns, each generated with different parameters. (b) Shows step function patterns,
varying based on the position of the step change. (c) Visualizes Beta distribution curves,
each defined by specific parameter settings.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
27
==PAGE:32==
To make a prediction, we require a metric that quantifies the similarity between the ob­
served head probability over time and the generated patterns. The most suitable choice,
in our opinion, is the cosine similarity metric.
Cosine Similarity = cos(θ) =
A · B
∥A∥∥B∥=
Pn
i=1 AiBi
qPn
i=1 A2
i
qPn
i=1 B2
i
By representing the observed head probability over time as a vector of length 300 (A),
we can compare it to each generated pattern, represented as a vector (B). The similar­
ity between these vectors is measured using the cosine similarity metric, allowing us to
determine which generated pattern most closely matches the observed data.
To make a prediction, we select the generated pattern with the highest cosine similarity
(the lowest angular distance) to the observed probability distribution.
Function with step after 50 frames
Exponential function
Figure 5.2: Sweeps from 2 different patients. Denoted with orange color is observed
probability, and blue is the closest pattern in cosine metric. Other patterns are shown as
light gray lines.
This approach offers an additional advantage: it allows us to quantify prediction certainty
by comparing the similarity scores of the best­matching left and right patterns.
• If the cosine similarity scores for both the left and right patterns are close, the pre­
diction is more uncertain.
• If the observed probability vector has high similarity to the closest left pattern and
low similarity to the closest right pattern (or vice versa), the model’s confidence in
the predicted fetal head position is higher.
In our case, we analyze five vertical sweeps (as shown in Figure 4.6). To this end, we
developed an algorithm that, based on all five vertical sweeps from a patient, infers the
observed head confidence and makes a prediction along with a confidence score.
5.2.2
Algorithm
The first algorithm (1) determines the head position for each individual sweep by com­
paring observed probability sequences to predefined left and right patterns using cosine
similarity. A confidence score is assigned based on the difference between the best­
matching patterns, ensuring that the model accounts for uncertain cases where similarity
scores are close. This step ensures that the model does not make unreliable predictions
when the fetal head is not clearly visible in the sweep.
28
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:33==
Algorithm 1 Predicting fetal lie with uncertainty
Require: Observed probability sequence P
Ensure: Predicted head position and confidence
1: function ComputeSimilarity(P, patterns)
2:
Initialize empty lists for left and right pattern similarities
3:
for each pattern p in left patterns do
4:
Compute similarity score SL = cosine similarity(P, p)
5:
Store (p, SL) in left similarity list
6:
end for
7:
for each pattern p in right patterns do
8:
Compute similarity score SR = cosine similarity(P, p)
9:
Store (p, SR) in right similarity list
10:
end for
11:
Smax = max(max(SL), max(SR))
▷Find the highest similarity score
12:
if Smax > 0 then
13:
Normalize SL = SL/Smax
14:
Normalize SR = SR/Smax
15:
end if
16:
return left and right similarity lists
17: end function
18:
19: function PredictHeadPosition(P, min_occurrence)
20:
if head probability appears too infrequently in P then
21:
return uncertain
22:
end if
23:
(SL, SR) = ComputeSimilarity(P, patterns)
24:
if max similarity from SL equals max similarity from SR then
25:
return uncertain
26:
end if
27:
best_similarity = max(max(SL), max(SR))
28:
certainty = | max(SL) −max(SR)|
29:
if max(SL) > max(SR) then
30:
return 1, certainty
▷1 equals head­down
31:
else
32:
return ­1, certainty
▷­1 equals head­up
33:
end if
34: end function
35:
The second algorithm (2) aggregates the predictions from all sweeps of a given pa­
tient. Different sweeps may yield different predictions due to variability in ultrasound im­
ages, making it necessary to combine results using a weighted sum based on confidence
scores. The final prediction is determined by evaluating the net confidence across all
sweeps, ensuring that stronger predictions outweigh less certain ones.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
29
==PAGE:34==
Algorithm 2 Final Prediction for a Single Patient
Require: Set of sweeps S for a given patient
Ensure: Final head position prediction for the patient
1: function PredictForAllSweeps(S)
2:
Initialize empty list predictions
3:
for each sweep s in S do
4:
result = PredictHeadPosition(s)
5:
if result is not uncertain then
6:
Store (s, result) in predictions
7:
end if
8:
end for
9:
return predictions
10: end function
11:
12: function AggregateFinalPrediction(predictions)
13:
Compute count of head­down predictions: N+
14:
Compute count of head­up predictions: N−
15:
Compute total certainty for head­down: C+ = sum of certainty scores for positive
predictions
16:
Compute total certainty for head­up: C−= sum of certainty scores for negative
predictions
17:
if N−= 0 then
18:
return head down, C+
19:
else if N−= 0 then
20:
return head up, C−
21:
else if N+ = N−then
22:
if C+ > C−then
23:
return head down, C+ −C−
24:
else
25:
return head up, C−−C+
26:
end if
27:
else
28:
return uncertain, 0
29:
end if
30: end function
The algorithms provide us with the final prediction and the confidence score for each pa­
tient based on outputs of per­sweep results. The confidence for each sweep is computed
based on the cosine similarity between each pattern and the head prediction probability.
This can be expressed as:
confidence =
max(cos(CPleft, Probhead)) −max(cos(CPright, Probhead))

where cos is cosine similarity, CPleft is the closest matching pattern from the left group,
and CPright is the closest matching pattern from the right group, respectively. Given the
predictions and confidence values, the final prediction is computed as a weighted sum:
TotalConfidencepatient =
X
s=sweep
Predictions × confidences
30
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:35==
The final prediction is then determined as:
FinalPrediction =





−1
TotalConfidence < 0
1
TotalConfidence > 0
0
TotalConfidence = 0
Where Prediction ∈{−1, 1}.
There are multiple advantages of this approach:
• Incorporates Uncertainty ­ Avoids making strong predictions in ambiguous cases.
• Accounts for Variability Across Sweeps ­ Aggregates multiple observations to
improve accuracy.
• Uses a Weighted Confidence Measure ­ Ensures that highly confident predictions
have a greater impact.
• Interpretable Framework ­ Provides an explainable decision­making process rather
than a black­box approach.
In the next section, we will take a closer look at detailed algorithm outputs for some pa­
tients along with provided clinical annotations.
5.2.3
Results
To build intuition about the algorithm’s output, we present a plot (Figure 5.3) showing the
closest patterns and their associated certainty scores.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
31
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.3: Head prediction probabilities along with matched patterns are presented.
Columns represent selected patients, while rows correspond to consecutive sweeps. The
displayed confidence values are derived from the difference in cosine similarities between
the two best­matching patterns from the left and right groups. When the head is unde­
tected in any frame, its position is replaced by a blank plot labeled ”No head prediction.”
In Figure 5.3, we selected three patients with the most interesting head prediction confi­
dence values.
To take a closer look at Figure 5.3, let’s focus on patient M, sweep 2. The confidence
score in this case is low, yet the selected pattern clearly belongs to the left group. This
32
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:37==
occurs because the number of head predictions is relatively small—only a few are present,
while the rest fluctuate around zero. As a result, the cosine similarity to the left pattern is
influenced, and the right pattern is not significantly distant. If the number of head predic­
tions was higher—such as inpatient M, sweep 4—then the confidence score would also
be higher.
Therefore, based on the analysis of the plots in Figure 5.3, we can conclude that for the
confidence score to be higher, the head probability must be more strongly biased toward
one side and persist for more than just a few frames.
The final prediction for a patient is computed as a weighted sum of predictions and con­
fidence scores across all sweeps. In our case, all patient sweeps leaned toward a single
side (10 head­downs, 1 head­up), allowing the algorithm to predict all fetal lies correctly.
The total certainty score for each patient reflects the sum of individual certainty scores
across sweeps. In the case of most patients, the head was observed in multiple sweeps,
leading to higher overall certainty.
Patient
Final Prediction
Total Certainty
Ground Truth
patient A
1
1.29
1
patient B
1
1.66
1
patient C
1
0.80
1
patient D
1
2.21
1
patient E
­1
1.32
­1
patient F
1
0.61
1
patient G
1
2.63
1
patient H
­
­
1
patient I
1
1.80
1
patient J
1
1.09
1
patient K
­
­
1
patient L
1
0.84
1
patient M
1
2.67
1
Table 5.1: A prediction of 1 indicates that the patient is head­down (cephalic), while ­1
indicates head­up (breech). No predictions were made for patients H and K, as no frames
were identified as containing the head. This outcome is expected, as the annotation
process also did not identify any head­containing frames for these patients. All patients
were correctly classified according to the annotations provided by clinicians.
5.2.4
Summary
To summarize, we presented an interpretable approach to distinguishing between cephalic
and breech fetal lies using vertical blind sweeps. The method requires that the model
detect only the fetal head in the frames. Additionally, it calculates a certainty score to
indicate the likelihood of each prediction. Ultimately, the method works by aggregating
confidence scores across vertical sweeps to produce a final prediction. We acknowledge
that the number of cases used to test this method is not sufficient to establish its clinical
reliability. However, the results are encouraging, and further testing is necessary.
5.3
Head rotation prediction
5.3.1
Approach
Extracting head rotation is crucial for determining whether the fetus is facing right or left.
We propose a method based on extracting masks of two distinct brain structures: the
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
33
==PAGE:38==
thalamus and the cavum septi pellucidi (CSP).
In fetal ultrasound imaging, the thalamus appears as two oval structures symmetrically
positioned within the brain. The CSP is a fluid­filled space located between the two lat­
eral ventricles of the brain. It is commonly observed in fetal ultrasounds and serves as an
important anatomical marker for assessing normal brain development. The CSP lies an­
terior (in front of) the thalamus and appears as a thin, elongated, anechoic (dark) structure
in ultrasound images.
These structures are particularly well visible on the standard head plane, though not ex­
clusively. If the masks are extracted correctly, we can precisely determine their positions
and use them to predict fetal head rotation.
Let’s examine an example in Figure 5.4.
Frame
Mask with an arrow
Figure 5.4: A frame and corresponding masks for the thalamus, CSP, and part of the
skull are shown side by side, with the direction indicated. An arrow originates from the
thalamus and extends to the CSP.
To predict head rotation, we can analyze two key brain structures: the thalamus and the
CSP. Given that the thalamus has a curved structure and the CSP is always located ante­
rior to the thalamus, we can design an algorithm that leverages these spatial relationships
to determine the direction of head rotation.
5.3.2
Algorithm
To accurately predict the orientation, we developed an Algorithm 3 that determines fetal
head direction based on masks of brain structures. The algorithm considers two different
cases: one where both the thalamus and CSP are visible and another where only the
thalamus is detected.
Additionally, the algorithm includes safeguards to ensure that predictions are not made
based on small or fragmented masks.
34
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:39==
Algorithm 3 Predicting Angle from Segmented Brain Structures
Require: Frame from ultrasound sweep
Ensure: Estimated fetal head rotation angle
1: function ExtractMask(frame)
2:
mask = Extract segmentation mask from the frame
3:
return mask
4: end function
5:
6: function SegmentRegions(mask)
7:
thalamus, CSP = Identify and extract thalamus and CSP masks
8:
return thalamus, CSP
9: end function
10:
11: function ComputeAngle(thalamus, CSP)
12:
if Both regions are visible then
13:
thalamus_skeleton = Skeletonize(thalamus)
14:
angle = CalculateAngle(thalamus_skeleton, CSP)
15:
16:
else if Only thalamus is visible then
17:
largest_component = GetLargestComponent(thalamus)
18:
solidity = MeasureSolidity(largest_component)
19:
points = ExtractPointsOfInterest(largest_component)
20:
21:
if Validate(points, solidity) then
22:
angle = CalculateAnglePoints(points)
23:
else
24:
angle = None
25:
end if
26:
else
27:
angle = None
28:
end if
29:
return angle
30: end function
31:
32: function ComputeFinalAngle(angles)
33:
if HasValidResults(angles) then
34:
filtered_angles = FilterAngles(angles)
35:
final_angle = CalculateCircularMean(filtered_angles)
36:
37:
else
38:
final_angle = None
39:
end if
40:
return final_angle
41: end function
Additionally to the algorithm, we are explaining the used functions in detail:
• ExtractMask(frame): Extracts the raw mask data from the frame predictions.
• SegmentRegions(mask): Segments the mask into binary CSP and thalamus re­
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
35
==PAGE:40==
gions.
• IsVisible(region): Checks if a region is visible (non­empty) in the mask.
• bothRegionsVisible(CSP, thalamus): Check if both regions are visible and ensure
that the thalamus mask consists of a single component. If multiple components
exist, the largest one is selected.
• Skeletonize(region): Computes the skeleton (medial axis) of a binary region.
• CalculateAngle(CSP, thalamus_skeleton): Calculates the angle between the tha­
lamus skeleton graph center and the CSP center of mass. The skeleton is repre­
sented as an adjacency graph of pixels, including diagonal connections, and the
graph center is measured. This method leverages the expected structural proper­
ties of the thalamus (curved and thin) and CSP (more blob­like).
• GetLargestComponent(region): Extracts the largest connected component in a
binary region.
• MeasureSolidity(region): Computes the solidity of a region to assess its concavity.
Solidity is measured as the ratio of pixels in the mask to the pixels in its convex hull.
This check helps determine if the thalamus retains its expected curved shape (see
a green region in Figure 5.4). If the solidity score is high, the region may exhibit an
undesired concave shape, indicating a partial mask of the thalamus.
• ExtractPointsOfInterest(region): Extracts key points from the region, including
the graph center, endpoints, and midpoint :
– Graph center: The center of the graph obtained by skeletonizing the mask.
– Endpoints: The extreme points of the skeletonized mask of the thalamus. The
method for selecting endpoint pixels is described further in this section.
– Midpoint: The point equidistant from both endpoints of the graph.
• Validate(points, solidity): Validates whether the region meets specific criteria based
on:
– Distance between the graph center and midpoint.
– Concavity (solidity score).
– Region size.
Quartiles of these statistics were measured and used to define lower and upper
boundaries for validation (e.g., lower boundaries for distance and pixel count, upper
boundary for solidity).
• CalculateAnglePoints(points): Computes the angle using the midpoint and graph
center.
• FilterAngles: Filters angles based on predefined validation checks. The details of
these checks are discussed later in this section.
• CalculateCircularMean(angles): Computes the circular mean of angles, ensuring
correct handling of angular values on a circle. This approach accounts for circularity,
such that the difference between 359° and 1° is correctly treated as 1°, as illustrated
in Figure A.7 in the Appendix.
36
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:41==
When we calculate the endpoints for the thalamus shape, we heavily rely on endpoints
being identified. To do this correctly, we use the method described below.
1. Skeleton Matrix: Let S be the binary skeleton matrix of size m × n (in our case 3 × 3),
where:
S(i, j) =
(
1,
if pixel (i, j) is part of the skeleton,
0,
otherwise.
2. Kernel: The convolution kernel K is defined as:
K =


1
1
1
1
10
1
1
1
1

.
The convolution C of the skeleton S with the kernel K is given by:
C(i, j) =
1
X
u=−1
1
X
v=−1
S(i + u, j + v) · K(u + 2, v + 2),
where: ­ (i, j) are pixel coordinates in S, ­ (u, v) are offsets in the kernel, and ­ S(i+u, j +
v) = 0 if (i + u, j + v) is outside the bounds of S.
A pixel (i, j) is identified as an endpoint if:
C(i, j) = 11.
The coordinates of the endpoints are determined as:
Endpoints = {(i, j) | C(i, j) = 11}.
Checks and steps are in place to ensure that the correct masks are selected for angle
computation. This is achieved by considering all angles produced by sweeps for a single
patient. Some of the most important steps are as follows:
• If both the CSP and thalamus are detected, only the angles derived from these
structures are used. Angles produced solely by the thalamus are disregarded.
• If neither the CSP nor the thalamus is detected in the patient, only the thalamus
shape is considered for angle computation. However, the following caveats apply:
– If the thalamus is partitioned (i.e., there is more than one connected component
in the mask), the frame is disregarded.
– If the thalamus produces more than two endpoints, the frame is disregarded.
– As previously mentioned, statistical thresholds were determined by analyzing
observed quartiles. If the computed statistics fall outside the allowed ranges,
the frame is disregarded. A frame will not produce an angle if:
* The solidity is below 0.82.
* The pixel distance between the midpoint and graph center is less than
1.09.
* The total number of pixels is less than 55.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
37
==PAGE:42==
At the core of this method is the observation that the thalamus and CSP have a consistent
anatomical arrangement. By analyzing their relative positions, we can infer whether the
fetus is facing left or right without requiring complex machine learning models that may
lack interpretability. This approach ensures that predictions remain grounded in biological
principles, making them both explainable and clinically meaningful.
Furthermore, fetal ultrasound imaging is highly variable, with factors such as fetal move­
ment, scan angle, and image quality influencing visibility. Our algorithm is designed to
adapt to these challenges by handling cases where structures may be partially visible or
entirely missing. Instead of relying on a single frame, we aggregate information across
multiple ultrasound sweeps, ensuring greater robustness and reliability in the final predic­
tion.
When designing the algorithms, we ensured some key aspects:
• Anatomically Grounded ­ The method relies on well­established brain structures,
making it interpretable and explainable.
• Handles Partial Visibility ­ Even if one structure (e.g., the CSP) is missing, the
algorithm can still estimate head rotation.
• Robust to Variability ­ By using multiple sweeps and filtering noisy data, the ap­
proach is resistant to errors in individual frames.
• Avoids Unreliable Predictions ­ It includes safeguards to prevent misleading out­
puts based on poor­quality segmentations.
In the next section, we will test the algorithm on our dataset.
5.3.3
Results
To evaluate the algorithm on our dataset, we applied it to all acquired sweeps and frames,
predicting the head rotation angles for each patient.
In Figure 5.5, we present a selected frame from one patient per case, visualizing the
algorithm’s output. This illustration highlights how the method determines head orientation
based on the segmented brain structures.
38
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:43==
A ­ facing right
B ­ facing left
C ­ facing left
D ­ facing right
E ­ facing left
F ­ facing right
G ­ facing right
J ­ facing right
M ­ facing left
Figure 5.5: The proposed method accurately predicts the orientation of the fetal head.
The data shows that in 9 out of 11 patient cases where the brain was visible in the frames
of sweeps, the method successfully determined the orientation. In the visual represen­
tations, the thalamus mask is shown in yellow, while the CSP mask is shown in blue.
An arrow extends from the thalamus graph center to either the CSP center of mass or
the thalamus midpoint, depending on visibility. Clinical annotations are provided at the
bottom of each figure. The facing indicator specifies which side of the mother’s body the
fetus is facing.
All patient predictions for each frame are aggregated, and the mean angle is computed.
The output predictions of the algorithm can be viewed in the Table 5.2 below:
All predictions for the patients listed in Table 5.2 are correct. However, four predictions
are missing. For patients H and K, the missing predictions are due to the absence of the
head and brain structures in all sweeps. This can be seen in Figure 4.6, where no frames
were annotated as containing the head.
For patients I and L, the head was visible, and PCBM successfully recognized the rounded
skull and inferred skull masks from the frames. However, it failed to generate the thalamus
and CSP masks despite annotations confirming the full presence of the head and at least
partial visibility of brain structures.
Apart from the validity of predictions, we wanted to ensure that the checks in the algorithm
were reasonable and effective. To dig deeper, we have plotted some statistics derived
from the thalamus mask (Figure 5.6).
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
39
==PAGE:44==
Patient
Angle (degrees)
Prediction
Ground Truth
Patient A
7.08
Right
Right
Patient B
152.5
Left
Left
Patient C
178.13
Left
Left
Patient D
347.74
Right
Right
Patient E
195.95
Left
Left
Patient F
326.31
Right
Right
Patient G
15.75
Right
Right
Patient H
­
­
Left
Patient I
­
­
Right
Patient J
342.97
Right
Right
Patient K
­
­
Right
Patient L
­
­
Right
Patient M
174.56
Left
Left
Table 5.2: Measured angles for each patient. The prediction is based on the angle. The
ground truth is clinician­annotated by the end of the acquisition sweep.
(a) Distance vs Solidity
(b) Solidity vs Num. of Pixels
(c) Distance vs Num. of Pixels
Figure 5.6: Statistics of the thalamus and its statistics of interest derived from masks.
Their correlations are shown as solid lines. The color indicates the method from which
the valid angle was computed ­ either thalamus and CSP or only thalamus. CSP does
not contribute to the statistics, only the thalamus.
As expected, solidity, pixel distance, and the number of pixels are correlated with each
other. For all patients, we extracted the valid angles and measured these statistics.
40
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:45==
From Figure 5.6, we observe several key correlations:
• Distance and Solidity (subplot a) ­ Distance is negatively correlated with solidity.
This makes sense because a higher distance implies that the shape is more con­
cave, meaning its curvature is more pronounced. When curvature is more evident,
the midpoint (defined as the middle point between endpoints) is naturally farther
from the graph center.
• Solidity and Number of Pixels (subplot b) ­ Solidity is also correlated with the
number of pixels. As the pixel count increases, the shape becomes less solid. This
occurs because a low pixel count often results in a fragmented shape, which appears
less concave.
• Distance and Number of Pixels (subplot c) ­ Distance and the number of pixels
are positively correlated. This relationship can be inferred from their individual cor­
relations with solidity, but it also follows logically: if the thalamus is larger and more
curved, the distance from the graph center to the midpoint will also be greater.
These simple yet important observations allowed us to ensure validity checks in the algo­
rithm are important and crucial.
5.3.4
Summary
This section introduces a novel approach to predicting fetal head rotation based on the
spatial relationships between two key brain structures: the thalamus and the CSP. Given
their consistent anatomical positioning, an algorithm was developed to extract these struc­
tures from ultrasound images and compute the fetal head rotation angle. The algorithm
has 2 key steps. The first one is feature extraction ­ the thalamus and CSP are seg­
mented from ultrasound frames using PCBM, and their relative positioning is analyzed.
The second one is angle computation ­ if both structures are present, the thalamus skele­
ton and the CSP center of mass are used to determine the rotation angle. If only the
thalamus is visible, additional shape­based features (solidity, endpoints, and curvature)
are used to infer the direction. The algorithm includes validation checks to ensure pre­
dictions are reliable and not based on incomplete or fragmented masks. These checks
discard cases where the segmentation is inconsistent or does not meet quality thresholds.
This approach has some important advantages:
• The method provides a reliable and interpretable way to infer fetal head rotation.
• It works effectively even in cases where only partial structures are visible.
• The use of validation checks and statistical analysis enhances accuracy and pre­
vents unreliable predictions.
• The algorithm successfully classified all cases with visible brain structures, while
missing predictions only occurred due to a lack of visible anatomy in some sweeps.
By leveraging both anatomical consistency and statistical validation, this method offers
a practical and interpretable solution for determining fetal head rotation from ultrasound
scans.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
41
==PAGE:46==
6
Discussion
This thesis introduced several key components aimed at democratizing ultrasound (US)
usage, reducing the cognitive load on sonographers, and showing potential for usage by
less experienced sonographers.
The first major step was developing an automated blind sweep data collection system.
The dashboard ensured that ultrasound sweeps were performed consistently and in a
standardized manner, reducing variability in the collected data. This structured acquisition
process minimized operator­dependent inconsistencies and resulted in a more uniform
dataset, which is crucial for training reliable machine learning models. Designed to be
intuitive and user­friendly, the dashboard required minimal sonographer training. Its web­
based architecture made it adaptable to different ultrasound machines and easily scalable
to multiple clinical settings. Additionally, the plug­and­play design allowed for quick setup,
ensuring that the system could be accessed from any device connected to the same Wi­Fi
network as the portable server. This dashboard and its setup were not only valuable for
our specific use case but also had the potential to support other downstream tasks by
providing a structured and standardized data collection framework.
The second step was testing and analyzing the models. We have evaluated the Pro­
gressive Concept Bottleneck Model (PCBM), which consistently outperformed SonoNet
in detecting fetal brain structures. By providing segmentation masks rather than simple
classifications, PCBM allowed for a more interpretable and structured approach to head
orientation estimation. This made the AI model’s outputs more meaningful, as they aligned
well with clinical knowledge of fetal anatomy. While segmentation quality varied depend­
ing on image clarity and fetal position, the ability to extract thalamus and CSP structures
was a major step forward in integrating AI into ultrasound interpretation and, in our case,
in predicting fetal head rotation.
The fetal lie detection method proved to be a strong component of the study, successfully
determining whether the fetus was in a cephalic (head down) or breech (head up) position
using vertical blind sweeps. The method could distinguish between different fetal orien­
tations without requiring extensive labeled data by analyzing the probability distribution
of head detections across frames and comparing them to predefined patterns. One of
its key strengths was its interpretability—rather than relying on a black­box AI model, the
approach used a structured, probabilistic framework based on the natural progression of
ultrasound sweeps. This ensured predictions were grounded in observable anatomical
features rather than opaque machine learning outputs. Additionally, the model incorpo­
rated uncertainty estimation, allowing it to flag ambiguous cases rather than making unre­
liable predictions. The method performed well even with a small dataset, demonstrating
that fetal lie detection can be achieved with relatively simple yet effective computational
techniques. By combining automated ultrasound data collection with this structured anal­
ysis, the study provided a promising pathway for AI­assisted fetal positioning, particularly
in settings where expert sonographers may not be available. This method also does not
need to rely on a single model like PCBM and could benefit from training smaller and
faster models that would be specialized in only predicting whether the head is present in
a frame.
The second prediction method proved to be useful in predicting fetal head rotation. Instead
of relying on traditional deep learning classification, which often functions as a black­
42
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:47==
box model, this method used anatomical relationships between the thalamus and CSP to
infer rotation. This approach was highly interpretable, providing measurable anatomical
reasoning for each prediction. Not forcing predictions in uncertain cases also improved
robustness, ensuring that unreliable estimates were filtered out rather than misleading
clinicians.
Our results demonstrate the potential of AI for ultrasound navigation. However, several
limitations must be addressed before clinical deployment.
6.1
Limitations
Both prediction methods were tested on a small dataset collected from a single clinic con­
sisting of 13 patients. Due to this limited sample size, the evaluation of these methods
remains constrained. However, the results demonstrate their potential for further valida­
tion on a larger and more diverse dataset.
The proposed fetal lie prediction method builds on previous research, enhancing the ex­
isting approach by introducing an uncertainty score. In our dataset, the method performed
well, correctly classifying all patients. However, due to a significant class imbalance (12
cephalic, 1 breech), its effectiveness in predicting breech positions remains uncertain.
This limitation could stem from anatomical differences in maternal scans for breech pre­
sentations or different probabilistic curve distributions, which may result in lower prediction
confidence for breech cases.
A similar limitation applies to head rotation prediction. Additionally, the data acquisition
process presents a constraint—if brain structures are not clearly visible, the model cannot
extract the necessary segmentation masks for prediction. This issue occurred in two
cases within our dataset. However, it is important to note that the model did not fail when
the brain structures were clearly visible. This suggests that data quality rather than model
performance is the primary challenge. To improve reliability, future efforts should ensure
high­quality data acquisition, including maintaining stable probe motion and optimizing
ultrasound machine settings to capture the clearest possible images.
6.2
Future works
The most effective way to improve analysis quality and further evaluate the algorithms for
future work would be to collect a larger and more diverse dataset, incorporating scans
from different ultrasound machines. Expanding the dataset size and increasing popula­
tion variability would help address class imbalance, particularly by including more cases
of breech presentation. This would allow for a more comprehensive assessment of the
algorithms’ performance and ability to generalize across clinical settings.
The PCBM model proved to be very effective during analysis; however, due to the lack of
a GPU in the portable server, real­time feedback was not possible. Integrating real­time
feedback would offer a significant advantage, as sonographers could immediately assess
the quality of predictions after performing the blind sweeps. This capability would not only
improve the practical usability of the system but also provide a more direct way to evaluate
the level of support the proposed methods offer to sonographers in their workflow.
Another promising direction for future research is the development of a simpler and less
operator­dependent acquisition protocol. While the proposed setup and architecture func­
tioned well during data collection, the acquisition process itself could be significantly op­
timized. Since the data was collected at the end of routine practice and performed by
different sonographers, factors such as intensity, brightness, view, and zoom varied be­
tween acquisitions. These inconsistencies may have contributed to PCBM’s difficulties
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
43
==PAGE:48==
in generating accurate segmentation masks. Initially, the protocol included five vertical
and six horizontal sweeps, but only five were used to test the final methods. This process
could be further streamlined—potentially reducing the number of sweeps to three or even
one, as in most cases, the central vertical sweep alone provided a clear view of the fetal
head. Simplifying the protocol would reduce scanning time and enhance reproducibility
across different operators and clinical settings.
44
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:49==
7
Conclusion
This work has helped us understand how AI can support sonographers in navigating ob­
stetric ultrasound by assisting in fetal position estimation. We found that structured data
collection protocols are important for improving the consistency of AI predictions, as they
help reduce operator variability in ultrasound scans.
By testing PCBM on our collected dataset, we observed that segmentation­based ap­
proaches can provide useful anatomical information for fetal head localization. Using
anatomical masks rather than relying only on classification probabilities may offer advan­
tages in certain cases, particularly in terms of interpretability.
In fetal lie prediction, we confirmed that matching head detection probabilities to prede­
fined spatial patterns can be an effective way to estimate fetal position. At the same time,
we found that incorporating uncertainty estimation can provide valuable indications for
operators, helping them assess how confident the AI is in its predictions and potentially
reducing misinterpretations.
For head rotation estimation, we introduced and tested a segmentation­based method
that uses the spatial relationship between the thalamus and CSP. Our results suggest
that this approach has the potential to be an effective and interpretable way to infer fetal
head orientation.
Overall, we have seen that AI­assisted navigation has the potential to aid sonographers,
but its effectiveness depends on factors such as data quality, model reliability, and clini­
cal validation. Further research is necessary to refine these methods and evaluate their
practical impact on ultrasound workflows.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
45
==PAGE:50==
46
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Gail ter Haar. “Therapeutic applications of ultrasound”. in: Progress in Biophysics
and Molecular Biology. Effects of ultrasound and infrasound relevant to human
health 93.1 (1 january 2007), pages 111–129. issn: 0079­6107. doi: 10.1016/j.
pbiomolbio.2006.07.005. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0079610706000836.
[2]
John L. Kendall, Stephen R. Hoffenberg and R. Stephen Smith. “History of emer­
gency and critical care ultrasound: The evolution of a new imaging paradigm”. in:
Critical Care Medicine 35.5 (may 2007), S126. issn: 0090­3493. doi: 10.1097/01.
CCM.0000260623.38982.83. url: https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/fulltext/2007/
05001/History_of_emergency_and_critical_care_ultrasound_.2.aspx.
[3]
Jacques S Abramowicz. “Obstetric ultrasound: where are we and where are we go­
ing?” in: Ultrasonography 40.1 (january 2021), pages 57–74. issn: 2288­5919. doi:
10.14366/usg.20088. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7758093/.
[4]
Delwyn Nicholls, Linda Sweet and Jon Hyett. “Psychomotor Skills in Medical Ultra­
sound Imaging”. in: Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine 33.8 (2014), pages 1349–
1352. issn: 1550­9613. doi: 10.7863/ultra.33.8.1349.
[5]
Martin Grønnebæk Tolsgaard. “Assessment and learning of ultrasound skills in Ob­
stetrics & Gynecology”. in: Danish Medical Journal 65.2 (february 2018), B5445.
issn: 2245­1919.
[6]
Andre Kumar, John Kugler and Trevor Jensen. “Evaluation of Trainee Competency
with Point­of­Care Ultrasonography (POCUS): a Conceptual Framework and Re­
view of Existing Assessments”. in: Journal of General Internal Medicine 34.6 (1 june
2019), pages 1025–1031. issn: 1525­1497. doi: 10.1007/s11606-019-04945-4.
[7]
Doug Clem andothers. “An Exploratory Study of Spatial Ability and Student Achieve­
ment in Sonography”. in: Journal of Diagnostic Medical Sonography 26.4 (1 july
2010). Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc STM, pages 163–170. issn: 8756­4793.
doi: 10.1177/8756479310375119. url: https://doi.org/10.1177/8756479310375119.
[8]
Alice Self andothers. “Developing Clinical Artificial Intelligence for Obstetric Ul­
trasound to Improve Access in Underserved Regions: Protocol for a Computer­
Assisted Low­Cost Point­of­Care UltraSound (CALOPUS) Study”. in: JMIR research
protocols 11.9 (1 september 2022), e37374. issn: 1929­0748. doi: 10.2196/37374.
[9]
Chace Lee andothers. “Development of a Machine Learning Model for Sonographic
Assessment of Gestational Age”. in: JAMA Network Open 6.1 (4 january 2023),
e2248685. issn: 2574­3805. doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.48685. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.48685.
[10]
Kwang­Sig Lee andothers. “Prediction of newborn’s body mass index using nation­
wide multicenter ultrasound data: a machine­learning study”. in: BMC Pregnancy
and Childbirth 21.1 (2 march 2021), page 172. issn: 1471­2393. doi: 10 . 1186 /
s12884-021-03660-5. url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-021-03660-5.
[11]
Sagar N Malani, Deepti Shrivastava and Mayur S Raka. “A Comprehensive Review
of the Role of Artificial Intelligence in Obstetrics and Gynecology”. in: Cureus 15.2
(2023), e34891. issn: 2168­8184. doi: 10.7759/cureus.34891. url: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10013256/.
[12]
Arroyo et al. “(PDF) No sonographer, no radiologist: New system for automatic pre­
natal detection of fetal biometry, fetal presentation, and placental location”. in: Re­
searchGate (10 december 2024). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0262107. url: https:
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
47
==PAGE:52==
//www.researchgate.net/publication/358484424_No_sonographer_no_radiologist_
New_system_for_automatic_prenatal_detection_of_fetal_biometry_fetal_presentation_
and_placental_location.
[13]
Ivana Marić andothers. “Early prediction of preeclampsia via machine learning”. in:
American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology MFM 2.2 (1 may 2020), page 100100.
issn: 2589­9333. doi: 10.1016/j.ajogmf.2020.100100. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2589933320300306 (urlseen 11/01/2025).
[14]
V.T. Truong, B.P. Nguyen, T.H. Nguyen­Vo andothers. “Application of machine
learning in screening for congenital heart diseases using fetal echocardiography”.
in: International Journal of Cardiovascular Imaging 38 (2022), pages 1007–1015.
doi: 10.1007/s10554-022-02566-3. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10554-022-02566-3.
[15]
Zheng Zhang and Yibo Han. “Detection of Ovarian Tumors in Obstetric Ultrasound
Imaging Using Logistic Regression Classifier With an Advanced Machine Learning
Approach”. in: IEEE Access 8 (2020). Conference Name: IEEE Access, pages 44999–
45008. issn: 2169­3536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2977962. url: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/abstract/document/9022980 (urlseen 11/01/2025).
[16]
Masaaki Komatsu andothers. “Detection of Cardiac Structural Abnormalities in Fe­
tal Ultrasound Videos Using Deep Learning”. in: Applied Sciences 11.1 (january
2021). Number: 1 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, page 371.
issn: 2076­3417. doi: 10.3390/app11010371. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-
3417/11/1/371.
[17]
Rima Arnaout andothers. Expert­level prenatal detection of complex congenital
heart disease from screening ultrasound using deep learning. Pages: 2020.06.22.20137786.
24 june 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.06.22.20137786. url: https://www.medrxiv.org/
content/10.1101/2020.06.22.20137786v1 (urlseen 11/01/2025).
[18]
Jeffrey S. A. Stringer andothers. “Diagnostic Accuracy of an Integrated AI Tool to
Estimate Gestational Age From Blind Ultrasound Sweeps”. in: JAMA 332.8 (27 august
2024), pages 649–657. issn: 0098­7484. doi: 10.1001/jama.2024.10770. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1001/jama.2024.10770.
[19]
Lok Hin Lee andothers. “Machine learning for accurate estimation of fetal gesta­
tional age based on ultrasound images”. in: npj Digital Medicine 6.1 (9 march 2023).
Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pages 1–11. issn: 2398­6352. doi: 10.1038/
s41746-023-00774-2. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41746-023-00774-2.
[20]
Fetal Weight Estimation via Ultrasound Using Machine Learning | IEEE Journals &
Magazine | IEEE Xplore. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8753650.
[21]
Thunakala Bala Krishna and Priyanka Kokil. “Standard fetal ultrasound plane clas­
sification based on stacked ensemble of deep learning models”. in: Expert Sys­
tems with Applications 238 (15 march 2024), page 122153. issn: 0957­4174. doi:
10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122153. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0957417423026556.
[22]
Lami Yeo and Roberto Romero. “Fetal Intelligent Navigation Echocardiography (FINE):
a novel method for rapid, simple, and automatic examination of the fetal heart”. in:
Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology 42.3 (2013). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.100
pages 268–284. issn: 1469­0705. doi: 10.1002/uog.12563. url: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/uog.12563.
[23]
Katie Swor andothers. “Fetal intelligent navigation echocardiography (FINE) has
superior performance compared to manual navigation of the fetal heart by non­
expert sonologists”. in: Journal of Perinatal Medicine 51.4 (1 may 2023). Publisher:
De Gruyter, pages 477–491. issn: 1619­3997. doi: 10.1515/jpm- 2022- 0387. url:
https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/jpm-2022-0387/html.
48
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:53==
[24]
Chiara Di Vece andothers. “Deep learning­based plane pose regression in obstetric
ultrasound”. in: International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery
17.5 (2022), pages 833–839. issn: 1861­6410. doi: 10.1007/s11548-022-02609-z.
url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9110476/.
[25]
Richard Droste andothers. Automatic Probe Movement Guidance for Freehand
Obstetric Ultrasound. 8 july 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2007.04480. arXiv: 2007.
04480[eess]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.04480.
[26]
Chaoyu Chen andothers. “FetusMapV2: Enhanced fetal pose estimation in 3D ul­
trasound”. in: Medical Image Analysis 91 (1 january 2024), page 103013. issn:
1361­8415. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2023.103013. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1361841523002736.
[27]
Alexander D. Gleed andothers. “Statistical Characterisation of Fetal Anatomy in
Simple Obstetric Ultrasound Video Sweeps”. in: Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology
50.7 (1 july 2024). Publisher: Elsevier, pages 985–993. issn: 0301­5629, 1879­
291X. doi: 10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2024.03.006. url: https://www.umbjournal.org/
article/S0301-5629(24)00135-2/fulltext.
[28]
T. L. A. Van den Heuvel. “Automated low­cost ultrasound: improving antenatal care
in resource­limited settings”. phdthesis. 2019. url: https://repository.ubn.ru.nl/
bitstream/handle/2066/199000/199000.pdf.
[29]
Chun Kit Wong andothers. Deployment of Deep Learning Model in Real World
Clinical Setting: A Case Study in Obstetric Ultrasound. 22 march 2024. doi: 10.
48550/arXiv.2404.00032. arXiv: 2404.00032[cs,eess]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.
00032.
[30]
Teeranan Pokaprakarn andothers. “AI Estimation of Gestational Age from Blind
Ultrasound Sweeps in Low­Resource Settings”. in: NEJM Evidence 1.5 (26 april
2022). Publisher: Massachusetts Medical Society, EVIDoa2100058. doi: 10.1056/
EVIDoa2100058. url: https://evidence.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/EVIDoa2100058.
[31]
Alice J. Sophia Fox and Michael G. Chapman. “Longitudinal ultrasound assessment
of fetal presentation: A review of 1010 consecutive cases”. in: Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 46.4 (2006), pages 341–344. issn:
1479­828X. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-828X.2006.00603.x.
[32]
Abhishek Thakur andothers. abhiTronix/vidgear: VidGear Stable v0.3.2. version vidgear­
0.3.2. september 2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.8332548. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.8332548.
[33]
Christian F. Baumgartner andothers. SonoNet: Real­Time Detection and Localisa­
tion of Fetal Standard Scan Planes in Freehand Ultrasound. 2017. arXiv: 1612.05601
[cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.05601.
[34]
Manxi Lin andothers. I saw, I conceived, I concluded: Progressive Concepts as
Bottlenecks. 2022. arXiv: 2211.10630 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.10630.
[35]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large­Scale Image Recognition. arXiv:1409.1556 [cs]. april 2015. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.1409.1556. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
[36]
Pang Wei Koh andothers. “Concept Bottleneck Models”. in: Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Machine Learning. byeditorHal Daumé III and
Aarti Singh. volume 119. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 13–
18 Jul 2020, pages 5338–5348.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
49
==PAGE:54==
50
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:55==
A
Supplementary Figures
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
51
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.1: Time series confidences for patient A using SonoNet. The columns indicate
classification labels and the rows show sweep numbers.
52
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.2: Time series confidences for patient C using SonoNet. The columns indicate
classification labels and the rows show sweep numbers.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
53
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.3: Time series confidences for patient C using SonoNet. The columns indicate
classification labels and the rows show sweep numbers.
54
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.4: Time series confidences for patient A using PCBM. The columns indicate
classification labels and the rows show sweep numbers.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
55
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.5: Time series confidences for patient B using PCBM. The columns indicate
classification labels and the rows sweep numbers.
56
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.6: Time series confidences for patient C using PCBM. The columns indicate
classification labels and the rows show sweep numbers.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
57
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.7: The coordinate system based on a circle. The numbers denote the number
of degrees.
58
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.8: Screenshot of frontend dashboard before clicking any button.
Figure A.9: Screenshot of frontend dashboard after going through 5 vertical and 2 hori­
zontal sweeps.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
59
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.10: PCBM predictions for patient A. Each column has a classification label (one
class in SP and Non­SP), and each row denotes for which sweep it was performed. Each
image in the grid shows how the confidence changed in time for each label and sweep
number.
60
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.11: PCBM predictions for patient C. Each column has a classification label (one
class in SP and Non­SP), and each row denotes for which sweep it was performed. Each
image in the grid shows how the confidence changed in time for each label and sweep
number.
AI­Based Navigational Support for Obstetric Ultrasound Imaging
61
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
