==PAGE:1==
Investment Optimization of an Energy Capac­
ity Portfolio using Stochastic Modelling
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared in the period from September 2024 to February 2025 at
the Department of Technology, Management and Economics at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree of Master of Science (MSc) in Sus­
tainable Energy Technologies, and was assigned 30 ECTS points.
The people involved with this thesis are listed below:
[Lucas Rehfeld Moshøj],[Student],[DTU]
[Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen], [Assistant Professor], [DTU, Department of Tech­
nology, Management and Economics]
[Kristoffer Steen Andersen], [Consultant], [Energy Modelling Lab]
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis explores scenario­based investment portfolio optimization within renewable
energy systems using the TIMES energy model. Three energy system models were de­
veloped: two utilizing stochastic modeling approaches (’Stochastic’ and ’SPINES’) and
one deterministic model.
A complete energy system model capable of modeling Onshore and Offshore wind power,
photovoltaic panels and gas turbines, supported by energy sales through a Power Pur­
chase Agreement (PPA), has been developed for the western region of Denmark. The
model incorporates uncertainty through three representative and highly granular wind and
solar weather scenarios from 1995, 2008 and 2009, as well as through future cost reduc­
tions.
Four thematic sensitivity runs have been performed, including changing discount rate, ad­
dition of new technology, reductions in carbon energy substitutions and impact of chang­
ing scenario probability. This way the Stochastic model has been shown to identify robust
investment decisions by analyzing repeated investments uncertain futures.
All employed models show that renewable energy portfolio composition is highly depen­
dent on the discount rate. Increasing discount rate devalues renewable energy portfolios,
and forces a risk hedging towards traditional carbon sources.
This study has modeled multiple future scenarios, tested how to build robust investment
portfolios, using various sustainable energy sources, and offers pathways to further work
on scenario analysis and investment risk modeling of energy systems.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to the entire team at Energy Modelling Lab
(EML). For the openness with which you engaged with me at the office, as well as your
willingness to engage in discussion around modelling issues I was facing, or thesis con­
siderations. I have learnt a lot from the time at the EML office, and wish you all the best for
the future. In particular, I owe a lot to my supervisor at EML, Kristoffer Steen Andersen,
for all the insightful discussion around my energy model and my goals with the thesis. My
progress in understanding VEDA and TIMES was greatly benefitted by your guidance.
Thank you for the patience with my questions and learning curve, I hope I managed to
return a small bit of learning or useful knowledge in the process.
I would also like to thank my supervisor, Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen, for his guid­
ance throughout the project and for his positive support and feedback on my approach
and results.
I also want to thank Joanna Madej, both for supporting me tirelessly, and for making sure I
got outside once in a while. I am also deeply grateful to my parents, Claus Rehfeld Moshøj
and Christina Mary Moshøj, for their solid advice and guidance on how to structure and
write my thesis.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Modeling Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Literature review
7
3.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Stochastic modeling and uncertainty in energy models . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Portfolio optimization and hedging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Data Collection and Analysis
10
4.1
Climate years
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2
Projected energy production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.3
Data transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4
Technology data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.5
Demand data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.6
Price data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
Model case
20
5.1
Scenarios & Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6
Results
27
6.1
Technology volatility and price sensitivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6.2
Robustness analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.3
Reference model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.4
Influence of the discount rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.5
Removal of carbon energy substitutions or introduction of CO2 emission
qouta
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.6
Impact of new technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7
Discussion
45
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8
Conclusion
48
Bibliography
50
A Appendix
54
A.1 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
A.2 Graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Energy systems across the world are evolving. Over the past decades, there has been a
mounting pressure to move from conventional energy production sources, such as coal,
oil, gas and hydro power, to a system consisting of more intermittent sources of energy
such as wind, tide and solar energy. This evolution is necessary to reduce the atmo­
spheric greenhouse gas pollution inherent in most conventional energy sources, with the
exception of nuclear energy and hydropower. However, intermittent sources bring new
challenges, due to natural fluctuations of renewable resources, such as wind and sunlight.
This may ultimately result in production below energy demand which can cause disrup­
tions.
Renewable energy also introduce another challenge, as they have low variable cost on
electricity production. As long as there is demand to satisfy, this is usually a boon both
for society and the producers. Producers are guaranteed to sell their electricity and con­
sumers prices are lowered. However, on days when renewable energy generation is high,
market prices can fall below the marginal costs of renewable production. Consumers may
also experience significant price fluctuations due to variability in renewable energy supply.
For example, periods with low wind availability, combined with little to no sun, a so called
‘dunkelflaute’, can lead to sharp increases in electricity prices [1]. This is especially prob­
lematic if other conventional sources have increased in price due to supply restrictions,
as was the case for natural gas at the outbreak of the war in Ukraine. Another recent
example of this was in early December 2024, where the energy prices suddenly spiked
following a period of low energy production from both solar and wind[2].
Finally, due to the rising inflation seen from 2021 the interest rates have gone up signifi­
cantly, following a long period of low inflation and interest rates. This directly impacts the
cost, and from an investor perspective, the risk of renewable energy investments.
In just the last year in Denmark, these challenges have already had consequences on the
green transition. As recently as the 5th of December 2024 the tendering of three wind
farms in the North Sea received no bids for the first time in Danish history. Potential rea­
sons cited for this are recent increase in interest rates, direct state ownership of part of the
wind farms, and the lack of public subsidies to the projects [3] [4]. These factors discour­
age investors exactly because of the challenges stated above, which result in cashflow
uncertainty, especially in a market saturated by renewables. Examples include the recent
financial challenges of the green energy pioneers Better Energy [5] [6].
The struggles of private actors on the current energy market, presents a fundamental
challenge to the future of the energy transition. Berensmann and Lindeberg (2016) for
example, emphasize that public financial sources alone will be insufficient to drive the
green energy transformation, and that funding from the private sector and investors is im­
portant [7]. However, investors face a dilemma: How can they mitigate risks in a market
where their primary source of revenue is uncertain? One way to tackle this, is through
energy system models, which can incorporate future uncertainty, to attempt to predict fu­
ture cash flows and thus lower the risk associated with green finance.
This thesis aims to develop a TIMES (The Integrated MARKAL­EFOM System) energy
systems model, from the ground up with the purpose of analyzing how TIMES can be
applied for portfolio optimization in an uncertain future.
1
==PAGE:7==
TIMES offers two built­in stochastic modeling approaches—’Stochastic’ and ’SPINES’—
both of which will be analyzed in this thesis. Given the limited analysis of the ’Stochastic’
model type, and subsequent comparative analysis of these two approaches in existing
literature, this thesis will take an initial step in evaluating their respective use cases, along
with their advantages and limitations.
The end result is three distinct energy system models. Two of which optimizes invest­
ments for an energy portfolio based on hedging principles, by incorporating elements of
stochastic modeling. The third is a deterministic model for comparison purposes.
The model case is focused on a green field portfolio optimization under a fixed Power
Purchase Agreement (PPA) at electricity market spot prices. The objective is to develop
a investment portfolio which considers future uncertainty of renewable production to min­
imize discounted system cost, while meeting the agreed upon energy demand. As such,
the thesis works with a hybrid perspective, part private investor and part public service.
The public service perspective is introduced through a fixed energy production target. In
contrast, the investor perspective lies in the portfolio optimization, with a focus on robust­
ness analysis through cash flow evaluations and Net Present Value (NPV) assessments
of different portfolio compositions.
The aim of this study is to answer the following research questions:
1. How can energy technologies and legislation shape scenario­based energy system
modeling?
2. How can stochastic modeling be leveraged to identify robust investment decisions
for a green­field energy portfolio?
3. How do changes in the discount rate affect renewable energy investment decisions
and the resulting portfolio composition?
The energy system models were developed in collaboration with Energy Modelling Lab
(EML), a Danish consulting firm specializing in energy systems and strategic energy plan­
ning.
2
==PAGE:8==
2
Methodology
The data gathered and adapted for the TIMES model covers:
• Wind energy production predictions
• Solar energy production predictions
• Capital Expenditures of energy technologies (CAPEX)
• Operational expenditures of energy technologies (OPEX)
• Electricity prices
• Gas prices
The technical data collected covers the following types of energy production in western
Denmark (Jutland and Funen).
• Offshore Wind
• Onshore Wind
• Photovoltaic panels
• Natural Gas Turbines
Data has primarily been provided by Energy Modelling Lab (EML), sourced from the Dan­
ish Energy Agency and Energinet. The data from the Danish Energy Agency consists
of the 2023 analysis prerequisites (AF23) of the RAMSES energy system model. The
Analysis prerequisites for 2024 were released October 9th last year, but has not been
incorporated here. The 2023 values work just as well from a proof of concept angle.
Technology specifications have been primarily derived from the Energy Catalogue for
electricity and district heating[8]. Some offshore technology values, relevant to the danish
market, were also gathered from L, Kitzing et. al. (2015) and P.E Morthorst et al. (2016)
[9] [10].
The decision to rely mostly on the Energy Catalogue, was to keep the cost basis consis­
tent between technologies. Different agencies and parts of the world, such as the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), provide similar data but apply a different price as­
sessment for the technologies, which may make them less compatible within a Danish
context.
Even so, NREL has been used to assess projected technology cost reductions, in percent
[11]. Future cost reductions are considered here, as they have historically been decreas­
ing, and are expected to continue, as supported by Nicolas Campion et al. (2024) [12].
Data on Vertical Bifacial solar panel production has also been collected for the purpose
of sensitivity analysis. The data comes from a paper by Szabo et al. (2024), who have
investigated the impact of introduction of vertical bifacial photovoltaics in the European
market [13].
2.1
Definitions
• Stochastic Modelling
3
==PAGE:9==
The term stochastic used in this thesis was defined by Meriam Webster, as a process
involving chance or probability [14]. In other words, the term stochastic must not be un­
derstood as it is used in a stringent statistical context. The stochastic elements will be
implemented through probabilities of entering into a specific scenario, and how the model
perceives the variables that might occur as random variables.
Stochastic modeling, specifically refers to a mathematical method of incorporating uncer­
tainty in a model framework, by not having a single fixed outcome but considering multiple
possible outcomes based on probability. The exact formulation will be covered in more
detail during chapter 5.
• Energy portfolio
An energy portfolio in the context of this paper refers to a collection of investments into
energy generation assets, owned by a company or legal entity, with the intention of con­
structing and operating said assets.
• State of the World & Scenarios
State of the World (SOW) is a term that will be used in the context of the uncertain mod­
elling. This refers to the different combinations of variables that occur in the future, during
a specified time period.
Scenarios refer only to the SOWs at the very last time period, i.e. the final combination
of all the uncertain variables along a future pathway (See Figure 5.2). There will be some
overlap between the two terms, as the final states, the scenarios, are still states of the
world, just of the final time period.
• TIMES terminology
Processes, Commodities, Commodity flows and Timeslices will also be used in relation to
the energy model. Process are different kinds of physical technologies, that transform one
commodity into another, such as energy producing plants or mining operations. Mining
operations is the process of extracting a type of energy source to feed into a process. A
mining process is required to ’mine’ wind, sun and gas to feed into the energy producing
plants.
Commodities are items produced and consumed by processes, such as electricity or emis­
sions. Commodity flows are unique links between a process and a commodity, repre­
senting what processes created what commodity, and in what context. Timeslices are
user­defined division of the year, such as hours, weeks and seasons.
• Discount & Interest rate
In this work the Interest rate equals the interest paid on loans in a bank. The Discount
rate on the other hand is used to determine the present value of future cash flows, and
reflects the time value of money and risk. Consequently, the Discount rate is the return
on investment required by investors. The Discount rate is assumed to always be higher
than the Interest rate on loans to include this risk premium. Given this definition, it is the
discount rate that will be varied in this project, and not the interest rate.
2.2
Modeling Framework
The model framework used to solve the investment optimization problem has been cre­
ated in TIMES (The Integrated MARKAL­EFOM System) model. TIMES is a technology­
rich, bottom­up model generator designed for minimizing discounted system costs by de­
termining optimal investment, operation, energy supply, trade decisions, service demands
4
==PAGE:10==
as well as environmental and resource constraints [15]. Being technology rich means that
TIMES is able to provide detailed representations of technologies, based on efficiency,
costs, operational characteristic and emissions. TIMES is written in the General Algebraic
Modelling System (GAMS) language with a linear solver approach in mind. It is possible to
add non­linearity through for example risk­aversion [16], although this is more well suited
for smaller models.
The ability to handle multiple technologies in an energy network and optimize them against
the economic costs makes TIMES well suited for this project, as it allows for a high de­
gree of flexibility in designing a system, and tailoring the program to comparing possible
energy futures based on different scenarios.
A license to the data handling system VEDA, has been provided by Energy Modelling Lab
(EML). VEDA is software tool used to specify model settings, as well as handling the input
and output data. The TIMES model thus been built through VEDA, with a combination of
excel documents containing input tables, which define processes, commodities, attributes
and constraints. Result analysis has been done mainly with Python, due to the ease in
handling large .csv datasets.
Figure 2.1 provides a visualized structure of the modeling approach in this project, with
data flows as described above.
Figure 2.1: TIMES and VEDA modeling environment
For the purpose of this thesis, it has been necessary to build a model from the ground
up, adding new aspects in a stepwise process. Whenever a new section or input to the
model has been verified to be active and work in the model, further detail has then been
added. Due to the modelling complexity of later models, it has been necessary to migrate
and adapt the TIMES modelling to the shared DTU Linux environment. This reduces
modeling time from upwards of 15 hours per run to a consistent 2­3 hours. The model
adaptations required to run the Windows­based TIMES model on Linux servers have been
shared in the VEDA User Forum (see this post for details).
2.2.1
Financial investment evaluation
All potential Investments in the portfolio, will be evaluated by a number of traditional fi­
nancial evaluation tools, being:
1. Net Present Value (NPV)
2. Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
3. Cashflow analysis
5
==PAGE:11==
The idea is to use several angles to consider both robustness of chosen investments and
the model sensitivity.
The NPV takes time value of money into account, by being the sum of the present value
of all cash inflows and the present value of all cash outflows. A positive NPV indicates a
profitable project and vice versa for negative NPV, Shou (2022) [17]. But, as highligted by
Sheng and Sorourkhah (2024), NPV does not by itself account for uncertainty in calculat­
ing the expected return on investment [18]. In both the paper by Sheng and Sorourkhah
(2024) and this thesis, the NPV model is used to find suitable investments in conditions
of future uncertainty, by defining alternative future scenarios. The approach taken in this
thesis is to utilize sensitivity analysis over the future scenarios, varying for example dis­
count rates, which Sheng and Sorourkhah (2024) do not utilize.
The discount rates used in the NPV calculations is the financing cost or the price of the
money required for the investment. Money that could have been used for other alterna­
tive investments. A higher interest rate, makes it more expensive to borrow money, and
requires higher returns to finance. As mentioned in chapter 1, assessing discount rates
and their impact on energy projects is particularly relevant in today’s market.
The IRR is a calculation of the discount rate at which the NPV is zero, and as such is
an assessment of how much variation in the discount rate a certain investment path can
handle, while still being profitable, or before it begins to be profitable, depending on the
initial NPV value.
Cashflow analysis looks at the outgoing investments costs or capital expediture (CAPEX),
the running operational expediture (OPEX) and the in­coming revenue streams or earn­
ings over time, to make an assessment of both the size and spread of potential cashflow
across SOWs. In this model the CAPEX costs have been split into annuity payments
of the Lumpsum investment (a one­time payment made in full at the beginning of an in­
vestment period). This reflects the payback required after the uptake of a loan, and is
therefore distinct from the NPV analysis which focuses purely on Lumpsum investments.
Cashflow analysis is used to asses the financial sustainability of an investment over time,
which is essential for continuous operation of the company.
An analysis of the robustness of certain investment options across model runs will also
be performed. The definition of a robust investment in this thesis, is an investment that
is consistently repeated across different sensitivity runs or States of the World (SOW).
This will be achieved by looking at the total return of a given portfolio compared to the
capacities installed.
The financial assessment in this work does not include a full financial analysis, in the
sense that no considerations have been made to e.g. tax issues or depreciation of assets
over time or the use of subsidies or other financial tools. The only exemption to this is the
inclusion of the CO2 tax on natural gas for energy production using a Gas turbine, which
are legislative tools that may impact investment decisions and risk.
6
==PAGE:12==
3
Literature review
The following chapter will start by covering existing literature on the state­of­the­art of en­
ergy system models. It will then shift to a focus on papers where uncertainty and stochas­
tic modeling has been implemented in energy models. Finally, some consideration has
also been made to papers covering portfolio optimization and hedging in energy system
models, with a focus on renewable energy.
3.1
State of the art
Pfenninger et al. (2014) provide a natural starting point to understanding current modeling
paradigms present in the 21st century, as well as highlighting key challenges facing these
models [19]. 3 paradigms as well as model examples for these are:
1. Energy systems optimization models
• Bottom­up, highly detailed technical models
– TIMES (The Integrated MARKAL­EFOM System)
– BALMOREL
2. Energy system simulation models
• Focused on providing forecasts on likely system evolution
– LEAP (the Long­range Energy Alternatives Planning System)
3. Electricity market and power systems models
• Focused exclusively on electricity, with more detail of temporal variation and
operational strategies (balancing supply and demand)
– Wien Automatic System Planning Package (WASP)
TIMES and the bottom­up approach itself will be covered in chapter 2. Energy system
simulation models, such as LEAP, are focused on seeing what happens under given sce­
narios, rather than finding an optimal solution. Consequently, they are focused on system
dynamics and evaluation of what can happen in a scenario, rather than what the best
solution is to make something happen in that scenario. A deeper comparison between
optimization and simulation models is also discussed by Lund et al. (2017) [20].
Electricity market and power system models are purely focused on maintaining reliability
of electricity production. These are very specific models, and as such they are less rel­
evant to this work. TIMES can be applied more broadly in comparison, as it can include
the entire energy sector, including the heat and transport sector for completeness. The
approach to the TIMES model in this project, brings it a little closer to a pure electricity
model. A key difference in this project is the focus on maximize earnings across multiple
scenarios at once with both resource and emission constraints, whereas a pure electricity
model is often tailored towards reliability and dispatch analysis.
Another broad overview is given by Wallace and Fleten (2003) [21] as they tackle both
mathematical programming and stochastic dynamic programming models. Their focus is
mostly on energy markets, both regulated and deregulated. Energy models presented by
7
==PAGE:13==
Wallace and Fleten include system wide models, such as BALMOREL, which is also a
bottom­up optimization model. BALMOREL as an energy model focuses on maximizing
social welfare using a partial equilibrium approach through supply and demand optimiza­
tion [22]. The TIMES model, on the other hand, is more suited for optimal technology
selection for system cost minimization and investment planning. Returning to Wallace
and Fleten (2003), much is discussed about production uncertainty, but the purpose of
the paper is mostly to provide pointers on relevant theory and present ideas that could
be used within uncertain energy modeling when considering electricity prices in markets.
This includes examples of how to address future price uncertainty, through expected spot
prices, which is the method utilized in this project, or through risk adjusted prices, compar­
ing forward prices to spot prices. A hybrid model is described under deregulated electricity
markets (See page 653). Here local demand has to be met, while the producer can decide
to meet the demand with their own production means, or by buying from the wholesale
market. This hybrid model approach has been employed in this thesis.
3.2
Stochastic modeling and uncertainty in energy models
There are many studies that have explored ways to implement stochastic modeling in en­
ergy systems and discuss the considerations that follow. A study by Zakaria et al. (2020)
concluded that stochastic optimization methods almost always outperform the determinis­
tic optimization methods in terms of social, technical, and economic aspects of renewable
energy systems [23]. Another paper by Seljom and Tomasgard (2015) [24], uses TIMES
to compare a stochastic energy model to a model utilizing a peaking capacity restraint.
They find that stochastic models have a tendency to reduce investment in wind capacity
compared to deterministic models. They also point out that the methodology presented is
useful for assessing the impact of other intermittent energy sources such as photovoltaics,
which are included in this project.
In a further study, Pernille Seljom and Lisa Kvalbein et al. (2021) discuss scenario gen­
eration in order to provide a good representation of the underlying uncertainty in a given
dataset [25]. This includes stability tests to see if results are consistent, if different sets
of scenarios generated from the same data is used. They also point out that considering
variation in renewable energy generation across several years is important when model­
ing uncertainty in energy production. An insufficient introduction of variability in production
poses a risk of underestimating flexibility in supply if not properly considered. This is a
well­known issue covered in many papers, including Ringkjøb et al. (2020) [26] and the
International Energy Agency (2023) [27]. The most direct approach to mitigating this issue
of supply variability of many green power technologies, is by implementing highly detailed
temporal resolutions, as described by Pfenninger et al. (2004). This is also reflected in
other papers, such as by Haydt et al. (2011) [28]. Although this is seen as the direct
approach to solving the resolution issue, it is rarely used in other papers, often due to
high computational times. The model designed and built for the purpose of this project,
consequently utilizes datasets representative of the last 30 years, and uses all a full 8760
hours of resolution, as will be covered in chapter 4.
Given these choices, the focus of this project has been on the application of the stochas­
tic modeling approach as a hedging tool using highly detailed time slice structures. This
provides the opportunity to assess the impact of a stochastic modeling approach on invest­
ment portfolio composition. Assessing the impact of scenario generation and subsequent
stability tests have therefore been left as potential future work on top of a larger scale sce­
nario model approach. Results will be compared to some of the papers above to validate
8
==PAGE:14==
results.
All of the papers above use stochastic models with scenarios that have the same prob­
ability of occurring in the future. A very initial attempt at discerning what effect different
scenario probabilities has on the model results has been completed under sensitivity anal­
ysis in chapter 6.
3.3
Portfolio optimization and hedging
Hedging is a risk management strategy often used in stock market or commodity trading.
Essentially it involves combining investments to safeguard against losses based on their
probabilities. In other words, Hedging is a strategy that aims to limit investment risks.
A hedging approach may be particularly important with renewable energy investments
as Hain et al. (2018) study in their paper ”Managing renewable energy production risk”.
They investigate the stochastic production risk in Germany, focusing on an owner of phys­
ical renewable assets, and find that unhedged renewable portfolios carry significant risk
[29]. A paper by Morris et al. (2018), investigates the balance between over investing
in renewables, and under investing in non­carbon sources when needing to reduce car­
bon emissions dramatically [30]. The study advocates for a diversified energy portfolio,
to combat uncertainty in the future. A similar investigation takes place in this project, with
the removal of carbon sources entirely and the introduction of CO2 emission constraints.
Fabien A. Roques et al. (2008) study energy portfolio optimization, to assess how ready
European markets are to move away from natural gas [31]. The paper uses a Monte Carlo
simulation of gas, coal and nuclear plant investment returns in a Mean­Variance portfolio
theory. The robustness test as described under subsection 2.2.1, is a simplified version
of this method. Their findings show that because of a high degree of correlation between
gas and electricity prices, portfolios heavily weighted toward gas plants are more attrac­
tive to investors. They conclude that policies such as long­term power purchase contracts
(PPAs) might be necessary to push for greater diversification. A similar result is also found
in this project, as will be discussed in chapter 8.
9
==PAGE:15==
4
Data Collection and Analysis
The main data sources used for the energy model are listed below:
• The Danish Energy Agency (Energistyrelsen)
• Energinet DK
• National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL ­ U.S. Department of Energy)
These datasets and the data manipulation required to prepare data for the TIMES model
is described below.
4.1
Climate years
Production values, energy price and energy demand from DK West (Jutland and Fyn),
across all 8760 hours (time slices), of several years. Included is historic data from 2022
and 2023 from Energinet and projected data from 2030, 2040 and 2050, from the RAM­
SES Energy Model of the Danish Energy Agency.
Three projected future paths are at the core of the developed model. These paths are
based on 3 representative climate years. These climate years were chosen as they are
identified as the most representative climate years from a 30 year climate dataset, in
the Ten­Year Network Development Plans (TYNDP) 2024 Scenarios Methodology Report
[32]. Each climate year has a weight assigned to them, based on their representation in
calculating future climate years.
Climate year
Weight
1995
23%
2008
37%
2009
40%
Table 4.1: Caption
Essentially, the Danish Energy Agency provides full 8760 hour datasets of projected future
values based on each climate year.
4.2
Projected energy production
Projected production values has been gathered for 4 renewable energy technologies:
• Photovoltaic panels (PV)
• Vertical Bifacial PV
• Offshore wind turbines
• Onshore wind turbines
Data for these technologies have been implemented in 2030 and 2040, for all climate
years, as the basis for an uncertain future in the model case. The exception to this is the
Vertical Bifacial PV panels, which is based on data from Szabo et al. (2024), who do not
consider different climate years. As it will only be used for one model run during sensitivity
analysis, the lack of production patterns across climate years, will not impact any other
10
==PAGE:16==
model runs.
All supply data is presented below, starting with Figure 4.1 for wind energy, showing a
moving average of the provided production values.
As seen in Figure 4.1, the onshore and offshore wind curves for 2030 and 2040 largely
(a) Offshore supply curves
(b) Onshore supply curves
Figure 4.1: Aggregated wind supply curves based on climate years ­95, ­08 and ­09
overlap when based on the same climate year (e.g., ’Onshore 2030 ­ 08’ and ’Onshore
2040 ­ 08’). However, the reasons for this overlap differ between the onshore and offshore
graphs. For onshore wind, the projected capacity in 2040 is only slightly lower than in
2030, decreasing from 6256 MW in 2030 to 5456 MW in 2040. The AF23 data files do
not explicitly state why the expected capacity decreases. It could be due to assumptions
about the limited availability of land for turbines in Denmark or the lack of re­powering
projects at the end of turbine life cycles.
For offshore production, the overlap in the data is primarily due to an adjustment made for
this project, where the climate years for offshore production in 2030 has been forced to be
identical to the 2040 values. The reason for this adjustment, can be found by examining
the production curve ’Offshore 2030 ­ 09’ in Figure 4.1a. This curve has been included as a
representation of the original data, before it was made equal to 2040. Here, the production
is low in the start of 2030 but increases significantly in the middle of the year. EML has
been in contact with Energistyrelsen and been informed that new offshore capacity is
brought online medio 2030, in the RAMSES model. This invalidates the 2030 data for the
intended use in this project, as the production data requires transformation into capacity
factors.
In the case of solar production, a similarly weighted average plot is shown in Figure 4.2
11
==PAGE:17==
(a) Aggregated solar supply curves
(b) Cutout of hourly solar production in the sum­
mer
Figure 4.2: Aggregated solar supply curves based on climate years ­95, ­08 and ­09
Similar to the wind energy curves, there is also a noticeable repeating pattern noticeable
in Figure 4.2a. For example, the red curve patterns representing climate year 2008, are
equal, with the only difference being the increase in production in 2040 due to more ex­
pected solar capacity in 2030. The moving average of solar production in Figure 4.2a, is
mainly presented to provide an overview of general production potential across the year.
Figure 4.2b provides a more exact pattern of production across a given week.
The similar production patterns in the above supply graphs are likely a result of the RAM­
SES model being a linear, deterministic model. Since the model projects future production
patterns based on the historic data of a single climate year (2008 in this case), it applies
the same patterns for both 2030 and 2040.
Finally, for the vertical bifacial PV panels, Szabo et al. (2024) provide average hourly
panel irradiation data (W/m2), across 24 hours for every month of the year. Standard
testing conditions to determine the potential capacity in kilowatt peak of a solar panel, is
1000 W/m2. The capacity factor of a given hour and month can then be calculated. Every
month will therefore have the same production pattern every day, and the patterns will be
equal across climate years. This is illustrated by comparing the production data of the
Vertical Bifacial solar panel to the regular solar panels from the Danish Energy Agency, in
Figure 4.3. The following data has already been transformed to capacity factors, as will
be discussed in section 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Vertical Bifacial pattern compared to regular PV panels
12
==PAGE:18==
The data for the PV panels from the Danish Energy Agency is an aggregation of single
axis trackers (east to west), roof installations and fixed installations. Most of these solar
panels are optimized for midday production, reflected in Figure 4.3, where the highest
production occurs between 10 am and 1 pm. During winter, production is limited from
8 am to 3 pm, while while summer has only 7 hours with no production. Even so, as
production is not optimized for the morning and evenings, the production values are still
low in the outlying hours. Vertical bifacial panels are shown here to be better suited for
the outlying hours. The effect of this on the model investment decisions will be discussed
under chapter 6.
4.3
Data transformation
As already shown briefly in Figure 4.3, transformation of the data is required. The energy
model developed in this thesis is not meant to use existing production and capacity values,
but to evaluate possible investments in new renewable energy capacity from the ground
up. The model must therefore be allowed to vary production based on investment path
takes, and as such direct application of the supply data is not possible. Consequently, the
input to the model is a recalculation of production values into hourly capacity factors (CF).
This tells the program to what degree the installed capacity can be utilized in a specific
hour. As the total projected capacity installed in DKW is provided in the AF23 dataset, the
hourly capacity factors have been calculated using eq. (4.1).
CF = Hourly production (MWh)
Installed Capacity (MW)
(4.1)
The fact that aggregated values are used in the production values, should also be con­
sidered after transforming the data into capacity factors. When aggregating production
values across an entire region, it is unlikely that the energy production is from sources
producing at 100% of their rated power in a given hour. The capacity factor is therefore
never going to be 1 for any technology, at any given hour and a lower overall capacity fac­
tor does not necessarily imply anything about the power output. Depending on the wind
resource at a given location for example, a larger generator could output more power at a
lower CF than a smaller generator operating at full capacity. In most cases however, tur­
bines should be designed to fit the resource of its location, which means that they should
be able to produce at rated capacity, for at least some hours during the year. To this
end, the CF values of the aformentioned technologies have been normalized to 1, using
eq. (4.2). Producing the maximum rated power is more rare for solar panels, as conditions
have to be ideal, but as it can occur, and to offset the effect of the aggregated values they
are transformed as well.
xNormalized =
x −min(x)
max(x) −min(x)
(4.2)
4.3.1
Variations across climate years
As seen in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2 there are large variations on the seasonal level,
which will impact how well technologies are suited for meeting demand across the climate
years. To highlight some of these variations within the seasons, the data has been broken
into northern hemisphere seasons, following the traditional calendar, based on the dates
associated to each season, and the hours they comprise. The average seasonal capacity
factors and standard deviation of the data after transformation, are shown in Figure 4.4.
13
==PAGE:19==
(a) Average of renewable CF values across sea­
sons
(b) Standard deviation of renewable CF values
across seasons
Figure 4.4: Seasonal mean and standard deviation of renewbale capacity factor values
for 2040
Some general trends in Figure 4.4a is that wind production is generally highest in winter
and fall, while solar production unsurprisingly excels in the spring and summer, with little
to no variation between Climate years.
Climate year 1995 generally boasts slightly higher production in the winter and spring,
whereas the wind resource drops heavily during the summer. Climate year 2008 is gen­
erally the middle ground, while climate year 2009 is located in low to middle production
values in comparisons. Wind production specifically suffers in the winter, where it would
usually be able to make up for lower solar production.
When it comes to the spread of the data, Figure 4.4b, climate year 1995 indicates slightly
more volatility, mostly visible in the summer for solar and the spring for offshore, while
climate year 2009 is the closest to the mean in its production values, for all technologies
across most seasons. For onshore production climate year 2009 is the most stable, while
also having the lowest production potential. The standard deviation also shows that even
though the data has been normalized, the full load hours are still outliers, even for offshore
wind. All in all, the variation between climate years is not overly pronounced when look­
ing at these statistics, which is not too suprising, since they were all chosen as the most
representative years of a dataset covering 30 years. The lack of focus on more extreme
years or outliers will be discussed in chapter 7
Only climate year 2040 has been shown, due to the similarity of the data for 2030 and
2040. A full table of seasonal differences within 2040 can be found in Table A.2 of Ap­
14
==PAGE:20==
pendix A.1.
4.4
Technology data
As mentioned earlier, NREL cost development data has also been gathered to be used
in the model as input to investment cost variations. The investment (CAPEX) data is
specifically gathered for Onshore developments, Offshore developments and Utility scale
PV, across 3 different scenarios [11].:
• Conservative
• Moderate
• Advanced
While the data provided are in
$
kW , it has been recalculated to be percentage reduction
in cost across the years. The exact data used can be found in Table A.5, Table A.4 in
Appendix A.1.
The Energy Catalogue summarizes available Danish and European energy data, to give
an overview on the current technology landscape. A first thing to note is that cost data in
this document are not all from the same years, but are all given in Euro. To account for
inflation across the years, conversions between the value of the Euro have been added
in the system settings of the program, based on Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices
(HCIP) values from Eurostat [33]. HICP values might not fully reflect cost changes that
are specific to the chosen technologies, as there are raw material costs and supply chains
to consider, but it is an estimate. Every technology option has been given an associated
investment cost, a yearly fixed maintenance cost, a variable cost associated with the
production level and a construction delay (lead time). All costs given below will be trans­
formed into M€
GW and M€
PJ before being input to the model. These final transformed cost
values are presented in Table 4.2. There has not been made any consideration for the
effect of failure rates on OPEX, for any of the technologies. It is assumed that this is part
of the averaged values used in OPEX calculations. It could be added in the future, by
implementing higher costs during early and late stages of operation.
4.4.1
Offshore Wind Turbines
CAPEX costs for offshore wind are based on an estimate of specific CAPEX for a 5 differ­
ent combinations of WTG size, water depth and distance to shore, found in figure 9 in the
Technology catalogue [8]. The larger WTG sizes are also tied to deeper water and longer
distances to shore. The cost breakdown includes the turbine, transport and installation
of the turbine, foundation, cables, insurance and contingencies. As for fixed and variable
O&M costs, they are often very specific to an offshore wind farm, so an estimation has
to be made. Fixed costs covers planned maintenance and transport, insurance and ad­
ministration. Variable costs cover things like spare parts, unplanned service costs due to
wear and tear during operation and the ensuing logistics of transport for said maintenance
[34].
Hevia­Koch and Jacobsen (2019) provide a general value of 57,300
€
MWh/year of fixed
OPEX and 4,3
€
MWh of variable OPEX, based on Danish installations [34]. In compari­
son, Kitzing and Morthorst (2015), estimate fixed OPEX costs to be between 2 to 4,9% of
CAPEX costs, but with no estimation of variable costs [9]. This estimations is not tied to
any depth nor distance and thus the average, 3̃%, will be used to calculate fixed OPEX
costs through the CAPEX values.
15
==PAGE:21==
Taking 3% of the CAPEX cost of the 8.4 MW turbine from the Technology Catalogue,
around 1950
€
kW , gives an OPEX of 58,500
€
MW/year. While not identical, it is similar
to the estimation that Hevia­Koch and Jacobsen (2019) provide. As such the variable
maintenance cost of 4,3
€
MWh is assigned to the 8.4 WTG. Kitzing and Morthorst further
highlight that O&M costs depend heavily on the distance to shore. The fixed OPEX is
assumed to already consider this cost increase, so the variable OPEX will follow the per­
centage change that the fixed OPEX experiences (i.e. if the OPEX increases x%, so will
the variable cost). The idea is simply to account for an increase in transport and service
cost.
4.4.2
Onshore Wind Turbines
For Onshore wind CAPEX estimation in the Technology Catalogue is based on the aver­
age prices of Køberets projects from 2017 to 2021 with no particular focus on WTG size
(See table 8 and figure 22 under Onshore section). In general however, these would be
smaller, around 3­4 MW, given visual and noise considerations for neighbors. The val­
ues used have been compared with values given by Hevia­Koch and Jacobsen (2019)
to double check validity [34]. The CAPEX cost, 1150 M€
GW , includes turbine, purchase of
land and neighboring settlements, grid connection, foundation and project development.
Fixed OPEX, 23
M€
GW/year, contain service agreements, administrative costs and insur­
ance, while variable OPEX, 0.7 M€
PJ mostly covers risk of failure and subsequent repairs.
4.4.3
PV Panels
The PV panels are based on IEA’s annouced pledges scenario 2021. The values are
given in table 4 under photovoltaics in the Energy Catalogue. The PV panel data from
above, was also compared with National Renewable Energy Labs 2022 statement: ’...A
decade ago, the module alone cost around $2.50 per watt, and now an entire utility­scale
PV system costs around $1 per watt’ [35]. Using an average conversion rate from 2020
between US dollars and Euro, the final cost of an entire utility­scale PV system, when con­
verted to relevant units would in this case be 877 M€
GW . This is quite far from the 450 M€
GW
provided in the IEA pledge. To ensure that the PV panels are competitive in the model,
the values from IEA are used. Vertical Bifacial PV panels have been given the exact same
costs as the regular PV panels.
4.4.4
Natural Gas Turbine
Finally, also included in the technology options, is a natural gas turbine engine plant. The
cost data is calculated directly from a technology sheet from Wartsila Power Plant solu­
tions 2016 for their natural gas engine plant, provided itself in the Technology Catalogue
(see the ’Natural Gas Engine Plant’ section). CAPEX and OPEX are presented in Ta­
ble 4.2.
The import price of gas for the turbine is based on historic prices from ’andelenergi’, se­
lecting a single gas price from year 2021 and 2022 (3 M€/PJ)to reflect the higher gas
prices that Europe has been experiencing [36] [37].
A CO2 emission factor of 55 kt
PJ has also been recalculated from Energinet and attached
to the production of the natural gas [38]. A CO2 tax is then levied on the production of
the natural gas turbine. It is based on the industry CO2 taxes agreed upon by the Danish
Parliament in June 2024, of 0.1 M€/kt in 2030. [39].
16
==PAGE:22==
4.4.5
Lead times
Each technology also has a lead time attached which defines how long it takes after the
initial investment before the plant can start producing electricity. For offshore wind, this
lead time is based on publicly available documents detailing the applications of 11 off­
shore wind parks built between 2003 and 2021 [40]. The lead time has been set as the
application date for construction permission listed in the establishment permits to when
the farm was operational. Certain prerequisites necessary to construct wind farms, such
as environmental surveys, had already been completed prior to some of these application
dates. This has not been considered, which might make the final lead time of 4 years, a
somewhat liberal estimate. The list of wind farms and their lead times used can be found
in A.1 in Appendix A.1. Historic data has not been used for onshore wind, and while there
is still a lot of hearings and proceedings surrounding onshore wind, the process from ap­
plication to finished construction has been assumed shorter, so it has a lead time of 2
years. The natural gas plant and the solar plant only have 1 year lead times.
4.4.6
Summary
Table 4.2 gives a summary of the technology data discussed above.
CAPEX (M€/GW)
CAPEX (M€/GW)
Fixed OPEX (M€/GW/year)
Variable OPEX (M€/PJ)
Lifetime (Years)
Construction time(Years)
Offshore 8.4 WTG
1950
58.5
1.19
30
4
Offshore 20 WTG
2060
61.8
1.38
30
4
Onshore WTG
1150
23.00
0.7
30
2
Tilted PV
447
3.00
­
30
1
Vertical Bifacial PV
447
3.00
­
30
1
Gas turbine
494
6.50
1.66
25
1
Table 4.2: CAPEX, OPEX, Lifetime and Construction time for energy technologies used
in the model
The decision to split the offshore technology into two subcategories, is discussed more in
detail under chapter 5.
4.5
Demand data
The demand curve used in the this thesis is based on historic gross electricity consumption
in 2018, as these are the only available data given in the AF23. The hourly demand values
here have been transformed into percentages of the total sum of the entire year. In this
way, the gross electricity demand value defined in the model, will be split across the year
in the same pattern as the original demand curve. The demand pattern can be seen in
Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Demand curve in percent of yearly demand based on historical 2018 values
17
==PAGE:23==
4.6
Price data
Below, Figure 4.6 provides an overview of the price data used over the modeling horizon
years. The price data applied across the climate years and investment scenarios is based
on the climate year 2009. Price data based on one climate year was used due to rising
computational times, when more uncertain variables were present on hourly time slices.
The prices are specifically based on climate year 2009, as it has the largest weight out of
all climate years used, as mentioned earlier.
Limitations that come with this choice is that prices should often follow the expected pro­
duction pattern of a given climate year. Say the production pattern follows climate year
2008, but the prices follow the 2009 pattern. This would result in a lower correlation
between renewable production and electricity price, and skew the results somewhat. Re­
gardless, as shown in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2, the production patterns will sometimes
overlap or at least become similar for some time, so some correlation will be retained.
Historic prices for 2022 are only included to compare the shape of actual price variations
(a) Historical prices for 2022
(b) Projected prices for 2030 based on climate
year 2009
(c) Projected prices for 2040 based on climate
year 2009
(d) Projected prices for 2050 based on climate
year 2009
Figure 4.6: Electricity spot prices both historical (2022) and projected based on climate
year 2009
compared to modeled ones. The data for 2022 sees rapidly growing prices leading out of
the summer into the fall, likely as a response to outside stimuli brought on by the energy
crisis.
In comparison, the 2030 and 2040 price data have more repeating patterns, with much
less fluctuation and hence uncertainty as to how the price will develop. In light of the
previous discussions on the potential increase in price fluctuations in the future due to
the green energy transition, this model assumption is probably not likely. However, the
generally lower energy price might be a more reasonable assumptions as the marginal
energy cost for renewable energy is lower than fossil fuel and decreasing, as can for ex­
ample be found described by Campion et al. (2024) [41].
18
==PAGE:24==
A solution in future modeling, could be to either be to include prices for the climate years
1995 and 2008, assuming more calculation power is available, or to increase the am­
plitude of the 2030 and 2040 price curves to 2022 levels, in order to mimic expected
fluctuations in futures price curves.
There are some clear outliers in Figure 4.6, which for 2030 occurs during week 50, which
is the start of December, and in 2040 during New Years eve. Large price spikes during
the winter months are not uncommon, and the large spikes could be attributed to the in­
creased climatic sensitivity of the green transition combined with periods of time where the
energy consumption is relatively high. In the modeling the outliers have been allowed to
stay as the prices are still nowhere near the 2022 levels, and they occur during the winter
months which is not unusual. Prices are interpolated down to the hourly level, between
years, to ensure some price variation between 2030 and 2040. The model does not run
to 2050, but the price data for 2050 is included due to this interpolation, and to ensure
that the model does not extrapolate after 2040 prices are introduced.
19
==PAGE:25==
5
Model case
As mentioned, a model been built from the ground up to be able to assess how to include
uncertainty in the energy system modeling in TIMES. The model case is a green field
system seen from an investor perspective, focused on the western region of Denmark,
which encompasses Jutland and Fyn. The supply of this green field system has been
tendered out through a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) starting at 10 PJ in 2030 with
a smaller linear increase to 12 PJ in 2050. The electricity provided is remunerated at
market price.
As it is a green field system, the investor is expected to construct, and operate, these new
energy technologies over a 20 year period, from 2025 to 2045. The investment company
can apply wind and solar energy technologies with an option for including a gas turbine
or importing energy to cover the periods where sustainable energy supply is low.
The objective of this model is to assess the best possible investment portfolio for the
investment company under these constraints.
5.0.1
Model input and segmentation
A visual representation of the inputs and segmentation provided to VEDA, the workings of
which was explained in 2.2, is shown in figure 5.1. The inputs represented, are the most
important aspects that have been considered in the base model.
Figure 5.1: Overview of the input data and their segmentation
What Figure 5.1 shows is the main input and output data for the model, as well as their
segmentation. The inputs are defined at the top, left and bottom of the VEDA block, while
output is on the right. The naming convention in Figure 5.1 is based on VEDA and is
somewhat superfluous. Base Scenario as a general rule, contains external elements that
the model cannot influence. This could be already existing energy technologies, mining
or procurement processes and end­user demands (in this case, the electricity demand).
Regular scenarios and Sub Res are usually where changes between model runs are im­
plemented. Regular scenarios define variables often directly associated with process or
20
==PAGE:26==
commodity flows in Base Scenario or Sub RES. This could be supply curves or production
costs levied on inputs and outputs (CO2 taxes or electricity price in a given hour). Sub
RES data is usually where data endogenous to the model is located. This would refer to
something that the model can directly interact with and apply during model runs, such as
energy technologies available for investment.
5.0.2
Options for technology investments
A breakdown of the technologies that the base model can invest in has already been listed
in Table 4.2, but is reiterated here (Vertical Bifacial PV panels are not mentioned as they
are relevant for sensitivity analysis only):
1. Monopile Offshore WTG, 8.4 MW
2. Monopile Offshore WTG, 20 MW
3. Onshore WTG
4. Tiled PV panels
5. Natural gas turbines
The Gas turbines are meant as a potential backup capacity, and as a later way to gauge
model sensitivity. The offshore wind turbines have been broken into two sub technologies
to asses the models willingness to build more expensive equipment. While the 20 MW
turbines are purely concepts in current years, they are open to investments here, as the
program runs to 2045, in which case it is assumed that these turbines will be available for
construction. The larger the turbines the more uncertainty is introduced into the capacity
factor calculations earlier, as it is uncertain whether or not they would hit a capacity factor
of 1 as frequently as the transformed data would suggest, regardless of location.
The investments are made in capacities in Gigawatt (GW), meaning no amount of turbines
or panels are specified, but it provides the overall capacity required instead. This imposes
some limitations when using the model to provide investment recommendations. It means
that any proposed capacity installation not divisible by the given turbine capacity, should
either be rounded up or down, which could offsets the optimal solution a bit. It could also
mean that recommendations might differ from what is reasonable in a practical invest­
ment case. Assuming also that a smaller turbine could be installed to correctly match the
proposed capacity is unrealistic given the increase in production complexity involved.
To avoid that the model only invests in the cheapest offshore wind option, a constraint has
been placed upon the activity of the 8.4 WTG option. The idea of the constraint is twofold:
1. Ensure that there is some incetive to upgrade to larger turbines
2. Impose a limit to project size
Ideal areas for wind farms at shallower waters around the danish coast will be limited in
the future, and the cost calculation of the 8.4 WTG considers only water depths up to 25
m. With these considerations in tandem, the 8.4 WTG is set to a ceiling of 2.5 Petajoule
(PJ) annual production, so up to 25% of the annual demand in 2030. After this point the
larger wind turbines can be installed with no capacity constraints. This is in fact a low es­
timate, as such an investment would reach about the same production level as the Horns
Rev II wind farm, which consists of 2.9 MW turbines [42]. However, Horns Rev II also
covers an area of 35 square kilometers, and for a smaller demand scenario like this, it
should allow the model to potentially invest in the larger turbines, which is the trend that
the industry is moving towards regardless.
21
==PAGE:27==
Another way to divide the investments into the more offshore wind technologies could
have been to differentiate by water depth of installations (or distance to shore). That way,
the specific turbines that should be installed, can be tailored to more closely mimic the
proposed capacity. A linear relation between cost across water depth, calculated based
on CAPEX sensitivty to water depth can be found in Table A.3, Appendix A.1. The expec­
tation was that this alternate method provided limited value to the overall model and was
discarded.
5.0.3
Export and Import
As for the export and import processes, all technologies produce the same electricity com­
modity on an hourly basis, which is then forced to enter a process which converts it into
two separate outputs. One electricity demand commodity, which supplies the demand
side, and one electricity price commodity, which is defined by a cost equal to the market
price of the given hour. The electricity price is what the system understands as the in­
come.
The import process can buy electricity at wholesale market price, but comes with an ad­
ministration fee. This means that using this option operates at a net loss. Since imports
are operating at a small loss, the model effectively treats them as a last­resort option. This
helps compare whether it is more economical to invest in new capacity or rely on imports
in specific periods.
5.0.4
Other technologies
In the model design process, three other sustainable energy technologies were consid­
ered. These where:
• Biogas production
• Battery storage
• Emerging storage technologies (PtX)
As concerns the Biogas production, this could be the gas provider to the Gas turbine. Bio­
gas technology in itself is a complex technology which is quite different to model compared
to the solar and wind energy sources, it was discarded for this modeling development. The
same goes for battery storage and PtX as these technologies are not regarded as suf­
ficiently mature at this time to sustain a purely private sector investment without public
subsidies. Consequently, these technologies where also discarded for this model.
5.1
Scenarios & Uncertainty
TIMES has access to 2 main uncertainty settings, when it comes to stochastic modeling;
1. SPINES
2. Stochastic
Documentation for the programming approach of both options is found in Loulou and
Lehtilä (2016) [16].
Common for both approaches is that they operate with a deterministic equivalent to a
stochastic problem. Both models can be formulated as a multi­period, multi­stage Linear
Programming (LP) model. The mathematical formulation is presented in Equation 5.1.
The formulation is based on Dantzig (2004) [43], who provided a foundation for stochastic
modeling in LP optimization problems. An in­depth walkthrough of the theory and practical
22
==PAGE:28==
applications of stochastic programming is also described by Birge and Louveaux (2011)
[44].
MinimizeZ =
∑
t∈T
∑
s∈S(t)
C(t, s) · X(t, s) · p(t, s)
(5.1)
Where:
• t: time period.
• T: set of time periods.
• s: state index.
• S(t): set of state indices for time period t.
• C(t, s): the cost row vector.
• X(t, s): the column vector of decision variables in period t, under state s.
• p(t, s): event probabilities.
The objective function Z is the total discounted system cost which the model aims to
minimize. In essence, the summation gives the total cost of the entire energy system,
considering each time period, and all possible states within these time periods. Each
state has a user defined probability to occur and a set of decision variables associated
to specific costs. The minimization is then subject to single and multi period constraints,
equation 5.2 and 5.3, respectively:
A(t, s) × X(t, s) ≥b(t, s)
∀t ∈T, ∀s ∈S(t)
(5.2)
∑
t∈T
D(t, g(t, s)) × X(t, g(t, s)) ≥e(s)
∀s ∈S(T)
(5.3)
where:
• A(t, s): the LP sub­matrix of constraints only active in given time period, t, in state
s.
• b(t, s): the right­hand side of the single period constraints in time period t, under
state s.
• D(t, g(t, s)): the LP sub­matrix of constraints active through multiple time periods,
in state s.
• g(t, s): a unique path from a state s, to another state s, within the same time period
t, S(T), according to the event tree, see Figure 5.2.
• e(s): the right­hand side column vector for the multi­period constraints, in state s.
In this way the optimization is done considering all possible states for all time periods.
The fact that the model is forced to optimize across all these years and states at the
same time based on their probabilities, is what makes the linear programming model
stochastic, following definitions given in section 2.1. In other words, each of the scenarios
are not optimized separately, as they would be in a deterministic model, because the
model cannot know which of the outcomes is going to come to pass, before they actually
occur. A visualization of this is shown in the next section.
23
==PAGE:29==
5.1.1
The model event tree
A visual breakdown of the model states and assumptions is provided in Figure 5.2, using
an event tree. This event tree shows all the possible realizations of the future also called
scenarios. The event tree shown, is that of the ’Stochastic’ base model.
The top part of Figure 5.2 provides the years associated with the nodes below. The red
dotted lines highlight when new uncertain values are introduced, and the text at the bot­
tom next to the dotted lines provide the uncertain variables that have been added. The
final nodes in 2045 represent a ’scenario’ each, which has different combinations of the
uncertain variables. The combinations are provided to the right of each scenario.
Starting from the left side of the graph, there is one node present in 2025. This shows
that there is only one possible realization of the variables in the model in 2025. Going
further right to 2030, the tree now branches first into 3 separate nodes, representing the
uncertainty in cost developments, which then each branch 3 more times, representing the
3 possible climate years that can occur. So, there are now in total 9 different nodes in
2030. In 2025, the model knows that it must cover some demand in 2030, and it knows
there are 9 possible realizations of future variables.
Figure 5.2: Event tree representation of the ’Stochastic’ model
The model cannot however, predict which one of these realizations will come to pass, be­
fore it actually arrives in 2030 and has to provide supply for the energy demand. It must
therefore hedge its investments before 2030, in order to try to optimize for all the possible
futures. As mentioned at the start of the Model Case chapter, the demand that must be
met begins at 10 PJ in 2030. The reason for this choice can be seen in the event tree,
in Figure 5.2. If the demand started earlier, the uncertain variables have not been intro­
duced yet, and a few new investments would have been made, not taking the uncertainty
into account.
The weight with which the model designates each possible future, is defined by the prob­
abilities in percent, p(t, s), which are displayed on the lines between nodes. The final 9
scenarios in the model, all have an equal probability of occurring, which is 1/9 = 11%.
24
==PAGE:30==
The hedging will therefore consider all potential futures equally important.
A final note on this event tree, is the 5 year time steps. The model essentially runs every
5 years to ease computational times, and all cost and income values reported for a year
are aggregated values from a 5 year time span. 2030 for example, covers 2028 ­ 2032,
while 2045 would cover 2043 to 2047.
5.1.2
Comparing the SPINES and Stochastic models
There is a key difference between the ’SPINES’ and ’Stochastic’ models:.
• The ’Stochastic’ model, is focused on long­term uncertainty, and can adapt its in­
vestment strategy based on the scenario it enters.
• SPINES is focused on short­term, recurring, uncertainties.
Lets say the Stochastic model enters 2030, and scenario 7 is realized, that is, an ad­
vanced cost decrease, with production values from 1995. The model must operate with
the technologies it has invested in before 2030, but after 2030, it can assume that the
revealed uncertainties are long term, and based on these values it can invest in new ca­
pacities before 2035. If it sees that the cost of offshore for example decreases in 2030,
it can invest into more of this technology, to be ready to operate in 2035. It cannot know
the actual realization of the variables in 2035, so if more uncertainty is introduced in 2035
it has to further hedge against that. Essentially, it is a rolling uncertainty model, where
revealed uncertainty can be used in the future.
SPINES on the other hand is focused on short­term uncertainties. As an example, SPINES
enters 2030, and the variables for scenario 1 are realized. SPINES cannot assume that
the production pattern of climate year 1995 is going to be similar in the future, and it cannot
therefore add any new investments in the coming periods. So for SPINES, all investments
in all scenarios have to be planned out the same way, and only the dispatch of electricity
will vary.There is however, a designed limitation on the SPINES model, that should be
considered. Due to its inability to adapt to revealed uncertainty, any variables that have
an effect on investments, such as cost development on technologies, cannot be used as
uncertain variables (only one realization can be true). As such, with the goal in mind of
stress testing investments made under the ’Stochastic’ mode, only the conservative cost
developments are used. In essence, this means that SPINES only has 3 scenarios, those
being scenario 1, 2 and 3 in Figure 5.2.
Finally, a deterministic model has also been created to compare its results with the stochas­
tic run. This deterministic run has the exact same values as scenario 3 in Figure 5.2,
a conservative cost development, and production values for 2009, as it is the highest
weighted climate year from TYNDP24, see chapter 2.
5.1.3
Considerations on the model approach
The reason for considering both the SPINES and Stochastic models in this thesis, is that
while SPINES is more suited for short term uncertainty, which hourly availability factors
certainly fall under, the model data used does favour the ’Stochastic’ model. This is due to
the fact that production patterns within different climate years from chapter 4, are repeat­
ing, i.e. for 1995, 2008 or 2009, the pattern for production in 2030 is equal to the pattern
of production in 2040. The stochastic model will correctly (in this model case) assume
that the pattern it observes is a long term development, despite it being built on an hourly
uncertainty. The perspective that the ’Stochastic’ model provides is useful for an investor
perspective, as it can also tell you what new investments should be considered if certain
uncertainties come to pass in the future.
25
==PAGE:31==
Given the lack of comparison between these two model types in papers, a first step will
be made to see how the outputs actually differ and the investment options they produce.
26
==PAGE:32==
6
Results
Three model types have been applied to investigate portfolio compositions:
1. Deterministic
• One determined future with all variables known.
2. Stochastic
• Uncertain future with possibility to adapt future investment strategy after un­
certainty is revealed.
3. SPINES
• Uncertain future with no possibility to adapt investment strategy after uncer­
tainty is revealed.
A predefined set of model runs have been performed to investigate the sensitivity of the
portfolio composition:
1. Influence of discount rate
2. Removal of carbon energy substitutions or introduction of CO2 emission qouta
3. Impact of new technology
4. Impact of changing probabilities
These thematic sensitivity tests have all been run as investment optimizations in the model
types described above and in chapter 5. The initial analysis is a broad robustness anal­
ysis in section 6.2, looking across all sets of model runs as well as model types. These
model types, the Stochastic, SPINES and deterministic, are broadly compared in the sec­
tion 6.2.2. The finer details of each thematic model run will then slowly be expanded in
subsequent sections.
The main focus of result analysis will be the ’Stochastic’ model type, but the deterministic
and SPINES model type results will also be discussed and have interesting results high­
lighted.
The full list of model runs performed, organized thematically, altering investment options,
constraints or variables, is shown in Table 6.1 below:
Model run
Deterministic
Stochastic
SPINES
Reference model with 3% discount rate
!
!
!
1% discount rate
!
!
!
6% discount rate
!
!
!
10% discount rate
!
!
!
Removal of Gas Turbine
!
!
!
Yearly reduction in allowable CO2 emissions
!
!
!
Addition of vertical bifacial PV panels
!
!
!
Altered probability of climate years ’95, ’08, ’09
#
!
!
Altered probability of climate years and cost reductions
#
!
#
Table 6.1: Overview of Sensitivity model runs
27
==PAGE:33==
The first portfolio composition comparison looks at the importance of the discount rate.
The discount rates used, ranges from a very low or essentially no discount rate of 1% in­
creasing stepwise up to a 10% discount rate, to assess how this increasing cost of money
influence the composition of the investment portfolio. A discount rate of 3% is used across
all other models.
The second portfolio composition focuses on political tools such as CO2 quotas to pro­
hibiting the use of carbon based energy, which in this case is a Gas turbine. Altering the
allowable CO2 emissions reduces the emission levels produced based on the reference
model, and cuts them by 30% in 2030, 60% in 2040 and 90% in 2050, using linear inter­
polation between the years.
The addition of new technology is focused on vertical bifacial PV panels, while the final
portfolio composition alters the probability of the climate years and cost reductions. In the
first altered probability, the weight assigned to each year follows the TYNDP24 weights,
as described in chapter 4. The weights are 23% for 1995, 37% for 2008 and 40% for
2009. Looking at Figure 5.2, the resulting probabilities for the final scenarios would be
around 8%, 12% and 13% percent for climate year 95, 08 and 09 respectively. The final
run tests the effect of a few unlikely scenarios in only the stochastic model. The relative
probability of the climate years remain the same, but the conservative cost future now has
a relative probability of 10%. This would result in a combined probability of a scenario with
a conservative cost future and climate year 1995, being 2.3%. The deterministic model
type has no probabilities attached so the final two sensitivity runs are not relevant to it.
The altered probability of cost reductions is also not relevant to the SPINES model, as
only the conservative cost reduction is implemented in this model (see chapter 5).
6.1
Technology volatility and price sensitivity
A feature which is also studied across the four thematic sensitivity runs, is the impact of
the production volatility properties and price connection across the four technology types
applied on the model. An overview is given below:
Technology
Production volatility
Price connection
Wind
High
Increase in production means decrease in price
Solar
Binary
Increase in production means decrease in price
Gas
Stable
Need for gas means high prices
Import
Stable
Useful if prices and renewables are low
Table 6.2: Connection between technology, production volatility and price [45]
Wind energy production is volatile in the sense that energy output fluctuates in correlation
with wind velocities. In periods of calm weather, wind turbines may provide no or only a
very limited energy output, and inversely in periods of windy weather, up to cut­out wind
speeds. In periods with optimal weather conditions, wind energy production and the price
is inversely correlated. At these time a great deal of the wind turbines will produce a sur­
plus of energy, driving down energy prices.
Solar energy display a different pattern driven by the time of day and season of the year.
Fixed Solar panels perform optimally in the middle of the day when the sun is high on
the sky, with a diminishing energy output towards sun­up and sun­down. Solar energy
can be said to be binary in the sense the energy output requires the sun to be on the sky
and thus are non­functional at night. From a price correlation point of view, solar energy
exhibits the same properties as wind, since the energy in general decrease at optimal sun
28
==PAGE:34==
conditions. On the other hand the binary quality makes is so that there is no correlation
with any price development at night. Furthermore, the energy production is at its high­
est in the middle of the day, where demand is not peaking and lower in the morning and
evening peak demands times for household energy consumption.
Looking at carbon energy alternatives, gas turbines in this case, has properties that are
opposite to renewable energy technologies. Renewables often get to sell their energy
on the wholesale electricity market first, due to their lower Levelized cost of Energy (The
minimum price at which energy must be sold for an energy project to break even) [12].
Gas production with higher cost margins will often only get sold when renewable energy is
not as available, which will increase spot prices which in turn compensates for the higher
energy production cost. Energy import is the most expensive way to comply with a en­
ergy supply requirement. However, from a hedging perspective, without access to a Gas
turbine, it may in some scenarios an expense that inflicts the lowest loss or likelihood of
incurring losses.
As will be discussed in the sensitivity analysis, these different energy production tech­
nology properties clearly influence how the model hedges its investment to build optimal
investment portfolios.
6.2
Robustness analysis
As mentioned in the Methodology section, this section will look at the total return of a
given portfolio compared to the capacities installed. The below analysis is inspired by
the Mean­Variance portfolio analysis as done by Fabien A. Roques et al. (2008), cited
in chapter 3. It focuses on the perceived risk of the model investment suggestions (the
spread of the returns), and holds it up against the potential return and the capacities that
the model invests in. This analysis also serves as an overview and reference point, before
diving into the deeper details in subsequent sections.
To support the robustness analysis, the average NPV and IRR values of the complete set
of model runs are found in Table 6.3, and Table 6.4 along with the standard deviations.
An overview of all the NPV and IRR values, considering all states of the world for all the
different model types, is shown in Appendix A.1 from Table A.6 to Table A.11.
The data and graphs presented below, from Figure 6.1 to Table 6.4 will be analyzed more
in depth in subsequent result sections, but will have short comments attached when in­
troduced.
29
==PAGE:35==
(a) Return on investment against standard deviation across
model runs
(b) Spread of capacity installed across model runs
Figure 6.1: Portfolio return on investment and capacity investments of the Stochastic
model
The overall Stochastic model result show that expected higher returns generally come at
a higher potential risk, or with a bigger standard deviation. Looking at the capacity invest­
ments compared to the return plot, there appears to be some correlation between higher
risk and on average larger investments into wind energy. This is visible by for example
comparing the 3% and 6% discount rate and CO2 Cap returns and investments. In other
words, there is potential for a very high upside or very low return on the investment inten­
sive wind options.
30
==PAGE:36==
(a) Return on investment against standard deviation across
model runs
(b) Capacity installed across model runs
Figure 6.2: Portfolio return on investment and capacity investments of the SPINES model
The SPINES model only uses a conservative cost reduction in the future, so naturally, it will
have slightly lower total returns compared to the Stochastic models. The fact that it cannot
optimize the portfolio over time after revealed uncertainty, also likely contributes to a lower
return across scenarios. The SPINES model composition of the investment portfolio,
Figure 6.2b appears very similar to the Stochastic model Figure 6.1b.The difference is of
course that the Stochastic model also provides a spread of potential investments, while
SPINES does not.
31
==PAGE:37==
(a) Return on investment across model runs
(b) Capacity installed across model runs
Figure 6.3: Portfolio return on investment and capacity investments of the Deterministic
model
The deterministic only has one future path and so does not vary in investments or return.
The overall average investments are similar to the other models, the background for which
will be discussed further down.
Below is found a matrix of the NPV calculations across all scenarios for the three model
types Stochastic, SPINES and Deterministic, including the standard deviation for Stochas­
tic and SPINES.
Runs
Stochastic
Spines
Deterministic
NPV MV
NPV STD
NPV MV
NPV STD
NPV
Disc. 1%
274.9
300.6
207.2
69.3
323.2
Reference 3%
167.1
138.0
100.4
62.4
132.3
Disc. 6%
66.6
29.2
2.9
9.7
23.4
Disc. 10%
21.2
19.7
45.9
0.0
19.8
No Gas
­0.3
137.1
­141.0
120.9
­46.1
CO2 bound
217.9
89.1
­30.3
97.9
­186.3
Solar addition
343.0
63.3
236.8
60.4
145.6
Prob. Clim.
296.3
59.8
126.7
26.5
140.3
Prob. Clim. & Cost
298.3
62.6
123.4
24.9
140.3
Table 6.3: Summary of NPV and standard deviation (STD) for sensitivity runs
The same set of model results shown as IRR values:
32
==PAGE:38==
Runs
Stochastic
SPINES
Deterministic
IRR MV
IRR STD
IRR MV
IRR STD
IRR
Disc. 1%
3.51%
4.02%
3,09%
0,65%
3.84%
Reference 3%
5.38%
2.23%
4,20%
0,74%
4.68%
Disc. 6%
7.83%
0.89%
6,09%
0,32%
6.61%
Disc. 10%
11.75%
1.58%
13,53%
0,00%
12.07%
No Gas
2.91%
2.18%
1,08%
1,78%
2.54%
CO2 bound
6.73%
2.32%
2,37%
1,69%
–%
Solar addition
8.44%
2.28%
6,23%
0,76%
4.70%
Prob. Clim.
6.86%
0.71%
4,60%
0,31%
4.68%
Prob. Clim. & Cost
7.39%
1.38%
4,59%
0,31%
4.68%
Table 6.4: Summary of IRR and standard deviation (STD) for sensitivity runs
The NPV has been calculated using Lumpsum investment values, with 2024 as the base
year. The model itself discounts back to 2022, but the only difference this makes is a
small NPV reduction, and as the focus here is on the reaction of the NPV to the model
runs and their relative sizes, this is less important.
Since each timeslice of the model runs cover 5 year periods, it is not possible to accu­
rately pinpoint where exactly the investments are being made within the 5 year period.
More accurate NPV assessments could be made by running more years. The decision to
focus on a long­term investment portfolio, rather than a short­term one with more yearly
variation, was made based on the generally long­term investment horizon of energy tech­
nology, where short­term optimizations are less relevant.
6.2.1
Robust investments based on sensitivity runs
Looking at the figures 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3, shows that PV panels are the largest investment
capacity wise across all model types and sensitivity runs. All three model types invest in
a solar capacity of around 700 MW, which appears to be a robust decision, regardless
of whether it is a normal PV panel or vertical bifacial panel technology. The spread is
quite large in the stochastic model reflecting this models ability to diversify due to rolling
uncertainty.
Looking at wind investments in the Stochastic model type first, Figure 6.1b, Onshore wind
is generally used more, compared to the Offshore investments, probably due to the lower
initial investment cost. However, the spread between SOWs is also larger. In fact, the
onshore wind standard deviation is often on par with the much cheaper solar panels. This
suggests that the Stochastic model considers the Onshore investments good choices,
mainly if the model is sure that the future production patterns are going to favour it. This
is again an effect of the Stochastic model being able to wait until 2030 and invest further
to have new Onshore capacity up by 2032 if the future production favours it. It still has
to hedge against what happens in 2030, but it can then choose how to expand after this
year. The details found in section 6.3, shows exactly how the Onshore investments are
spread out across SOWs.
The offshore investments therefore generally appear more robust to changes, regularly
investing in the 100 to 200 MW area with less deviation. The exception to this rule is the
10% discount rate and if the Vertical Bifacial solar panels come into play. In this case
high investment costs are generally avoided due to the higher risk, and exchanged for
33
==PAGE:39==
lower risk and lower investments. This is the hedging strategy applied, but there might be
others that could lead to a different result.
The SPINES model shows much the same thing, in that it values Offshore wind more
than Onshore. SPINES has no opportunity to adapt its investment portfolio at a later
stage dependent on climate year. Consequently, SPINES will prioritize Offshore turbines
as they present a higher worth more than the Onshore ones. SPINES still restrict the
investments to below 200 MW, but this is likely due to the higher production capabilities.
To SPINES, it is more optimal to invest more in higher yield, as Offshore turbines can
produce at higher levels across all SOWs.
As for the addition of the vertical bifacial solar panels, this technology provides the highest
average NPV, with a comparatively low standard deviation as well. This is also a point
where NPV and the return analysis complement each other. It is possible to tell from all
of the return plots, that the 1% discount rate scenario, has a higher average return than
the solar panels. The NPV for the solar values in the Stochastic and SPINES model, is
however, on average, better than the 1% run case. This means that when hedging against
the future, the vertical bifacial solar panels are a safer choice, even when compared to
other technologies at very low discount rates. This could be due to the synergy with
the other solar panels, where only the nighttime hours need to be covered by anything
other than sun. As sun is one of the cheapest technology per GW options at any time, the
perceived gain from this production makes the solar panels ’safe’ investments in all cases.
Another possibility to consider, is that the Vertical Bifacial solar panels do not have the
unpredictability found in the Danish Energy Agency production data. Their data source is
different and not as detailed, as explored in chapter 4.
The natural gas turbine is the one with the investments with the least cost fluctuations
but also with the lowest earnings. The hedging models favor a steady backup of 300 to
400 MW capacity. This reliance on natural gas is consistent with the findings of Fabien
A. Roques et al. (2008), that portfolios weighted toward gas plants are more attractive
to investors [31]. Another finding consistent with their paper is that a lower capital costs
could increase renewable share in portfolios. Having used 3 cost reduction futures, the
states of the world with the highest cost reductions, also contains the largest investments
into renewable energy.
The results also shows that the lack of adequate backup capacity creates unprofitable
scenarios in most cases. This is the case for both the no gas and CO2 bound model runs.
However, the Stochastic model is capable of navigating the CO2 bound. It can afford to
have have more and more gas capacity offline after 2030, because it can adapt with other
investments. This will be seen in the more detailed section. SPINES on the other hand,
which cannot adapt to future changes, has to attempt a more balanced approach. This
makes it less likely to provide an investment portfolio strategy that i capable of handling
all of the scenarios equally well.
Considering the IRR values in the No Gas model run first, investments in the no gas
category requires a discount rate lower than the reference 3% to become profitable. Only
the Stochastic model has a relatively high IRR ceiling to provide this leverage.
The final investment runs, in which the probabilities were changed, show an increase
in average values in both NPV and return, compared to the reference run. At the same
time, they see a reduction in standard deviation of the NPV values and the cashflow return.
The reason for the reduction in spread, is likely because the weight of several scenarios
have been reduced, and so the model can focus more on investments that are optimal
for the remaining scenarios. This should mean, that the less weighted scenarios should
34
==PAGE:40==
suffer more in return. However, when looking at the spread of cashflows across SOWs
for these runs, they do not differ greatly from the reference run. The figures can be found
in Figure A.15b, and Figure A.17 in Appendix A.2. This result might indicate that further
testing with more extreme scenarios are required to see a greater effect. As it is with
these results, they will not receive more attention in this project.
6.2.2
Comparison between model types
Some differences in investment decisions between the Stochastic and SPINES model
types were highlighted in the previous section, but more differences in return and risk will
be covered here.
Overall however, the two model types are not that distinct. There a few reasons for this,
based on the decisions made in this project. One is that demand only increases 2 PJ
across the modeling horizon. The differences would likely be more distinct if the increase
was larger over the years, forcing larger capacity investments. Another reason is that
while the time slice structure is extensive, the amount of variables that are uncertain, is
only production and in the case of Stochastic, also cost. This leads to fewer scenario
outcomes, reducing how many scenarios that are being hedged against.
It should be noted that the SPINES runs only work with the conservative reduction ap­
proach, and so the point of comparison between the two model types here, is mainly to
see how sensitive the portfolio reaction is to the sensitivity runs. For example, by looking
at the 6% discount rate returns, in figure 6.1 and 6.2, compared to the reference model.
The Stochastic model drops its average return by 36% when it goes from 3% discount
rate to 6%, but retains the relative standard deviation at 17% of the average return value.
The SPINES on the other hand, reduces the standard deviation of the results down from
15% of the average return value, down to 6% of the average return value. SPINES has
to make more conservative investment plans, and this entails focusing more on backup
capacities. This becomes even more clear when going to the 10% discount rate. SPINES
in this case tells you that the optimal choice when making an investment plan which can
handle all futures, is to not use renewable energy. The Stochastic model on the other
hand shows that even if you can adapt after revealed uncertainty, the average return is
still the same as for SPINES, but your uncertainty increases. As will be covered more
in depth in section 6.4, this reaction to the discount rate, is symptomatic of the models
narrowing their options to focus on the cheaper and more reliable energy sources, that
can give more rapid returns.
Looking at the IRR in Table 6.4, it has some interesting trends depending on the model
type used. For the Stochastic model, the IRR value generally moves closer to the actual
discount rate, the higher said discount rate is. If the model invests around the discount
rate being 3% in the future, The IRR is 5.38%. This means, that the discount rate could
have an uncertainty margin of +2.38%, within which the investments are still profitable.
At a discount rate of 6% it is down to +1.83%. It should be noted however, that the lower
the discount rate is, the higher the standard deviation is as well, at least for the Stochastic
model.
When comparing these two hedging models to the deterministic model using figure 6.3,
6.2 and 6.2, it can be seen that the deterministic model invests close to the average
amount of natural gas capacity present in the other two models. As such the determin­
istic model does not appear to underestimate the need for backup capacity. This is a
direct result of the extensive time slice details, which mitigates the risk of underestimating
flexibility, as mentioned earlier by for example Ringkjøb et al. (2020) [26].
The capacity investments as well as the returns for the deterministic model are gener­
35
==PAGE:41==
ally close to the Stochastic model, while the returns for the SPINES model generally de­
creases more in comparison. As such, with enough detail, the deterministic model seems
to be able to perform similarly to the two other models. However, this is only in the cases
when the gas turbine is involved. In the No Gas model run, the deterministic model does
well return wise, in this case because it is sure of the future, but cannot present any con­
sideration for future risk. Both the SPINES and Stochastic model show a drop in average
return, along with large standard deviations. The deterministic model thus overestimates
how well renewable energy investments will do by themselves in the future. Looking at
Table 6.3, actually also reveals negative NPV values for the deterministic run, both for the
removal of the Gas turbine and the CO2 bound. The background for this, is discussed in
the more detailed sections below.
A second overall difference is that the deterministic model has a tendency to invest more
in wind. It is the only one that chooses to invest in the 20 WTG apart from the Stochastic
model, which only does it in the Vertical Bifacial run. This is indicative of the fact that if
the model knows exactly what future awaits it, there is not as much risk involved in early
investments in Offshore wind. The tendency for a stochastic investment model to reduce
wind investment compared to a deterministic one, is a conclusion also drawn by Seljom
and Tomasgard (2015) [24].
The next sections will look at each thematic run in more detail. The aim is to explain
the difference in results between states of the world (SOW) specifically, and focus on the
uncertain variables that separate them.
6.3
Reference model
The reference model provides the template for graphs going forward. The first kind of
graphs contain minimum and maximum cumulative cashflow across SOWs along with
averaged costs and as well as income. Standard deviation of the costs for the stochastic
models is not shown in the graphs, as the variation is usually comparatively small and can
be gleaned from the cashflows as well. The second kind of graph contains the final in­
stalled capacities in 2045, as shown for all three model types in Figure 6.4. The reference
plots provide trends across SOWs and model types, that are useful before investigating
the overall impact of the thematic sensitivity runs further.
36
==PAGE:42==
(a) Cashflow, income and cost for the Determin­
istic model
(b) Total Deterministic capacity investments
(c) Cashflows, income and costs for SPINES
model
(d) Total SPINES capacity investments
(e) Cashflows, income and costs for the Stochas­
tic model
(f) Total Stochastic capacity investments
Figure 6.4: Reference run: Maximum and Minimum cashflows, average cost and income
shown over modelling horizon (Left). Total capacities installed across SOWs (Right)
While the overall cashflow is lower for SPINES, all reference models are able to hedge and
provide positive cashflow in 2030 across all SOWs (Figure 6.4e Figure 6.4c). Note that
income is always the same, as the demand curves and prices are always equal in every
run, as shown in chapter 4. The income values provided by VEDA have been validated
in Excel, and can be found in the Google drive link at the top of Appendix A.1.
All three models invest heavily in solar which is most likely due to its high production
capacity during summer along with its cheap cost. However, as mentioned, solar is binary
and can only cover the day demand, which means that if wind production is low during
evening and night hours in the summer, the model is forced to import electricity or use the
gas turbine. The production in winter and fall is also very dependent on the volatility of
wind.
These factors are likely why the lowest cash flows are seen in SOWs with climate year
37
==PAGE:43==
2008 (SOW 2, 5 and 8), which can be seen if you consider all possible cashflows across
SOWs in Figure 6.5.
(a) Cashflow trajectories for the SPINES model
(b) Cashflow trajectories for the Stochastic model
Figure 6.5: Cumulative cashflow trajectories across SOWs for reference run
The wind production in climate year 2008, is a particular type of volatile in the way that
reaches high peaks during one month only to drops far down the next (see Figure 4.1).
As a result, SOW 2, 5 and 8 in the Stochastic model hardly invest in any offshore wind but
compensate with the highest possible onshore wind investments instead. The most likely
reason it prefers onshore is because the cheaper operational and fixed costs means it
is less expensive to have limited production for extended periods. However, as onshore
wind follows a similar volatile pattern to offshore wind, the gas and import have to be used
more to compensate during the sudden drops in production.
The annual costs of climate year 2008 are therefore always slightly greater than in the
two other climate years. An example showing this cost difference in more detail, can be
seen in Figure A.2 in Appendix A.2.
On the other end of the spectrum is climate year 2009. The offshore energy production
here is more aligned throughout the year, not dropping in quite as many deep dives as
climate year 2008 does. This also means that SOWs with 2009 climate years (3, 6 and 9)
might often provide higher returns as they can more effectively utilize the high production
values of offshore wind.
Considering the above conclusions, the investments in SPINES, Figure 6.4d, becomes
a little more clear. it separates itself from the Stochastic model, by devaluing onshore
wind but keeping offshore wind. The reason for this is likely that offshore wind is capable
of more consistent high levels of production in 66% of SPINES future scenarios. In this
case it would rather have an investment that can perform well in two scenarios, rather
than having to overinvest into onshore wind to cover the last scenario.
6.4
Influence of the discount rate
The average capacity investments across SOWs for the Stochastic model are shown in
Figure 6.1b, but are repeated underneath, in Figure 6.6, for ease of comparison.
38
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.6: Average capacity investments against discount rates in the ’Stochastic’ model
Figure 6.6 shows that the investment strategy used by the Stochastic model in cases of
higher discount rates, is to reduce the investment risk by increasingly emphasizing Gas
turbine investment. The model prioritizes minimizing the risk of losses despite the lower
return on the investment. PV panels remain a viable choice regardless, due to their low
investment cost and virtually non­existent OPEX costs. With no downsides to generating
energy in the daytime, they can provide quick returns.
While Table 6.3 showed a NPV decrease as discount rate increased, SPINES and the
deterministic run both stay just on the line of being profitable, by focusing purely on the
cheapest investments, being the gas turbine and solar power. However, the stochastic
run shows a larger risk involved during the 10% discount rate run specifically, which is
shown in Figure 6.7.
(a) Cashflows, income and average costs for the
Stochastic model
(b) Cashflow over 9 SOW trajectories for the
Stochastic model
Figure 6.7: 10% discount rate cash flows, income and average costs over model horizon
(Left). Cashflow trajectories across all SOWs (Right)
Not only does the model focus more on the gas turbine investment, it also increases the
energy imports, as seen in Figure 6.7a. Figure 6.7b shows that only 3 scenarios, SOW
1, 2 and 3, have positive cashflow before 2035 in this sensitivity run, meaning there is a
high likelihood of little to no returns on the investments made during a 10% discount rate
39
==PAGE:45==
future. The 3 scenarios with more stable cashflow are all the conservative cost futures.
They perform better because the reduction in price of the renewables in the future, is not
as large, and consequently it does not value them as highly as the other scenarios do.
These 3 conservative scenarios all focus purely on investing in natural gas. The scenarios
with cheaper future costs diversify investments, which hurts the investment potential.
The exact capacity investments for all model types, across all investment can be found in
Appendix A.1, in Figure A.3 to Figure A.7.
6.5
Removal of carbon energy substitutions or introduction
of CO2 emission qouta
As mentioned, two cases testing the models response to energy substitution have been
performed:
1. Removal of the option to invest in Gas turbines
2. Reduction of Gas turbine production, through CO2 emission quota’s
Both scenarios look at the effect of removing or reducing access to backup carbon energy
sources, that are less volatile and can substitute green energy investments during low
production periods, but a lower return.
6.5.1
Removal of Gas turbine investment option
Removing the backup capacity in gas causes a more distinct divide in the cashflows
across SOWs in both the SPINES and Stochastic model. It is most pronounced for the
SPINES run, seen below:
(a) SPINES min and max cashflow, average
costs and income
(b) Total SPINES capacity investments
Figure 6.8: Minimum and maximum cashflows, average costs and income in the No Gas
run (Left). Total capacity investments in the No Gas run (Right)
Figure 6.8 shows that the costs now encompass a greater share of energy imports, com­
pared to the reference model. With the given renewable energy options, there does not
appear to be a reliable way in which SPINES can compensate for the lack of gas turbine.
The model in this case predicts that there is a 33% chance that the optimal investments
never make any money back, as is visible through the minimum cashflow line in Figure 6.8.
As discussed under the reference model, the under performing state of the world is once
again SOW 2. The SPINES model has to ensure that the cost is minimized across all
SOWs from a single investment plan. The optimal way to do that was to minimize the
dependency on the more volatile wind scenario.
This volatility is something that the stochastic model can compensate for after 2030. This
40
==PAGE:46==
can be seen when comparing investments completed within 2030, to the investments
completed in 2045, in Figure 6.9. Note that Figure 6.9a shows capacities completed in
the period 2028 to 2032, as a result of the 5 year aggregation of the model results. The
model could invest in an onshore wind turbine in 2030, as the uncertainty is revealed, for
it to be operational in 2032 and fall within the 2028­2032 aggregation.
(a) Capacity 2030
(b) Capacity 2045
Figure 6.9: Energy capacities in 2030 compared to 2045 for the Stochastic model
What is found from the above graph, is that the Stochastic model is forced to invest more
heavily into wind after 2030, in SOW 2, 5 and 8 to attempt to produce more power in the
slumps where the capacity factors are low.
Despite the fact that it can try to compensate, the expansions in wind investment needed
in SOW 2, 5 and 8, still make them the least profitable in the long run. The cashflow
graph is similar to the SPINES graph, and can therefore be found in Figure A.9, Ap­
pendix section A.2. As mentioned in section 6.2, removing the gas turbine also makes
the deterministic model invest in around 100 MW of the 20 WTG Offshore turbines. The
deterministic model is based on the 2009 climate year, where it knows it can effectively
utilize the relatively stable and high output despite the cost.
6.5.2
Introduction of CO2 emission limit
In comparison to immediately removing the gas turbine, all SOWs in this Stochastic case
had positive NPVs and cashflows that were already positive in 2030. See Table A.6 in
Appendix A.1. The SOWs also show similar investment paths with gas turbine capacity
lowered to around 200 ­ 300 MW, while wind capacities both fluctuate around 200 MW,
as seen in Figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: Total capacity across SOWs for the Stochastic model during the CO2 bound
sensitivity run
41
==PAGE:47==
The reason both SPINES and the Deterministic runs have negative NPVs in Table 6.3 in
comparison to the Stochastic run, is due to two reasons:
1. One of the SOW NPV values in the SPINES run is ­160 MEURO, while the two
others are smaller positives, which brings the average down.
2. Both SPINES and Deterministic invest more into Offshore and Onshore wind within
2023­2027, than the Stochastic model does.
Since there is no income before 2030, the present value of the cashflow 4 to 5 years in the
future barely outweighs the early investments that the SPINES and Deterministic models
make. The Stochastic model can afford to wait till after future uncertainty has been re­
vealed, since it can still utilize a decent amount of gas turbine backup in 2030.
Potential errors in the NPV value is that there are also investments made late in the mod­
eling horizon, around 2040 for SPINES and the Deterministic cases. Note that in this
case the model might take the residual value of the investment into account, which is
missing in the calculation. There is also a positive cashflow already from 2030 across
all model types, (see Table A.8,Table A.11) which indicates that the investment portfolios
would have no issue actually generating profit.
The remaining cashflow and capacities for this run can be found in Appendix section A.2
Figure A.8.
6.6
Impact of new technology
The PV panels have already proven to be one of the most robust investment decisions
across the models, as it consistently shows up as one of the largest investments in almost
every strategy. By adding a cheap option that increase the efficiency in the early and late
hours of the day that a normal PV panel struggles with, results in the greatest share of
capacity installations across models, and overall higher NPV values Table 6.3.
42
==PAGE:48==
(a) Total capacity installed in the Deterministic
model
(b) Total capacity installed in the SPINES model
(c) Total capacity installed in the Stochastic
model
Figure 6.11: Total capacity investments across model types in the Bifacial PV sensitivity
run
Interestingly for the Stochastic model, Figure 6.11c, PV panels drop almost out of use in
climate years 2008 and 2009. This drop in PV panels provides a possible reason for the
high capacity values of solar in previous model runs. If the model sees higher prices or
perhaps more demand outside of optimal PV hours, it might try to increase solar capacity
to reach a higher production in those hours. This could make sense, since peak demands
are often found in the evening, when everyone is at home, and prices are normally higher.
This is verified by looking at a closeup of the demand and price graphs used in the model,
shown below for the first 48 hours of the year.
(a) Electricity spot prices
(b) Demand in percentage of yearly total
Figure 6.12: Electricity spot prices and demand for the first 48 hours of the year in 2040
Figure 6.12 is just a cutout, but it represents a general daily trend, albeit simplified in the
modeled prices for 2040. The prices increase during evening, and are often lower during
43
==PAGE:49==
the middle of the day. This is when the PV panels are usually most productive. Compared
to that, the demand and prices are generally higher in the evening, as seen leading up
to hour 40. As this time frame is somewhere that the vertical bifacial panels can produce
effectively, they can outperform the normal PV panels.
Another reason these vertical PV panels are effective is because towards the evenings
the atmosphere is slowly cooled while in the mornings it is slowly warmed. The evening
effect calms local air currents, while the morning effect slowly increases wind movement.
Wind turbines are therefore not always that effective in these hours, but the Bifacial PVs
are likely to be, meaning they should be able to cover demand that might otherwise have
had to be covered by natural gas or imports.
Adding more portfolio diversity through technology selection, and productions pattern in
itself likely also has a stabilizing effect on the security of supply.
An issues not considered here, but which could turn out to have an impact, is that the
prices used, do not show any effects of the production of vertical panels. If a lot of PV
panels where to suddenly produce more efficiently in the evenings and mornings, this
might push prices down, as discussed within Table 6.2.
44
==PAGE:50==
7
Discussion
The production data used in this project is as mentioned based on the production pat­
terns of the 3 years that best represent the weather conditions over the past 30 years. It
is worth considering however, whether this is actually relevant data for the assessment of
long term future investments. From the perspective of a hedging investment model, this
thesis has not analyzed whether these climate years expand the potential climate scenar­
ios broadly enough. It could well be that more extreme change in climate patterns would
alter the investment balance of the portfolio. The weather patterns we expect to see in
the future, have an increasing risk of being more extreme than the ones that have come
before. Extremes do not just refer to an average change in wind speed or precipitation
but also the severity of extreme weather events when they do arrive. Extremes might
be sudden periods of little to no wind or an increase in the severity of storms, and the
occurrence of them [46]. Data from even 10 years ago, might not reflect these increasing
extremes. Changes like those above are ones we are beginning to experience in our cli­
mate in Denmark already, and are therefore relevant to consider in future energy models.
As discussed, the portfolio compositions above heavily favours PV panels. The question
is whether the current climate of energy systems actually supports an investment deci­
sion such as this. A major problem facing a lot of energy investors in Denmark, but also
abroad, is the issue of electrification. If the production of energy exceeds demand, prices
are reduced, and the more of one type of energy source you pour into the system, the
more the price will fall. In other words there has to be someone to buy the electricity or
somewhere for it to go. Simultaneously, the EU has seen, and is pushing for a reduction
in energy consumption to meet the energy efficiency targets [47]. Since 2005 the amount
of renewable energy has doubled in the EU. At the same time energy prices have gone
up, but whether they will remain high is uncertain [37]. These changes in demand and
prices impact the modeling scenarios that must be considered to ensure a robust and
sustainable energy system development.
A recent example of how these multiple issues may influence the expansion of renewable
energy, is found in the restructuring that the Danish company Better Energy is undergoing
[5]. Better Energy have been expanding their energy investments rapidly since 2020, ex­
pecting the demand for this energy to rise with it. As electrification has not been rolled out
as rapidly, this trapped Better Energy in a financial vice, and they have had to postpone 3
GWp of solar projects until after 2030. Directly following the investment strategies given
by the model runs above, could make these similar financial risks apparent.
Another example of the investment costs against energy production is found in the port­
folio compositions shown to favour PV panels. Another question is whether the future
energy systems subsidies should actually support such an investment, or whether they
should differentiate between sources of renewable energy. This model approach also al­
lows for this more policy­driven analysis.
A more technical consideration lies in the way that the CPLEX algorithm (the solver used
with GAMS), solves Linear Programming (LP) problems. As used in this project, CPLEX
stops as soon as it finds one optimal solution. It does not automatically search for all
possible optimal solutions, and so there might be other optimal solutions with other in­
vestment combinations. If these other solutions exist, they are not reported. It may also
be that there are near­optimal solutions, that are very close to the given optimal solution.
45
==PAGE:51==
The reason this is interesting to consider, is that the solver does not think much about the
contents of the optimal solution. It could easily be a solution investing everything into one
technology capacity, with little to no spread.
There may be another optimal solution, or a few very close solutions, which contain a
more varied investment portfolio. The result you get is limited to how detailed your model
is, how many constraints and options the solver has to consider. CPLEX does provide
a solution pool tool, which stores multiple solutions within a certain percentage of the
optimal solution but this is developed for Mixed­Integer Problems, not LPs. This option
therefore hinges on whether TIMES, and by extension VEDA, is able to accommodate
mixed integer solutions, and how to implement them. The value it would bring in relation
to a hedging approach would be the ability to advocate for several investment pathways,
based on context that the model may not be able to consider.
7.1
Future work
The effect of additional technology options, and in particular, other alternatives to the nat­
ural gas turbine is a natural next step in developing the model. Denmark, and in fact most
of Europe, is currently trying to move away from a dependency on gas. This project has
illustrated, albeit through a simplified model, how robust natural gas is in several future
scenarios. This illustrates part of the issue in securing a future with reduced carbon based
energy sources.
It has however, not considered green alternatives to backup capacities, such as battery
storage or green hydrogen (PtX). With the framework built in this thesis, it could be in­
teresting to test whether these technologies can displace natural gas production across
model types. This would also be relevant as a continuation of the discussion above as PtX
would introduce a natural uptake of green energy production, and expand electrification.
Additional technology options could also include more technical distinctions in technology
options, based on more assumed future technology developments or production capabil­
ities.
Based on the spread of future cashflows seen in some of the above sensitivity runs, it
would also be valuable to study the level of subsidy required to ensure positive NPV of
all future scenarios. An apt example would be Figure A.8, where one cashflow never be­
comes positive. Different forms of subsidies, such as Premiums or Feed­in­Tarriffs, could
be tested to estimate the least amount of support needed to make investments profitable.
The approach taken, may also be used to test more complex types of Power Purchase
Agreements (PPA), that allow for e.g. varying price subsidies. While Denmark is moving
away from subsidized green energy projects, the combination of uncertain energy model­
ing with subsidy research could be valuable. Especially as the increase in interest rates
challenges the financial attractiveness of some renewable energy investments.
A potential avenue of work in the future also includes testing investments from one of the
Stochastic scenarios in the SPINES model. The decision of the scenario with advanced
cost reductions and climate year 2009, in the Stochastic model, could for example be
inserted into the SPINES model. The SPINES model then forces these investments to
operate in every climate year, which would tell you how resilient the cashflow of the cho­
sen investments is in different production climates. A variant of this has already been
tested by Sejlom et al. (2015) [24]. One of the tests of that paper was to take determin­
istic model investments and run through a SPINES model. An attempt to extend this to
also work for the Stochastic model results, has yet to be done.
The exact hedging strategy used by the model could also receive more attention in fu­
46
==PAGE:52==
ture work. The hedging decisions made when considering stochastic modeling seems
to want to avoid the larger, more expensive investments. There are cases where large
investments, with more capital behind them, could be better solutions than smaller invest­
ments. The choice of hedging strategy and what to hedge against could be a whole study
in itself.
47
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusion
A full energy system model, incorporating all 8760 hours of the year, capable of modeling
Onshore and Offshore wind power, photovoltaic panels and gas turbines, supported by
energy sales has been developed in TIMES. The model is capable of simulating three
wind and solar weather scenarios, electricity spot prices, as well as cost and technology
improvement changes. The TIMES model operates on windows, but due to extensive
computation times, has been made to function on a Linux High Power Computing server
setup. An extensive set of data input and output transformation tools have been devel­
oped in Python, simplifying model configuration and data interpretation significantly.
It has been shown that the Stochastic model is useful as a tool for optimizing investment
strategies facing an uncertain future and develop potential investment portfolios that are
robust across multiple future scenarios. The Stochastic model, can specifically be used to
identify robust investment decisions by analyzing what kind of investments are repeated
across uncertain futures. Secondly, it can be used to test rolling uncertainty, by seeing
what investment decisions should be taken after you know what long term uncertainty
is realized. The rolling uncertainty aspect is most effective if the uncertainty used has a
high probability of being a long term development. The production uncertainty used in this
project, is unlikely to reflect long term changes, whereas cost reductions are more likely
to be long term. Thirdly, it can outline the required early investments needed to hedge
against the introduction of uncertainty. However, to fully utilize this particular aspect, it
would be good to heighten the yearly resolution, i.e. not to average across 5 years at a
time. In this way, it would be possible to see exactly when, and what investments are
being made before 2030.
In essence, the strength of the Stochastic model is the potential for strategic long­term
planning under future uncertainty at a larger scale. This could be to address national
priorities in developing a long­term investment strategy for the green power transition or
more complex energy investments with multiple options.
It is also shown how the SPINES model is more well tailored to a use case where the
objective is to asses a particular project, and to establish the risk profile or robustness of
that single project. In future work developing this investment modeling approach further,
SPINES could be used to test the robustness of specific investment portfolios made in
a Deterministic or Stochastic run, similar to what Sejlom et al. (2015) has demonstrated
before.
In terms of the investment decisions made, all employed models show that renewable en­
ergy installations are highly dependent on the discount rate. An increase in the discount
rate, i.e. an investor is in need of higher returns, increases the risk and potentially reduces
the viability of renewable energy investments. This forces the models to hedge the risk
by increased use of the most stable or cheapest energy options. The results shown here
consider a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA), and so it would have to be assumed that
without this income certainty, the renewable energy options would be even less viable.
The results show that onshore wind and solar power appears financially viable up to a 6%
discount rate in both the deterministic and stochastic modeling approaches. The stochas­
tic modeling approaches generally reduces wind energy investments faster to hedge the
risk. This result is similar to the one found by Sejlom et al. (2015) [24]. Solar power invest­
ments are largely unaffected when comparing the Deterministic and stochastic modeling
48
==PAGE:54==
approaches. In fact, solar is the most favored of all the technology options, across all
model types and scenarios. However, given current issues with slow electrification, sig­
nificant price gauging could occur by increasing renewable energy optimized for middle
of the day production.
Another find that is consistent with other papers is the fact that natural gas turbines appear
to be highly valued as a hedging investment in portfolio optimizations, due to the stable
energy production, the close correlation to energy prices and the low financial risk despite
the low financial margins [31].
When reducing carbon energy dependency, the result was a poor portfolio performance
with high reliance on energy imports, and compensation investments, mainly in wind.
The results also show the positive impact on the investment portfolio from introducing new
technologies such as vertical bifacial solar panels. This technology is promoted in future
investments, assumedly due to better correlations with price and demand requirements.
In future work the introduction of storage technology such as PtX could greatly benefit
the robustness testing. Both to better understand the impact of such technology, but also
better understand the impact of cost reductions and storage capability over time.
Similarly, the model has been shown to be able to respond to legislative tools such as
CO2 quotas that limit the potential future use of for example Gas turbines.
A limitation in the scenario building has been the reliance on known weather patterns,
which may induce a trust in the portfolio robustness that is not based in reality. We are
already experiencing more extreme weather and working with relatively old weather pat­
terns from 1995, 2008 and 2009 will most likely not be representative of the future. They
are in nature probably a little too conservative, even if they represent particular systematic
weather patterns. Forecasting more likely future weather patterns would help expanding
the scenarios to cover more likely future outcomes. This would require a more in­depth
analysis of frequency and changes in weather patterns.
Future work should include more stringent methods for analyzing and assessing invest­
ment robustness across multiple parameters. In this work, focus has been on developing
an end­to­end modeling framework for building robust investment portfolios. Through
the significant reduction in calculation times that have been accomplished, the number
scenarios that can efficiently be investigated has potential to increase significantly. But
with the significant modeling capability made possible, the amount of output data also
increases. This points to future work looking at more stringent approaches to model­
ing robustness through various statistical and BI tools or using AI technology or scenario
methods that collate results into actual decision support needed to make informed deci­
sions.
What this work has shown, is that modeling multiple futures to assess future energy in­
vestments offer a way to build more robust investment portfolio made up of various and
complementary sustainable energy sources, and offers a way to expand on both analysis
and modeling complexity.
49
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Lion Hirth. “The market value of variable renewables: The effect of solar and wind
power variability on their relative price”. In: Energy Economics 38 (2013), pp. 218–
236. DOI: 10.1016/j.eneco.2013.02.004.
[2]
Ingeniøren. Rekordhøj elpris: Torsdag bliver elprisen den højeste i år. Accessed:
2025­02­01. 2025. URL: https://ing.dk/artikel/rekordhoej- elpris- torsdag- bliver-
elprisen-den-hoejeste-i-aar.
[3]
TV 2 Nyheder. Ingen bud på danske havvindmølleparker. Accessed: 2025­01­10.
2024. URL: https://nyheder.tv2.dk/samfund/2024-12-05-ingen-bud-paa-danske-
havvindmoelleparker.
[4]
DR Nyheder. Staten får første gang ejerskab i vindmølleparker – det risikerer at
forsinke projekter. Accessed: 2025­02­15. 2025. URL: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/
politik/staten-faar-foerste-gang-ejerskab-i-vindmoelleparker-det-risikerer-forsinke.
[5]
Better Energy. Better Energy Enters Restructuring. Accessed: 2025­02­09. 2024.
URL: https://www.betterenergy.com/en/global-news/2024/better-energy-enters-
restructuring/.
[6]
DR Nyheder. Dansk milliardvirksomhed går i betalingsstandsning ­ solcellemarkedet
æder sig selv. Accessed: 2025­01­10. 2024. URL: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/
penge/dansk-milliardvirksomhed-gaar-i-betalingsstandsning-solcellemarkedet-aeder-
sig-selv.
[7]
Kathrin Berensmann and Nannette Lindenberg. Briefing Paper (23/2016). 2016.
[8]
Danish Energy Agency and Energinet. Technology Data for Energy Plants for Elec­
tricity and District Heating Generation. Tech. rep. Version 0015. First published Au­
gust 2016; Current version published April 2024. Available online: https://ens.dk/
technologydata. Carsten Niebuhrs Gade 43, 1577 Copenhagen, Denmark: Danish
Energy Agency, 2024.
[9]
L ; Kitzing and P E Morthorst. “Trends in offshore wind economics­the past and the
future”. In: (2015), pp. 20–22.
[10]
P. E. Morthorst and L. Kitzing. “Economics of building and operating offshore wind
farms”. In: Elsevier Inc., Mar. 2016, pp. 9–27. ISBN: 9780081007808. DOI: 10.1016/
B978-0-08-100779-2.00002-7.
[11]
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). 2021 Annual Technology Base­
line: Electricity ­ Technologies. https://atb.nrel.gov/electricity/2021/technologies.
Accessed: 2024­10­01. 2021.
[12]
Nicolas Campion et al. MarE­Fuel: LCOE and Optimal Electricity Supply Strategies
for P2X Plants. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2025­02­01. Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), 2024. URL: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/264043718/
MarE_Fuel_LCOE_and_optimal_electricity_supply_strategies_for_P2X_plants.pdf.
[13]
Laszlo Szabo et al. “Impacts of large­scale deployment of vertical bifacial pho­
tovoltaics on European electricity market dynamics”. In: Nature Communications
15.6681 (2024). Received: 23 October 2023; Accepted: 19 July 2024. DOI: 10 .
1038/s41467-024-50762-7.
[14]
Merriam­Webster. Stochastic. https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary /
stochastic. Accessed: 2024­11­14. 2025.
[15]
International Energy Agency ­ Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme
(IEA­ETSAP). TIMES Model Generator. Accessed: 2025­02­09. 2025. URL: https:
//iea-etsap.org/index.php/etsap-tools/model-generators/times.
50
==PAGE:56==
[16]
Richard Loulou and Antti Lehtilä. Stochastic Programming and Tradeoff Analysis
in TIMES. Documentation for TIMES Version 3.9. Supplement to the TIMES Model
Generator documentation. Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme (ET­
SAP). 2016.
[17]
Tianle Shou. “A Literature Review on the Net Present Value (NPV) Valuation Method”.
In: Proceedings of the 2022 2nd International Conference on Enterprise Manage­
ment and Economic Development (ICEMED 2022). Atlantis Press, 2022, pp. 826–
830. ISBN: 978­94­6239­585­5. DOI: 10.2991/aebmr.k.220603.135. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.2991/aebmr.k.220603.135.
[18]
Shao Sheng and Ali Sorourkhah. “A Novel Perspective on Prioritizing Investment
Projects under Future Uncertainty: Integrating Robustness Analysis with the Net
Present Value Model”. In: Economics: The Open­Access, Open­Assessment E­
Journal 18.1 (2024), pp. 1–16. DOI: 10.1515/econ-2022-0111.
[19]
Stefan Pfenninger, Adam Hawkes, and James Keirstead. “Energy systems model­
ing for twenty­first century energy challenges”. In: Renewable and Sustainable En­
ergy Reviews 33 (2014). Received: 26 October 2013; Accepted: 4 February 2014;
Available online: 20 February 2014, pp. 74–86. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2014.02.003.
[20]
Henrik Lund et al. “Simulation versus Optimisation: Theoretical Positions in Energy
System Modelling”. In: Energies 10.7 (2017), p. 840. DOI: 10.3390/en10070840.
[21]
Stein W Wallace, Stein­Erik Fleten, and Alfred Getz. “Stochastic Programming Mod­
els in Energy”. In: (2003). looking at a deterministic future is far too optimistic ­ gen­
eral overview.
[22]
Frauke Wiese et al. “Balmorel open source energy system model”. In: Energy Strat­
egy Reviews 20 (2018), pp. 26–34. DOI: 10.1016/j.esr.2018.01.003.
[23]
A. Zakaria et al. “Uncertainty models for stochastic optimization in renewable en­
ergy applications”. In: Renewable Energy 145 (Jan. 2020), pp. 1543–1571. ISSN:
18790682. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2019.07.081.
[24]
Pernille Seljom and Asgeir Tomasgard. “Short­term uncertainty in long­term energy
system models: A case study of wind power in Denmark”. In: Energy Economics 49
(2015). Received: 19 February 2014; Accepted: 7 February 2015; Available online:
20 February 2015, pp. 157–167. DOI: 10.1016/j.eneco.2015.02.004.
[25]
Pernille Seljom et al. “Stochastic modelling of variable renewables in long­term en­
ergy models: Dataset, scenario generation & quality of results”. In: Energy 236
(2021). Received: 16 February 2021; Accepted: 4 July 2021; Available online: 8
July 2021, p. 121415. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2021.121415.
[26]
Hans­Kristian Ringkjøb et al. “Short­term solar and wind variability in long­term en­
ergy system models ­ A European case study”. In: Energy 209 (2020), p. 118377.
DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2020.118377.
[27]
International Energy Agency. Managing Seasonal and Interannual Variability of Re­
newables. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2025­01­31. International Energy Agency (IEA),
2023. URL: https : / / www . iea . org / reports / managing - seasonal - and - interannual -
variability-of-renewables.
[28]
Gustavo Haydt et al. “The relevance of the energy resource dynamics in the mid/long­
term energy planning models”. In: Renewable Energy 36.11 (2011), pp. 3068–3074.
DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2011.03.028.
[29]
Martin Hain et al. “Managing renewable energy production risk”. In: Journal of Bank­
ing & Finance 97 (2018), pp. 1–19. DOI: 10.1016/j.jbankfin.2018.09.001.
[30]
Jennifer F. Morris et al. “Hedging Strategies: Electricity Investment Decisions under
Policy Uncertainty”. In: The Energy Journal 39.1 (2018), pp. 101–122. DOI: 10.5547/
01956574.39.1.jmor.
51
==PAGE:57==
[31]
Fabien A. Roques, David M. Newbery, and William J. Nuttall. “Fuel mix diversifica­
tion incentives in liberalized electricity markets: A Mean–Variance Portfolio theory
approach”. In: Energy Economics 30.4 (2008), pp. 1831–1849. DOI: 10.1016/j.
eneco.2007.11.008.
[32]
ENTSO­E and ENTSOG. TYNDP 2024 Scenarios Methodology Report. Tech. rep.
Accessed: 2024­12­20. ENTSO­E and ENTSOG, 2024.
[33]
Eurostat. Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the Eurozone. Accessed:
2025­01­25. Used for adjusting monetary values across years in the eurozone.
2022.
[34]
Pablo Hevia­Koch and Henrik Klinge Jacobsen. “Comparing offshore and onshore
wind development considering acceptance costs”. In: Energy Policy 125 (Feb. 2019),
pp. 9–19. ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2018.10.019.
[35]
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). Documenting a Decade of Cost
Declines for PV Systems. https://www.nrel.gov/news/program/2021/documenting-
a-decade-of-cost-declines-for-pv-systems.html. Accessed: 2024­09­29. 2021.
[36]
Andel Energi. Vejledende og Historiske Gaspriser. https://andelenergi.dk/erhverv/
gas/vejledende-og-historiske-gaspriser/. Accessed: 2024­12­01. 2025.
[37]
World Economic Forum. Gas and Electricity Prices in Europe. Accessed: 2025­02­
16. 2023. URL: https://www.weforum.org/stories/2023/11/gas-electricity-prices-
europe/.
[38]
Energinet. CO2 Emission Factor. Accessed: 2024­11­10. 2025.
[39]
Danish Ministry of Taxation. En ny CO2­afgift i industrien er en realitet. https://skm.
dk/aktuelt/presse-nyheder/pressemeddelelser/en-ny-co2-afgift-i-industrien-er-en-
realitet. Accessed: 2024­12­01. 2025.
[40]
Danish Energy Agency. Etablerede Havvindmølleparker. https://ens.dk/energikilder/
etablerede-havvindmoelleparker. Accessed: 2024­10­15. 2025.
[41]
Nicolas Campion et al. MarE­Fuel: LCOE and Optimal Electricity Supply Strategies
for P2X Plants. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2025­02­01. Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), 2024. URL: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/264043718/
MarE_Fuel_LCOE_and_optimal_electricity_supply_strategies_for_P2X_plants.pdf.
[42]
Ørsted. Horns Rev 2 Wind Farm Project Summary. https://orsted.com/-/media/
www/docs/corp/com/our-business/wind-power/wind-farm-project-summary/horns-
rev-2_uk_2018.ashx?la=en&hash=c2efe01aac0b9706fc81774e5b8c7a3c. Accessed:
2024­11­23. 2018.
[43]
George B. Dantzig. “Linear Programming Under Uncertainty”. In: Management Sci­
ence 50.12 Supplement (2004). Originally published in 1955 and republished in
2004, pp. 1764–1769. DOI: 10.1287/mnsc.1040.0261.
[44]
John R. Birge and François Louveaux. Introduction to Stochastic Programming.
Second. Springer Series in Operations Research and Financial Engineering. New
York: Springer Science+Business Media, 2011. ISBN: 978­1­4614­0236­7. DOI: 10.
1007/978-1-4614-0237-4.
[45]
Anca Pircalabu et al. “Joint Price and Volumetric Risk in Wind Power Trading: A
Copula Approach”. In: Energy Economics 62 (2017), pp. 139–154. DOI: 10.1016/
j.eneco.2016.11.023. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0140988316303450.
[46]
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Climate Change 2023: Syn­
thesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Tech. rep. Accessed:
2025­02­09. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2023. URL: https:
52
==PAGE:58==
//www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_SYR_LongerReport.
pdf.
[47]
European Environment Agency. Primary and Final Energy Consumption. Accessed:
2025­02­16. 2025. URL: https://www.eea.europa.eu/en/analysis/indicators/primary-
and-final-energy-consumption.
53
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix
Link to Google Drive folder containing NPV and IRR as well as annuity calculation valida­
tions: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/10q_RcwQBk8zTzOGV3C-FEIdCsRFW127V/
edit?usp=sharing&ouid=104991829013799853901&rtpof=true&sd=true When considering the
annuity calculation validations, consider that annualized investment payments are the
lumpsum investment split across the entire lifetime, which the program uses to determine
optimal investments.
The annualized investment cost values that VEDA provides after a model run, have been
validated by splitting the lumpsum investment cost across the lifetime of the given tech­
nology, considering the interest rate. In the scenarios where no investments are made
near the end of model time horizon discrepancies between VEDA values and validated
values are small. The remaining discrepancy can likely be chalked down to the mid­year
discounting, which is active in the VEDA runs performed. In scenarios with investments
near the end of model time horizon, a variable called salvage costs, which accounts for
the residual value of the investment, lowers the annuity payments in the model, creating
larger discrepancies. When Offshore wind installments are made, the annuity payments
only begins after the lead time of 4 years, which is the subsequent 5 year period.
A.1
Data
Wind farm
Start ­ Finish
Rønland
1996­2003
Rødsand
1998­2003
Samsø
1999­2003
Frederikshavn
1999­2003
Horns Rev 2
2004­2009
Avedøre Holme
2008­2010
Sprogø
2008­2009
Rødsand II
2007­2010
Anholt
2010­2013
Horns Rev 3
2015­2019
Kriegers Flak
2016­2021
Table A.1: Offshore wind farms from application to ended construction
54
==PAGE:60==
Tech/Year
Season
Mean
Var
StDev
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 95
Winter
0.73
0.09
0.3
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 95
Spring
0.5
0.1
0.32
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 95
Summer
0.35
0.08
0.27
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 95
Fall
0.57
0.11
0.33
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 08
Winter
0.73
0.1
0.31
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 08
Spring
0.44
0.1
0.32
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 08
Summer
0.43
0.08
0.28
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 08
Fall
0.57
0.12
0.34
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 09
Winter
0.57
0.11
0.33
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 09
Spring
0.45
0.1
0.31
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 09
Summer
0.44
0.09
0.3
Offshore Wind 2040 ­ 09
Fall
0.59
0.09
0.31
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 95
Winter
0.48
0.08
0.29
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 95
Spring
0.31
0.06
0.25
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 95
Summer
0.18
0.03
0.18
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 95
Fall
0.3
0.06
0.24
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 08
Winter
0.52
0.09
0.3
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 08
Spring
0.21
0.05
0.23
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 08
Summer
0.23
0.04
0.19
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 08
Fall
0.32
0.07
0.26
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 09
Winter
0.28
0.07
0.27
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 09
Spring
0.22
0.04
0.2
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 09
Summer
0.22
0.04
0.2
Onshore Wind 2040 ­ 09
Fall
0.36
0.06
0.25
Solar 2040 ­ 95
Winter
0.09
0.03
0.16
Solar 2040 ­ 95
Spring
0.24
0.09
0.29
Solar 2040 ­ 95
Summer
0.3
0.09
0.31
Solar 2040 ­ 95
Fall
0.11
0.03
0.18
Solar 2040 ­ 08
Winter
0.06
0.02
0.14
Solar 2040 ­ 08
Spring
0.25
0.09
0.3
Solar 2040 ­ 08
Summer
0.27
0.08
0.28
Solar 2040 ­ 08
Fall
0.12
0.03
0.19
Solar 2040 ­ 09
Winter
0.07
0.02
0.14
Solar 2040 ­ 09
Spring
0.25
0.09
0.3
Solar 2040 ­ 09
Summer
0.27
0.08
0.28
Solar 2040 ­ 09
Fall
0.11
0.04
0.19
Table A.2: Seasonal statistics of production input for 2040
Water Depth (m)
CAPEX (MEUR/GW)
Fixed OPEX (MEUR/GW/yr)
Var OPEX (MEUR/PJ)
25
1900
57
1.194444444
30
1957
58.71
1.229234088
35
1995
59.85
1.251322751
40
2033
60.99
1.27258567
45
2071
62.13
1.293068298
50
2147
64.41
1.331858407
Table A.3: Cost by water depth of offshore wind turbines
55
==PAGE:61==
Period
2022­2025
2025­2030
2030­2035
2035­2040
2040­2045
Conservative
0,141926151
0,165400858
0,025
0,025641026
0,026315789
Moderate
0,158762546
0,188665226
0,05
0,052631579
0,055555556
Advanced
0,244352088
0,323377314
0,0625
0,066666667
0,071428571
Table A.4: Cost Reductions from NREL, Onshore Wind
Period
2022­2025
2025­2030
2030­2035
2035­2040
2040­2045
Conservative
0,071845213
0,09512569
0,040552902
0,031814972
0,026405048
Moderate
0,115463851
0,15793879
0,077358572
0,063234812
0,054102705
Advanced
0,135218827
0,187236413
0,098639123
0,082496063
0,072096602
Table A.5: Cost Reductions from NREL, Offshore Wind
A.2
Graphs
Figure A.1: Cost as a function of water depth
(a) Cost breakdown SOW 2
(b) Cost breakdown SOW 3
Figure A.2: Cost breakdown comparison from reference model
56
==PAGE:62==
Sow/Model Run
1%
Ref. 3%
6%
10%
No Gas
CO2 Bound
Vertical Bifacial
Prob. Climate
Prob. Cost & Climate
1
400.3
178.5
48.0
72.7
­13.42
359.31
440.09
340.8
350.74
2
­295.9
­49.1
37.7
28.5
­269.14
143.06
357.49
320.1
317.09
3
400.1
191.8
15.1
21.9
36.51
206.86
288.71
350.7
350.11
4
475.5
246.9
69.0
9.6
70.72
235.81
328.46
385.4
396.66
5
­77.2
­96.3
91.5
1.7
­171.62
65.25
230.57
204.3
206.49
6
489.7
253.0
58.6
9.6
106.56
286.06
357.44
203.7
201.55
7
550.1
309.8
113.8
21.8
134.75
194.60
387.86
315.9
318.39
8
­25.9
159.2
69.0
13.2
­62.37
144.61
283.98
282.5
282.21
9
557.3
309.8
96.9
12.0
165.68
325.25
412.83
263.7
261.41
Table A.6: Net Present Value (NPV) values for the Stochastic model type across SOWs and model runs
Sow/Model Run
1%
Ref. 3%
6%
10%
No Gas
CO2 Bound
Vertical Bifacial
Prob. Climate
Prob. Cost & Climate
1
4.80%
5.51%
6.94%
15.03%
2.81%
12.19%
13.17%
7.17%
9.60%
2
­5.25%
2.13%
7.53%
13.53%
­1.44%
8.62%
11.77%
7.10%
9.57%
3
5.09%
5.68%
6.35%
12.92%
3.51%
5.51%
6.64%
7.19%
7.14%
4
6.07%
6.58%
7.74%
10.63%
4.05%
6.00%
7.42%
7.94%
8.04%
5
­0.28%
0.84%
9.37%
10.12%
0.25%
3.79%
6.05%
5.78%
5.79%
6
6.25%
6.63%
7.36%
10.65%
4.53%
6.52%
7.61%
5.61%
5.56%
7
7.17%
7.72%
8.93%
11.37%
5.09%
5.83%
8.11%
7.39%
7.37%
8
0.47%
5.68%
7.97%
10.85%
1.89%
4.86%
6.79%
7.06%
7.01%
9
7.24%
7.63%
8.31%
10.69%
5.48%
7.21%
8.43%
6.51%
6.44%
Table A.7: Internal Rate of Return (IRR) values for the Stochastic model type across SOWs and model runs
==PAGE:63==
Sow/Model Run
1%
Ref. 3%
6%
10%
No Gas
CO2 Bound
Vertical Bifacial
Prob. Climate
Prob. Cost & Climate
1
2030
2030
2036
2030
2036
2030
2030
2030
2030
2
2030
2030
2030
2030
2043
2030
2030
2030
2030
3
2030
2030
2030
2030
2033
2030
2030
2030
2030
4
2030
2030
2030
2038
2033
2030
2030
2030
2030
5
2030
2030
2030
2038
2033
2030
2030
2030
2030
6
2030
2030
2030
2038
2030
2030
2030
2030
2030
7
2030
2030
2033
2035
2033
2030
2030
2030
2030
8
2030
2030
2030
2037
2033
2030
2030
2030
2030
9
2030
2030
2030
2038
2030
2030
2030
2030
2030
Table A.8: Years where cashflow becomes positive for the Stochastic model type across various SOWs and model runs
58
==PAGE:64==
Sow/Model Run
1%
Ref. 3%
6%
10%
No Gas
CO2 Bound
Vertical Bifacial
Prob. Climate
Prob. Cost & Climate
1
245.96
136.0
12.3
45.9
­104.16
29.62
267.07
162.0
157.26
2
109.79
12.7
­10.4
45.9
­306.53
­168.35
152.51
119.8
114.75
3
265.79
152.5
6.7
45.9
­21.21
47.69
290.97
98.2
98.18
Table A.9: NPV values for SPINES across SOWs and model runs
Sow/Model run
1%
Ref. 3%
6%
10%
No Gas
CO2 bound
Vertical Bifacial
Prob. Climate
Prob. Cost & Climate
1
3.43%
4.61%
6.40%
13.53%
1.82%
3.45%
6.70%
5.01%
5.01%
2
2.18%
3.17%
5.65%
13.53%
­1.39%
­0.01%
5.15%
4.55%
4.49%
3
3.67%
4.83%
6.22%
13.53%
2.75%
3.68%
6.84%
4.26%
4.26%
Table A.10: IRR values for SPINES across SOWs and model runs
Sow/Model run
1%
Ref. 3%
6%
10%
No Gas
CO2 bound
Vertical Bifacial
Prob. Climate
Prob. Cost & Climate
1
2030
2030
2030
2030
2039
2030
2030
2030
2031
2
2030
2030
2030
2030
inf
2030
2030
2030
2030
3
2030
2030
2030
2030
2033
2030
2030
2030
2030
Table A.11: Years where cashflow becomes positive for the SPINES model across SOWs and model runs
==PAGE:65==
(a) Det Cashflow
(b) Det Capacity
(c) Spines Cashflow
(d) Spines Capacity
(e) Stoch Cashflow
(f) Stoch Capacity
Figure A.3: 1% discount rate plots
(a) SPINES cashflow trajectories
(b) Stochastic cashflow trajectories
Figure A.4: Cashflow trajectories for 1% discount rate
60
==PAGE:66==
(a) SPINES cashflow trajectories
(b) Stochastic cashflow trajectories
Figure A.6: Cashflow trajectories for 6% discount rate
(a) Det Cashflow
(b) Det Capacity
(c) Spines Cashflow
(d) Spines Capacity
(e) Stoch Cashflow
(f) Stoch Capacity
Figure A.5: 6% discount rate plots
61
==PAGE:67==
(a) Det Cashflow
(b) Det Capacity
(c) Spines Cashflow
(d) Spines Capacity
(e) Stoch Cashflow
(f) Stoch Capacity
Figure A.7: 10% discount rate plots
In the following graphs, the deterministic model does not accurately display that there are
annuity payments to consider before 2030, due to an error in displaying the results.
62
==PAGE:68==
(a) Det. cashflow
(b) Det. capacity
(c) Stoch cashflow
(d) Stoch capacity
Figure A.8: Removal of gas turbine cashflow and capacities
(a) SPINES
(b) Stochastic
Figure A.9: Cashflow trajectories for no gas runs
63
==PAGE:69==
(a) Det. cashflow
(b) Det. capacity
(c) SPINES cashflow
(d) SPINES capacity
(e) Stoch cashflow
(f) Stoch capacity
Figure A.10: CO2 bound cashflow and capacities
(a) SPINES
(b) Stochastic
Figure A.11: Cashflow trajectories for CO2 bound
64
==PAGE:70==
(a) Det Cashflow
(b) Det Capacity
(c) Spines Cashflow
(d) Spines Capacity
(e) Stoch Cashflow
(f) Stoch Capacity
Figure A.12: Bifacial PV plots
(a) SPINES
(b) Stochastic
Figure A.13: Cashflow trajectories for Vertical Bifacial PV
65
==PAGE:71==
(a) Det Cashflow
(b) Det Capacity
(c) Spines Cashflow
(d) Spines Capacity
(e) Stoch Cashflow
(f) Stoch Capacity
Figure A.14: Probability changed of only climate years
(a) SPINES
(b) Stochastic
Figure A.15: Cashflow trajectories probability change of climate years
66
==PAGE:72==
(a) Stoch Cashflow
(b) Stoch Capacity
Figure A.16: Probability change of both cost and climate years
Figure A.17: Cashflow trajectories for probability change of both cost and climate years
67
==PAGE:73==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
