==PAGE:1==
 
 
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
M.Sc. Thesis 
Enhancing Dynamic Balancing in Rigid Planar Four-Bar Mechanisms 
Through AI-Driven Design Optimization of Coupler Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim 
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, DTU 
Winter 2025 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Thesis Title:  
Enhancing Dynamic Balancing in Rigid planar Four-Bar Mechanisms Through AI- Driven 
Design Optimization of Coupler Link 
Author's name:  
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim (s222507) 
Degree program: 
M.Sc. Engineering in Design & Innovation 
Department: 
Civil & Mechanical Engineering, DTU 
Supervisors’ names:  
Josef Peter Helmut Oehmen, Tobias Eifler 
Date & Year: 
23 Feb 2025 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
Approval 
 
This thesis is titled “Enhancing Dynamic Balancing in Rigid planar Four-Bar Mechanisms 
Through AI-Driven Design Optimization of Coupler Link” has been prepared over 5 months for 
the degree of M.Sc. Engineering in Design & Innovation program at the department of Civil and 
Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark. It has been approved and supervised 
by the following supervisors: 
Main Supervisor: Josef Peter Helmut Oehmen, Co-Supervisor: Tobias Eifler 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim (s222507) 
23 February 2025 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
I
Acknowledgment 
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, family and friends for their support, 
guidance and encouragement throughout this journey. 
I also want to give a special thank you to Tobias Eifler, for his valuable feedback and time 
dedicated to me during our weekly meetings. 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
II
Table of Contents 
Acknowledgment ........................................................................................................ I 
Table of Contents ...................................................................................................... II 
List of Figures ......................................................................................................... IV 
List of Tables ............................................................................................................ V 
List of Algorithms ..................................................................................................... VI 
List of Appendices ................................................................................................... VII 
Abstract .................................................................................................................... 1 
Introduction .............................................................................................................. 2 
Chapter 1: Dynamic Balancing in Four-bar Mechanisms ................................................. 5 
Background ................................................................................................................... 5 
Methodology, Results, Disscussion .................................................................................... 13 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 21 
Chapter 2: AI-driven optimization of a four-bar mechanism for reduced total force ............ 24 
Background .................................................................................................................. 24 
Methodology, Results, Discussion ..................................................................................... 26 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 36 
Discussion............................................................................................................... 38 
Conclusion .............................................................................................................. 42 
==PAGE:7==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
III
References ................................................................................................................ i 
Appendix ................................................................................................................. iv 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
IV 
List of Figures 
FIGURE 1 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STATIC BALANCING, FORCE BALANCING, AND DYNAMIC 
BALANCING 
7 
FIGURE 2 THREE DEVICES UTILIZING A FOUR-BAR MECHANISM: ANGLEPOISE LAMP (LEFT), A 
DOUBLE WISHBONE SUSPENSION (MIDDLE) AND A ROBOTIC ARM. 
8 
FIGURE 3 A FOUR-BAR MECHANISM. 
11 
FIGURE 4 KINETIC MECHANISM OF THREE FOUR-BAR MECHANISMS: DOUBLE CRANK (LEFT), 
CRANK-ROCKER (MIDDLE) AND DOUBLE ROCKER (RIGHT). 
12 
FIGURE 5 A FLOW CHART SHOWING A SYSTEMIC APPROACH TO CONDUCTING RESEARCH. 
13 
FIGURE 6 A P-DIAGRAM MAPPING THE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN INPUTS, OUTPUTS, AND 
FACTORS INFLUENCING THE SYSTEM. 
15 
FIGURE 7 SIMULATING A FOUR-BAR MECHANISM IN THE ANSYS RIGID BODY DYNAMICS 
SOFTWARE. 
18 
FIGURE 8 LINKS AND JOINTS IN A SIMULATED FOUR-BAR MECHANISM. THE GROUND LINK IS NOT 
SHOWN. 
19 
FIGURE 9 THE MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF THE STEEL UTILIZED FOR THE LINKS IN THE 
SIMULATED FOUR-BAR MECHANISM. 
20 
FIGURE 10 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE COUPLER LINK’S PHYSICAL PROPERTIES (LENGTH, 
MASS AND FRICTION) AND THE TOTAL FORCE WAS ANALYZED. PRELIMINARY VISUAL 
INSPECTION SUGGESTS THAT TOTAL FORCE PRIMARILY DEPENDS ON THE LENGTH OF THE 
COUPLER LINK. TO FORMALLY CHARACTERIZE THIS DEPENDENCY, A GAM WAS EMPLOYED 
TO INFER THE FUNCTIONAL RELATIONSHIP. 
28 
FIGURE 11 INFERRING THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN THE COUPLER LINK’S LENGTH AND THE 
SYSTEM-WIDE FORCE (TOTAL FORCE). 
30 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
V 
List of Tables 
TABLE 1 CORRELATION ANALYSIS BETWEEN THE COUPLER LINK’S PROPERTIES AND TOTAL 
FORCE. 
29 
TABLE 2 GAM PERFORMANCE METRICS INFERRING THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN LENGTH AND 
TOTAL FORCE. 
31 
TABLE 3 RESULT OF OPTIMIZATION ON TOTAL FORCE IN A FOUR-BAR MECHANISM. 
33 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
VI 
List of Algorithms 
ALGORITHM 1 A GENERAL PSEUDOCODE FOR A GENETIC ALGORITHM. 
34 
ALGORITHM 2 A GENERAL PSEUDOCODE FOR A GRADIENT DESCENT ALGORITHM. 
35 
ALGORITHM 3 A GENERAL PSEUDOCODE FOR AN SA ALGORITHM. 
36 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
VII 
List of Appendices 
APPENDIX 1 R SCRIPT FOR ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS BETWEEN COUPLER’S PARAMETERS AND 
SYSTEMIC TOTAL FORCE. 
IV 
APPENDIX 2 R SCRIPT FOR REGRESSION AND OPTIMIZATION. 
VII 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
1 
Abstract 
The Design optimization of mechanical systems is a critical aspect of engineering design, 
particularly for those in which force distribution impacts stability, precision and efficiency. This 
becomes increasingly important when these systems are in motion. This study focuses on a rigid 
planar four-bar mechanism, where the objective is to minimize total systemic force to enhance 
dynamic balancing of the mechanism. By utilizing simulation, regression and optimization 
techniques in artificial intelligence, an association analysis was performed to identify key 
parameters influencing total force. Among the three coupler link parameters—length, mass, and 
friction—only length exhibited a significant correlation with total force (r = 0.430, p = 0.028). 
Given the non-linear nature of this relationship, a generalized additive model with a Gamma 
family (inverse link function) was employed for predictive modeling. 
Building upon these insights, three optimization algorithms applied to determine the optimal 
coupler link length for minimizing total force: genetic algorithm (GA) with L-BFGS-B, gradient 
descent (GD) with NLOPT_LD_LBFGS, and simulated annealing (SA) with SANN. Since GA 
inherently maximizes fitness functions, the total force function got negated to ensure proper 
minimization. The results revealed that GA achieved the greatest force reduction (18.15%), 
outperforming the other methods. While GD exhibited fast convergence, it was prone to local 
minima, and SA effectively explored the search space, however with slower convergence. 
This study demonstrates how artificial intelligence-based modeling and optimization techniques 
can significantly enhance mechanical design by reducing systemic forces and improving 
dynamic balancing in a four-bar mechanism. The methodology presented here has broader 
implications for fields such as robotics, biomechanics, and industrial automation, particularly in 
high-speed operations where minimizing forces is crucial for enhancing stability, accuracy, 
efficiency and durability of the system. Future research could extend this work by integrating 
multi-objective optimization, incorporating additional constraints such as material properties, 
structural topology and frequency response. Moreover, this study highlights the potential of 
artificial intelligence-driven in engineering design, enabling the development of more intelligent, 
efficient, and optimized mechanical systems. 
==PAGE:14==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
2 
Introduction 
Achieving dynamic balancing in four bar mechanisms is critical to reduce reaction forces and 
moments at joints, minimizing energy losses, and enhancing system performance. Traditional 
methods, such as counterweights and counter-rotating masses, have been employed for 
balancing, but they often introduce additional mass and inertia, complicating the system’s 
dynamic behavior. Instead, recent studies have increasingly focused on exploring methods to 
achieve inherently dynamic-balanced systems. This study explores a data-driven approach, 
where the coupler link’s design parameters (length, mass, and friction at its joints) are 
systematically analyzed and optimized to improve dynamic balance while maintaining simplicity 
and manufacturability. 
The rapid advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and computational optimization has 
transformed the way engineers approach mechanical system design. From traditional analytical 
methods to modern AI-driven solutions, the integration of simulation, machine learning, 
regression modeling, and optimization algorithms has enabled engineers to tackle complex 
challenges with greater precision and efficiency. This thesis employs these techniques to improve 
dynamic balancing through design optimization, with a particular focus on the four-bar 
mechanisms—a fundamental structure in wide range of mechanical systems. 
Thesis Structure  
This thesis is structured into two main chapters beginning with a background overview followed 
by the methodology, results, discussion) section and finally concluding on the findings. 
Moreover, the findings of  the two chapters will be discussed and concluded at the end. Each 
chapter is built on the previous one to progressively develop an AI-driven solution for Design 
optimization of rigid planar four bar mechanism. 
Chapter 1: Dynamic balancing in Four-Bar mechanisms 
The first chapter lays the foundation by introducing dynamic balancing, four-bar mechanism, 
detailing its components, the kinematics associated with the rigid planar four-bar mechanism, 
and its significance in engineering applications. It discusses the challenges of dynamic balancing 
==PAGE:15==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
3 
and reviews various traditional and modern balancing techniques through a comprehensive 
literature review. The chapter also presents a structured scientific methodology for evaluating the 
system’s performance using simulation-based experiments in Ansys Rigid Body Dynamics. 
The dynamic behavior of the mechanism, considering variations of coupler link key design 
parameters—including its (1) length, (2) mass, and (3) joints' friction—will be simulated and 
measured through a range of kinematic and dynamic metrics—including (1) angular velocity, (2) 
acceleration, (3) total forces and (4) total moments.  
To systematically analyze the system by identifying factors that impact reliability and 
performance, a Parameter Diagram (P-diagram) is introduced, mapping input variables, noise 
factors, control parameters, and outputs. This structured approach ensures a data-driven process, 
setting the stage for further analysis. 
Chapter 2: AI-driven optimization of a four-bar mechanism for reduced total force 
Building upon the methodology established in Chapter 1, the second chapter delves into AI-
driven regression modeling and optimization techniques. The relationship between coupler link 
parameters (length, mass, and friction) and total force is first explored through association 
analysis. The study finds a significant non-linear relationship between coupler length and total 
force, best captured using a Generalized Additive Model (GAM) with a Gamma family (inverse 
link function). 
Following this, three powerful AI-based optimization techniques—Genetic Algorithm (GA) with 
L-BFGS-B, Gradient Descent (GD) with NLOPT_LD_LBFGS, and Simulated Annealing (SA) 
with SANN—are employed to minimize total force. The results demonstrate that GA achieved 
the highest reduction in total force (18.15%), effectively balancing global exploration and local 
refinement. While GD offered rapid convergence, it was prone to local minima, and SA helped 
escape local minima but converged more slowly. This chapter highlights how machine learning 
and optimization algorithms can refine mechanical designs, enhancing structural balance and 
overall efficiency. 
Thesis Objectives and Contributions 
==PAGE:16==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
4 
This thesis aims to bridge the gap between traditional mechanical design principles and modern 
AI-based optimization techniques. It provides: 
▪ A comprehensive study on dynamic balancing in four-bar mechanisms. 
▪ A novel approach that integrates simulation, AI-driven regression and optimization algorithms 
to enhance dynamic stability. 
▪ A methodology that can be extended to a wide range of mechanical systems where dynamic 
balancing is crucial. 
By combining simulation, statistical modeling, and AI-driven optimization, this thesis presents a 
comprehensive framework for improving dynamic balancing, trying to push the boundaries of 
what is possible in traditional engineering design. 
Future Work 
In the following chapters, this thesis explores how these AI-based methodologies can be further 
extended to multi-objective optimization, where additional parameters, such as energy efficiency, 
material properties, shape structure are considered. The goal is to develop a comprehensive 
optimization framework that can be applied to a wide range of mechanical systems. This thesis is 
intended for researchers, engineers, and students interested in improving dynamic balancing in 
mechanical design field through computational and AI-driven optimization techniques.  
 
==PAGE:17==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
5 
Chapter 1: Dynamic Balancing in Four-bar Mechanisms 
When mechanisms operate, their center of mass (CoM) and angular momentum may change in 
certain cases, leading to imbalances (1). Dynamic balancing involves achieving balance in an 
object or system while it is in motion. In contrast to static balancing, which focuses on stationary 
objects, dynamic balancing ensures stability during movement or rotation, and it achieves this by 
evenly distributing the mass and forces around the system (2, 3). 
Dynamic balancing consists of both force balancing and moment balancing. Force balancing is 
achieved by keeping the mechanism's CoM fixed at a specific point, while moment balancing is 
achieved by maintaining a constant angular momentum (1). A mechanism is considered fully 
dynamically balanced/reactionless when the sum of all forces  and moments (torques) acting on 
the base is zero (1), where force (F) and moment (M) are defined as: 
Static and dynamic balancing is a classic problem in the theory of machines and mechanisms (4). 
A rotating object must achieve static balance before it can have dynamic balance, and achieving 
dynamic balancing is more complex than static balancing, as it addresses the forces and moments 
generated during motion, such as centrifugal and twisting forces. They can cause vibrations or 
unwanted movements if the system is imbalanced, leading to increased wear and tear on 
bearings, noise levels, and potential structural damage (2, 5, 6). 
Background 
Dynamic balancing and its importance 
When mechanisms operate, their CoM and angular momentum may change in certain cases, 
leading to imbalances (1). Dynamic balancing involves achieving balance in an object or system 
while it is in motion. In contrast to static balancing, which focuses on stationary objects, dynamic 
balancing ensures stability during movement or rotation, and it achieves this by evenly 
distributing the mass and forces around the system (2, 3). 
Dynamic balancing is an essential engineering process, as it ensures the smooth and efficient 
performance of rotating components, and it is more crucial in high-speed or rotational systems. It 
==PAGE:18==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
6 
holds significant importance across numerous industries. In manufacturing, for instance, 
dynamically balanced machinery runs more smoothly, resulting in improved product quality and 
extended equipment lifespan. 
In the field of robotics, dynamic balancing is crucial for the development of mechanisms that 
require precise and stable movements. In the automotive industry, balanced tires and drive shafts 
enhance vehicle stability and ensure passenger comfort. Similarly, in power generation, turbines 
and generators demand precise balancing to function efficiently and safely (1, 7, 8). 
Dynamic balancing consists of both force balancing and moment balancing. Force balancing is 
achieved by keeping the mechanism's CoM fixed at a specific point, while moment balancing is 
achieved by maintaining a constant angular momentum (1). A mechanism is considered fully 
dynamically balanced/reactionless when the sum of all forces  and moments (torques) acting on 
the base is zero (1), where force (F) and moment (M) are defined as: 
𝑭= 𝑚· 𝒂 
𝑴= 𝒓× 𝑭 
Where m is mass, a is acceleration vector, r is position vector from the pivot to the point where 
the force is applied and × represents the cross product. 
Static and dynamic balancing is a classic problem in the theory of machines and mechanisms (4). 
A rotating object must achieve static balance before it can have dynamic balance, and achieving 
dynamic balancing is more complex than static balancing, as it addresses the forces and moments 
generated during motion, such as centrifugal and twisting forces. They can cause vibrations or 
unwanted movements if the system is imbalanced, leading to increased wear and tear on 
bearings, noise levels, and potential structural damage (2, 5, 6). 
==PAGE:19==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
7 
Another interesting aspect regarding the relationship between static balancing, force balancing, 
and dynamic balancing is that dynamic balancing is a subset of force balancing, while force 
balancing itself is a subset of static balancing. It means If a system is force balanced, it is also 
static balanced; but if a system is static balanced, it does not necessarily mean that it is force 
balanced Figure 1. 
In conclusion, dynamic balancing is crucial for ensuring the optimal performance and durability 
of moving and rotating components. By addressing imbalances effectively, it reduces vibrations, 
minimizes wear, and prevents mechanical failures, enabling efficient and reliable operation in a 
wide range of applications. 
Four-bar Mechanism 
The four-bar mechanism, a fundamental component in machine design, was selected for this 
study due to its simplicity, widespread engineering applications, and numerous advantages. With 
only four links and four joints, it is mechanically straightforward to design, manufacture, and 
maintain Figure 3. This compact structure enables its integration into constrained spaces while 
facilitating large-scale motions and handling significant loads with relatively small components. 
A key advantage of the four-bar mechanism is its ability to generate diverse motion types, 
including rotational, oscillatory, and complex non-linear movements, while also enabling the 
conversion of one motion type into another. By varying link lengths and selecting appropriate 
Figure 1 Relationship between static balancing, force balancing, and dynamic balancing 
==PAGE:20==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
8 
configurations based on Grashof’s Law, engineers can predict and design specific motion 
trajectories with precision. Properly designed four-bar linkages provide smooth, controlled 
motion, making them highly adaptable to various mechanical applications. 
In practical implementations, four-bar mechanisms are often paired with springs or 
counterweights to balance the weight of moving components effectively (9). A simple example is 
the Anglepoise lamp, where a four-bar linkage and spring system enable smooth head and arm 
adjustments. This design allows the lamp to maintain its position without additional support, 
ensuring inherent stability and balance (10) (Figure 2, left). 
Furthermore, by distributing loads across multiple points, four-bar mechanisms reduce localized 
stress, enhancing durability and performance. This principle is particularly significant in 
automotive suspension systems, such as the Double Wishbone Suspension, where a four-bar-like 
configuration improves stability, minimizes body roll, and enhances vehicle handling (11) 
(Figure 2, middle). Similarly, in precision applications like robotic arms, which require 
controlled positioning for assembly and manufacturing, four-bar mechanisms ensure reliable 
orientation and stability (12) (Figure 2 right). 
Despite its advantages, achieving dynamic balance in four-bar mechanisms remains challenging 
due to inherent trade-offs between minimizing reaction forces/moments and maintaining design 
simplicity. Traditional balancing methods, including counterweights (for static balancing) and 
Figure 2 Three devices utilizing a four-bar mechanism: Anglepoise lamp (left), a double 
wishbone suspension (middle) and a robotic arm. 
==PAGE:21==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
9 
counter-rotations, help mitigate imbalances by repositioning the system’s center of mass (CoM) 
to a fixed point (13). Also, counter-rotating components achieve moment balancing by ensuring 
that angular momentum remains zero (1). However, these strategies significantly increase system 
mass and inertia, complicating kinematic and dynamic analyses. Moreover, they become 
increasingly complex when applied to multi-link systems. 
Several studies have explored balancing methodologies. Meijaard et al. (2020) applied balanced 
masses and counter-rotating techniques, normalizing mechanism dimensions relative to the 
coupler length. By placing balance masses on the crank and rocker and incorporating counter-
rotating wheels, they effectively reduced vibrations and enhanced stability (14). Russo et. al. 
(2004) investigated counterweights and spring-based approaches for balancing parallel robots. 
While counterweights stabilized the structure by canceling gravitational effects, springs 
dynamically adjusted forces for improved balance (4). However, these methods remain 
suboptimal for dynamic conditions, often amplifying total reaction forces and joint moments 
(15). Furthermore, placing counter-balance devices on moving links rather than the base 
necessitates additional countermeasures to neutralize their effects (1, 16). 
A more effective approach to dynamic balancing involves designing mechanisms that are 
inherently stable by optimizing their geometry, shape, topology, mass distribution, and friction 
characteristics (17). Chaudhary et al. improved four-bar linkage balancing through shape 
optimization, refining link dimensions using cubic B-splines and genetic algorithms (13). Ayala-
Hernandez et. al. employed topology optimization to redistribute mass and modify link 
geometries, treating the links as three-dimensional flexible bodies to optimize the entire system 
(18). Matthijs et. al. validated a dynamically balanced inverted four-bar linkage through 
theoretical modal analysis and experimental testing, achieving high-acceleration motions with 
minimal shaking forces (19). 
Unlike the crank and rocker, which function as driver and output links, the coupler link plays a 
pivotal role in motion transmission. Its dynamic behavior includes oscillation, rotation, and 
translation, leading to complex inertial forces and torques that influence the entire system (20). 
Given its significant influence on system dynamics, this study focuses on the coupler link’s 
design parameters (length, mass and friction at its joints) and their impact on dynamic stability in 
==PAGE:22==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
10 
a standard rigid four-bar mechanism. The aim is to systematically analyze these factors and 
develop an optimized design to improve dynamic balancing, thereby enhancing efficiency in 
practical applications. 
This chapter investigates the variations of the coupler link’s design parameters through 
simulation technique. They will be simulated and analyzed at all joints of the mechanism through 
kinematic, and dynamic metrics—including angular velocity, angular acceleration, total/reaction 
forces, and total/reaction moments.  In the next chapter, optimization techniques, such as 
algorithmic optimization, will be applied to refine the coupler link’s design while adhering to 
dimensional and material constraints. The final optimized mechanism is expected to achieve 
enhanced dynamic balance by minimizing reaction forces and moments at joints while 
preserving desired kinematic characteristics, ultimately improving energy efficiency and overall 
system performance. 
Structure and components of a four-bar mechanism 
A Mechanism is the mechanical heart of a machine that has the function of transferring motion 
from a power source to an output. Several products and machines across various industries 
utilize four-bar mechanisms, also known as four-bar linkages, due to their simplicity, design 
flexibility, and efficiency in transferring forces and motions. It is a fundamental mechanical 
system consisting of four links (bars), connected in a closed-loop by four joints, enabling several 
ranges of controlled and predictable movements. The most common configuration involves four 
rigid bars connected by four one-degree-of-freedom revolute joints, forming a rigid-planar four-
==PAGE:23==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
11 
bar mechanism (21) (Figure 3). The basics of the mechanism are presented below to help with 
better understanding. 
1. Ground link (frame): This is the fixed link that serves as the reference frame for the 
mechanism. It anchors the system by connecting two pivot points, points A and B. 
2. Input link (crank): Connected to the ground link at point A, the input link is driven by an 
external force or actuator. 
3. Output link (rocker): Attached to the ground link at point D, the output link delivers the 
resultant motion of the mechanism. 
4. Intermediate link (coupler): This link connects the input and output links at points B and C, 
respectively, and it is not directly attached to the ground link but serves to transmit forces and 
motions between the input and output links. 
Examples of a planar four-bar mechanism is shown in Figure 4. 
The total degrees of freedom (DoF), or mobility of a rigid planar four-bar mechanism is only 
one. It means by moving one link, all other links can be at only one already predetermined 
position. 
Figure 3 A four-bar mechanism. 
==PAGE:24==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
12 
Using Grübler’s equation, the system can be verified to have one DoF, a defining characteristic 
of four-bar mechanisms (22): 
𝐷𝑜𝐹= 3(𝑛−1) −2𝑙−ℎ 
𝑖𝑓 𝑛= 4, 𝑙= 4, ℎ= 0 →𝐷𝑜𝐹= 3(4 −1) −2(4) −0 = 1 
Where: 
• F is number of degrees of freedom, 
• n is total number of links in the mechanism, 
• L is total number of lower pairs (1 DoF joints) and 
• H is total number of higher pairs (2 DoF joints). 
A standard classification of four-bar mechanisms based on Grashoff’s Law is derived from a 
fundamental inequality (23): If the sum of the shortest and longest link lengths in a planar 
quadrilateral linkage is less than or equal to the sum of the remaining two link lengths, then at 
least one link is capable of making a full rotation. In other words, the condition is satisfied if 
𝑆+ 𝐿≤𝑃+ 𝑄 
Where S and L are the shortest and longest links, respectively, and P and Q are the other links. 
Therefore, if 𝑆+ 𝐿> 𝑃+ 𝑄, then none of the links can make a full rotation. 
When choosing a mechanism for design, the link lengths are determined through a process 
known as dimensional synthesis (24). Types of mechanisms when Grashoff’s Law is met: 
Figure 4 Kinetic mechanism of three four-bar mechanisms: Double Crank (left), Crank-Rocker 
(middle) and double Rocker (right). 
==PAGE:25==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
13 
1. Double Crank: both the input and output links can rotate fully. The shortest link is the fixed 
one (ground) (Figure 4, left). 
2. Crank-Rocker: input link rotates fully, and the output link oscillates back and forth. The 
shortest link is the input (Figure 4, middle). 
3. Double Rocker: the coupler link makes a full revolution, and both the input and output links 
oscillate. The shortest link is the coupler (Figure 4, right). 
The input motion, constrained by the kinematic configuration of a four-bar mechanism, dictates a 
corresponding output motion. To enhance efficiency and minimize costs, designers strive to 
utilize the simplest mechanism that achieves the desired motion, guided by Grashof's Law (23). 
Methodology, Results, Disscussion 
A structured scientific methodology is employed in this study to ensure a systematic and reliable 
investigation. The research process begins with observation and literature review to identify key 
gaps and opportunities within existing knowledge. Upon defining the research focus, hypotheses 
are formulated, followed by experimental validation through simulation-based analysis. The 
collected data undergoes rigorous analysis and discussion to derive meaningful insights and 
effective solutions (Figure 5). 
This study specifically addresses the issue of unbalanced forces and vibrations in high-precision 
and high-speed mechanical applications, such as machinery. After reviewing existing literature 
Figure 5 A flow chart showing a systemic approach to conducting research. 
==PAGE:26==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
14 
on dynamic imbalances, a hypothesis is proposed regarding the role of the coupler link, which 
connects the crank to the rocker. Given its position within the mechanism, the coupler link is 
hypothesized to significantly influence the system’s overall balance. 
To test this hypothesis and achieve the study’s objectives, simulation-based experiments are 
conducted. The results are analyzed to identify key parameters for optimization, leading to the 
refinement of a design framework for enhanced dynamic balancing of four-bar linkages. This 
structured approach ensures a data-driven optimization process, improving the system’s overall 
performance and stability. 
Additionally, a Parameter Diagram (P-diagram) is utilized to map relationships between input 
variables, output responses, and influential factors affecting system performance (Figure 6). The 
P-diagram, a systems engineering tool, provides a structured framework for analyzing factors 
that impact system reliability and performance. It consists of: 
• Inputs: The factors that must pass through the system to produce ideal functional outputs.  
==PAGE:27==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
15 
• Noise factors: Uncontrollable factors that can affect the outputs.  
• Control factors: Parameters that can be adjusted to minimize the impact of noise factors on the 
outputs. 
• Outputs: The desired results or characteristics of the system. 
• Unintended outputs: Undesirable outputs that can occur due to noise factors. 
As shown in the P-diagram, the input parameters is categorized into three main aspects:  
Figure 6 A P-diagram mapping the relationships between inputs, outputs, and factors influencing 
the system. 
==PAGE:28==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
16 
• Geometry: these refer to the physical structure of the system, including shape, size and 
arrangement of components. The geometry and dimensions directly affect how forces are 
distributed and how the system moves. 
• Properties: these include material properties such as density, mass, strength and temperature. 
Different materials can alter system performance due to variations in weight, thermal 
expansion or resistance to stress and deformation. 
• Boundary conditions: these define the constraints and operating conditions under which the 
system functions. Examples include motion input (speed, force, acceleration), time, stress and 
movement type (rotational, translational, oscillatory, etc.). Properly defining boundary 
conditions ensures the system operates within expected limits. 
Noise parameters represent uncontrollable variations or external influences that can affect the 
system’s function. These factors introduce uncertainty and can impact system performance in 
ways that are difficult to predict or eliminate. Since noise parameters cannot be completely 
controlled, the goal is to design a system that is dynamically balanced enough to function 
effectively despite these variations. As this study employs a simulation-experiment approach, 
noise factors can be eliminated during the experiment, but examples of noise parameters in real-
world experiments include: 
• Environmental factors: temperature fluctuations, humidity, vibrations from external 
sources. 
• Wear and tear: gradual degradation of system components over time. 
• Manufacturing tolerances: small variations in component dimensions due to production 
limitations. 
Control parameters are adjustable factors that we can modify to optimize system performance. 
Unlike noise parameters, these can be directly tuned to improve efficiency, stability and 
effectiveness. By optimizing these parameters, we get to fine-tune the system to enhance 
performance while reducing unwanted effects while accounting for design constraints. In the 
given diagram, the key control parameters include: 
==PAGE:29==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
17 
• Link’s mass: adjusting the mass of certain components affects dynamic balance, inertia, and 
response time. 
• Link’s length: the length of a component influences leverage, force transmission, and 
mechanical advantage. 
• Joints' friction: The amount of friction in joints can impact energy losses, smoothness of 
motion, and wear on components. 
The output represents the results of the system function. It is categorized into two parts: Intended 
Output (desired performance) and Unintended Output (undesirable side effects). The expected 
and beneficial results of the system function include: 
• Improved dynamic balance: achieving better balance reduces unbalanced forces and moments 
at joints, leading to smoother and more stable operation. 
• Achieved high-acceleration motions: optimizing control parameters enables faster and more 
efficient motion. 
• Reduced energy losses due to imbalance: a well-balanced system minimizes energy waste 
caused by excessive vibrations or inefficient force distribution. 
Negative consequences or trade-offs may arise when optimizing the system. In the diagram, the 
unintended outputs include: 
• Increased manufacturing complexity: implementing design improvements often leads to more 
complicated manufacturing processes, requiring precise engineering and higher costs. 
• Risk of redesign constraints: adjustments to optimize one aspect of the system may introduce 
constraints that limit future modifications or require significant design changes. 
Setting up simulation process 
Simulation tools play a crucial role in assessing dynamic behavior of systems by offering virtual 
dynamic testing environments, which can be difficult to measure and control experimentally. 
==PAGE:30==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
18 
They allow for rapid testing of multiple designs and scenarios, saving time and enhancing 
efficiency. 
A standard rigid-planar model of a four-bar mechanism is modeled and simulated in the Ansys 
Rigid Body Dynamics software to analyze the effects of the coupler link’s design parameters on 
the dynamic balancing of the mechanism (Figure 7). The mechanism consists of a ground link, 
crank link (red), a rocker link (yellow) and a coupler link (blue), connected together with four 
revolute joints (Figure 8). The coupler link is connected to crank and rocker links with two 
joints, named coupler-to-crank and coupler-to-rocker. Also, the crank and rocker links are 
connected to the ground, called ground-to-crank and ground-to-rocker, respectively.  
Regarding its geometry design, the length of crank link, coupler link, rocker link and ground link  
(the distance between ground-to-crank and ground-to-rocker joints), are 62.987mm, 70.226 mm, 
72.848 mm and 32.278 mm, respectively, following the Garshof’s conditions for being a double- 
crank type. Also, their volumes are as follows, crank link = 3157.4 mm³, coupler link = 3449.1 
mm³ and rocker link = 3407.4 mm³. 
Each joint connected to the ground has one mobile body, with 6 mm diameter for ground-to- 
crank joint, and 5 mm diameter for ground-to-rocker one. The coupler-to-crank joint consists of 
Figure 7 Simulating a four-bar mechanism in the Ansys Rigid Body Dynamics software. 
==PAGE:31==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
19 
one mobile body with a diameter of 6 mm and a reference body of the same diameter. Similarly, 
the coupler-to-rocker joint includes one mobile body and one reference body, both with a  
diameter of 5 mm. Figure 8 shows all joints from left to right: ground-to-crank, ground-to- 
rocker, coupler-to-crank, and coupler-to-rocker, respectively. 
The structural steel, widely used in machinery, is selected as the material of the baseline model, 
with the properties’ values listed (Figure 9), including its density, 7850 kg/m³, tensile and 
compressive yield strengths, 2.5×10⁸ Pa, and tensile ultimate strength, 4.6×10⁸ Pa, which define 
Figure 8 Links and joints in a simulated four-bar mechanism. The ground link is not shown. 
==PAGE:32==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
20 
its mechanical performance. Based on the structural steel’s density, the mass of each link is 
Figure 9 The material properties of the steel utilized for the links in the simulated four-bar 
mechanism. 
==PAGE:33==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
21 
calculated, which are crank = 2.47 e-2 kg, coupler = 2.70e-2 kg and rocker = 2.67e-2 kg. 
To initiate the mechanism, a constant angular velocity of 2 rad/s was applied to the crank-to-
ground joint as the primary input motion, with a step end time of 4 seconds. 
For analyzing balancing in mechanisms with moving parts, such as a four-bar linkage, kinematic 
features, including angular velocity, angular acceleration, force and moment should be measured 
at joint connections. In Ansys Rigid Body Dynamics, this is enabled by a Joint Probe. 
Additionally, total force and moment, aka reaction forces and moments, from all joints were 
extracted to evaluate dynamic behavior and overall system stability. 
To systematically evaluate the impact of various parameters on dynamic balancing, key variables 
were parameterized to facilitate a structured analysis (Supplementary Tables 1-5): 
• Length: the starting length of the coupler link is 70.226 mm and incrementally increased by 
5% to 20% and decreased by 10% to 50% (Supplementary Tables 2). 
• Mass: the starting mass of the coupler link is 2.7075e-2 kg and incrementally increased by 
10% to 50% and decreased by 10% to 50% (Supplementary Tables 3). 
• Friction: as discussed earlier, the material of the mechanism, including its joints, is selected as 
steel. The kinetic friction coefficient (μk) for steel-on-steel contact, depending on whether the 
surfaces are dry, lubricated or in different conditions, typically ranges between 0.1 and 0.6. In  
this simulation, μk was incrementally increased from 0 (baseline model) to 0.6 in steps of 0.1 
to simulate realistic operational conditions (25) (Supplementary Tables 4). While 
Supplementary Tables 1 shows the baseline values, Supplementary Tables 5 shows the 
aggregate table of maximums used for regression and optimization in the next chapter. 
As a well-balanced system minimizes energy losses caused by vibrations and inefficient force 
distribution, the total energy of the baseline mechanism’s joints will ultimately be compared to 
those of the optimized design obtained in the next chapter. 
Conclusion 
This chapter has laid the groundwork for a comprehensive study on optimizing the dynamic 
balance of a four-bar mechanism. By systematically analyzing its structure, motion 
==PAGE:34==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
22 
characteristics, and dynamic behavior, this thesis has established a solid foundation for 
identifying key design parameters—particularly those related to the coupler link—that influence 
overall system stability. 
Through a detailed background review, this thesis explored the significance of dynamic 
balancing in mechanical systems, highlighting its critical role in reducing reaction forces and 
moments, minimizing energy losses, and enhancing performance in high-speed and precision 
applications. Traditional balancing approaches, such as counterweights and counter-rotating 
components, were discussed alongside modern optimization techniques, emphasizing the 
advantages and limitations of each method. Notably, existing research suggests that optimizing a 
mechanism’s inherent design—rather than relying on external balancing mechanisms—offers a 
more efficient and scalable approach to improving stability. 
In the Methods section, a structured simulation-based approach was outlined, enabling a precise 
and controlled analysis of the coupler link’s influence on the mechanism’s dynamic balance. 
Using Ansys Rigid Body Dynamics, this thesis parameterized key design factors, including 
length, mass, and joint friction, to assess their impact on reaction forces and moments. By 
integrating the P-diagram framework, this thesis categorized inputs, noise factors, control 
parameters, and outputs, ensuring a comprehensive and systematic evaluation of the system’s 
dynamic response under various operating conditions. The findings from these simulations serve 
as a critical dataset for the regression and optimization techniques presented in the following 
chapter. 
Ultimately, this chapter has established a clear link between mechanical design choices and 
dynamic stability, setting the stage for data-driven optimization. The results obtained here will be 
leveraged to refine the coupler link’s dimensions, material properties, and friction characteristics 
using advanced AI-based optimization techniques. The goal is to achieve a dynamically balanced 
mechanism with minimized reaction forces, improved energy efficiency, and enhanced 
mechanical performance. In the next chapter, machine learning-driven regression models and 
optimization algorithms will be applied to systematically determine the optimal coupler link 
configuration, ensuring the best possible balance between force minimization and practical 
design constraints. 
==PAGE:35==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
23 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
24 
Chapter 2: AI-driven optimization of a four-bar 
mechanism for reduced total force 
Background 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has emerged as a transformative force in engineering design, 
revolutionizing optimal object design by enabling engineers to explore complex relationships 
between variables and discover innovative solutions for enhanced performance. By integrating 
machine learning (a powerful tool within the AI overarching field) techniques, such as deep 
learning, regression models, and optimization algorithms, engineers can navigate intricate design 
spaces with unprecedented efficiency and precision, surpassing the limitations of traditional 
methods. These tools are instrumental in predictive modeling, control system tuning, and 
structural design refinement, facilitating the identification of non-linear relationships among 
system parameters and the optimization of configurations to minimize forces, improve balance, 
and increase efficiency in mechanical systems. For instance, a focused literature review by 
Khanolkar et al. (2022) maps various AI-based methods to different stages of the engineering 
design process, highlighting how these methods assist in tasks such as conceptual design and 
problem definition (26). 
One significant application of AI in design engineering is generative design (the optimization of 
mechanical components' shapes and materials). This process employs AI algorithms to 
autonomously generate a multitude of design alternatives based on specified performance criteria 
and constraints. For instance, Almasri et al. (2020) introduced a deep convolutional generative 
adversarial network (GAN) that incorporates shape-related constraints to produce viable 
mechanical designs, enhancing the efficiency of additive manufacturing processes (27). 
Another area where AI demonstrates substantial impact is in topology optimization. This 
technique focuses on determining the optimal material distribution within a given design space to 
achieve desired performance objectives. Shang et al. (2023) developed a framework that 
combines deep learning with genetic algorithms to tailor the mechanical properties of 3D 
==PAGE:37==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
25 
microstructures. Their approach efficiently identifies microstructural configurations that meet 
specific mechanical requirements, thereby accelerating the materials design process (28). 
Moreover, AI enhances simulation and modeling capabilities in mechanical engineering. Zhou 
and Li (2022) proposed an image-based AI surrogate model integrated with a shape morpher for 
real-time optimization of blank shapes in the hot stamping process. This method significantly 
reduces computational time and improves the accuracy of forming simulations, leading to more 
efficient manufacturing workflows (29). 
In the automotive industry, AI-driven design has led to remarkable advancements. Researchers at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology utilized AI to analyze extensive datasets of 3D car 
designs, optimizing aerodynamic performance and contributing to the development of more fuel-
efficient vehicles (30). Similarly, Rios et al. (2023) explored the use of large language and text-
to-3D models for engineering design optimization, focusing on aerodynamic vehicle 
optimization (31). Their study demonstrated the potential of deep text-to-3D models in 
generating diverse and realistic designs, contributing to improved aerodynamic performance. 
The four-bar mechanism, prevalent in applications such as robotic arms, automotive suspensions, 
and biomechanical prosthetics, benefits significantly from AI-driven optimization techniques. 
These methods enhance kinematics, reduce stress concentrations, and improve mechanical 
balance. For example, Nguyen-Van et al. (2022) applied a hybrid-combined DE and Jaya 
algorithm to optimize the dimensional synthesis of four-bar mechanisms, resulting in accurate 
optimal solutions superior to traditional methods (32). Similarly, Lee et al. (2024) utilized a 
cGAN-based framework to generate diverse and feasible four-bar linkage designs that satisfy 
specified kinematic and quasi-static conditions, offering a promising tool for mechanism design 
(33). 
These examples underscore the transformative role of AI in mechanical engineering, particularly 
in optimizing object design. By leveraging AI technologies, engineers can explore innovative 
design solutions, enhance performance, and streamline manufacturing processes, thereby pushing 
the boundaries of what is possible in mechanical design. 
==PAGE:38==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
26 
In this chapter, this thesis explores the relationship between coupler link parameters—
specifically length, mass, and friction—and the total force in a four-bar mechanism, aiming to 
reduce total force and enhance systemic balance. Our association analysis identified a significant 
correlation between link length and total force, while mass and friction were not statistically 
significant. To model this relationship, this thesis evaluated multiple regression models, 
including linear regression, generalized regression, generalized additive models (GAM) and 
loess (Locally Estimated Scatterplot Smoothing) regression. The GAM with a Gamma family 
provided the best fit, indicating a non-linear association between length and total force. 
Subsequently, this thesis employed AI-based optimization algorithms to minimize total force by 
determining the optimal coupler length. Techniques such as Genetic Algorithms (GA), Gradient 
Descent and Simulated Annealing were utilized. Our findings reveal that all three algorithms 
achieved comparable performance, with GA attaining the highest reduction in total force at 
18.15%. These results underscore the potential of AI-driven regression and optimization methods 
in refining four-bar mechanisms, particularly in reducing joint forces and improving mechanical 
stability. The methodologies presented herein offer valuable insights for engineering applications 
across robotics, biomechanics, and industrial automation. 
Methodology, Results, Discussion 
Association analysis 
In a four-bar mechanism, the forces and moments at each joint play a crucial role in determining 
the system’s mechanical stability and efficiency. The total systemic force, ∑𝐹, which is the sum 
of the forces acting at all four joints, directly influences the overall balance of the mechanism. 
By reducing this total force, the system can achieve improved torque distribution, resulting in 
greater mechanical efficiency and stability. The force acting at a joint can be decomposed into its 
components along the x and y axes. Mathematically, for a joint connecting two links, the force 
𝐹𝑖𝑗 is expressed as: 
𝐹𝑖𝑗= 𝐹𝑖𝑗,𝑥𝑖̂ + 𝐹𝑖𝑗,𝑦𝑗̂ 
==PAGE:39==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
27 
where 𝐹𝑖𝑗,𝑥 and 𝐹𝑖𝑗,𝑦 represent the force components in the x- and y-directions, respectively, and 𝑖̂ 
and 𝑗̂ are unit vectors in those directions. According to Newton’s Third Law, the force exerted by 
one link on another is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction: 
𝐹𝑖𝑗= −𝐹𝑗𝑖 
Similarly, the moment or torque at a joint arises due to the applied force and its distance from the 
joint. The moment 𝑀𝑖𝑗 about a joint is given by the cross-product of the position vector r𝑖𝑗 
(which represents the distance from the joint to the point of force application) and the force F𝑖𝑗: 
𝑀𝑖𝑗= 𝑟𝑖𝑗× 𝐹𝑖𝑗 
The magnitude of this moment is given by: 
|𝑀𝑖𝑗| = |𝑟𝑖𝑗| ⋅|𝐹𝑖𝑗| ⋅sin(𝜃) 
where θ is the angle between the force vector and the position vector. These equations highlight 
the fundamental interactions occurring at the joints of the four-bar mechanism and emphasize the 
importance of optimizing link parameters to reduce systemic forces and improve stability. 
To better understand which properties of the coupler link contribute the most to the total force, a 
correlation analysis was conducted between three key variables—coupler link mass, length, and 
friction at the joints—against the total force experienced across all four joints. Using Pearson’s 
correlation coefficient, the strength and direction of the relationship between each variable and 
total force were evaluated. Mathematically, the correlation coefficient r between two variables X 
and Y is computed as: 
𝑟=
∑(𝑋𝑖−𝑋̅)(𝑌𝑖−𝑌̅)
√∑(𝑋𝑖−𝑋̅)2 ⋅√∑(𝑌𝑖−𝑌̅)2 
Where 𝑋̅ and 𝑌̅ represent the mean values of the variables. To determine whether a correlation 
was statistically significant, a hypothesis test was performed using the t-statistic: 
𝑡= 𝑟√𝑛−2
√1 −𝑟2 
==PAGE:40==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
28 
where n is the number of observations. The p-value obtained from this test indicates the 
probability that the observed correlation occurred by chance. If the p-value is below 0.05, the 
correlation is considered statistically significant. 
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
40
50
60
70
80
Length
Total Force
Length vs Total force
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.02
0.03
0.04
Mass
Total Force
Mass vs Total force
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Friction
Total Force
Friction vs Total force
Figure 10 Relationship between the coupler link’s physical properties (length, mass and friction) 
and the total force was analyzed. Preliminary visual inspection suggests that total force primarily 
depends on the length of the coupler link. To formally characterize this dependency, a GAM was 
employed to infer the functional relationship. 
==PAGE:41==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
29 
The correlation analysis revealed a moderate positive correlation between the coupler link length 
and the total force, with r = 0.430 and a p-value of 0.028, suggesting that as the coupler link 
length increases, the total force also increases (Figure 10 and Table 1). In contrast, the 
correlation between total force and mass or friction was not significant, implying that these 
variables had minimal direct impact on systemic force levels. Given this finding, the focus 
shifted toward understanding the exact nature of the relationship between link length and total 
force. 
Table 1 Correlation analysis between the coupler link’s properties and total force. 
To investigate this relationship, several regression models were tested. A linear regression model 
was first applied, assuming a simple linear relationship of the form: 
∑𝐹= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑙+ 𝜀 
where l represents the coupler link length, 𝛽0 and 𝛽1 are intercepts and coefficient and ε is the 
residual error. However, visualization of the fitted curve suggested that the relationship was not 
strictly linear. Other models were then considered, including a generalized regression model with 
an inverse Gaussian family, which is suitable for positively skewed data, LOESS, a non-
Variable 1 
Variable 2 
Correlation r 
p-value 
length 
mass 
2.27E-17 
1.00E+00 
length 
friction 
0.12 
5.50E-01 
length 
total force 
0.43 
2.80E-02 
mass 
friction 
-7.10E-17 
1.00E+00 
mass 
total force 
0.05 
8.00E-01 
friction 
total force 
-0.13 
5.00E-01 
==PAGE:42==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
30 
parametric method that captures localized variations, and GAM with a Gamma family that 
provided the best fit (Figure 11 and Table 2). 
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
40
50
60
70
80
Length
Total Force
lm
Length vs Total force
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
40
50
60
70
80
Length
Total Force
glm with inverse.gaussian
Length vs Total force
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
40
50
60
70
80
Length
Total Force
gam with gamma
Length vs Total force
0.0
0.2
0.4
40
50
60
70
80
Length
Total Force
loess
Length vs Total force
Figure 11 Inferring the association between the coupler link’s length and the system-wide force 
(total force). 
==PAGE:43==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
31 
Table 2 GAM performance metrics inferring the association between length and total force. 
The GAM extends traditional regression models by incorporating non-linear smoothing 
functions. Instead of assuming a strictly linear relationship, GAM models the expected value of 
total force using an inverse link function: 
𝐸[∑𝐹] =
1
𝛽0 + 𝑓(𝑙) 
Where 𝐸[∑𝐹] is the expected response, 𝛽0 is the intercept and 𝑓(𝑙) is a nonlinear smooth 
function of the coupler link length, estimated from the data using splines. Unlike models with a 
logarithmic link function, which assume a multiplicative relationship, the inverse link function 
implies a reciprocal effect, meaning that small changes in length lead to nonlinear variations in 
total force. 
The smooth function 𝑓(𝑙) in the GAM model was represented using cubic regression splines 
with shrinkage, which allows flexibility while preventing overfitting by introducing a penalty 
term for excessive curvature. This function is defined as: 
Metric 
Value 
adjusted R-squared 
0.99 
deviance explained 
96.90% 
effective degrees of freedom (edf) 
4.165 
F-statistic for smooth term 
89.68 
p-value for smooth term 
< 2e-16 
Generalized Cross-Validation (GCV) 
0.02 
scale estimate 
0.02 
intercept estimate (p-value)) 
20.95 (<2e-16) 
==PAGE:44==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
32 
𝑓(𝑙) = ∑𝛽𝑗𝛣𝑖(𝑙)
𝐾
𝑗=1
 
Where 𝛣𝑗(𝑙) are basis functions that define the smooth curve, 𝛽𝑗 are coefficients estimated from 
the data and K is the number of basis functions that determines the complexity of the spline. 
These basis functions are piecewise polynomial functions typically defined over knots as: 
𝛣𝑖(𝑙) = {(𝑙−𝜅𝑗)
3 𝑖𝑓 𝑙> 𝜅𝑗
0           𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
 
where 𝜅𝑗 represents the knot locations. 
The results of the GAM with Gamma Family confirmed that the relationship between coupler 
link length and total force is non-linear, with the inverse link function effectively capturing the 
reciprocal trend in force variation. Compared to other regression approaches, this model 
provided the best predictive accuracy and visual fit to the data, justifying its selection for further 
analysis. 
By establishing this non-linear relationship, this thesis highlights the significant role of coupler 
link length in determining total force. With this understanding, the next step focuses on 
optimization—using advanced AI-driven algorithms to determine the ideal coupler link length 
that minimizes total force, thereby enhancing the system’s overall balance and efficiency. 
Optimization 
Following the association analysis, the next step was to optimize the coupler link length to 
minimize the total systemic force in the four-bar mechanism. The total force, which directly 
affects mechanical balance and torque distribution, was modeled using a GAM with a Gamma 
family (inverse link function). This model acted as the fitness function to interpolate and 
extrapolate force values during optimization. 
To achieve force minimization, three powerful optimization techniques were used: 
• Genetic Algorithm with local search (L-BFGS-B), a population-based, evolutionary approach. 
==PAGE:45==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
33 
• Gradient Descent with NLOPT_LD_LBFGS, an iterative, gradient-driven search. 
• Simulated Annealing with SANN, a probabilistic search inspired by metallurgy. 
While all three algorithms showed comparable performances, GA achieved the highest reduction 
in total force at 18.15% (Table 3). Below, each algorithm is explained with pseudocode, 
visualizations, and comparative tables. 
Table 3 Result of optimization on total force in a four-bar mechanism. 
Genetic algorithm with local search (L-BFGS-B) 
The Genetic Algorithm is inspired by natural selection. It starts with a population of random 
solutions, evaluates their fitness, and refines them through selection, crossover, and mutation. It’s 
used to find optimal or near-optimal solutions to problems with large, complex, or poorly 
understood search spaces, especially when methods like Gradient Descent struggle with multiple 
local optima or non-differentiable functions. To improve precision, local optimization using L-
BFGS-B is applied to the best candidates. It is a local search method that uses gradient 
information to quickly converge to a nearby optimum, starting from an initial point. 
Since GA maximizes fitness, but our goal is minimization, the fitness function is negated: 
𝐹𝑖𝑡𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠= −𝐹̂(𝑙) 
where 𝐹̂(𝑙) is the GAM-predicted total force for a given length l. Algorithm 1 demonstrates a 
pseudocode representation of a GA. 
Algorithm 
Reduction in 
total force 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
GA (L-BFGS-B) 
18.15% 
handles complex landscapes, 
avoids local minima 
computationally 
expensive 
Gradient Descent 
(NLOPT_LD_LBFGS) 
14.32% 
fast, precise 
stuck in local 
minima 
Simulated Annealing ( 
SANN) 
13.78% 
avoids local minima 
slower 
convergence 
==PAGE:46==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
34 
Algorithm 1 A general pseudocode for a Genetic Algorithm. 
GeneticAlgorithm(): 
    Initialize population with random individuals 
    Evaluate fitness of each individual in the population 
 
    While termination condition not met: 
        Select parents from the population based on fitness 
        Apply crossover to create offspring 
        Apply mutation to offspring 
        Evaluate fitness of new individuals 
        Select the next generation from the current population and offspring 
 
    Return the best solution found 
 
Gradient Descent with NLOPT_LD_LBFGS 
Gradient Descent (GD) is an iterative optimization algorithm used to minimize a function by 
adjusting its parameters in the direction that reduces the function's value most effectively. It’s 
widely used in machine learning and statistics to find optimal parameters for models (e.g., 
coefficients in regression and weights in neural networks). GD iteratively adjusts the coupler 
length to move in the direction of the steepest force decrease. It follows: 
𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑤= 𝑙𝑜𝑙𝑑−𝛼∙𝛻𝐹(𝑙𝑜𝑙𝑑) 
where α is the learning rate and ∇𝐹(𝑙𝑜𝑙𝑑) is the gradient. The L-BFGS-B algorithm enhances this 
by approximating second-order derivatives for faster convergence. Algorithm 2 demonstrates a 
pseudocode representation of a GD algorithm. 
==PAGE:47==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
35 
Algorithm 2 A general pseudocode for a Gradient Descent algorithm. 
GradientDescent(f, θ, α, max_iterations, tolerance): 
    Initialize parameters θ randomly or with predefined values 
    Set iteration = 0 
 
    Repeat until convergence or max_iterations reached: 
          # Partial derivatives of f with respect to θ 
        Compute gradient ∇f(θ) 
        # Move in the opposite direction of the gradient 
        Update parameters: θ = θ - α * ∇f(θ) 
        Check for convergence: if ||∇f(θ)|| < tolerance, break 
        Increment iteration 
 
    Return optimized parameters θ 
 
Simulated Annealing with SANN 
Simulated Annealing (SA) is a probabilistic optimization algorithm inspired by the annealing 
process in metallurgy, where a material is heated and then slowly cooled to reduce defects and 
reach a low-energy state. In the context of optimization, SA is used to find the global minimum 
(or maximum) of a complex, non-linear objective function, especially when the search space has 
many local optima. It’s particularly useful for problems where GD might get trapped in local 
optima. SA explores the search space randomly but accepts worse solutions with some 
probability to escape local minima: 
𝑝= 𝑒−∆𝐹
𝑇 
where ∆𝐹 is the force difference and T is the temperature. Cooling reduces randomness over 
time. The SANN method refers to SA as implemented in R language, specifically designed for 
general-purpose optimization. Algorithm 3 demonstrates a pseudocode representation of an SA 
algorithm. 
==PAGE:48==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
36 
Algorithm 3 A general pseudocode for an SA algorithm. 
SimulatedAnnealing(): 
    Initialize current solution S 
    Compute energy (fitness) of S: E(S) 
    Set initial temperature T 
    Set cooling rate α (0 < α < 1) 
 
    While stopping condition not met: 
        Generate a new neighbor solution S' 
        Compute energy of S': E(S') 
        Compute energy difference: ΔE = E(S') - E(S) 
 
        If ΔE < 0:  # Accept better solution 
            Accept S' as the new current solution S 
        Else: 
            Accept S' with probability P = exp(-ΔE / T) 
 
        Reduce temperature: T = α * T 
 
    Return the best solution found 
 
In conclusion, GA achieved the highest force reduction (18.15%), proving most effective. GD 
performed well but struggled with local minima, while SA effectively explored the search space. 
This AI-driven approach significantly optimized the four-bar mechanism’s performance, 
reducing systemic force and enhancing mechanical stability. 
Conclusion 
In this chapter, this thesis explored the role of regression and optimization techniques in 
minimizing total force within a four-bar mechanism, ultimately improving its mechanical 
balance. Beginning with an association analysis, this thesis identified a significant non-linear 
relationship between coupler link length and total force, which was best captured using a GAM 
with a Gamma family (inverse link function). This insight laid the foundation for the 
==PAGE:49==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
37 
optimization phase, where three powerful algorithms, GA with L-BFGS-B, GD with 
NLOPT_LD_LBFGS, and SA with SANN, were employed to determine the optimal coupler link 
length that minimizes total force. 
Among the three methods, GA with L-BFGS-B achieved the highest reduction in total force 
(18.15%), demonstrating its ability to effectively balance global exploration and local 
refinement. While GD provided rapid convergence, it was susceptible to local minima. Simulated 
SA, on the other hand, leveraged stochastic search mechanisms to escape local minima, though 
at the cost of slower convergence. Despite their differences, all three methods exhibited 
comparable performances, validating the robustness of AI-driven optimization techniques for 
improving mechanical systems. 
This study underscores the practical value of AI in engineering design, particularly in mechanism 
optimization. By integrating advanced regression modeling and metaheuristic optimization, this 
thesis successfully reduced the systemic force acting on the four-bar mechanism, enhancing its 
structural balance and mechanical efficiency. These findings highlight the potential of AI-based 
approaches in mechanical system design, robotics, and industrial automation, where force 
minimization is crucial for durability and performance. 
Future research could expand upon this work by incorporating multi-objective optimization, 
accounting for energy efficiency, material constraints, and dynamic performance. Additionally, 
integrating machine learning-based predictive modeling could further refine optimization 
strategies, enabling real-time adaptive tuning of mechanical linkages. 
This chapter has demonstrated that by combining AI-powered modeling and optimization, this 
thesis can push the boundaries of traditional mechanical design, unlocking new possibilities for 
smarter, more efficient mechanical systems. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
38 
Discussion 
The integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in mechanical design optimization represents a 
significant shift in how engineers approach the challenges of force minimization, dynamic 
balancing, and performance enhancement. Throughout this study, this thesis has demonstrated 
how machine learning-based regression models and AI-driven optimization algorithms can 
improve the efficiency and stability of a four-bar mechanism, a fundamental structure in 
mechanical engineering. This discussion synthesizes key findings from Chapter 1 and Chapter 2, 
contextualizing their implications and exploring the broader impact of AI-driven design 
methodologies. 
Key Findings and Interpretations 
A critical takeaway from this study is the identification of non-linear relationships between 
coupler link parameters and total force in the four-bar mechanism. In Chapter 1, this thesis 
established a structured methodology using simulation-based experiments in Ansys Rigid Body 
Dynamics, analyzing kinematic and dynamic metrics such as angular velocity, acceleration, 
reaction forces, and moments. By systematically varying length, mass, and friction at the joints, 
this thesis laid the foundation for data-driven optimization, ensuring that parameter changes were 
evaluated under realistic operating conditions. 
Building on this, Chapter 2 introduced machine learning-based regression models to analyze 
these relationships. The study confirmed that coupler link length was the most influential 
parameter affecting total force, while mass and friction were statistically insignificant. 
Traditional regression models such as linear and generalized regression failed to capture the non-
linearity in the data, but the Generalized Additive Model (GAM) with a Gamma family (inverse 
link function) successfully mapped this complex relationship. This finding underscores the 
importance of flexible, non-parametric models in mechanical optimization problems, where strict 
linearity assumptions often fail. 
The optimization phase further validated these insights. Three AI-driven optimization 
algorithms—Genetic Algorithm (GA) with L-BFGS-B, Gradient Descent (GD) with 
==PAGE:51==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
39 
NLOPT_LD_LBFGS, and Simulated Annealing (SA) with SANN—were implemented to 
minimize total force. The results highlighted GA’s superior performance, achieving an 18.15% 
reduction in total force, demonstrating its ability to effectively balance global exploration and 
local refinement. GD, despite its speed, struggled with local minima, while SA’s stochastic 
nature helped escape local minima at the cost of slower convergence. 
These findings highlight the trade-offs among optimization algorithms: 
▪ Evolutionary algorithms (GA) explore solutions broadly but require refinement through local 
search methods. 
▪ Gradient-based methods (GD) quickly converge but may struggle with complex landscapes. 
▪ Stochastic approaches (SA) offer robustness in avoiding local minima but require longer 
computation times. 
The convergence of engineering knowledge, simulation-based analysis, and AI-driven regression 
and optimization proved essential in solving force minimization in a four-bar mechanism. 
Theoretical and Practical Implications 
AI as a Transformative Tool in Mechanical Design 
The application of AI to mechanism optimization demonstrates its transformative power in 
engineering. Traditional mechanical design has often relied on analytical methods and manual 
iterative refinements. However, as demonstrated in this study, AI-driven approaches can 
automate and accelerate the optimization process, reducing engineering workload and 
computational costs. 
The ability to analyze non-linear relationships using GAM models and optimize solutions using 
metaheuristic search techniques provides a more accurate and scalable alternative to classical 
methods. This has broad implications for automotive engineering, biomechanics, robotics, and 
industrial automation, where achieving optimal force distribution is crucial for durability, 
efficiency, and performance. 
Generalization to Other Mechanical Systems 
==PAGE:52==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
40 
While this study focused on a four-bar mechanism, the methodology presented—combining 
simulation, regression, and optimization—is highly generalizable. The same approach could be 
extended to optimize: 
▪ Automotive suspensions (e.g., tuning double-wishbone suspension systems for enhanced 
stability). 
▪ Robotic arms (e.g., optimizing link parameters for precise, high-speed movement). 
▪ Biomechanical prosthetics (e.g., refining artificial limb designs for energy efficiency and 
comfort). 
▪ Manufacturing systems (e.g., designing conveyor mechanisms for reduced friction and wear). 
By adapting input variables and boundary conditions, the AI-driven framework demonstrated 
here can be extended to other mechanical applications, providing an adaptable tool for 
engineering optimization problems. 
Advantages of AI-Driven Engineering Approaches 
Compared to traditional analytical methods, AI-powered engineering design offers several 
advantages: 
1. Higher Accuracy: AI models like GAM capture non-linear behaviors that standard regression 
methods miss. 
2. Efficient Optimization: Algorithms such as GA, GD, and SA can explore vast solution spaces 
faster than manual tuning. 
3. Robustness to Variability: AI models are more adaptable to changing design constraints and 
environmental conditions. 
4. Scalability: Once trained, AI models can be reused and adapted for different mechanical 
applications with minimal adjustments. 
Challenges and Future Research Directions 
While this study successfully optimized the four-bar mechanism’s force distribution, some 
challenges remain: 
1. Multi-Objective Optimization 
==PAGE:53==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
41 
This study focused on force minimization as the primary optimization goal. However, real-
world engineering problems require balancing multiple objectives such as: 
▪ Energy efficiency (minimizing power consumption). 
▪ Material constraints (ensuring manufacturability). 
▪ Structural integrity (avoiding excessive stress concentrations). 
Future research should incorporate multi-objective optimization algorithms, such as Pareto-
based Genetic Algorithms or NSGA-II, to optimize for multiple competing factors 
simultaneously. 
2. Adaptive Learning and Real-Time Optimization 
Current optimization techniques require predefined datasets and offline training. Future work 
could explore real-time adaptive learning, where machine learning models continuously 
update based on new system conditions. This would be particularly useful in dynamic 
environments such as: 
▪ Autonomous robots adjusting their link lengths in real time. 
▪ Vehicle suspensions adapting to changing road conditions. 
▪ Industrial machines dynamically modifying their parameters for optimal performance. 
3. Computational Cost and Practical Implementation 
While AI-driven optimization is effective, computational costs remain a concern. Advanced 
optimization techniques, particularly Genetic Algorithms, can be computationally expensive due 
to their large search space and iterative refinement process. Developing efficient hybrid models 
that combine analytical techniques with AI-based optimization could reduce computational 
overhead while maintaining performance. 
Additionally, experimental validation remains a crucial next step. While this study relied on 
simulation-based analysis, real-world prototyping and physical testing are necessary to confirm 
the practical applicability of the optimized designs. 
==PAGE:54==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
42 
Conclusion 
This thesis highlights the potential of employing AI-driven design optimization techniques in 
mechanical design engineering, particularly in four bar mechanisms, to enhance dynamic 
balancing. By combining simulation-based analysis, regression modeling, and metaheuristic 
optimization, this study successfully minimized total force in a four-bar mechanism, paving the 
way for more efficient and dynamically balanced mechanical designs. 
Furthermore, the findings reinforce the value of this approach, helping mechanical design 
engineers to solve complex, non-linear design engineering problems with greater speed and 
accuracy than traditional methods. While challenges such as multi-objective trade-offs, real-time 
learning, and computational efficiency remain, the framework developed here serves as a robust 
foundation for future advancements in AI-powered mechanical design. 
Looking forward, this research tries to open exciting possibilities for real-time adaptive systems, 
automated design processes, and AI-driven predictive modeling, ultimately pushing the 
boundaries of what is achievable in mechanical engineering and optimization. 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
i
References 
1. 
Wei B, Zhang D. A Review of Dynamic Balancing for Robotic Mechanisms. Robotica. 
2021;39(1):55-71. 
2. 
Static And Dynamic Balancing On Rotating Machinery: HBK; 2025 [Available from: 
https://www.hbkworld.com/en/knowledge/resource-center/articles/static-and-dynamic-
balancing-part-two. 
3. 
Why is Dynamic Balancing Important? : The WDB Group; 2025 [Available from: 
https://wdbgroup.co.uk/blog/dynamic-balancing-explained/. 
4. 
Russo A, Sinatra R, Xi F. Static balancing of parallel robots. Mechanism and Machine 
Theory. 2005;40(2):191-202. 
5. 
What’s the Difference Between Static & Dynamic Balancing: Renown Electric; 2025 
[Available from: https://renown-electric.com/blog/whats-the-difference-between-static-
dynamic-balancing/. 
6. 
Balancing of Rotating Masses: StudySmarter; 2025 [Available from: 
https://www.studysmarter.co.uk/explanations/engineering/solid-mechanics/balancing-of-
rotating-masses/. 
7. 
Automotive Flywheel Balancing Machines: An Overview of its Importance and 
Functionality: Probal Dynamic Balancing; 2025 [Available from: 
https://probaldynamicbalancing.com/automotive-flywheel-balancing-machines-an-
overview-of-its-importance-and-functionality/. 
8. 
What is Dynamic Balancing in Industrial Applications? : IBT; 2025 [Available from: 
https://ibtinc.com/what-is-dynamic-balancing-in-industrial-applications/. 
9. 
Buśkiewicz J, editor Gravity balancing of a hoist by means of a four-bar linkage and 
spring2019; Cham: Springer International Publishing. 
10. 
French MJ, Widden MB. The spring-and-lever balancing mechanism, George 
Carwardine and the Anglepoise lamp. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical 
Engineers, Part C: Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science. 2000;214(3):501-8. 
11. 
Double wishbone suspension: Wikipedia; 2025 [updated 2025. Available from: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double_wishbone_suspension?utm_source. 
12. 
Franco JA, Gallego JA, Herder JL. Static Balancing of Four-Bar Compliant 
Mechanisms With Torsion Springs by Exerting Negative Stiffness Using Linear Spring At the 
Instant Center of Rotation. Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics. 2021;13(3). 
==PAGE:56==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
ii 
13. 
Chaudhary K, Chaudhary H. Shape Optimization of Dynamically Balanced Planar 
Four-bar Mechanism. Procedia Computer Science. 2015;57:519-26. 
14. 
Meijaard JP, van der Wijk V. Dynamic balancing of mechanisms with flexible links. 
Mechanism and Machine Theory. 2022;172:104784. 
15. 
Arakelian VH, Smith MR. Shaking Force and Shaking Moment Balancing of 
Mechanisms: A Historical Review With New Examples. Journal of Mechanical Design. 
2005;127(2):334-9. 
16. 
Feng G. Complete shaking force and shaking moment balancing of 17 types of eight-
bar linkages only with revolute pairs. Mechanism and Machine Theory. 1991;26(2):197-206. 
17. 
Gosselin CM. Static Balancing of Spherical 3-DOF Parallel Mechanisms and 
Manipulators. The International Journal of Robotics Research. 1999;18(8):819-29. 
18. 
Emmanuel Ayala-Hernández J, Briot S, Jesús Cervantes-Sánchez J. Structural 
Topology Optimization of Reactionless Four-Bar Linkages. Journal of Mechanical Design. 
2022;144(11). 
19. 
Zomerdijk MJJ, Van Der Wijk V. Structural Design and Experiments of a Dynamically 
Balanced Inverted Four-Bar Linkage as Manipulator Arm for High Acceleration Applications. 
Actuators. 2022;11(5):131. 
20. 
Shen Q, Russell K, Lee W-T, Sodhi RS. On cam system design to replicate spatial 
four-bar mechanism coupler motion. Inverse Problems in Science and Engineering. 
2011;19(2):251-65. 
21. 
Four-bar linkage: Wikipedia; 2025 [Available from: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four-bar_linkage. 
22. 
Zhang Y, Finger  S, Behrens  S. Introduction to Mechanisms.  Rapid Design through 
Virtual and Physical Prototyping: Spring; 1996. p. 39-245. 
23. 
Grashof’s Law: Explanation and Different Conditions: testbook; 2023 [Available 
from: https://testbook.com/mechanical-engineering/grashofs-law. 
24. 
Myszka DH. Machines & Mechanisms: Applied Kinematic Analysis, 4th edition: 
PEARSON; 2011. 
25. 
Friction - Friction Coefficients and Calculator: The Engineering toolBox; 2025 
[Available from: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/friction-coefficients-d_778.html. 
26. 
Khanolkar PM, Vrolijk A, Olechowski A. Mapping artificial intelligence-based 
methods to engineering design stages: a focused literature review. Artificial Intelligence for 
Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing. 2023;37. 
==PAGE:57==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
iii 
27. 
Almasri W, Bettebghor D, Ababsa F, Danglade F. Shape related constraints aware 
generation of Mechanical Designs through Deep Convolutional GAN. arXiv. 2020. 
28. 
Shang X, Liu Z, Zhang J, Lyu T, Zou Y. Tailoring the mechanical properties of 3D 
microstructures: A deep learning and genetic algorithm inverse optimization framework. 
Materials Today. 2023;70:71-81. 
29. 
Zhou H, Li N. Image-based Artificial Intelligence empowered surrogate model and 
shape morpher for real-time blank shape optimisation in the hot stamping process. 2022. 
30. 
Elrefaie M, Morar F, Dai A, Ahmed F. DrivAerNet++: A Large-Scale Multimodal Car 
Dataset with Computational Fluid Dynamics Simulations and Deep Learning Benchmarks. 
2025. 
31. 
Rios T, Menzel S, Sendhoff B. Large Language and Text-to-3D Models for Engineering 
Design Optimization. arXiv. 2023. 
32. 
Nguyen-Van S, Lieu QX, Xuan-Mung N, Nguyen TTN. A New Study on Optimization of 
Four-Bar Mechanisms Based on a Hybrid-Combined Differential Evolution and Jaya 
Algorithm. Symmetry. 2022;14(2):381. 
33. 
Lee S, Kim J, Kang N. Deep Generative Model-based Synthesis of Four-bar Linkage 
Mechanisms with Target Conditions. arXiv. 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
iv 
Appendix 
Appendix 1 R script for association analysis between coupler’s parameters and systemic total 
force. 
# This script performs association analysis between the Coupler link's variables (friction, mass and length) and the system-
wide total force and consequently moment, aka torque, representing the system-wide balance. This learned function is used 
for extrapolation and interpolation during optimization with genetic algorithm, gradient descend and simulated annealing. 
# Written by Yasaman Chalabi, Winter 2025, DTU, Denmark 
library(ggplot2)      # for visualization 
library(gridExtra) 
library(cowplot)      # for plot arrangement 
# Reading in simulated data #### 
df_ = read.delim(file = 'simulated_data.tsv', header = T, quote = '', sep = '\t', as.is = T, check.names = F) 
# Check relationships 
# length vs force 
p_1 = ggplot(df_, aes(x = length, y = total_F))+ 
  theme(panel.background = element_blank(), axis.line = element_line(color = 'black'), 
        text = element_text(family = 'Helvetica', face = 'bold', size = 25), plot.title = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5))+ 
  labs(title = "Length vs Total force", x = "Length", y = "Total Force")+ 
  geom_point() 
# mass vs force 
p_2 = ggplot(df_, aes(x = mass, y = total_F))+ 
  theme(panel.background = element_blank(), axis.line = element_line(color = 'black'), 
        text = element_text(family = 'Helvetica', face = 'bold', size = 25), plot.title = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5))+ 
==PAGE:59==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
v 
  labs(title = "Mass vs Total force", x = "Mass", y = "Total Force")+ 
  geom_point() 
# friction vs force 
p_3 = ggplot(df_, aes(x = friction, y = total_F))+ 
  theme(panel.background = element_blank(), axis.line = element_line(color = 'black'), 
        text = element_text(family = 'Helvetica', face = 'bold', size = 25), plot.title = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5))+ 
  labs(title = "Friction vs Total force", x = "Friction", y = "Total Force")+ 
  geom_point() 
pdf(file = 'relationships.pdf', width = 15, height = 15) 
plot_grid(p_1, p_2, p_3, nrow = 2) 
graphics.off() 
# Collinearity analysis #### 
cors_ = NULL 
for(i_ in 1:(ncol(df_)-1)) 
{ 
  for(j_ in (i_+1):ncol(df_)) 
  { 
    x_ = df_[,i_]; y_ = df_[,j_] 
    cor_test = cor.test( x = x_, y = y_, alternative = 'two.sided') 
    cors_ = rbind(cors_, data.frame(x = colnames(df_)[i_], y = colnames(df_)[j_], correlation = cor_test$estimate, p_value = 
format(signif(cor_test$p.value,2), scientific = T)) ) 
  } 
} 
==PAGE:60==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
vi 
write.table(cors_, file = 'correlation_test.tsv', quote = F, row.names = F, col.names = T, sep = '\t') 
# Regression analysis #### 
# linear regression model 
p_1 = ggplot(df_, aes(x = length, y = total_F))+ 
      theme(panel.background = element_blank(), axis.line = element_line(color = 'black'), 
            text = element_text(family = 'Helvetica', face = 'bold', size = 25), plot.title = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5), 
plot.subtitle = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5))+ 
      labs(title = "Length vs Total force", subtitle = 'lm', x = "Length", y = "Total Force")+ 
      geom_point()+ 
      geom_smooth(method = "lm", se = T) 
# generalized linear regression model with inverse gaussian distribution/Gamma 
p_2 = ggplot(df_, aes(x = length, y = total_F))+ 
      theme(panel.background = element_blank(), axis.line = element_line(color = 'black'), 
            text = element_text(family = 'Helvetica', face = 'bold', size = 25), plot.title = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5), 
plot.subtitle = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5))+ 
      labs(title = "Length vs Total force", subtitle = 'glm with inverse.gaussian', x = "Length", y = "Total Force")+ 
      geom_point()+ 
      geom_smooth(method = "glm", method.args = list(family = inverse.gaussian), se = T) 
# generalized additive regression model with inverse gaussian/Gamma family 
p_3 = ggplot(df_, aes(x = length, y = total_F))+ 
      theme(panel.background = element_blank(), axis.line = element_line(color = 'black'), 
            text = element_text(family = 'Helvetica', face = 'bold', size = 25), plot.title = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5), 
plot.subtitle = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5))+ 
==PAGE:61==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
vii
      labs(title = "Length vs Total force", subtitle = 'gam with gamma', x = "Length", y = "Total Force")+ 
      geom_point()+ 
      geom_smooth(method = "gam", method.args = list(family = Gamma), se = T) 
# loess regression model 
p_4 = ggplot(df_, aes(x = length, y = total_F))+ 
      theme(panel.background = element_blank(), axis.line = element_line(color = 'black'), 
            text = element_text(family = 'Helvetica', face = 'bold', size = 25), plot.title = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5), 
plot.subtitle = element_text(hjust = .5, vjust = .5))+ 
      labs(title = "Length vs Total force", subtitle = 'loess', x = "Length", y = "Total Force")+ 
      geom_point()+ 
      geom_smooth(method = 'loess', span = .85, se = T) 
pdf(file = 'regression_models.pdf', width = 15, height = 15) 
(p_1+p_2)/(p_3 + p_4) 
graphics.off() 
 
Appendix 2 R script for regression and optimization. 
# This script performs polynomial regression analysis to infer a function associating length of the Coupler link to the system-
wide force and consequently moment (torque). This learned function is used for extrapolation and interpolation during 
optimization with genetic algorithm, gradient descend and simulated annealing. 
# Written by Yasaman Chalabi, Winter 2025, DTU, Denmark 
library(ggplot2)    # for visualization 
library(mgcv)       # for generalized additive models 
library(GA)         # for Genetic Algorithm 
==PAGE:62==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
viii
library(nloptr)     # for Gradient Descent 
set.seed(41)        # reproducibility of results 
# Reading in simulated data #### 
df_ = read.delim(file = 'simulated_data.tsv', header = T, quote = '', sep = '\t', as.is = T, check.names = F) 
# Regression model #### 
model_ = gam(total_F ~ s(length, bs = "cs"), family = Gamma, data = df_) 
summary(model_) 
## plotting prediction #### 
new_length = data.frame(length = runif(n = 100, min = min(df_$length), max = max(df_$length))) 
pred_total_F = predict(object = model_, newdata = new_length, type = 'response') 
plot(x = df_$length, y = df_$total_F, pch = 20, xlim = range(new_length$length), ylim = range(pred_total_F), xlab = 'Length', 
ylab = 'Total F') 
par(new = T) 
plot(x = sort(new_length$length), y = sort(pred_total_F), pch = 20, col = 'red', type = 'l', xlim = range(new_length$length), 
ylim = range(pred_total_F), xlab = NA, ylab = NA) 
# Optimization #### 
## fitness function to minimize total_F #### 
fitness_function = function(x_) 
{ 
  f_ = predict(model_, newdata = data.frame(length = x_[1]), type = 'response')     # x is a vector where x[1] is length 
  if(f_ < 0){ return(1e20) }                                                        # large penalty to avoid negative values 
  return(f_) 
} 
==PAGE:63==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
ix
## set the bounds for length and mass based on your data #### 
lower_bounds = min(df_$length) 
upper_bounds = max(df_$length) 
## 1. Genetic Algorithm (GA) #### 
ga_result = ga( type = "real-valued", 
                fitness = function(x){ -fitness_function(x) },      # minimize total_F; # Negative because we want to minimize 
                lower = lower_bounds, 
                upper = upper_bounds, 
                popSize = 50, 
                maxiter = 1000, 
                monitor = T)                                        # if TRUE, it will plot the evolution 
# stats for GA 
opt_ga = ga_result@solution 
rslt_ga = (df_$total_F[1]-(-ga_result@fitnessValue))/df_$total_F[1]*100 
cat("Using GA:\n", 
    "optimal Length:", opt_ga[1], ",\n", 
    "minimum Total Force (GA):", -ga_result@fitnessValue, ".\n", 
    "This led to a ",rslt_ga, '% decrease in total force at all 4 joints') 
## 2. Gradient descend (GD) #### 
# gradient function 
gradient_function = function(params) 
{ 
==PAGE:64==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
x 
  epsilon = 1e-6  # small perturbation for numerical differentiation 
  grad = numeric(length(params)) 
  for (i in 1:length(params)) 
  { 
    params_forward = params 
    params_backward = params 
    params_forward[i] = params_forward[i] + epsilon 
    params_backward[i] = params_backward[i] - epsilon 
    # evaluate function values at perturbed points 
    f_forward = fitness_function(params_forward) 
    f_backward = fitness_function(params_backward) 
    if (1e20 <= f_forward  | 1e20 <= f_backward) 
    { 
      grad[i] = 1e6     # assign large gradient penalty to force optimizer to avoid bad regions; should be 1/epsilon 
    }else 
    { 
      grad[i] = (f_forward - f_backward) / (2 * epsilon)      # δy/δx; finite difference approximation 
    } 
  } 
  return(grad) 
} 
# GD optimization 
==PAGE:65==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
xi
gd_result = nloptr( x0 = mean(df_$length),                # Start at mean values 
                    eval_f = fitness_function, 
                    eval_grad_f = gradient_function,      # Supply numerical gradient 
                    lb = lower_bounds,  
                    ub = upper_bounds, 
                    opts = list(algorithm = "NLOPT_LD_LBFGS", maxeval = 1000)) 
# stats for GD 
opt_gd = gd_result$solution 
rslt_gd = (df_$total_F[1]-gd_result$objective)/df_$total_F[1]*100 
cat("Using GD:\n", 
    "optimal Length:", opt_gd[1], ",\n", 
    "minimum Total Force (GD):", gd_result$objective, ".\n", 
    "This led to a ", rslt_gd, '% decrease in total force at all 4 joints') 
## 3. Simulated Annealing (SA) #### 
sa_result = optim(par = mean(df_$length),     # Starting point 
                  fn = fitness_function, 
                  method = "SANN") 
# stats for SA 
opt_sa = sa_result$par 
rslt_sa = (df_$total_F[1]-sa_result$value)/df_$total_F[1]*100 
cat("Using SA:\n", 
    "optimal Length:", opt_sa[1], ",\n", 
==PAGE:66==
 
Yasaman Chalabi Hajkarim, M.Sc. thesis, Winter 2025 
xii
    "minimum Total Force (SA):", sa_result$value, ".\n", 
    "This led to a ", rslt_sa, '% decrease in total force at all 4 joints') 
# results 
results = data.frame(Method = c("Genetic Algorithm", "Gradient Descent", "Simulated Annealing"), 
                     Optimal_Length = c(opt_ga[1], opt_gd[1], opt_sa[1]), 
                     Mass = df_$mass[1], 
                     Friction = 0, 
                     Minimum_Total_F = c(fitness_function(opt_ga), fitness_function(opt_gd), fitness_function(opt_sa)), 
                     Decrease = c(rslt_ga, rslt_gd, rslt_sa)) 
print(results) 
write.table(x = results, file = 'results.tsv', quote = F, sep = '\t', row.names = F, col.names = T) 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
