==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Analysis of floating wind turbine concept 
OPTIFLOAT using HAWC2
Angelica Chistè
DTU Wind-M-0876 
February 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0876
February 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Martin Otto Laver Hansen
Rasmus Sode Lund
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for graduation in the 
above education at the Technical 
University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Angelica Chistè
Title:
Analysis of floating wind turbine 
concept OPTIFLOAT using HAWC2
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
As the global demand for renewable energy increases, wind power offers significant advan-
tages in the energy transition. The wind industry is advancing with innovative solutions and
is expected to grow, particularly in the offshore sector. Floating offshore wind is becoming
increasingly attractive due to the availability of locations and higher wind speeds. However,
maintenance remains expensive, accounting for approximately 23% [35] of the total invest-
ment, primarily due to the long distances and the need for large vessels.
To address this challenge, the new concept OptiFloat has been developed. OptiFloat is a
floating offshore downwind turbine and introduces an innovative solution by lowering the
turbine during maintenance operations instead of relying on crane vessels, effectively reduc-
ing the costs significantly. The design is based on the IEA 15 MW wind turbine, aligning
with the market trend of increasing rotor sizes.
To analyze the interplay between structure, aerodynamics, hydrodynamics, and control in
OptiFloat, a dedicated tool is required. For this reason, this thesis aimed to model and
analyze the OptiFloat concept using the aeroelastic tool HAWC2. The results confirmed
that OptiFloat remains stable, does not sink or capsize, and maintains the correct draft
level. Additionally, the analysis revealed a potential bug in the hydrodynamics part in the
software, which was bypassed with an alternative approach.
Tests with wind, waves, and turbulence conditions demonstrated the reliability of the model,
making the model suitable for further load analysis. A comparison with ANSYS AQWA
model confirmed consistent static and dynamic behaviour at rated wind speed. While further
studies on OptiFloat are necessary, its innovative approach has the potential to revolutionize
the floating offshore wind market by addressing major maintenance challenges.
Keywords: OptiFloat, maintenance, floating, offshore, HAWC2, ANSYS AQWA
i
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Martin Otto Laver Hansen.
His constant support and willingness to help me with any challenge have been invaluable
throughout this project. Without his guidance, this work would not have been the same.
A thank you also goes to my co-supervisor, Rasmus Sode Lund, for his insightful advice,
and continuous support in overcoming the challenges of this thesis.
Finally, I want to extend my gratitude to Niels Christian Olsen, inventor of OptiFloat.
Without his invention, this project would not have existed. His continuous updates on the
project kept me deeply involved, making this experience even more meaningful.
iii
==PAGE:7==
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Overview of offshore wind energy
1
1.1
Renewable energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Wind energy as a key renewable source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Onshore vs. offshore
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Offshore wind energy, opportunities and challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Types of foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Floating offshore wind turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.7
State of art: fixed and floating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
OPTIFLOAT: a new era in offshore wind
13
2.1
The OPTIFLOAT concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
IEA 15 MW Reference Wind Turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
HAWC2 software – Methodology
21
3.1
Introduction to HAWC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Detailed model descriptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Structural model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Wind model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.3
Aerodynamic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.4
Control Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.5
Hydrodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.6
Mooring lines model and connecting cables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Additional tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
v
==PAGE:9==
Contents
4
Code development
34
4.1
Monopile upwind configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Monopile downwind configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.1
Monopile downwind configuration with free-yaw . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
OptiFloat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.1
Modified OptiFloat with extra mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Results
52
5.1
Monopile downwind free-yaw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
OptiFloat with extra mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
OptiFloat: some important results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Comparison with ANSYS AQWA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Conclusions and future work
71
Bibliography
76
A Annex
78
List of tables
81
List of figures
84
vi
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1
Overview of offshore wind energy
1.1
Renewable energy
In a world facing an energy crisis, renewable energy plays a vital role in the transition by
providing a sustainable alternative to replace fossil fuels.
The transition is accelerating, driven by global agreements such as the COP28 climate con-
ference. As highlighted by IEA [2], ”the goals of tripling renewables and doubling the annual
rate of energy efficiency improvements every year to 2030” were set to limit global temper-
ature rise. The meet of these targets would require the increase of the global renewable
capacity to over 11000 GW by 2030, leading to reach the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE)
scenario.
However, achieving these objectives presents several challenges, such as policy uncertainties,
social acceptance, and insufficient grid infrastructure. The strategies required to triple re-
newable energy capacity vary across different countries, depending on national policies and
economic conditions [2].
The renewable energy capacity is increasing, and photovoltaic (PV) plants and wind sys-
tems are becoming more and more competitive from an economic point of view. This growth
requires global investments, particularly in Europe, as well as progress in modernizing elec-
tricity grids [2].
Figure 1.1 shows the percentage of the different renewable energy technologies: the forecast
for 2028 is that the renewable energy sources will account for 42% of the global electricity
generation[2].
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
Figure 1.1: Electricity generation by technology, 2000-2028.[2]
The meeting of 2030 targets remains in any case uncertain and challenging and urgent
actions with new support policies are then required.
1.2
Wind energy as a key renewable source
Wind energy is a key renewable source, with an important role in the energy transition and
energy mix. It can help to reach the IEA’s Net Zero Emissions Scenario by 2050. According
to the Ren21 [26], the global wind power capacity increased significantly in 2023, with 117
GW of new capacity added, where 106.1 GW were onshore and 10.9 GW offshore. This
brought the total installed capacity to 1021 GW.
Figure 1.2: Wind power global capacity and annual additions, 2014-2023.[26]
2
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
The future development of wind energy must focus on economic optimization, primarily
measured through the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE), an important index that accounts
for the cost of power production per MWh across all stages of a wind turbine’s lifecycle.
The wind industry is making significant progress, especially in the offshore sector, where
research and technological innovation are growing.
1.3
Onshore vs. offshore
Wind turbines are divided into two main groups: onshore and offshore turbines and both
play a central role in the energy transition. They fundamentally generate electricity in the
same manner, but they differ in their location, size, scale, and the method of transferring
electricity to the grid.
Figure 1.3: Onshore and offshore wind turbines.[24]
Onshore wind turbines are a mature technology, supported by a robust global supply
chain and in 2023 they reached a global onshore wind capacity of 945 GW[13]. Onshore
wind energy is one of the cheapest forms of renewable energy source, together with the solar
PV, and their costs are expective to reduce even more. In the last years onshore turbines
have become bigger with taller hub heights and larger rotor diameters. Their main pro is that
onshore turbines have quicker installation and easier maintenance than offshore turbines.
Offshore wind turbines differ from the previous ones primarily due to their location: they are
situated in the sea. The installation of offshore wind turbines increased a lot with a massive
reduction of cost per MW due to higher capacity factors, given by the improvement in the
technologies and new foundations. In 2023, the offshore wind turbines reached a global wind
3
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
capacity of 75.2 GW [26], marking a significant turning point for the energy sector and they
are expected to be in the centre of the energy transition by 2050 due to its low costs per
MWh. In according to 2050 Scenario the offshore wind installation is expected to grow to
494 GW by 2030, according to Irena [20].
1.4
Offshore wind energy, opportunities and challenges
The offshore wind turbine is becoming more and more attractive for its performance, for
the availability of offshore locations and for the developments in turbine, foundation and
integration technologies. The increase of the turbine size led to higher per unit output, with
the average installed turbine growing from 7.7 MW in 2022 to 9.7 MW in 2023. [23]
Offshore wind takes advantage of the higher wind speed in the sea, not affected by the
mountains and buildings. The wind velocity is higher and more constant with lower sea-
sonal effects, leading to higher equivalent hours, higher energy output and higher efficiency.
Moreover, offshore wind farms benefit from their remote location, minimizing both noise and
visual impact. Initially, the turbines were close to the shore at shallow depths but thanks to
resources, now are more far away from the shore at deeper water. The opportunity to have
wind farms in water deeper than 50 meters allows countries with steep seabed gradients to
install more offshore wind capacity.
Despite its potential, its growth faces a lot of challenges. Firstly, the time needed to get
offshore projects up and running is quite long. This long time can be a risk, particularly
considering the targets 2030. The problem is further exacerbated by the need for long and
expensive cables to connect wind turbines located far from land, which also leads to trans-
mission losses.
Beyond financial and logistical challenges, maintenance represents another major challenge,
more difficult than that of onshore wind turbines due to seabed. The replacement of compo-
nents such as gears, generators, and blades is critical and represents the majority of heavy
maintenance costs. Over the 25-30 year lifetime of an offshore wind turbine, it is estimated
that approximately five heavy maintenance operations are required: three blade replace-
ments, one gear failure, and one generator failure.
The main problems related to their
replacement are the following:
• The distance reduces accessibility and increases downtime, as maintenance must be
carried out in remote areas;
• Equipment such as large crane vessels must be used hundreds of metres high, leading
4
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
to huge costs for lifting operations and to health and safety issues for technicians;
• Weather significantly limits accessibility for service vessels. Adverse weather condi-
tions postpone maintenance, increasing both time and energy losses and resulting in
complex and uncertain maintenance. The weather window for maintenance operations
is limited, leading to long shutdowns and higher costs while waiting for repairs;
• The need for specialized equipment to address problems further raises maintenance
costs compared to onshore operations;
• The severe offshore environment, characterized by higher wind speeds, higher waves,
and increased structural vibrations, leads to higher failure rates and increased mainte-
nance costs;
• CO2 emissions from the transit of crane vessels are significant;
• The global supply of large offshore crane vessels is limited.
These challenges contribute significantly to the overall operational and maintenance costs,
which account for 23% of the total investment in offshore wind farms, much higher than
the 5% for onshore farms. This substantial difference heavily impacts the levelized cost of
energy (LCOE)[35].
In addition to economic and technical challenges, offshore wind must address environmen-
tal concerns. [15] Some obstacles are the impact on marine life and seabirds: the turbines
should not be placed in areas critical to these animals. With the introduction of an offshore
platform the habitat is altered, requiring careful consideration of environmental factors. It
can happen that new invasive species, coming from the onshore preparation, colonize the
system changing the habitat. In addition, fishing activities may overlap with the floating
foundations, leading to potential conflicts. The effect on birds’ routes must also be taken
into account, ensuring that the mortality from collisions remains low. It is important that
the main area of migration is avoided and early consultations with the fishing industry are
essential.
All these challenges could delay the achievement of the 2030 targets set by the IEA’s Net Zero
Emission Scenario. However, despite these obstacles, offshore wind energy holds immense
potential to address global energy demands and drive the transition toward a sustainable
future. With higher wind availability, technological advancements, especially in the main-
tenance problem, and increasing investments in floating wind technology, offshore wind has
the capacity to overcome its current limitations.
5
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
1.5
Types of foundations
Most of the offshore turbines are nowadays limited to depths < 40 m but a lot of prototypes
are under development to reach depths > 40 m. There are mainly two different types of
offshore wind turbines commercially used: fixed support and floating.
The first is a proven technology, fixed at the seabed and is divided into five types:
• Gravity base: it is characterized by a large structure resting on the sea floor. It is
typically used for water deep between 0 and 30 meters [9];
• Suction bucket: it is made by steel and concrete and is installed without any mechanical
force, the force is given by the pressure difference between the inside of the bucket and
the water outside [9];
• Monopile: it is a single tower-like structure inserts deeply in the seabed due to gravity,
it is the most common [9];
• Tripod: it is characterized by three legs connecting to the central shaft and each leg is
inside the seabed [9];
• Jacket: is a three- or four-legged lattice support [9].
The disadvantage of the fixed structure is that it can be installed in a maximum sea depth
of 60 meters, otherwise the cost of installation becomes too high.
Figure 1.4: Different types of fixed offshore wind turbines[9]
6
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
The floating structure is not fixed at the seabed and is divided into four types, taken and
adapted from the oil industry:
• Tension leg: it has three or four mooring lines in tension, connecting the platform with
the seabed, and the wind turbine is in a central column. This structure is lighter in
compared to others and it has the smallest mooring impact but can be unstable during
the transportation and the installation. The static support is given by the tension in
the lines which lead to have expensive lines with high vertical loads but in general it
is very stable [20];
• Semi-submergible: it has buoyant structures attached to the main substructure, con-
nected to the seabed with a spread mooring system. The foundation has usually 3-5
vertical cylinders linked by connecting bracings and pontoons and the wind turbine is
on one of the columns. This structure is simple to install but it is complex to build
and less stable than other designs, the stability is given by water and gravity [20];
• Barge: it is characterized by a large surface area in contact with water, connected to
the seabed with a spread mooring system. It is simple to install but less stable [20];
• Spar buoy: it is characterized by a vertical cylinder substructure filled with ballast,
connected to seabed through mooring cables. The stability is given by the ballast which
lead to have the centre of gravity below the centre of buoyancy, so it is stabilized
through gravity. It is simple to build and has good stability, but it requires a very
deep-water installation vessel [20].
Figure 1.5: Different types of floating offshore wind turbines [25]
7
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
1.6
Floating offshore wind turbines
Floating wind turbines are stabilized at the bottom using a mooring system consisting of
mooring lines and anchors. They have the advantage of generating power in deeper waters
where fixed offshore foundations are unfeasible, which allows access to more ocean surface
area with stronger winds and results in higher equivalent hours. Since floating wind turbines
are located much farther offshore than other types, their environmental impact is lower.
The floating offshore wind industry has just been born, and it reached 270 MW of operational
global capacity in 2023, as reported by Irena [20]. It is estimated that around 80% of the
world’s offshore wind resource potential is in water deep more than 60 meters [25] and that
the floating industry has a global potential capacity of 13 TW [20].
Despite the potential of floating wind turbines, several challenges arise even more than the
fixed offshore wind turbine, primarily due to the high CAPEX and OPEX costs and the long
and complex regulatory framework. The high costs are largely attributed to the fact that the
technology is still under development. However, this also presents numerous opportunities
for innovation, particularly in reducing operational and maintenance costs. Maintenance is
especially challenging and expensive due to the motion. There is a clear need for future
investment in new ideas that allow to reduce maintenance costs and make the maintenance
more accessible.
One technical challenge of floating foundations lies in their motion and their six degrees of
freedom:
• Surge: displacement in the longitudinal axis;
• Sway: displacement in the lateral axis;
• Heave: displacement in the vertical axis;
• Roll: rotation about the longitudinal axis;
• Pitch: rotation about the lateral axis;
• Yaw: rotation about the vertical axis.
The motion is influenced by the site conditions, the choice of the foundation, power cables,
etc. and can affect the design. Another major technical challenge is the stability of the
floater, as it depends on the floater design and mooring system.
Nevertheless, some innovations are under development to further improve the design and
stability of the foundations.
8
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
Figure 1.6: Six degrees of motion for a floating offshore wind turbine[20]
With more experience and research, floating industry is expected to growth soon. Today’s
developments in technologies, such as foundations and mooring systems, are helping to reduce
costs and increase efficiency. In addition, policy support and more investments are needed,
and international co-operation must be accelerated.
To summarize, the floating offshore wind industry is expected to growth, and it has a great
potential for the energy transition. It is expected to be one of the major renewable energy
sources.
9
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
1.7
State of art: fixed and floating
The most important companies for floating wind turbines are Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
and Hitachi in Japan, Vestas and Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy in Denmark.
The world’s first offshore wind farm was established in Denmark, IT IS Vindeby project,
operating from 1991 to 2017, with a total capacity of 5 MW using fixed offshore wind
turbines.
Regarding floating wind turbines, the world’s first large-scale floating wind turbine was the
Hywind Demo in Norway, with one turbine spar-buoy concept of 2.3 MW. The first floating
wind turbine using semi-submersible platform was WindFloat1 in Portugal, with 2 MW wind
turbine. Additionally, the world’s first floating barge turbine was Floatgen Demonstrator in
France, with a 2 MW turbine. The world’s first floating wind farm was Hywind Scotland,
located in Scotland, with 30 MW spar-buoy wind turbines. Meanwhile, the first floating
wind farm using semi-submersible concept was WindFloat project in Portugal, with a total
capacity of 25 MW turbines.
So far, the world’s largest operational offshore wind farm is Hornsea 2, located in the North
Sea in UK, with a total capacity of 1.32 GW and comprises 165 turbines, situated next to its
predecessor, Hornsea 1. The world’s largest offshore wind farm under construction is Dogger
Bank A-B-C in UK, which will have a total capacity of 3.6 GW (1.2 GW each phase). It is
expected to be fully operational by 2026. The world’s largest floating offshore wind farm is
Hywind Tampen in Norway, with its 88 MW of spar-buoy floating wind turbines.
An overview of the main projects in offshore wind turbines and farms is given in the following
tables. As can be seen the rated power of the turbines is increasing.
Year
Country
Project
Name
Total Capacity (MW)
Turbine Rating or Number
Concept
1991-2017
Denmark [29]
Vindeby
5
11
Fixed
2011-2016
Portugal [33]
WindFloat
1
2
2 MW
Floating
semi-
sub
Table 1.1: Historical offshore wind projects
10
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 1.
Overview of offshore wind energy
Year
Country
Project
Name
Total Capacity (MW)
Turbine Rating or Number
Concept
2009
Norway [3]
Hywind
Demo
2.3
2.3 MW
Floating
spar-
buoy
2017
Scotland [18]
Hywind
Scot-
land
30
5
Floating
spar-
buoy
2018
France [11]
Floatgen
Demon-
strator
2
2 MW
Floating
barge
2019
UK [16]
Hornsea
1
1200
7 MW
Monopile
2020
Portugal [34]
WindFloat
25
8.3 MW
Floating
semi-
sub
2021
Norway [10]
TetraSpar
Demo
3.6
3.6 MW
Floating
spar-
buoy
2022
UK [17]
Hornsea
2
1320
8 MW
Monopile
2022
Italy [1]
Beleolico
30
10
Monopile
2023
US [32]
South
Fork
Wind
Farm
132
12
Monopile
2023
Norway [19]
Hywind
Tam-
pen
88
11
Floating
spar-
buoy
2023
Scotland [27]
Seagreen
1075
114
Fixed
Table 1.2: Operational offshore wind projects
Year
Country
Project
Name
Total Capacity (MW)
Turbine Rating or Number
Concept
2022
UK [7]
Dogger
Bank
A-B-C
3600
277
Monopile
2024
US [30][31]
Vineyard
Wind
806
62
Monopile
Table 1.3: Under construction offshore wind projects
11
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
2
OPTIFLOAT: a new era in offshore wind
2.1
The OPTIFLOAT concept
To address the significant and costly challenges of maintaining offshore wind turbines, a new
concept has been developed: the OptiFloat concept. It is a downwind design, meaning the
rotor is positioned on the leeward side of the turbine. It features a single-point moored
floating platform with an anchor system.
Figure 2.1: OptiFloat concept Printed with permission from
NCO-Engineering
Figure 2.2: OptiFloat con-
cept 3D model
13
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2.
OPTIFLOAT: a new era in offshore wind
This innovative solution involves lowering the turbine foundation instead of relying on
large, high-cost crane vessels. The lowering process can be performed either by the founda-
tion itself or with the assistance of a smaller vessel. The main advantages of this concept
include:
• Reduced costs associated with crane vessels;
• Increased safety due to a lower operational height during maintenance;
• Expanded weather windows for maintenance, increasing the days per year.
The structure consists of the following key elements:
i. Spar: it is the main tower, inclined from the vertical axis. It is reinforced with a solid
stay to increase rigidity;
ii. Two support legs: The structure includes two support legs, inclined from the vertical
axis and a certain angle relative to each other. Each leg has a pivot bearing at its end
position, positioned at a specific angle that allows the leg to shift slightly forward as
the legs spread apart. This enhances stability during crane operations. The two legs
have separate pivot bearings. When observing the turbine from the front of the shaft,
the legs are referred to as the ”right” leg and the ”left” leg;
iii. Tilt Degree Of Freedom: Located at the end of the spar, this feature increases the
system’s degrees of freedom, allowing the rotor to rotate of 180 degrees and enabling the
crane functionality. Additionally, it helps reduce loads and vibrations on the structure;
iv. Yaw lock: This mechanism connects the spar to the two support legs, locking them
together to enhance structural stiffness. During the lowering process, the yaw lock
opens allowing the two legs to spread;
Figure 2.3: Yaw lock Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering
14
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2.
OPTIFLOAT: a new era in offshore wind
v. Foils: Three foils are mounted on the spar and support legs. These can rotate to
align with the current and waves. Their shape and rotation help reduce hydrodynamic
loads, contributing to a more stable structure;
vi. The suspended masses: Two masses are suspended 100 meters below the support
legs. Their main purposes are to lower the center of gravity. They are still an open
point and under study;
vii. Buoyancy elements: Buoyancy elements are located at the base of the spar and the
support legs. These provide the necessary buoyancy forces. The buoyancy forces of
the support leg elements should balance at least the weight of the suspended masses,
while the buoyancy force of the spar’s element should balance at least the preload of
the taut mooring lines;
Figure 2.4: Spar including foil, buoyancy element and part of the yaw lock Printed with permission
from NCO-Engineering
Figure 2.5: Support leg including foil, buoyancy element and part of the yaw lock Printed with
permission from NCO-Engineering
The heavy maintenance process involves lowering the foundation by spreading the sup-
port legs while lowering the spar. The yaw lock mechanism allows the legs to open, and
the tilt DOF enables the rotor to rotate 180 degrees. To ensure smooth and symmetri-
cal movement, the use of two synchronized hydraulic cylinders is recommended. This
approach minimizes the risk of structural collapse during crane operations. Multiple
methods for lowering the foundation are currently under consideration, with the final
15
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2.
OPTIFLOAT: a new era in offshore wind
solution potentially involving a combination of approaches.
Figure 2.6: OptiFloat concept during maintenance Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering
viii. Mooring lines: The foundation is anchored to the seabed using four tensioned moor-
ing lines arranged symmetrically around the connection point. Based on the principles
of taut mooring, these lines remain under tension, and never slack, and maintain a
specific angle with the seabed. The pretension of the mooring lines acts as permanent
load, leading to stabilize the OptiFloat. The mooring lines are manufactured by Dy-
namica Ropes, a Danish company. The lines are made from Dyneema fibers, renowned
for their high strength (stronger than steel), light weight (10 times lighter than steel),
UV resistance, and durability. For this application, DM20 fibers were selected.
16
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2.
OPTIFLOAT: a new era in offshore wind
Property
Value
Diameter
0.2 m
Weight
21.7 kg/m
Breaking strength
2250 t
Table 2.1: Mooring lines properties
ix. Connecting cables: The spar and support legs are connected with cables in their
buoyancy elements, also made from Dyneema DM20 fibers.
[22] The masses in tons of the different elements are the following:
Component
Mass (tons)
Spar (without yaw lock)
688.1
Foil spar
310.4
Buoyancy element spar
396.0
Support leg (without yaw lock)
437.7
Foil support leg
320.8
Buoyancy element support leg
245.8
Yaw lock
265.4
Table 2.2: Masses in tons of the OptiFloat
2.2
IEA 15 MW Reference Wind Turbine
To effectively study the OptiFloat concept, the IEA-15 MW Reference Wind Turbine was
selected as the reference turbine. Given the increasing scale of floating offshore wind tur-
bines, it was important to choose a large rotor to accurately represent the state-of-the-art in
floating structures. A reference wind turbine provides a crucial baseline for studies and helps
better understand key design principles allowing comprehensive research opportunities.
The 15 MW Reference Wind Turbine features a rotor diameter of 240 meters and three
blades. Its main characteristics are reported in Table 2.3 [5].
The reference wind turbine features a direct-drive nacelle equipped with a permanent-magnet
synchronous radial flux generator. The direct-drive system simplifies the design by eliminat-
ing the need for a gearbox, resulting in fewer components and reduced complexity. [5]
17
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2.
OPTIFLOAT: a new era in offshore wind
Parameter
Value
Power rating
15 MW
Specific rating
332 W/m2
Number of blades
3
Design tip-speed ratio
9
Rated wind speed
10.59 m/s
Cut-in wind speed
3 m/s
Cut-out wind speed
25 m/s
Minimum rotor speed
5 rpm
Maximum rotor speed
7.56 rpm
Rotor diameter
240 m
Blade length
117 m
Control
variable speed, collective pitch
Design Cp
0.489
Design Ct
0.799
Annual energy production
77.4 GWh
Table 2.3: Key parameters for IEA-15 MW RWT
The main parameters of the nacelle are reported in Table 2.4 [5].
Parameter
Value
Y [m]
5.486
Z [m]
-3.978
Mass [tons]
820
Ixx [kg m2]
21433958
Iyy [kg m2]
12607277
Izz [kg m2]
18682468
Table 2.4: Main parameters of the nacelle
18
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2.
OPTIFLOAT: a new era in offshore wind
The coordinate system has its origin at the beginning of the tower top, considering a
downwind configuration, with y pointed upwind parallel to the sea water level and z pointed
down.
Figure 2.7: Nacelle of the 15 MW RWT [5]
For the OptiFloat case a downwind configuration was chosen with a tilt angle equal to 6
degrees and a coning angle equal to 0 degree. The controller provided for this reference wind
turbine, and for the OptiFloat concept is the DTU Basic Controller.
19
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
3
HAWC2 software – Methodology
3.1
Introduction to HAWC2
To represent the intricate interplay between structure, aerodynamics, hydrodynamics, and
control in wind turbines, a specialized tool is essential. HAWC2 (Horizontal Axis Wind
turbine Code, 2nd generation) serves this purpose. It is aero-elastic tool developed at Riso
and at DTU Wind Energy designed to study the response, the loads and the dynamics of
wind turbines. The software is used across different industries to study both innovative
and established concepts, as well as to verify thier performance under different weather
conditions. HAWC2 excels in modeling the aeroelasticity of the wind turbine, capturing
the interactions between the key components, such as the structure, aerodynamic, control,
hydrodynamic and soil, and the external conditions, including wind, waves and currents.
All these parts interact together and influence each other, leading to complex mathematical
behaviour. Moreover, it is also possible to add external models with the introduction of DLL
(dynamically linked libraries) interfaces, allowing to conduct a broader variety of simulations.
Figure 3.1: HAWC2 different blocks
21
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
The main input of HAWC2 is the so-called htc file, where the different blocks are specified.
Additional data files and DLL files are other inputs, which are described more in detail in
the following paragraphs.
The outputs of HAWC2 are time simulations output for different sensors, animations and
eigen frequencies. Additional tools, such as Python, Matlab and/or Pdap, are required to
post process the data and analyse the plots. [28] [8]
Figure 3.2: HAWC2 input and output
3.2
Detailed model descriptions
3.2.1
Structural model
The structural model in HAWC2 is based on a multibody formulation combined with Tim-
oshenko beam elements theory. Each component, such as blades, tower and others, can be
divided in multiple bodies, with each body represented by different Timoshenko beam ele-
ments featuring six degrees of freedom. These bodies are described by different nodes, at
least two per body, and the Timoshenko beams are defined between pairs of nodes, operat-
ing under the assumption of small deflections. The nodes are fundamental in defining the
properties and the positions of each component; the more complex a component is, the more
nodes are required.
A beam is treated as one-dimensional entity represented by a line. Different bodies interact
with one another and must satisfy various constraints at their interfaces, represented with
algebraic equations. The bodies can be either flexible, captured using multiple Timoshenko
22
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
beam elements, or rigid, where stiffness, mass and inertia, remain constant for each element.
Timoshenko beams are considered isotropic.
Figure 3.3: Main body divided in three bodies with different number of nodes
The main input files for the structure of HAWC2 are:
• Filename.htc: this is the main file, structured into multiple code blocks. The locations
of components, bodies, nodes, orientation and constaints are described. Additionally,
it described other blocks, such as those for aerodynamic, hydrodynamic, etc;
• Filename.st: this file contains the beam cross-sectional data for the Timoshenko beams.
It consists of 19 properties including: mass, mass center coordinates, radius of gyration,
shear center coordinates, modulus of elasticity, shear modulus of elasticity, area mo-
ment of inertia, torsional stiffness, shear factor, cross sectional area, structural pitch,
center of elasticity coordinates. These structural parameters are defined in the cross
sections in 2D.
For simple beams the formulas below can be used to calculate the structural properties, the
reference point for the data is the position of the node. Formulas are valid for cylinders.
However, for complex components, such as blades, specialized consideration and formulas
are required, and this analysis is beyond the scope of this thesis.
Mass per unit length:
m = ρA = ρπ
"D
2
2
−
D
2 −t
2#
(3.1)
Radius of gyration around the principal bending axis, for an isotropic circular tube.
Around y is the same for symmetry:
rx =
s
Ix
A =
v
u
u
t1
4
"D
2
2
+
D
2 −t
2#
(3.2)
23
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
Area moment of inertia:
Ix =
Z
A x2 dx dy = π
4
"D
2
4
−
D
2 −t
4#
(3.3)
Torsional stiffness:
K =
Z
A r2 dx dy = π
2
"D
2
4
−
D
2 −t
4#
(3.4)
Shear reduction factor:
kx = 1
2 + 3t
4D
(3.5)
Cross-sectional area:
A =
Z
A dx dy = π
"D
2
2
−
D
2 −t
2#
(3.6)
where D is the outer diameter and t is the wall thickness. [5]
Each body has its own coordinate system, described in the orientation block of the htc
file, important to describe the nodes and their positions.
The global coordinate system
has the z axis aligned with the direction of gravity and the y axis parallel to the ground
pointed upwind. The local coordinate system may be different from the global one. All
coordinate systems follow the right-hand rule, with the z-axis corresponding to the primary
axis of the object. This block also allows the definition of body orientations relative to the
global coordinate system. The constraint block defines how bodies interact. It can either fix
two bodies together or allow one or more degrees of freedom, representing various types of
mechanism. Remember that the constraints can be added only where nodes are present.
The approach described follows the methodology outlined by T.J.Larsen and A.M.Hansen in
the manual ”How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual” [28] and in the course ”HAWC2 Selfstudy
from DTU”[8].
Figure 3.4: Global coordinate system HAWC2
24
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
3.2.2
Wind model
The wind is a crucial parameter in the wind turbine simulations as it significantly influences
the loads and the structural response of the turbine. In HAWC2 simulations, key wind-
related parameters include wind speed at hub height, wind shear, wind direction, and the
slope of the mean wind. Wind speed varies with height, as it is affected by surface roughness
and the location. Due to the no-slip condition the wind speed at the surface is zero. This
height is called roughness length and the wind speed increases with the increase of the
altitude. The direction of the average wind speed is typically referred to as u-direction.
The variation of wind speed with height is described by the wind shear profile. For offshore
locations, two commonly used profiles are:
• Logarithmic profile
U(z) = Uhub
ln(z/z0)
ln(zhub/z0)
(3.7)
where U(z) is the wind speed at altitude z, Uhub is the wind speed at hub height, zhub
is the height of the hub and z0 is the roughness length. For open-sea conditions, the
roughness length z0 is typically around 0.0001 m.
• Power law profile:
U(z) = Uhub
 z
zhub
α
(3.8)
where α is the power law coefficient.
It is important to describe also the orientation of the wind field. It is described by three
key angles: wind yaw angle, tilt angle and roll angle. The first describes the angle of the
wind with respect to the turbine’s shaft and it is considered positive if the wind comes from
the right while sitting on the nacelle and looking in negative y direction. The tilt angle
indicates whether the wind comes from above or below. A positive tilt angle means the wind
approaches from below. The roll angle describes the rotation of the wind with respect to the
turbulence component.
Wind turbulence describes the variability of the wind around its mean value over a specified
period of time. It is usually described for the main direction of the wind, u-direction. It is
described by an important parameter called turbulence intensity, which is the ratio between
the 10 minutes standard deviation of the wind speed and the mean wind speed over a certain
period.
I =
σ
Vmean
(3.9)
25
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
According to ”IEC61400-1 design requirements” the equation for the turbulence standard
deviation for normal turbulence model (NTM) is the following:
σ = Iref (0.75Vhub + 5.6) ;
(3.10)
where Iref is a reference value depending on the turbine class. The turbine class depends on
the desired site for the installation.
HAWC2 software can describe the turbulence with two models: the Veers’ method, which is
not described in detail here, and the Mann model.
The Mann model originates a 3D turbulence vector field under neutral atmospheric condi-
tions. Each point represents the local speed and direction of the wind. As assumption, the
turbulence field doesn’t change in time.
HAWC2 needs four important parameters as input: the length scale L, the alpha epsilon
value, gamma value Γ and one logical number, zero or one.
According to IEC61400-1 the length scale for a height above 60 m is equal to 42*0.8=33.6.
The alpha epsilon value is typically considered equal to 1. The logical number says if the
points are a local vector or not (average over a cube). The gamma value Γ is typically taken
equal to 3.9, referred to neutral atmospheric conditions. A seed number for the turbulence
is also required.
Additionally, the model requires the box dimensions in u, v, and w directions. The total
length of the box in the u-direction is equal to the simulation length, excluding the transient
time, multiplied by the wind speed. The following formula is considered:
wsp = Nx ∗∆x
tstop −t0
(3.11)
where wsp is the mean wind speed, tstop is the simulation time, t0 is the time for the
initial transient, Nx is the number of grid points in u-direction and delta x is the distance
between each grid point.
The total lengths of the box in the other two directions must cover all the rotor plane area.
The total number of grid points for the Mann turbulence are selected as a power of 2.
The approach described follows the methodology outlined by T.J.Larsen and A.M.Hansen in
the manual ”How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual” [28] and in the course ”HAWC2 Selfstudy
from DTU”[8].
26
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
3.2.3
Aerodynamic model
The aerodynamic block models how the rotor extracts energy from the wind by dividing
it into concentric annular elements, referred to as blade elements. It is based on the Blade
Element Momentum (BEM) formulation. For each element, 1D momentum theory is applied
independently to estimate the local wind speed and direction near the blades. Subsequently,
the aerodynamic forces on the 2D airfoil sections of each blade element are calculated. Lift
and Drag are considered as functions of the angle of attack.
As the wind interacts with the rotor, it changes its speed and direction, this effect is consid-
ered by the induction factor. The induction factor, a, represents the reduction in the wind
speed at the rotor plane area. The main assumptions in the BEM formulation are that the
rotor is ideal, consisting of an infinite number of blades, frictionless and constantly loaded,
and that the blade elements operate independently from each other.
The BEM formulation in HAWC2 differs from the classic BEM formulation because, in-
stead of having a uniform induction factor and thrust coefficient across the annular element,
HAWC2 calculates variations in induction and thrust in both the radial and the azimuthal
direction for a better representation.
To improve the accuracy of the model several corrections are considered:
• The tip correction: this considers the finite number of blades, not infinite as the ideal
case;
• Skewed inflow correction: this accounts for the induction variations when the rotor has
a tilt or yaw angle;
• Dynamic inflow model: this considers the transitional time required for the rotor loads
to reach equilibrium.
In the aerodynamic section HAWC2 requires as input two external specific files, essential for
the aerodynamic calculations:
• Filename.ae: it requires the chord length and the thickness/chord ratio;
• Filename.pc: it contains the airfoil profile coefficients, CL, CD, Cm as function of angle
of attack.
The aerodynamic block in the htc file specifies the models to be used for the corrections and
the links to the ae and pc files.
It is possible to account for the tower shadow and for aerodynamic drag on any main bodies
using different models; however, these topics are not covered in this thesis.
27
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
The approach described follows the methodology outlined by T.J.Larsen and A.M.Hansen in
the manual ”How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual” [28] and in the course ”HAWC2 Selfstudy
from DTU”[8].
3.2.4
Control Systems
The control strategy of a wind turbine is crucial for optimizing energy capture and ensuring
safe operation. HAWC2 utilizied the DTU Wind Energy Basic Controller, which manages
both partial load and full load operational regions. This controller allows to have stable and
efficient performances.
The pitch angle and the rotational speed define the operating conditions of a wind turbine
at any given wind speed. The goals are to maximize the power coefficient below rated wind
speed by adjusting the rotational speed, while keeping constant nominal power above rated
wind speed by regulating the pitch angle.
There are three main operational regions:
1. Partial load operation: the rotational speed increases to maximize the power capture
and the generator torque adjusted accordingly. The pitch angle is constant;
2. The rotational speed is kept constant to its nominal value and the generator torque
increases to match the aerodynamic torque;
3. Full load operation: the rotational speed and the power are constant while the pitch
angle is adjusted.
HAWC2 integrates the DTU Basic Controller via an external DLL, enabling the use of various
control algorithms that exchange input and output data with HAWC2. This controller is
designed for variable speed - pitch regulated wind turbines. When the DLL is connected to
HAWC2, a continuous flow of data is established. Typically, multiple DLLs interact[28][8]:
1. Regulator DLL: receives input from HAWC2 and generates output parameters for the
other DLLs;
2. Generator, Mechanical Brake and Pitch DLL: process the regulator’s output and send
updated parameters back to HAWC2.
The approach described follows the methodology outlined by T.J.Larsen and A.M.Hansen in
the manual ”How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual” [28] and in the course ”HAWC2 Selfstudy
from DTU”[8].
28
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
Additional controller tuning may be required, when the controller is applied to floating wind
turbines. This is due to the coupling between the control and the platform motion. The
tuning ensures proper damping and frequency values of the controller. The approach is ex-
plained in detail by T.J.Larsen and T.D.Hanson [21].
The key challenge for floating wind turbines arises because their natural frequencies are lower
than those of onshore wind turbines. If the natural frequency of the controller is higher than
the natural frequencies of the tower, the structure is stable, and vice versa.
An important aspect is the gradient of the thrust curve. When the wind speed is lower than
the rated one, the gradient is positive and it helps reducing the oscillations. However, when
the wind speed is higher than the rated one, the gradient is negative and it amplifies the
oscillations. This destabilizing effect occurs because, when the platform moves backward,
the relative velocity decreases and the thrust increases, while when it moves forward, the
relative velocity increases and the thrust decreases.
Since the fluctuations influence the rotor speed, pitch regulation is required to maintain
rotational stability. The pitch control system regulates the blade angle to maintain a con-
stant rotor speed. However, if the pitch response is too fast compared to the platform’s
natural motion, it modifies the blade angles before the system completes its natural oscil-
lation, introducing a phase delay relative to the platform’s motion. As the platform moves
backward, the controller increases the pitch to reduce thrust. However, if this adjustment
happens too quickly, by the time the platform moves forward, the pitch remains too high,
over-reducing thrust.
This misalignment amplifies oscillations instead of damping them,
leading to increased power fluctuations and system instability. This phenomenon is known
as negative damping, where oscillations in power and platform motion are amplified rather
than suppressed.[21]
3.2.5
Hydrodynamics
Particularly important for offshore wind turbines, is the interaction between the structure,
the waves and the currents, which affect the entire behaviour. The hydrodynamic loads can
be calculated either with the Morisons formula within HAWC2, or with the external solver
WAMIT, coupled via ESYS.dll. The first is only valid for sender elements with a diameter-
to-length ratio D
L < 0.2.
Buoyancy forces play an important role in the hydrodynamic contributions and they can be
turned on or off. These forces are determined by the submerged volume of the structure
and are crucial for maintaining the equilibrium to prevent the structure from sinking. The
forces are calculated by integrating of the water pressure over the volume of the submerged
29
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
structure: as the water depth increases, so does the pressure and consequently the buoyancy
force.
The Morison equation is used to calculate the hydrodynamic forces due to the movement of
the flow. It does not account for waves generated by the interaction of the structure with
water, called wave diffraction.
dF = ρA ˙U + ρCaAR ˙Urel + 1
2ρDCd
 ˙Urel
 ˙Urel
(3.12)
where F is the hydrodynamic force in N/m, U is the movement of flow, Urel is the
relative movement between the water and the structure, Cd is drag coefficient, Ca is added
mass coefficient, ρ is density, AR is the reference cross sectional area. The added mass and
drag coefficients, the cross sectional area and diameter are required as inputs in HAWC2.
The first term represents the Froud-Krylov force, and it is linked to the pressure variations
caused by waves acceleration. The second term accounts for the inertia forces generated
by the movement of the water. When a structure is submerged in water and experiences
relative acceleration, it must displace the surrounding water. This displacement increases
the effective inertial forces acting on the structure. The last term represents the drag force,
which is due to the relative movement between the structure and the fluid.
The waves are included in the calculation with an external dll, which can include different
types of waves: regular, irregular, stream function and deterministic waves.
The main
parameters to describe the waves are wave height, wave period and the spectrum. The first
represents the difference between the minimum and the maximum of the wave measured
from the sea water level. The wave period is the duration it takes for a full wavelength to
pass a stationary observation point. The spectrum indicates how wave energy is distributed
across different frequencies.
Regular waves are characterized by constant height and period for each wave: in the htc
file the height and the period must be specified. Irregular waves have different heights and
periods and are characterised by a certain frequency spectrum. The spectrum can be based
on either the Jonswap or Pierson Moscowitz models, they primarily differ in the gamma
factor, which causes the Jonswap spectrum to have higher energy contentration at the peak
frequency. The stream function waves require as input only the wave height, period and
current. The deterministic waves consist of several waves, with each wave must be defined
in an external input file. The current can be added with constant or variable velocity.
The approach described follows the methodology outlined by T.J.Larsen and A.M.Hansen in
the manual ”How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual” [28] and in the course ”HAWC2 Selfstudy
from DTU”[8].
30
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
3.2.6
Mooring lines model and connecting cables
The mooring lines are an important part of floating offshore wind turbines and influence the
dynamics and the loads of the turbine. The mooring lines in HAWC2, explained in detailed
by Hansen, Morten Hartvig, Zahle, Frederik [14], follow a dynamic approach, meaning that
the mass and drag forces are included (opposite of a quasi-static approach). The mooring
lines are divided in small elements, each element is described by its hydrodynamics drag
coefficient, added mass and buoyancy forces while the contact with the seabed is described
by a non linear spring.
The axial force in the mooring line is calculated as follows [14]:
f = EAεG
(3.13)
where E is the Young’s modulus and A is the cross-section area of the line. εG is the green
strain value and it is calculated as:
εG = L2
n −L2
n,0
2L2
n,0
(3.14)
where Ln,0 is the unloaded length of one element and Ln is the final length of one element.
Mooring lines and connecting cables are modeled in HAWC2 with an external DLL called
ESYSMooring. Each lines is represented with different nodes. Two main parts are necessary
to described the behavior of the lines: the properties theirself and a set of constraints. The
DLL requires as input the following parameters:
• mass per length in air [kg/m];
• mass per length in water [kg/m] calculated as
mwater −ρwater · A
where A is the cross-sectional area of the cable;
• starting and ending positions of the first and last nodes of the line;
• a set of hydrodynamic values: the drag coefficient perpendicular to the element (cdp)
and along the element (cdl) and the mass coefficient (cm).
HAWC2 requires as input for the drag coefficients
cd = 1
2ρDCd
(3.15)
31
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3.
HAWC2 software – Methodology
where D is the diameter of the line and Cd the drag coefficient.
The mass coefficient is defined as
cm = ρACm
(3.16)
where A is the cross sectional area of the line and Cm the mass coefficient.
• the axial stiffness of the line in Newton
There are four different possible constraints for the mooring lines: fixed to another moor-
ing lines, fixed to a global system, fixed to a structural node and fixed to a structural node
but with a relative distance.
The approach described follows the methodology outlined by T.J.Larsen and A.M.Hansen
in the manual ”How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual” [28].
3.3
Additional tools
Additional tools were used for the study of the results: Pdap, HAWC2 Visualization and
Matlab.
Pdap stands for Python Data Analysis Program and allows the post processing and the
analysis of the data output. It integrates an user friendly graphical interface with Python,
enabling the automatic generation of graphs. It was utilized for the initial analysis of the
time output.
HAWC2 Visualization is Python-based graphical tool for visualizing HAWC2 simulations. It
was used for the visualization in the time domain of different simulations.
The programming language Matlab was used for the study of HAWC2 output graphs.
32
==PAGE:43==
==PAGE:44==
4
Code development
4.1
Monopile upwind configuration
This preliminary study analyzes a monopile offshore wind turbine equipped with the IEA 15
MW rotor, sourced from GitHub to enhance the understanding of the main OptiFloat code.
The reference wind turbine has a hub height of 150 meters above sea level. The monopile
foundation extends 30 meters below the mean water level and is anchored 45 meters into the
seabed. It has an upwind configuration, meaning the wind first encounters the blades and
rotor before reaching the tower.
Figure 4.1: Monopile upwind configuration in HAWC2
34
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4.
Code development
The properties of the blades and tower are not detailed in this report, as they are not the
primary focus of this analysis.
The structural description is divided into three main sections: the main tower, the sub-
merged portion of the monopile below the waterline, and the embedded monopile within the
seabed. The structural properties are taken from the IEA 15 MW reference report [5]. The
shaft, hub, and blades are modeled according to HAWC2 reference data but are not analyzed
in detail in this study.
The turbine has a tilt angle of 6 degrees and a coning angle of 4 degrees, as specified in the
orientation block of the code.
Special attention is given to the coordinate systems of the shaft and blades. The shaft coor-
dinate system has its z-axis aligned with the shaft axis, oriented positively downwind. This
allows to have the proper matching with the aerodynamic block, crucial aspect, particularly
for the hub vec line. This line defines the suction and pressure sides and is typically de-
scribed using the shaft coordinate system.
The shaft is simulated under wind conditions with an initial rotational speed of -0.2 rad/s,
as specified by the mbdy2 ini rotvec d1 line. This means the shaft begins rotating in a
clockwise direction in global coordinates.
Figure 4.2: Shaft coordinate system, x in red, y in green and z in blue, upwind
35
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4.
Code development
The hub and blades are oriented such that the z-axis runs along the blade length, while
the x-axis points towards the leading edge, and the y-axis is positive in the direction of the
suction side. The blades are connected to the hub through a bearing that enables pitch angle
adjustments according to the external DLL controller. Initially, the pitch angle of the blades
is set to zero degrees.
Figure 4.3: Blade coordinate system, x in red, y in green and z in blue, upwind
Between the shaft and the towertop an additional component is present, called connector. It
is a massless body and allows to have the desired length of the shaft. The shaft is connected
to the connector via a bearing without friction, allowing the shaft to move freely with the
wind.
4.2
Monopile downwind configuration
A downwind configuration was initially investigated for the monopile foundation to validate
the simulation framework.
The tilt angle and the coning angle were set to zero degree.
Particular attention was given to coordinate system transformations and orientation adjust-
ments.
36
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4.
Code development
Figure 4.4: Monopile downwind configuration in HAWC2
The overall structure and orientation of the tower remained unchanged, while the shaft
was repositioned to align its z-axis in the downwind direction.
Figure 4.5: Shaft coordinate system, x in red, y in green and z in blue, downwind
To ensure correct aerodynamic behavior, the coordinate system of the blades was checked:
• The x-axis points towards the leading edge;
• The y-axis points towards the suction side.
The applied constraints remained unchanged, and the rotor continued to rotate clockwise.
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4.
Code development
Figure 4.6: Blade coordinate system, x in red, y in green and z in blue, downwind
4.2.1
Monopile downwind configuration with free-yaw
An additional configuration was explored by modifying the existing monopile downwind
model.
The constraint governing the connection between the tower and the connector was modified.
Instead of a fixed constraint that prevents any movement, a bearing allowing free rotation
about the z-axis was introduced. This modification is defined by the line: bearing vector
1 0.0 0.0 1.0
Additionally, gravity was deactivated for the shaft, hub, and blades to enable a comprehensive
aerodynamic study.
This adjustment enables the simulation of a downwind turbine configuration with free yaw.
This setup will be valuable for checking results in HAWC2. The check in the stability is
important because the OptiFloat concept is a free-yaw concept and it is free to rotate,
it is important to check the stability of the self alignment with the wind direction. The
simulations aimed to demostrate the yaw stability of a free-yawing downwind turbine and
its capacity to passively align with the wind direction.
According to G.Wanke, M.H.Hansen, T.J.Larsen [12], the total yaw moment is calculated as
the summation of different terms:
Myaw ≈MQ,δ + MW,δ + Ma + MW,θ + MW,γc,θ
(4.1)
where MQ,δ represents the torque projection due to the tilt angle δ and Ma represents the
moment due to the variation of the induction factors a because of the skewed yaw wind.
38
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4.
Code development
MW,δ, MW,θ and MW,γc,θ represent the moment due to wind speed project from tilt δ, yaw θ
and coning angles γ.
Removing the tilt and coning angles allow to study the effect of the variation of the induction
coefficient and of the yaw angle. The moment Ma and the two moments due to the projection
of the wind speed from a yaw angle are restorative moments.
When the shaft is not align with the wind direction there is an important effect. Due to
the skewed inflow wind, there is a variation in the induction factors. This leads to have the
upwind blade loaded more than the downwind blade and creates a restoring moment. [12]
4.3
OptiFloat
Once the downwind rotor was built for the monopile foundation, the OptiFloat concept was
analyzed. The analysis was conducted considering only the main structure, without taking
into account the specialized lowering mechanism of the spar for maintenance purposes.
For the simulations, the dense Newman solver was used, as it is known for its robustness.
Three parameters were defined to set the convergence limits: the first value represents the
residuals on the forces, the second value corresponds to the residuals on the increment and
the third value accounts for the residuals on the constraint equations. These values were set
to 1E3, 1, and 1E-7, respectively. The time step between each iteration was set to 0.01 s.
Nacelle and blades
The nacelle, shaft, and hub were modeled based on the IEA 15 MW Monopile report. A
concentrated mass was added at the center of gravity of the entire nacelle and assigned to
the towertop body using the corresponding coordinates. The mass properties of the nacelle,
including mass, (x, y, z) coordinates, and moments of inertia (Ixx, Iyy, Izz), were taken from
Table 2.4 and referenced with respect to the towertop coordinate system. The towertop was
considered massless.
The available data for the st files of the IEA 15 MW Monopile, sourced from GitHub,
were considered for the shaft and blades but are not explained in detail in this report.
Main spar and support legs
The main spar, which includes the buoyancy element and the foil, was modeled by dividing
the structure into two main bodies:
• One body combining the buoyancy element and the foil;
39
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4.
Code development
• Another body representing the remaining part of the spar.
Figure 4.7: Two separate bodies for the spar
This approach was chosen to satisfy the Morison assumption D
L < 0.2 and to separate the
buoyant components from the rest of the structure, effectively resolving convergence issues
and ensuring accurate results. A more detailed explanation is provided in the Annex A.
The same modeling strategy, involving the separation of the buoyancy element, foil, and the
remaining leg, was applied to the support legs as well.
The spar has a total length of 186.26 m. The conical sections were modeled as equivalent
cylinders with the same height and mass per unit length. Similarly, the complex buoyancy
elements were represented as cylinders with equivalent height and mass per unit length.
Their diameters were determined to preserve the same volume, a crucial factor for buoyancy
force calculations, which are detailed in the hydrodynamic block.
Special attention was given to the foil. The foil has a height of 27 m and an airfoil-shaped
cross-section, rather than a cylindrical one. To represent it within the HAWC2 framework,
where bodies are modeled as beams, an equivalent cylinder with the same height and volume
was used. Since HAWC2 does not allow for direct attachment of additional components to
the spar, the spar covered by the foil was integrated into the foil.
In the main project, a small air gap exists between the inner diameter of the foil and the
outer diameter of the spar. However, for simplicity, this gap was not considered in the model.
Consequently:
• The outer diameter corresponds to the outer diameter of the foil;
• The mass per unit length is calculated as the combined mass per unit length of both
the foil and the spar at the same position.
Further considerations regarding shape variations are discussed in the hydrodynamic block.
It is important to note that in the st files used in the main code, the foil and buoyancy
element are represented as a single body, while the remaining part of the spar is treated
separately. As a result, the effective length of the spar, excluding the section covered by the
foil, is 158.86 m.
40
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4.
Code development
The spar, excluding the section covered by the foil, was divided into 28 nodes. The node
positions were selected based on variations in the properties of the spar and the locations
of key attachment points, including those for the spar itself, the yaw lock, and the support
legs.
The buoyancy element of the spar were divided into 4 nodes, with their positions determined
by the attachment points for the connecting cables and the mooring line pivot.
The section of the spar that includes the foil was divided into 6 nodes. Figure 4.9 summarize
how the buoyancy element and foil of the spar were represented in HAWC2 as a beam.
Figure 4.8: Buoyancy element and foil of the spar, the red dots represent the nodes
The support legs have a length of 118.39 m and are equipped with a pivot bearing at their
ends. This bearing allows slight movement between the legs when they separate and enhances
stability in crane mode. It is represented as a concentrated mass of 109370 kg at the end
of each leg. The same modeling approach as the spar was applied to the foil and buoyancy
elements of the support legs.
The two support legs form an angle relative to each other. In the 3D model of the main
project, their endpoints are slightly offset due to the yaw lock system.
However, since
HAWC2 models the legs as beams, both legs must have the same endpoint. To ensure the
same starting positioning of the buoyancy elements, the angle was adjusted to a slightly
higher degree. As a result, the effective leg length is slightly reduced to 113.11 m, while
maintaining the same mass per unit length.
41
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4.
Code development
Figure 4.9: Change of the angle between the legs
The buoyancy elements of the legs were modeled as equivalent cylinders with the same
height and volume as the original draft, ensuring proper representation of buoyancy forces.
The foils were modeled using the same methodology as those on the spar.
The legs, excluding the foil section, were divided into 13 nodes, with node positions selected
based on property variations. The buoyancy elements of the legs were divided into 4 nodes,
with positions determined by the attachment points of the connecting cables. The sections
of the legs containing foils were divided into 7 nodes.
The connection between the buoyancy element of the spar and the mooring lines was mod-
eled as a massless pivot connection. The length of this connection was selected to align with
the desired mooring attachment point.
For all elements of the spar and legs, the wall thickness was assumed to be constant at 25
mm.
The mass per unit length (kg/m), outer diameter (m), and relative positioning within their
coordinate systems were all specified. All structural properties were calculated using Equa-
tions 3.1-3.6, explained in Section 3.2.1
All bodies, expect for the solid stay, are made of steel with the following modulus of elasticity
E and shear modulus of elasticity G:
Parameter
Value
E [N/m2]
2E+11
G [N/m2]
7.93E+10
Table 4.1: Modulus of elasticity and shear modulus of elasticity for steel
42
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4.
Code development
Stay and yaw lock
The solid stay characteristics were selected to limit excessive tower movement, while allowing
for potential adjustments in geometry and material properties. The modulus of elasticity
(E) and shear modulus of elasticity (G) were increased to 2E+18 and 7.93E+17. The stay
is connected at the center of the spar and at two lateral points.
The yaw lock, which connects both the spar and the support legs, was modeled as two main
bodies:
• A structural component connecting the two support legs within their plane;
• A second component linking the spar to the first yaw lock body.
The first component was modeled as an equivalent cylinder with the same mass per unit
length and a total length of 33.97 m. In the main project, this body is considered part of
the spar.
The second component was initially modeled as a cylinder of 62.22 m. However, due to the
angle variations between the legs, a shorter equivalent length was used while maintaining
the same total mass, leading to a slightly higher mass per unit length.
Suspended masses
The suspended masses were represented as two cylindrical bodies, each with a height of 10
meters and a diameter of 10 meters.
Mooring lines and connecting cables
The mooring lines, connecting cables, and suspended mass cables play a crucial role in the
numerical model. In some cases, initializing the cables is necessary to reduce large oscilla-
tions, shorten transient response time and improve numerical convergence.
Cable initialization involves calculating the initial positions of their nodes, which should be
as close as possible to their equilibrium positions.
To achieve proper initialization of the mooring a separate htc file was created. The simula-
tion begins with the cables in an unloaded position, with no wind or waves. The constraint
block gradually enforces the constraints over a specified time period, allowing the lines to
move into their equilibrium positions. The time parameter in the constraint block must be
sufficiently high to prevent sudden accelerations, which could introduce unwanted waves or
oscillations in the system.
In the description of each mooring line, the command data read write initcond 0 1 is
43
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4.
Code development
included. This setting ensures that at the end of the initialization simulation, the equi-
librium positions of the cables are recorded in a separate .dat file. The .dat file contains
the final equilibrium positions of the cable nodes (from node 1 to the last) in global co-
ordinates. This file is then used as input in the main htc simulation, with the following
command: data read write initcond 1 0. This instructs the main simulation to read the
pre-computed equilibrium positions from the .dat file and use them as the initial cable con-
figuration. As a result, the constraint time parameter in the main htc file can be significantly
reduced, since the lines are already close to equilibrium.
The approach described follows the methodology outlined by T.J.Larsen and A.M.Hansen
in the manual ”How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual”. [28]
In the separate htc file, instead of modeling the entire structure, only the mooring pivot
(attachment point of the mooring lines in the buoyancy element of the spar) was considered.
The mooring pivot was fixed to the global reference system using a fix0 constraint and waves
and wind were completely disabled. The mooring pivot was positioned at its desired equi-
librium location, assuming that it corresponds to the equilibrium position without external
forces (wind/waves). A 100-second simulation was conducted to allow the mooring lines to
reach their stable configuration. The mooring lines were modeled using Dyneema 20. Fur-
ther details on the material properties and numerical values can be found in ”Mooring lines
model and connecting cables” in 3.2.6.
Property
Value
Mass data
21.7, -10.56
cdp, cdl, cm
102.7, 0, 64.53
Number of nodes
20
Table 4.2: Mooring lines main parameters for the OptiFloat
Table 4.3 shows the coordinates in global system of the first and end nodes of each
unstretched mooring lines. X, Y, Z init represent the seabed anchor points of the mooring
lines and were selected to match the AQWA model (Section 5.4). The four mooring lines
are arranged symmetrically around the connection point. X, Y, Z end represent the end
coordinates of the unloaded mooring lines before initialization and were determined based
on the desired zero draft level of the spar. The unstretched lenghts of the mooring lines are
explained in Section 5.3. The value EA [N] was selected with the requirement that the ratio
between the axial stiffness (EA) [N] and the unstretched length is 10000000 N/m, to match
the AQWA model (Section 5.4).
44
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4.
Code development
After the initialization the mooring lines are connected to the attachment point on the
buoyancy element of the spar.
Mooring 1
Mooring 2
Mooring 3
Mooring 4
X init [m]
0.00
-150.00
150.00
0.00
Y init [m]
-179.89
-25.17
-25.17
120.25
Z init [m]
250.00
250.00
250.00
250.00
X end [m]
0.00
-150.00
150.00
0.00
Y end [m]
-179.89
-25.17
-25.17
120.25
Z end [m]
-24.50
-24.50
-24.50
-24.50
Unstretched length [m]
274.50
274.50
274.50
274.50
Axial stiffness EA [N]
2745000000
2745000000
2745000000
2745000000
Table 4.3: Mooring lines data before initialization in global coordinate system
The initial positions of connecting cables were not initialized and their initial and final
positions were defined in the main htc files. The connecting cables were modeled with the
same mass and hydrodynamic coefficients as shown in Table 4.2. Each cable consists of
11 elements. The following parameters were chosen for the three connecting cables. Same
considerations as the mooring lines were done for the axial stiffness. Connecting cable 1
connects the spar with the right leg, connecting cable 2 connects the spar with the left leg
and connecting cable 3 connects the two legs.
Cable 1
Cable 2
Cable 3
X init [m]
-7.00
7.00
-78.00
Y init [m]
-20.22
-20.22
94.18
Z init [m]
24.09
24.09
24.08
X end [m]
-79.48
79.48
78.00
Y end [m]
94.18
94.18
94.18
Z end [m]
24.08
24.08
24.08
Unstretched length [m]
135.40
135.40
155.96
Axial stiffness [N]
1357983997
1357983997
1539577600
Table 4.4: Connecting cables data in global coordinate system
Same analysis was done for the cables connecting the buoyancy elements of the legs and the
suspended masses.
45
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4.
Code development
Orientation and constraints blocks
The following section describes the orientation and constraints of the OptiFloat wind turbine.
The buoyancy element of the spar was oriented with the correct angle with respect to the
vertical axis. The starting point was set such that the desired sea water level matches that
in the draft project. The global coordinate system was defined at the intersection point
between the foil of the spar and the desired sea water level, with the y-axis pointing upwind
and the z-axis directed from the sea water level to the seabed. Based on this, the first node
of the buoyancy element of the spar was located in (0, -23.381, 27.864).
The spar was connected at the end of the foil at the same angle. The coordinate system of
the mooring connector was rotated by 50 degrees around the x-axis and the right and left
support legs were rotated by the appropriate degrees in x and y relative to the main spar.
The coordinate system of the foil and the buoyancy element shares the same orientation
as the respective leg. To ensure that the towertop is aligned in the vertical direction, its
coordinate system was rotated by -40 degrees relative to the main spar.
The shaft has a tilt angle of 6 degrees and the same considerations as the monopile downwind
configuration were applied to the coordinate system of the shaft.
When the turbine is
simulated with wind, an initial rotation of -0.2 rad/s in the clockwise direction was added to
the shaft. The coning angle of the blades was removed, and the hub and blade orientations
are identical to those of the monopile downwind turbine configuration.
Mathematical calculations were performed to determine the angles between the main spar,
the stay, and the yaw lock. The right and left masses were positioned along the z-axis near
their initial positions.
The same constraints for the shaft, the hub, the connector and the towertop as the monopile
downwind configuration were used. For the others, where not otherwise specified, two bodies
were connected with a fixed constraint (Fix1), which restricts all degrees of freedom.
An important constraint was added in the first node of the buoyancy element of the right
leg to prevent translation in the x-direction of the OptiFloat wind turbine. A more detailed
explanation in the result Section 5.2 is provided.
46
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4.
Code development
The mooring lines are fixed at the first node to the seabed, and their last nodes are
attached to the spar. These constraints must be satisfied at the desired time. The connecting
cables are fixed at the desired nodes of the buoyancy elements of the legs and the spar, with
a time constraint of 10 seconds. The cables for the suspended masses are fixed at their
first nodes to the buoyancy elements of the legs and at their last nodes to the suspended
cylinders, providing a connection to the masses that would otherwise fall.
Figure 4.10: OptiFloat in HAWC2,
beam visualization side view
Figure 4.11: OptiFloat in HAWC2, beam
visualization
47
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4.
Code development
Wind, aerodynamic and hydrodynamic blocks
In the wind block, the mean wind speed and the yaw angle of the wind direction were
specified according to the purpose of the simulations. A logarithmic description of the wind
shear, with a roughness length z0 equal to 0.0001, was used. The hub height was specified
in global coordinate system. For all simulations with wind, a wind ramp from 20% to 100%
over 50 seconds was considered, meaning that the wind increases linearly until it reaches the
desired value.
Since the site is still unknown, when turbulence was included in the simulations, a reference
value for the turbulence intensity Iref equal to 0.14 was used: a site with medium turbulence
characteristics was chosen for simplicity. In addition, a value of 10 m/s for the average wind
speed was selected. This corresponds to a wind turbine class IB, where I is derived from the
average wind speed and B from the turbulence characteristics. Consequently, the turbulence
standard deviation σ equals 1.834 (Eq. 3.10) and the turbulence intensity equals 0.1834 (Eq.
3.9).
The Mann turbulence box was used with the parameters in Table 4.5. 8192 number of grid
points in u-direction was chosen, while 32 number of grid points in v and w directions were
chosen. The length between grid points in v and w directions was chosen such that it covers
the total rotor area. The length between grid points in u-direction was selected using Eq.
3.11. The other parameters were selected accoording to Section 3.2.2.
Parameter
Value
length scale L
33.6
alpha epsilon
1
Γ
3.9
seed
1001
logical number
1
box u Nx
8192
box u length between grid points
1.23
box v Nx
32
box v length between grid points
8.4
box w Nx
32
box w length between grid points
8.4
Table 4.5: Main parameters of the Mann turbulence box
48
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4.
Code development
In the aerodynamic block, methods such as induction, tip losses, and dynamic stall were
included.
The tower shadow method, as well as the aerodynamic drag of the tower and the shaft, were
not considered for the simplicity of the model.
For the hydrodynamic block, a mud level of 250 meters was considered. Three main elements
were defined in the hydro block, one for each leg. Each hydro element includes both the
foil and the buoyancy element for the respective leg. The drag coefficients and added mass
coefficients are required for the Morison equation (Eq. 3.12). The drag and added mass
coefficiets are both set to 1 for the buoyancy elements, and 0.7 and 1 for the foils, respectively.
The cd coefficients are functions of the Reynolds number; however, for simplicity, they were
treated equal to 1 for the buoyancy elements. A 30% decrease in the drag coefficient of the
foils was considered due to their particular shape. The added mass coefficients follow the
DNV standard, assuming circular sections [4].
Two additional hydro elements were defined, one for each suspended mass respectively.
In all hydro elements, the buoyancy force is switch on, since all elements contribute to the
total buoyancy force.
When waves and currents were included in the simulations, a constant current of 0.5 m/s,
aligned with the wave direction, was considered. Irregular wave type was taken into account
for different simulations. Irregular waves, with Jonswap spectrum with gamma factor 3.3,
wave height 1 m and wave period 7 s, were considered as case studies.
Irregular waves
wave height H [m]
1
wave period T [s]
7
gamma factor γ [-]
3.3
Table 4.6: Main parameters of the waves
Control block
The DTU Basic Controller was used. The same controller as IEA 15 MW reference wind
turbine in GitHub was used.
49
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4.
Code development
Simulations details
Some specific comments need to be made to describe the changes implemented when the
simulations were run without wind and with a new controller.
When wind was not included, the mean wind speed was first set to zero. Additionally, the
initial rotation of the shaft was removed. Lastly, the constraint between the shaft and the
connector was changed from a bearing without friction to a fixed constraint. This change
prevents any possible rotation of the blades, allowing for the simulation of a static case.
When a new controller was implemented, the following changes were made:
• The initial rotation of the shaft was set to the nominal rotational speed;
• The pitch angles of the three blades were adjusted from zero to the desired values;
• The shaft was modified to maintain a constant rotational speed, equal to the nominal
value;
• The blades were no longer connected to the hubs by a bearing; instead, they were fixed
to maintain a constant pitch angle;
• The wind ramp was removed, allowing for a constant wind speed throughout the sim-
ulation;
• The controller was updated with the main goal of maintaining constant pitch angles.
The generator controller and the pitch controller were both removed.
4.3.1
Modified OptiFloat with extra mass
An alternative version of the OptiFloat configuration code was considered for the study and
analysis of the hydrodynamics, as explained in the Results section 5.2. An additional mass,
modeled as a concentrated mass at the first node of the right buoyancy element, was added.
The model was simulated in the absence of any external forces, meaning no wind, waves, or
current were applied.
50
==PAGE:61==
==PAGE:62==
5
Results
5.1
Monopile downwind free-yaw
A downwind configuration with free yaw, zero-degree coning, and zero-degree tilt was chosen
and gravity was deactivated, as explained in Section 4.2.1.
A constant shear (uniform mean wind speed along the entire height) and flexible blades were
considered. Simulations were conducted at a rated wind speed of 10.59 m/s.
The graph 5.1 shows the shaft angle of rotation for different wind yaw angles.
Figure 5.1: Angle of rotation of the shaft at rated wind speed for different yaw angles
52
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5.
Results
It can be observed that when the wind is aligned with the shaft, the angle is zero.
As
expected, when the wind direction changes and there is a misalignment, the rotor aligns
with it due to the restorative moments and it is stable, as explained in Section 4.2.1.
Specifically, when the wind yaw angle is zero, the shaft angle reaches an equilibrium point
at -0.25 degrees. This small deviation may be due to the accuracy of the simulation or the
flexibility of the blades and tower. When the wind direction increases or decreases by 10
degrees, the shaft rotates accordingly by +10 or -10 degrees after an initial transient phase.
It is shown that the free-yaw downwind turbine is stable for different yaw angles. The study
of the OptiFloat was subsequently conducted.
5.2
OptiFloat with extra mass
A simulation of the OptiFloat concept with an additional mass, as explained in Section
4.3.1, was conducted. The extra mass was introduced to study the hydrodynamic behavior
in HAWC2. A simulation without external forces, such as waves and wind, was run for 1000
seconds.
The structure, with the additional mass, was expected to sink at the location of the extra
mass. However, instead of simply sinking, it also rotated around the z-axis, generating a yaw
moment. The graph 5.2 illustrates the angular displacement of the floater. As observed, the
platform continuously rotates and does not stop.
Figure 5.2: Angular displacement of the floater
53
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5.
Results
The total hydrodynamic moment around the z-axis was not zero, introducing a yaw mo-
ment. Due to this unexpected result, a bug in the software related to the calculation of the
hydrodynamic forces in the x-y directions was hypothesized.
For this reason, a translational constraint was applied along the x-axis, removing the sway
and the yaw degrees of freedom. The constraint is called fix2 and it was applied to the first
node of the buoyancy element of the right leg. This constraint allows for a more controlled
study of the OptiFloat concept when simulating wind.
However, this constraint prevents an accurate analysis of the platform’s natural rotation
under varying wind speeds and wave directions. For this reason, such an analysis was not
performed.
5.3
OptiFloat: some important results
The final code consists of approximately 1600 lines. The OptiFloat concept was studied with
different wind and waves conditions.
No wind, no waves
First, the system was analyzed without any external forces, such as wind and waves. The
primary objective was to achieve the correct zero-draft level, where the sea surface intersects
the foils of the structure.
To achieve the desired zero-draft level of the legs, the suspended masses were adjusted,
ultimately reaching a final value of 2320 tons each. The final draft deviates from the target
by approximately 167 mm in the z coordinate, a small and acceptable margin of error.
Simultaneously, to reach the desired draft level of the spar, the unstretched lenght for all
mooring lines was adjusted and reached a value of 274.5 m. The final draft deviates from
the target by approximately 107 mm in the z coordinate, which is also within an acceptable
range.
Parameter
Value
Suspended mass [tons]
2320
Error in leg z position [m]
0.167
Unstretched length mooring line [m]
274.5
Error in spar z position [m]
0.107
Table 5.1: Parameters for the zero draft level
54
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5.
Results
As a result, the axial forces in the mooring lines were analyzed. Each mooring line experiences
an axial force of approximately 6333 kN (645.9 tons). The mooring lines were verified to
ensure they are under continuous tension, a crucial requirement for taut mooring systems.
Additionally, the connecting lines were examined to confirm that they are under tension and
do not exceed their breaking strength, ensuring the structural integrity of the system. These
lines sustain a force of 4564 kN (465.38 tons).
Figures 5.3 and 5.4 illustrate the static model of the OptiFloat in the absence of external
forces. Under these conditions, the structure remains stable, it does not capsize or sink.
Figure 5.3: Side view, OptiFloat concept, no
wind, no waves
Figure 5.4: Back view, OptiFloat concept,
no wind, no waves
Rated wind speed, no waves
The introduction of wind leads to additional thrust and torque, affecting the system’s equi-
librium. A rated wind speed of 10.59 m/s was considered. The turbine remains stable, as it
neither capsizes nor sinks. The rated power output was 14.9 MW, slightly lower than 15 MW
due to the introduction of losses. Figure 5.5 shows the power in kW during the simulation.
After an initial transient the power reaches the right value.
55
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5.
Results
Figure 5.5: Power in kW for the rated wind speed
As expected, one leg is positioned deeper in the water than the other. Since a torque is
present, a restoring moment is generated to maintain equilibrium. This occurs because the
deeper leg experiences higher water pressure, resulting in a greater vertical force compared
to the other leg. This imbalance is crucial in counteracting the torque and maintaining
stability.
The z coordinate of the zero draft position of the first node of the buoyancy element of the
leg is positioned at 29.927 m. The table 5.2 presents data on the reached positions of the two
node of the buoyancy elements of the legs when wind is added and on how much the right
and left legs submerge relative to their equilibrium positions (called dive-in). It is evident
that the right leg is deeper than the left leg.
Parameter
Value
Right leg z position [m]
37.747
Right leg dive-in [m]
3.820
Left leg z position [m]
31.849
Left leg dive-in [m]
1.922
Table 5.2: z position and dive-in for the two buoyancy elements of the legs at rated wind
56
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5.
Results
The graph 5.6 shows the difference in the z coordinate of the first node of the buoyancy
elements. After an initial transient, the right leg has an higher value, meaning that it is
deeper in water.
Figure 5.6: z coordinate of the first node of the buoyancy elements
Furthermore, a pitch angle of just 1.56 degrees was calculated for the rated wind speed,
which corresponds to the maximum thrust. This means that, as expected, the taut mooring
lines restrict the movement.
The mooring lines were analyzed, revealing that the fore mooring line experiences a greater
force than the others, as it counteracts the thrust generated by the wind. Additionally, all
mooring lines remain under continuous tension.
A study on the importance of the stay on the spar was also conducted. A simulation was
performed by removing the stay while keeping all other components unchanged. The results
showed that due to the flexibility of the spar, and consequently a reduction in the rotor plane
area, there is a 2.99% decrease in power output. The graph 5.7 shows the power reduction
resulting from the removal of the stay.
57
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5.
Results
Figure 5.7: Power in kW, with and without stay
A visual comparison of the system with and without the stay at the rated wind speed is
provided in the following images. It is evident the flexiblility of the spar.
Figure 5.8: Side view, OptiFloat
concept
Figure 5.9: Side view, OptiFloat
concept without stay
58
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5.
Results
Different wind speeds, no waves
Different wind speeds were tested to evaluate the performance of the model. The graph 5.10
presents the power output for three different wind speeds: below the rated, at the rated, and
above the rated wind speed.
Figure 5.10: Power in kW for three different wind speeds
It is evident that, after an initial transient, for wind speeds equal to or below the rated
value, the model remains stable and produces reasonable results. However, for wind speeds
exceeding the rated value, the power output becomes unstable, exhibiting oscillations.
This instability is attributed to the control system, specifically the negative damping effect
associated with pitch control, as explained in Section 3.2.4.
Graph 5.11 shows that the floater and the pitch motions are connected. The pitch angle and
the y coordinate of the shaft are represented. When the shaft moves backward (increase of y),
the relative wind speed decreases, increasing the thrust. Consequently, the pitch controller
tries to reduce the thrust, increasing the pitch angle. If there is a delay in the motions, the
oscillations amplify. The graph shows that changes in shaft position do not immediately re-
sult in pitch angle responses. As explain in Section 3.2.4, it is evident the negative damping.
59
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5.
Results
Figure 5.11: Pitch angle and floater motion at 14 m/s
To address this issue, the controller should ideally be adjusted by de-tuning it, making
it slower than the floater’s pitch motion, or by applying more advanced control techniques.
However, due to time constraints, an alternative approach was adopted, just to show that
there is a problem with the controller, it does not present a possible solution. A fixed pitch
angle, determined as the average value from the previous pitch graph, was implemented
along with a fixed rotational speed, as detailed in the code development Section 4.3.
Figure 5.12: Power in kW for two different controllers
60
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5.
Results
The graph 5.12 shows the power outputs for 14 m/s with the previous controller, called for
simplicity ”old”, and the ”new” one.
This adjustment successfully eliminated power oscillations, confirming that the issue origi-
nates from the controller. Further studies are required to refine the control strategy.
Throughout the tests, the mooring lines were continuously monitored, and they remained
under tension.
The study of suspended masses is still ongoing. The primary hypothesis is that when the tur-
bine moves backward, the suspended masses should shift forward, and vice versa. However,
the following graph demonstrates that this behavior does not occur. The graph represents
the y coordinate of the suspended mass during time and the y coordinate of the first node
of the buoyancy element of the leg. So, where there is a maximum of the suspended mass
there should be a minimum of the first node of the buoyancy element of the leg.
Further analysis of the line properties and a sensitivity study on cable length are necessary
to better understand and optimize the response of the system.
Figure 5.13: y coordinate of the suspended mass and buoyancy element
61
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5.
Results
Addition of turbulence and waves
Turbulence, waves, and current were added to validate the model, demonstrating its readi-
ness for further simulations.
Graph 5.14 shows the wind speed at 8 m/s with turbulence with parameters described in
Section 4.3 in the ”Wind, aerodynamic and hydrodynamic blocks”.
Figure 5.14: wind speed at 8 m/s with turbulence
Graph 5.15 shows the heave for a simulation with 8 m/s with turbulence, irregular waves and
current, as described in Section 4.3 in the ”Wind, aerodynamic and hydrodynamic blocks”.
Figure 5.15: Heave with turbulence, waves and current
62
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 5.
Results
Graph 5.16 shows the blade root flapwise moment when turbulence, waves and current are
introduced at wind speed 8 m/s.
Figure 5.16: Blade root moment, flapwise [kNm] with turbulence
These simulations demonstrate the robustness of the model and the feasibility of using
HAWC2 to analyze the behavior of OptiFloat under various wind and wave conditions.
Key outputs, including loads and the six degrees of freedom motions of the floating offshore
wind turbine, can be accurately simulated.
63
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 5.
Results
5.4
Comparison with ANSYS AQWA
To evaluate the results obtained with the HAWC2 model, a comparison with another soft-
ware was conducted. Specifically, results from ANSYS AQWA were considered to validate
the findings. ANSYS AQWA is a 3D software used for the hydrodynamic analysis of offshore
structures. It is capable of simulating the effects of waves, currents, and wind on different
structures. Additionally, it can assess hydrodynamic loads, mooring line responses, fatigue
evaluation, and stability analysis.
Both HAWC2 and AQWA are used for offshore floating wind turbines, but they differ signif-
icantly in their approach to solving equations. AQWA is primarily used for hydrodynamic
simulations of floating structures, while HAWC2 focuses on aeroelastic simulations of wind
turbines.
The study of the aerodynamic and the control strategy is not possible in AQWA. HAWC2,
however, simulates these effects using Blade Element Momentum (BEM) theory, dynamic
stall models, and external DLLs, which can be defined by the user.
AQWA considers structures as rigid bodies or models them using a time-domain finite ele-
ment method (FEM). However, HAWC2 uses a multi-body formulation, providing a more
flexible approach for wind turbine structures.
AQWA solves hydrodynamics using a frequency-domain potential flow analysis, while HAWC2
uses a time-domain Morison equation for hydrodynamic calculations. [6]
ANSYS AQWA allows importing geometries from external CAD software or creating them
directly in ANSYS Design Modeler, ANSYS SpaceClaim, or ANSYS Discovery. To ensure
correct interpretation, each floating body should ideally be split into two parts (upper and
lower sections). These must be placed within a single assembly, which AQWA then interprets
as a unified structure.
The body is then meshed appropriately—either directly within AQWA or using an external
meshing module that provides advanced meshing options. Once meshed, AQWA can per-
form diffraction and hydrostatic analyses. The software also includes an auto-draft feature,
which adjusts the mass distribution to achieve the correct zero-draft level.
Before conducting time-domain simulations, a stability analysis is typically performed to
verify the draft of floating objects. This preliminary check runs much faster than full time-
domain simulations, making it a useful step for early-stage validation. [22]
So, one of the most fundamental differences between AQWA and HAWC2 is how they model
structures: AQWA represents structures as 3D rigid bodies, calculating hydrodynamic forces
on these volumes, while HAWC2 models structures using beam elements, leading to a differ-
64
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5.
Results
ent approach in force calculations.
The AQWA model and its results were provided to me and were developed based on the
following considerations: [22]
• The mesh size was set to 425 mm, ensuring the correct waterplane stiffness, although
this aspect is not detailed further in this thesis;
• The model was built using the 3D volumes of the foils and buoyancy elements, which
provide buoyancy forces essential for hydrodynamic calculations;
• A global reference system was defined at the intersection point between the mean water
level and the foil of the spar;
• Legs, spar, buoyancy elements, and foils were included as 3D bodies;
• The masses and the moments of inertia Ixx, Iyy, Izz, Ixy, Iyz, Ixz were added to the
centers of gravity of their bodies;
• The nacelle and the blades were modeled with mass and inertia values at their respec-
tive centers of gravity;
• The suspended masses, were represented as cylinders (10m height, 10m diameter),
positioned 100m below sea level;
• The mooring lines and connecting cables were modeled with an axial stiffness of EA/L
= 10000000 N/m.
The suspended masses and the unstretched length of the mooring lines were calculated to
achieve the correct zero draft level. The figure 5.17 and 5.18 show the detail of the buoyancy
elements, the foils and the mesh of the OptiFloat concept in ANSYS AQWA.
Figure 5.17: ANSYS AQWA model, de-
tail of the buoyancy elements and the
foils Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering
Figure 5.18: ANSYS AQWA model, detail
of the mesh Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering
65
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 5.
Results
Figure 5.19: ANSYS AQWA model of OptiFloat concept Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering
Several important comparisons were made. Firstly, the masses of all bodies were ana-
lyzed, revealing that the total mass difference between the two models is only 0.57% when
considering only the buoyancy elements, foils, legs and yaw lock. When including the nacelle
and blades, the total mass discrepancy decreases slightly to 0.55%. The table 5.3 reports
the total masses of the two models and differences.
AQWA
HAWC2
error
Total mass structure [kg]
3642467.40
3663207.00
0.57%
Total mass including blades and nacelle [kg]
4658217.40
4683830.80
0.55%
Table 5.3: Comparison of the masses of the two models
The differences in the construction of the legs result in a small discrepancy. In HAWC2,
the mass of the leg is 1.23% lower than in AQWA. Another minor difference is found in the
mass of the blades: AQWA uses the values provided in the ”Definition of the IEA Wind
15-Megawatt Offshore Reference Wind Turbine” report, HAWC2, on the other hand, takes
66
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5.
Results
the blade mass from the GitHub repository of the model. Despite these differences, the
overall structure remains consistent, with a total mass error of 0.55%.
A comparison of the centers of gravity for all bodies was conducted. By adjusting the co-
ordinate system in AQWA to match that of HAWC2, the total centers of gravity for the
buoyancy elements, foils, legs, and yaw lock were compared. The table 5.4 shows the %
error of coordinates of the total centre of gravity of the structure of the two models. The
errors are calculated with respect to the total lengths in x, y, z directions.
error
x
0.00%
y
0.9%
z
0.9%
Table 5.4: Comparison of the COG of the two models
In both models, the nacelle is represented as a concentrated mass at its center of gravity,
with its corresponding inertia values. In both AQWA and HAWC2, the center of gravity of
the nacelle (including the hub) maintains the same distance from the tower top, as shown in
table 5.5 and as explained in Section 2.3. Also the y and z distances between the towertop
and the hub are the same in the two models.
coordinate
x [m]
0.000
y [m]
5.486
z [m]
-3.978
Table 5.5: Centre of gravity of the nacelle with respect to the towertop for both models
However, the final position of center of gravity of the nacelle differs slightly in the global
coordinate system due to small differences in the construction of the structure in HAWC2.
The errors in Table 5.6 are calculated with respect to the total lengths in x, y, z coordinates.
The errors are small and acceptable.
67
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 5.
Results
error
x
0.00%
y
1%
z
-0.4%
Table 5.6: Comparison of the COG of the nacelle of the two models
A comparison of the suspended masses and the unstretched length for all mooring lines is
shown below:
AQWA
HAWC2
Suspended mass [tons]
2376.33
2320.00
Unstretched length mooring line [m]
274.51
274.50
Table 5.7: Comparison of the suspended masses and the unstretched lenghts of the mooring
line of the two models
These values were chosen, in both models, to ensure the correct zero-draft level of the legs
and the spar.
The suspended masses differ slightly by 56 tons, likely due to the small variation in the total
mass and centre of gravity of the structure between the two models.
In both cases, the EA/L value of the mooring lines was set to 10000000 N/m, resulting in
an unstretched mooring line length of 274.51 m in AQWA and 274.50 m in HAWC2. The
attachment point of the mooring lines and the seabed anchor points are nearly identical.
Only a minor difference of 107 mm in the z-coordinate of the attachment point is present,
which causes a small difference in the unstretched length.
In general, the models present reasonable and similar results in static conditions.
A comparison between the two models was conducted with the introduction of thrust and
torque. In HAWC2, thrust and torque forces are generated with the addition of wind. Since
AQWA does not simulate aerodynamic effects, a thrust force and a torque were manually
added to the model for comparison. The torque was applied by considering a couple force,
M=F*a, where a is the total distance between the couple forces. In AQWA, the torque and
thrust were chosen to match the values obtained in HAWC2 at rated wind speed.
Based on this setup, the rated thrust and torque were then applied in both models, and the
resulting difference in the dive-in of the two legs was analyzed and compared.
68
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 5.
Results
AQWA
HAWC2
error
Dive-in right leg [m]
3.8188
3.8197
0.02%
Dive-in left leg [m]
1.9216
1.9219
0.02%
Table 5.8: Comparison of the dive-In of the two models
This analysis demonstrated that the behavior of the two models is consistent, with a
discrepancy of only 0.02%. This result supports the similarity between the models. Since
the dive-in of the legs is primarily influenced by the vertical buoyancy force, this agreement
confirms that the vertical buoyancy force calculations in HAWC2 closely match those in
AQWA, with only a minor error.
Further simulations incorporating wave effects would provide additional validation; however,
due to time constraints, these simulations were not conducted.
69
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
6
Conclusions and future work
The purpose of this thesis was to model and analyze an innovative floating offshore wind
turbine, OptiFloat, with HAWC2, an aeroelatic tool developed by DTU. OptiFloat is a down-
wind floating turbine with a single-point mooring system. After an initial analysis of the
monopile upwind and downwind configurations, where the coordinate systems of the shaft
and the blades were examinated, the OptiFloat configuration was studied. The structure,
aerodynamic, wind and hydrodynamic models were implemented based on the preliminary
design of OptiFloat.
An initial study was conducted to evaluate the stability of the shaft alignment at different
yaw angles of the wind. The results show that a free-yaw downwind turbine remains stable
following the wind direction across various yaw angles, an important result, as OptiFloat is
free to move due to its single-point mooring system. This confirms that HAWC2 is capable
of simulating such a concept effectively.
Further analysis was carried out by introducing an additional mass into the OptiFloat model,
leading to the hypothesis of a potential bug in the calculation of the hydrodynamic forces.
The turbine was expected to sink due to the extra mass, it instead starts rotating. For
this reason an unphysical constraint was added, to eliminate rotation, allowing for a more
accurate study of the OptiFloat system when wind is introduced.
The results indicate that the model works correctly and provides reasonable outputs. Op-
tiFloat remains stable, does not sink or capsize, and maintains the correct zero draft levels
in the absence of external forces. The simulations with wind and waves, confirm that the
model is suitable for further analysis. However, at wind speeds exceeding the rated value,
unexpected oscillations were observed in the outputs, which were identified as being caused
by the control system, requiring additional investigation.
A comparison with ANSYS AQWA validated the consistency of the two models, demonstrat-
ing agreement in both static and dynamic behavior at the rated wind speed. The masses,
71
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 6.
Conclusions and future work
the centre of gravity and the zero draft levels are consistent, with only small and acceptable
deviations. The response of the two models to rated thrust and torque is also consistent,
confirming that the HAWC2 model was correctly built and that the vertical buoyancy forces
match those in the AQWA model.
Several key aspects require revision and further improvement. As mentioned before, the
study of the suspended masses is still in development, and its functionality needs to be con-
firmed. How the cables and the suspended masses are modeled in HAWC2 must be checked,
with the potential for parameter optimization. A sensitivity analysis on the length of the
cables is necessary to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of the suspended masses.
A detailed analysis of the yaw rotation must be conducted, addressing the identified possible
bug, and investigating the rotation of the floater under different wind and waves directions.
Additional simulations are required, particularly with waves. During early summer, Opti-
Float will undergo pool tests under different wave conditions. It is essential to compare these
experimental results with numerical simulations to validate the response.
The study of the damping is required for future simulations. The damping characteristics of
a floating offshore wind turbine influence its response to waves, wind and currents. Struc-
tural, aerodynamic and mooring line damping must be incorporated into the htc file.
Understanding the natural frequencies of the system is essential to avoid resonance. Future
work will be their study and the comparison with frequencies of external loads.
In the final stages of design and certification, all Design Load Cases must be completed to
check if OptiFloat respects the industry standards with the right safety levels. The appropri-
ate parameters, simulation lengths, directionalities and misalignments must be considered.
Both ultimate and fatigue analysis should be conducted through numerical calculations.
To conclude, OptiFloat is a highly promising concept, that has the potential to revolutionize
the market of floating offshore wind turbine by significantly reducing maintenance costs.
However, futher studies are required using different simulation tools, such as HAWC2, and
the model was developed as part of this thesis. The model is functional, but it requires
improvements to better reflect real-world conditions.
Further investigations are necessary, including pool tests, wind tunnels tests and mooring
line experiments, to refine the concept and validate its performance. Although OptiFloat is
promising, its introduction in the offshore wind market may take longer than that of the well
known technologies, due to the new and innovative design. However, with the right investors
and continued development, this innovation can reshape the floating offshore wind industry.
72
==PAGE:83==
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1]
“A Taranto, alla scoperta di Beleolico: il parco marino del vento pi`u grande del Mediter-
raneo” (). url: https://moveo.telepass.com/taranto-beleolico-parco-eolico-
vento-piu-grande-mediterraneo/.
[2]
International Energy Agency. “Renewables 2023 Analysis and forecast to 2028” (2023).
[3]
New EnergyStatoilHydro Alexandra Bech Gjørv Senior VicePresident. “Theworld’sfirst
largescalefloatingwindturbine” ().
[4]
DNV GL AS. “Environmental conditions and environmental loads” (2019).
[5]
“Definition of the IEA Wind 15-Megawatt Offshore Reference Wind Turbine Technical
Report” (March 2020).
[6]
DNV. “DNVGL-RP-0286, coupled analysis of floating wind turbines” (2019).
[7]
“Dogger Bank Wind Farm” (). url: https://www.sserenewables.com/offshore-
wind/projects/dogger-bank/.
[8]
DTU. “HAWC2 Selfstudy” ().
[9]
“Fixed offshore wind” (). url: https://tethys.pnnl.gov/technology/fixed-
offshore-wind.
[10]
“Floating Offshore Wind in Norway TetraSpar Demonstrator” (). url: https : / /
www.rwe.com/en/our-energy/discover-renewables/floating-offshore-wind/
tetraspar/.
[11]
“France’s first offshore wind turbine and BW Ideol’s first unit Floatgen” (). url:
https://www.bw-ideol.com/en/floatgen-demonstrator.
[12]
Morten Hartvig Hansen Gesine Wanke and Torben Juul Larsen. “Qualitative yaw
stability analysis of free-yawing downwind turbines” (2019).
74
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[13]
“Global capacity of onshore wind power 2009-2023” (). url: https://www.statista.
com/statistics/476306/global- capacity- of- onshore- wind- energy/#:~:
text=Global%20onshore%20wind%20capacity%20has,further%20away%20from%
20fossil%20fuels..
[14]
Frederik Hansen Morten Hartvig; Zahle. “Aeroelastic Optimization of MW Wind Tur-
bines” (2011).
[15]
Kate L Brookes Helen Bailey and Paul M Thompson. “Assessing environmental im-
pacts of offshore wind farms: lessons learned and recommendations for the future”
(2014).
[16]
“Hornsea 1 Wind Farm” (). url: https://orsted.co.uk/energy- solutions/
offshore-wind/our-wind-farms/hornsea1.
[17]
“Hornsea 2 Offshore Wind Farm” (). url: https://orsted.co.uk/energy-solutions/
offshore-wind/our-wind-farms/hornsea2.
[18]
“Hywind Scotland” (). url: https://www.equinor.com/energy/hywind-scotland.
[19]
“Hywind Tampen” (). url: https://www.equinor.com/energy/hywind-tampen.
[20]
IRENA. “FLOATING OFFSHORE WIND OUTLOOK” (2024).
[21]
T J Larsen and T D Hanson2. “A method to avoid negative damped low frequent tower
vibrations for a floating, pitch controlled wind turbine” (2007).
[22]
Niels Christian Olsen NCO. “NCO confidential material” (2024-2025).
[23]
Nrel. “OFFSHORE WIND MARKET REPORT” (2024).
[24]
“Onshore vs offshore wind energy: what’s the difference?” (). url: https://www.
nationalgrid.com/stories/energy- explained/onshore- vs- offshore- wind-
energy.
[25]
Orsted. “Floating offshore wind energy” (). url: https://orsted.com/en/what-we-
do/renewable-energy-solutions/floating-offshore-wind-energy.
[26]
Ren21. “RENEWABLES 2024 GLOBAL STATUS REPORT – RENEWABLES IN
ENERGY SUPPLY” (2024).
[27]
“Seagreen wind farm” (). url: https://www.sserenewables.com/offshore-wind/
operational-wind-farms/seagreen/.
[28]
Anders M. Hansen Edited by the DTU Wind Energy HAWC2 Development Team
Torben J. Larsen. “How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual” (2023).
75
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
[29]
“Vindeby Offshore Wind Farm” (). url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vindeby_
Offshore_Wind_Farm.
[30]
“Vineyard Wind 1” (). url: https://www.vineyardwind.com/vineyardwind-1.
[31]
“Vineyard Wind I, our first offshore wind farm in the United States” (). url: https:
//www.iberdrola.com/about-us/what-we-do/offshore-wind-energy/vineyard-
wind-offshore-wind-farm.
[32]
“Welcome to South Fork Wind” (). url: https://southforkwind.com/.
[33]
“WindFloat1” (). url: https://www.principlepower.com/projects/windfloat1.
[34]
“World’s first semi-submersible floating offshore wind farm” (). url: https://www.
windfloat-atlantic.com/.
[35]
Ye Li Julie J.E. Teuwen Zhiyu Jiang Zhengru Ren Amrit Shankar Verma. “Offshore
wind turbine operations and maintenance: A state-of-the-art review” (2021).
76
==PAGE:87==
==PAGE:88==
A
Annex
Initially, an alternative model was considered. Instead of modeling the buoyancy element and
the foil together while keeping the rest of the leg as a separate body, the buoyancy element
was treated as an individual body, with the foil and the leg modeled together. Figure A.1
shows how the spar was considered, separated from the buoyancy element.
Figure A.1: Spar and buoyancy element, old model
In this configuration, the number of bodies contributing to the buoyancy element increased
from three to six, consisting of three foils and three buoyancy elements. Despite having the
same total mass and center of gravity as the other model, this approach led to significant
convergence issues in all simulations, resulting in excessively long computational times and
inaccurate results.
Figure A.2 shows the convergence problems of all simulations.
78
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A. Annex
Figure A.2: Convergence problems, old model
The inaccuracies were confirmed through a comparison with ANSYS AQWA. When sim-
ulating at rated wind speed, the dive-in of the legs was incorrectly calculated, leading to
errors of up to 60.4%.
AQWA
HAWC2
error
Dive-in right leg [m]
3.8188
1.5140
60.4%
Dive-in left leg [m]
1.9216
0.8352
56.5%
Table A.1: Comparison of the dive-in of the two models, old model for HAWC2
In addition, the suspended masses required to achieve the correct zero-draft level were in-
correct by up to 43.4%, reaching a value of 3407 tons.
Based on my observations, these errors could be attributed to the fact that HAWC2 may
not accurately calculate hydrodynamic forces when a long body only partially contributes
to the hydrodynamics rather than being fully considered.
79
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
List of Tables
1.1
Historical offshore wind projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2
Operational offshore wind projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3
Under construction offshore wind projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1
Mooring lines properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Masses in tons of the OptiFloat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Key parameters for IEA-15 MW RWT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Main parameters of the nacelle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1
Modulus of elasticity and shear modulus of elasticity for steel . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Mooring lines main parameters for the OptiFloat
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Mooring lines data before initialization in global coordinate system
. . . . .
45
4.4
Connecting cables data in global coordinate system . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.5
Main parameters of the Mann turbulence box
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.6
Main parameters of the waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1
Parameters for the zero draft level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
z position and dive-in for the two buoyancy elements of the legs at rated wind
56
5.3
Comparison of the masses of the two models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.4
Comparison of the COG of the two models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.5
Centre of gravity of the nacelle with respect to the towertop for both models
67
5.6
Comparison of the COG of the nacelle of the two models . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.7
Comparison of the suspended masses and the unstretched lenghts of the moor-
ing line of the two models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.8
Comparison of the dive-In of the two models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.1 Comparison of the dive-in of the two models, old model for HAWC2 . . . . .
79
81
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
List of Figures
1.1
Electricity generation by technology, 2000-2028.[2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Wind power global capacity and annual additions, 2014-2023.[26]
. . . . . .
2
1.3
Onshore and offshore wind turbines.[24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Different types of fixed offshore wind turbines[9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Different types of floating offshore wind turbines [25]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Six degrees of motion for a floating offshore wind turbine[20] . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1
OptiFloat concept Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
OptiFloat concept 3D model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Yaw lock Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Spar including foil, buoyancy element and part of the yaw lock Printed with permission
from NCO-Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Support leg including foil, buoyancy element and part of the yaw lock Printed
with permission from NCO-Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
OptiFloat concept during maintenance Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering . . . .
16
2.7
Nacelle of the 15 MW RWT [5]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1
HAWC2 different blocks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
HAWC2 input and output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Main body divided in three bodies with different number of nodes . . . . . .
23
3.4
Global coordinate system HAWC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1
Monopile upwind configuration in HAWC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Shaft coordinate system, x in red, y in green and z in blue, upwind
. . . . .
35
4.3
Blade coordinate system, x in red, y in green and z in blue, upwind . . . . .
36
4.4
Monopile downwind configuration in HAWC2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Shaft coordinate system, x in red, y in green and z in blue, downwind . . . .
37
4.6
Blade coordinate system, x in red, y in green and z in blue, downwind . . . .
38
4.7
Two separate bodies for the spar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
83
==PAGE:94==
List of Figures
4.8
Buoyancy element and foil of the spar, the red dots represent the nodes . . .
41
4.9
Change of the angle between the legs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.10 OptiFloat in HAWC2, beam visualization side view . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.11 OptiFloat in HAWC2, beam visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.1
Angle of rotation of the shaft at rated wind speed for different yaw angles . .
52
5.2
Angular displacement of the floater . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Side view, OptiFloat concept, no wind, no waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4
Back view, OptiFloat concept, no wind, no waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.5
Power in kW for the rated wind speed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.6
z coordinate of the first node of the buoyancy elements . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.7
Power in kW, with and without stay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.8
Side view, OptiFloat concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.9
Side view, OptiFloat concept without stay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.10 Power in kW for three different wind speeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.11 Pitch angle and floater motion at 14 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.12 Power in kW for two different controllers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.13 y coordinate of the suspended mass and buoyancy element . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.14 wind speed at 8 m/s with turbulence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.15 Heave with turbulence, waves and current
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.16 Blade root moment, flapwise [kNm] with turbulence . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.17 ANSYS AQWA model, detail of the buoyancy elements and the foils Printed with
permission from NCO-Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.18 ANSYS AQWA model, detail of the mesh Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering
. .
65
5.19 ANSYS AQWA model of OptiFloat concept Printed with permission from NCO-Engineering .
66
A.1 Spar and buoyancy element, old model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.2 Convergence problems, old model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
84
==PAGE:95==
==PAGE:96==
