==PAGE:1==
Detecting and Visualizing Wear and
Non-wear of a Wearable Self-tracking
Device
Detektion og visualisering af brug og ikke-brug af et
wearable self-tracking device
Author
Andreas Birch - s194614
February 10, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for a Master
of Science degree in Computer Science engineering.
The thesis was carried out under supervision of Associate Professor Jakob Eg Larsen from
August 26th 2024 to February 10th, 2025, corresponding to 32.5 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, February 10, 2025
Andreas Birch (s194614)
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen for his help and guidance throughout
the project and in our weekly meetings.
I would like to express my gratitude to every participant who tested and provided feedback
during UX validation and testing.
Finally, I want to thank my family and friends, whose endless support helped me throughout
the entirety of this project.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis describes the development of a system for detecting and visualizing wear and
non-wear data using a wearable self-tracking device. Previous work using data driven ap-
proaches to Cognitive Behavioral Therapy has proven to improve the overall treatment, with
a particular example using a One-Button wearable to treat patients with military PTSD,
using a single button to track subjective observations. The simplicity of this particular ap-
proach has proven useful to therapists and patients alike. However, it currently cannot track
when the device is being worn or not, leaving out context to patient observations or a lack
thereof.
This project implements a simple wearable instrument based on a One-Button tracker, in-
corporating tilt sensors as a novel, low-complexity approach to detecting wear and non-wear,
as well as an Inertial Measurement Unit for further and improved detection. Furthermore,
a system for processing data acquired by the instrument is introduced, and various classi-
fication algorithms are explored and developed. Finally, a visualization tool is presented,
allowing for data analysis and contextualization by a therapist. Here, User Experience val-
idation and testing has been applied in an iterative process, resulting in an interactive and
usable program which integrates with the instrument.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Holistic Component Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Part I - Instrument
4
2.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.5
Sub-conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
Part II - Data Processing
33
3.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.5
Sub-conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4
Part III - Visualization
65
4.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
4.5
Sub-conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5
Discussion
88
6
Future Work
90
7
Conclusion
92
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Bibliography
I
A Instrument
V
B Data Processing
XI
C Visualization
XV
C.1 ChatGPT prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XX
D User Validation Tests
XXIII
v
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Mental health issues are becoming more common among Danish citizens. A 2021 national
health study published by the Danish National Institute of Public Health [32] shows an
increase in citizens with poor mental health across all ages. 17.4% of Danes ranked low on
the mental health scale, increasing by 4.2% from 13.2% in 2017. Furthermore, approximately
1% of Danes are suffering from PTSD, with upwards of 10% of Danish veterans suffering
from military PTSD [18]. Multiple treatment processes for mental health and PTSD exists,
one of them being Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)[25]. CBT is a talking therapy, in
which a patient and a therapist map the patients feelings and thoughts, and attempts to
analyze and break down large, overwhelming issues into smaller problems. The therapy is
usually supported by the patient recollecting their thoughts between therapeutic sessions.
However, it can be difficult to map out what triggers episodes of mental health issues,
especially from a day-to-day perspective, where limited context prohibits understanding the
patterns of these triggers.
This project aims to provide more context to therapeutic treatments, by extending the ca-
pabilities of wearable self-tracking devices for patients suffering from mental health issues
and PTSD.
The project is in large part built upon the previous work of the project supervisor and their
research into the topic. Specifically, they introduce the concept and prototype of a One-
Button Wearable instrument, or One-Button Tracker (OBT). The tracker is meant to be
used as an addition to a therapeutic session, in collaboration with a therapist. It consists
only of a single button, which when pressed logs a timestamp, and the duration of the button
press. What a button press indicates is decided beforehand by the patient and therapist,
generally a marker for a specific feeling or event. For example, in a case study by Larsen et
al[20], a 35 year old Danish male combat veteran suffering from military PTSD, who wore
and used the One-Button Tracker. In collaboration with their therapist, they defined two
consecutive button presses to indicate a precursor of the patients hyperarousal, and were
successfully able to use the instrument in order to identify details regarding those markers
not previously observed.
Another case study using a One-Button Tracker to improve treatment processes was done
with two PTSD patients, a 23- and 30 year old woman[2]. This study focused on distin-
guishing between rumination and intrusive memories, where a button press would initially
correspond with an observation of either phenomenon, and later extended to distinguish the
two by either a long or short button press. Both patients reported a subjective improvement
in their ability to distinguish the two. Similarly, a study on wearables in therapeutic ses-
sions for patients with depression[14] describes how high-level information such as activity
patterns and stressors might be extracted from basic sensor measurements from a wearable
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1. Holistic Component Overview
device, and how this objective data may complement subjective patient information.
Using a One-Button Tracker as a low-effort approach to self tracking is promising and the
user experience of using a device with such a simple user interface is considered good [3][6],
with subjects expressing positivity towards the simplicity of its design and use cases.
A barrier with the One-Button Tracker and self-tracking wearable devices in general is limited
in the context it provides to the observations logged by the patient wearing the device. Some
context can be obtained from the press itself, e.g. its duration and the amount of consecutive
presses, as well as when during the day the observation occurred. However, it crucially lacks
the capability of detecting device wear and non-wear.
For example, there is no way of
discerning whether a 24 hour period with no button presses meant that the patient did not
experience any observations, or if they did not wear the device at all.
This thesis aims to implement wear and non-wear tracking capabilities of a self-tacking
wearable device similar to the One-Button Tracker. Specifically, a novel approach using
tilt switches is introduced to determine periods of wear and non-wear while prioritizing low
overall complexity.
Additionally, further activity classification during periods of wear is
explored, providing even more context to the observations themselves.
1.1
Holistic Component Overview
This project uses a holistic approach to describe the system as a combination of three distinct
components, each essential to the system as a whole. Each component represents different
domains of the system, and is also the main focus of a dedicated chapter.
These three
components are:
• Instrument
• Data Processing
• Visualization
Each component is connected both in terms of the actual system, and how they are presented
in the chapters. Data flows between each component, as shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Component overview and data flow between components
The chapter for each component will be structured similarly, containing an analysis,
method, results, discussion and summary sections specific to each chapter. The only excep-
tion to this is the Visualization section, in which an evaluation of the design is used instead
of results due to the iterative nature of developing this component.
Page 2 of 92
==PAGE:9==
1.1. Holistic Component Overview
Instrument
The instrument is the physical device itself, which the patient will wear in order to
gather data. This component includes both the design and construction of the device itself,
as well as the code running on the device. Furthermore, methods of classifying wear and non-
wear are presented and discussed, as well as a novel approach to detecting non-wear using
tilt switches. Lastly, a comprehensive battery analysis and a discussion of configurations
and considerations is presented for this component.
Data Processing
Data processing describes the intermediary step between the data collection from the in-
strument and the visualization tool. This section presents different approaches to classifying
activity and discusses the parameters of an accelerometer-based classifier.
Visualization
The visualization describes the software used by a therapist to analyze patient data
collected by the instrument and transformed by the data processing algorithms. This com-
ponent presents solutions to visualizing patient wear and activity data, and discusses aspects
of software platforms and user experience. It also aims to enhance user experience, empha-
sizing on ease of use when connecting devices to be analyzed.
While dividing the project into components is viable and makes sense in providing a sound
overview, it should be noted that the components themselves are not as divided in practice,
and that e.g. the design of the instrument affects the data processing, and the data visual-
ization tool is closely related to the data processing. Furthermore, the focus of this project
is skewed towards the instrument and data processing.
Page 3 of 92
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Part I - Instrument
The instrument represents a physical device through which data is collected about the pa-
tient’s behavioral patterns, and are an essential part in contextualizing data about the pa-
tient.
Numerous wearable devices exists for self-tracking[17]. These include commercial devices
such as smart watches, which generally provide a wealth of additional features beyond simple
self-tracking capabilities, medically focused devices such as ActiGraph, which has a narrower
use-case meant specifically for research, and commercial fitness-trackers such as the FitBit.
These are however all designed for various degrees of flexibility in use-cases. While this
allows these devices to be used on a wide range of scenarios, it may not necessarily excel
at any of them. [3] shows that there are several facilitators using a One-Button wearable
tracker aimed with a specific use-case in mind. Specifically, the ease of use of a single button
with no other elements which might overwhelm or distract has proved to have a positive
impact for the usage of the device.
Therefore, this thesis will focus on building a bespoke prototype instrument from readily
available components, building upon the principles of the One-Button tracker.
The physical instrument should contain the following:
• Sensors
• Microcontroller
The sensors will be the channel with which the patient’s observations and behavior will be
measured and used for logging, with project aims to explore multiple sensors. Choosing the
right sensor will have a significant impact in the performance of the instrument as a whole,
its ability to collect meaningful data, and its power consumption.
The microcontroller is the platform which connects and interfaces with every sensor, and
must be able to efficiently process and log data gathered from every sensor. It may contain
additional peripherals to support this core functionality, such as a real-time clock, and must
contain a battery for mobility. Furthermore, it must be able to interface with a computer, to
allow for data transfer for processing and visualization. Being conscious of microcontroller
choice and design may improve both the complexity and capabilities of the instrument, and
affects the overall performance of the instrument.
The instrument should, similarly to the One-Button tracker contain a single button for user
interfacing, and the overall design of the instrument should be small enough to be worn on
the body in a pant pocket.
4
==PAGE:11==
2.1. Analysis
2.1
Analysis
Multiple sensors and microcontrollers and their ability to provide context are analyzed.
A previous study exploring classification algorithms is examined, and a power consumption
survey is carried out.
2.1.1
Microcontrollers
Two microcontrollers were chosen for the instrument prototypes:
• Adafruit Feather M4 Express
• Adafruit Feather RP2040
These were chosen due to their availability within the project scope, and due to them being
programmable with CircuitPython[7], a Python derivative specifically designed for micro-
controllers, which would be installed on the the microcontrollers. This approach was chosen
due to previous work by the project supervisor and others[13]. The Feather ESP32 was
briefly considered, and had been used in [13]. However, the built-in WiFi chip was deemed
unnecessary.
Feather M4 Express
The Adafruit Feather M4 Express[1] was chosen as the initial device for building the
first instrument prototypes. It is a cheap microcontroller built on the ATSAMD51 chip and
is installed with CircuitPython. It contains 2 MB Flash memory, which is shared between
code, libraries and storage. It supports several digital and analog GPIO pins for connecting
various sensors, as well as supporting both light- and deep sleep, i.e. configurations in which
the system enters a low-power mode.
Feather RP2040
The Adafruit Feather RP2040 was similar to the Feather M4 in many aspects, but with
two significant differences: The RP2040 is a different chip from the ATSAMD chip used in
the Feather M4, and the RP2040 also has 8MB of Flash storage, an increase from the 2MB
of the M4. The key difference was that the RP2040 supported pin deep sleep on every pin,
up from a single pin on the M4. This microcontroller was discovered later on in the project,
so both microcontrollers were used.
Sleep states
An important feature of both microcontrollers, and of CircuitPython, is the implemen-
tation of sleep states, i.e. program states with reduced functionality but also a significant
Page 5 of 92
==PAGE:12==
2.1. Analysis
decrease in power consumption1. The simplest form is time.sleep which interrupts program
execution. The CircuitPython module alarm provides two sleep states: Light sleep, which
keeps the program running, meaning that program execution can continue upon waking up,
and deep sleep, which exits the program before going to sleep, meaning that the program
state is reset between sleep cycles.
Before a sleep state is initialized, a wake alarm must be defined. The alarm module provides
two such sources: TimeAlarm, which wakes the program when a certain time has elapsed,
measured by the onboard monotonic clock. The other, PinAlarm, wakes the program when
a pin receives a signal, either high or low. This can be further configured with a pull resistor
to avoid accidental triggering of the alarm2, as well as configuring an edge trigger, to trigger
when the pin registers a transition from high to low, or vice versa3.
The actual power consumed in the various sleep states varies between microcontrollers, and
will be studied further in the battery performance analysis. Regardless, an extra emphasis
is put on the importance of low power modes for maximizing instrument longevity.
2.1.2
Sensors
An analysis of available sensor types were performed, studying their strength and weak-
nesses in regards to complexity and contextualization.
Button
The button of the One-Button Tracker itself can provide some context by at least
revealing points in which the device is being worn. Whenever the user presses the button to
log an event, it is an indication that the instrument is being worn and used. It is also arguably
one of the most essential sensors, as it is the method in which mental health observations
are registered with the One-Button Tracker, and will be used similarly in this instrument.
Additionally, it is extremely simple, and provides basic pin operations including pin-based
deep-sleep, which can help reduce power consumption.
Vibration sensor
One approach to detecting activity is to use a vibration sensor mounted on the instru-
ment controller. A vibration sensor is a small metal rod enclosed by a conductive spring,
with multiple spring stiffness variations allowing for a more or less motion sensitive sensor.
A sufficiently strong movement to the sensor will shift the spring, making contact with the
rod and completing the circuit. The spring allows for the sensor to naturally reset to an
"off" state. The simplicity of the sensor means it can interface with a microcontroller GPIO
pin, which allows for the use of pin-based deep sleep.
1https://learn.adafruit.com/deep-sleep-with-circuitpython/alarms-and-sleep
2https://www.electronics-tutorials.ws/logic/pull-up-resistor.html
3https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/edge-triggering-and-level-triggering/
Page 6 of 92
==PAGE:13==
2.1. Analysis
Inertial Measurement Unit
Oppositely to the button, an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) is another sensor for
adding additional context to observation data. An inertial measurement unit combines mul-
tiple sensors into one component, allowing for extremely high contextualization capabilities,
but with similarly high complexity. For this thesis, the Adafruit BNO085 IMU (BNO)[4]
would be used due to its availability and integration with the other sensors.
The BNO
contains multiple different sensors, being individually toggle-able, and were thus considered
individually
Raw accelerometer
The BNO provides accelerometer measurements in the x-, y-, and z-dimensions.
It is a
power efficient sample source, with power consumption of 0.14mA[4], making it valuable
for the power constrained environment required by the instrument. A classification may
be performed by analyzing the acceleration vector, determining an activity level based on
computed thresholds.
Activity classifier
The activity classifier is a built-in module of the BNO. Using accelerometer data and step
rates, it applies a threshold matrix to determine one of eight activities : unknown, in vehicle,
on bicycle, on foot, running, still, tilting, walking, with a confidence rating between 1 and
100. Similarly to the pure acceleration based classifier, the activity classifier measures step
rates and acceleration in 4 second epochs, using the standard deviation of the accelerometer
normal[4]. Contrary to the pure accelerometer classifier however, the BNO is continuously
measuring acceleration, and as such does not suffer from the same issues with sample win-
dows. This also means that an activity classification can be determined in the instant of the
measurement.
Stability classifier
The stability classifier is another built-in BNO module. In addition to the accelerometer,
the stability classifier also uses the more power-expensive gyroscope to classify activity into
three categories doing so with increased precision: in motion, on table and stable, where
stable is classified as still, but likely being worn, hence there being slight movement, and on
table as completely still.
Temperature classifier
Several papers describe methods implementing thermometers in order to determine
wear and non-wear, often in conjunction with an accelerometer[36][42].
A thermometer
implemented on the worn device may continuously read ambient temperature. Observing
temperature changes may indicate whether the device is being worn. For example, a device
worn on the body would usually read a higher temperature compared to it laying on e.g. a
table. The DS3231 RTC component has a built-in thermometer used to calibrate temperature
fluctuations in its crystal oscillator [9]. This sensor is exposed in the CircuitPython library
Page 7 of 92
==PAGE:14==
2.1. Analysis
API4, but with a sample rate of 1/64Hz. While it could be used as a secondary source
of classification, using temperature to classify activity is deemed outside the scope of this
project.
Tilt switches
This approach relies solely on tilt switches mounted directly onto the board. A tilt switch
contains a hollow tube with a conductive ball or liquid inside and a conductive element in
each end. Tilting the switch in one direction moves the conductive element to one side of the
switch, completing the circuit. This is also a very simple I/O operation, reading a single pin’s
value on the microcontroller board, meaning it doesn’t require much power. Furthermore, it
also uniquely allows for deep sleep to be implemented. Using CircuitPython’s alarms library,
a PinAlarm can be configured to sleep until the tilt switch changes state. This operation
drastically reduces the power consumption, with the battery performance analysis in Figure
2.3 measuring a power draw of around 0.64mA during deep sleep for the Feather M4 board.
Two tilt switches are mounted on the Feather M4 board along the x- and y-axis, relative to
the BNO[4]. The device is most likely to be worn in a orientation perpendicular to the z-axis,
meaning that not much movement would be registered when e.g. walking. This, alongside a
priority of minimizing the form factor of the device, lead to that axis being excluded.
2.1.3
Defining activity and wear
In order to determine which sensors should be included in the instrument, one must look
at the contextualization requirements, which is to add context to button-press observations
by observing patient wear/non-wear, and activity levels. Periods of non-wear can lead to in-
sufficient data and misclassification or incomplete analysis of the resulting measurements[42].
One such example is activity classification and related measurements, in which non-wear can
be indistinguishable from sedentary behavior [5].
An important assumption is that the instrument should not focus on minute periods of wear
and non-wear, but rather large parts of a day or longer, where the device is not worn. This
could e.g. be an entire day where the patient left the instrument at home, and allows for a
more lenient approach to sample rates.
Implementing a detection system of wear and non-wear can be divided into two distinct but
dependent problems.
Sampling: Samples must be taken with respect to both data resolution and battery con-
straints
Classification: A set of samples must reveal information about whether the device was
worn or not
4https://docs.circuitpython.org/projects/ds3231/en/latest/api.html#adafruit_ds3231.
DS3231
Page 8 of 92
==PAGE:15==
2.1. Analysis
A popular approach is to use accelerometer data to relate periods of little to no move-
ment as non-wear. Skovgaard, et. al. [36] presents a thorough analysis comparing several
different methodologies for classifying non-wear. The paper analyses a combined dataset con-
sisting of known periods of non-wear for accelerometers mounted on the hip and thigh[29]
with their own dataset from wrist mounted accelerometers.
The paper develops a decision tree algorithm utilizing accelerometer and temperature
measurements, and compares them to four other classification methods. The first method
is an implementation of a consecutive zeros algorithm [cz60]), which classifies non-wear as a
continuous recording of accelerometer values below a minimum threshold for a given epoch,
in this case of 60 minutes.
The second method is a heuristic [heu_alg] implemented by Rasmussen et al.[30] which
utilizes both accelerometer data as well as surface skin temperature.
The third method implements a random-forests model [sunda_RF].
Trained on a
dataset of wrist worm accelerometer data, the method classifies wear and non-wear[37].
The final method utilizes a deep convoluted neural network [syed_CNN]. Trained on
accelerometer datasets, it aims to analyze the accelerometer data right before and right after
a period of known non-wear, classifying non-wear based on these immediate measurements
surrounding periods of non-wear[38].
Finally, Skovgaard et al. compares the different classification methods in their ability
to classify non-wear, as shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Comparison of different classification methods[36]
Page 9 of 92
==PAGE:16==
2.1. Analysis
The resource-constrained nature of the system presented in this thesis means that some
of the methods analyzed by Skovgaard et al. are more relevant than others. Firstly, the
[treeimp6], [treefull] and [heualg] algorithms cannot be applied as the system does not
support temperature measurements. The [sundaRF] and [syedCNN] approaches deemed
too resource intensive in regards to the processing power and battery life of the system, and
they scored low in the classification metrics.
However, the [cz60] algorithm performs very well in all measured metrics, while also being
arguably the simplest of all the proposed methods.
Simply reading accelerometer data
and deciding a period to trigger a non-wear classification is certainly within the scope of
resources for the system. As such, this project relies heavily on consecutive zeros based
activity classifiers.
2.1.4
Power consumption analysis
A power consumption analysis of every component is performed in order to support
choices in sensors and controllers, and to get a sense of the overall power consumption of the
system.
The nature of the device’s functionality would mean it would ideally be worn daily on
the person, with the person bringing and recharging their device during therapeutic sessions.
The expected time between recharges is around one month, so the battery must last for the
entirety of that time period.
Battery
The battery used for the prototyping device is a PKCELL L801735[26] LiPo battery
delivering 3.7V with a 400mAh capacity. This battery was chosen due to its availability,
ease of integration with both instrument prototypes, and due to constraints of the project.
Some discussion was put into the expectations of the battery. In the One-Button Tracker
device presented by Larsen et. al. The battery is far smaller, at around 150mAh, but the
device itself is highly optimized, and as such draws significantly less power than the prototype
instruments presented in this thesis.
Theoretical power consumption
An obvious point of reference is to look up the power consumption on the manufac-
turer’s datasheets of the devices, and base the power consumption of the entire device as the
sum of the sub-components’ power draw. However, this doesn’t work in practice, as there
will be numerous factors affecting battery capacity and power consumption of the devices.
Furthermore, for both the Feather M4 and RP2040 boards, no average power consumption
is listed in the data sheets, further limiting the viability of this approach. Instead, a manual
power consumption analysis would be carried out.
Page 10 of 92
==PAGE:17==
2.2. Methodology
2.2
Methodology
This section describes the different approaches for creating an instrument prototype,
and how this might be implemented with the microcontrollers. Deep sleep is a key part of
reducing the overall power consumption, and will be a main focus area of this section.
2.2.1
Initial implementation
Initially, a Feather M4 microcontroller was configured on a breadboard. Very early test-
ing sought to use vibration sensors, and three different sensitivities were tested, but neither
would react to any movement except shaking the instrument violently, or forcefully tapping
the switch itself. This led to these being discarded as a viable approach.
While awaiting delivery for tilt switches, which would replace the vibration switches, a but-
ton was instead mounted on the breadboard, see Appendix A.1. Since both a normal button
and tilt switches behave functionally identically, this would work decently for a test bench,
particularly testing the deep sleep capabilities. The overall idea was to have the instrument
idling in a low power state. Any movement to the instrument would then activate the tilt
switches, indicating activity.
M4 Express deep sleep limitations
An issue was discovered, limiting how many GPIO pins could be used to wake the board
from deep sleep. Binding a pin alarm to any pin other than A0 would result in an invalid
Pin error. Looking into the source code of the CircuitPython library for SAMD based mi-
crocontrollers including the Feather M4, the PinAlarm.c shows that only only four internal
pins are configured for interrupts5. Of these, only the PA02 pin is exposed to the external
GPIO pins, being the GPIO pin A0.
Regardless, the board was still used for this small-scale test, and a pin alarm was configured,
as seen in Appendix A.2:
alarm.pin.PinAlarm(board.A0, value=False, pull=True, edge=True)
The PinAlarm class is a main functionality for deep sleep, and is used extensively. In this
configuration, the following arguments are passed:
• board.A0 The analog pin to listen for interrupts on.
• value=False The value to trigger the alarm on. Setting it to false will result in pressing
the button, simulating a tilt in one direction, will connect pin A0 to GND, reading 0 and
triggering the alarm.
5https://github.com/adafruit/circuitpython/blob/main/ports/atmel-samd/common-hal/
alarm/pin/PinAlarm.c
Page 11 of 92
==PAGE:18==
2.2. Methodology
• pull=True Sets a pull resistor6 to the opposite value of value[16], meaning the resistor
will pull up. This is done to avoid pin floating 7, and ensures that a digital signal can
be read without interference.
• edge=True ensures that the signal was triggered in the transition from high to low, or
vice versa, further ensuring that the alarm will not trigger multiple times on the same
state.
However, this configuration did not work properly. Pressing the button and triggering the
alarm would correctly create a pull resistor. However, releasing the button would cause the
microcontroller to constantly go to sleep and immediately wake up, entering a loop until the
button was pressed again. This was likely due to a combination of noise on the analog pin,
and either triggering the edge transitions on the pin alarm, or the pull resistor not being
configured properly.
It also exposed a different problem: It was not possible to latch the state of the device.
Ideally, the alarm would trigger once the tilt switch was tilted, or in this case the transition
from the button being pressed to released, and vice versa. Since deep sleep resets the pro-
gram state, it was not possible to get the pin value from the alarm configuration itself, and
the alarm.wake_alarm property only returns the type of alarm, without the configuration.
One approach was to introduce a wake pin - a separate pin connected to the switch
circuit, which would be used to set the value of the next alarm state
Figure 2.2: Example of a wake pin (yellow) configured to a button circuit
Pressing the button would connect both the digital pin and the analog pin to ground.
This configuration seen in Appendix A.3 and A.4 would allow for the analog pin to trigger
the alarm, and the digital pin could be configured with a pull up resistor, and could be read.
The idea was that reading the pin value could set up the next alarm to be the opposite of the
current value. In theory, this would always set the alarm to the opposite state of the current,
however it did not work, and the code behaved similarly to the initial implementation.
6https://www.electronics-tutorials.ws/logic/pull-up-resistor.html
7https://learn.adafruit.com/circuitpython-digital-inputs-and-outputs/digital-inputs
Page 12 of 92
==PAGE:19==
2.2. Methodology
2.2.2
Prototype with Feather M4 Express
While earlier testing concluded that the Feather M4 microcontroller did not sufficiently
support deep sleep pins, it was still chosen as a testbed for the different components to
test as a whole, due to the RP2040 not yet being available for further testing, and the
M4 being able to still carry out many of the tests. Initially tested on a breadboard, each
component was connected, and their capabilities tested, as shown in Appendix A.8. The most
important distinction of the program running on the chip was that deep sleep naturally wasn’t
implemented, opting instead for the time.sleep function. This still allowed for testing each
component, as well as the system as a whole. It also allowed for the tilt switches to be
connected via digital pins, which worked more consistently and were less sensitive to noise
than analog pins, even when the analog pins were configured with a DigitalIO pull resistor.
Once the components had been tested, a portable prototype for the Feather M4 was
soldered together, as seen in Appendix A.9. For testing purposes, as much data as possible
was logged, initially with no considerations of optimizing storage. Data included the entire
activity_classification tuple, including probabilities for each activity classification as
well as stability classification, shake detection, step counter, full quaternion components for
orientation, acceleration vectors, tilt switch values and power consumption. Even with the
large power consumption of enabling most of the BNO085’s features[4], the limiting factors
when conducting tests were the storage, as the Feather M4’s 2 MB storage, which was
shared across logging data and python files and libraries, could store approximately 7150
data points.
2.2.3
RP2040 microcontroller approach
After asserting the Feather M4 to be insufficient in implementing the tilt switch solu-
tion due to the limitations of the ATSAMD51 microcontroller in handling pin interrupts, a
solution was instead found in the RP2040 microcontroller[33], which supports tamper pins
for every GPIO pin, both analog and digital.
In order to test the feasibility of the microcontroller, a breadboard test bench, see Appendix
A.5, was set up with the Adafruit KB2040 board, which is a smaller microcontroller using
the RP2040 chip8. It was configured similarly the Feather M4 express board, but with the
button connected to a digital pin (D9) instead. This test confirmed the deep sleep capabili-
ties on multiple GPIO pins, and it also didn’t have the same problem of the looping between
deep sleep cycles, due to the pull up resistor of the digital pin.
With the RP2040 chip allowing every pin to be used as a wake pin, configuring a pin alarm on
a digital pin worked in preventing the instant looping between deep sleep cycles, experienced
with the Feather M4 Express board.
The approach using a wake pin was re-implemented with the KB2040 board, with better,
but still not satisfying results. In some cases, this code would behave as expected, switching
between states with proper deep sleep. However, it would routinely get stuck in one state.
8https://cdn-learn.adafruit.com/downloads/pdf/adafruit-kb2040.pdf
Page 13 of 92
==PAGE:20==
2.2. Methodology
This could perhaps be due to the button press being fast enough to wake the device, but
releasing before its value is read. This would lead to the new alarm being set to the same
as its current value, which due to the edge parameter and pull, would throw the whole cycle
out of sync.
An alternative way of tracking state was necessary, with an approach utilizing the
alarm.sleep_memory property considered. This property exposes the SleepMemory class,
which behaves like a byte array, and allows data persistence between deep sleep cycles.[7].
However, this feature is not supported on the RP2040 based boards.
Storing values directly onto the file system was also considered, but the power consump-
tion of writing and reading from another file besides the data file was deemed to high.
Simply using the same pin for both reading the button value and for sleep alarms was
also considered, see Appendix A.6. This would define a DigitalInOut object on the same
pin used for the alarm, in this case D12. The value would then be stored in a variable, and
the pin would then be de-initialized, allowing it to be reassigned to the PinAlarm object.
This way, the current state was logged, and the code would create the new alarm targeting
the opposite state of the current. Unfortunately, this too didn’t work. The first button press
would be registered, but a subsequent release would not change the state again. Different
configurations of pull and edge were tried, in hopes it would give any sort of different out-
come, but with no luck.
One thing that should be noted was the instability of the test bench, especially when
interacting with the physical buttons. Accidentally touching the board could ground the
circuit, leading to unusual behavior, such as the deep sleep seemingly cycling correctly, only
for it to suddenly behave differently. In some cases, likely due to a grounding error, touching
the wire connecting the device to the computer could also lead to inputs being registered.
This meant that as much as possible, directly touching the board was avoided, with each
configuration being tested in various ways, including touching the device with non-conductive
materials in between the finger and the device.
Consistent results with tilt switches
Among all the different approaches, the only consistent function was that the alarms
configured to trigger upon completing the circuit, i.e.
the button being pressed, always
worked as intended. Realizing this, the decision was made to simply introduce an extra
switch to trigger oppositely of the first. In the tilt switch case, this meant installing an
additional tilt switch pointing oppositely of each axis.
Page 14 of 92
==PAGE:21==
2.2. Methodology
(a) Initial configuration of tilt switches on RP2040
board
(b) RP2040 board with additional switches (and
battery)
Figure 2.3: Additional tilt switches pointing in opposite directions were added the device.
This new configuration meant that one switch in each direction would practically always
be completing the circuit, with a brief void during a tilt, where neither ball would contact.
However, this didn’t negatively affect the code’s functionality. Furthermore, wiring each pin
separately made it easy to associate a pin value to a tilt direction. A new test was designed
for this setup, see Appendix A.7, which successfully handled deep sleep cycles.
Furthermore, the code checks all sensors’ values whenever it is awoken. This makes the
code more robust in the event where the device is quickly tilted e.g. left, right, an then left
again, as it will not enter a deep sleep loop, and instead reconfigure the next alarms based
off its current state.
This nature of how the device is worn and how the tilt switches work presents some chal-
lenges. The tilt switches are extremely sensitive to movement, especially when the device
is laying horizontally, where the conductive elements inside the tilt switches are the most
sensitive to movement in either direction. Similarly, if the device is tilted even slightly too
hard, the elements inside may bounce before settling, effectively triggering the alarms mul-
tiple times for a single movement. This can be mitigated by introducing a light sleep for
a brief period, in the case of Appendix A.7, this is set to .5 seconds. This prevents any
immediate bounce from triggering the alarms, but is far from perfect.
This could also have been a use case for the alarm.sleep_memory array, which could
Page 15 of 92
==PAGE:22==
2.2. Methodology
have been used to keep track of previous orientations across deep sleep cycles, to determine
whether a specific orientation should be excluded from becoming an alarm trigger until
another orientation has been registered.
2.2.4
Expanding capabilities
With a successful implementation of the tilt switches, the goal was to expand on the
device to include an RTC and an accelerometer.
It was possible to work on a second prototype concurrently, using a Feather M4 Board
for interfacing with the other components, as deep sleep and wake pins were not a concern
for those. With the decision to incorporate deep sleep, and thus frequently resetting the
program, it was necessary to include a way to keep consistent track of time. As such the
DS3231[9] was chosen as a precise real-time clock. The One-Button Tracker by Larsen et al
[20] used the internal clock of the Feather M4 express, with a GPS module to synchronize
time periodically, to avoid time drift. The DS3231 was chosen as an alternative to this
due to the power consumption of acquiring GPS signals, as well as the capabilities for
alarms allowed by the DS3231. This was particularly useful with the RP2040 not supporting
time.sleep_memory.
Furthermore, in order to determine activity levels, it was necessary to include an ac-
celerometer, for which the BNO085 was chosen. While the capabilities expanded what was
necessary, and consequently, the power consumption, it was still chosen due to the ease
of use of incorporation, as well as availability. One thing that worked well with using the
BNO085 was its activity_classifier and stability_classifier functions, which used
its accelerometer and gyroscope to determine different activities with great precision [4].
This was used extensively throughout the tests as a baseline to compare against the tilt
switches and raw accelerometer with a custom activity classifier.
It should be noted that in a real implementation, considerations should be done to
replace the BNO085 with a simpler, less power consuming device, ideally only containing an
accelerometer, as there definitely was some unnecessary power consumption with the more
complex BNO085.
2.2.5
Expanding logging capabilities
With a portable prototype having been developed, and a general need for logging data
on the device instead of printing, changes had to be made to the code.
Storage and boot.py
CircuitPython includes the library storage9 which handles mounting a file system to
a path on the CircuitPython device. Initially, the file system is mounted with a read-only
access to CircuitPython, with write access being granted to the host computer. This allows
the user to save files onto the CircuitPython drive, which is useful when developing, but it
also prohibits CircuitPython from writing data directly onto the board.
9https://learn.adafruit.com/circuitpython-essentials/circuitpython-storage
Page 16 of 92
==PAGE:23==
2.2. Methodology
By calling storage.remount("/", readonly=False), the file system is remounted with
write access to CircuitPython.
This remount operation must be done before the main program execution, which is
where the boot.py file is introduced. CircuitPython has a defined order on named files it
will attempt to run upon a device power-on and reload. The exact order is dependent on
whether the board was reloaded, powered on, or powered on in safe mode. However, the
order generally is as follows[7]:
1. boot.py
2. code.py or (main.py)
3. REPL
As such, the remount function is written into the boot.py file. There must be some way to
control the readonly argument passed to the remount function, in order for CircuitPython
to get control of the board only when the user allows it. In the breadboard prototypes, this
was accomplished simply by wiring a pin to ground. If that pin was connected, the value
would read False, and the device would gain write access. To give write access back to the
computer, then pin would simply be removed, and the device restarted.
Voltage divider
A better solution was needed. Both due to the fact that it was a tedious process to
manually plug a wire in and out, with it only being made more difficult once the device
components were soldered together, and the pins removed. Initially, simply soldering on a
sliding switch, mapping one position to write access to CircuitPython, and the other to the
computer. While this worked, it was still a less than optimal solution, dependent on the user
remembering to switch the switch to the correct position at a given time.
A better solution would be for write access to be determined by whether the device was
plugged into a computer or not. This would make it extremely convenient to switch, since
the only time the user would interface with the device’s files would be when the device is
plugged into a computer. Furthermore, in case the goal was for the device to be plugged
in while still granting CircuitPython write access, the device could be powered on with the
battery before being plugged in. As boot.py only ran on resets, simply plugging the already
running device into the computer would not change write permissions.
In order for this solution to be implemented, the code had to check if the device USB
port was plugged in. Using the supervisor.runtime library was considered, as it contains
both the usb_connected and serial_connected, to check whether the device is plugged
in. However, the underlying library is not yet initialized in the boot.py file, which is where
the remount must take place, so this approach was discarded.
Instead, whether the device was plugged in or not would be determined by the battery
voltage.
When plugged into a power source such as a computer, the device is supplied
5V[33][1]. Detecting this value can be used to determine whether the device is plugged into
Page 17 of 92
==PAGE:24==
2.2. Methodology
a computer or not. Incorporating a battery monitor like the Adafruit LC709203F10 was
briefly considered, but this couldn’t be used to determine if the device was plugged in.
Instead, looking at the datasheet for the Feather M4 Express, which was being used for
testing, the documentation specified that a voltage divider had been installed between the
BAT and internal A6 pin for reading the battery voltage. A voltage divider is a series resistor
circuit, which scales down the voltage of the input source based on the resistors in the circuit
11. Ideally, a similar approach could be used to read the provided voltage through the USB
port.
However, neither the A6 pin, nor any other pin which may be used to sense the voltage
being supplied to the board is exposed to the CircuitPython board library, even though a
code snippet from the documentation calls a board.VOLTAGE_MONITOR, see Appendix A.10.
Furthermore, the RP2040 board does not have a built-in voltage divider[33]. Therefore, a
custom voltage divider would need to be added to each device. This was accomplished by
mounting two resistors in series, connecting USB to A1 to GND as seen in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Voltage divider on the Feather M4 Express board
In the initial implementation, 1000Ωresistors were used. These were later exchanged for
100KΩresistors to reduce power wasted in the circuit 12. With this, the code snippet could
be modified slightly to read the board.A1 pin instead of board.VOLTAGE_MONITOR, and the
voltage supplied to the device via the USB pin could be read. When the device is connected,
reading A1 will read 5V , and otherwise 0. It may not be completely 0, so a threshold of 2
is defined, which is easily surpassed if the device is plugged into a computer and charging.
With A1 being readable from the boot.py file, it was possible to define read/write access
based on whether the board was plugged into the computer or not.
10https://cdn-learn.adafruit.com/downloads/pdf/adafruit-lc709203f-lipo-lipoly-battery-monitor.
pdf
11https://www.khanacademy.org/science/electrical-engineering/ee-circuit-analysis-topic/
ee-resistor-circuits/a/ee-voltage-divider
12http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/electric/voldiv.html
Page 18 of 92
==PAGE:25==
2.2. Methodology
2.2.6
The BoardLogger class
In order to reduce the complexity, and the amount of logic in the code.py file, the pro-
gram would be decomposed to include a BoardLogger.py file and class. The BoardLogger
class works similarly to a factory13, including the logic necessary to construct either a
ConsoleLogger or a FileLogger, which is determined by measuring the USB voltage, i.e.
if the device is connected to a computer, and should write measurements directly to the
console, or if they should be logged on the device itself. While interfaces are not necessary
in python, both FileLogger and ConsoleLogger implement the same methods, log and
log_multirow. These methods are then exposed by BoardLogger, working as an adapter
for the two classes.
This eases the usage from code.py in that the only concern is to
instantiate a BoardLogger object. An optional headers argument may be passed to the
BoardLogger constructor.
When a FileLogger is instantiated by BoardLogger, it is passed a filename and op-
tionally a header argument. It starts by checking if the data folder exists in the file system,
creating it if it doesn’t. It then checks if the data folder contains a file matching the filename
argument, creating this too, and immediately writing the headers to the file.
The log and log_multirow functions behave similarly between ConsoleLogger and
FileLogger. ConsoleLogger writes either a single, or multiple rows directly to the console,
while FileLogger writes them to the data file, in this case a .csv file. Writing to files
is a rather power intensive operation as can be seen in the power consumption analysis in
Table 2.3. As such, the amount of calls to log and log_multirow were kept to a mini-
mum, especially in tests where multiple samples were being done. This is the main role of
log_multirow; to allow for the code to store multiple samples in memory until a number
of samples have been collected, before writing them all at once, as to not have to open and
close multiple file streams immediately after one another. Ideally, one would aim to write
as much as possible to memory before writing to the disk. In the early tests, where e.g.
the entire activity classification object was stored, a single observation required 184 bytes of
storage, according to the getsizeof() function in the sys library 14.
The amount of file write operations required could be decreased by storing multiple obser-
vations in memory, and then writing them all at once. Take the Feather M4, which includes
192KB of RAM. This could hypothetically store around 1043 lines in memory, greatly re-
ducing the amount of file writes necessary. This assumes no other RAM usage which is not
realistic. Instead, it was decided that 50 observations would be stored in RAM before being
written.
The amount of observations stored in RAM were further complicated when utilizing deep
sleep, due to memory being reset between cycles. For the Feather M4 microcontroller, using
alarm.sleep_memory was considered to store some data in between cycles. alarm.sleep_memory
is a byte array with a length of "a couple thousand bytes" [16], seemingly 8192 bytes for the
Feather M4 Express board, and could potentially hold upwards of 44 rows of data if packed
using struct.pack.
However, the tests in which the Feather M4 Express was used did not prioritize power
13https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/factory-method-python-design-patterns/
14https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys.html
Page 19 of 92
==PAGE:26==
2.2. Methodology
management compared to the RP2040 which does not support alarm.sleep_memory in any
case.
2.2.7
Second prototype
Based on the experience gained from the previous experiments, a final prototype was
designed, using a RP2040 as the microcontroller, with a BNO085 and a DS3231 connected,
using the STEMMAQT connectors for a I2C connection. Using the STEMMAQT connection instead
of soldering the devices onto the RP2040 board greatly sped up the assembly of the device.
Soldered onto the board is a button as well as four tilt switches in opposing pairs,
oriented along the x- and y-axes, relative to the BNO085 (x-axis running parallel to the di-
rection of the USB C port). A PKCell L801735 LiPo battery pack is mounted to the device.
Figure2.3(b) shows the final prototype with tilt switches marked, and Figure 2.5 shows the
circuit schematic.
Page 20 of 92
==PAGE:27==
2.2. Methodology
Figure 2.5: Feather RP2040 based device schematic
The program loop is built around waking up, logging the sensors, then going to sleep based on
the source of the alarm. It switches states between an idle state awaiting a physical activity,
and a cool down state determined by a timer. A distinction is made between whether the
alarm is from a time alarm or from a sensor, as described in the activity diagram:
Page 21 of 92
==PAGE:28==
2.2. Methodology
Figure 2.6: RP2040 prototype activity diagram
The latter indicates a physical interaction with the device, which is counted as it being
worn. Furthermore, once a physical interaction wakes the board, it is allowed to enter deep
sleep for a "cool down" period after the activity. This reduces the overall power consumption,
by reacting to fewer interactions. It also minimizes the issue described in Section 2.2.3, where
the brief period after the device is moved and the conductive element inside the tilt switch is
still moving, multiple alarms are triggered resulting in unnecessarily many deep sleep cycles.
Finally, it fits with the overall goal of a "close enough" approximation over longer periods
of non-wear prioritized over minute samples spanning seconds or less. The work done by J.
Larsen, et al. [20] specifies a similar cool down period of 5 minutes.
Page 22 of 92
==PAGE:29==
2.2. Methodology
Once the device has slept for the cool down period, and is awakened from the time alarm,
the system enters an idle state, setting the alarm triggers to the tilt switches and the button.
It is important to point out that the Button Press activity is enabled for both sleep config-
urations. The system should at all times be ready to log a button press to mark a patient
observation.
The data logged during this process was heavily minimized. Firstly, many of the sensors
were disabled, logging only a minimum amount of sensor data. Secondly, in tests where
the activity or stability classifiers of the BNO085 were included, the dictionaries and strings
were collapsed into a number representing an enum value. Tilt switch values were reduced
to 0 or 1, and only one value was included for each direction, under the assumption that
the opposing tilt switch on one axis would always read a value opposite of its counterpart.
The normal vector of the acceleration vector was computed, and afterwards rounded down
to three decimals. Finally, the timestamp was logged in UNIX epoch time.
Improving power consumption using DS3231
During the design of the final prototype, analyzing the RP2040’s deep sleep performance
[16] revealed that the board did not implement a true deep sleep when used with a TimeAlarm,
instead using a modified light sleep, drawing more than five times the amount of power of a
PinAlarm, as seen in Table 2.1.
Awake
Light sleep
Deep sleep (time)
Deep sleep (pin)
27mA
17.9mA
7.4mA
1.4mA
Table 2.1: Comparing power draw across RP2040 wake states[16]
This specifically affected the cool down state happening after the device was awoken
from a physical interaction, especially over longer cool down periods. A solution to this
was discovered by using the two built-in alarms of the DS3231. These alarms can be de-
fined by a time.time_struct struct and a string specifying the period the alarm should
trigger on, ranging from every second to once a month. While the online documentation
was scarce, inspecting the library source files revealed that only alarm1 supported second-
wise alarms by default. A has_seconds boolean argument was passed to the underlying
BCDAlarmTimeRegister constructor, denoting the accuracy of the alarm. If the argument
was set to False, the alarm would trigger when the seconds property from the time struct
was 0. This would mean accuracy was lost for longer cool down periods, and it being useless
for cool down periods shorter than a minute. It was considered manually altering the source
file to pass the has_seconds argument from the alarm constructor, or just manually setting
it to True, but since only the cool down alarm needed seconds precision, alarm1 could simply
be used as-is.
By wiring the DS3231 SQW pin to D10 on the RP2040, configuring it with a pull up resistor,
and setting an alarm for the current time read by its datetime property plus some duration,
Page 23 of 92
==PAGE:30==
2.2. Methodology
the DS3231 would send a signal, bringing D10 to LOW, and thus being able to trigger a
PinAlarm. While it was not possible to distinguish between sources directly from the alarm
library, the DS3231 alarm1_status property would return True when the alarm was active.
It could simply be turned off by setting the status to False, and alarm1_interrupt to
False, to avoid interrupts until the alarm was reconfigured.
While this was perhaps a smaller optimization of power consumption, it was still essentially
"free", only utilizing currently integrated components.
It also allowed for a more robust method of logging the battery voltage. Initially, a
timer similar to the above had been attempted using alarm.sleep_memory, and checking if
fifteen minutes had passed since the last measurement.
Now, the second alarm of the DS3231 could be utilized with an "hourly", triggering
when the minutes matched. With the same methodology as with the cool down period,
when the device awoke, alarm2_status was checked to determine if the alarm was from
that. If it was, the current alarm would be reset, and a new alarm would be set fifteen
minutes in the future.
Preventing drive hard resetting
An issue was discovered when attempting to write files to an already full instrument file
system, it would behave unexpectedly, and in some cases, it was observed that the device
would simply reset itself back to a clean configuration, albeit without flashing the boot
drive, and with a default boot_out.txt file. In order to prevent this, the os.stat function
was imported into the code.py file. The stat function returns information about a folder,
including its file size. A check was put into the file, such that if the file system was near
maximum capacity, for the case of the RP2040 around 7MB, it would immediately terminate.
2.2.8
Data collection
Using the two prototypes, data was collected throughout the project in an effort to get
as much data as possible. The device would be worn in the pant pockets, while the test
subject would go about their day. The device would log in different intervals and different
parameters, but generally would all log movement in some form. A few brief tests were
done with the device being held in different orientations and on different surfaces, to see
how well the sensors would read the different states. The overarching goal was to determine
periods of wear and non-wear using the tilt switches, and to determine activity levels based
off of the accelerometer. To compare, the BNO085 was chosen as a "ground truth", in that it
contained advanced sensing capabilities, including an activity and stability classifier, which
were used heavily to compare against tilt switch and accelerometer readings. Furthermore, it
was initially decided to use Google Maps’ Timeline feature as another point of reference[23].
A mobile phone was worn alongside the device. Using Timeline, it gave further insight into
movement, especially detecting periods in vehicles. It was however limited by grouping data
by locations, meaning that movements in the same location were not tracked by Google
Maps’ Timeline. Using a phone app to track accelerometer data alongside the device was
considered, but eventually discarded, as it couldn’t track tilt switches, which were an essential
Page 24 of 92
==PAGE:31==
2.2. Methodology
part of the measurement process.
The following data sets were collected by the devices, shown in Table 2.2:
date
device
duration (d:hh:mm)
rows
interval
notes
07-10
M4
10:17
14304
1 sec
09-10
M4
11:06
13396
1 sec
10-10
M4
9:54
2033
10 sec
29-10
M4
0:45
8082
.33 sec
25-11
M4
23:38
108178
1 sec
data compression
02-12
M4
16:20
54940
1 sec
data compression
11-01
RP2040
2:14:49
2421
-
deep sleep, data compression
18-01
RP2040
1:18:22
3550
1 min
deep sleep, 5 sample,
then 1 min sleep,
then 5 sample
28-01
RP2040
1:40
615
1 min
deep sleep, 5 sample,
then 1 min sleep,
then 5 sample
28-01
M4
11:38
39160
1 sec
Table 2.2: Datasets collected from wearing the prototypes
The 28-01 dataset was a test trying to compare the activities registered by the RP2040
using deep sleep with a continuously logging M4 as control. This was a failed test as the
RP2040 device was unknowingly reset, leading it to stopping logging.
It is important to mention the spliced datasets. In some of the tests, gathering a lot of data
over a long period was a goal. This however meant that the instruments’ internal storage
would fill up, and the data would have to be moved. In order to do this, the device would
have to be plugged in, not able to take measurements at the same time. In order for the data
to appear continuous, the newly formed void between datasets, most often around a minute
in length, was removed, and the following dataset was offset backwards by the duration of
the void. This worked in mocking a complete dataset, but it is important to note that these
datasets not are completely true to the actual data, but instead is offset slightly.
2.2.9
Measuring power consumption
Several methods for approximating power consumption were explored with varying de-
grees of success. Measurements vary between the different approaches, and as such it was
decided to only use the ammeter measurements for the final Battery Performance Analysis.
Measuring battery voltage drop
One approach that was explored was to approximate the power consumption of the dif-
ferent components by setting up a specific test environment where that particular component
could be tested in isolation, with the power consumption being measured over time.
Page 25 of 92
==PAGE:32==
2.2. Methodology
A test using a Feather M4 connected to a BNO085 was carried. The test consisted of
the following steps:
1. Sample the battery 50 times, calculate and log mean "before" voltage.
2. Sample the BNO085
3. Sample the battery 50 times, calculate and log mean "after" voltage.
4. Repeat steps 1-3 10 times, compute mean "before" and "after" voltages.
5. Repeat this 1000 times
The instrument was tested in four configurations: with the BNO connected and disconnected,
and using deep sleep and light sleep. A Linear Regression was applied, assuming the battery
discharge to be linear.
The voltage drop could then plotted and visualized, as seen in
Appendix A.12.
This process was tedious and difficult to set up, taking a long time to run the tests in order
to get meaningful data. Furthermore, it had to be assumed that the battery would discharge
linearly in order to rely on the readings. For these reasons, this approach was eventually
discarded for the current measurement approach.
Measuring current
This approach used the same methodology as presented by Fafoutis et al.[12].
Here a multimeter configured as an ammeter was used to measure the current draw
of the components in the system, including the microcontrollers themselves.
It enabled
measuring isolated components, which was not possible using the previous method.
This approach proved to be the most viable, as it allowed for real-time and isolated mea-
surements of power consumption, for both the system as a whole and distinct components.
It also allowed for easier switching between tests, and a reduced testing time, compared to
the previous method.
Individual components were tested on both the M4 and RP2040 microcontrollers using
the third approach, applying a consistent methodology for the tests. Measurements would
be taken with the ammeter mounted in different configurations.
• Ammeter mounted in series with the positive wire between the battery and the termi-
nals on the microcontroller.
• Ammeter mounted in series with the positive side between the microcontroller and the
power input terminal of the component being tested.
Ammeter readings were observed and noted. Some readings, such as the step counter module,
had some fluctuations. As such, measurements like those were done over a 15 sample window,
with the average being used as a final measurement. Due to the limitations of the ammeter’s
sampling rate, and due to some variation in the readings, this analysis would serve as an
Page 26 of 92
==PAGE:33==
2.3. Results
indicator and point of reference for the power consumption of the components, but not a
complete analysis.
Multiple configurations of microcontrollers and sensors was set up. First, only the mi-
crocontrollers themselves would be tested, logging device initialization consumption, and idle
power in various power states.
Then the BNO085 was connected to the controller, and similar measurements were taken.
Specifically, the power consumption of multiple configurations of enabled sensor features and
tilt switches were tested. Finally, the DS3231 RTC was connected, and these further tested
as well.
When testing the power states for the RP2040, a distinction was made following the analysis
of its deep sleep performance [33]. Therefore, it was tested both with a time alarm and pin
alarm.
For measuring the power consumption of components actively measuring, 10,000 samples
were measured, and an average sampling time determined from the average of the time
elapsed form first to last measurement.
This was increased to 100.000 samples for the
digital pin read as it was far quicker, and decreased to 1000 samples for logging due to
the IO operations being slow. By measuring the elapsed time between these operations,
an approximation of how long it would take to sample a measurement could be computed,
further indicating how much power would be spent "per sample". Samples were immediately
discarded and not printed, to minimize power consumption noise due to operations other
than the sampling itself. For the logging specifically, a sleep time of .1 seconds were added
to avoid deadlocks trying to write to the file too quickly.
2.3
Results
Two prototype instruments of a wearable one-button tracker were built, tracking periods
wear and non-wear. Each prototype is built using off-the-shelf components, based around
the two microcontrollers:
• Adafruit Feather M4 Express
• Adafruit Feather RP2040
The Feather M4 was chosen as an initial implementation, being superseded by the RP2040
once it was found to better fulfill the challenges discovered through testing, especially regard-
ing power preservation utilizing deep sleep which was better optimized for the RP2040. The
choice of sensors also emphasized on ease of access and integration with the microcontrollers,
prioritizing Adafruit devices with existing CircuitPython libraries. The Adafruit BNO085
IMU was chosen to measure activity. This capable microcontroller contains an activity and
stability classifier, which was used heavily as a baseline for classifying activity during test-
ing. It also included an accelerometer which was used for both for testing and in the final
prototype.
The Adafruit DS3231 was chosen as a realtime clock. This was chosen as a more precise
alternative to the on-board monotonic clock of the microcontrollers themselves. It was also
Page 27 of 92
==PAGE:34==
2.3. Results
further utilized by the RP2040 to optimize deep sleep cycles, using its built-in alarms instead
of the default TimeAlarm.
Tilt switches was installed and successfully used to control deep sleep cycles on the
RP2040, greatly improving its capabilities to track data over longer periods of time, by
being able to sleep during periods of deep sleep.
Finally, a button was integrated, building upon the work of Larsen et al [20] of a single
purpose button for tracking subjective experiences such as PTSD markers.
The physical devices were designed with form factor in mind, prioritizing a compact
design to make wearing the device as easy as possible.
A program was developed to run on the microcontrollers, written in CircuitPython. This
program was built on a program loop, waking up from a sleep period to log available sensors.
The program would determine a state based on what woke up the board. It would then set
alarms specific to the current state, listening for physical events or entering a cool down
period to save power if recently awoken form a physical event. A button press, indicating
an event of interest, was programmed to interrupt any state, taking precedent.
Lastly, the devices were used to carry out multiple tests, gathering sample data of the physi-
cal activities of the movement of a test subject. The M4 was used primarily for a short-term
testbed, with the RP2040 performing tests spanning multiple days. This proved the value of
using tilt switches as analog switches to determine periods of no activity, greatly improving
the power consumption of the device. During testing iterations, the code was optimized by
compressing data stored and by using techniques such as limiting the amount of file write
actions, and implementing a better time based deep sleep utilizing the alarm capabilities of
the DS3231.
2.3.1
Power consumption results
A comprehensive energy analysis was performed, measuring power consumption in various
configurations between the microcontroller and external components, and the power deliv-
ered to the entire system, as well as analyzing the data from different software configurations,
comparing among others the power consumption between light and deep sleep versus power
consumption during normal operations. This was used as a baseline for several design de-
cisions including sleep modes, limiting writing to the file system as well as showcasing the
advantages of implementing a wear detection system using low power tilt switches, compared
to sensors such as the BNO085.
The power consumption for the different microprocessors and sensors were measured us-
ing an ammeter connected in series between the microprocessor and sensors, and between
the battery and microprocessor. This gave some indication to the different configurations’
power consumptions, and was an essential tool to at least estimating the theoretical power
consumption of each device.
Page 28 of 92
==PAGE:35==
2.3. Results
M4 (mA)
RP2040 (mA)
Sensor (mA)
Sample rate (Hz)
Id
Configuration
No sleep
100ms sleep
No sleep
100ms sleep
No sleep
100ms sleep
M4
RP2040
1
Startup
17.5
26.3
2
While True
21.9
17.95
23
22.9
3
While True read digital pin
22.9
17.98
23.2
23.1
72760
3226
4
Write to file
29
18.16
35.7
35.4
3
2232
5
Light sleep
8.84
17.7
6
Deep sleep
0.64
7.9(0.99)
BNO085
7
While true
22.5
9.42
27.2
23.7
0.38
0.39
8
Light sleep
9.51
18.8
0.38
0.39
9
Deep sleep
1
9.09(2.05)
0.38
0.39
10
Acceleration enabled
23.3
9.7
27.5
23.9
0.71
0.71
11
Acceleration enabled, logging
26.2
12.51
32.6
25.9
6.29
1.68
608
485
12
Acceleration and Activity classifier enabled
24.8
11.33
28.9
25.6
2.43
1.56
13
Acceleration and Activity classifier enabled, logging
26.8
11.76
33.2
25.9
6.57
2.55
831
673
14
Step counter enabled
23.4
9.83
27.4
24.1
0.81
0.81
15
Step counter enabled, logging
26.3
12.47
32.3
25.8
6.29
1.76
620
509
16
Acceleration, Activity classifier, Step counter enabled
25
11.58
29.2
25.8
2.69
2.69
16a
Acceleration, Activity classifier, Step counter enabled, light sleep
11.7
20.9
2.69
2.69
16b
Acceleration, Activity classifier, Step counter enabled, deep sleep
3.18
11(4.2)
2.69
2.69
17
Acceleration, Activity classifier, Step counter enabled, logging
26.9
14.35
34.1
27.7
6.71
3.56
211
166
18
Stability Classifier enabled
31.3
18.29
35.6
32.1
9.3
9.3
0.37
18a
Stability Classifier enabled, light sleep
18
27.1
9.3
9.3
0.37
18b
Stability Classifier enabled, deep sleep
9.72
17.3(10.4)
9.3
9.3
0.37
19
Stability Classifier enabled, logging
33.6
19.7
40.4
33.6
12.97
9.67
770
617
20
Acceleration, Stability Classifier enabled, tilt enabled
32.6
18.95
35.8
32.5
9.9
9.9
20a
Acceleration, Stability Classifier enabled, tilt enabled, light sleep
18
27.4
9.9
9.9
20b
Acceleration, Stability Classifier enabled, tilt enabled, deep sleep
10
17.5(10.6)
9.9
9.9
20c
Acceleration, Stability Classifier enabled, tilt enabled, logging
34.4
21.5
40.2
34.1
13.2
10.4
292
225
DS3231
21
While True
22.3
9.14
26.2
23
0.07
0.08
22
Light Sleep
9.21
17.9
0.07
0.08
23
Deep Sleep
0.64
8.12 (1.2)
0.06
0.08
24
Logging
8.88
9.32
27.5
23.3
0.39
0.08
771
685
Table 2.3: Power consumption analysis. time.sleep(.1) is applied during certain opera-
tions. Deep sleep values for RP2040 are TimeAlarm(PinAlarm)
configurations
As seen in Table 2.3, one takeaway is the power consumption benefits of heavily applying
deep sleep whenever possible. The Feather M4 measured a deep sleep power consumption,
and the RP2040 in Table 2.1, showed a significant decrease in power consumption during
both light and deep sleep.
It also proves the effectiveness in reducing complexity and especially power consumption by
using simple switches, such as buttons and tilt switches. Furthermore, the BNO requires a
significant amount of power, and is a main source of battery drain.
Determining if one microcontroller is better than the other is not as straightforward, as they
both have strengths and weaknesses. The M4 microcontroller generally consumes less power
and has a higher sample rate, but the RP2040 does perform well during especially pin deep
sleep states, with the added benefit of better implementing deep sleep.
However, even with a power efficient design, the devices did not meet the goal of a
battery life upwards of a month, with the best forming tests lasting around three days. The
M4 wasted power by not being able to properly implement tilt switches to control periods
of deep sleep. The RP2040, while proving better at managing deep sleep, still fell short of
the same goal.
Page 29 of 92
==PAGE:36==
2.4. Discussion
2.4
Discussion
While the prototypes succeeded in logging activity data and detecting periods of wear
and non-wear, the goal of the instrument lasting upwards of a month did not succeed.
2.4.1
Power consumption
An obvious solution to the power consumption issues would be to limit the sample rate,
and especially limiting the usage of the BNO, which had a high power consumption accord-
ing to the power consumption analysis.
From that analysis, a distinction could be made showing the strengths and weaknesses of
either microcontroller.
The Feather M4 Express generally outperformed the RP2040 in terms of active power con-
sumption, as well as having a very low power deep sleep state. It generally also seemed to
process data faster, having a higher sampling rate than the RP2040. This would mean that
the M4 would spend less time in a high-performance state of computation, further decreasing
the overall power consumption.
For these reasons, the M4 in many aspects appears to be the better candidate. However,
even with the higher overall power consumption, the RP2040 has a good deep sleep power
consumption when configured with a PinAlarm, which could work as a TimeAlarm when
used in conjunction with the DS3231’s alarm triggers.
As mentioned before, the usability of the pin deep sleep capabilities of the RP2040 would
at least mean that it could utilize deep sleep more freely, whereas the M4 could in practice
only use the TimeAlarm deep sleep.
2.4.2
Design
The design of the instrument was significant for the final results, including the bat-
tery performance. One point is the balance of hardware and software in implementing a
power efficient design while still capturing meaningful data. Much of the functionality of
the device could be implemented in either hardware or software, and a hardware oriented
implementation would likely be more power efficient, and work more reliably in some cases.
For example, the issue of the board not waking in time to log a button press could be entirely
circumvented by introducing a hardware accelerator especially designed to listen for button
presses, and could then transfer the data after the event.
Another optimization that was experimented with on a circuit level, was to introduce a
transistor mounted between the board and the BNO085, with a control pin. By applying a
current to the control pin, the transistor could turn off the BNO085, with the intent of sav-
ing power. However, this introduced other problems, primarily due to the BNO085 having
a small delay upon startup, as well as the I2C connection not properly resetting between
power cycles, leading to errors when attempting to re-initialize the BNO in software.
A software approach, triggering a low power bit[4] directly in the BNO’s firmware was looked
into, but was not pursued due to it not being exposed in the BNO CircuitPython library.
Page 30 of 92
==PAGE:37==
2.4. Discussion
It is important to underline that this project is focused primarily on software, and a higher
abstraction level. This means sacrificing performance by not having to implement custom
hardware, in order to develop a working prototype faster and easier. This has also been a
reason for the hardware chosen. Generally, readily available components were selected for
the same reason.
With that being said, there exists many alternative hardware components which would
generally be as easy to implement, that may have suited the project better. For example,
the BNO085 was overly feature-rich compared to what was necessary for the project. While
the activity and stability classifiers worked well for testing, a simpler alternative would have
served better for a final implementation. For example, the BNO could be replaced with
a single-purpose accelerometer like the ADXL34315. Beyond a 3-axis accelerometer, it in-
terestingly supports activity/inactivity detection, and can send an alarm on a pin in these
cases, which could be used for detecting wear and non-wear. While this was perhaps better
than the BNO085, similar wear and non wear detection was possible using solely the tilt
switches, concluding that it is feasible to detect using only simple analog switches, and not
microcontrollers such as either the BNO085 or the ADXL343.
The trade-off of choosing a programming language and runtime also determined the
development process. There exists several programming languages and compilers designed
to program microcontrollers, including Arduino implementing C or C++ programs, or Mi-
croPython and of course CircuitPython, which is a fork of MicroPython. CircuitPython
was chosen due to its quick development process, with it generally being faster to write and
test code with, compared to lower level languages such as C or C++, which may however
offer more control over the program and its hardware interactions. The previous software
by Larsen had also been written in CircuitPython, and as such it seemed natural to con-
tinue. Another consideration when writing the software was the trade-off of preprocessing
data on the board to limit storage consumption. An example of this is normalizing the
acceleration vector, thus decreasing that value’s storage consumption by one third, but at
the cost of power consumption due to the extra processing required to compute the normal.
In the tests using the M4 board, the limiting factor was the storage space. As such, it made
sense for this implementation to sacrifice some battery power to decrease the amount of data
stored. However when using the RP2040, this relation inverted, with it using considerably
less storage. Furthermore, the storage capacity of the RP2040 was greater than that of the
M4, and as such, this implementation would consume slightly less power.
Insufficient device power-on time
Another issue discovered with deep sleep was that the device would take too long to
power on, not registering short presses of the button. It also meant that logging the duration
of the press would not be feasible, seeing as a duration counter could not be initialized the
moment the button was pressed, leading to timing inconsistencies on longer presses, and not
15https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/adxl343.pdf
Page 31 of 92
==PAGE:38==
2.5. Sub-conclusion
applicable at all on short presses. This was also an issue experienced in the supervisor’s work
on [20]. They proposed a solution in which they modified the board firmware to support
a pseudo deep sleep, with a system state similar to deep sleep, but while not resetting the
program counter, allowing for immediate resumption of the program.
2.4.3
Testing
It was chosen that this device would be worn in the pants pocket. This in part came from
a priority of keeping the device discrete, which had previously been cited as a subjectively
positive aspect [20], but also in large part due to the simplicity of carrying it. However,
multiple other locations could also have been used, for example on the wrist or even around
the neck. Some wearers in previous tests [20] noted a barrier being not being able to wear
the device if they did not have pockets in their pants. This should be considered should the
device be used by as many people as possible, and the software for detection would likely need
to be altered in order to support the different movement characteristics, and is a limitation
of this project. A major limitation of the testing, and inherently the design as well, was the
lack of test subjects. The device was only tested on one person, which greatly affected the
adaptability of the tracking. For example, my walking speed was generally considered fast,
and the activity classifier would often misclassify the activity as running instead of walking.
This was known since the start of the project, and it was considered in the decision making,
to mitigate the impact of only having a single test subject. However, it almost certainly
has lead to certain activity characteristics being overlooked, which could have resulted in a
better overall implementation of the device and its software.
2.5
Sub-conclusion
Constructing the data gathering instrument is an important first step in this thesis,
laying the foundation for further work.
Choosing the right microcontrollers and sensors
may have a significant influence on the overall performance of the system, with the power
consumption being a key metric in order to extend the duration as long as possible.
Furthermore, the importance of applying deep sleep is emphasized when analyzing the power
consumption of the instruments. A massive power consumption increase can be achieved by
utilizing low power modes as much as possible.
There is great potential for using tilt switches as sensors for tracking periods of wear and
non-wear. They consume very little power, and microcontrollers which support deep sleep
may see a significant power reduction with using these. Furthermore, the tilt switches are
extremely simple and cheap, enabling their usage in an instrument such as the one presented
in this chapter. Including an accelerometer is a significant step up in both complexity and
capabilities, allowing for better measurement of activity beyond wear and non wear, at the
cost a power-consuming component which may not support deep sleep. Lastly, using the
full IMU capabilities of the BNO085 does provide additional capabilities, namely in a more
precise measurement of activity, as well as built-in classifiers of e.g. vehicle movement. It
does however suffer from a sharp increase in power consumption.
Page 32 of 92
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
Part II - Data Processing
This chapter aims to use the data collected by the instrument in the previous part, and
process it into data which can be used for analysis with the visualization tool, as described
in Figure 1.1. The design choices of the instrument introduces the following sensors:
• The button
• Tilt switches
• Accelerometer
• Activity and stability classifier
The raw data gathered from these sensors already provide some insights in how the device is
worn. However, the main goal of this section is to process the data collected from these sen-
sors to further improve upon the value of the data collected from the instrument, extracting
low-level features as described in [14].
Specifically, this chapter aims to use the available data to accomplish the following goals:
1. Classifying periods of wear and non-wear
2. Classifying activity levels
• Non-wear
• Still wear
• Active wear
The tilt switches and accelerometer will be the primary source of measurements, supported by
button presses similar to the original One-Button Tracker indicating observations. The built-
in activity and stability classifiers of the BNO085 will be used as ground truth measurements,
due to their accuracy.
For each of these goals, different algorithms for data segmenting and classification will be
introduced and iterated upon, focusing on custom algorithms specifically designed to work
with the instrument from Part I.
Both goals can be described as classification problems, and a confusion matrix classification
will be used to compare different classifiers against a ground truth.
One consideration to keep in mind is how the data will eventually be analyzed. Minute
periods of activity are not of interest to the end user, e.g. a therapist, who will approach
the data much more generally. The data is used as a support for therapeutic sessions with
33
==PAGE:40==
3.1. Analysis
the patient trying to recall experiences, since the last session. Knowing their activity down
to the minute is not relevant, and instead overall activities are more meaningful and easier
for both patient and therapist to work with.
3.1
Analysis
3.1.1
Measuring classification success
A common approach to comparing classification algorithms is to use a confusion matrix
1. Typically, a test and a true dataset is compared, for example wear/non-wear classification
data. The relationship between each datasets’ classifications can be described by counting the
amount of true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false positives (FP), and false negatives
(FN). From this confusion matrix, metrics can be derived, describing different classification
metrics, the most common being Accuracy, Prevision, Sensitivity/Recall and F1-score. As
it is not always impossible for the test data to perfectly align with the actual data, these
become important in describing the classifier.
Crucially, this proposes multiple aspects of what the goal of the classifier actually is. Take
for instance the following scenarios:
If an activity is accidentally classified as non-wear (FN), it is more likely to be ignored by a
therapist. If an activity is accidentally classified as non-wear (FN), periods of mental
wellness may be disregarded
If non-wear is accidentally classified as an activity (FP), it will wrongly be considered a
period of mental wellness.
In the first case, aiming for a high Recall score is important, as it is affected by the amount
of FN measurements in the system:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
Likewise, a high Precision score is important for the second case, is the amount of TP affects
this score:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
The F1 score, aims to balance the two parameters, by weighing the two metrics equally:
F1 = 2 ∗Precision ∗Recall
Precision + Recall
This chapter will focus primarily on these three metrics, as they closely align with the two
proposed scenarios. Furthermore, there may be multiple different goals, each requiring a
specific metric to be prioritized.
This is ultimately a subjective goal, and for a domain
expert to decide.
1https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/confusion-matrix-machine-learning/
Page 34 of 92
==PAGE:41==
3.1. Analysis
3.1.2
Activity segmentation
An important aspect in reaching the goals presented in this chapter is to identify periods
wherein a certain activity is taking place. Take for example Figure 3.1, showing the Feather
M4 instrument being worn and classifying activities:
Figure 3.1: 08-10 dataset, datapoints before 09:00 UTC, with labeled activities. Data is
acceleration magnitude vector from accelerometer, colored by the BNO activity classifier.
While it is possible to discern the different activities, the actual classification is chaotic.
For example, the classifier classifies the individual periods in the bus fare, like stopping to
let passengers off, for traffic lights, etc. However, it is more valuable to consider the whole
bus fare as a single activity.
Another example, is the seemingly even split of classifications of running and walking peri-
ods, which should be considered as a single period of walking.
The process of segmenting data into meaningful chunks, including accelerometer data,
is known as Time Series Segmentation, and is an extensively researched topic. Change points
are often used in this context, specifying points in the time series dataset that partitions the
data, differentiating one segment from another. Determining change points is the essence of
time series segmentation, and is the goal of these algorithms.
Page 35 of 92
==PAGE:42==
3.1. Analysis
ClaSP and ClaSPy
One such example of a time series segmentation algorithm is that proposed by Schäfer et
al [34]. They use a Classification Score Profile (ClaSP) and produces time series segments by
hierarchically splitting the time series into two parts, with every split point being evaluated
using a binary classifier, picking the one with the highest accuracy. This process is executed
recursively on each consecutive partition, choosing a local optimal ClaSP, until the number
of change points is reached.
Figure 3.2: Activity data change poitns are determined by measuring the global ClaSP score
for the graph in its entirety, showing the next iteration’s ClaSP score computed on the
partition generated by the first iteration. Source: [34]
This algorithm, and many others, often require hyper-parameters, i.e. algorithm vari-
ables which determine the output of the algorithm. For the ClaSP algorithm, the window
size w is specified as the only hyper-parameter, with the performance in classifying segments
being dependent on this value. However, the paper proposes several different methodologies
of computing window sizes without needing parameters. Multiple Python libraries imple-
ments the ClaSP algorithm and auxiliary functions for determining window sizes[24] [22].
However, these both require a number of change points hyper-parameter.
This drastically decreases the usability of the algorithm, as this data would span upwards
of a month at a time, with little to no prior knowledge of how many breakpoints would be
present in the dataset.
ClaSPy is a python package developed by the same authors as ClaSP[34][10], providing an
Page 36 of 92
==PAGE:43==
3.1. Analysis
implementation built upon ClaSP, specifically as a parameter-less model, not requiring the
number of change points parameter. This would in practice allow for it to be used "plug-
and-play", without the need of a domain expert. The Python library supports both uni- and
multivariate time series segmentation.
3.1.3
Classifying activity from acceleration
The raw accelerometer data can be processed in order to determine whether or not an
activity has taken place. Accelerometer data can be described as fluctuations due to the
instrument being moved, and can be compared to amplitudes with positive and negative
peaks. Measuring the standard deviations of these peak to peak amplitudes [31] explains
how big of a movement has occurred within an epoch.
Figure 3.3: Mean and standard deviation σ for instrument laying on a surface, being worn
while still, and being worn while walking sensor readings, respectively
Figure 3.3 demonstrates how standard deviation may be used to determine activity
levels. The example is based off three tests. One where an instrument was laid on a table,
one with the device in a pant pocket while standing, and one with the device in a pocket
while walking. Computing and comparing the standard deviation for each scenario, it seems
that periods with high activity correlates with a high standard deviation.
One factor to consider is the components of the acceleration vector, whether to compute the
standard deviation based off of the acceleration vector magnitude, or the individual x-,y-
and z-components. Furthermore, the sampling window should be considered, defining the
data into segments. This is especially important in transition periods, e.g. between still and
active wear.
Page 37 of 92
==PAGE:44==
3.2. Methodology
3.2
Methodology
3.2.1
Tools
The data processing of this project was done on two platforms. The first was Python
projects in the PyCharm IDE. With both instrument prototypes being built on CircuitPython,
it was a natural extension to use Python for data processing, too. Furthermore, the Python
programming language has strong support for data science and processing, especially in the
many libraries built around this. As such, libraries like pandas, scikit-learn and numpy
were used heavily throughout the data processing phase, to increase efficiency while devel-
oping.
The second platform was ObservableHQ, specifically Notebooks, and its built-in libraries,
Plot and D3. In some aspects, this functions similarly to the Jupyter Notebook IDE, except
Observable uses JavaScript. This was introduced by the project supervisor, and had among
other been used to generate patient visualization tools in [20] and [13]. Observable is an on-
line document editor combining cells containing markdown, JavaScript code, or UI elements.
It was chosen in large part due to its integration of the Observable Plot library, which made
it extremely useful when visualizing test results, and to it excelling at data exploration, e.g.
by quickly plotting data gathered during testing, and being able to easily and visually view
the impact of changing parameters on the data. It is also the primary source of the plots
generated throughout the project.
This platform did however also have drawbacks. With it being an online editor, it suffered
performance issues when processing large datasets. This was another reason for the Python
scripts run locally to do the main processing workload, with Observable primarily used for
visualizing data from a .json or .csv file. Additionally, JavaScript lacks many of the same
libraries as is found in Python, which further decreased productivity for most data process-
ing tasks.
As such, a workflow was implemented where work was cycled between data being gathered
from the instruments, then being imported to the computer. From there, the data would
be processed by a python script. Firstly, the data was standardized for ease of use across
different test configurations. As seen in Table 2.2, multiple different tests were conducted
with various configurations. Therefore, it was necessary to standardize the data as best as
possible, to make it easier to run tests on multiple configurations afterwards. This meant
converting the timestamp, which was either a string or a UNIX epoch timestamp, to a
Python datetime object, converting numeric representations of boolean values, i.e. 0/1 to
False/True, and computing an acceleration magnitude vector. In the tests where the entire
activity classification tuple was included, this would have to be parsed into a Python dict.
A test would then be run on one or multiple datasets, generating some resulting data,
which would be written to either .csv or .json files. From there, that resulting data would
be uploaded to Observable, where it would be visualized, explored and manipulated.
Page 38 of 92
==PAGE:45==
3.2. Methodology
3.2.2
Segmenting data
The ClaSPy library was tested on the data sets collected by the Feather M4 device in Table
2.2, applying the multivariate classifier on each component of the acceleration vector, and the
univariate classifier on the acceleration vector magnitude. The true change points for each
data set were labeled by hand and focusing on overall, not-minute activities, to compare
against the results of the ClaSPy models. The results are shown in Appendix B.1. The
RP2040 dataset was excluded as it would not work well with the index-based classifiers, and
when tested on the 11-01 dataset, no change points were found regardless. Additionally, it
was tested against the 08-10 dataset from Figure 3.1, as the smaller data size made it easier
to distinguish the different activities.
(a) univariate
(b) multivariate
Figure 3.4: Dataset 08-10, with data earlier than 11:00 UTC. Comparing the ClaSPy al-
gorithm’s segments classification against labeled segments, and showing the ClaSP score.
Univariate uses the acceleration vector magnitude
In every test except the 25-11 dataset, the multivariate classifier generated more change
points and performed better than the univariate classifier. The 25-11 dataset was the largest
(n = 108178), and also the dataset with the highest amount of detected change points
(nunivariate = 14), (nmultivariate = 13). The dataset included roughly seven hours of non-wear,
lying on a table while the test person slept. This resulted in the majority of the dataset
being labeled on-table, and little to no changes in acceleration. As seen in Figure 3.5, in
both the univariate and multivariate classification, the change points generated are severely
misclassified, with a large amount of change points designated on the section on the dataset
in which there is no activity, due to the instrument not being worn.
Page 39 of 92
==PAGE:46==
3.2. Methodology
(a) univariate
(b) multivariate
Figure 3.5: 25-11 dataset
It should be mentioned that some change points are indeed placed correctly, for example
around the [90000..100000] index marks. The univariate algorithm does also correctly detect
the change point once the device begins to be worn, around the 50000 index. Regardless,
this approach did not perform desirably.
Segmentation using tilt switches
One idea was to define segments based off of the tilt switch readings. Intuitively, it
would make sense that there would not be any changes in the tilt switches during periods of
non-wear, where the device would not move. Furthermore, it would be an extremely simple
approach to defining segments.
The idea was conceived while still using the Feather M4 based instrument, meaning that
deep sleep was limited, and the device was logging at a set interval. During post-processing
of the data, a simple algorithm was implemented, iterating over the data, and marking tilt
switch changes. This algorithm introduced some considerations:
x
y
x ∨y
x ∧y
x∨y
x∧y
(OR)
(AND)
(XOR)
(XNOR)
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
Table 3.1: Truth table for tilt switch configurations and comparison methods
Another consideration was tracking state changes, preventing a scenario where several
successive readings of the same tilt direction would register as multiple segments.
These consideration can be described as follows:
First, a comparison is defined as one of the following logical operations:
Compare(A, B) = A ∨B, A ∧B, A ⊕B, A ⊙B
(3.1)
Page 40 of 92
==PAGE:47==
3.2. Methodology
And a change as two elements not being equal
Change(A, B) = A ̸= B
(3.2)
Given a set of all measurements M, and a set of previous measurements P, an element of
either is defined as m and p, respectively. A tilt switch reading for a measurement is mx
and my, and the previous reading is px and pm. The two approaches can then be defined as
follows:
Compare(Change(mx, px), Change(my, py))
Change(Compare(mx, my), Compare(px, py))
(3.3)
There are many other approaches, but the intuition of the above approaches are as follows:
One can individually check if each sensor detected a change, and then compare those changes,
or they can compare both sensors in a measurement, and consider them as a single record.
Then, the current record is compared to the previous record.
In order to pick a meaningful approach, a testing framework was set up, comparing different
configurations’ ability to segment the data, based off the aforementioned logic. The test
would iterate over all the datasets of the initial instrument. For each row in each dataset,
change points would be labeled as points where one row’s stability classification was dif-
ferent from the previous row’s classification, and their indices stored. Then, for each row,
the operations specified in equation 3.3 would be applied. This generated a list of change
points for each combination of Change and Compare.
Once a "true" list of change points, and a set of "test" change points had been generated,
each combination was tested for each dataset. A Jaccard Index2 was computed for each test,
testing its similarity to the true list. The best performing configuration for each 8 datasets
was counted towards the total score, with the results presented in Table 3.2
OR
XOR
AND
XNOR
Compare (Change)
0
0
0
0
Change (Compare)
0
0
0
8
Table 3.2: Highest scoring Comparison and Change tests, of 8 datasets
It became immediately clear that the configuration performed the best, scoring the
highest Jaccard index for each of the 8 tests.
Change(mx ⊙my, px ⊙py)
This would compare the x- and y-components of each
However, even the best performing configuration was far from perfect. Generally, every
configuration for this algorithm generated far more change points than both the python
2https://medium.com/@mayurdhvajsinhjadeja/jaccard-similarity-34e2c15fb524
Page 41 of 92
==PAGE:48==
3.2. Methodology
libraries and the "true" change points generated by the stability classifier. A goal of this
component is to create a better segmentation when combined with a classification procedure.
3.2.3
Determining periods of wear and non-wear
Having tested approaches for segmenting data, the data processing could now be ex-
tended to include actual classification of wear and non-wear.
3.2.4
Accelerometer
As described in the analysis, a simple classifier might be implemented by calculating the
standard deviation of the accelerometer vector.
This implementation used a rolling 10-
sample window, looking backwards from every point, calculating the standard deviation off
the acceleration vector magnitude for each measurement in that window. An initial test
was performed, comparing this classifier to the built-in activity and stability classifiers of
the BNO085 sensor. The instrument was tested in six scenarios, lasting approximately two
minutes each:
• Laying on a table
• Being held outwards from the body in chest height
• In a pant pocket, standing up
• In a pant pocket, sitting down
• In a pant pocket, walking
• Laying on a table
Afterwards, each segment were labeled by hand, with the only true non-wear period being
the scenarios where the device was laying on the table.
A non-wear activity threshold was set at 0.05m/s2. This was chosen as the lowest standard
deviation which would correctly classify the true non-wear periods.
The classifiers were applied to the test data set, and their classification scores were computed
in Figure 3.6.
Page 42 of 92
==PAGE:49==
3.2. Methodology
Figure 3.6: Different classifiers on minute dataset
While the accelerometer classifier correctly classified the true non-wear periods, it also
wrongly classified periods of wearing the device while sitting as non-wear periods.
This
indicated a higher rate of false negatives (FN) but a lower rate of false positives (FP), which
corresponded with the high precision, but low sensitivity/recall score. These results served
as a baseline to measure improvements against.
The sample window for this test was based on indices. This made sense in this specific
test, where the sample rate was a constant 2Hz. However, only considering indices wouldn’t
necessarily reveal anything about the time passed. For example, with a drastically slowed
sample rate, say 1 sample per hour, two adjacent samples, based on index, could mean
two drastically different actions in real life. Likewise, introducing dynamic sample rates
could also negatively affect the classification for the same reasons. This would have to be
considered for more complex tests and would become further apparent in the later datasets
using deep sleep.
The initial classifier was bad at detecting transitions from one state to another, and so
the sample window was changed to a centered window on a measurement, with a 5 sam-
ple look-back and look-ahead. Comparing the two confusion matrices in Figure 3.6 and
Appendix B.1, this change improved every metric. Further sample window sizes, ranging
from 2-20 measurements were tested, and a trend could be observed in Appendix B.2. The
precision decreased inversely to the window size, with every other metric approaching an
equilibrium around windows of a total size of 10-12, i.e. a center with a five second look-
ahead and look-back window.
The Accuracy, Sensitivity/Recall and F1 score could all be improved by modifying the ac-
celerometer sensor to classify based on the entire acceleration vector instead of the vector
magnitude, as can be seen in Appendix B.3, although at the cost of precision. With this
implementation, the standard deviation of the window would be applied to the x-y-z- compo-
Page 43 of 92
==PAGE:50==
3.2. Methodology
nent of the acceleration vector. If any component exceeded the threshold, that measurement
would be classified as wear, increasing the overall sensitivity of the algorithm. This would
also explain a higher chance of classifying measurements as activity, i.e. false positives, ex-
plaining the decrease in precision.
Looking at the classification scores, the accelerometer classifier interestingly outper-
formed the built-in activity classifier of the BNO085, the only exception being a 0.4% higher
precision score when comparing the initial accelerometer implementation to the built-in ac-
tivity classifier. This is especially interesting considering that they are both based off of the
BNO085’s accelerometer.
However, even with the improvements to the accelerometer based classifier, it becomes evi-
dent from the confusion matrix metrics in every test that the stability classifier outperforms
all the other classification approaches on the small dataset.
Nonetheless, as mentioned in the beginning of the chapter, due to the interest of clas-
sifying non-wear on a macro scale, a worse classifier can be accepted if their performance
on larger datasets is good enough. The three variants of the accelerometer classifier were
applied to a dataset with a longer non-wear period of around 1.5 hours, and two 10 minute
periods of walking surrounding it. The same confusion matrix derivatives were computed in
Appendix B.4. Every configuration scored much higher in every metric in this test, showing
an example with good results.
3.2.5
Tilt switches
Having installed tilt switches on the instruments, the goal was to use these to detect
periods of wear and non-wear.
Initially, the same approach devised in the accelerometer classifiers were adapted to fit
the tilt switch classification algorithm. A centered window with a five sample look-back
and look-ahead.
However, instead of using the accelerometer, a classification would be
determined based on whether the tilt switches within that sample window contained both a
True and a False reading. This would indicate that there had been a movement along that
axis during the sample window, and was classified as wear.
The original tests presented in the accelerator classifier were extended to include the
tilt switch classifier, with the results shown in figures 3.7a and3.7b. This tilt switch classifier
only performed slightly better than the built-in activity classifier, and was outperformed by
the accelerator classifiers.
Page 44 of 92
==PAGE:51==
3.2. Methodology
(a) Minute dataset
(b) Long dataset
Figure 3.7: Comparing confusion matrix metrics for different accelerometer classifiers and
tilt switches
A different approach was instead considered, using the time span between tilt switch
state changes to define segments instead of a sliding window. A threshold would be defined,
and the dataset scanned for changes in tilt switch states. If the time between a tilt switch
change was above the threshold, it would be classified as non-wear. In order to determine this
threshold, multiple thresholds were tested spanning 0 to 60 seconds in the minute dataset,
and 0 to 100 seconds in the longer dataset, as shown in Appendix B.5 and B.6.
These
indicated a good threshold of 8 seconds or longer between a tilt switch state change to count
as non-wear for the minute dataset, and around 70 seconds or longer to count as non-wear
for the longer dataset. This approach was in many ways similar to the consecutive zeros
algorithms presented in the Instrument chapter.
This tilt switch classifier performed very well on the larger datasets, stabilizing around a
score of above 97% on every metric. However, as with the accelerometer classifier, this test
was ideal in that the non-wear period was very well-defined, making it easier to classify
Page 45 of 92
==PAGE:52==
3.2. Methodology
correctly.
3.2.6
Comparison on larger datasets
The accelerometer and tilt switch classifiers from the initial tests were tested on larger
datasets, with the BNO stability classifier representing true wear, specifically whether the
stability classification was not "On Table".
Accelerometer classifier
The accelerometer classifier was easily adaptable to the larger datasets, as the threshold
for determining non-wear σ ≤0.05m/s2 was assumed to be agnostic of the dataset, relying
only on the behavior of the device’s accelerometer itself.
Tilt switch classifier
With the increase in dataset size, a longer threshold would be necessary for the tilt switch
classifier.
First, the tilt switch classifier was tested on the available large datasets (datasets 18-01 and
28-01 were not available yet). The test ran with a classification window duration of 0 seconds
up to 1000 seconds. Afterwards, the confusion matrix metrics scores were plotted along the
y-axis, and the duration threshold span along the x-axis, as seen in Figure 3.8
Figure 3.8: Matrix metrics of tilt switch classifier, on large datasets. The x-axis scales from
0-1000, for each duration tested in seconds
These tests provided varied results, depending on how well-defined the periods of wear
and non-wear were in the different datasets in Appendix B.7. However, the general trend
Page 46 of 92
==PAGE:53==
3.2. Methodology
among all datasets was that the every metric except precision performed better on longer
duration windows. Many of the dataset scores seemed to still increase beyond the 1000
second threshold, which prompted for testing on larger durations
The test was redone, this time including the 18-01 dataset, and extending the classification
window durations from [0s..1000s] to [0s..3600s]. The same metrics were computed, and
for each metric, the highest score, along with the threshold which generated that score, was
saved in Table 3.3
Metric
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Score
0.819
0.978
0.905
0.819
Duration
3028
0
3350
3028
Table 3.3: The best duration for each metric, measured as average across all datasets using
the tilt switch classifier
This emphasized the difficulty in determining a "one size fits all" duration for the tilt
switch classifier. Accuracy, Recall and F1 Score scored highly on large window durations.
Oppositely, the precision was highest with a very short classification window. As with the
other tests, a domain expert would have to base a window duration off of the specific needs
of their application domain.
Combined classifier
To further increase the classification performance, a new approach was attempted where
the accelerometer and tilt switch classifiers were combined. The sample windows would be
segmented using the tilt switch classifier, but the activity within that window would be
calculated using the accelerometer classifier, measuring standard deviation on each x-y-z-
acceleration vector component.
This introduced a problem unique to this classifier. Some segments defined by the tilt switch
classifier contained only a single measurement. This in turn crashed the classification step,
due to a standard variation not being applicable on datasets of this size.
The solution to this was to merge the single-value segment with a neighboring segment. A few
approaches to this were possible. The first and easiest was to evaluate the newly generated
segment, checking if it had length 1. If it did, it would be appended to the previous segment,
associating and classifying that measurement as its previous chunk. This did however come
with an edge-case, namely if the first segment was of length 1, although this did not appear in
practice during testing. The other approach was slightly more sophisticated, implementing
a look-forward operator to forward-associate the segment. This would require storing the
current segment as the next iteration’s segment, in which further measurements would be
appended to. Similarly to the backwards-associating merger, this presented an edge case if
the last measurement was of length 1, which also did not appear during testing.
Another solution entirely was to simply discard single segments as outliers. This was in
line with the overall goals of not focusing on minute details, but was not considered during
Page 47 of 92
==PAGE:54==
3.2. Methodology
testing.
The backwards associating merge operator was implemented due to its simpler approach.
Additional considerations for the RP2040 instrument data
The combined classifier approach introduced another challenge, specifically for the RP2040
instrument data, which implemented periods of deep-sleep, as well as cool-down periods after
sampling. The nature of the deep sleep data meant that windows could span hours during
periods of non-wear, with only a few samples measured in the beginning of that period. Take
for example a scenario where the patient places the device somewhere, picking it up after
multiple hours. A period would be triggered due to the device moving, as it is being placed
down. This triggers an initial sample showing activity. However, the instrument then goes
into deep sleep, only waking when the device is picked up again several hours later. The
pure acceleration classifier would consider only the acceleration part in the beginning, and
would classify the entire segment as wear, while the pure tilt switch classifier would classify
it as non-wear.
The duration threshold from the tilt switch classifier was reintroduced, taking precedence
over the accelerometer classifier, meaning that long periods of no activity change would
automatically be classified as non-wear, regardless of the accelerometer measurement at the
beginning of that segment.
3.2.7
Determining activity levels
Once a wear and non-wear classification had been accomplished, the task of determining
wear was expanded to include activity levels, similar to the BNO085 stability classifier, i.e.
Still during non-wear, Stable, while being worn while standing still or sitting down, and
Active for any activity level above that.
Overall, much of the code from the previous tests could be reused, as only configurations
to the classification criteria had to be modified. This time, the entire stability classification
would be used, instead of wether the activity was On Table or not.
Accelerometer classifier
The accelerometer classifier using the centered window considering each acceleration vector
component would be used during testing. Figure 3.3 was referenced to determine thresholds
for classifying activity. It showed a clear difference in standard deviation while walking and
while stable, being worn on the body. Thus, the threshold was defined to be the middle
of the standard deviations of the two scenarios, i.e. (σ = 2.49). This led to the following
classifier:
classification(window) =





On Table
if σsegment ≤0.05m/s2
Stable
if 0.05m/s2 < σsegment < 2.49m/s2
In Motion
otherwise
Page 48 of 92
==PAGE:55==
3.2. Methodology
The combined tilt switch/accelerometer classifier use the same thresholds, albeit with its
window computed from the tilt switch states.
Tilt switch classifier
An interesting idea was conceptualized. Instead of computing the classification from an
accelerometer, the frequency of tilt switch changes would instead be analyzed. The thought
behind this was that the more movement exerted by the person wearing the instrument, the
more it would move, triggering the tilt switches. The duration of the windows generated by
looking at tilt switch state changes could then be used to classify those windows’ activity.
As with the accelerometer classifier, the duration threshold for On Table had been computed
to be 3208 seconds. A new threshold for distinguishing Stable from In Motion was limited
due to the resolution of the timestamps from the readings. Seeing as the overall approach
had been to not base the tests off of minute readings in the sub-second sample rate range,
the timestamps were precise to the second only.
A test was performed, comparing the
classification results using a lower threshold of [0..9] seconds for the window size for classifying
movement. Each classification score was averaged for every duration, across all datasets. Test
datasets were divided into instrument M4 and RP2040 prototypes, i.e. whether or not the
data collection was continuous or using deep sleep and compared in Table 3.4.
Duration
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
0
0.705
0.454
0.388
0.407
1
0.732
0.522
0.660
0.524
2
0.744
0.552
0.658
0.559
3
0.751
0.573
0.659
0.579
4
0.753
0.585
0.657
0.590
5
0.755
0.596
0.658
0.599
6
0.754
0.604
0.656
0.604
7
0.753
0.608
0.653
0.606
8
0.753
0.611
0.652
0.608
9
0.752
0.615
0.651
0.611
Duration
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
0
0
0.000
0.000
0.000
1
0.052
0.075
0.216
0.098
2
0.056
0.078
0.216
0.104
3
0.056
0.078
0.216
0.104
4
0.056
0.078
0.216
0.104
5
0.056
0.078
0.216
0.104
6
0.072
0.098
0.215
0.121
7
0.075
0.102
0.214
0.124
8
0.078
0.104
0.212
0.128
9
0.085
0.115
0.212
0.133
Table 3.4: Comparison of average metrics for each duration [0..9] for m4 (left) and rp2040
(right) datasets.
It immediately became clear that this approach was heavily dependent on a fast sample
rate in order to classify well. Observing the second instrument prototype (RP2040) datasets,
which contains deep sleep periods, these score significantly lower than those implementing a
continuous sample rate.
The M4 datasets did fare better. These results did not yield high scores in either metric,
although they also seemingly didn’t skew towards either metric.
Both datasets seemed to trend towards a higher duration threshold yielding a higher score
overall, so the test durations were extended to test [0..99]. Finally, the duration threshold
with the best performance in precision, recall and F1 score was determined in Table 3.5:
Page 49 of 92
==PAGE:56==
3.2. Methodology
Metric
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Score
0.755
0.617
0.660
0.611
Duration
5
10
1
10
Metric
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Score
0.094
0.130
0.216
0.141
Duration
14
14
2
14
Table 3.5: Durations and scores for the best performing metric, for each instrument
This seems to further support the assumption that short durations of activity windows
are likely to mean more physical movement of the instrument. From these tests, one possible
tilt switch classifier was proposed as simply observing if the duration of a activity duration
window was less than, or equal to 10 seconds, then classifying it as In Motion, leading to a
final classification expression for the tilt switch classifier:
classification(window) =





On Table
if ∆window ≤10s
Stable
if 10s < ∆window < 3208s
In Motion
otherwise
However, this works directly against the design of the second instrument prototype, which
specifically emphasizes on small bursts of samples, with long periods of deep sleep in between.
This proved detrimental to the tilt switch approach for determining activities other than
wear/non-wear.
3.2.8
Clustering Classification Data
The results of the classification algorithms generally proved difficult to read at a glance.
This was due to how individual, small sections of a specific movement could influence the
overall structure of an activity. Take for example the dataset in Figure 3.1. The period in
which the subject rides the bus consists as periods of In-Vehicle, Still and a few readings
of Unknown. Ideally, this should be registered as one single period.
Therefore, experiments were done, aiming to cluster the classification data of the clas-
sifiers developed earlier. The mixed accelerometer and tilt switch classifier was used as a
baseline for generating classifications to apply a clustering algorithm on. Firstly, the mixed
classifier is applied to the 08-10 dataset, as a baseline.
The time segments from the tilt witch switches was considered and a sliding window was
applied, looking at neighboring time segments. A weighted majority vote was then applied
on the window, counting occurrences of each classification within that window’s time seg-
ments. A weighted majority vote was chosen over a standard majority vote, as it would bias
towards large continuous samples of an identical category. This meant that small deviations
generally would be re-classified as its surrounding activities.
This clustering was applied, and visualized using ObservableHQ’s plotting tools. Addition-
ally, a slider was introduced to determine the sampling window width, allowing for better
parameter tweaking. This approach was subjective, with no window length necessarily be-
ing better than others. However, a short sample window, e.g. w = 4 seemed to work well,
Page 50 of 92
==PAGE:57==
3.2. Methodology
eliminating small discrepancies while emphasizing on large, similar classifications, as can be
seen in Figure 3.9, comparing the dataset before and after clustering.
(a) Before clustering
(b) After clustering, cluster window size = 4
Figure 3.9: Stability classification before and after clustering using the mixed classifier, on
the 08-10 dataset
Notably, there seems to be small sections classified as Stable within the walking period
from around 8:15 to 8:45 which were smoothed out using the clusters. Furthermore, a spike
in measurements around 7:52 was classified as stable. The actual choice of the clustering
and its sample window size would be another decision of a domain admin, with it perhaps
being introduces as a real-time filter to apply on the data when needed, to better define
these periods.
RP2040 Data
The data collected by the RP2040 instrument was different in nature, in that deep
sleep periods would have to be interpolated with the data gathered for that period. This
meant that both periods of deep sleep, as well as the cool-down period introduced, would
lead to data gaps, which would have to be interpolated with the samples which were available.
An example could be the 18-01 dataset, in which two rounds of five measurements are
sampled, with the instrument sleeping for a minute in between. Here, the data should be
presented as lists of object, with a start and end timestamp, and a classification for that
period. This is in contrast to the continuously sampled data from the M4 instrument, in
which every timestamp contains a accelerometer, tilt switch and classification property. This
change in data structure also means that the RP2040 data cannot properly be plotted as a
line showing the accelerometer values, which had otherwise been the standard for most of
the other dataset visualizations. This did however present a simpler view, which would be
utilized in the visualization tool.
Page 51 of 92
==PAGE:58==
3.3. Results
3.3
Results
Firstly, the concept of using confusion matrices and its derived metrics for comparing
classifications was introduced. Then, the consequences of wrongly classifying wear and non-
wear were emphasized and related to said metrics.
The problem of classifying activity was divided into smaller problems, starting with parti-
tioning data into meaningful segments, separated by change points. A state-of-the-art time
series segmenting algorithm, CLaSPy, was analyzed and tested, but did not yield satisfiable
results, specifically in the lack of change points generated.
A more specialized time segmentation algorithm was introduced, which specifically utilized
the tilt switches included on both instrument prototypes. This allowed for time segments to
be defined as periods in between state changes of the tilt switches in the x- and y-axes.
Multiple configurations were explored comparing changes between the x- and y-axes, as well
as comparing current to previous tilt switch values was tested and compared on existing
data, evaluating each configuration’s similarity to the true segments of a labeled dataset.
The configuration Change(mx ⊙my, px ⊙py) scored the best.
Wear/non-wear classification
The actual classification capabilities were initially implemented as classifying wear and
non-wear. Three classifiers were introduced, an acceleration-based classifier, a tilt switch
based classifier, and a combined classifier. These classifiers were first tested on a minute
dataset, where several labeled activities were consecutively executed for two minutes each.
Another dataset was longer, and consisted of two periods of walking, with a labeled non-wear
period in between. This was considered an "easy" classification problem, as the different
segments were long and well-defined. The different configurations were tested against each
other and the built-in classifiers of the M4 instrument prototype, as can be seen in Figure
3.7a and 3.7b. Overall, every classifier scored better in every metric on the longer dataset,
with slight exceptions to precision. Furthermore, the final iteration of the accelerometer
classifier performed the best, beaten only by the built-in stability classifier. The tilt switch
only classifier, along with the built-in activity classifier, performed the worst in general, and
the tilt switch classifier was especially outperformed on the longer dataset.
The datasets were extended to include all datasets in Figure 2.2 except 28-01. Firstly, tests
were conducted on the tilt switch classifier to determine a good sample threshold, which
was found to be gaps between tilt switch changes larger than 3208s, as seen in Table 3.3.
This yielded the highest metrics on average, although this threshold was dependent on the
datasets it was sampled on.
Furthermore, a new classifier was introduced, combining the time segment generation of the
tilt switch classifier, with the actual classifier from the accelerometer classifier.
The classifiers were applied on both continuously sampled (Feather M4 instrument) data,
Page 52 of 92
==PAGE:59==
3.3. Results
and data with gaps due to deep sleep (RP2040). For each classifier, the average classification
scores were computed, and the highest average score was noted, as seen in Tables 3.6 and
3.7.
Classifier
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Average
Accelerometer classifier
0.780
0.941
0.680
0.775
0.794
Tilt switch classifier
0.835
0.831
0.906
0.862
0.859
Combined classifier
0.800
0.813
0.953
0.858
0.856
Table 3.6: Comparison of the best overall performing wear/non-wear classification scores of
the three classifiers on continuously sampled (M4 instrument) data.
Classifier
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Average
Accelerometer classifier
0.838
1.000
0.838
0.911
0.897
Tilt switch classifier
0.756
1.000
0.756
0.856
0.842
Combined classifier
0.853
1.000
0.853
0.916
0.905
Table 3.7: Comparison of the best overall performing wear/non-wear classification scores of
the three classifiers on continuously sampled (RP2040 instrument) data.
All three classifiers performed well in detecting wear and non-wear on both M4 and
RP2040 dataset. The accelerometer classifier underperformed slightly, with the tilt switch
and combined classifiers performing similarly. On the RP2040 datasets, the tilt switches
performed slightly worse, with the combined classifier performing best. The perfect preci-
sion score indicated zero false positives, which might be a sign that the classifier might be
overfitting, or that there are an insignificant amount of registered periods of wear in the
dataset, i.e. the dataset is imbalanced.
Classifying activity
Finally, the wear/non-wear classifiers were further extended to classify activity levels
of Stable and In Motion, specifically on the combined classifier, which was the main focus
onward, as it showed promising scores with larger flexibility than its competitors. The fol-
lowing describes the functionality of this classification algorithm:
Given a time segment defined as the period between changes in the tilt switches, as imple-
mented in the segmenting section, the duration of that segment is first examined. If this
duration is longer than a threshold of 3208s, it is automatically classified as non-wear. If the
duration is smaller than this, an accelerometer classification is instead applied, computing
the standard deviation σ of each x- y- and z-component of the acceleration vector of each
observation in the segment. A decision tree is used based on two thresholds, determining
whether to classify the observation as On Table, Stable, or In Motion. σsegment ≤0.05m/s2
Page 53 of 92
==PAGE:60==
3.3. Results
was found as a viable threshold for On Table, and 0.05m/s2 < σsegment < 2.49m/s2 as the
threshold for classifying Stable. The pseudocode classification is shown:
Algorithm 1 Algorithm for determining a classification based on the input sample segment.
The classification is applied to every element in the segment, which is then returned.
Require: A0 . . . AN
Require: σOnTable ←0.05m/s2
Require: σStable ←2.49m/s2
Require: ∆OnTable ←3208s
Ensure: A classification based off the input segment
function ClassifySegment(A[ ])
classification ←null
if seconds(timestamp(A0)) −seconds(timestamp(Alength(A)−1)) >= ∆OnTable then
classification ←On Table
break
end if
for acc in [accx, accy, accz] do
σsegment = standard_deviation(filter(A, acc))
if σwindow ≤σOnTable then
classification ←On Table
break
end if
if σOnTable < σsegment < σStable then
classification ←Stable
break
end if
classification ←In Motion
break
end for
for i ←0 to length(A) do
classification(Ai) ←classification
end for
return A
end function
A main classifying algorithm was implemented, using the mixed classifier. Using the
tilt switches to generate data segments, the ClassifySegment method is applied to each
segment, before the entire segment is either appended to the global list of segments, or is
merged with the previous segment if its length is 1, such that a standard deviation may be
calculated.
Page 54 of 92
==PAGE:61==
3.3. Results
Algorithm 2 Main classification algorithm used the mixed-classifier approach. Time seg-
ments are generated based on tilt switch changes, and a classifier is applied. Single observa-
tion segments are merged to ensure proper classification.
Require: A0 . . . AN
Ensure: Segments Time segments
function Classify(A[ ])
prev_x ←tiltx(A0)
prev_y ←tilty(A0)
segment ←[first_row]
segments ←[]
for i ←1 to length(A) do
if tiltx(Ai) ⊙prevx ∨tilty(Ai) ⊙prevy then
if length(segment) > 1 then
segment ←ClassifySegment(segment)
concatenate(segments, segment)
else
previous_segment ←segments[length(segments) −1]
concatenate(prevous_segment, segment0)
previous_segment ←ClassifySegment(previous_segment)
end if
prev_x ←tiltx(Ai)
prev_y ←tilty(Ai)
segment ←[]
end if
concatenate(segment, Ai)
end for
if length(segment) > 1 then
segment ←ClassifySegment(segment)
concatenate(segments, segment)
else
previous_segment ←segments[length(segments) −1]
concatenate(prevous_segment, segment0)
previous_segment ←ClassifySegment(previous_segment)
end if
return segments
end function
The three classifiers were tested on Feather M4 instrument data and compared in Table 3.8.
Page 55 of 92
==PAGE:62==
3.4. Discussion
Classifier
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Average
Accelerometer classifier
0.905
0.849
0.866
0.849
0.867
Tilt switch classifier
0.722
0.596
0.485
0.507
0.578
Combined classifier
0.906
0.874
0.866
0.857
0.876
Table 3.8: Comparison of the best overall performing activity classification scores of the
three on classifiers on continuously sampled (M4 instrument) data.
The accelerometer and combined classifier performed very similarly, and outperformed
the tilt-switch classifier, with the combined classifier performing slightly better.
For the RP2040 data however, the classification performances were poor, as can be seen with
the same classifiers in Table 3.9
Classifier
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Average
Accelerometer classifier
0.120
0.104
0.241
0.145
0.153
Tilt switch classifier
0.307
0.266
0.160
0.199
0.233
Combined classifier
0.070
0.129
0.202
0.157
0.140
Table 3.9: Comparison of the best overall performing activity classification scores of the
three on classifiers on continuously sampled (M4 instrument) data.
This was in large part due to the classification algorithms being difficult to score on this
data, as it was not continuously sampled. This was a shortcoming which would need to be
worked on for more reliable and better classification on this type of data.
Lastly, a smaller addition was smoothing out classified data by interpolating data based
on a majority vote cluster function, applied to a sliding window n = 4 to appear more
cohesive to an end user. Additionally, The data output from the RP2040 tests were modified,
to contain a period start and end date, and a classification.
3.4
Discussion
The data processing chapter was wide in scope, especially since due to the amount
variables in approaches, configurations, tests etc. This introduced many challenges and also
meant having to limit the scope to be able to deliver results.
3.4.1
Difficulties acquiring and processing data
Many aspects made the process of data difficult.
One was the frequency in which
datasets were made, which was generally limited, especially when exploring new parame-
ters. First, acquiring data was a process usually spanning one or several days. While the
Page 56 of 92
==PAGE:63==
3.4. Discussion
instrument was worn, it was naturally not possible to use for anything else, slowing down the
process of generating datasets. Furthermore, processing the data, analyzing it, potentially
comparing it to the other datasets, and then determining or trying out other parameters or
metrics to test, meant that it could easily take multiple days in between wearing the instru-
ment. This was further increased by the time it would take to acquire hardware components
and assembling the physical instrument. Specifically, the RP2040 instrument was not fully
implemented until late in the project.
3.4.2
Testing instrument parameters
An important part of the data processing aspect was testing the data collected by the
device, to try and adjust the parameters configured on the device to collect data.
For
example, how many samples should be logged once the device awoke? Hold long could the
cool-down period last? Furthermore, it would also be used to test classification algorithms
against the built-in classifiers of the BNO085.
Much of the initial testing was based around the Feather M4 instrument. Since it didn’t
support deep sleep on tilt switches, it was instead configured to log data at a set time interval.
Sleep configurations were then simulated based off the accelerometer or tilt switch readings.
For this reason, a lot of the early data sets are sampled at a very high frequency of once per
second or faster, see Table 2.2. This is in order to be able to capture distinct actions that
could have been used to trigger an alarm, allowing for more accurate simulations. Simulated
configurations were used heavily during the testing phase with the Feather M4, as it al-
lowed for easy comparison of different configurations using the same data. Alternatively, one
would have had to use multiple instruments at the same time, configured with a specific set
of parameters, or repeating the same test multiple times as identically as possible. Neither
of these were feasible due to the scope and resources available to the project. Furthermore,
the sampling periods overall are centered among, ideally, multiple week periods, making test
repeats challenging.
An example of such a simulation was simulating deep-sleep using the M4 instrument, which
did not properly support sleeping between tilt switch activity. In this case, fake deep-sleep
periods were introduced based off reading the tilt switch values sampled, "waking up", when
these changed. While this makes the tilt switch state dependent on the time, and not the
other way around, as would have been the case with a proper deep sleep alarm trigger, the
fast sample rate meant that this difference was insignificant in practice. Implementing this
with a tilt switch classifier required two parameters to be controlled, a cool-down period used
for saving power, as well as a sample window period. This would determine the duration
between tilt switch state changes required to classify that segment as wear or non-wear.
To simulate this, after a state change had been registered, the next n samples would be
discarded, as these would not be sensed by the actual implementation, due to its deep-sleep
cool-down period.
A matrix of these parameters applied on the 25-11, 02-12 and 03-12
datasets, and its corresponding classification rate could then be plotted as seen in Appendix
B.9. In this case, the F1-score metric is used, and the classifier, but the actual metric to
Page 57 of 92
==PAGE:64==
3.4. Discussion
measure would be determined by a domain expert. It becomes evident from this, that there
is a correlation between the cool-down period, and the classification window duration, in
that its score drops significantly when the cool-down period becomes equals to or greater
than the window duration. This makes sense, in that in this case, the classifier would always
count the period as non-wear, because the cool-down period means there will always be a
gap longer than the threshold for classifying a segment as non-wear.
3.4.3
Domain expert
The concept of a domain expert, i.e. a user with in-depth knowledge and familiarity
of the system, which would be able to determine parameters best suited for the use-case of
the system, was mentioned several times throughout this chapter. It was used as a reason
against using the ClaSP algorithms, but was also necessary for e.g. determining the duration
threshold for the tilt switch classifier. In any case, requiring a domain expert is less than
ideal, but often necessary. However, a distinction can be made in the two examples, as a
reason as to why the ClaSP was disregarded, while the tilt switch classifier wasn’t. The
ClaSP parameter determined by a domain expert would be the number of change points
expected in a time series, which is practically impossible for anyone, including a domain
expert, to predict. However, in the case of the tilt switch duration threshold, this decision
could be made off of general knowledge of patterns of wear, and not necessarily be dependent
on knowing the actual data of a specific patient.
M4 vs RP2040 data
Another problem in the same subject is that of the difficulties properly scoring the
classification algorithms on the RP2040 instrument data. The nature of the design made
it extremely difficult to compare to something like a stability classifier, as was done with
the M4 instrument tests. This was in large part due to the small initial sample size, with
potentially large periods of deep-sleep, which would somehow need to be classified. This led
to terrible classification scores across all metrics and classifiers when applied to this data.
This, combined with the fact that the data processing on this instrument’s datasets late,
meant that classifying it would be difficult.
3.4.4
09-10 dataset partial invalidation
An error was discovered while testing the ClaSPy algorithm on the original 09-10
dataset. The original dataset consisted of two gathering periods that had been combined, as
the instrument data storage was at capacity and had to be moved. The ClaSPy algorithm
visualization tool plots data based off of indices while the plotting tools used to visualize the
data was timestamp based. As seen in Figure 3.10(a), the two datasets were significantly
dissimilar.
Page 58 of 92
==PAGE:65==
3.4. Discussion
(a) Timestamps
(b) Indices
Figure 3.10: 09-10 dataset
This led to confusion whether two separate datasets had been used to plot the data
and ClaSPy, respectively. However, inspecting the dataset, it was discovered that the issue
stemmed from the dataset seemingly "shifting" approximately 2.5 hours back in time around
the halfway mark of the dataset, with the latter half being offset by this. Worrying that
other datasets had experienced similar gaps, every dataset was checked to determine if any
next time stamp following the current would be at an earlier point in time. Fortunately, the
only case in which data had had its timestamps changed midway was this dataset, and it
was subsequently discarded. A deeper analysis into the separate data segments revealed an
error in the data that had been missed when combining the datasets. Specifically, the RTC
had reset during the first dataset, which had been overlook when combining the two. In an
original attempt at correcting this time, the discrepancy had been introduced. The first half
was discarded, while the second segment was used.
This however also illustrates the different approaches to visualizing the data well, and
how the data may be misleading. The time span in graph (a) between the beginning and
when the activity actually starts around 08:00 is actually only 53 measurements, with the
plotting library filling in the data between this period to fill in the missing data. This gives
an indication that there are recordings of zero acceleration in the time span, when in reality
there are no recordings. Alternatively, observing the indices dataset, the person reviewing
the data may assume that the samples are taken over a single, continuous time period, with
there being a gap in the beginning, between the 53rd and 54th index, as that is were the
data sets were joined. There is certainly a due diligence of the paper to emphasize on these
gaps, however, it also illustrates some shortcomings of the plotting libraries, especially when
filling in data, that needs to be considered when visualizing data.
3.4.5
Additional parameter tuning
The issues of acquiring datasets led to a lack of meaningful data and parameter explo-
ration. Much of these parameters ended up being simulated instead, with the majority done
on the M4 instrument datasets.
It was considered at one point to build out a larger, more sophisticated framework. This
would have had multiple parameters, such as deep-sleep times, window times, and would aim
to simulate some of the more random or unknown parameters, such as deep sleep boot-up
times. However, it was instead prioritized building the actual RP2040 instrument prototype,
Page 59 of 92
==PAGE:66==
3.4. Discussion
aiming to acquire more data from that. Furthermore, it was deemed difficult to realistically
mock, with the thought being that the nature of how the tilt switches interacted with the
device would not be comparable to the continuous sample rate of the M4 instrument, and
interactions such as the "bounce" that was observed when the tilt switches were rapidly
tilted, would be difficult to accurately mimic.
However, much more work could be done exploring other parameters. A major one
is that of the cool-down period on the final prototype, which still needs to explored more
thoroughly. This is an important parameter, affecting the overall classification algorithm,
while also being a significant factor in power consumption, as it can be directly used to
decrease power consumption. The same goes for the classification windows upon waking up.
The number of times the sensors are sampled before going back to sleep directly affect the
quality of the samples. The same goes for the second sample period that was introduced,
sampling a little after the board had first woken up. This could be considered a bias, as the
second sample almost invalidates the first, i.e. the automatic assumption when the device is
first awakened is that the disturbance was due to a spike, and that whatever comes shortly
after is the interesting data. Essentially, this prioritizes the tilt switch sensors as the more
telling sensors. While not necessarily worse, it is certainly a feature which may be more or
less necessary depending on what the goal of the sampling is.
Confusion matrices metrics
The classification changed from a binary classification in the wear/non-wear detection
problem, to a multiclass classification problem, as there were now multiple classes. Fur-
thermore, a discrepancy between the classification of the newly developed classifiers, and
the stability classifier of the BNO. This being that the BNO introduced a Unknown class in
scenarios where it could not correctly classify a stability. This is different from the classifiers
which are guaranteed to classify into one of the three labels. For this, it was determined that
this label would not be considered when computing the confusion matrix and its metrics.
Furthermore, computing a confusion matrix would now yield three distinct matrices, for each
label. This introduced additional variables for a domain expert to potentially account for.
For example, it could be of interest to ensure a best possible score specifically for correctly
classifying periods of Stable, or other combinations of classes and metrics. Computing an
average was proposed as one approach to summarize the data fairly. Both an average as
well as a weighted average was computed, with the weighted average affected by the support
of each classification, i.e. the amount of each classification. However, this approach with a
weighted average could introduce bias, especially when comparing the large datasets of con-
tinuous measurements, to those of the second instrument prototype, using deep sleep. This
is due to the fact that these datasets are reduced in size, with the data being interpolated.
This increases a large bias towards the first prototype’s datasets.
While binary classifier had had the confusion matrix and its metrics computed by hand,
due to the added complexity of the multiclass classification, the scikitlearn
metrics.confusion_matrix and metrics.classification_report functions were used to
speed up the development process.
Page 60 of 92
==PAGE:67==
3.4. Discussion
3.4.6
FLUSS and FLOSS
Other algorithms were looked into for data segmentation, including the FLUSS and
FLOSS algorithms, which are implemented in a python library by Stumpy [21]. The FLUSS
algorithm, Fast Low-cost Unipotent Semantic Segmentation, is introduced in the paper by S.
Gharghabi et al [15] as an unsupervised algorithm, segmenting data into smaller, uniformly
sized chunks called "regimes". The algorithm spans the time series and compares regimes,
until there is a significant change, which is then denoted as a change point, and the data is
segmented. The FLOSS presents a domain agnostic, online algorithm based off of the same
principles. However, the case of the both algorithms, a domain expert is required to specify
the approximate length of these chunks of data, again making it unsuited for the needs of
this project.
3.4.7
Scope of data processing approaches
As soon as work began researching data processing, the vastness of this research area
immediately became apparent. Countless articles, papers and other material had been writ-
ten, with extensive research gone into a multitude of different classification algorithms, data
processing approaches, sample rate optimizers, and so on. In many aspects, this chapter
aligns with machine learning, and the process of analyzing different approaches to data pro-
cessing could be a complete project itself.
Multiple papers were studied closely, to try and implement and test on the instruments’
datasets. The obvious initial approach was to try and implement the classification algorithms
on the activity- and stability classifiers of the BNO. However, both algorithms had challenges
associated with their implementation. For example, the datasheets for the BNO085 reveal a
classification matrix for some of the activity classifications, namely its still, walking and
running classification, which was sampled as a function of step signal strength, being the
standard deviation of the accelerometer normal, and the step rate, i.e. the amount of steps
sampled over a time window. The stability classifier used both the accelerometer and the
significantly more power consuming gyroscope to determine a stability classification, which
is likely why it generally performed the best of the built in classifiers.
However, seeing as it was a goal of the project to specifically limit power and resource con-
sumption as much as possible, it was determined that only a pure accelerometer classifier
would be used, limiting the amount of sensors the instruments would need to activate. Ad-
ditionally, the BNO sampled at a much higher frequency than what the instruments logged
at, sampling the accelerometer at around 500Hz and the gyroscope around 400Hz.[4] Thus,
it was likely that the BNO would classify more detailed than what would have been able to
be reproduced while saving power by purely using the instruments.
Other papers were also studied, to see if they could be applied on the data types of this
projects datasets.
In the activity segmentation challenge at the beginning of this segment, the data was re-
garded as time-series, and a paper by Doerr et al [8] was looked into, implementing a genetic
algorithm to detect time series break. An old project from an earlier course had worked
Page 61 of 92
==PAGE:68==
3.4. Discussion
with this algorithm, and it was re-implemented in an attempt to see whether it could fit this
data. However, this firstly required multiple hyperparameters as well as it not delivering
interesting results, scoring only a single or two change points in the limited testing done,
even in simple tests, and was disregarded early on in the development process.
Another paper, by Fafoutis et al [11] studied a similar problem of wearable sensors,
and also introduced a supervised classifier. This too was briefly considered in the beginning
phases, but a supervised machine learning model like the one introduced was deemed cum-
bersome from the perspective of real-world use-cases with limited domain knowledge, and a
simpler classifier was insisted on.
The ClaSPy and FLUSS/FLOSS classifiers were however chosen due to their simplicity
in implementing, not requiring to implement entire algorithms, instead exposed in a Python
library. This led to faster implementation and testing times, even though their performance
was underwhelming, and they were discarded early on as well.
The decision to create simpler classifying algorithms was inevitably based on a wish to
utilize the instruments’ configurations and hardware as much as possible, especially trying
to optimize the usage of the tilt switches on the instruments. This, along with the seg-
mented nature of the data due to deep sleep meant introduced a desire to implement a more
specifically adapted classifying algorithm.
3.4.8
Introducing a in-vehicle classifier
An idea early with the custom classifiers was to implement a In Vehicle classifier,
similar to that of the activity classifier of the BNO085. It could have been interesting to
further analyze how e.g. driving a car or being in public transport may affect a patient’s well-
being, and the activity classifier could accomplish this to some degree of success, although
it would generally interpret traffic as periods of standstill and driving. Furthermore, the
activity classifier generally scored poorly, and the stability classifier was used overall for
most of the classification comparisons, due to its increased precision. However, the stability
classifier could not detect vehicle movement, so a decision would need to be made on which
classifier would be preferable.
With this in mind, and time constraints with implementing another classifier, the goal was
narrowed to a simpler classification problem of non-wear, still wear and active wear, similar
to that of the stability classifier.
Google Maps Timeline
One approach that could potentially have helped with classifying vehicle activities specif-
ically, and which was considered for classifying other activities, was the Google Maps Time-
line function, in which a persons overall activities are logged throughout the day via their
phone, using GPS. This data was analyzed, and it did contain activity classifications. It per-
formed particularly well with classifying periods in public transport and by car, but struggled
Page 62 of 92
==PAGE:69==
3.5. Sub-conclusion
with other activities such as running. However, it tended to simplify periods of travel as
overarching activities, and a major downside was also that it would group up several activ-
ities in the same location as a singular activity. This would mean that spending e.g. five
hours at one location would be classified as a single activity, not regarding what the person
was doing during that time period, or if they were carrying their phone with them at all.
However, it is a good candidate for both logging general activity as well as a general timeline
of location data, and could be seriously considered if a wish were to track similar data using
only a phone. This does in turn raise privacy concerns, as google stores personal location
data upwards of 120 days by default, and its benefits would need to be considered if one
were to use this as a main activity tracker.
Python implementation
A smaller issue is the play between the data processing algorithms and the presentation
layer. While most data processing was done in Python, the data presentation layer is written
in Typescript and Node.js. This distinction was decided to show each section of the overall
process separately, and Python was simply a more efficient tool to develop and process
data with, with Typescript being preferred for presenting data, which is why it was used
for visualization both in the data presentation, and in plotting tests etc. in Observable.
However in practice, one could consider rewriting the main classifier in Typescript to better
integrate into the data visualization, with the end goal being everything running off of a
single Electron app, both processing and visualizing data.
3.5
Sub-conclusion
This chapter has focused on processing data acquired during testing, using both the M4
and RP2040 instrument prototypes. Specifically, different approaches to obtaining as much
context as possible from the data available has been the main goal, further supporting the
contextualization matrix.
Multiple classification algorithms have been designed specifically with the sensor, sampling
and processing limitations of the prototypes in mind. Specifically, the tilt switches and ac-
celerometer onboard each prototype have been used as data sources to evaluate against a
"ground truth" from the stability classifier in the BNO085 IMU. This was done by comput-
ing confusion matrices and deriving classification metrics for further use.
The concepts of what meaningful contexts in terms of activity classification might entice
are explored, and how different algorithms and classification goals may differ based on the
requirements of the use case.
Determining periods of wear and non-wear is feasible using only the onboard sensors of the
wearable instrument. Specifically, tilt switches have proven to be able to reliably classify
periods of wear and non-wear, enabling a cost and resource effective approach to this type of
data collection. Furthermore, the combination of a low level sensor such as a tilt switch in
Page 63 of 92
==PAGE:70==
3.5. Sub-conclusion
combination with a higher level sensor like the BNO085 shows how a combination of sensors
might further improve performance.
Determining specific activity levels is feasible, but is more dependent on the type of data that
is collected. Specifically, determining activity levels of sporadic datasets such as the RP2040
instrument data is difficult, and requires some further work in order to reliably work.
Page 64 of 92
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 4
Part III - Visualization
This chapter focuses on visualizing processed instrument data using an interactive desktop
application, with the aim of contextualizing this data in a meaningful way. Emphasis is put
into delivering a good user experience, and conveying data in a easily accessible manner,
with the possibility of being able to delve deeper into an analysis of specific data points. It
is also a priority to ensure ease-of-use when managing the instruments, as well as the data
transfer process from instrument to visualization tool. The software is evaluated using UX
validation, usability testing, and manually testing the components in an iterative approach,
to build an overall solid visualization tool.
This iterative approach means that there is a constant back and forth between designing and
testing, with the design being largely based on the results from said tests. This also means
that the methodology section also contains some results from testing, where it has been a
factor in progressing the design and implementation.
4.1
Analysis
The goal of this chapter is to present the data gathered and processed in previous chapters to
an end user for analysis. Therefore, it is paramount that a good visualization is implemented.
It should accurately communicate the activities of a user wearing the instrument, and im-
portantly clearly show when the user has pressed the button, indicating a marker of distress.
A sound visualization is key to contextualizing data gathered from the instrument, as it can
help a therapist detect patterns between activity, use and button presses. It should be kept
in mind that the device is worn for large periods of time in-between therapeutic sessions,
sometimes lasting upwards of a month as mentioned in [20]. Therefore, there should both
be an emphasis on getting an overview of the data at a glance, while having the possibilities
of examining periods of interest more closely.
Additionally, the process of getting to a point where data analysis can take should be straight-
forward and efficient. Especially for therapists that may not be technologically skilled, it is
important that they are hindered as little as possible, in order to get the most out of their
analysis process.
A multitude of existing software for visualizing physical activity data already exists,
ranging from technical analysis tools, well suited for domain experts and data scientists,
down to easily available apps mobile- and desktop apps for everyday health monitoring, fo-
cusing on self-tracking. These especially are centered around meeting certain criteria, i.e. a
65
==PAGE:72==
4.1. Analysis
daily amount of steps or active minutes. Generally, software for monitoring mental health,
especially that with respect for a therapist to monitor the mental health of their patients,
is less common. While not a full-on tool, Larsen et al [20] introduced a plot of a patient’s
self tracking period using a one-button tracker, displaying observations for each day during
the period. Here, weekend days, therapeutic sessions and phone consultations were marked,
giving context to the data. It was possible to discern patterns from this simple overview,
such as the patient having very few observations during the weekend, although with no way
of discerning whether it was due to the person not wearing the one-button tracker.
The paper by Fager and Thomsen [13] also included a visualization tool for using a
self-tracking device built upon the foundations of Larsen, including a one-button tracker to
note markers of distress, but extended the contextualization to include location data. They
proposed plotting a smaller timeline for less detailed observations over a longer period, with
a focused view showing hourly observations, associating it with different places. Another
project from Larsen plots activity from a BNO stability classifier, coloring each activity in
a timeline [19].
More-so targeting activity visualization primarily, a paper by Tong et al [39] devel-
oped an interactive visualization tool, plotting multiple features, with each feature being
extractable for further customization. While this implementation can seem cluttered with
data, the interactivity helps a user focusing in on specific parts of data was interesting to fur-
ther examine. Similarly, Activinsights provides activity analysis and visualization software,
also with some levels of interactivity 1.
Furthermore, several apps aimed at high levels of usability exists, for example the Fit-
nessView app for IOS devices 2, which tracks various forms of activities. This app presents
data in several scopes, including a weekly and daily scope of activity, allowing for deeper
analysis of data.
Much of the existing work balances being oriented more towards domain experts, such
as therapists, using more complex visualizations, which may decrease ease of use due to
potentially overwhelming amounts of data presented at once. On the other hand, those
tools targeting self-tracking on end-users generally focus more on usability, interactivity and
simpler data presentation, but which may be simplified and biased in order to better convey
the data interpretation.
Suggesting patterns off of data without intervention from e.g.
a therapist could be an
interesting approach to "nudge" them into the analysis, or make it easier to contextualize
the data observed. For example, indicating "good" or "bad" days could be a entry point for
starting the data analysis, if the raw data may seem unmanageable.
Earlier tools by Larsen [19] and Fager and Thomsen [13] used ObservableHQ as their
platform for displaying the visualization data. This had the main benefit of being extremely
simple to distribute. Seeing as it is run entirely online in the browser, distributing it is as
1https://activinsights.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/GENEActiv-Instructions-for-Use-v1_
31Mar2022.pdf
2https://fitnessview.app/
Page 66 of 92
==PAGE:73==
4.2. Methodology
simple as sharing a link to the notebook. Furthermore, it is possible to upload local files to
the notebook, which only exist in the current context, thus minimizing the risk of personal
data being exposed online. Furthermore, ObservableHQ’s notebooks support excellent plot-
ting features, making it easy to construct meaningful graphs of the patients observations
of PTSD markers, for example. However, Observable as a platform lacks capabilities in its
interactivity, at least if using the built-in plotting tools, whose APIs limit most data interac-
tion to hoverable tooltips. Furthermore, being an online tool, Observable lacks interactivity
with the system, for example not being able to detect or directly fetch data from a plugged
in instrument.
UX in data visualization
User experience plays a key factor in visualizing data and helping contextualize data.
It is also important for the usability of the program. Ideally, the program should behave in
predictable ways, and be intuitive to use. Nielsen, Jacob presents 10 usability heuristics [27]
to include in systems to increase user experience. The importance of a well-defined system
means that using the visualization tool will be easier, and overall allow for better use of the
program, and in the end a better analysis, benefiting the patient. A bad tool design and user
experience will result in a slower and worse analysis of the therapist, and may in some cases
even lead to false conclusions of the data, i.e. wrongly assuming periods of non-wear as wear
without mental wellness issues, which may have detrimental consequences for the patient.
This further underlines the important of keeping UX into the design considerations.
4.2
Methodology
The goal of visualization is to enable a therapist to best utilize the extended contextu-
alization capabilities of the instrument a patient has worn. Some therapists had previously
mentioned finding the calendar visualization difficult to interpret, being overwhelmed by the
data, and not being able to easily determine patterns.
4.2.1
Design
There was a particular emphasis on building a highly interactive app, which would en-
able an easy overview of the data at a glance, easing the therapist into the data analysis,
and then allowing them to delve deeper into specific parts of the data they might have found
interesting, for more thorough analysis.
From the beginning of the project, the instrument would be central to the tool. Other
tools mostly used a standard file import system, where a therapist would manually select
the file to be imported.
To make the process of importing data into the visualization tool as simple as possible,
plugging in the instrument into a computer should instead be enough to get started with
Page 67 of 92
==PAGE:74==
4.2. Methodology
the data processing. The user should not need to know where the mobile storage device was
located in their system. They should simply just open the visualization tool, plug in the
instrument, and get started with as little effort as possible.
Originally, having the instrument itself host the website to serve the data was considered,
keeping the entirety of the program isolated on the device. However, due to the significant
storage and memory limitations of the devices used, this idea was scrapped, as it would
simply not have been possible to include multiple sessions worth of data, alongside the data
processing code and visualization tools.
4.2.2
Tech stack
A desktop app was chosen from the beginning, as it would allow for the most control of the
instrument when plugged into the therapists computer.
Frontend
React with TypeScript was chosen as the library for designing and handling the front
end. This was in part due to previous experience with the aforementioned, but also due to the
wide range of libraries supported by the library, which would help the development process
tremendously. Bootstrap was included early on to help keep the design consistent, and also
sped up the efficiency, as many of its components could be used without the necessity of
custom styling using CSS.
Typescript was also chosen due to its extensions on JavaScript to typing, being strongly
typed, and a more structured code implementation.
Backend
Node.js was chosen as the backend, also with TypeScript. Keeping the tech stack based
entirely on TypeScript would help simplify the development process, and communication
between front- and backend. Crucially, Node.js supported several libraries which would be
essential to the goal of a semi-automatic data import tool from the instrument.
In order to bundle a desktop app, Electron.js was used. This framework was chosen due to
its simplicity to implement both the frontend and backend. Electron packages a Chromium
browser with a server backend, meaning the React frondend and Node backend would be
easy to integrate, and could even be tested separately. This also meant that the project
would be able to run on different operating systems, by just bundling the application for the
targeted platform, without any need to modify code.
4.2.3
Implementation
Preface
Before the actual data visualization tool can be designed, a proper underlying system
must be defined and supported by the backend in particular. The following data structures
are presented:
Page 68 of 92
==PAGE:75==
4.2. Methodology
• Patient Device: This relates a physical instrument being plugged into the computer
to a patient. Minimal effort should be done by the therapist in order to ensure this
relation.
• Patient Data: Patient specific data that must be related to the patient and the
device it was imported from.
The entire patient data collection should consist of
sessions, representing the data gathered since the patient was last at a therapeutic
session. Each session contains an id, a collection of observations, i.e. data presses, and
a collection of wear/non-wear data and activities.
Furthermore, the system must support the following operations
• Instrument detection: When a physical instrument is either plugged into or discon-
nected from the computer, the system should automatically register this.
• Device handling and mapping: The therapist must be able to access the correct
patient’s data from the instrument they plugged into the computer, with minimal
effort. They should not be concerned with finding the right dataset, or transferring
data from device to computer.
Setup
The first step was to set up the Electron project34. Electron uses Electron Forge to
package and create applications, and Electron-Webpack is used to bundle modules, and is
used as a template when creating the initial project. The following command generated the
project:
npx create-electron-app@latest my-new-app --template=webpack-typescript
The React project itself could then be scaffolded by running
npm install --save react react-dom
npm install --save-dev @types/react @types/react-dom
The entry point and main process for the backend would be index.ts, which handled the
processes running in the backend, and generated the main electron app window, which the
frontend would run in.
Instrument detection
Once the project had been set up, the next step was to create a proof of concept of
the instrument detection. When a USB device was plugged into the computer, the program
should be notified, and the instrument should be presented for a therapist, to begin the data
analysis process.
3https://www.electronforge.io/templates/typescript-+-webpack-template
4https://www.electronforge.io/guides/framework-integration/react-with-typescript
Page 69 of 92
==PAGE:76==
4.2. Methodology
For this, the nodeusb library was used 5, specifically the WebUSB class. This includes event
handlers for devices being connected and disconnected to the computer. This is called on
an object instance
webusb.addEventListener('connect', handleDeviceConnected);
webusb.addEventListener('disconnect', handleDeviceDisconnected);
With handleDeviceConnected and handleDeviceDisconnected being custom event han-
dlers. Initially, these would simply print out the list of available usb devices by calling and
awaiting the asynchronous method
await webusb.getDevices();
The list returned metadata for each connected USB device, as can be shown in Appendix
C.1. However, this list doesn’t reveal the physical drive, only the USB device. In order
to access the patient’s drives, another library drivelist was included in the project. This
library contains the method list(), which returns a list of all connected drives. By default
this lists every available drive, including internal drives such as the computers hard drives
and partitions. This list could be filtered on the isUSB property, effectively returning every
USB device.
However, these drive objects did not indicate which USB device they were mounted on. This
could cause problems if multiple USB devices were connected at once, e.g. two different in-
struments. There would then be no way to discern which USB device belonged to which
USB drive. Therefore, a mapping would be required in order to ensure that the correct USB
device and drive would match up.
The first approach was to match the description property on the drive object to the
productName on the device object, as they both contained the name of the device. This was
however quickly discarded, as it would not help if two identical devices were plugged in. It
would also not be able to handle if the device was renamed to something different from its
description.
Instead, the serialNumber property on the device object could potentially work, as it was
at least unique for the device. Then, if the same serial number could be extracted from
the drives, the mapping would be complete. However, the serial number was not directly
exposed in the drives list. One idea was to rename the drive to the first n characters of
the serial number, as many as were supported by the OS, and the mapping could then be
complete by matching the serial number to the device name.
This was an inadequate approach with several flaws. Firstly, it had to be ensured that the
device name was compatible across operating systems. Another was in the case of device
being reset for some reason. In this case, it would revert back to a default name determined
by its firmware, and thus would manually need to be configured.
The second approach, which was used in the beginning, was to create a hidden file on
the drive. This would need a reference name, and .OBT was chosen. Then, the full serial
5https://github.com/node-usb/node-usb#readme
Page 70 of 92
==PAGE:77==
4.2. Methodology
number would be appended to this filename, e.g. .OBTDF625857C7603C2B. When searching
for drives, a simple directory lookup could be executed, parsing files on the drive starting
with .OBT, and then extracting the rest of the string as the device id. The reason behind this
approach was that a directory lookup would be significantly faster than reading the serial
number from a file.
While this did work well for testing, it suffered from the same shortcomings as the filename
approach, in that it would be vulnerable against the device being reset. Likewise, it also
required an extra setup step, in that the id file would need to be hand created before the
device could be connected.
The contents of the instruments drives were further analyzed, specifically the boot_out.txt
file. This file is generated the the boot.py script, instead of it writing to serial[7]. This
means the file is generated on every hard reset, which guarantees the file to be created every
time the device is powered on. Furthermore, it contains the UID field, with the value of
that field being the device serial number. Reading the boot_out.txt file would be a much
more robust approach, and would similarly not require any setup. The only concern was if
there was a significant time penalty to reading the serial number. A simple test was set up,
described in Appendix C.2, in which a directory lookup and file read were executed 100.000
times, comparing the elapsed time for each loop.
Directory lookup
8ms
File read
690ms
The file read operation was significantly slower than the directory lookup, but a duration of
690ms to read a file 100.000 led to the conclusion that this difference was insignificant on
what would be at most one file read per connected drive, and this was deemed the overall
best implementation.
The mapping of USB devices to storage drives was now complete, but this approach essen-
tially invalidated the need for the USB device lookup, as knowing the USB device didn’t
provide any additional value. The eventhandlers for devices connected and disconnected
were still necessary, but only to trigger the drivelist library to get all available drives.
Another challenge was the delay between a connected USB device being registered, and its
corresponding file system becoming available. This was a noticeable delay, upwards of one
or two seconds, and it was not possible to add an event handler to the event of that device
becoming available, especially since its file path would not be known. Therefore, a periodic
polling loop was introduced, which would be triggered when a USB device was registered.
This would call await driveList.list() every .25 seconds for 60 attempts, or until it there
were an equal amount of drives with the label isUSB as there were connected USB devices.
Finally, when all drives were accounted for, the USB devices and drives could be returned.
This was an inefficient process, but was deemed acceptable due to fewer concerns with
resource usage, assuming the program would be run on a computer.
In order to compartmentalize the project and divide responsibilities, the entire code was
moved into a service class DeviceService, and implementing a IDeviceService, modeled
in Appendix C.4.
This class, in combination with the index.ts file, would satisfy the
Page 71 of 92
==PAGE:78==
4.2. Methodology
Instrument detection criteria presented in the preface.
Device and data management
With the Instrument detection criterion met, work was put into properly managing data
from the instrument. When an instrument was plugged into the computer and selected,
it should automatically load all relevant data for that patient and retrieve potential data
from the instrument. The data should be stored locally, in part due to a privacy concern of
limiting the patient data accessibility, but mainly due to the easier implementation of not
managing a database. The data structures presented in the preface can be defined using an
class diagram as this data structure aligns with document oriented data as seen in Figure
4.1 and 4.2.
Figure 4.1: UML diagram of Patient Data. A collection of Patient Data classes constitutes
a Patient Data Map
This is represented in a parent object, the PatientDataMap. A similar, albeit simpler
structure is defined for the PatientDeviceMap, consisting of PatientDevice classes index
by id.
Figure 4.2: UML diagram of a Patient Device class. A collection of Patient Device classes
constitutes a Patient Device Map
The data is stored in JSON files, and modeled for TypeScript using the above class dia-
grams.
Page 72 of 92
==PAGE:79==
4.2. Methodology
A repository design pattern was used to decouple the business logic layer from the data
access layer [43]. This benefited the overall code structure in several ways:
1. It simplified the overall structure of the code by compartmentalizing components.
2. With the decoupling multiple data sources could be introduced if needed. This project
implemented a simple JSON "database", reading to a data file, but it could easily be
replaced by a different implementation using e.g. a document-oriented database like
MongoDB.
3. In a production context, the same decoupling would allow for the code to be tested
without using actual patient data, by introducing a mock interface implementation.
To implement this pattern, two interfaces were introduced IPatientDeviceRepository and
IPatientDataRepository, with the PatientRepository class implementing both inter-
faces.
This relation is modeled in Appendix C.3 Each interface would correspond to a
database connection, or in this case two JSON files: patient_data.json and
patient_devices.json The IPatientDeviceRepository defined the CRUD6 operations: Cre-
ate, Read, Update and Delete. The IPatientDataRepository was however limited to only
Create and Read, as records would not be updated in this implementation, and that it was
deemed unnecessary for the therapist to be able to delete data.
The code was then combined with the previous code, now implemented in the DeviceService.
When a device was connected to the computer, the DeviceService would handle getting
the proper device ID, which would then be used to make a lookup in the PatientDeviceMap.
If no record was found with that id, it would mean the device was new, and a new mapping
should be created, associating the device id with a human-readable patient name.
Otherwise, if a matching device was found, that could then be used to make a new lookup in
the PatientDataMap. From here, the data would be read from the instrument, parsed using
a data parser, and processed, determining periods of wear/non wear, and a classification as
specified in the Data Processing chapter. Finally, the data would be serialized based off of
the UML models in Figure 4.1 and 4.2 and written as a session into the patients data.
Inter-process communication
In order for the frontend and backend to communicate, a method of communication
would need to be implemented. Specifically, the following communication should be sup-
ported
• The backend should alert the frontend when a device is connected or disconnected.
• The frontend can request a device list from the backend.
• The frontend can request a patient’s data from the backend.
6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete
Page 73 of 92
==PAGE:80==
4.2. Methodology
• The frontend can send a request to the backend to create a device mapping.
The sequence diagrams for these goals are shown in Appendix C.5, C.6 and C.7. Specifically,
the frontend would need to receive an update from the backend when a device was connected
or disconnected, and which devices were available. Similarly, if a new device mapping was
created in the frontend, the backend would need to be alerted such that it could save that
mapping into the PatientDeviceMap. To support these actions, inter-process communica-
tion had to be supported. This is supported natively by Electron7. Electron defines a main
process as the main entry point running the main application with full Operating System
access, which is defined as a singleton instance of the BrowserWindow class 8, and a renderer
process as a process running a webpage with limited access for safety reasons. Renderer pro-
cess may be created and destroyed when a user navigates through e.g. web pages, but there
is only one main process. Specifically for this case, there is also only a single renderer process.
Initial testing was spent trying to configure the project correctly for testing, and introducing
a simple ping message from the renderer process to the main process. The following exchange
looked like so:
// app.tsx
...
import { ipcRenderer } from "electron";
ipcRenderer.send('ping', "Hello, World!");
...
// index.ts
...
import { app, BrowserWindow, ipcMain } from 'electron';
ipcMain.on('ping', (event, arg) => {
console.log(arg) // prints "Hello, World!"
});
...
Once familiarized, the first step was to implement the alert from backend to frontend, when a
device was connected or disconnected. This meant sending a message from the main process
to the renderer process.
To accomplish this, an idea of the main process broadcasting
whenever it detected a change using the DeviceService, which the renderer process would
listen for. This can be described as a publisher-subscriber pattern9, where the main process
publishes the device list which is received and consumed by the renderer process, representing
a subscriber, with the main process’ BrowserWindow class method webContents.send()
being the message broker.
7https://www.electronjs.org/docs/latest/tutorial/ipc
8https://medium.com/@vamsikrishnaadusumalli999/creating-cross-platform-desktop-app-with-electron-js
9https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/patterns/publisher-subscriber
Page 74 of 92
==PAGE:81==
4.2. Methodology
// index.ts
const handleDeviceConnected = async () => {
let availableDevices = await deviceManager.getAvailableDevices();
win.webContents.send('available-devices-broadcast', availableDevices);
}
This would then be consumed by the renderer code, listening for the
’available-devices-broadcast’, handling it with the ipcRenderer, which is the message
broker that runs in the renderer processes.
// devices.tsx
useEffect(() => {
ipcRenderer.on('available-devices-broadcast',
(e: Electron.IpcRendererEvent,
args: { patientDevices: PatientDevice[],
unknownDevices: UnknownDevice[] }) => {
setPatientDevice(args?.patientDevices?? []);
setUnknownDevices(args?.unknownDevices?? []);
});
ipcRenderer.send('available-devices-request', '');
}, []); // Empty dependency array ensures this runs once on mount
Here, the useEffect hook is used upon the React component being mounted. It subscribes
to the ’available-devices-broadcast’ event from the main process, adding an even-
thandler to update the devices in the view.
One issue that was discovered during user experience validation was that testers were too
impatient when plugging an instrument into the computer, and not getting feedback. This
was due to the time the instrument would use to ready its file system to be readable, which
could take upwards of a couple of seconds. In order to indicate the program working in
Nielsen’s first usability heuristic[27], a second broadcast would be sent when a connected
USB device was detected, in order to indicate that the drive was getting ready to be read.
The next messages that was required by the system revolved around the frontend re-
questing data from the backend, specifically a device list and patient data.
This was accomplished using the ipcRenderer, which handles messages from a renderer pro-
cess to the main process, and is syntactically similar to the webContents message broker. The
’available-devices-request’ was the published message which the main process would
then subscribe to with a corresponding eventhandler this was handled using the ipcMain
module. That would in turn invoke the ’available-devices-broadcast’, which the ren-
derer process was subscribed to, completing the request.
The PatientRepository was was called directly from the frontend, as it didn’t necessarily
require the same backend capabilities as the device detection. Therefore no inter-process
communication was necessary for this. This was however bad practice, as a layer between
the front end for displaying, and the backend for actually managing "database" data would
be crucial in order to restrict a users access, and a similar setup to the above would have
Page 75 of 92
==PAGE:82==
4.2. Methodology
made better sense.
Lastly, the frontend had to notify the backend upon creating a new patient-device map-
ping. This communication also used the ipcRenderer module, but more closely represented
a traditional request-response model10.
The renderer process would call ipcRenderer.invoke(’create-device’), passing along a
device mapping as arguments. It would then await a response from the main process. The
main process would handle the request ipcMain.handle(’create-device’,...)
asyn-
chronously, storing the mapping using the PatientManager repository. It would then return
a response, indicating that the process had completed.
This is what the renderer process was awaiting, and a callback function was invoked, return-
ing the user back to the main screen.
With this, the messaging requirements were satisfied. The main focus would then be design-
ing the visualization itself, and added contextualization capabilities.
MVP Design
With the messaging requirements satisfied, and a solid framework successfully imple-
mented, focus was shifted on building an Minium Viable Product with the intention of
getting user experience validation done as fast as possible, to get feedback on the design.
Furthermore, a goal was to be conscious of the usability heuristics presented in [27].
The MVP would consist of a simple menu screen, awaiting a device to connect to the com-
puter. Once pressed, it would load data and enter the main view. The main view revolved
around an interactive calendar, showing a compact calendar of a whole year, with each date
in the calendar colored by the amount of observations recorded that day, as seen in Figure
4.3. A orange to red color scale was used to indicate this, with a dark red color being many
observations. Clicking on a date would bring up a screen below, showing all observations
for that date, including activities. Observations are plotted as vertical rules on timestamps,
with the hight of the rule determined by the duration of the button press. Furthermore, the
rules were initially colored by the duration as well.
10https://medium.com/@imakashsharma135/understanding-request-and-response-model-a-general-overview-8
Page 76 of 92
==PAGE:83==
4.2. Methodology
Figure 4.3: Screen shot showing the MVP for the calendar view.
At this point, only
wear/non-wear is shown as activity
First iteration
After a first round of UX validation, numerous additions were added to the visualizer. The
first was an additional to the menu screen. One concern was that there was no indication of
the system working when an instrument was plugged in, before the storage device became
available. This was reconciled by introducing a broadcast from the main process when the
device was registered, which would then be replaced when the drive for that device became
available. In the visualizer, this would be added as a loading spinner and a text, which would
become replaced by the drive once located. Additionally, an image was included when no
instruments were connected, to indicate how to initialize data processing, as seen in Figure
4.4a.
Page 77 of 92
==PAGE:84==
4.2. Methodology
(a) No instrument plugged in
(b) Reading instrument
(c) Instrument ready
Figure 4.4: Three stages of plugging in instrument
These were the result of multiple participants being unaware what to do when presented
with the initial screen, or becoming impatient with the drive taking too long to register, in-
stead going into the "All patients" menu. The All patients menu was primarily for easily
accessing old datasets for testing purposes, but could also be useful as a tool for a therapist
to view other patient’s old data.
The main view also received major changes. Firstly, a sessions picker was included to
better help visualize what events had occurred since a last therapy session, as well as trying
to lessen the amount of data the therapist would need to consider at first glance. By default,
this would show only the latest session, but other sessions could easily be toggled on or off.
This was done with the goal of satisfying the 8th heuristic in [27], of keeping the design
minimal and to some extent supported the 6th heuristic of recognition rather than recall,
i.e. The therapist should not need to remember when the last session took place, they can
simply reference the list in the view, or toggle the data.
Several design mockups for the sessions picker were proposed as shown in Appendix C.9,
with preference testing showing that the participants preferred a compact vertically stacked
design rather than a side bar proposition.
Secondly, the calendar itself was updated. A major barrier revealed during user experience
validation was difficulties navigating the calendar, as it displayed weekdays along the y-axis,
whereas most calendars display weekdays on the x-axis. This difference led to a significant
increase in task execution time, and went against design heuristics 2 and 4. Similarly, a few
designs were presented in a preference test in Appendix C.8, with the most popular being
horizontally spread calendars. While not as compact as the initial design, this approach was
much more familiar to users, who navigated the calendar faster after the new design.
The daily view also received changes. Firstly, a more complete classifier, classifying non
wear, still and moving activity levels were introduced as differently colored bars similar to
the previous non-wear bars. Based on feedback from the user validation tests, some partici-
pants found it redundant that the coloring of the bars meant the same as the height, i.e. the
Page 78 of 92
==PAGE:85==
4.2. Methodology
button press duration. Furthermore, since the yearly calendar and daily view used the same
color scale for two different metrics, participants found the two confusing, often mixing them
together. Thus, these were simply colored black, also to not mix in with the now colored
background.
Lastly, the date display tool was consolidated. As seen in Figure 4.3, there were two com-
ponents both displaying dates, with the bottom originally being dependent on the type of
view. This was instead merged with the upper picker, such that all information was gathered
in one place. Furthermore, the user could now press each component of the date, to get a
focused view of that component, essentially making it function as a breadcrumb, and can be
seen in Figure 4.5. This, in relation with the yearly calendar always being visible, in some
ways satisfy the 3rd heuristic, of easily being able to backtrack to a more zoomed-out view.
Figure 4.5: The updated visualization tool after first iteration
Second iteration
The second iteration showed an overall improvement to the program’s usability, and the
comments and changes gathered from feedback after the second iteration were minor.
Participants initially had trouble properly using the sessions. Each session corresponded
to a dataset which would have been saved for each therapeutic session. By default, only the
most recent session would be active, with the rest being toggleable. Inactive sessions would
not be colored, and would initially return an empty daily activity screen when pressed.
A/B testing was used to test this functionality due to the component being isolated, as well
as having a clearly defined error state, i.e. the participant assuming no observations for that
Page 79 of 92
==PAGE:86==
4.3. Evaluation
date.
The control version was tested on participants 6, 7, 8 and 9. When pressing a date which
was in an unselected session, an empty daily view would be loaded, which led to participants
assuming there were no data for that date. Participants 2, 3 and 4 were shown a variant
design in which the buttons were disabled, giving the user no feedback when pressed.
The latter immediately proved better. All four participants using the control design would
get stuck assuming there were no data, requiring an intervention telling them to select a
dataset first. With the variant design, all three participants would still try and press the
empty date, but would immediately recognize something was wrong due to receiving no
feedback, and they all quickly selected the relevant session without any intervention.
However, most participants still found this to be a barrier, with a majority of participants
preferring every session to be selected by default.
Another suggestion appearing multiple times were a summary of average duration of an
observation as well as a total number of presses for a day, these were also added, to give
more context to the daily overview and more easily view the data at a glance.
4.3
Evaluation
4.3.1
User experience validation
With the core functionality supported, the design of the actual visualization tool could
begin. This consisted of an iterative process revolving around user experience validation,
preference testing and manual testing. The MVP design lacked a lot of features and were
not satisfying the 10 design heuristics, so getting user experience validation was crucial in
the design of the final program.
Before the actual validation, the goals of the program are listed, inspired by the steps
mentioned in [40]. Specifically, the visualization tool must be:
• Accurate - therapists should be able to deduce correct conclusions from the data, it
must not be misleading.
• Efficient - therapists should quickly be able to obtain the information they are inter-
ested in
• Easy to use - the program must be simple and satisfying to use, it should motivate the
therapist to analyze the patients data
The users of this specific program would be therapists, analyzing observations made by a
patient suffering from PTSD in the form of button presses using the instrument. This data
should be further contextualized by including the activities conducted by the user in this
period.
One pain point mentioned by users of previous implementations was that data would be
overwhelming and difficult to grasp at a glance, and them having a hard time discerning
Page 80 of 92
==PAGE:87==
4.3. Evaluation
patterns from the previous views. Furthermore, many of the therapists are likely not tech-
nologically experienced or confident, and tools to manipulate data might be difficult to use
properly. The metrics used to test the goals was based on [41]. Specifically for this problem,
a combination of qualitative and quantitative metrics would be used to determine if the goals
are fulfilled.
• Error rate: The error rate can be used to determine the accuracy of the system. An
accurate system should not allow for errors by the user.
• Time on task: This metric will be used to determine the efficiency of using the
program. The therapist should be able to complete their tasks in a short amount of
time.
• User satisfaction: This metric is qualitative, but should indicate the overall sat-
isfaction with the program. An easy to use program is hopefully also satisfying to
use.
In order to evaluate these metrics, two types of tests are conducted. The first will be a
thinking aloud test [28], and a user preference test 11. The thinking aloud test was built
around three test scenarios a user would complete:
• Scenario 1:
1. Connect the physical instrument
2. Choose the patient
3. Look at the data for 25-02-2024
4. Determine the amount of button presses for that day
5. Determine when the longest button press occurred.
• Scenario 2:
1. Connect a new instrument
2. Create a new instrument/patient mapping
3. Chose that patient’s data
• Scenario 3:
This was mostly qualitative Assume the last session was on 31-07.
1. Chose a patient dataset
2. By looking at the data, explain what has happened since last session
3. Analyze the worst day
4. Analyze the worst month
11https://www.userinterviews.com/ux-research-field-guide-chapter/preference-testing
Page 81 of 92
==PAGE:88==
4.3. Evaluation
5. Analyze the best month
6. Analyze the patient’s daily routine
7. Analyze the patient’s weekly routine
The tool used generated mock data in order to appear more interesting, and to have longer
periods of simulated wear for the participants to explore. This was done using dat sets from
previous chapters, with ChatGPT used to generate large simulated datasets and data gen-
erators from these. This was done as a low-impact solution to quickly generate data which
may necessarily be accurate, but will be meaningful to the participants.
Before starting the tests, the test participants were briefly introduced to the project with
the following description: "You are a therapist tasked with analyzing the data gathered by a
patient suffering from PTSD. They have been given a instrument with a button, which logs a
timestamp and duration when pressed. Furthermore, the instrument tracks periods of wear
and non-wear, as well as information about the patient’s activity levels.". They were then
presented with an instrument and a computer with the program opened on its initial screen.
The tests were aimed to target the goals, being both quantitative and qualitative, with each
test skewing slightly towards specific goals. Scenario 1 and 2 would primarily target the
accuracy and efficiency: The user should be able to quickly reach a place where data anal-
ysis can commence, i.e. getting from the instrument to the visualization. The third focuses
primarily on accuracy and ease of use, in that the user should be able to draw correct con-
clusions from the data, and it should also be intuitive to do so. The last task specifically
would test whether the user would actually use the tools capabilities, such as inspecting on
a monthly, daily or weekly basis.
The users testing the scenarios were given a minimal introduction to the point of the tool,
as well as a quick overview of what the data resembled. They were told as little about the
functionality as possible, only being given an instrument and a computer. The intention
was to ensure that they would have as little prior knowledge to the program as possible,
emphasizing on design choices to ensure they could successfully complete the tasks. While
performing each scenario, the users time to completion would be noted, as a quantitative
measurement of their performance. Furthermore, any errors were also logged, and what
caused those. Finally, being a thinking aloud test, the participants were encourages to talk
as much as possible about their thought process throughout the test, which would be writ-
ten down. This was especially useful for getting qualitative feedback, and indicating what
worked and what didn’t.
After the thinking aloud tests, a preference test was carried out, where the participants
were presented with different design approaches to one feature, and asked to pick a preferred
approach and describing why they preferred their pick. This was done after the tests to ensure
that the users had had some experience to familiarize themselves with the design, increasing
the chances of them having formed an opinion, and being able to better determine what they
liked and didn’t like, making the comparison more meaningful. These were typically done
as mock-ups using Figma and Observable. In total, two rounds of user experience validation
was completed.
The first was done one the MVP design, and had the most criticisms.
Specifically, the calendar design received many criticisms, so the preference testing was used
Page 82 of 92
==PAGE:89==
4.3. Evaluation
to test four different designs. Similarly for the dataset picker, three different approaches
were shown to the users. In both cases, the consensus was similar, that every participant
preferred a calender layout with weekdays along the x-axis, oppositely of the MVP. These
criticisms were used to build upon the MVP, and introduced many new features. When the
next iteration was complete, another round of UX validation was commenced with the same
three scenarios.
Major redesigns were accomplished after the first user validation and preference tests, espe-
cially in regards to the calendar, which had now had its layout changed to a more familiar
layout displaying weekdays along the x-axis. During the second round of validation testing,
this was a particular point of interest, anticipating a more easier calendar navigation process.
This was indeed the case, as can be seen in Table 4.1.
Round 1
P 1-5
Round 2
P 2-4
Round 2
P 6-9
Round 2
P 2-4, 6-9
Mean execution time
task 1 (mm:ss)
03:26
02:22
02:40
02:32
P = participants
Table 4.1: Comparisons of User Acceptance testing, task 1, showing faster completion times
after design reiteration
Three of the original five participants were able to test the design in validation round
2, as well as four new participants taking part in the second round.
Comparing the completion times seems to indicate that the calendar redesign helping nav-
igating the data faster, spending less time understanding its layout. Participants 2-4 ex-
pectedly performed the fastest in Round 2, as they were more familiar with the design from
Round 1, however even new participants, who had no prior experience using the tool, still
navigated significantly faster than the initial design, showing the benefits of the redesign.
However, feedback on the sessions tool was mixed, with users in particular not selecting
sessions before checking related data. This felt unintuitive to most participants, who would
have preferred every session to be selected by default.
A smaller, final UX validation round was carried out with variants of the first two tasks.
These tasks were less descriptive, encouraging non-assisted usage of the program.
Even
fewer comments arose from these tasks, further indicating that the iterative approach was
important in building a solid tool.
All user validation tests and preference tests are included in appendix D.
Page 83 of 92
==PAGE:90==
4.4. Discussion
4.4
Discussion
The iterative process of building an MVP, getting user experience validation, and then
reiterating and further improving the design worked well in regards to developing a good
design. However, the amount of test participants were limited, and the final design could
likely be improved further by completing more iterations, as well as using more participants
from a wider variety of backgrounds.
The development was driven with getting fast prototypes delivered. This did however mean
sacrificing some best-practices in regards to the development process. For example, in order
to truly ensure the viability of the tool, especially in the context of a real-life implementation,
would be to thoroughly test the project to a larger extent than what was done within this
project. Ideally, unit testing should be done, especially since the interfaces set up for the
PatientRepository and DeviceService meant that they could be decoupled and mocked,
to test the specific functionality.
Furthermore, considerations to the patient storage should be made. For this project, storing
the data in a JSON file was sufficient, but in an actual setting, a database could be considered
instead. This then also presents various considerations in regards to the privacy of patient
data and how this is stored. Measures could be put in place to encrypt data if needed, in
order to decrease risk of accidental data leakage.
A major downside towards testing as well, was the lack of opportunity to perform User
Acceptance Testing[35]. This would have required formulating requirements for the visual-
ization tool in collaboration with a therapist as stakeholder, ideally one who had experience
with previous projects similar in nature to this, using a One-Button tracker. Then, user
acceptance tests could have been performed, with the therapist verifying that the require-
ments were satisfied.
User Experience validation task format
An error was discovered in the UX validation tests, specifically how the first and second
task was structured. The first task objectives, especially in task 1 were deemed too specific,
guiding the participant too much instead of letting them figure out the program themselves.
This meant the participant were more likely to use the program correctly, which would not
be representative of the actual intuitiveness of the program.
The error was discovered after the two intended rounds of user validation had already fin-
ished. Still, the task description of task 1 and 2 was rewritten to be more nondescript,
focusing on goals without revealing how to achieve them similarly to how task 3 was format-
ted. Then, a smaller third round was carried out on four new participants, testing only the
task variants for task 1 and 2.
This discovery occurred late in the project, meaning that the actual results would not have
a large impact, as there was not time to further implement changes based on this round.
While there was not a significant change in the responses from the original task, this should
have been caught earlier on in the process, which would given these tests more credibility in
Page 84 of 92
==PAGE:91==
4.4. Discussion
describing the user experience of using the program.
Encouraging user exploration
A major challenge which was not fully overcome was encouraging user exploration of
the data, especially in regards to the monthly and weekly views. Across both testing rounds,
and with multiple designs, participants would quickly become familiar with the overall cal-
endar, clicking around when tasked with exploring data, but would not consider pressing the
calendar month or week number, which would trigger the focused views. When a participant
were instructed in how to access either, the overall response was positive and that it enabled
better analysis of the data.
However, they were unsure why they did not feel compelled to reach these views on their
own. Initially, an underline was added to each component upon hovering over it, which
was eventually turned into a permanent underline. However, neither approach seemed to
encourage participants to use said tools.
One approach, which was introduced after the testing rounds, and was thus not verified, was
to add a link to the weekly and monthly views from the daily view. This was done in an
attempt to make these other views more noticeable, but still would not reveal that the same
functionality could be executed directly from the main calender.
It could be argued that this final approach satisfied the 7th usability heuristic of accelerators
meant for expert users, in this case accessing focused views directly from the main calender,
could speed up the data analysis process.
However, every user should ideally want to explore the data more, so further work in making
data exploration more intuitive and inviting would certainly be a point of improvement.
User friendliness
Another potential usability barrier, although mentioned sparsely throughout testing,
was user friendliness, especially from the perspective of a technologically unfamiliar user.
Here, further emphasis on usability heuristics 1, 5, 9 and 10 could be improved. For example,
the system could guide the user better through the instrument process, i.e. letting them
know relevant steps (data being transferred, instrument can now be safely unplugged etc.),
which could make a user more confident in using the program. Additionally, user guides and
documentation would be a good addition for a user to utilize, for gaining both initial and
further insights in using the program. These are all aspects disregarded in this thesis, but
should certainly be supported in a real-world project.
ChatGPT
One decision that was made, was to use ChatGPT in order to generate mock data to
populate the visualization tool. The decision was chosen due to the actual data gathered
spanning only a few days in total, with the tool ideally being used for large datasets spanning
multiple months. It was crucial that the data generated would not have any meaningful
usage, it should be used only to better emphasize how the tool would look and work with
actual data. A dataset spanning approximately 3 months of actual data from a case study
Page 85 of 92
==PAGE:92==
4.4. Discussion
using the One-Button tracker was provided from the project supervisor. This contained
timestamps and button press durations, and was used for the initial dataset. ChatGPT was
prompted with a request to create a dataset based on the attached file, but for a whole year.
Later in the process, this data was extended by providing the generated file alongside actual
data from a test collecting wear and activity data, and again asked to create a new dataset
spanning a year. Prompts are attached in appendix C.
ChatGPT was also used with less success in generating React UI components for the tool.
These would be generated but often manually modified to better fit the exact needs, however
the usage of AI helped speed up the development process by rapidly generating a component.
Again, the usage of a tool such as ChatGPT was specifically used for non-critical aspects
such as the aforementioned.
The process of using ChatGPT for e.g. components revolved around either prompting the
tool with some requirements, or to get feedback on an already existing component, with
changes wished to be performed. Therefore, it was discussed with the project supervisor to
simply include initial prompts, as the full conversation would contain irrelevant comments,
with long sections of e.g. React component code.
Data analytics
One feature that was considered very early on was to introduce an analytics tool, some-
thing similar to a "patterns" tab, as can be seen in some of the wireframe mockups as well.
The idea behind this was to further process the data to try and detect patterns or similarly
gain further insights into the data algorithmically, in an attempt of incentivize the thera-
pists data analysis. This was an issue presented by the project supervisor, that therapists
in actual case studies found the amount of data overwhelming, and had trouble initializing
the data analysis process.
It could be interesting to determine for example if the patient is less likely to have mental
health issues during periods of heightened activity, or if they were more likely to have issues
during specific days. These may be difficult to determine at a glance, but there is a near-
infinite amount of predictions that can possible be done.
However, this tool in itself was deemed out of scope of the project, simply due to the ad-
ditional work needed just to generate the analytics data, which could make up an entire
project.
Data labeling
Another interesting feature that was considered but cut due to scope creep was that
of psychiatrist-added labels to datasets. This could be especially useful when looking back
at older data, and to keep better track of what was analyzed previously.
For example,
an psychiatrist could label a specific observation, og an entire day, writing notes to that
event. This could be further improved by adding common tags to an observation, potentially
coloring them. Thus, if the psychiatrist and patient found out that i.e. observations logged
during the night was nightmares, these could be labeled specifically, and allow for easy
overview when reviewing that data. This could then further work in conjunction with the
Page 86 of 92
==PAGE:93==
4.5. Sub-conclusion
data analytics aspect, with it potentially being predictable, and the system being able to
suggest labels based off of previous manual labeling.
4.5
Sub-conclusion
This chapter presents a visualization tool, enabling a therapist to analyze the data gath-
ered in the previous parts. The tool is built as an Electron application written in TypeScript
running a Node.js server hosting React frontend.
The visualization tool is focused on an instrument-first approach. The instrument is the main
source of activity, with the program functioning as an idle screen until a device is plugged
in. The main visualization aspects revolves around a calendar which allows the psychiatrist
to view the overall data at a glance without being overwhelmed, optionally toggling previous
sessions’ data sets. The features of the visualization tools allow the psychiatrist to "zoom"
into the data, getting a more focused, detailed overview. The use of plots to display both
activity and observation events, alongside color scales to indicate daily overviews, allows the
psychiatrist to contextualize the data gathered, looking at when the device was and was not
worn, and the activity levels throughout the day.
User Experience validation and testing has been an essential part in developing this tool.
The design has undergone three major iterations, starting with an MVP, iteratively building
and redesigning the tool based on user feedback. This has made it a more robust and usable
tool overall, and would not have been possible without this approach.
Visualization is a crucial aspect in data-driven therapeutic processes, and it must be easily
available to an end user that may not be technologically proficient. The data gathered and
processed is essentially meaningless if it cannot be conveyed in a way that is meaningful and
easy to understand for the end-user to user for further analysis.
Page 87 of 92
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 5
Discussion
Determining periods of wear and non-wear add meaningful context in the scope of self-
tracking wearables, especially in the context of patients with PTSD. The work in [3] shows
that users prefer the simplicity of a device specifically meant to track a single metric, com-
pared to e.g. a smartphone, which maybe distracting, less likely to be used, or overwhelming
for a patient.
Detecting periods of wear and non-wear is arguably the most significant addition to the
device, in that it better allows a therapist to distinguish non-eventful periods from periods
in which the device is not being worn.
The approach of dividing the project into three main components, the Instrument, Data
Processing, and Visualization made for a good separation of the system as a whole, but also
showcased the interconnectedness of each component. There were significant overlays espe-
cially between the instrument and data processing aspects, with changes to the instrument
affecting the data processing, and parameters tested in data processing influencing future
tests. An iterative approach was applied to all three components, working between design,
implementation and testing.
This thesis set out to implement a system for detecting and visualizing wear and non-wear
for a wearable self-tracking device. This goal has been met to some extent, but with some
shortcomings, primarily regarding the power consumption performance of the instrument.
With the approaches attempted in this project, both prototypes consumed too much power,
with the best performing test only lasting around 3 days. They would need a significant
increase in power efficiency in order to be usable for upwards of a month. However, methods
for reducing power consumptions have proven to work, and should be considered in future
attempts at building similar devices. Tilt switches in particular stand out as a hugely bene-
ficial sensor due to its simplicity while performing well in defining wear and non-wear periods.
The work in this project showed the feasibility in successfully classifying periods of wear and
non-wear using both tilt switches as a low-cost, low-complexity sensor, and how the quality
of these measurements may be increased by adding an accelerometer. It also shows how an
accelerometer may be necessary in order to properly classify activity levels during periods
of wear, with tilt switches not being able to accurately determine these periods by themselves.
The visualization tool shows how important user experience validation has been for the
design and development of a robust tool. The testing phases revealed many barriers and fa-
cilitators along the way, and the finished program would not have been as well-designed had
it not been for the user experience validation. Still, incorporating user acceptance testing
88
==PAGE:95==
on an actual therapist would without a doubt have added even more insight in the needs
of the end users. This project leaves room for further exploration in applying the tool on
real-world case studies.
Further work in particular should be focused with experimenting how the battery perfor-
mance may be further increased. In particular, this thesis leaves room for a more com-
prehensive analysis in hardware approaches, and in particular how to best sample data to
get proper measurements without sacrificing power consumption. Furthermore, how to best
classify and process the data collected sporadically by the RP2040 leaves room for further
improvement, as the nature of the data structure makes it difficult to classify using conven-
tional approaches.
Furthermore there are also many other channels for acquiring context to patient observations
that could be explored, perhaps further assisting in understanding patient issues. This paper
discussed ambient noise as one possibility, but a near-endless amount of possible channels
and sensors exists for further contextualizing data. Additionally, while this thesis has fo-
cused primarily on patients suffering from PTSD, the nature of self-tracking wearables leaves
many possible use-cases for a wide variety of personal assessment.
Page 89 of 92
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 6
Future Work
This project describes the three main components, the Instrument, Data Processing and
Visualization, and how this system as a whole may solve the issues of detecting wear and
non-wear. This does mean that there is still room to dive further into each of the compo-
nents, to maximize the benefits which can be obtained from each.
For the instrument, there is still work to be done in order to be able to use it for upwards
of a month, while providing meaningful wear and non-wear data. There are still multiple
variants of both controllers and sensors which remains unstudied, such as the ADXL343 ac-
celerometer, which may help in further decreasing power consumption. Furthermore, there
is a huge potential for a hardware-centered analysis of the instrument, introducing perhaps
a custom microcontroller specifically designed for the goals of this project, and how such
an approach could further improve both performance and consumption. Additionally, the
instrument in this project was intended to be worn in a pocket only. Work could be done
exploring multiple wear locations, to remove the barriers of patients not being able or willing
to wear the device in a pocket.
The task of processing and classifying data, including activity data gathered from the instru-
ment, is a vast topic with numerous existing and ongoing work within the fields of Computer
Science and Machine Learning. As such, there are certainly more approaches how to mea-
sure such data, which may further improve classification scores. Additionally, this thesis
explores a simple activity classification of still and active wear. However, approaches closer
to an activity classifier similar to that of the BNO085, specifying different activities from
accelerometer and tilt switch data only might certainly feasible.
Finally, the visualization tool could be further improved. One example in particular is that
this thesis was not able to perform user acceptance tests, or UX tests on psychologists in
general. Having the intended end-user be able to test the device would undoubtedly provide
extremely useful feedback, which was not achievable from the testing carried out in this
project. This would almost certainly affect both the functionality and design of the tool,
and would hopefully improve the user experience for the intended end-user.
This thesis has focused specifically on wear and non-wear, however, a multitude of different
metrics could be tracked to add context to the patient’s health. For example, an interesting
analysis could be sound around the patient, and how that might affect or trigger periods of
unwellness. A simple approach could be extending the instrument to include a microphone
to measure ambient sound levels, to better understand if a pattern can be detected between
sound and a patients issues. This could potentially even be extended even further by intro-
90
==PAGE:97==
ducing speaker diarization, i.e. distinguishing people by their voice in order to determine if
specific people have a higher chance of triggering episodes of unwellness.
Another area entirely could also be data processing in between sessions. This could for ex-
ample be the device adaptively configuring parameters based on a patients behavior, or a
way for a therapist to track the patients observations in real-time, instead of the scheduled
physical therapeutic sessions.
Page 91 of 92
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
This thesis has studied approaches to tracking periods of wear and non-wear, and determining
activity, using a self-tracking wearable device. The project covers the necessary components
for an entire system which can be implemented, including a data gathering instrument, an
algorithm for processing collected data, and a visualization tool.
Two prototype instruments using a Feather M4 Express and Feather RP2040 microcontroller
have been designed, incorporating tilt switches and a BNO085 IMU. The M4 instrument in-
corporates a continuous sample rate, with the RP2040 utilizing tilt switches to generate
fragmented observation periods. A program written with CircuitPython is presented, uti-
lizing deep sleep power states to minimize power consumption of the instruments. Different
sensors and the two microcontrollers have been explored, and a power consumption analysis
has been performed, comparing strengths and weaknesses for different configurations.
Different approaches to processing the data collected by the instrument have been analyzed
and tested. This includes classification algorithms for determining periods of wear and non-
wear, and additionally for classifying periods of still and active wear on continuously sampled
datasets from the Feather M4. These tests have concluded that periods of wear and non-
wear, and activity can be classified using either the accelerometer or the tilt switches, with an
improved classifier using both. Applying the same classifiers to the fragmented data from the
RP2040 introduces difficulties in properly scoring the algorithms’ classification performances.
Finally, a visualization tool is designed for therapists in the form of a desktop application,
emphasizing on the instrument as a central piece in using the tool. The program includes an
initial screen for interfacing with and awaiting a connected instrument, and a main screen
for analysis of the processed data. This is built around an interactive calendar colored by
recorded observations with toggleable datasets for each therapeutic session. It allows for
deeper analysis by interactively displaying months, weeks or days, showing an increasingly
detailed level of data including specific timestamps and durations for each observation, as
well as the recorded activities throughout the wear period.
Continuous iterations using user validation testing has been utilized to gain feedback and
insight in the strengths and weaknesses of the design, improving the design through each
iteration, increasing the speed in which users can navigate as well as the user experience.
This thesis has used a perspective of enhancing Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for patients
with PTSD by adding activity context to observations of a One-Button wearable tracker,
crucially highlighting periods where the instrument has not been worn. However, the nature
of the system means it can also be applied to other self-tracking assessments.
92
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1]
lady ada. Adafruit Feather M4 Express. 2025. url: https://cdn-learn.adafruit.
com/downloads/pdf/adafruit-feather-m4-express-atsamd51.pdf.
[2]
Ida-Marie T. P. Arendt et al. “Distinguishing between rumination and intrusive memo-
ries in PTSD using a wearable self-tracking instrument: a proof-of-concept case study”.
In: The Cognitive Behaviour Therapist 14 (2021), e15. doi: 10.1017/S1754470X2100012X.
[3]
Tom H. van de Belt et al. “Barriers to and Facilitators of Using a One Button Tracker
and Web-Based Data Analytics Tool for Personal Science: Exploratory Study”. eng.
In: Jmir Formative Research 6.3 (2022). Ed. by Amaryllis Mavragani, e32704. issn:
2561326x. doi: 10.2196/32704.
[4]
BNO08X Data Sheet. 2023. url: https://www.ceva-ip.com/wp-content/uploads/
2019/10/BNO080_085-Datasheet.pdf.
[5]
M.M. Borghese et al. “Imputing accelerometer nonwear time in children influences
estimates of sedentary time and its associations with cardiometabolic risk”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 16.1 (2019). Cited by: 5;
All Open Access, Gold Open Access. doi: 10.1186/s12966-019-0770-0. url: https:
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85060148923&doi=10.1186%
2fs12966-019-0770-0&partnerID=40&md5=69394ea5176d90419598dc7887e5b85b.
[6]
John Brooke. “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale”. In: Usability Eval. Ind. 189
(Nov. 1995).
[7]
CircuitPython Contributors. CircuitPython Documentation. Version Release 9.2.2. 2025.
url: https://docs.circuitpython.org/_/downloads/en/stable/pdf/.
[8]
Benjamin Doerr et al. “Detecting structural breaks in time series via genetic algo-
rithms”. eng. In: Soft Computing 21.16 (2016), pp. 4707–4720. issn: 14337479, 14327643.
doi: 10.1007/s00500-016-2079-0.
[9]
DS3231 Extremely Accurate I2C-Integrated RTC/TCXO/Crystal. url: https://www.
analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/DS3231.pdf.
[10]
Arik Ermshaus, Patrick Schäfer, and Ulf Leser. “ClaSP: parameter-free time series
segmentation”. In: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (2023).
[11]
Xenofon Fafoutis et al. “Extending the battery lifetime of wearable sensors with em-
bedded machine learning”. In: Extending the battery lifetime of wearable sensors with
embedded machine learning. Vol. 2018-January. Cited by: 68; All Open Access, Green
Open Access. 2018, pp. 269–274. doi: 10.1109/WF-IoT.2018.8355116. url: https:
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85050502061&doi=10.1109%
2fWF-IoT.2018.8355116&partnerID=40&md5=8ca7545fa37a4adc6ff22f3c0386dcb4.
I
==PAGE:100==
Bibliography
[12]
Xenofon Fafoutis et al. “SPW-1: A low-maintenance wearable activity tracker for res-
idential monitoring and healthcare applications”. In: Lecture Notes of the Institute for
Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering, LNICST
181 LNICST (2017). Cited by: 10, pp. 294–305. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-49655-
9 _ 37. url: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 -
85009487513&doi=10.1007%2f978- 3- 319- 49655- 9_37&partnerID=40&md5=
825beff3bffc4d338f3797d1b484832a.
[13]
Mathias Fager and Erik Nørgaard Thomsen. “A Privacy-preserving Place Detection
Method for Wearable Self-tracking Devices, Metode for anonym stedsidentificering for
mobile self-tracking enheder”. und. 2023.
[14]
Szymon Fedor et al. “Wearable Technology in Clinical Practice for Depressive Dis-
order”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 389.26 (2023), pp. 2457–2466. doi:
10.1056/NEJMra2215898. eprint: https://www.nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/
NEJMra2215898. url: https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMra2215898.
[15]
Shaghayegh Gharghabi et al. “Matrix Profile VIII: Domain Agnostic Online Semantic
Segmentation at Superhuman Performance Levels”. In: 2017 IEEE International Con-
ference on Data Mining (ICDM). 2017, pp. 117–126. doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2017.21.
[16]
Dan Halbert. Deep Sleep with CircuitPython. 2023. url: https://learn.adafruit.
com/deep-sleep-with-circuitpython.
[17]
André Henriksen et al. “Using Fitness Trackers and Smartwatches to Measure Physical
Activity in Research: Analysis of Consumer Wrist-Worn Wearables”. In: Journal of
Medical Internet Research 20 (2018). url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:4148847.
[18]
Lægehåndbogen. Posttraumatisk belastningsreaktion (PTSD). 2023. url: https://
www.sundhed.dk/sundhedsfaglig/laegehaandbogen/psykiatri/tilstande-og-
sygdomme/oevrige-sygdomme/posttraumatisk-belastningsreaktion-ptsd/.
[19]
Jakob Eg Larsen. Quantifying wear/non-wear time. 2024.
[20]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen. Active Self-
Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One-Button Wearable: A Case Study in Mili-
tary PTSD. 2017. arXiv: 1703.03437 [cs.HC]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.
03437.
[21]
Sean M. Law. “STUMPY: A Powerful and Scalable Python Library for Time Series
Data Mining”. In: The Journal of Open Source Software 4.39 (2019), p. 1504.
[22]
Markus Löning et al. “sktime: A Unified Interface for Machine Learning with Time
Series”. In: CoRR abs/1909.07872 (2019). arXiv: 1909.07872. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1909.07872.
[23]
Google Maps. Manage your Timeline data. 2025. url: https://support.google.
com/accounts/answer/14200149?sjid=15121625194900038071-EU.
Page II of 92
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[24]
Matthew Middlehurst et al. “aeon: a Python Toolkit for Learning from Time Series”.
In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 25.289 (2024), pp. 1–10. url: http://
jmlr.org/papers/v25/23-1444.html.
[25]
NHS. Overview - Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). url: https://www.nhs.uk/
mental-health/talking-therapies-medicine-treatments/talking-therapies-
and-counselling/cognitive-behavioural-therapy-cbt/overview/.
[26]
Xiaojun Nie. Li-Polymer Battery Technology Specification. 2023. url: https://www.
batterypkcell.com/uploads/LP801735-400mAh-3.7V-AC303128-20230329.pdf.
[27]
Jakob Nielsen. “Enhancing the explanatory power of usability heuristics”. In: Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’94.
Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1994, pp. 152–
158. isbn: 0897916506. doi: 10.1145/191666.191729. url: https://doi.org/10.
1145/191666.191729.
[28]
Jakob Nielsen. Thinking Aloud: The #1 Usability Tool. 2012. url: https://www.
nngroup.com/articles/thinking-aloud-the-1-usability-tool/.
[29]
Natascha Holbæk Pedersen et al. “Protocol for evaluating the impact of a national
school policy on physical activity levels in Danish children and adolescents: The PHASAR
study - A natural experiment”. In: BMC Public Health 18.1 (2018). Cited by: 13; All
Open Access, Gold Open Access. doi: 10.1186/s12889-018-6144-8. url: https:
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85056286576&doi=10.1186%
2fs12889-018-6144-8&partnerID=40&md5=1dd13c682aa6a274d00a443b562b8ae9.
[30]
Martin Gillies Banke Rasmussen, Jesper Pedersen, Line Grønholt Olesen, et al. “Short-
term efficacy of reducing screen media use on physical activity, sleep, and physiological
stress in families with children aged 4–14: study protocol for the SCREENS randomized
controlled trial”. In: BMC Public Health 20.1 (2020), p. 380. issn: 1471-2458. doi:
10.1186/s12889-020-8458-6. url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-8458-
6.
[31]
John Clayton Rawlins. “CHAPTER 2 - AC and the Sine Wave”. In: Basic AC Circuits
(Second Edition). Ed. by John Clayton Rawlins. Second Edition. Burlington: Newnes,
2000, pp. 29–63. isbn: 978-0-7506-7173-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
075067173-6/50003-1. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780750671736500031.
[32]
Heidi Rosendahl et al. Danskernes sundhed: Den Nationale Sundhedsprofil 2021. Dansk.
Danmark: Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2022. isbn: 978-87-7014-420-9.
[33]
RP2040 A microcontroller by Raspberry Pi. 2024. url: https://datasheets.raspberrypi.
com/rp2040/rp2040-datasheet.pdf.
[34]
Patrick Schäfer, Arik Ermshaus, and Ulf Leser. “ClaSP - Time Series Segmentation”.
In: CIKM. 2021.
[35]
Matthew Setter. What Is User Acceptance Testing (UAT): Meaning, Definition. 2025.
url: https://usersnap.com/blog/user-acceptance-testing-right/.
Page III of 92
==PAGE:102==
Bibliography
[36]
Esben Lykke Skovgaard et al. “Generalizability and performance of methods to de-
tect non-wear with free-living accelerometer recordings”. In: Scientific Reports 13.1
(2023). Cited by: 3; All Open Access, Gold Open Access. doi: 10.1038/s41598-
023- 29666- x. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-
s2.0-85147960617&doi=10.1038%2fs41598-023-29666-x&partnerID=40&md5=
797d10b96c7f87d35875e9f7701018b2.
[37]
Kalaivani Sundararajan, Sonja Georgievska, Bart H. W. te Lindert, et al. “Sleep clas-
sification from wrist-worn accelerometer data using random forests”. In: Scientific Re-
ports 11.1 (2021), p. 24. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-79217-x. url:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-79217-x.
[38]
Shaheen Syed et al. “A novel algorithm to detect non-wear time from raw accelerometer
data using deep convolutional neural networks”. In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (2021),
p. 8832. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-87757-z. url: https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-021-87757-z.
[39]
Chuxuan Tong et al. “An Interactive Visualization Tool for Sensor-based Physical Ac-
tivity Data Analysis”. eng. In: Acm International Conference Proceeding Series (2019),
a30. doi: 10.1145/3290688.3290734.
[40]
UserTesting. How to set and measure UX goals. 2023. url: https://www.usertesting.
com/blog/measure-UX-goals.
[41]
UXness. 7 UX metrics to measure the User Experience. 2023. url: https://medium.
com/uxness/7-ux-metrics-to-measure-the-user-experience-2782409d7a41.
[42]
Adam Vert et al. “Detecting accelerometer non-wear periods using change in accel-
eration combined with rate-of-change in temperature”. In: BMC Medical Research
Methodology 22.1 (2022). Cited by: 12; All Open Access, Gold Open Access, Green
Open Access. doi: 10.1186/s12874-022-01633-6. url: https://www.scopus.
com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85130390918&doi=10.1186%2fs12874-022-
01633-6&partnerID=40&md5=15dfae64f78084bcb6dd49701150fde9.
[43]
Ravindu Wickramage. Repository Pattern with Layered Architecture. 2024. url: https:
//medium.com/@leadcoder/repository-pattern-with-layered-architecture-
35f7b9182ebf.
Page IV of 92
==PAGE:103==
Appendix A
Instrument
Figure A.1: Image showing the initial implementation on a breadboard
Figure A.2: Simple deep sleep
V
==PAGE:104==
Figure A.3: The physical setup of the configuration, with a wake pin
Figure A.4: Python code for a simple deep sleep program, with a wake pin
Page VI of 92
==PAGE:105==
Figure A.5: KB2040 prototype
Figure A.6: Deep sleep with a reused digital pin for both button readout and deep sleep
alarm
Page VII of 92
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.7: Implementation using two pairs of tilt switches pointing in opposite directions
Figure A.8: Testbed with the Feather M4 Express, BNO085, DS3231 and two tilt switches
on a breadboard.
Page VIII of 92
==PAGE:107==
Figure A.9: The portable Feather M4 prototype, without the battery, with a BNO085
mounted on top, alongside two tilt switches. A DS3231 is mounted on the underside
Figure A.10: Screenshot of the Adafruit documentation showing a board.VOLTAGE_MONITOR
property, which is not available in this project’s code. Source: https://learn.adafruit.
com/adafruit-feather-m4-express-atsamd51/power-management
Figure A.11: boot.py
Page IX of 92
==PAGE:108==
Figure A.12: Battery voltage drop measured from different configurations
Page X of 92
==PAGE:109==
Appendix B
Data Processing
Dataset
True change points
Computed change points, univariate
Computed change points, multivariate
07-10
7155, 7480, 7599, 8649, 8650, 8953,
9249, 9271, 11277, 11346, 11609,
11677, 13544, 13609, 14128, 14204
7012
3154, 5318, 7062, 8895, 11205
08-10
100, 270, 435, 637, 724,
800, 1690, 2856, 13925, 14202,
23103, 23395, 23725, 23985, 24146,
25034, 25128, 25200, 25377, 25874
26208
25947, 27609
09-10
42, 109, 2705, 2754, 2879, 3714
-
2540, 2925, 3240, 3689
10-10
93, 244, 273, 496, 566, 707,
787, 884, 970, 1796, 1839, 1992
-
-
29-10
1215, 2363, 2402, 2423, 3065,
3069, 3167, 3204, 3323, 3931,
4112, 4226, 4260, 4388, 4539,
4605, 4649, 4729, 4837, 4954,
5040, 5209, 5308, 5354, 5462,
5561, 5839, 5935, 5990, 6059,
6343, 6517, 6958, 7024, 7416,
7510, 7756, 7775, 8081
-
502, 1148, 4167
04-11
700, 7429, 8057, 9710, 10720,
10766, 11162, 11293, 11404, 11438,
11467, 11496, 11552, 11646,
11692, 11747, 11796, 11858, 11894,
11936, 12072, 12105, 12124,
12154, 12268, 12340, 12507, 12534,
12694, 12738, 12871, 13628,
13727, 13750
25-11
52707, 53112, 53290, 54511, 54941,
55331, 55371, 57106, 57385, 57942,
58085, 61008, 61129, 61982, 62125,
65507, 65809, 66025, 66460, 68020,
68192, 70615, 71181, 72822, 72927,
75213, 75509, 81824, 82217, 83294,
84847, 91797, 101083, 102253, 102383
611, 1127, 1522, 1927, 2496,
5038, 7938, 33510, 40762, 44978,
47105, 51928, 91427, 100654
452, 6131, 7717, 13876, 17023,
20028, 30142, 36529, 39497, 52648,
92010, 100545, 103246
02-12
665, 2308, 2671, 3280, 3431,
5250, 5302, 5575, 5589, 6269,
6321, 6943, 7040, 7116, 7139,
7952, 7979, 8144, 8166, 8464,
8483, 8909, 8932, 10863, 11024,
11510, 11532, 14031, 14335, 15939,
16094, 18635, 18672, 18966, 19068,
21884, 22025, 27632, 27757, 27982,
28115, 28360, 28403, 28544, 28643,
29064, 29413, 30516, 31424
-
31646
Table B.1: Change points determined by each model for Feather M4 collected data, compared
to labeled data
XI
==PAGE:110==
Figure B.1: Confusion matrix metrics, minute dataset, centroid window
Figure B.2: Confusion matrix metrics as function of window size, minute dataset.
Figure B.3: Confusion matrix metrics, with a acceleration_any classifier, classifying either
acceleration vector component.
Figure B.4: Comparing confusion matrix metrics for different accelerometer classifiers, on a
longer dataset
Page XII of 92
==PAGE:111==
Figure B.5: Comparing confusion matrix metrics for different tilt switch window durations,
on a minute dataset
Figure B.6: Comparing confusion matrix metrics for different tilt switch window durations,
on a longer dataset
Figure B.7: Acceleration during datasets
Figure B.8: Caption
Page XIII of 92
==PAGE:112==
Figure B.9: Comparison of F1-scores for various cool-down times and sample window lengths,
on multiple datasets.
Page XIV of 92
==PAGE:113==
Appendix C
Visualization
Figure C.1: Returned list from calling await webusb.getDevices()
Figure C.2: Comparison of reading ID from directory vs from file
XV
==PAGE:114==
Figure C.3: Patient Repository UML diagram
Figure C.4: Device Service UML diagram
Figure C.5: Sequence diagram for user connecting device
Page XVI of 92
==PAGE:115==
Figure C.6: Sequence diagram for user creating patient/device mapping
Figure C.7: Sequence diagram showing device connected and data selected
Page XVII of 92
==PAGE:116==
Figure C.8: Different calendar designs proposed for preference testing
Page XVIII of 92
==PAGE:117==
Figure C.9: Different dataset picker designs proposed for preference testing
Page XIX of 92
==PAGE:118==
C.1. ChatGPT prompts
C.1
ChatGPT prompts
ChatGPT was used in the visualization phase, for generating mock data to use in
visualization and user testing, and helping with generating UI component templates and
scaffolding the electron project. An emphasis was put on not using ChatGPT in "critical
code", only for e.g. components which would be further modified afterwards. The process of
using ChatGPT for e.g. components revolved around either prompting the tool with some
requirements, or to get feedback on an already existing component, with changes wished to be
performed. Therefore, it was discussed with the project supervisor to simply include initial
prompts, as the full conversation would contain irrelevant comments, with long sections of
e.g. React component code.
C.1.1
Generating Mock Data
The following prompt was asked alongside an uploaded .csv file containing timestamps
and durations from an actual OBT device spanning about three months over 871 samples.
Can you generate a larger dataset based off the attached dataset? The attached dataset
spans around 3 months, I’d like one spanding about a year
The following prompt was asked alongside a .csv file using instrument data including tilt
switches, BNO classifiers and accelerometer data, alongside the .csv from the previous
prompt.
I want to create a python script which generates some data. The data simulates a person
wearing a device which contains a clock, an accelerometer, a button and a tilt switch in the
x- and y- direction. The person will occasionally press the button for a certain amount of
milliseconds. Moving around will naturally affect the accelerometer and the tilt switches,
which will tilt often while the device is being worn and moved around with. I have
uploaded a sample dataset 25_11_complete.csv containing a timestamp from the clock,
accelerometer data in the x- y- and z- components, a stability column which you can
ignore, and a tilt_up and tilt_forward column. I have also contained a click_data.csv
dataset, containing also a timestamp in the first column corresponding to when the button
is pressed, and a time pressed duration in miliseconds in the third column.
If possible, I want you to use the datasets I have provided to generate a data file for a six
month span of wearing this device, otherwise the python code used for generating such a
dataset. It should contain the following columns: "timestamp", "acc_magnitude" (the
vector magnitude of the x, y, and z components of the accelerometer), "reason" (1 if button
press, 0 otherwise), "duration", "tilt_x", "tilt_y" It can be assumed that the person sleeps
around 11 PM to 7 AM in weekdays and 01 AM to 10 PM in weekends. This means that
the device will not be worn, meaning the accelerometer is still around its default readings,
and the tilt switches are not switching state. The data must contain very few button
presses on a saturday, but more than average amount of presses on a monday. The data
should contain more presses than usual every other thursday, and you should pick a single
date in which there’s an abnormal amount of button presses and duration. Finally, once or
Page XX of 92
==PAGE:119==
C.1. ChatGPT prompts
twice a month, the device should be forgotten by the user for 2-3 days, meaning no activity
can be seen, similar to when sleeping.
Further interaction the response from the above prompt:
I don’t like how the button presses are generated. Usually, a button press appears once or
twice in a minute at most, and on average lasting for slightly less than half a second. It can
also easily go hours without a button press. Furthermore, the dataset must be no larger
than 50 MB. You should lower the sample rate accordingly
The following prompt was initiated alongside a .json file of the data generated by the first
prompt:
Given the following mock data file, please generate a similar file but for 2025. There should
be gaps between 23 and 7 in the night with no recordings. This should hold true for most
nights, but one or two exceptions per month would be nice, where there are recordings
throughout the night. At most once or twice per month, there should be an additional gap.
This should be random, but about a .5 to 2 day gap. Lastly, every gap should be represented
in a new mock_data_gaps.json file, with a "start" and "end" timestamp for each period.
C.1.2
React component generation
A few React components were attempted created using ChatGPT, with varying degrees
of success. One such example, centering a bootstrap form: Using React bootstrap, can you
help me create a form that appear centered in the middle of the screen? You can assume the
only content on the screen is a container containing the form. The form should contain a
title: "Devices", A large button with some placeholder text and a right arrow, and a smaller
link at the bottom with the text "All patients". The styling should happen entirely in the react
components style property
Another example, changing the design of a grid layout: I have a grid layout in react I’m
not satisfied with. [...] The cells are all different width, and I would want them all to be
consistent, with the exception of the months, which should span at certain lengths specified
by my method. The months and week number rows both need to be offset by one columns
width to align with the date data Upon response with inital design based on provided code:
This is good. However, the cells width of the content in .week-day is uneven
The code doesn’t behave as expected, a followup reply:
Why does the gap attribute only add a get in the x-axis?
And then:
This styling seems to be the reason: grid-template-columns: 1em repeat(53, 1fr); I like how
it distributes it on the x-axis, I just also want to style the y-axis After another response, it
still doesn’t look right:
This style: calendar-year .week-date:hover:not(:empty) border: 2px solid black !important;
transform: scale(1.1); /*Slight zoom effect*/ box-shadow: 0 4px 8px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1); /*
Soft shadow for depth */ Shifts everything when it creates the border. How do I keep the
Page XXI of 92
==PAGE:120==
C.1. ChatGPT prompts
border, but prevents everything from expanding to fit the border?
These conversations show the conversations back and forth, and is a reason for the limited
inclusion of chatGPT transcripts, due to bloat.
Page XXII of 92
==PAGE:121==
Appendix D
User Validation Tests
XXIII
==PAGE:122==
Task overview 
Task 1 
●​ Connect instrument 
●​ Choose patient “James A” 
●​ Choose data for 25-02-2024 
●​ How many observations exist for that date? 
●​ When was the longest button press? 
●​ State something about the data 
Task 1b 
●​ Obtain James’ tracking data 
●​ How many observations did James register on 25-02? 
●​ When was the longest button press that day? 
●​ State something about the data 
Task 2 
●​ Connect instrument 
●​ Create new patient mapping 
●​ Click to load their device 
Task 2b 
●​ Register a new patient 
Task 3 
Assume that the last session was 31-07-2024 
●​ Choose the newly created patient 
●​ State something about what happened since the last session 
●​ Which was the worst date since last session? 
●​ Which was the worst month since last session? 
●​ Which was the best month since last session? 
●​ What is the patient’s daily routine? 
●​ What is the patient’s weekly routine? 
 
 
Page XXIV of 92
==PAGE:123==
Round 1 
Participant 1​
Male, 26 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
3 minute 6 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Error: Unsure how to get started, ended up 
looking at “all patients” tab without plugging in 
device. 
(Patient was then instructed to plug in instrument) 
Understood the point afterwards, main screen 
made sense 
 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
38 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
When creating a patient, didn’t care for device ID 
and path, felt it was irrelevant. 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
4 minutes 23 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Overall design made sense, understood color/rule 
height context. 
Calendar was a bit difficult to read, initially read 
dates as amount of events (error) 
Calendar designs 
Strongly preferred calendar design #2 (separated 
months, weekdays along x-axis) 
Session picker designs 
Preferred design #2 (top bar, not-compact) 
Additional notes 
Mac computer is difficult to use 
 
Page XXV of 92
==PAGE:124==
 
Participant 2​
Male, 56 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
4 minute 7 seconds 
Errors 
2 
Thinking aloud 
Understood how to connect devices. 
The coloring when looking at a day made good 
sense, but was redundant with the height meaning 
the same. 
The yearly calendar was difficult to understand 
(He thought the coloring indicated whether a day 
had contained many long presses, not the amount 
of presses, error) 
Mistook the calendar dates for number of presses 
(error) 
Would have preferred the daily bars to be a 
different color 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
50 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
No comments, the process was easy and intuitive. 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
5 minutes 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Analysis was easier after doing previous tests, no 
real comments. 
Calendar designs 
Preferred design #2, was more familiar. 
Session picker designs 
Preferred design #1 (top bar, compact). Better 
spacing 
Additional notes 
 
 
Page XXVI of 92
==PAGE:125==
 
Participant 3​
Female, 20 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
3 minutes 26 seconds 
Errors 
2 
Thinking aloud 
Didn’t understand what to do at intro screen, 
pressed “all patients” multiple times.(error) 
(Did this even after resetting the application and 
being told to try again) 
(Participant was then suggested to plug in 
instrument) 
Impatient, didn’t wait for device to register in 
screen, would plug in but immediately press “all 
patients” (error) 
Didn’t understand the data import part. 
Understood bar colors to mean intensity, not 
directly just the press duration. ​
Interpreted gray areas to mean sleep, some 
difficulties reading the calendar. 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
43 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Was not immediately clear what the device name 
mean (CIRCUITPY), only understood it because 
of “+” sign. Would have preferred it to simply say 
“create” or similar. Otherwise no issues. 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
4 minutes 3 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Easy enough once familiar, first to use the monthly 
and weekly overview, liked the monthly view a lot. 
Calendar designs 
Preferred design #3, it more closely resembled the 
calendar on the phone. 
Session picker designs 
Preferred design #1 (top bar, compact). 
Additional notes 
Generally preferred calendars with weekdays 
along x-axis. 
Page XXVII of 92
==PAGE:126==
 
Participant 4​
Female, 54 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
3 minutes 11 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Connecting device was simple. 
Calendar was not intuitive to follow. 
Correctly identified the metrics, even hovering 
over bar to determine exact time point. 
Colors in year overview meant good/bad days 
(error) 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
27 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Didn’t really make sense with the info on the 
screen. Device ID and path didn’t make sense. 
Task 3 
Kunne bedre lide farve. Kan bedre lide farven på linjen, selvom hun fik af vide at de betyder det 
samme. 
Time to execute 
6 minutes 3 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Hard to analyze from only the yearly overview. 
She didn’t use the daily/monthly/weekly tools, tried 
to look only at the overview. (error) 
Otherwise no comments. 
Calendar designs 
Preferred design #2 
Session picker designs 
Preferred design #1 (top bar, compact). 
Additional notes 
Unsure whether she would have preferred the 
color in the yearly overview to mean number of 
occurrences, or the average length of button 
presses that day. 
 
Page XXVIII of 92
==PAGE:127==
Participant 5​
Male, 24 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
3 minutes 21 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Calendar was difficult to navigate, 
Slight difficulties determining the amount of times 
button was pressed. 
Interprets gray areas to be device non-wear. 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
24 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Didn’t fill out name, immediately pressed create 
(error) 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
4 minutes 50 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Didn’t like calendar, 
Didn’t find monthly/weekly overviews, however like 
the designs once introduced. Could see the value 
in using those 
Calendar designs 
Preferred design #2 
Session picker designs 
Preferred design #1 (top bar, compact). 
Additional notes 
 
 
 
Page XXIX of 92
==PAGE:128==
Round 2 
 
Participant 1​
Male, 26 
Not present for round 2 
 
Participant 2​
Male, 56 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
2 minutes 06 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Did not activate sessions, but quickly learned 
without intervention. 
Took a bit to correlate colors to legend 
Correctly assumed still/active wear. 
Would have preferred every session pre-selected. 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
22 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Easy 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
4 minutes 41 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Used monthly view 
Assumed dark colors to correlate with a large 
amount of button presses, but exact amount was 
difficult to read. 
Also used weekly tool. Correctly correlated 
number of clicks and color, but was hard to 
conclude. 
Underlines guided towards button press. 
Calendar designs 
 
Session picker designs 
 
Page XXX of 92
==PAGE:129==
Additional notes 
 
 
Participant 3​
Female, 20 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
2 minutes 8 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Did not pick sessions at first, but realized how to 
toggle without intervention 
 
Would have preferred all sessions to be selected 
by default. 
 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
17 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Very easy 
 
 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
2 minutes 57 sec 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Uses the detail tools. 
 
 
Calendar designs 
Preferred the new design. 
 
Session picker designs 
 
 
Additional notes 
Didn’t understand what still and active wear 
meant. Generalized sections didn’t feel intuitive 
(i.e. minute wear averaged out might omit data). 
 
 
 
Page XXXI of 92
==PAGE:130==
 
 
Participant 4​
Female, 54 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
2 minutes 54 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Did not use sessions, assumed date to not work. 
Learned to activate sessions without guidance. 
 
Read duration using tooltip. 
 
Correctly assumed still and active wear. 
 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
27 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Straightforward 
 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
5 minutes 10 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Would have liked a recap of each day, i.e. no. of 
button presses. 
 
Did not use focus views, when asked what might 
incentivise participant to click on e.g. month: 
Dropdown icon might lead participant to press the 
week/month, even though it would have been 
misleading. 
Would have liked some way of indicating active 
date/month/week 
Calendar designs 
Preferred new calendar design 
Session picker designs 
Would have preferred all sessions enabled by 
default.  
Additional notes 
 
 
Page XXXII of 92
==PAGE:131==
Participant 5​
Male, 24 
Not present for round 2​
 
 
Participant 6​
Male, 24 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
3 minutes 14 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Pressed date outside of loaded session, stuck on 
empty screen, needed intervention (error) 
Active wear is “sport”, walking would be still, 
Red dates could be therapy or “bad days” 
(changed mind to instead be amount of presses) 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
32 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Easy to use 
 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
2 minutes 31 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Did not use monthly or weekly views, intervention 
necessary, 
Liked the weekly view in particular 
Calendar designs 
Didn’t like week numbers 
Session picker designs 
Would have preferred every session be enabled 
by default 
Additional notes 
 
 
Page XXXIII of 92
==PAGE:132==
 
Participant 7​
Male, 25 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
2 minutes 4 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Sessions are difficult to figure out 
A summary of presses and duration would have 
been nice. 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
28 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Maybe add more patient info input fields. (e.g. 
height, weight) 
 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
3 minutes 28 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Color scale can be difficult to measure, would 
have liked legend. 
Used the dates a lot, didn’t use monthly/weekly 
Calendar designs 
Would have preferred week numbers more 
highlighted 
Session picker designs 
Would have preferred every session be enabled 
by default 
Additional notes 
Would be nice to have a feature to test the 
device/show that it is working 
 
Page XXXIV of 92
==PAGE:133==
Participant 8​
Female, 25 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
2 minutes 4 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Pressed date outside of loaded session, 
intervention necessary (error) 
Gray colors means sleep 
Did use weekly view for more details 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
18 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Simple 
Would have liked a way to reset devices 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
2 minutes 30 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
No comments 
 
Calendar designs 
Color scale was a bit hard to read 
Session picker designs 
Preferred having only the most recent session 
enabled by default 
Additional notes 
Liked weekly view, but felt monthly view was 
redundant 
 
Page XXXV of 92
==PAGE:134==
 
Participant 9​
Male, 25 
Task 1 
Time to execute 
3 minutes 19 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Did not utilize sessions, got stuck on an empty 
date, and assumed 0 observations (error). 
Pointed out observations in between states. 
Red dates are anomalies or “bad days” 
Preferred having all sessions selected by default 
Task 2 
Time to execute 
23 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
No comments 
 
Task 3 
Time to execute 
3 minutes 36 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Did not use monthly or weekly views, intervention 
necessary. 
Colors in week are button press duration 
Calendar designs 
Preferred new calendar design 
Session picker designs 
Would have liked to pick multiple dates 
Additional notes 
 
 
Page XXXVI of 92
==PAGE:135==
Round 2 b 
This round of testing was introduced to reconcile the errors of task 1 and 2 
Participant 10​
Male, 25 
Task 1b 
Time to execute 
3 minutes 41 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Didn’t understand the meaning of still and active 
wear. 
Would say walking to be still wear. 
Task 2b 
Time to execute 
32 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Would have like more guidance in the initial 
screen, i.e. “call to action” 
 
Participant 11​
Male, 24 
Task 1b 
Time to execute 
3 minutes 9 seconds 
Errors 
2 
Thinking aloud 
Did not plug in device, went to all patients 
Manually counted observations instead of reading 
summary. 
A bit unsure what colors meant in daily view. 
Would say that walking was active wear. 
Task 2b 
Time to execute 
18 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
No comments 
 
Page XXXVII of 92
==PAGE:136==
 
Participant 12​
Female, 25 
Task 1b 
Time to execute 
4 minutes 1 second 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Sessions were a bit confusing, didn’t understand 
what it meant at first. 
Coloring meaning number of observations made 
sense 
 
Task 2b 
Time to execute 
24 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
Simple 
 
 
Participant 13​
Male, 26 
Task 1b 
Time to execute 
2 minutes 48 seconds 
Errors 
1 
Thinking aloud 
Read summary for 25-02 
Sessions were not intuitive, pressed empty data 
before realising. 
Colors on yearly calendar meant presses 
Task 2b 
Time to execute 
19 seconds 
Errors 
0 
Thinking aloud 
No comment, easy to use 
 
 
Page XXXVIII of 92
