==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Investigating biotic and abiotic factors
influencing the expression of non-ribosomal
peptide synthetases (NRPSs) in marine
sediments through amplicon sequencing
Master’s Thesis
Matilde Reiff (s193781)
Supervisors:
Mikkel Bentzon-Tilia
Morten Dencker Schostag
February 16th 2025
==PAGE:2==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Resumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1
Background and aim
2
2
Introduction
2
2.1
Microbial interactions in marine sediments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Secondary metabolite production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Amplicon sequencing and BGC diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Materials and methods
9
3.1
Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Microcosm experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Metadata measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Metametabolomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Nucleic acid extraction and amplicon sequencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Sequence data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Results
13
4.1
Establishing a microcosm experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Conditions in microcosms differed from environmental samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Metabolites showed differences between treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4
Diversity differed between cDNA and DNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Sampling time and treatment were important factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Discussion
25
6
Conclusion
30
References
31
Appendices
36
A
Sample environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
B
Metadata plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
C
Metametabolomics PCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
D
PCR product gels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
E
Global clustering threshold
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
F
Alpha diversity measures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
G
OBU BLAST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
H
DMS poster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:3==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Abstract
Uncultured microorganisms from natural microbiomes contain vast biosynthetic potential of novel
non-ribosomal peptides and other secondary metabolites. Particularly marine sediment microbiomes
are rich in genes encoding non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) with unknown products and
ecology. However, the drivers behind NRPS expression in marine sediments are generally unknown.
Therefore, NRPS expression was investigated in a microcosm experiment where the effects of both
biotic and abiotic factors were tested. Long-read amplicon sequencing of conserved adenylation (AD)
domains from cDNA and DNA was combined with metadata and metametabolomics analyses to
achieve a thorough understanding of the microcosms and how they were changed over time. Through
this, cDNA samples were found to be different from DNA samples, with 17% of AD domain opera-
tional biosynthetic units (OBUs) from DNA being expressed. Sampling time was an important factor
for changes in the system, as the richness of expressed OBUs was higher for samples taken at t20 than
for t68, while OBU compositions and microcosm environments showed differences over time. Addi-
tionally, treatments with signal molecules, nutrients, and anaerobic conditions caused changes in the
microcosms. While signal molecules and nutrients treatments affected the biosynthetic potential, the
anaerobic treatment was found to affect the expression of NRPSs in addition to the metadata and
metametabolomics data. Overall, microcosms were successfully used for finding changes caused by
the treatments, thereby providing an initial investigation of NRPS expression for future analyses to
build upon.
Resumé
Ikke-dyrkede mikroorganismer fra naturlige mikrobiomer indeholder stort biosyntetisk potentiale af
nye non-ribosomal peptider. Især marine sediment mikrobiomer er rige på gener for non-ribosomal
peptide synthetases (NRPS’er) med ukendte produkter og økologi. Dog er drivkræfterne bag NRPS-
ekspression i marine sedimenter generelt ukendte.
Derfor blev NRPS-ekspression undersøgt i et
mikrokosmos eksperiment, hvor effekten af både biotiske og abiotiske faktorer blev testet. Amplikon-
sekventering af lange reads for bevarede adenyleringsdomæner fra cDNA og DNA blev kombineret
med metadata og metametabolomics analyser for at opnå en grundig forståelse af mikrokosmerne, og
hvordan de ændrede sig over tid. cDNA prøverne viste sig at være anderledes end DNA prøverne
gennem disse analyser, med 17% ekspression af adenyleringsdomænernes operationelle biosyntetiske
enheder (OBU’er) fra DNA. Tiden for prøvetagning var en vigtig faktor for ændringer i systemet, da
mængden af unikke OBU’er, der blev udtrykt, var større for prøver taget ved t20 end ved t68, mens
sammensætninger af OBU’er og mikrokosmos miljøer var forskellige over tid. Derudover forårsagede
behandlinger med signalmolekyler, næringsstoffer og anaerobe forhold ændringer i mikrokosmerne.
Mens signalmolekyler og næringsstoffer påvirkede det biosyntetiske potentiale, påvirkede anaerob
behandling både NRPS-ekspressionen, metadata og metametabolomics data.
Overordnet set blev
mikrokosmer med succes brugt til at finde ændringer, der skyldtes behandlingerne, og kunne dermed
bruges som en indledende undersøgelse af NRPS-ekspression, som fremtidige analyser kan bygge videre
på.
1
==PAGE:4==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
1
Background and aim
With the increase in antimicrobial resistance among pathogenic microorganisms [1], finding novel
bioactive compounds has become a priority. The advances within sequencing methods and the possi-
bility of efficient annotation of biosynthetic genes through tools like antiSMASH have made it possible
to search for compounds of interest without relying on bioactivity testing of cultured microorganisms
[2]. This has allowed for searching among the large fraction of microorganisms belonging to what
is often referred to as microbial dark matter based on their uncultured status [3]. Such approaches
have discovered both novel microbial species with great genomic potential for production of secondary
metabolites and novel biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) [4], consisting of groups of genes located
together on the genome and involved in production of the same secondary metabolite [5]. The precise
composition of the microbiomes and the BGCs they encode differ between environments. Both soil and
marine microbiomes contain diverse BGCs with very little overlap [6], and even within similar envi-
ronments small differences in parameters such as organic carbon content can be linked to differences in
BGC content [7]. With soil microbiomes being a more common source of known bioactive compounds,
a larger fraction of their encoded BGCs have already been characterized. In comparison, marine envi-
ronments have a higher fraction of novel BGCs, and especially for the group of non-ribosomal peptide
synthetases (NRPSs) larger diversity is found in seawater and particularly in marine sediments [6, 7].
However, not all BGCs are expressed, in general or under specific conditions. Even the expression
of a BGC in one host organism, will not guarantee expression under the same circumstances in another
microorganism, despite the presence of the same BGC [8]. In seawater, it has been determined through
the use of metatranscriptomics that expression differs with both sampling depth and the lifestyle of
the microorganism [9]. Additionally, experiments with soil microbiomes have shown time dependency
of transcription, when perturbing the system through addition of water and nutrients to simulate
conditions after a rainfall [10]. With some photosynthetic species, changes in expression can also be
linked to day-night cycles [11]. Despite this, the extent to which the vast majority of NRPSs is actively
expressed and under which conditions, is currently unknown [8], particularly in marine sediments.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate NRPS expression in sediment microbiomes through
the use of long-read amplicon sequencing with primers targeting conserved domains within NRPSs.
Specifically, the effects of both biotic and abiotic factors were observed over time in a microcosm
experiment. The influence of abiotic factors was investigated through different nutrient and oxygen
content. Proxy compounds in the form of bacterial signaling molecules and antibiotics produced by
marine organisms were used to simulate biotic factors. Coupled with metadata and metametabolomics
analysis on the sediment, the study sought to improve understanding of the interactions between
microorganisms and with their environment through changes in gene expression for production of
secondary metabolites.
2
Introduction
2.1
Microbial interactions in marine sediments
In nature, microorganisms are generally not found alone and are instead surrounded by many other
species in microbiomes.
These microbiomes are adapted to the environment, with the microbial
compositions depending on many factors such as system type and nutrient availability [7]. For marine
sediment microbiomes, factors include currents and sedimentation rate, which differ between areas of
2
==PAGE:5==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
the sea floor. Importantly, the currents affect nutrient delivery to primary producers, causing higher
sedimentation rate with more organic carbon reaching the sediment. Due to the excess of organic
carbon, microorganisms in the top layer of the sediment are limited by oxygen availability for growth.
Therefore, the oxygen is depleted in the upper layer without reaching the layers below [12]. With
oxygen depleted, fermentation can be used, or alternative electron acceptors must be found to sustain
respiration under anaerobic conditions. Possible electron acceptors are generally found in gradients
across sediment layers, with the best acceptor used preferentially [13]. If electron donors suitable for
a microorganism are absent, it might become dormant and avoid growth [14], or it might switch to
fermentative growth instead. Such changes affect the gene expression of the microorganism, which is
true for facultative anaerobes switching from using oxygen as well [15]. The fact that the same species
can use different methods for growth cause them to be found across the sediment layers. However,
specific types are enriched in different areas according to the available electron donors, such as sulfate-
reducers in sulfate rich layers [12]. Overall, bacteria have the highest richness, although they are
affected by depth and are less rich at lower layers. In contrast, archaea are more similar across layers
but have lower richness [16], and with the lack of oxygen available the diversity of fungi is low. Despite
this, the overall abundance of microorganisms in marine sediments is higher where oxygen is depleted
in the upper layer [12].
When microorganisms are found together, they interact in various different ways (see Figure 1).
Such interactions might benefit the microorganisms, might inhibit them, or can sometimes leave them
unaffected, with the different interacting species being affected in different ways. Positive interactions
often occur through one microorganism making a substrate available for use by other species [17].
Negative interactions can for example happen through the release of antibiotics to interfere with
competitors [18], release of products such as ethanol which interferes with growth, or even using
the same nutrients [17]. However, the type of interaction depends on the environment and species
involved.
Generally, similarity in the nutrients used promotes competition between species, while
higher availability of nutrients allows for secretion of various metabolites which other species can use
for growth [19]. In some cases, the interaction between microorganisms makes use of direct attachment
between cells. Additionally, they might directly feed from each other, with one microorganism gaining
advantage from taking over nutrients from the other cell, leaving it empty [17]. A similar form of
interaction is found between bacteria and their vira, called bacteriophages or phages. Bacteriophages
have different strategies for infection of bacteria, but when they are actively spreading, they hijack
the expression machinery of their host cell to make new phage copies. If the strategy used is lytic, the
host cell is lysed to spread the new phage particles. Otherwise, the host bacterium may be chronically
infected, leading to continuous release of new phages from the infected host cell. The presence of
bacteriophages affects bacterial composition, as different phages infect specific species, with larger
abundance of a bacterium compared to others often promoting phage attacks [20].
Another way for bacteria to interact, primarily within the same species, is through the production
of signaling molecules called autoinducers [17]. They form the basis quorum sensing, a regulation
pathway reliant on cell density to control gene expression. The autoinducers used depend on the
species, with Gram-positive bacteria using oligopeptides and Gram-negative bacteria using N-acyl
homoserine lactones (AHLs). Additionally, a shared autoinducer known as autoinducer-2 can be used
by both groups [21]. These signal molecules allow bacteria to coordinate changes in gene expression
3
==PAGE:6==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Figure 1: Interaction types. Interactions between microorganisms can be positive (+), neutral
(0), or negative (-) for both parties. Curved arrows indicate positive effects, and curved lines with flat
ends indicate inhibition. Modified from [17].
4
==PAGE:7==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Figure 2:
Quorum sensing in Gram-negative bacteria.
Quorum sensing signal molecules,
AHLs, are produced by bacteria across cell densities by the LuxI protein. At high enough cell density,
AHLs will enter the cell at sufficient concentration to bind the LuxR receptor, activating gene expres-
sion. Modified from [21].
both within and between species [17]. As seen in Figure 2, quorum sensing relies on the concentration
of autoinducers to determine cell density, as higher concentration indicates more cells are present that
produce the molecule. At high enough concentrations the cell will react to the signal by changing
gene expression. In some cases, bacteria will also be able to react to autoinducers which they are
themselves unable to produce, changing their gene expression in response to the abundance of another
species [21]. However, the necessary concentration depends on the signal molecule, as well as the type
of system used to sense the autoinducer within a bacterium [22]. Additionally, several ways exist of
interfering with quorum sensing. One way is to degrade AHLs used by other bacteria for communicat-
ing, thereby lowering the perceived concentration of these bacteria. The effectivity of such strategies
is also dependent on the bacterial species [23]. Overall, the quorum sensing system depends on the
species which use them, both for how it works but also what it controls. Several different processes
controlled by quorum sensing have been found, with growth, virulence, and secondary metabolite
production among them [21].
2.2
Secondary metabolite production
Secondary metabolites have traditionally been separated from the primary metabolism due to not
always being produced, often being linked to the stationary phase of growth, and generally not being
critical for survival [18]. This large group of compounds have diverse structures with various bioac-
tivities [5]. Most commonly known are secondary metabolites such as penicillin which function as
antibiotics, but they have many different pharmaceutical uses, for example as anticancer drugs [24].
Some secondary metabolites also have multiple functions. One example is pyocyanin which, in addition
to its role as an antibiotic, is a virulence factor helping the pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa during
infections. The same molecule has also been shown to help with redox balancing in producing bacteria
during the stationary growth phase, as if it were a part of the primary metabolism [25]. Secondary
metabolite effects can also be dose dependent, with several antibiotics changing gene expression at
lower concentrations [26]. Similarly, some can act as signaling molecules and take part in quorum
sensing cascades [18]. Additionally, secondary metabolites sometimes help the producing organism by
obtaining lacking resources, such as siderophores scavenging for iron, or in some cases other metals.
However, siderophores are generally only produced when the microorganism senses iron depletion [27].
This dependence on the right conditions for gene expression is part of what makes novel secondary
5
==PAGE:8==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Figure 3: NRPS module structure. A denotes AD domains, T represents PCPs, C is for C
domains, and Te denotes a thioesterase domain. The NRPS contains three modules, M1, M2, and
M3, each connected to an amino acid. The amino acids are connected, and the combined peptide
is released and modified to form isopenicillin N. Further modification results in either penicillin or
cephalosporin. Modified from [33].
metabolites so hard to find and describe, as many BGCs are not expressed under normal laboratory
conditions, if the producer can be cultivated at all [28]. On this basis, the term silent BGCs has been
coined with the understanding that the genetic potential for secondary metabolite expression exists
but remains unexpressed or undetectable [8]. Therefore, different strategies have been developed for
expressing silent BGCs. Changing the culture conditions or co-culturing with other microorganisms
sometimes promotes expression [28], and in some cases a different microorganism will produce the same
BGC under laboratory conditions [8]. Inserting genes for foreign activators may result in BGC ex-
pression [29], while decoy DNA sequences can sequester repressors to allow transcription [30]. Genetic
engineering approaches can be used for example to remove repressors, introduce new active promoters,
or express the BGC in another host through heterologous expression [28]. However, activating a BGC
risks causing the microorganism to lose the genes instead, as the production of secondary metabolites
can become a burden on the organism [31].
Secondary metabolites are generally produced by large enzymes catalyzing the polymerization of
substrates from the primary metabolism, with modifications being made afterwards by various tailoring
enzymes. Most or all of the genes necessary for these functions, as well as their regulation, are found
within the BGC of a product [5]. The large catalytic enzymes are categorized based on the primary
metabolites used as building blocks and the type of their final product. Polyketide synthases forming
polyketides from small carboxylic acids and NRPSs using amino acids as substrates for producing
non-ribosomal peptides (NRPs) are prominent examples. Hybrid BGCs also occur, for example with
an NRPS adding amino acids to a polyketide produced by a polyketide synthase from the same BGC.
Different genes together can also be necessary for production of NRPs, with the different NRPSs
interacting [32].
When producing NRPs, specific amino acids are added sequentially to a growing peptide. Each
amino acid is added by a specific set of domains of the NRPS, making NRPSs modular enzymes with a
set of repeating domains which together add amino acids to the growing chain in the correct order (see
Figure 3). The core module of the NRPS is a set of three domains: The condensation (C) domain, the
6
==PAGE:9==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
adenylation (AD) domain, and the thiolation domain, also known as peptidyl carrier protein (PCP).
AD domains recognize specific amino acids and activate them by adding AMP at the carboxylic acid
through cleavage of ATP [33]. Then, the resulting aminoacyl-AMP is transferred to the neighboring
PCP at a thiol group, creating aminoacyl-S-PCP which is brought close to the C domain [34]. The C
domain catalyzes peptide bond formation between the enzyme linked aminoacyl groups on the PCP
of its own and the previous module. For this reason, there is no C domain at modules beginning the
amino acid chain, as there is no previous aminoacyl group to combine that of the first module with.
The catalytic reaction leaves the combined peptide bound to the PCP of the later module for a repeat
of the process with the next module [33]. Most often the last module ends with a thioesterase domain
responsible for releasing the peptide. The release can happen with the help of water for release of the
linear peptide or using an available oxygen or nitrogen atom either from the peptide itself or from
another molecule. This creates cyclic peptides and a longer chain respectively [35].
Domains with other functions can also be present within the enzyme. Some of these are epimeriza-
tion domains which change the stereochemistry of an amino acid, cyclization domains creating rings
in the structure using cysteine residues, and methylation domains adding methyl groups to the struc-
ture. Methylation can also happen through the activity of tailoring enzymes. Other possible functions
of tailoring enzymes include hydroxylation adding oxygen atoms to the structure, and glycosylation
which adds sugar molecules. The diversity of NRPs stem both from differences in NRPSs and the
included amino acids, and the tailoring enzymes used [34]. For example, the antibiotics penicillin
and cephalosporin start from the same NRPS in Figure 3, but different modifications of the shared
precursor isopenicillin N result in different NRPs [33].
Attempts at engineering NRPSs for making novel NRPs have generally focused on changing or
swapping AD domains because of their role in selection of amino acids [36]. However, C domains
can also have some influence on the selectivity for addition of amino acids [37]. Therefore, strategies
have been developed for transferring C and AD domains together, but the AD domain is always
included [36]. Conveniently, the identity of added amino acids can to some degree be determined from
the amino acid sequence of the AD domain binding pocket [38], making predictions possible before
changes are made [36].
Outside the variation of the binding pocket, AD domains contain several
conserved sequences, termed A1 to A10, which remain mostly unchanged between NRPSs [38]. The
conserved nature of these regions make them a useful target for primer design. Multiple primer pairs
have been made which target conserved regions to capture the variability between them, with both
Ayuso-Sacido et al. [39] and Bakal et al. [40] focusing on the A3 and A7 regions. Despite their similar
targets, these primer pairs will amplify different AD domains when used for amplicon sequencing, with
those from Ayuso-Sacido et al. amplifying a larger fraction of the total AD domains [40].
2.3
Amplicon sequencing and BGC diversity
Amplicon sequencing is a tool for sequencing specific regions of DNA. It relies on PCR using specially
designed primer pairs binding both DNA strands for amplification of the region of template DNA
found between the primers. This will increase the amount of copies of the wanted region available for
sequencing, thereby selecting for sequencing of the specific region [40]. As new sequencing methods
have been developed, amplicon sequencing has been adapted to allow various types of sequencing.
Starting from the Sanger sequencing used by Drebot et al. [41], it has been expanded to include
Illumina sequencing as seen with Charlop-Powers et al. [42], and the 454 pyrosequencing done by
7
==PAGE:10==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Bakal et al.
[40], among others.
The PCR amplification can also happen in different ways, for
example by adding another round of PCR using different primers. This can be done for different
reasons, with Dube et al. [43] using the extra round to add unique sequences to each sample for
pooling during sequencing, while Charlop-Powers et al. [42] completed adapter sequences on already
barcoded and pooled samples. Additionally, primer design can greatly affect the results, as seen from
the primer pair comparison done by Bakal et al. [40].
With the use of different primers, amplicon sequencing has multiple different applications. For
decades the method has found use within epidemiology, with Drebot et al. [41] identifying the vi-
ral strains responsible for infections in the early 1990’s and linking the incidents together. Similarly,
Dube et al. [43] could detect infections with human papillomavirus. Due to the ability to genotype the
matches, the most prevalent virus types could be determined for effective vaccine development, and
combined infections has been found. When investigating microbiome composition, amplicon sequenc-
ing targeting variable regions of universal genes can be used. Bromberg et al. [44] used primer pairs
specific to ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes in bacteria, archaea, and fungi to determine microbiome
compositions and link the microorganisms to metabolic functions.
Through similar investigations
by Liao et al. [16], differences in microbiome composition and function between layers of sediment
have been shown. Additionally, Charlop-Powers et al. [42] found differences in biosynthetic potential
between environments when targeting genes within BGCs for NRP and polyketide production. Con-
veniently, amplicon sequencing with different purposes can be combined. Bech et al. [6] targeted both
rRNA genes and BGCs to link the presence of NRPSs and polyketide synthases to bacterial taxon-
omy. Another use of determining both microbiome composition and BGC diversity is the possibility
of predicting biosynthetic potential from microbial diversity as done by Geers et al. [7].
While Charlop-Powers et al., Bech et al., and Geers et al. all found differences in biosynthetic
potential between environments, Charlop-Powers et al. focused solely on one type of system. They
compared soil microbiomes between different New York City parks, while also including samples taken
from nonurban soil. Their results show a high diversity of NRPSs and polyketide synthases in park
soils, where less than 1% of the amplicons found correspond to known BGCs. Additionally, their
analysis provided proof that several medically relevant secondary metabolites are found within the
same areas. Therefore, amplicon sequencing can be used to highlight areas of importance for discovery
of new potential drug candidates, with particular importance placed on high sequencing depth.
As seen from the findings of Bech et al. and Geers et al., differences between types of systems can
also be evaluated. Bech et al. determined marine sediments to be richer in BGCs than soil, while
the richness of seawater compared to other systems differs with the type of BGC. For NRPSs, the
biosynthetic potential of seawater is between that of sediment and soil. However, the specific BGCs
found differ between systems, showing variation in composition of NRPSs and polyketide synthases
between sediment, seawater, and soil microbiomes as well. Like the findings of Charlop-Powers et al.,
the degree of novel BGCs is large for the investigated systems, although soil had a larger percentage
of known clusters with 12.5% of AD domains being recognized. With the inclusion of taxonomical
analysis, the BGCs could be linked to bacterial genera. In this way, most species were found to have
few BGCs, and the number of BGCs was shown as completely unrelated to species abundance. Bech et
al. also demonstrated that most of the microorganisms are unable to be cultivated, which causes less
of the biosynthetic potential to be available for analysis. However, even within this lower biosynthetic
8
==PAGE:11==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
potential, novel BGCs with antimicrobial effect could be found.
Like Bech et al., Geers et al. showed differences in BGC composition between systems, all mostly
consisting of novel BGCs, and with a larger richness of AD domains found in marine sediments.
These differences between systems were expanded upon through sampling across gradients within
each type of system.
This showed marine sediments to be more similar in biosynthetic potential
across different redox potentials than soil microbiomes across pH gradients and seawater systems
with different salinity. Variations within types of systems are also linked to microbiome composition.
Particularly, soil biosynthetic potential is affected by bacterial diversity, while sediments are instead
affected by the diversity of fungi in the microbiomes.
Across different system types, biosynthetic
potential of polyketide synthases is also related to microbiome richness. Conversely, NRPS richness
was found to be affected by organic carbon content of the system, with both types of BGCs affected
by moisture content. All of this was combined to allow prediction of richness for polyketides from
data on bacterial richness and diversity as well as the type of system, with a separation of seawater
based on salinity improving the model.
3
Materials and methods
3.1
Sampling
Samples of seawater and marine sediment were collected from Nivå bay (55°55’44.4"N 12°31’24.9"E)
on 17th of September 2024. The water was collected from just above the sediment layer. Sediment
was collected from the top layer of the area down to a depth of approximately 5 cm.
Temperature, dissolved oxygen (DO), conductivity, and salinity of the water were measured from
the water using a YSI Pro 2030 sensor, while pH was measured using a GE151-BNC-L01-GE pH
electrode (Greisinger). pH for the top 1-5 cm of sediment from a sediment core removed from the water
was measured with the same pH electrode. A GR 175-BNC-L01 Greisinger ORP/Redox electrode was
used for measuring redox potential of the sediment.
3.2
Microcosm experiment
The collected sediment was sieved through a 4 mm sieve. Then, 50 g was transferred to each of 30
serum flasks with volumes of 100 mL. These were grouped into different treatments as seen on Figure
4, either acting as control, having an anaerobic environment, or with signal molecules, antibiotics, or
nutrients added. All treatments were added 5 mL seawater with the relevant chemicals. For anaerobic
treatment 10 replicates were used to allow sampling partway through the experiment, while all other
treatments had 5 replicates.
AHLs were added as the signal molecule treatment.
This was done
using 3 µM each of the AHLs N-Butyryl-DL-Homoserine Lactone, N-(β-Ketocaproyl)-L-Homoserine
Lactone, N-(Hexanoyl)-DL-Homoserine Lactone, N-(3-oxodecanoyl)-L-Homoserine Lactone, and N-
(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-Homoserine Lactone (Sigma-Aldrich). The antibiotics treatment was addition of
1.86 mg/L Holomycin (Toronto Research Chemicals), and 0.56 mg/L Vancomycin (Sigma-Aldrich).
Nutrient treatment was done by adding approximately 150 µM each of glucose, galactose, mannitol,
sodium acetate, and sodium pyruvate (Sigma-Aldrich) as well as 2.8 µM disodium hydrogen phosphate
(Carl Roth), and 2.42 mg/L ammonium nitrate (Sigma-Aldrich). To avoid any differences between
treatments due to solvents, a total of 5 µL/mL ethyl acetate, and 1.82 µL/mL methanol (Sigma-aldrich)
were added to each flask, and 3 µL/mL resazurin (Sigma-aldrich) was added as an oxygen indicator.
The anaerobic treatment had oxygen removed through the addition of N2 for 1 h. Anaerobic flasks
9
==PAGE:12==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Figure 4:
Microcosm experimental setup.
Flasks containing marine sediment samples and
seawater were separated into different treatments with signal molecules, antibiotics, and nutrients
respectively added to three sets of replicates. Another set of replicates acted as control, and the last
set was made anaerobic and closed with a cap instead of a cotton stopper. Made with biorender.com.
were capped, while cotton was used for stoppers in the other flasks. Then, all flasks were incubated
at 25°C for 68 h, while shaking at 70 rpm.
To preserve samples for RNA and DNA extraction at time point 0 h (t0), 2 g sieved sediment
was transferred to a 5 mL eppendorf tube in 5 replicates, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at
-80°C. Samples for metametabolomics analysis were taken at the same time by transferring 10 g in 5
replicates to 15 mL falcon tubes and were stored at -20°C. At time points 20 h (t20) and 68 h (t68) all
aerobic flasks and half of the anaerobic flasks were sampled for RNA and DNA extraction as before.
Sampling from anaerobic flasks removed the anaerobic conditions, so different anaerobic flasks were
sampled from at t20 and t68. The same flasks sampled at t68 for RNA and DNA extraction, were
sampled for metametabolomics at t68 as before. The flasks were kept in the fridge for 5 days until
samples could be taken for metadata measurements.
3.3
Metadata measurements
Water content of the sieved sediment was determined through separating 10 g sediment and leaving
it at 55°C until the weight was stable after about 20 h. The difference in weight between wet and
dry sediment was calculated, and the mean across replicates was found.
Sediment in 4 samples
collected from Jyllinge harbor was used to estimate the water content of sediment in preparation for
the microcosm experiment. With the sediment from Nivå bay 3 replicates were taken from the sieved
sediment for determining concentrations in the microcosm experiment with greater precision.
To check for the possibility of differences between treatments stemming from differences in pH,
four beakers were filled with 50 g sieved sediment and 5 mL seawater from the solutions used in AHLs,
antibiotics, nutrients, and control and anaerobic treatments were each added to one beaker. pH was
measured using a BlueLine 19 pH electrode (SI Analytics).
As preparation for metadata analysis, the sediment from each flask was vacuum filtered through
a 125 µm mesh into a 15 mL falcon tube. Through addition of milliQ water, the water from sediment
10
==PAGE:13==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
in anaerobic flasks was diluted about 1.75 times, while for other flasks the dilution was around 1.78
times. Then the tubes were centrifuged to get leftover sediment to stay at the bottom. The liquid
was filtered through a 0.45 µm sterile filter into a new 15 mL falcon tube and stored at -20°C until
they were sent for analysis at DTU sustain, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering,
in collaboration with Mikael Emil Olsson. Concentrations of phosphate, nitrogen oxides, ammonia
(NH3), nitrite, total organic carbon (TOC), inorganic carbon (IC), total carbon (TC), and total
bound nitrogen (TNb) using a Skalar system. Ion chromatography was used for determining fluoride
(F), bromide (Br), chloride (Cl), and sulfate (SO4) concentrations. Sodium (Na), magnesium (Mg),
potassium (K), calcium (Ca), aluminum (Al), phosphorous, iron, and selenium concentrations were
measured using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry.
Statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism on data where all samples were above the
limit of detection. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to find differences in mean between
treatments, followed by Tukey’s test for data with significant differences. Principal component analysis
(PCA) was performed using all data without missing values, both including and excluding a single
replicate for t0 which had not been sieved but was otherwise prepared for analysis in the same way.
3.4
Metametabolomics
Sediment samples for metametabolomics analysis taken at t68 were vacuum filtered, and both the
dried sediment and the filtered liquid were collected and returned to -20°C. All sediment samples for
both t0 and t68 were then frozen at -80°C, followed by freeze drying. Lastly, the dried sediment was
sieved, and grains smaller than 2 mm were collected. Both sieved sediment samples and liquid samples
were sent for analysis with Daniel Jordan Otto at DTU Bioengineering, Department of Biotechnology
and Biomedicine. Metabolites were extracted from sediment samples with a gradient of water and
methanol, while liquid-liquid extractions were performed using ethyl acetate. This was followed by
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Bruker MALDI timsTOF fleX.
For the sediment samples, only the methanol fraction was run through LC-MS/MS. MS data was
processed using mzmine 4.4.3 [45].
The output table of relative peak area for each sediment sample and mass to charge ratio, denoting
different features, was processed with MetaboAnalyst 6.0 [46] for statistical analysis. To approximate a
normal distribution for the features, the data was processed before analysis. Samples were normalized
by sum, and square root transformation was used on the data. Additionally, Pareto scaling, where
data is mean-centered and divided by the square root of the standard deviation (sd) of each variable,
was used. A PCA plot was made, and permutational multivariate ANOVA (PERMANOVA) was used
to evaluate differences between treatment groups. Based on features with large peak areas which only
existed in a single control replicate for sediment samples, the analysis was repeated with this replicate
excluded.
To determine if variation between groups was explained by dimensions not highlighted
by PCA, a partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) plot was made and evaluated with
5-fold cross-validation. The analysis was repeated for the liquid samples, with one replicate for AHL
treatment left out due to too low mass of metabolites extracted.
3.5
Nucleic acid extraction and amplicon sequencing
RNA and DNA were co-extracted from 2 g sediment for each of the 55 samples using the RNeasy®
PowerSoil® Total RNA Kit and RNeasy® PowerSoil® DNA Elution Kit (QIAGEN) by following their
protocols. RNA samples were stored at -80°C while DNA was stored at -20°C. Quality of extracted
11
==PAGE:14==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
RNA and DNA was assessed using a NanoDrop (DeNovix DS-11+ spectrophotometer) and by gel
electrophoresis.
The RNA samples were DNase treated using the TURBO DNA-freeTM Kit (Invitrogen) according
to the protocol for rigorous DNase treatment, with the exception of skipping the first step. 3 µL of
the TURBO DNaseTM Enzyme was used. The DNA free RNA samples were again stored at -80°C. A
NanoDrop and gel electrophoresis was used to control RNA quality and success of DNase treatment.
Afterwards, reverse transcription was performed on the samples using the SuperScript® IV Reverse
Transcriptase (Invitrogen) by following the relevant protocol with random hexamers as primers, 11
µL RNA sample, and no RNA removal step. The results were stored at -80°C.
For the amplification of AD domains, a pair of degenerate primers (A3F 5’-GCSTACSYSATSTACA
CSTCSGG and A7R 5’-SASGTCVCCSGTSCGGTA [7]) originally published by Ayuso-Sacido and
Genilloud [39] for targeting a fragment of about 700 bp was used. Reaction mixtures consisted of
12.5 µL TEMPase Hot Start 2x Master Mix K (VWR), 1.6 µL each of A3F and A7R (10 µM, TAG
Copenhagen), 1 µL BSA (20 mg/mL, Thermo Scientific), 2 µL template, and 6.3 µL nuclease free water
(QIAGEN) for a total of 25 µL. Template was either in the form of extracted DNA samples, reverse
transcribed cDNA, DNase treated RNA samples, or nuclease free water as control. Amplification
conditions for cDNA and RNA was 95°C for 15 min, 39 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 55°C for 40 s, and
72°C for 30 s, followed by 72°C for 5 min in a T100 Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad). For DNA samples,
the number of cycles was lowered to 35. The results were stored at -20°C until use. Negative controls
were included for both programs. Gel electrophoresis was used to validate AD domain amplification
(Appendix D).
The replicate for each time and treatment with the most distinct DNA contamination in the
DNase treated samples was left out of sequencing. None of the nutrient samples for t20 had clear DNA
contamination, so the four samples with a combination of higher quality after DNAse treatment, and
distinct AD domain bands in cDNA samples after PCR were chosen for sequencing.
The chosen
PCR samples for both cDNA and DNA were cleaned using AMPure XP Beads (Beckman Coulter)
by following the protocol, except for using a beads to sample volume ratio of 0.6.
Then, DNA
concentrations were measured on a Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen) using dsDNA Broad Range
standards (Invitrogen). Cleaned samples were kept at -20°C.
Samples were prepared for sequencing using the Native Barcoding Kit 96 V14 (Oxford Nanopore
Technologies) and following the protocol for amplicon sequencing with a very short (<1 kb) fragment
library length on a PromethION flow cell (Oxford Nanopore Technologies) with 6637 pores at the
start. Higher sample volume was used to substitute for DNA sample control, which was left out. It
was instead included in a separate mixture with its own barcode. A smaller volume of AMPure XP
Beads was used during Native barcode ligation due to loss of sample volume.
3.6
Sequence data processing
All FastQ files for each sample were merged, and both adapters and barcodes were removed using
Porechop (https://github.com/rrwick/Porechop) without chimera checking, but otherwise with de-
fault settings. Cutadapt [47] was used for selecting reads with ends matching the primer pair in either
direction. For this purpose, the primer sequences were reverse complemented with DNA Sequence
Reverse and Complement Online Tool (http://www.cellbiol.com/scripts/complement/dna_sequence_
reverse_complement.php). Various settings were tested, but a maximum error rate of 0.2 was chosen
12
==PAGE:15==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
to maximize the number of reads selected while avoiding too many reads outside the expected length
of 700 bp. Cutadapt was set to keep the primers in the sequences to preserve variability within the
degenerate primers. Seqkit [48] was used to reverse complement reads where primers were found in
the reverse direction, and remove reads outside a length of 600-800 bp to select for the expected length
of AD domain fragments.
Before combining reads from different samples, VSEARCH [49] was used to relabel reads based on
sample of origin. Different global clustering thresholds were tested for clustering reads from samples
individually (Appendix E). From this, a value of 0.85 was chosen based on small changes in threshold
around this value not resulting in large differences in clustering, to avoid small differences between
samples greatly impacting clustering. Reads from all samples were clustered together to represent all
operational biosynthetic units (OBUs) in the samples. Afterwards, the reads were mapped to OBUs,
creating a OBU table over OBU abundance per sample. The R packages phyloseq [50] and vegan were
used for analyzing the OBU table. Rarefaction curves were made, followed by rarefaction to 1500
reads while removing samples with too few reads (6 cDNA samples). Alpha diversity was determined
using Chao1 estimates, which used the number of different OBUs in the samples combined with
the prevalence of low abundance OBUs to estimate the actual richness of the samples. Samples were
compared with ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test when significant. Additional alpha diversity measures
were calculated as well, from samples rarefied to 1500 reads after singlet clusters had been removed
(7 cDNA samples removed). The Simpson index was used to determine the evenness of the OBUs in
the samples from the proportions of the individual OBUs. Here, a value close to 1 represented high
diversity and evenness with 0 as no diversity. Additionally, Shannon entropy was used, which combined
both richness and evenness to determine the uncertainty about which OBU a randomly chosen read
would belong to. The value of Shannon entropy increases both with richness and evenness.
To evaluate how OBUs were distributed between DNA and cDNA samples, a Venn diagram was
made from the reads resulting from singlet cluster removal and rarefaction. For beta diversity, single
read clusters were removed from the full OBU table, and abundances were normalized by dividing with
total reads per sample. A principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity was
performed to visualize beta diversity. Bray-Curtis dissimilarity relies on minimal abundances of all
OBUs to determine the difference in abundance between two samples. PERMANOVA was used to eval-
uate differences between groups. For selected OBU loadings, NCBI nucleotide BLAST (https://blast.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PROGRAM=blastn&PAGE_TYPE=BlastSearch&LINK_LOC=blasthome) was used
with standard parameters on the nucleotide sequences to determine possible similarity to genes with
known functions.
4
Results
4.1
Establishing a microcosm experiment
Establishing a microcosm experiment to follow changes caused by different treatments requires knowl-
edge of the concentrations of added compounds. For this purpose, the water content of sediment from
Nivå bay was estimated using sediment from Jyllinge harbor. The sediment had a mean water content
of 11.79 g per 50 g with a standard deviation (sd) of 0.49 g per 50 g sediment. When measuring
water content of the sediment from Nivå, it had a mean of 15.98 (sd 0.33) g water per 50 g sediment,
leading to just above 4 times dilution instead of the 3 times dilution estimated from Jyllinge sediment.
13
==PAGE:16==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Table 1: Sediment pH. Control also represents anaerobic treatment before oxygen removal. Nivå
mean and sd was determined from Appendix A.
Treatment
Control
AHLs
Antibiotics
Nutrients
Nivå mean (sd)
pH
7.02
7.00
7.06
7.08
6.64 (0.057)
Therefore, concentrations of the added AHLs, antibiotics, and nutrients were lower than expected,
possibly too low to have caused changes in the microcosms.
To ensure any changes in the microcosms would not be caused by differences in pH between the
added seawater solutions, pH was measured in sediment samples with the solutions added. The anaer-
obic treatment shared seawater solution with the control, and the two treatments were measured
together. All four of the tested treatments in Table 1 had similar values at approximately neutral
pH. Therefore, no clear differences between treatments should result from the pH of the added sea-
water solutions. Interestingly, the pH for the treatments were different from the pH measurements
taken directly from sediment at Nivå bay, which were lower in value. This could indicate that the
sediment preparation process or the seawater solutions made the environments less acidic. However,
the differences in value might result from having used different electrodes for measuring pH.
Resazurin was used as oxygen indicator to ensure oxygen had been removed for the anaerobic
treatment. This was the case, as after addition of N2 gas the liquid in the flasks had turned from
the pink of aerobic conditions to colorless. At t20 the aerobic flasks were checked for oxygen as well.
As seen from Figure 5, the water of the aerobic replicates was not colorless, instead showing a slight
pink color associated with some oxygen being present. This proved different oxygen presence had
been achieved between the aerobic and the anaerobic treatments, making it possible for anaerobic
conditions to affect the microcosms differently.
4.2
Conditions in microcosms differed from environmental samples
To establish whether the treatments in the microcosm experiment had caused changes in sediment
conditions over time, concentration of various ions and chemical elements was determined for a con-
trol sample at t0 and in all microcosm flasks at t68. Not all measured parameters were above the
detection limit for all samples, so phosphate, nitrogen oxides, nitrite, phosphorous, iron, and selenium
Figure 5: Microcosm flask with nutrients treatment. Picture taken at t20 showing slight pink
color in the liquid.
14
==PAGE:17==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
a)
b)
c)
Figure 6:
Comparison of concentrations between treatments at t0 and t68.
Measured
concentrations of a) TOC, b) inroganic carbon (IC), and c) potassium (K) grouped by treatment.
Shown are all replicates, their mean concentration, and their standard deviation.
Stars mark p-
values below 0.01 (**), and below 0.05 (*), while ns stands for not significant. In c) significance for
comparisons with control at t0 is not shown (see Appendix B).
concentrations were left out due to incomplete data. The concentration of the other parameters was
generally similar between treatments and showed statistically significant differences from the environ-
mental control sample taken at t0 (see Appendix B). The t0 sample was also generally the lowest in
concentration. However, for aluminum, total organic carbon (TOC), and total carbon no groups were
significantly different from each other, and only the anaerobic treatment was different from the t0
control for calcium. The lack of difference in organic carbon concentration was unexpected, as several
forms of organic carbon was added to the nutrients treatment, and to some degree the AHLs and
antibiotics treatments as well. As seen from Figure 6a, the mean of TOC concentration for nutrients
treatment was the highest but three of the replicates were at about the same level as the other treat-
ments. With the other two replicates for nutrients being much higher, the variance within the group
was large. This could lead to problems with the use of ANOVA for determining differences between
the treatments, as it assumes equal variances between groups. Additionally, the high concentration of
TOC for some nutrient treated replicates could indicate that higher concentration had at some point
been present in all five replicates, but was used by the microorganisms present.
Another parameter with variation from the overall trend was inorganic carbon (seen in Figure
6b), where the anaerobic treatment was not different enough from the t0 control to be significant.
The t0 sample also had the highest concentration, indicating that carbon might have been used in
inorganic form over time by microorganisms in other samples. This might have happened to a lesser
degree in the anaerobic samples, since one replicate was at about the same concentration as other
treatments. Interestingly, the anaerobic samples were significantly different from the AHL samples.
Therefore, microorganisms growing under anaerobic conditions might have a different use of inorganic
carbon than those growing in the presence of AHLs. Additionally, the concentration of potassium in
the anaerobic treatments was significantly higher than for all other treatments (see Figure 6c). This
15
==PAGE:18==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
a)
b)
Figure 7: PCA plot of metadata at t0 and t68. a) Samples plotted according to their principal
component scores and colored based on treatment. b) Loadings plot showing the direction and strength
of the different parameters in the PCA. Explained variance for each principal component is shown in
parentheses.
indicated a difference in environment for the anaerobic treatment.
PCA was used to evaluate the overall differences in conditions between treatments. Despite PC1
in Figure 7 explaining more than half the variation, about 25% of the variance between samples could
not be explained with two components. Figure 7a showed the samples from t68 being close together,
with replicates from different treatments mixed between each other. This could indicate that the
different treatments were similar in conditions of the microcosms for the measured parameters. Even
then, some replicates were away from the closer group, with two replicates for the nutrients treatment
being separated along PC2 from the rest. As seen from Figure 7b, this lower value was likely largely
driven by higher concentrations of carbon in different forms. This could correspond with the two
replicates with much higher TOC concentration, and possibly with one nutrients sample in Figure
6b showing higher inorganic carbon concentration as well. The PCA plot in Figure 7a also showed
the sample from t0 as separate from the other samples. It was mostly separated along PC1, generally
corresponding to low concentrations for the measured parameters (see Figure 7b). Additionally, higher
concentrations for aluminum and inorganic carbon had a smaller effect on the separation. However,
with t0 consisting of a single sample which was not prepared completely as the others, any differences
could have been the result of an outlier sample or changes caused by the different preparation.
Therefore, metadata was analyzed again without the t0 control. Generally, no new significant dif-
ferences in concentration of the measured parameters appeared between treatments (data not shown),
but two additional significant relationships were found (see Figure 8). Anaerobic treatment had signifi-
cantly higher concentration of calcium than nutrients treatment, and higher concentration of inorganic
carbon than the control. These additional differences lent credence to the anaerobic treatment having
different conditions than other treatments. To further investigate differences in measured parameters
between the conditions, a PCA plot was made without the t0 sample (see Figure 9a). Without the
clear separation on PC1 due to this sample, PC1 explained almost 10% less of the variance between
samples, although the first two components still explained the majority of variation. The concentra-
16
==PAGE:19==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
a)
b)
Figure 8: Comparison of concentrations between treatments at t68. Measured concentrations
of a) calcium (Ca), and b) inorganic carbon (IC) by treatment. Shown are all replicates from t68, their
mean concentration, and their standard deviation. Stars mark p-values below 0.01 (**), and below
0.05 (*).
a)
b)
Figure 9: PCA plot of metadata from t68. a) Samples plotted according to their principal
component scores and colored based on treatment. b) Loadings plot showing the direction and strength
of the different parameters in the PCA. Explained variance for each principal component is shown in
parentheses.
tion of fluoride had much less much less effect on variance, as seen from the shorter loading arrow in
Figure 9b compared to Figure 7b. Directions of loadings also changed slightly, with fluoride changing
the most. However, the samples from different treatments were still mostly found together in Figure
9a. The exception is the anaerobic treatment, where four of the five replicates were grouped together
away from other treatments. This seemed to indicate a difference in conditions within the microcosm
flasks. From the loadings plot (Figure 9b), the differences were indicated to result from higher concen-
trations for several parameters. Most of the relevant parameters showed higher mean concentrations
for anaerobic treatment (see Appendix B), even if only calcium, inorganic carbon, and potassium had
significant differences.
17
==PAGE:20==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
4.3
Metabolites showed differences between treatments
To examine the microcosms for differences in metabolite content, metametabolomics was employed
on samples taken at both t0 and t68. For metabolites extracted from sediment, 931 features were
detected. PCA was used to reduce the high dimensionality, and to show variation between samples.
This allowed for visualizing differences between treatments, however, there was great overlap between
the groups (see Appendix C). Replicates from the same treatment were generally tightly grouped,
indicating that similar metabolites could be detected. An exception from the tight grouping was the
control group for t68, where one replicate was on its own in the top left of the plot. When investigating
the sample, it turned out to have features with large peak areas which were not present in any other
sample, likely causing this distance.
Removing the sample was deemed prudent due to the unknown features skewing the results. This
resulted in much tighter grouping for the t68 control samples, as seen from Figure 10a. The different
treatments still mostly overlapped, but some points for anaerobic treatment were separate from other
groups and their predicted confidence areas. With the use of PERMANOVA, treatments were found
to be significantly different from each other (p-value 0.001). However, pairwise comparisons between
treatments showed differences between the t0 control and aerobic, antibiotics, and nutrients treatments
with adjusted p-values of 0.045. This was not quite clear from the PCA plot, where the confidence
region for anaerobic treatment overlapped with that for the samples at t0. Additionally, the variance
explained from the first two principal components was low, leading to more dimensions being necessary
to more fully explain the differences between samples.
To see if PCA missed any dimensions which were important for treatment separation, PLS-DA was
used as well. As seen from Figure 10b, the variance explained by the first two components was still
low. Additionally, cross-validation showed that predicting the groups for different samples was more
accurate for three components at 56%. However, several treatments were separated from each other
with the control at t0 being different from everything at t68. This could indicate that metabolites in the
microcosms changed over time. Such changes would likely come from being in the enclosed system of a
flask without exchange with the rest of Nivå bay. Of the groups at t68, anaerobic treatment differed the
most from the other treatments with most of its confidence region outside those of the other groups.
However, it still had some overlap with the control, and AHL treatments, so the difference was not
significant for all treatments. The antibiotics and nutrients treatments were completely separated
from the anaerobic and control samples, indicating significant differences in metabolism between the
groups. When investigating the features table for features resulting from the various AHLs, antibiotics,
and nutrients added to different treatments, no matching features were found. This indicated that the
presence of these chemicals was not part of the differences detected.
To investigate metabolites found in the liquid content of the sediment, the analysis was repeated
using filtered liquid.
From this 1174 features were found and analyzed using PCA, however, one
replicate for AHL treatment was left out due to too low weight of extract for meaningful analysis. The
variance explained by PC1 for liquid samples was much larger than for the sediment bound metabolites
(see Figure 10c), indicating that more of the differences between samples could be visualized in a single
dimension.
Interestingly, the AHL treated samples were much more tightly grouped than before,
showing high similarity of metabolism between replicates. Additionally, the AHL treatment had no
overlap with the anaerobic samples.
Combined with PERMANOVA finding significant differences
18
==PAGE:21==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 10:
Plots of metametabolomics data.
Samples plotted according to their principal
component scores from PCA in a) and c), and according to their component scores from PLS in b)
and d). a) and b) represent data from sediment bound metabolites, while c) and d) contain liquid
data. The samples are colored based on treatment. Translucent ellipses mark the 95% confidence
regions of the treatments, and explained variances are shown in parentheses.
19
==PAGE:22==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Table 2: Number of amplicon sequencing reads. Mean number of reads for DNA and cDNA
samples at sequencing, after selection for primer matches, and after length filtering.
Sample type
Sequenced reads (sd)
Primer matched reads (sd)
Length filtered reads (sd)
DNA
905347 (455246)
63846 (55900)
18942 (16615)
cDNA
1940914 (1733725)
255951 (242221)
6534 (6793)
between treatments (p-value 0.015), this indicated that the treatments had different metabolisms.
However, no significant differences between treatments were found using pairwise comparisons.
Therefore, the data was analyzed using a PLS plot as well (see Figure 10d). Again, the components
explained more of the variation between samples than for the sediment bound samples, indicating that
differences in samples from the liquid content had a stronger trend. The accuracy found using cross-
validation was also higher, with up to 79% accuracy for four components. As for the PCA plot the
anaerobic treatment was different from the AHL treated samples, however, using PLS the antibiotics
treatment was separated from the anaerobic samples as well. Interestingly, the control samples were
placed between the anaerobic treatments and the rest. This could indicate that the metabolism in the
microcosms changed from the control in different ways for aerobic and anaerobic samples. However,
the control overlapped with all the other treatments, making it impossible to tell from the current
data.
4.4
Diversity differed between cDNA and DNA
To focus specifically on differences in NRPS production between treatments, amplicon sequencing of
AD domains from cDNA was performed. DNA amplicons were included as well to represent biosyn-
thetic potential of the microcosms. Amplicon sequencing reads with ends matching the degenerate
primer pair were selected, followed by filtering out reads with lengths too far from the expected length
of 700 bp. From Table 2, it was clear that cDNA samples contained more sequenced reads on average
than DNA samples. However, the number of reads varied greatly between samples, as seen from the
sd being almost as large as the mean, or in one case larger than it. The different selection steps did
not affect both types of samples equally. For DNA samples, 7% of the reads were kept during primer
selection, and almost 30% of these reads passed through the length filter. This suggested that a lot
of the reads matching the primer pair were of the right length to be AD domain amplicons. The
primer selection for cDNA samples kept a larger fraction of reads at about 13%, however, less than
3% of these reads were of the right length. Therefore, only a small fraction of the cDNA reads were
considered AD domains for the further analysis. Overall, more reads were removed for cDNA samples,
with the final number of reads for cDNA being lower than that for DNA samples, despite starting out
with one million reads more on average.
The length filtered reads, considered to be AD domains, were further compared between all samples.
As seen from Figure 11, the total number of AD domain reads varied greatly between samples, with
DNA samples generally reaching higher abundances. This variation reflected the high sd values from
Table 2.
Additionally, with the the mean being higher for DNA samples, the higher abundances
were expected as well. Some DNA samples had about 70000 different reads, as seen from Figure
11. In contrast, most cDNA samples were concentrated below 10000 reads, with six samples having
below 1500 reads in total. However, abundance of reads does not always reflect the diversity of the
sequences. Therefore, the reads were clustered into AD domain OBUs using a clustering threshold
20
==PAGE:23==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Figure 11: Total AD domain abundance of samples. Histogram showing the total number of
reads separated into intervals of 1500 reads, and the number of samples with a total abundance of
reads within each interval. Bars are colored based on sample type, with the different types stacked to
reflect the total number of samples at each interval of reads.
Figure 12: Rarefaction curves. Number of different AD domain OBUs dependent on number of
tested reads shown for all samples, and colored by sample type.
of 85% identity, with each OBU representing a unique AD domain. 102710 OBUs were found across
the samples. From these clusters, the rarefaction curves in Figure 12 were made. The differences in
total abundance were mirrored by the graphs stopping at different numbers of reads, with many of the
cDNA curves stopping before 10000 reads. Additionally, the rarefaction curves showed the diversity
of the reads to differ between the two types of samples. The DNA samples increased more rapidly
in number of different OBUs represented by an increasing number of reads, and while they gradually
increased less at higher numbers of reads the overall diversity in OBUs was much higher. None of
the samples seemed to have reached a plateau where adding new reads did not affect the number of
OBUs. However, the samples generally seemed to have reached a number of reads where the number
of OBUs was less affected by adding new reads.
21
==PAGE:24==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
a)
b)
c)
Figure 13: Chao1 richness estimates. Chao1 estimates for a) all samples, b) DNA samples, and
c) cDNA samples separated by treatment.
To better compare the diversity of reads between samples, the samples were rarefied to 1500
reads.
Afterwards, alpha diversity was measured using Chao1 richness estimates (see Figure 13).
From Figure 13a the DNA samples were found to have much higher diversity than cDNA samples,
which was expected due to many NRPSs not being expressed despite the genes being present. The
difference was confirmed to be significant using ANOVA (p-value <2·10-16). The diversity estimates
for DNA samples were generally at least twice that of the number of reads (see Figure 13b), with
one estimate reaching a diversity of 6000 OBUs. These higher numbers indicated that many of the
OBUs found in the samples occurred at low abundances, making it more likely for additional low
abundance OBUs to be present in the samples. Unlike the DNA samples, the cDNA samples in Figure
13c were mostly found at estimates lower than the number of reads, indicating more of the OBUs were
represented by multiple reads. A few samples from anaerobic and antibiotics treatments had higher
richness, causing their replicates to be more spread out. In contrast, the control samples for cDNA
had similar richness estimates for all replicates across times. However, there was no clear difference
in diversity between treatments for both cDNA and DNA. Similarly, there was no clear difference
between sampling times for DNA, even if the cDNA samples often had more of the higher estimates
at t20. This observed difference was tested using ANOVA. The cDNA samples were shown to be
significantly different between sampling times (p-value 0.034), with pairwise comparison confirming
t20 to be different from t68. No significant differences were found for DNA samples.
Additionally, alpha diversity was measured using the Simpson index and Shannon entropy (see
Appendix F). For these measures, the samples were also rarefied to 1500 reads, but single read OBUs
were removed beforehand.
The high values for the Simpson index showed all samples to be very
22
==PAGE:25==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Figure 14: Venn diagram comparing number of OBUs. Number of OBUs found in DNA,
cDNA, and both.
diverse, although the DNA samples generally had higher evenness than the cDNA samples. For the
DNA samples, the Shannon entropy was also higher, which made sense as both richness and evenness
were higher for DNA. ANOVA confirmed the DNA and cDNA samples to be significantly different for
both Simpson index (p-value 1.03·10-13) and Shannon entropy (p-value <2·10-16), although no other
differences were found.
The difference between DNA and cDNA samples was further investigated through comparing the
OBUs present in both types of samples. This was done on the rarefied samples with single read OBUs
removed beforehand to allow for comparisons of OBU numbers. From the Venn diagram in Figure 14
it was clear that the DNA samples contained the greater number of different OBUs. However, more
OBUs were found solely in cDNA than in both sample types, with 26% of the total sequences only
found in cDNA. This could be a result of the rarefaction randomly selecting the OBUs from only the
cDNA samples, even if it was present in DNA as well. The OBUs being present in low abundance in
the sediment could also explain the OBUs not being sequenced for DNA samples. Unfortunately, the
cDNA specific OBUs could also be a result of nonspecific amplification of other cDNA sequences at
high concentrations. When ignoring the OBUs found only in cDNA, the Venn diagram could be used
for determining the fraction of DNA OBUs which were expressed. Of the total OBUs found the DNA
samples, about 17% were expressed.
To compare the similarity of the OBUs present across samples, PCoA was used on normalized
OBU abundances. From Figure 15 the sample types were again seen to be different in OBU com-
position, as cDNA samples were completely separated from DNA samples along the first axis with a
high explained variance. This indicated that most of the differences between the samples came from
differences between the genetic potential for NRPS production and the expressed NRPSs. For the
second axis, most of the difference was between cDNA samples, with most of the anaerobic samples
found close together at the top. However, one of the bottom most samples was also from anaero-
bic treatment, showing the replicates to be spread out. The DNA samples were instead all grouped
closely together across treatments, showing the biosynthetic potential to be similar for the different
microcosms. While the difference between DNA and cDNA samples seemed clear, it was tested for
statistical significance using PERMANOVA. With a p-value of 0.001, the samples were clearly different
across type. From the direction of the loadings shown on Figure 15, the difference was likely driven
by expression of OBUs much less abundant among the DNA samples than the cDNA samples. By
comparing the OBUs present in both types of samples, all of the included loadings were found only in
cDNA samples. Using BLAST to determine possible similar sequences, 9 of the 15 OBUs were found
to be dissimilar to everything in the database (see Appendix G). The other OBUs had matches with
high similarity, but some matches were only for short sequences of the OBU. Some of the matches
23
==PAGE:26==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Figure 15: PCoA plot of sequencing data. Samples plotted according to their coordinate scores
and colored based on treatment. Arrows represent OBU loadings with lengths above 0.5.
were from genes associated with growth such as elongation factor G and 16S rRNA, however, only
one match represented a protein with AD domains. This indicated that some unknown degree of the
OBUs from cDNA at least were not AD domains as expected. The loadings pointed mostly at an
anaerobic sample, but all treatments were represented by samples close by, making it likely that the
expression was similar between treatments.
4.5
Sampling time and treatment were important factors
To investigate the samples further for differences between treatments and times, the different types
were separated. This way, much less of the variation seen between the samples could be explained
by the principal coordinates (see Figure 16), indicating the samples no longer had a clear overall
trend. For the DNA samples (Figure 16a), most replicates were still clustered together. Three of the
four replicates for the control at t0 were found closely together in this larger cluster, together with
most of the other control samples. Surprisingly, the last t0 sample was separated from most other
samples. The longest loadings were mostly found to point in the direction of the separate t0 sample,
indicating that it contained something separate from the rest. However, this general clustering was
a good sign that the homogenization of the initial sediment sample had succeeded, as the samples
being close showed that they had roughly the same biosynthetic potential. With the group containing
samples from different sampling times, the composition would also be unlikely to change over time.
However, all the t68 nutrient treated replicates were found away from the main group. They were
close together, indicating that the changes affected them all. The AHL treatment also showed changes
over time with most of the t20 samples being separate from the rest. This could indicate a short-term
change in NRPS gene composition in response to the presence of AHLs, before the samples return
to the normal composition over time. With the explained variance being small, the differences could
be simply from noise. Therefore, the samples were tested for differences using PERMANOVA, which
found time to be slightly significant (p-value 0.049), while the interaction between treatment and time
was significantly different (p-value 0.001). Therefore, samples from at least one treatment at a specific
time point differed from the samples from another treatment and time.
In contrast to the DNA samples, cDNA was more spread out without a more densely populated
24
==PAGE:27==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
a)
b)
Figure 16: PCoA plot of sequencing data separated by type. a) DNA samples and b) cDNA
samples plotted according to their coordinate scores and colored based on treatment. Arrows represent
OBU loadings with lengths above 0.3 for a) and 0.4 for b).
area (see Figure 16b). Again, the explained variance was low, but the second axis on Figure 15 had
less explained variance than the first axis on Figure 16b. Therefore, PCoA could account for more
variance between cDNA samples when it did not need to take DNA samples into account. Generally,
the sampling times were separated, with t0 samples found near each other between samples from
t20 and t68. Interestingly, most of the anaerobic samples from t68 were separated from the other t68
samples. The same difference was not found for the DNA samples, so it could not stem from differences
in biosynthetic potential. This indicated a change in expression compared to the other treatments.
From the loadings it was clear that most of the stronger influences were from the expression of OBUs
mostly present in anaerobic samples. Therefore, these OBUs or their higher expression would likely
be linked to anaerobic activity. To check the differences for significance PERMANOVA was used,
confirming sampling times to be different (0.002), and treatments as well (p-value 0.005).
5
Discussion
Despite marine sediments showing great diversity and biosynthetic potential for expression of NRPSs
[6, 7], not much is known of when and how much of it is being expressed in situ. Therefore, this study
sought to explore possible drivers of NRPS expression in sediment microbiomes. Microcosms were
used to simulate microbial communities in natural sediments and follow them over time, an approach
which has previously been used to follow BGC expression in soil microbiomes in response to abiotic
stimuli [10, 11]. In this work, changes were generally seen over time. Samples taken at t0 differed from
later samples for metadata, and metametabolomics, while expression of AD domain OBUs changed
over time. While the work done by Crits-Christoph et al. [10] considered soil microcosms instead,
they found that wetting and nutrient release affected transcription at a temporal scale. Similarly, Van
Goethem et al. [11] has shown a time-dependent change in the expression of BGCs, and that some
photosynthetic species are affected by day-night cycles. Therefore, changes over time were not unusual
for microcosm experiments.
25
==PAGE:28==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Here, no wetting was used as the sediments already contained water. Instead, other treatments
were tested to establish if any influenced transcriptional regulation in marine environments. Overall,
not many differences were seen between microcosms treated with AHLs, antibiotics, and nutrients,
as well as compared to the control. Part of this might be from the concentrations ending up lower
than expected due to the higher water content of the sediment compared to initial tests. The effects
of AHL and antibiotic addition are concentration dependent [22, 26, 51], and the amount of organic
carbon was shown by Geers et al.
[7] to be inversely related to biosynthetic potential of NRPSs
on the DNA level. While the expected concentrations used for nutrients treatment have a proven
effect on other systems [52], it is unknown whether the lower concentrations applied here would still
cause changes.
On the other hand, even with lower AHL concentrations than initially expected,
the concentrations applied here exceeded those needed to impact cultivation of marine bacteria [53].
However, the necessary concentration for AHL effect is also dependent on the AHL structure and
microorganisms present [22]. For some combinations, the concentrations might not be high enough
to cause a response. Similarly, the minimum inhibitory concentration of the antibiotics depend on
the species [51, 54]. Much lower concentrations were chosen to avoid killing the microorganisms in
the sediment, while still keeping the concentration high enough to have a potential effect on gene
expression. For holomycin at least, higher effect on biofilm formation has been shown at the expected
concentration than the actual concentration [51]. These considerations makes it difficult to determine
if a lack of changes in the microcosms was caused by lack of effect or insufficient concentration.
Through sampling of cDNA and DNA from the microcosms, the diversity of AD domain OBUs
was found to differ between the types of samples. However, the shape of the rarefaction curves for
both types indicated that new reads would increase the number of OBUs found for the samples. As
new OBUs could still be found according to the curves, the sampling depth must have been too low
to capture the full richness of the samples [55]. Such a problem hinders direct comparison of alpha
diversity measures between treatments. Instead, correction for different numbers of reads is necessary
to make comparisons reflect the true relationships between samples. Here, the problem was addressed
through rarefaction to 1500 reads for each sample, while all samples which fell short were removed,
allowing the samples to be compared.
Analysis of amplicon sequencing results showed clear differences in diversity and composition of
AD domains which were found on the DNA and those that were expressed. Overall, the biosynthetic
potential was much larger than the number of transcribed OBUs. This was not an unusual finding,
as silent gene clusters are generally considered to take up a great part of the biosynthetic potential
[28–30]. However, Amos et al. [8] discovered that 51% of the BGCs they found were expressed by one
of their tested strains during either exponential or stationary growth phase. An even higher degree of
expression was found by Crits-Christoph et al. [10], with expression from about 74% of BGCs over the
course of simulated rainfall. With this in mind, the 17% expression obtained here was lower than could
perhaps be expected. Instead, this number was closer to the 6% constitutively expressed biosynthetic
genes Van Goethem et al. [11] found, but larger fractions of genes are expressed at least at one time
point. This discrepancy was potentially a result of a different method being used, with Amos et al.,
Crits-Christoph et al., and Van Goethem et al. all analyzing metagenomes and transcriptomes instead
of amplicons. As seen by Amos et al., fewer secondary metabolites are also commonly detected than
transcriptional data suggests. This relationship was confirmed here, with much fewer features found
26
==PAGE:29==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
through metametabolomics analysis than the number of AD domain OBUs which were expressed.
The precise relation was unknown, as both the number of features from a single metabolite and the
number of AD domains are variable.
When analyzing the DNA of different samples, they were found to be similar in biosynthetic
potential despite differences in treatment. Since biosynthetic potential has been linked to microbiome
composition [4, 6, 7], the DNA samples being close together on the PCoA plots indicated that the
samples also likely contained the same species. In contrast, the cDNA samples were less similar. Such
a difference makes sense, as DNA is more stable than the RNA cDNA is made from, with DNA being
found freely in the environment and in dead cells [56]. Therefore, amplicon sequencing of DNA samples
likely included reads from DNA outside of living cells. This would make microcosms more similar in
biosynthetic potential as even dead microorganisms would still be found in the samples and contribute
to the diversity. Additionally, many microorganisms can enter a dormant state in response to stressors
such as the presence of antibiotics. Jones and Lennon [14] found that much of the microbial diversity
is found in dormant bacteria depending on the environmental conditions. As dormant microorganisms
also contain DNA, their biosynthetic potential would also have been included in the DNA samples.
Overall, accounting for both dead and dormant microorganisms in the DNA samples could explain
much of the similarity in biosynthetic potential.
While the biosynthetic potential was mostly similar across treatments, the nutrients treated sam-
ples from t68 showed differences from most of the other samples. The samples showed different com-
position of AD domain OBUs, but not significantly increased alpha diversity. Therefore, the changes
in composition were likely changes in the abundance of OBUs found in other samples as well. As
the nutrients treatment was the one affected, the change might have been a result of further growth
over time leading to higher number of NRPS genes in the microcosms. As mentioned before, Geers
et al. [7] found that more organic carbon will lead to less richness of NRPSs in the DNA. This would
seem to be contradicted by the lack of effect of nutrient addition on richness, however, there was no
significant difference in the TOC concentrations of the samples either. For the AHL treatment, a
response was also solely seen in the DNA samples. In some quorum sensing systems, AHLs lead to
an increase in cell growth when detected [21], which would lead to more copies of the NRPSs from
affected bacteria. The lack of response in cDNA samples indicated that the quorum sensing response
did not affect NRPS expression. Since neither of these changes in biosynthetic potential were reflected
in the NRPS expression, both reactions were likely independent of NRPs.
In contrast, the anaerobic samples generally showed differences from other treatments. However,
the DNA samples had no clear differences in AD domain compositions, indicating that the biosynthetic
potential was unaffected by anaerobic conditions. This lack of effect on OBU composition for DNA
samples reflects the findings of Geers et al. [7] that biosynthetic potential in sediment microbiomes
is largely unaffected by oxygen availability and redox potential. Instead, a change was seen in the
expression of NRPSs through differences in cDNA OBU composition and metametabolomics. With
the differences in expression not reflected in DNA samples, the microbial community was likely to be
unchanged. This indicated that the same microorganisms changed expression to adapt to anaerobic
conditions. As found by Anas et al. [57], many facultative anaerobic bacteria can live in sediment while
adapting to the amount of oxygen available for respiration. Additionally, Ye et al. [15] discovered genes
involved with production of secondary metabolites to be upregulated under anaerobic growth. These
27
==PAGE:30==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
genes are differentially upregulated between fermentation and respiration with alternative electron
acceptors. Such a difference could explain why the change in cDNA OBUs only seemed to affect the
samples from t68, as the alternative electron acceptors might have been depleted, and the organisms
switched to fermentative growth. Alternatively, some oxygen might have been present at first at too
low concentrations to change the color of the oxygen indicator. As found by Morris and Schmidt
[58], many diverse species contain genes homologous to those encoding oxidases with high affinity for
oxygen. This higher affinity allows for more effective use of oxygen at low concentrations. With these
types of genes widespread among bacteria, parts of the microbiomes at t20 were possibly still using
up the last oxygen found at low concentration due to high affinity. Then, the expression could have
changed with the shift to fully anaerobic conditions.
However, despite anaerobic treatment showing differences for metadata, the changes seemed un-
related to changes in potential electron acceptor concentrations.
According to Nealson [13], such
compounds include nitrate, nitrite, sulfate, as well as certain metals such as iron. The measurements
of nitrite and iron concentrations were both below the limit of detection for the instruments used
for analysis, making any differences impossible to follow. Only sulfate was found in this study, but
the concentration did not differ between treatments. This could indicate that sulfate was not used
for anaerobic respiration. However, sulfate has been found to be the primary electron acceptor in
marine sediments due to high concentrations in seawater leading to sulfate being found deep below
the sediment surface as well [59]. This reaction leads to formation of sulfide. At the same time, some
microorganisms are capable of converting sulfide to sulfate using other electron acceptors such as iron.
Overall, these reactions, together with sulfate renewal from the seawater, lead to less reduction in
sulfate than might be expected from using sulfate as electron acceptor [59]. Therefore, sulfate might
have been used for anaerobic respiration despite the lack of difference in concentration. Otherwise,
measuring nitrate concentrations might have shown a difference, something else might have been used
as electron acceptor, or the microorganisms were using fermentation.
Generally, differences in response to treatments were found using different methods, highlighting
different aspects of the microcosms. Without all the analyses, less would have been known about the
effect on microbiomes from changing their environment. Particularly the differences between biosyn-
thetic potential and expression measured through both amplicon sequencing and metametabolomics
highlighted the importance of considering multiple analyses. Similar multilevel analysis done by Crits-
Christoph et al. [10] has shown its utility for determining which BGCs are actively expressed when
changing the system. Additionally, combining analyses can help with understanding by linking BGCs
to possible functions, showing their use for the microorganisms.
While the amplicon sequencing method used resulted in a great diversity of AD domain OBUs,
particularly from DNA samples, the choice of primers for amplification provides some limitations to
the method. As discussed by Bakal et al. [40], different primer pairs will amplify different subsets of
AD domains. Therefore, potential sources of diversity between samples and treatments are left out of
the analysis when making a choice in primers. Additionally, Crits-Christoph et al. [10] has demon-
strated that commonly used degenerate primer pairs are unlikely to amplify the majority of sequences
present in microbiomes. Even then, this study demonstrated the utility of amplicon sequencing of
AD domains as an initial step for evaluating treatments for differences in biosynthetic potential and
NRPS expression.
28
==PAGE:31==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
As seen from the BLAST results of OBUs from the loadings separating cDNA and DNA samples,
not everything caught by the amplicon sequencing was guaranteed to be from an AD domain either.
The match to a segment of rRNA presented the possibility of highly expressed RNA sequences being
amplified during PCR. Together with the recognition of other genes such as elongation factors in-
volved in translation, this prevented complete certainty that differences between samples were caused
by differences in AD domain OBUs. To mitigate this issue, nucleotide sequences would either have
to be removed before amplicon sequencing or reads would need to be sorted with greater stringency
afterwards. In the case of the matches for rRNA, experimental procedures exist for removing these
types of sequences. Otherwise, mapping reads to BGC databases such as MiBiG, which contains ex-
perimentally verified BGCs and their characterized products, could serve to confirm reads as stemming
from NRPSs. However, as previous studies have shown, many NRPSs found through sequencing of
microbiomes are unknown and, therefore, not represented in the database, particularly those origi-
nating from marine environments [4, 6, 7]. Such an approach would likely leave out far too large a
fraction of sequences if it was not coupled to additional annotation methods. Nevertheless, this study
sought to function as a starting point for evaluating NRPS genes and their expression, making the
more rigid checking of reads less important than for a more in-depth analysis.
For a more extensive analysis of NRPS expression, making use of metagenomics and metatran-
scriptomics instead of amplicon sequencing would likely be preferable. With these types of data, BGC
annotation can be performed with tools like antiSMASH [4, 10]. This annotation can ensure differ-
ences between the tested treatments are only based on differences in NRPSs, or even other types of
BGCs. Additionally, a more complete variety of NRPSs in the samples could be taken into account, as
the exclusion of certain AD domains due to the use of primers would be avoided [10]. Such an analysis
would likely prove interesting for treatments where differences have already been shown in this initial
study. At the same time, determining which AD domain OBUs, or more broadly BGCs, were different
between treatments and times would provide a deeper insight into the role of the produced secondary
metabolites. For this purpose, an R package such as DESeq2 could be used to test for differentially
expressed genes [10, 11].
As seen from other studies linking biosynthetic potential to microbiome composition [4, 6, 7],
investigating the metataxonomy of the different treatments could be used to link differences in BGCs
to specific taxonomy.
With the 16S rRNA gene as target for amplicon sequencing, the bacterial
composition in different samples could be determined. Using DNA samples, the full genetic material
of the microbiomes would be investigated, while coupling it with an analysis of the present 16S rRNA
through cDNA samples could provide insight into how much and which parts of the microbiome are
active. Since random hexamer primers were used for reverse transcription in this study instead of a
gene specific primer, the existing cDNA could be used for this purpose. With such an analysis, the
current study could be expanded on to include differences in present and actively growing bacteria
in the different treatments. Additionally, the information could be used for tentatively linking AD
domain OBUs to specific bacteria without the use of full genome sequencing.
Another possible direction of further research is to focus on the sequences of the AD domains,
specifically the variable parts between the conserved regions where the degenerate primers bind. With
the primer pair amplifying everything between regions A3 and A7, enough of the variable regions should
be included to determine the identity of possible amino acid substrates [40]. This would be done using
29
==PAGE:32==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
the substrate specificity codes introduced by Stachelhaus et al.
[38], and later expanded on with
further experimental data [36]. Through determining the amino acid residues present at specific sites
of the AD domain, the substrate specificity of the AD domain could perhaps be elucidated. However,
the full amino acid sequence resulting from different NRPSs would not be determined without further
knowledge of which AD domains go together. Using full transcripts for analysis instead of separate
AD domain OBUs could present the amino acids in the correct order. Regardless, the predicted amino
acids could be used to link possible metabolites to expression data, as seen with the work done by
Amos et al. [8]. Further use could also be made of the metametabolomics data through investigating
the discovered features for their compound type with tools such as SIRIUS [60], which performs in
silico prediction of chemical classification. This way peptide products could be separated out from
general metabolites. Using only peptides for finding differences between treatments would result in a
more specific analysis focusing solely on NRPs and ribosomally produced peptides.
6
Conclusion
Expression of NRPSs in marine sediment microbiomes was investigated under different conditions over
time through AD domain sequencing. The biosynthetic potential of the microbiomes was confirmed
to be much larger than the diversity of expressed NRPSs. Additionally, the composition of NRPSs
was different between DNA and cDNA samples, with only 17% of AD domains from the DNA being
expressed. Sequencing of NRPS AD domains in combination with metadata and metametabolomics
analyses were successfully used to find differences between both sampling times and treatments. Sam-
ples from t0 were different from later samples for both metadata and metametabolomics analyses,
showing changes over time. Similarly, sequencing data were significantly different between sampling
times. cDNA samples from t20 had higher AD domain richness than those from t68, while composi-
tion of NRPSs differed between time points for both cDNA and DNA samples. Overall, sampling at
multiple time points made it possible to follow the time-dependent behavior of NRPS expression.
Treating sediment microbiomes with nutrients was found to affect the biosynthetic potential over
time, as the composition of AD domains in DNA samples changed between time points. Similarly,
AHL addition caused the biosynthetic potential to be different at t20. Both of these effects could
likely be linked to growth of specific microorganisms within the microbiomes, however, the changes
were not reflected in the expression of NRPSs. In contrast, anaerobic conditions were shown to affect
expression, with metadata and metametabolomics data confirming changes from anaerobic treatment
as well. Therefore, a possible driver for expression of NRPSs had been identified. With further analysis,
the NRPSs whose expression was affected by different treatments might be identified. Additionally,
the expression data could be linked to microorganisms through investigating the taxonomy of the
microbiomes across sampling times and treatments. Alternatively, the amplicon sequencing method
could be supplemented with metatranscriptomics for a more complete insight into NRPS expression.
30
==PAGE:33==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
References
1.
Neu, H. C. The Crisis in Antibiotic Resistance. eng. Science 257, 1064–1073. issn: 10959203,
00368075. doi:10.1126/science.257.5073.1064 (1992).
2.
Luo, Y., Cobb, R. E. & Zhao, H. Recent advances in natural product discovery. eng. Current
Opinion in Biotechnology 30, 230–237. issn: 18790429, 09581669. doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2014.
09.002 (2014).
3.
Lloyd, K. G., Steen, A. D., Ladau, J., Yin, J. & Crosby, L. Phylogenetically Novel Uncultured
Microbial Cells Dominate Earth Microbiomes. eng. Msystems 3 (ed Neufeld, J. D.) e0005518.
issn: 23795077. doi:10.1128/mSystems.00055-18 (2018).
4.
Paoli, L. et al. Biosynthetic potential of the global ocean microbiome. eng. Nature 607, 111–118.
issn: 14764687, 00280836. doi:10.1038/s41586-022-04862-3 (2022).
5.
Leitão, A. L. & Enguita, F. J. Synthetic biology approaches for secondary metabolism engineer-
ing. eng. Microbial Cell Factories Engineering for Production of Biomolecules, 51–64. doi:10.
1016/B978-0-12-821477-0.00022-2 (2021).
6.
Bech, P. K., Lysdal, K. L., Gram, L., Bentzon-Tilia, M. & Strube, M. L. Marine Sediments Hold
an Untapped Potential for Novel Taxonomic and Bioactive Bacterial Diversity. eng. Msystems 5
(ed Pupo, M. T.) e0078220. issn: 23795077. doi:10.1128/mSystems.00782-20 (2020).
7.
Geers, A. U., Strube, M. L. & Bentzon-Tilia, M. Small Spatial Scale Drivers of Secondary Metabo-
lite Biosynthetic Diversity in Environmental Microbiomes. eng. Msystems 8 (ed Pupo, M. T.)
e0072422. issn: 23795077. doi:10.1128/msystems.00724-22 (2023).
8.
Amos, G. C. et al. Comparative transcriptomics as a guide to natural product discovery and
biosynthetic gene cluster functionality. eng. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 114, E11121–E11130. issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi:10.1073/pnas.
1714381115 (2017).
9.
Geller-McGrath, D. et al. Diverse secondary metabolites are expressed in particle-associated and
free-living microorganisms of the permanently anoxic Cariaco Basin. eng. Nature Communica-
tions 14, 656. issn: 20411723. doi:10.1038/s41467-023-36026-w (2023).
10.
Crits-Christoph, A., Diamond, S., Butterfield, C. N., Thomas, B. C. & Banfield, J. F. Novel soil
bacteria possess diverse genes for secondary metabolite biosynthesis. eng. Nature 558, 440–444.
issn: 14764687, 00280836. doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0207-y (2018).
11.
Van Goethem, M. W. et al. Long-read metagenomics of soil communities reveals phylum-specific
secondary metabolite dynamics. eng. Communications Biology 4, 1302. issn: 23993642. doi:10.
1038/s42003-021-02809-4 (2021).
12.
Orsi, W. D. Ecology and evolution of seafloor and subseafloor microbial communities. eng. Nature
Reviews Microbiology 16, 671–683. issn: 17401534, 17401526. doi:10.1038/s41579-018-0046-8
(2018).
13.
Nealson, K. H. Sediment bacteria: Who’s there, what are they doing, and what’s new? eng.
Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 25, 403–434. issn: 15454495, 00846597. doi:10.
1146/annurev.earth.25.1.403 (1997).
31
==PAGE:34==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
14.
Jones, S. E. & Lennon, J. T. Dormancy contributes to the maintenance of microbial diversity.
eng. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107, 5881–
5886. issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi:10.1073/pnas.0912765107 (2010).
15.
Ye, R. W. et al. Global gene expression profiles of Bacillus subtilis grown under anaerobic condi-
tions. eng. Journal of Bacteriology 182, 4458–4465. issn: 10985530, 00219193. doi:10.1128/JB.
182.16.4458-4465.2000 (2000).
16.
Liao, W. et al. Characteristics of microbial community composition and its relationship with
carbon, nitrogen and sulfur in sediments. eng. Science of the Total Environment 795, 148848.
issn: 18791026, 00489697. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.148848 (2021).
17.
Tshikantwa, T. S., Ullah, M. W., He, F. & Yang, G. Current trends and potential applications of
microbial interactions for human welfare. eng. Frontiers in Microbiology 9, 1156. issn: 1664302x.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2018.01156 (2018).
18.
Price-Whelan, A., Dietrich, L. E. & Newman, D. K. Rethinking ’secondary’ metabolism: Physi-
ological roles for phenazine antibiotics. eng. Nature Chemical Biology 2, 71–78. issn: 15524469,
15524450. doi:10.1038/nchembio764 (2006).
19.
Qiao, Y. et al. Nutrient status changes bacterial interactions in a synthetic community. eng.
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 90 (ed Glass, J. B.) e0156623. issn: 10985336, 00992240.
doi:10.1128/aem.01566-23 (2024).
20.
Chevallereau, A., Pons, B. J., van Houte, S. & Westra, E. R. Interactions between bacterial and
phage communities in natural environments. eng. Nature Reviews Microbiology 20, 49–62. issn:
17401534, 17401526. doi:10.1038/s41579-021-00602-y (2022).
21.
Liu, L. et al. AHL-mediated quorum sensing to regulate bacterial substance and energy metabolism:
A review. eng. Microbiological Research 262, 127102. issn: 16180623, 09445013. doi:10.1016/j.
micres.2022.127102 (2022).
22.
Wang, J. et al. AHLs-mediated quorum sensing threshold and its response towards initial adhesion
of wastewater biofilms. eng. Water Research 194, 116925. issn: 18792448, 00431354. doi:10.1016/
j.watres.2021.116925 (2021).
23.
Rehman, Z. U. & Leiknes, T. O. Quorum-quenching bacteria isolated from red sea sediments
reduce biofilm formation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. eng. Frontiers in Microbiology 9, 1354.
issn: 1664302x. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2018.01354 (2018).
24.
Giurini, E. F., Godla, A. & Gupta, K. H. Redefining bioactive small molecules from microbial
metabolites as revolutionary anticancer agents. eng. Cancer Gene Therapy 31, 187–206. issn:
14765500, 09291903. doi:10.1038/s41417-023-00715-x (2024).
25.
Price-Whelan, A., Dietrich, L. E. & Newman, D. K. Pyocyanin alters redox homeostasis and
carbon flux through central metabolic pathways in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14. eng. Journal
of Bacteriology 189, 6372–6381. issn: 00219193, 10985530. doi:10.1128/JB.00505-07 (2007).
26.
Goh, E. B. et al. Transcriptional modulation of bacterial gene expression by subinhibitory concen-
trations of antibiotics. eng. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 99, 17025–17030. issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi:10.1073/pnas.252607699 (2002).
32
==PAGE:35==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
27.
Schalk, I. J. Bacterial siderophores: diversity, uptake pathways and applications. eng. Nature
Reviews Microbiology 23, 24–40. issn: 17401534, 17401526. doi:10.1038/s41579-024-01090-6
(2025).
28.
Reen, F. J., Romano, S., Dobson, A. D. & O’Gara, F. The sound of silence: Activating silent
biosynthetic gene clusters in marine microorganisms. eng. Marine Drugs 13 (ed Proksch, P.)
4754–4783. issn: 16603397. doi:10.3390/md13084754 (2015).
29.
Mingyar, E. et al. A regulator based “semi-targeted” approach to activate silent biosynthetic
gene clusters. eng. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22 (ed Aminov, R. I.) 7567. issn:
14220067, 16616596. doi:10.3390/ijms22147567 (2021).
30.
Wang, B., Guo, F., Dong, S. H. & Zhao, H. Activation of silent biosynthetic gene clusters using
transcription factor decoys. eng. Nature Chemical Biology 15, 111–114. issn: 15524469, 15524450.
doi:10.1038/s41589-018-0187-0 (2019).
31.
Dziuba, M. V. et al. Silent gene clusters encode magnetic organelle biosynthesis in a non-
magnetotactic phototrophic bacterium. eng. Isme Journal 17, 326–339. issn: 17517370, 17517362.
doi:10.1038/s41396-022-01348-y (2023).
32.
Du, L., Sánchez, C. & Shen, B. Hybrid peptide-polyketide natural products: Biosynthesis and
prospects toward engineering novel molecules. eng. Metabolic Engineering 3, 78–95. issn: 10967184,
10967176. doi:10.1006/mben.2000.0171 (2001).
33.
Felnagle, E. A. et al. Nonribosomal peptide synthetases involved in the production of medically
relevant natural products. eng. Molecular Pharmaceutics 5, 191–211. issn: 15438392, 15438384.
doi:10.1021/mp700137g (2008).
34.
Walsh, C. T. et al. Tailoring enzymes that modify nonribosomal peptides during and after chain
elongation on NRPS assembly lines. eng. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 5, 525–534. issn:
18790402, 13675931. doi:10.1016/S1367-5931(00)00235-0 (2001).
35.
Kohli, R. M. & Walsh, C. T. Enzymology of acyl chain macrocyclization in natural product
biosynthesis. eng. Chemical Communications 3, 297–307. issn: 1364548x, 13597345. doi:10.1039/
b208333g (2003).
36.
Zhang, M. et al. Functional Diversity and Engineering of the Adenylation Domains in Nonribo-
somal Peptide Synthetases. eng. Marine Drugs 22 (ed Mazur-Marzec, H.) 349. issn: 16603397.
doi:10.3390/md22080349 (2024).
37.
Belshaw, P. J., Walsh, C. T. & Stachelhaus, T. Aminoacyl-CoAs as probes of condensation
domain selectivity in nonribosomal peptide synthesis. eng. Science 284, 486–489. issn: 10959203,
00368075. doi:10.1126/science.284.5413.486 (1999).
38.
Stachelhaus, T., Mootz, H. D. & Marahiel, M. A. The specificity-conferring code of adenylation
domains in nonribosomal peptide synthetases. eng. Chemistry and Biology 6, 493–505. issn:
18791301, 10745521. doi:10.1016/S1074-5521(99)80082-9 (1999).
39.
Ayuso-Sacido, A. & Genilloud, O. New PCR primers for the screening of NRPS and PKS-I
systems in actinomycetes: detection and distribution of these biosynthetic gene sequences in
major taxonomic groups. eng. Microbial Ecology 49, 10–24. issn: 1432184x, 00953628. doi:10.
1007/s00248-004-0249-6 (2005).
33
==PAGE:36==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
40.
Bakal, T. et al. Comparative analysis of oligonucleotide primers for high-throughput screening of
genes encoding adenylation domains of nonribosomal peptide synthetases in actinomycetes. eng.
Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek, International Journal of General and Molecular Microbiology 108,
1267–1274. issn: 15729699, 00036072. doi:10.1007/s10482-015-0557-5 (2015).
41.
Drebot, M. A., Nguan, C. Y., Campbell, J. J., Lee, S. H. S. & Forward, K. R. Molecular epidemi-
ology of enterovirus outbreaks in Canada during 1991–1992: Identification of echovirus 30 and
coxsackievirus B1 strains by amplicon sequencing. eng. Journal of Medical Virology 44, 340–347.
issn: 10969071, 01466615. doi:10.1002/jmv.1890440406 (1994).
42.
Charlop-Powers, Z. et al. Urban park soil microbiomes are a rich reservoir of natural product
biosynthetic diversity. eng. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 113, 14811–14816. issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi:10.1073/pnas.1615581113 (2016).
43.
Dube Mandishora, R. S. et al. Genotypic diversity of anogenital human papillomavirus in women
attending cervical cancer screening in Harare, Zimbabwe. eng. Journal of Medical Virology 89,
1671–1677. issn: 10969071, 01466615. doi:10.1002/jmv.24825 (2017).
44.
Bomberg, M., Mäkinen, J., Salo, M. & Arnold, M. Microbial community structure and functions
in ethanol-fed sulfate removal bioreactors for treatment of mine water. eng. Microorganisms 5,
61. issn: 20762607. doi:10.3390/microorganisms5030061 (2017).
45.
Schmid, R. et al. Integrative analysis of multimodal mass spectrometry data in MZmine 3. eng.
Nature Biotechnology 41, 447–449. issn: 15461696, 10870156. doi:10.1038/s41587-023-01690-2
(2023).
46.
Pang, Z. et al. MetaboAnalystR 4.0: a unified LC-MS workflow for global metabolomics. eng.
Nature Communications 15, 3675. issn: 20411723. doi:10.1038/s41467-024-48009-6 (2024).
47.
Martin, M. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput sequencing reads. und.
Embnet.journal 17, 12. issn: 22266089. doi:10.14806/ej.17.1.200 (2011).
48.
Shen, W., Sipos, B. & Zhao, L. SeqKit2: A Swiss army knife for sequence and alignment pro-
cessing. eng. Imeta 3, e191. issn: 2770596x, 27705986. doi:10.1002/imt2.191 (2024).
49.
Rognes, T., Flouri, T., Nichols, B., Quince, C. & Mahé, F. VSEARCH: A versatile open source
tool for metagenomics. eng. Peerj 2016 (ed Hrbek, T.) e2584. issn: 21678359. doi:10.7717/peerj.
2584 (2016).
50.
McMurdie, P. J. & Holmes, S. Phyloseq: An R Package for Reproducible Interactive Analysis and
Graphics of Microbiome Census Data. eng. Plos One 8 (ed Watson, M.) e61217. issn: 19326203.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0061217 (2013).
51.
Zhang, S.-D., Isbrandt, T., Lindqvist, L. L., Larsen, T. O. & Gram, L. Holomycin, an antibiotic
secondary metabolite, is required for biofilm formation of the native producer Photobacterium
galatheae S2753. eng. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 87 (ed Stabb, E. V.) 1–15. issn:
10985336, 00992240. doi:10.1128/AEM.00169-21 (2021).
52.
Severin, I., Bentzon-Tilia, M., Moisander, P. H. & Riemann, L. Nitrogenase expression in estuar-
ine bacterioplankton influenced by organic carbon and availability of oxygen. eng. Fems Microbi-
ology Letters 362 (ed Daniell, T.) fnv105. issn: 15746968, 03781097. doi:10.1093/femsle/fnv105
(2015).
34
==PAGE:37==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
53.
Rygaard, A. M., Schmidt Thøgersen, M., Nielsen, K. F., Gram, L. & Bentzon-Tilia, M. Effects
of gelling agent and extracellular signaling molecules on the culturability of marine bacteria.
eng. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 83 (ed Drake, H. L.) e00243–17. issn: 10985336,
00992240. doi:10.1128/AEM.00243-17 (2017).
54.
Van Hal, S. J., Lodise, T. P. & Paterson, D. L. The Clinical Significance of Vancomycin Minimum
Inhibitory Concentration in Staphylococcus aureus Infections: A Systematic Review and Meta-
analysis. eng. Clinical Infectious Diseases 54, 755–771. issn: 15376591, 10584838 (2012).
55.
Gotelli, N. J. & Colwell, R. K. Quantifying biodiversity: Procedures and pitfalls in the mea-
surement and comparison of species richness. eng. Ecology Letters 4, 379–391. issn: 14610248,
1461023x. doi:10.1046/j.1461-0248.2001.00230.x (2001).
56.
Tessler, M., Cunningham, S. W., Ingala, M. R., Warring, S. D. & Brugler, M. R. An Environ-
mental DNA Primer for Microbial and Restoration Ecology. eng. Microbial Ecology 85, 796–808.
issn: 1432184x, 00953628. doi:10.1007/s00248-022-02168-5 (2023).
57.
Anas, A., Chekidhenkuzhiyil, J., Nilayangod, C., Krishna, K. & Raju, G. T. Prevalence of obligate
and facultative anaerobic bacteria in the mudbank along the southwest coast of India. eng.
Regional Studies in Marine Science 42, 101660. issn: 23524855. doi:10.1016/j.rsma.2021.101660
(2021).
58.
Morris, R. L. & Schmidt, T. M. Shallow breathing: Bacterial life at low O2. eng. Nature Reviews
Microbiology 11, 205–212. issn: 17401534, 17401526. doi:10.1038/nrmicro2970 (2013).
59.
Jørgensen, B. B., Findlay, A. J. & Pellerin, A. The biogeochemical sulfur cycle of marine sed-
iments. eng. Frontiers in Microbiology 10, 849. issn: 1664302x. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2019.00849
(2019).
60.
Dührkop, K. et al. SIRIUS 4: a rapid tool for turning tandem mass spectra into metabolite
structure information. eng. Nature Methods 16, 299–302. issn: 15487105, 15487091. doi:10.1038/
s41592-019-0344-8 (2019).
35
==PAGE:38==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
Appendices
A
Sample environment
Tables show conditions of seawater in Nivå bay.
pH
7.47
7.79
7.86
7.92
7.93
7.97
7.96
Temperature [°C]
DO [mg/L]
Conductivity [µS/cm]
Salinity [PSU]
16.2
8.80
19105
11.39
16.1
9.53
18757
11.17
16.1
9.50
18784
11.19
16.1
9.96
18862
11.24
16.0
9.34
19157
11.43
Tables show conditions of top layer sediment from Nivå bay.
Redox potential [mV]
-305
-184
-151
-217
pH
6.70
6.62
6.59
B
Metadata plots
Figures show concentrations of measured parameters from metadata samples. The parameters are
sulfate (SO4), ammonia (NH3), potassium (K), bromide (Br), chloride (Cl), fluoride (F), total bound
nitrogen (TNb), sodium (Na), magnesium (Mg), aluminum (Al), calcium (Ca), and total carbon (TC).
Stars mark significant differences in concentration between treatments for p-values below 0.0001 (****),
below 0.001 (***), below 0.01 (**), and p-values below 0.05 (*). No significant differences between
treatments is marked with ns.
36
==PAGE:39==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
37
==PAGE:40==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
C
Metametabolomics PCA
PCA plot of sediment metametabolomics data, with the samples plotted according to their principal
component scores and colored based on treatment.
Translucent ellipses mark the 95% confidence
regions of the treatments, and explained variance for each principal component is shown in parentheses.
D
PCR product gels
Pictures of gels after gel electrophoresis with PCR products from DNA, cDNA, and DNase treated
RNA samples.
A marks anaerobic treatment, B is antibiotics treatment, C is control, H is AHL
treatment, N is nutrients treatment, and neg marks negative controls. Orange color denotes samples
from t0, purple t20, and green color from t68. Numbers mark the replicates, with arrows pointing at
the replicates which were left out of sequencing.
38
==PAGE:41==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
39
==PAGE:42==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
40
==PAGE:43==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
E
Global clustering threshold
Plots of the number of clusters found in four samples with different percent identities used as global
clustering threshold in VSEARCH. Barcode01 is a cDNA sample from t0, while barcode45, barcode53,
and barcode86 are DNA samples from nutrients treatment at t68, anaerobic treatment at t20, and AHL
treatment at t68 respectively.
41
==PAGE:44==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
F
Alpha diversity measures
Simpson index for a) all samples, b) DNA samples, and c) cDNA samples separated by treatment.
a)
b)
c)
Shannon entropy for a) all samples, b) DNA samples, and c) cDNA samples separated by treatment.
a)
b)
c)
42
==PAGE:45==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
G
OBU BLAST
Query cover is the percentage of the OBU sequence found in the nucleotide BLAST match, percent
identity is the percentage of matching bases in the alignment of the match, and E value is the expected
number of matches found at random with the same alignment score as the match. Table shows the
best match based on E value and matches with different predicted product for each OBU loading from
Figure 15.
OBU
Query cover
Percent identity
E value
Match
barcode26_1405
-
-
-
No significant similarity found
barcode26_1415
96%
97.78%
0.0
TRAP transporter substrate-binding protein
barcode26_1563
12%
82.72%
8e-06
GH92 family glycosyl hydrolase
barcode26_1658
-
-
-
No significant similarity found
barcode26_1704
96%
75.14%
5e-83
elongation factor G
barcode26_1817
-
-
-
No significant similarity found
barcode26_203
-
-
-
No significant similarity found
barcode26_427
-
-
-
No significant similarity found
barcode26_431
-
-
-
No significant similarity found
barcode26_526
-
-
-
No significant similarity found
barcode26_746
-
-
-
No significant similarity found
barcode26_806
-
-
-
No significant similarity found
barcode26_827
6%
94.29%
0.017
OmpA family protein
barcode26_963
5%
95.00%
1e-04
acetate–CoA ligase
5%
97.06%
0.002
amino acid adenylation domain-containing
barcode38_4074
70%
89.59%
4e-173
4Fe-4S ferredoxin
10%
100.00%
3e-25
16S ribosomal RNA
43
==PAGE:46==
Matilde Reiff - Master’s Thesis
February 16th 2025
H
DMS poster
Investigating biotic and abiotic factors 
influencing the expression of non-ribosomal 
peptide synthetases in marine sediments
Introduction
Secondary metabolites govern an array of interactions between microorganisms and their environment, 
and among microorganisms. Marine sediment microbiomes have been shown to house an astounding 
diversity of genes encoding non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs)1,2, which produce secondary 
metabolites the ecological role of which remain elusive. By investigating upon which cues NRPSs are 
expressed, we aim to understand the roles and functions of secondary metabolites in marine sediment 
microbiomes.
Nanopore sequencing
Demultiplexing, debarcoding, quality filtering, 
trimming. 
Clustering of AD domains for alpha- and beta-
diversity and comparison with genomic potential
Matilde Reiff 1, Signe Lolle1, Morten Dencker Schostag1, Mikkel Bentzon-Tilia1
1Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark
o DNase treatment of RNA samples
o Reverse transcription
o PCR amplification of AD domains 
and 16S rRNA on cDNA and DNA
Microcosm experiment
Different biotic and abiotic cues used to investigate 
expression
Sampling at different time points
Metadata analysis
Physicochemical parameters 
and nutrients compared 
between treatments
RNA and DNA extraction
Contact: s193781@dtu.dk
References:
1: Bech, P. K., Lysdal, K. L., Gram, L., Bentzon-Tilia, M., & Strube, M. L. (2020). Msystems, 5(5), 
e0078220. https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00782-20 
2: Geers, A. U., Strube, M. L., & Bentzon-Tilia, M. (2023). Msystems, 8(2), e0072422. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/msystems.00724-22 
Figures made using biorender.com
Metametabolomics analysis
Sediment collection
                     Nivå bay
Approach
Using marine sediment, we performed microcosm experiments to determine the effects of biotic proxy 
compounds, nutrients, and different O2 conditions on the secondary metabolome expression. RNA 
samples were taken for full-length amplicon sequencing of 16S RNA and AD domains to uncover effects 
on general microbial activity and NRPS expression, respectively. Moreover, samples were collected for 
metametabolomics.
Classifying taxonomy of 16S rRNA for 
microbiome compositions
This work is supported by:
Danish National Research 
foundation DNRF137 
Extraction of metabolites 
from sediment samples
Overview of metabolic 
profiles between treatments
44
