==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Sensitive detection of oncological drugs in
biological fluids through electrochemically
assisted surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
(EC-SERS)
Author
Anne Cruchaga Arregui
s230285
Supervisor & Co-Supervisor
Anja Boisen
Isidro Badillo Ramirez
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Health Technology
Drug Delivery and Sensing (IDUN)
==PAGE:2==
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
This thesis is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Master of Science in Biomed-
ical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It has been carried out in the
Department of Health Technology in collaboration with the Drug Delivery and Sensing (IDUN)
group from September 1st to February 23th, 2025, under the supervision of Anja Boisen and Isidro
Badillo Ramirez.
Firstly, I would like to thank Anja for accepting the responsibility of supervising me and giving me
the opportunity and freedom to explore a topic of interest and writing my MSc thesis on it.
I would also like to thank Isidro, who offered the support from the very beginning. For the doubt
solving, time invested, discussions and help along all the process. It was a long ride with you as
supervisor, thank you for teaching me, for pushing me to give my best version and for being patient
with me. Thank you for making me happy about the decision of choosing this thesis since the first
day, it could not have been a better process in any way.
To the IDUN team, thank you very much for your help, your willingness and generosity to answer
my questions and for making me feel welcomed since day one. Special thanks to Santanu Patra for
his help, explanations and always putting a smile on my face. I also wanted to thank Yaman Göksel
for sharing his knowledge, always being easy to approach, and keeping an eye on how I was doing. I
am also particularly thankful to Gohar Soufi for her invaluable kindness, time and help throughout
the process of completing my thesis. Lastly, I would like to thank Roman Slipets for his willingness
to aid and technical support during all the process.
I would specially like to thank my friend Almudena, for helping me put things into perspective
and for her support in every aspect needed. Her positive mindset and humor has been a source of
comfort during my thesis journey and throughout my entire master’s. My experience in Denmark
would not have been the same without you by my side.
To all the people I have met over these two last years, not only within DTU, but also in Denmark.
Thank you for being part of this experience and for making it feel like home now.
"A mi madre y padre, por su apoyo incondicional, por creer en mí y acompañarme en cada uno
de mis proyectos.
Agradezco las largas llamadas, los consejos y el cariño que me dais.
A mi
hermana, gracias por estar a mi lado y por hacerme reír. A la tía Marian, por estar siempre ahí y
comprenderme. A todos los miembros de mi familia, os quiero mucho."
2
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) is essential for optimizing treatment outcomes, particularly
in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) protocols where busulfan (Bu) and phenytoin
(Pht) concentrations require careful monitoring. Current analytical methods, while precise, are
limited by cost, time, and rely on centralized laboratory requirements. These limitations are fur-
ther exacerbated in HSCT patients due to complex metabolic variations and drug-drug interactions,
highlighting the need for rapid monitoring techniques that can adapt to dynamic physiological con-
ditions.
This thesis presents the development of an electrochemically assisted surface-enhanced Raman spec-
troscopy (EC-SERS) methodology for individual and simultaneous detection of Bu and Pht in phys-
iological matrices, aiming to overcome the limitations of conventional monitoring approaches. The
research focuses on establishing a rapid, sensitive, and cost-effective platform for real-time TDM in
clinical settings.
Using gold nanopillars (AuNPs) SERS substrates, two novel individual EC-SERS approaches were
established: Enhanced molecular surface attraction for Pht detection and Ag ion-mediated sensitiv-
ity enhancement for Bu detection. The methodology achieved significant reproducibility improve-
ments, reducing the Relative Standard Deviation (RSD) compared to conventional SERS methods
while achieving detection of clinically relevant concentrations for Bu (2–20 µM) and Pht (40–80 µM).
The optimal conditions found in individual optimizations were used and, for the first time, an
EC-SERS assay was developed for the double detection of Bu and Pht, followed by univariate and
multivariate analysis. The protocol was also evaluated in serum matrices, which impacted Bu and
Pht detection due to higher complexity and protein binding affinity.
This label-free EC-SERS platform represents a significant advancement in TDM, offering rapid
detection capabilities for HSCT protocols.
Future developments will focus on process automa-
tion, substrate characterization, serum filtration improvement, and clinical validation to enhance
widespread accessibility of the developed EC-SERS approach.
3
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
APDs Avalanche PhotoDiodes.
AUC Area Under the Curve.
BMT Bone Marrow Transplantation.
CCDs Charged-Coupled Devices.
CML Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia.
CV Cyclic Voltammetry.
DBS Dried Blood Spot.
DFT Density Functional Theory.
DFT-D Density Functional Theory with Dispersion.
EBL Electron Beam Litography.
EBM Electron Beam Milling.
EC-SERS Electrochemically assisted Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy.
EDL Electrochemical Double Layer.
ELISA Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay.
EM ElectroMagnetic.
FIB Focused Ion Beam.
GC Gas Chromatography.
HOMO Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital.
HPLC-UV high-performance liquid chromatography with ultra-violet spectroscopy.
HSCs Hematopoietic Stem Cells.
HSCT Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation.
IHP Inner Helmholtz Planes.
LC-MS/MS Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectroscopy.
LoD Limit Of Detection.
LOMO Lowest Occupied Molecular Orbital.
4
==PAGE:6==
LoQ Limit Of Quantification.
LSPR Localized Surface Plasmon Resonances.
MAC MyeloAblative Conditioning.
NPs Nanoparticles.
OHP Outer Helmholtz Planes.
PBS Phosphate Buffered Saline.
PCA Principal Component Analysis.
PES Potential Energy Surface.
PLS Partial Least Square.
PMMA Poly(Methyl MethAcrylate.
PMTs PhotoMultiplier Tubes.
PON Point Of Need.
PZC Potential of Zero Charge.
SERS Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy.
SOD/VOD Syndrome/Venooclusive Disease.
TDM Therapeutic Drug Monitoring.
UV Ultra-Violet.
XPS X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy.
5
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project outline and scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Raman spectroscopy
2
3
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
(SERS))
5
3.1
Enhancement mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.1
Electromagnetic Enhancement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.2
Chemical Enhancement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.3
SERS Substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.4
SERS approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Electrochemically Assisted SERS (Electrochemically assisted Surface Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy (EC-SERS))
13
4.1
Essential Features of EC-SERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.1
Electrochemical Double Layer (EDL) of EC-SERS Systems
. . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.2
Influence of Electrolyte Solutions and Solvents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
EC-SERS Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.1
Experimental configuration for EC-SERS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.2
Applications of EC-SERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (TDM))
17
5.1
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1.1
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT) Conditioning Regime . . .
20
5.1.2
Current TDM practices for HSCT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
EC-SERS as a potential tool for TDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Methodology
26
6.1
Chemicals, Solutions and Sample Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
SERS Substrates Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.3
Substrate characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.4
EC-SERS cell components and assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.5
Benchtop Raman Spectrometer with Incorporated Electrochemical Analyzer . . . . .
28
6.6
Electrochemically Assisted SERS Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.7
Data Preprocessing and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Results
30
7.1
Single-Analyte Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.1.1
Reference spectra of Bu and Pht
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.1.2
SERS characterization of Bu and Pht
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.1.3
Optimization of Parameters for EC-SERS Detection of Bu . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.1.4
Optimization of Parameters for EC-SERS Detection of Pht
. . . . . . . . . .
37
7.2
Bu and Pht Simultaneous Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.2.1
First Approach - Whole substrate mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.2.2
Second Approach - Half substrate mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
==PAGE:8==
7.2.3
Second Approach with clinical scenario concentrations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2.4
Detection in Plasma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.3
Analytical Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.3.1
Univariate Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.3.2
Multivariate Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Discussion and Future Perspectives
55
9
Conclusion
57
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Project outline and scope
The effective management of drug therapies, particularly for drugs with narrow therapeutic windows
and those exhibiting marked pharmacokinetic variability that can cause toxicity at high concentra-
tions, requires rapid and precise monitoring of drug concentrations in biological fluids, a process
known as TDM [1].
The majority of analytical methods used in clinical setting are based on
hromatographic methods (HPLC and/or LC-MS) in conjunction with immunoassays or separation
techniques [2]. These TDM traditional methods often depend on large, costly equipment and involve
lengthy procedures for both detection and sample preparation often requiring large sample volumes
for processing [2, 3]. As a result, there is an increasing demand for the development of techniques
capable of facilitating Point Of Need (PON) testing and replacing conventional laboratory-based
systems [3]. Spectroscopic methods, such as SERS and EC-SERS approaches have shown to be a
powerful technique for sensitive quantification of TDM drugs in closer biological media conditions [4].
EC-SERS is a powerful method, that combines the application of a tuned voltage over a nanos-
tructured solid SERS substrate, enhancing the vibrational modes of molecules on the surface. This
combined approach allows to significantly improve the sensitive detection of small molecules, like
drugs, contaminants, pharmaceuticals, or toxins [5, 6]. While numerous studies have highlighted the
benefits of EC-SERS for ultra-low sensitive molecular detection, its adoption as a reliable analytical
technique remains challenging due to the need to understand and optimize various physical and
chemical parameters during the measurements [7]. In particular, the performance of EC-SERS in
real samples, like biological samples, is challenging due to the high complexity matrix, as well as
the different physical and chemical parameters involved during the measurements. Therefore, the
implementation of an optimal sample preparation method before the EC-SERS measurements, and
optimization of measurement physicochemical parameters, might allow to advance the application
of EC-SERS closer to medical applications.
This project aims to advance the implementation of a label-free SERS assay, employing EC-SERS
method, for improved sensitivity detection of oncological and antiepileptic drugs. The detection will
focus on the quantification of Busulfan (Bu) and phenytoin (Pht) (ideal simultaneously) in different
media from electrolytic solutions to physiological based solutions.
Page 1 of 67
==PAGE:10==
2
Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy is an optical spectroscopic technique which allows for the sensitive identi-
fication of analytes by interpreting their unique vibrational spectrum, often referred to as their
"fingerprint" [8]. It is based on the Raman scattering principle, initially theorized by Smekal in
1923 and later, in 1928, experimentally confirmed by C.V. Raman and K.S. Krishnan. Since the
1980s, it has experienced significant advancements that marked a period of rapid instrumentation
development [9].
The Raman spectrum are generated by irradiating a sample with a laser source that typically
emits visible or near-infrared monochromatic light. The scattered light, which carries the molecular
information, is typically detected perpendicular to the incident beam [10]. The interaction of light
with a molecule results in two types of scattering: elastic and inelastic.
In elastic scattering,
known as Rayleigh scattering, the scattered photon retains the same energy and wavelength as the
incident photon (E = E0). This occurs when there is no exchange of energy between the molecule
and the incident photon. Conversely, in inelastic scattering, the scattered light experiences energy
and wavelength shifts due to interactions with molecular vibrations, which forms the basis of the
Raman effect [11].
Based on the energy exchanged, the inelastic scattering phenomena can be
further subdivided in (i) Stokes scattering, where the scattered photon has a lower frequency and
a longer wavelength as energy is transferred to the molecule (E = E0 −Ev) and (ii) Anti-Stokes
scattering, where the photon gains energy from a molecule that is already in an excited vibrational
state (E = E0 + Ev) resulting in a shorter wavelenght [11, 12] (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Raman Scattering Mechanism
The majority of the scattered light retains the same frequency as the incident light, in contrast,
only a small portion exhibits a different frequency, which is attributed to Raman scattering. Within
Raman scattering, Stokes bands are more intense due to the shift from a higher to a lower vibrational
energy state, being predominantly observed in Raman spectroscopy.
On the other hand, Anti-
Page 2 of 67
==PAGE:11==
Stokes bands are generally recorded in samples exhibiting fluorescence, as fluorescence can introduce
interference with the Stokes bands [13]. Considering this, the Raman signal generated by a sample
can be mathematically expressed as:
PRaman = KNσkI
(1)
where:
• PRaman (photon/s). Raman power measured by the detector
• K. Factor that represents the detection efficiency, specifically, what fraction of emitted pho-
tons are successfully collected and converted to electrical signals by the detector, taking into
account various instrumental factors.
• N. Number of illuminated molecules
• σk (cm2/molecule). Raman cross-section for the k-th vibrational mode, integrated across
both the bandwidth and all possible emission angles.
• I (photons/(cm2s)).
Incident laser intensity hitting the sample, measured in photons per
square centimeter per second.
In order to acquire the Raman spectrum, it is crucial that polarizability changes occur during molec-
ular vibrations [14]. Polarizability refers to how easily a molecule’s electron cloud can be deformed
in response to an external field. When a molecule vibrates and its polarizability is altered, a dif-
ference between the frequencies of incident and scattered light is caused, which can be detected as
Raman shifts in the spectrum [15]. These shifts depend on energy levels of vibrations specific to
the chemical bonds and their atomic masses, the electronic environment, and the symmetry of the
molecule, making them independent of the excitation wavelength. This allows, Raman spectra to
be obtained with various excitation wavelengths and still yield consistent frequency shift [10].
As it can be seen in Figure 2, the Raman spectra is typically displayed with Raman shift (cm−1)
on the x-axis, indicating the frequency shift from the incident light (Rayleigh line), while the y-axis
is usually plotted as intensity, often in arbitrary units, showing the intensity of the scattered light
[14].
Figure 2:
Reference spectrum of Bu, the signature peaks are positioned at 1097 (cm−1) and 1453
(cm−1), corresponding to the CH2 scissoring mode and C–C stretching, respectively [16].
Page 3 of 67
==PAGE:12==
Despite being a powerful tool for semi-quantitative analysis across various fields, its application
is constrained due to the inherently weak nature of the Raman scattering signal (typically about
10-7 fraction of the incident photons). This weakness stems from the small cross-section of inelastic
scattering events [17], which results in low sensitivity. Additionally, the high cost of equipment and
fluorescence interference (from either the sample or impurities) further limit Raman spectroscopy’s
applications. To avoid this, fluorescence can often be minimized by shifting the laser to the near-
infrared (NIR) region. However, care must be taken with excitation intensities, as excessive power
may cause thermal decomposition of the sample [18]. These limitations have minimized its broader
acceptance and routine use in analytical characterization methods [7], remaining unsuitable for ana-
lyzing and detecting trace substances without the complementary use of an enhancement technique.
Page 4 of 67
==PAGE:13==
3
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS)
SERS can amplify the Raman signal of a molecule or ion bound due to the presence of a structured
metallic surface, usually referred as SERS substrate, by 103–106 times compared to its Reference
Raman intensity [18]. This phenomenon was first identified in 1974 by Fleischmann et al., who
observed the surface enhancement effect through the introduction of pyridine in the proximity of
Ag electrodes [19]. Since then, SERS has been closely linked with electrochemistry. Its combination
has emerged as an effective approach for real-time observation of electron transfer processes, redox
reactions, and the structural changes of surface-bound species or reaction intermediates [20].
Initially, the enhancement of the Raman signal was attributed to the increased surface area in-
duced by electrochemical roughening. However, later investigations revealed that this enhancement
(GSERS) arises from a combination of two multiplicative contributions, that will be explained in
detail in the following sections. Considering this, Raman and SERS scattered powers (PRaman and
PSERS, respectively) are related by:
PSERS = GSERSPRaman
(2)
SERS combines the intrinsic advantages of Raman, and the high sensitivity that, in some cases, al-
lows single molecule detection. Within these advantages, it can be found: (i) recognition specificity,
(ii) non-destructive analysis, (iii) minimum preparation of the sample required, (iv) possibility of
carrying out measurements in biological fluids; (v) simultaneous detection of different analytes and
(vi) possibility of carrying out on-site analysis with portable instruments [21].
3.1
Enhancement mechanisms
The SERS enhancement mechanism comprises two primary components: ElectroMagnetic (EM)
enhancement, arising from plasmon resonance excitation, and chemical enhancement, resulting from
changes in molecular polarizability. Both mechanisms are influenced by the applied potential and
the SERS substrate characteristics (form, size, shape, type of metal) [7].
Figure 3: Electromagnetic enhancement and chemical enhancement mechanisms for SERS
Each mechanism is detailed below.
3.1.1
Electromagnetic Enhancement
The significant increase in signal given by SERS is predominantly attributed to the EM mechanism.
This mechanism arises from the interaction of incident light with nanostructured plasmonic ma-
terials (such as gold, Ag or copper) that support Localized Surface Plasmon Resonances (LSPR).
When the frequency of the incident light matches the plasmon resonance of the nanostructure, free
Page 5 of 67
==PAGE:14==
electrons oscillate collectively giving rise to highly localized regions known as hotspots where the
EM field is notably enhanced.
For strong LSPR to occur, and thus substantial EM enhancement, two conditions are essential [22]:
• Plasmonic material. The material must have a negative real dielectric function (indicative of
metallic behavior) and a small positive imaginary dielectric function (implying low losses),
conditions ideal for sustaining strong plasmonic resonances (Figure 3.a).
• Nanostructured surface. The surface must be appropriately structured at the nanoscale to
lead the formation of the abovementioned "hotspots".
The overall EM enhancement arises from two interconnected effects: local field enhancement and
re-radiation (emission) enhancement [21].
Local field enhancement. The excitation of surface plasmons results in strong spatial localization
and amplification of laser light within hotspots. As a result, molecules within or near these hotspots
experience a significantly enhanced EM field compared to what they would encounter in the absence
of the metallic substrate [23]. This enhancement is mathematically expressed as:
MZ
Loc(ωL) = |ELoc(ωL)|2
|E(ωL)|2
(3)
where:
• ωL is the laser (angular) frequency.
• ELoc(ωL) is the amplitude of the local electric field at the molecule’s position, enhanced by
the plasmonic nanostructure.
• E(ωL) is the amplitude of the incident electric field in the absence of the nanostructure
The superscript Z indicates that the incident laser is linearly polarized along the axis Z, perpendic-
ular to the propagation direction.
Re-Radiation Enhancement. In addition to the excitation field enhancement, the plasmonic
substrate modifies the emission characteristics of the molecule. When the molecule, acting as an
oscillating dipole at the Raman frequency ωR, emits light, the nanostructure can reflect or scatter
part of this emission, increasing the effective radiative decay rate of the molecule and leading to
re-radiation enhancement. This effect can be treated analogously to the local field enhancement,
but now at the Raman-scattered frequency ωR.
Combining these two effects, local and re-radiation, the total EM factor can be expressed as:
GEm
SERS = MZ
Loc(ωL)MZ
Loc(ωR) = [ELoc(ωL)
E(ωL) ]2 · [ELoc(ωR)
E(ωR) ]2
(4)
The previously shown equation can be further simplified for small Raman shifts (ωR ≈ωL) as:
GEm
SERS = [MZ
Loc(ωL)]2 = [ELoc(ωL)
E(ωL) ]4
(5)
Page 6 of 67
==PAGE:15==
Equation 5 shows that the overall SERS enhancement is proportional to the fourth power of the
local field enhancement, often referred as the E4 law [21].
3.1.2
Chemical Enhancement
The chemical enhancement mechanism arises from direct molecule-substrate interactions, leading
to a smaller boost in the overall Raman signal compared to EM enhancement.
This interactions alters the electronic structure and polarizability of the molecule, thereby mod-
ifying Raman cross-sections for its vibrational modes. Although it contributes less to the total
enhancement, the chemical mechanism plays a crucial role in determining spectral details such as
band positions and intensity ratios in SERS measurements [21].
Chemical enhancement is a short-range phenomenon, typically observed when the molecule is in
direct contact or separated by only a few angstroms from the substrate [24]. The enhancement
for the k-th vibrational mode is quantified as the ratio of the Raman cross-section of the adsorbed
molecule (σk
ads) to that of the molecule in its free state(σk
free) [25].
GChem
SERS = σk
ads
σk
free
(6)
Two main effects contribute to chemical enhancement: non-resonant chemical effect and resonant
charge transfer chemical effect [21].
Non-resonant chemical effect. The molecule-metal interaction alters the molecule’s geometrical
and electronic structure without forming new electronic states near the metal’s Fermi level. This
modification can cause slight shifts in Raman peaks and variations in vibrational mode intensities.
Resonant change transfer chemical effect.
The interaction between the molecule and the
metal can create new electronic states that involve charge transfer between both. If the energy of
the incident laser matches (or is close to) the energy gap between these new states (or between
the molecule’s Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO)/Lowest Occupied Molecular Orbital
(LOMO) and the metal’s Fermi level), the process enters resonance, increasing the likelihood of the
electron transfer [21],[25] (Figure 3.b). In this case:
• Raman scattering is strongly enhanced for vibrational modes associated with permitted elec-
tronic transitions.
• The charge transfer direction depends on the electronic properties of the molecule and metal,
occurring either from metal to molecule or viceversa [26].
The EM and chemical mechanisms are illustrated in Figure 4, where a comparison between Raman
and SERS can be seen considering both enhancement mechanisms.
Page 7 of 67
==PAGE:16==
Figure 4: Electromagnetic and chemical enhancement [21]
From the Figure 4, the following highlights can be obtained. As it can be seen in Normal Raman
(top left, a), a laser with an oscillating electric field E(ωL) interacts with a molecule character-
ized by a Raman polarizability tensor to induce a dipole p(ωR) (red arrow), which oscillates at
the Raman frequency ωR. The power of the Raman signal is proportional to |p(ωR)|2. When the
molecule is placed near a plasmonic nanostructure (yellow spheres in the SERS, bottom left, b),
the local electric field is significantly amplified compared to the incident laser field (green line).
This enhancement is quantified by MZ
Loc(ωL). Additionally, the plasmonic substrate enhances the
efficiencty with which the Raman dipole re-radiates, quantified by MZ
Loc(ωR).
On the other hand, when talking about chemical enhancement, as it can be seen in Normal Raman
(top right, c), the molecule’s vibrational modes have a characteristic Raman cross-section, σfree
k
,
determining the intrinsic Raman scattering efficiency.
However, when the molecule is adsorbed
onto a plasmonic surface (yellow spheres in the SERS, bottom right, d), the electronic structure is
modified due to charge transfer interactions, affecting the cross-section, now denoted as σads
k
.
While EM enhancement accounts for the majority of the signal amplification, particularly driven by
LSPR, chemical enhancement adds specificity through molecular interactions and charge-transfer
processes. Together, the total SERS enhancement can be expressed as the product of both mech-
anisms, which collectively enable its remarkable sensitivity and versatility. Table 1 presents the
approximate contributions of the two types of enhancements [27].
Page 8 of 67
==PAGE:17==
Approx. max. value
Type
GChem SERS
102
Atomic scale roughness
GChem SERS
104
CT resonance
GEm SERS
108
Averaged over the substrate
GEm SERS
1010
In a hot spot
Table 1: Estimated maximum values for GChem SERS and GEm SERS
3.1.3
SERS Substrates
Plasmonic materials
A proper design of plasmonic nanostructures for SERS is crucial for the effective performance of
both label-free SERS and indirect SERS applications.
The efficiency of SERS largely depends on how adsorbed molecules interact with the surfaces of
plasmonic nanostructures, and the number of hotspots present in the substrate. Typically those are
made of gold (Au), silver (Ag), or copper (Cu). While gold and silver are most selected as SERS
substrates due to their stability, copper is more chemically reactive. These three metals possess
LSPRs that span most of the visible and near-infrared wavelengths, making them ideal for most
SERS applications [28].
As already mentioned, hotspots are typically found at sharp edges, tips, or in the narrow gaps
between closely positioned Nanoparticles (NPs). To maximize their number, strategies like creating
anisotropic NPs with sharp features or assembling closely packed nanostructures have been em-
ployed. Additionally, substrate homogeneity is crucial for reproducible and reliable measurements,
especially in quantitative applications [29]. The reproducibility of SERS substrates posed a signif-
icant challenge; however, advancements in self-assembly techniques and nanofabrication methods
have substantially improved reliability [30].
Fabrication Methods
According to the fabrication strategies employed, SERS substrates can be subdivided into two cat-
egories: top-down and bottom-up approaches. The following section examines some of the widely
used fabrication methods and the techniques available for precise and reliable SERS substrate pro-
duction.
Top-down approaches
Top-down approaches encompasses physical methods that aim to produce sophisticated nanostruc-
tures with sharp edges and/or nanogaps allowing highly enhanced EM fields.
In top-down synthesis, larger structures are reduced into smaller substrate components through
methods like milling, etching, or molding. Lithography, in particular, has found widespread used
in industrial applications due to its exceptional reproducibility and ability to facilitate wide-scale
production [31]. In lithographic techniques a beam, whether of light, electrons or ions, is used to
Page 9 of 67
==PAGE:18==
expose a resist material that is subsequently developed to reveal a defined nanostructure [32].
Photolithography relies on light to induce chemical changes in a resist layer, making it highly reli-
able and scalable in the semiconductor industry. However, light-induction methods face resolution
limits, that can be overcome by the use of laser direct-writing approaches with visible light, of-
fering a cost-effective route to achieve high-resolution features. On the other hand, methods that
use charged particles, such as Electron Beam Milling (EBM),Electron Beam Litography (EBL) or
Focused Ion Beam (FIB); overcome the limitations of resolution due to the fact that electrons are
not limited by the diffraction limit of a light surface [32].
Once the regions are defined using lithography, etching, that can also be called subtractive lithog-
raphy, selectively removes material from the substrate in the exposed areas, causing an increase in
their depth [33].
Despite being being useful for obtaining precisely controlled structures, top-down approaches have
a high cost, low throughput, large-scale issues and limited application in large size biomolecule
analysis that limit their use [32].
Bottom-up approaches
Bottom-up approaches encompass chemical methods where the objective is to create multifunctional
nanostructural materials from smaller units. These approaches are characterized by having a low
cost, with large-scale production feasibility and easier application in large size biomolecule analysis,
overcoming some of the top-down approaches’ disadvantages [32].
Some techniques used are atomic layer deposition, chemical synthesis, laser trapping, self-assembly,
and colloidal aggregation [31].
Atomic layer deposition enables precise layer-by-layer deposition of extremely thin, high-quality,
conformal films through sequential, self-terminating surface reactions of gaseous precursors. In this
case, nanostructures are built atom by atom, rather than sculpting them from larger materials as
in top-down methods [34].
Page 10 of 67
==PAGE:19==
Figure 5: Schematic illustration of the growth process of ALD [34]
On the other hand, other approaches, such as self-assembly could be used, where individual compo-
nents are organized spontaneously into ordered structures without external guidance, only driven
by interactions [35].
Despite the above mentioned advantages, these approaches are also characterized by some chal-
lenges, such as the difficulty in precise control of nanogap structures, non-control over aggregations
and the loss of signal reproducibility [32].
3.1.4
SERS approaches
SERS detection is broadly categorized into two distinct approaches: label-free and label-based. The
label-free method involves the direct detection of SERS signals originated from analytes adsorbed
onto the SERS substrate. On the other hand, the label-based approach involves indirect detection,
wherein the spectroscopic signals originate from the interaction between the analyte and the labels
attached to SERS tags, which are specifically designed to bind to target analytes [36].
Label-free SERS: Label-free SERS provides detailed molecular insights, by capturing unique
structural fingerprints and the information about the spatial orientation of molecules. This makes
it a valuable tool for analyzing a wide range of molecules samples from proteins and pathogens to
nutrients, supporting various biomedical applications [37].
However, two main challenges are idnetified label-free SERS detection: sensitivity limitations and
reproducibility due to inconsistent performance of SERS-active nanostructures. Several approaches
can enhance sensitivity:
• Optimizing instrumentation for better throughput and reduced noise.
• Minimizing interference from unwanted molecular signals.
• Engineering SERS-active nanostructures with optimized characteristics (dimensions, morphol-
ogy, coupling mechanisms, and LSPR properties).
Page 11 of 67
==PAGE:20==
To address reproducibility issues, researchers have developed surface modification strategies. These
include cleaning procedures to eliminate contaminants and protective coatings to prevent un-
wanted molecular interactions, such as SHINERS (shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spec-
troscopy), which utilizes ultrathin protective layers of silica or aluminum oxide on metallic NPs to
maintain sensitivity while improving measurement consistency [38].
Although label-free SERS is simplicity is of great advantage, its effectiveness in biological appli-
cations still limited by several key factors. The technique often produces weak signals due to the
small Raman cross-sections of aliphatic bonds common in biomolecules. In addition, the analyte of
interest might be embedded in a complex matrix, where overlapping Raman signals can interfere
with detection. Indirect detection offers a solution by functionalizing the substrate with a label or
tag, which significantly enhances specificity for the target substance, at the cost of a more complex
detection strategy [24].
Label-based SERS: Typically, indirect SERS is composed of four parts: (i) a metal nanosubstrate,
(ii) an organic Raman reporter molecule, (iii) a protection shell, (iv) and targeting ligands [39].
Various metal nanostructures can provide strongly enhanced spectroscopic signals due to the local
optical fields at metal surfaces, however, gold is preferred in biomedical applications due to its
superior stability. The metal core’s shape, structure, and aggregation can be further engineered to
optimize signal enhancement in specific spectral regions [24].
Raman reporter molecules, chosen for their large cross-sections, are then attached to these metal
nanostructures to produce distinct spectral fingerprints. These reporters must generate signals in
spectral regions free from interference with other sample components. Since the basic metal-reporter
structure tends to be unstable and susceptible to environmental interference, protective coatings of
PEG or silica are essential. These coatings not only improve biocompatibility and prevent aggre-
gation but can also be modified with targeting molecules such as antibodies, aptamers, or peptides
for selective analyte targeting [39], [24].
Page 12 of 67
==PAGE:21==
4
Electrochemically Assisted SERS (EC-SERS)
In conventional SERS, the presence of an analyte has to be in close proximity (ideally < 3 nm) to the
enhancing metal surface to achieve optimal Raman scattering signal enhancement. Despite analytes
being located near the surface, they may fail to come close enough to experience the benefits of the
enhanced EM field due to factors such as electrostatic interactions and hydrophobic characteristics
[7].
The application of an external voltage can effectively modify the surface charge, thereby facilitating
the analyte’s access to the surface and enabling the acquisition of SERS signals. EC-SERS not only
significantly amplifies the SERS signals but also allows for the real-time monitoring of redox-active
processes under electrochemical control, achieving sensitivity at the sub-monolayer level and, in
certain instances, down to the single-molecule scale [7].
4.1
Essential Features of EC-SERS
4.1.1
EDL of EC-SERS Systems
In EC-SERS, the integration of SERS with an applied potential, establishes an EDL at the sub-
strate surface. This interface between the nanostructured electrode and the electrolyte, enables the
modulation of electrical interactions between analytes and substrates, yielding valuable insights into
the mechanisms governing analyte absorption and reaction mechanisms [40].
The EDL concept was first theorized by Helmholtz in 1853. Since then, the initial model evolved
significantly through several important contributions that will be discussed below.
Helmholtz model. 1853
Helmholtz model proposed that charged solid-liquid interfaces could be modeled by parallel planes
of charge, forming a electrode-electrolyte interface. One plane represents a charged surface, and the
other represents a single counter-ion layer that neutralize the surface charge. Since the solvation
effects of ions are not considered, the distance between these planes is determined by the radius of
the ions. Consequently, the voltage drop at the interface is assumed to be linear.
However, the model has two significant limitations. Firstly, it overestimates the interface’s charge
storage capacity (capacitance). Secondly, it does not consider the natural tendency of ions to move
around and spread out due to thermal energy, known as entropy [41].
Gouy and Chapman. 1909
To overcome these limitations, Gouy and Chapman adapted the Helmholtz theory by applying the
Poisson-Boltzmann theory, a mean-field approximation, in which ions are non-uniformly distributed
in the solution due to the influence of temperature, in a diffuse layer. In this model, as distance
from the electrode increases, the concentration of ions decreases [42].
However, according to the Poisson equation, the ions are treated as independent point charges that
can approach the surface unrealistically close. Therefore, leading to the overestimation of double-
Page 13 of 67
==PAGE:22==
layer capacitances that cannot be observed experimentally, as ions have a limited size and cannot
accumulate indefinitely close to a charged surface. Moreover, the model does not account for the
ion solvation effects. [41]
Stern. 1924
Stern combined some aspects of both previously mentioned approaches and proposed a "double
layer" that consists of two different regions (Figure 6.a). The first, defined as the Stern layer, is a
tightly bound layer of ions at a distance δ from the electrode (as in Helmholtz model). At distances
greater than δ, a longer range "diffuse" layer that gradually transitions into the bulk solution (like
in the Gouy-Chapman model) is defined (Figure 6.b)[42].
Despite providing a more precise definition of the solid-liquid interface, this model fails to account
for the distinct behavior of ions and electrolytes, such as large anions (Cl−or Br−), that tend to
adsorb on the electrode due to less rigid solvation shells than cations.
Grahame, Devanathan, and Bockis. 1947
To differentiate between bare and solvated ions, the Gouy-Chapman-Stern rigid layer was refined
by the introduction of the Inner Helmholtz Planes (IHP) and Outer Helmholtz Planes (OHP),
respectively. In the IHP region, ions are adsorbed into the electrode surface; while, the OHP region
is mainly composed by solvated ions [42] (Figure 6.a).
Figure 6: (a) EDL mechanism for a negatively charged surface. (b) Potential profile.
4.1.2
Influence of Electrolyte Solutions and Solvents
As the most common solvent in electrochemistry, water is a weak Raman scatterer and shows vir-
tually no absorption in the visible range [43]. This weak scattering is advantageous in aqueous
electrochemical measurements, as it minimizes interference.
Page 14 of 67
==PAGE:23==
The intensity of SERS signals in EC-SERS systems is influenced by both the electrolyte nature and
its concentration, which govern the extent of compression or expansion in the EDL. This, in turn,
impacts various electrochemical properties, including non-specific adsorption onto the electrode sur-
face and the resistance to diffusion. Additionally, the solvent plays a crucial role in shaping the
chemical and physical characteristics of the analyte adsorbed onto the surface, due to the enthalpy
and characteristics of the solvation process [44].
Furthermore, when conducting EC-SERS measurements, care must be taken to avoid electrolytes
with species that strongly scatter Raman signals themselves, as well as anions (e.g., Cl-, Br-, I-)
that strongly adsorb onto metal surfaces like gold and silver, which could obscure the signal of
interest. Highly acidic or basic electrolytes should also be avoided, as they may interact with the
plasmonic surface.
Commonly used supporting electrolytes include NaF, Na2SO4, NaClO4 and
phosphate buffer. Conversely to water being the ideal solvent, organic solvents used in non-aqueous
electrochemistry can present challenges due to their typically strong Raman signals [45].
4.2
EC-SERS Experiments
4.2.1
Experimental configuration for EC-SERS
The experimental set-up for in-situ EC-SERS typically consists on the following components: laser
source, spectrometer, spectroelectrochemical cell, potentiostat and a computer (Figure 7).
Figure 7: Diagram showing the experimental set-up for EC-SERS [46].
A laser source is used to excite the SERS signal from the samples. SERS typically uses laser ex-
citation in the visible range (e.g., 488–633 nm), but wavelengths from the near Ultra-Violet (UV)
(325 nm) to near IR (785–830 nm) have also been utilized. The choice of wavelength depends on
Page 15 of 67
==PAGE:24==
achieving a balance between enhancing scattering efficiency and minimizing sample fluorescence.
Since the majority of biological samples are fluorescent, high frequency lasers with high power are
considered to be suitable. [47].
The spectrometer is responsible for dispersing and detecting the Raman signal. Detection is per-
formed by single-channel devices, such as PhotoMultiplier Tubes (PMTs) or Avalanche PhotoDiodes
(APDs), or multi-channel detectors like Charged-Coupled Devices (CCDs), with the latter increas-
ingly becoming the preferred option due to their sensitivity [48].
The spectroelectrochemical cell accommodates the electrode/electrolyte interface under investiga-
tion, by including a reference, a counter and a nanostructured working electrode. Additionally, a
potentiostat is used to regulate the working electrode’s potential, enabling and monitoring electro-
chemical reactions [48].
Lastly, a computer allows for the control of the Raman and potentiostat softwares for data visual-
ization and manipulation during acquisition.
4.2.2
Applications of EC-SERS
Since its discovery, EC-SERS has been significantly used to study the electrode-electrolyte inter-
face, studying key phenomena such as the adsorption of organic molecules and co-adsorption with
inorganic species, interfacial water structure, electrodeposition, electropolymerization, corrosion
inhibition, passivity, and surface redox reactions. Over the past four decades, advancements in elec-
trode materials, such as nanoparticles and single crystals [46], have expanded the scope of EC-SERS.
This technique has become a versatile analytical tool for detecting a wide range of biomolecules,
including nucleic acids, lipids, peptides, and bacteria [49]. Its pharmaceutical applications have
also extended to analyzing complex biological matrices, supporting drug development, monitoring
stability, and integrating treatment with diagnostic imaging, known as theranostic approaches [50].
Page 16 of 67
==PAGE:25==
5
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (TDM)
TDM is a branch of clinical pharmacology that enables tailored drug dosages, aiming to achieve drug
concentrations that are both therapeutically effective and minimize the potential concentration-
dependent adverse effects [51]. It consists on assessing drug concentrations after a specified du-
ration of administration and at appropriate intervals. The drug dosage is then adjusted based on
its therapeutic effects at various stages of treatment, considering the drug’s therapeutic window [52].
In TDM, understanding the concept of the therapeutic window is fundamental for optimizing pa-
tient care. The therapeutic window represents the span between the lowest plasma concentration
at which a drug is effective and the concentration at which toxicity may occur.
This range is
quantified by the therapeutic index, which is the ratio between these two limits. For drugs with a
broad therapeutic window, dose adjustments may not be necessary, even in cases of considerable
renal elimination. In contrast, drugs that exhibit a narrow therapeutic window, precise modifica-
tions to the dosage are crucial to prevent toxicity and ensure therapeutic efficacy [53]. Common
drugs requiring TDM in hospitals include: antiepileptics (e.g., carbamazepine, Pht, valproic acid),
antiarrhythmics (e.g., digoxin, procainamide), antibiotics (e.g., gentamicin, vancomycin), antide-
pressants (e.g., amitriptyline, nortriptyline), immunosuppressants (e.g., cyclosporine, tacrolimus),
antineoplastics (e.g., methotrexate), anticoagulants (e.g., warfarin), and antifungals (e.g., flucona-
zole, amphotericin B) [54].
TDM relies on pharmacokinetics, which refers to the study of the processes by which a drug (or its
metabolites) behaves in the body, focusing on factors such as absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and elimination [53]. Key parameters such as the drug’s half-life (t1/2), peak plasma concentration
(Cmax), Area Under the Curve (AUC), clearance (Cl), time at which Cmax occurs (tmax), and
dose/concentration relationships can differ substantially, can vary significantly between patients
[55]. The area under a plasma concentration-time curve, known as AUC (Figure 8), displays the
concentration of drug in blood plasma with time following administration. The administered dose
and the AUC are directly proportional in the case of linear pharmacokinetics (dose proportionality).
By dividing the dose absorbed by the AUC, one can determine the drug’s clearance based on the
dose and bioavailability. [56].
Figure 8: Plasma Drug Concentration-Time Profile
Page 17 of 67
==PAGE:26==
Significant variability is observed between groups due to factors such as age, diet, ethnicity, weight,
and prescription drug interactions. Pharmacokinetics seeks to mitigate this variability to minimize
the risk of severe toxicity and ensure adequate therapeutic effects [56].
Therefore, a thorough
understanding of these pharmacokinetic elements, along with the appropriate therapeutic and toxic
concentration ranges, is crucial for clinicians to optimize medication regimens. The details of these
parameters, definitions and their applicability are presented in Table 2.
Parameter
Definition
Application
Bioavailability (F)
Percentage of a dose that appears
in the systemic circulation after ad-
ministration by an alternative route
compared with intravenous adminis-
tration
Determines
the
amount
of
drug
reaching the systemic circulation
Volume of Distribution (VD)
Proportionality
constant
relating
the amount of drug in the body
at a given time to a simultane-
ously occurring drug concentration
in plasma, blood, or other reference
fluid at an identical time
Determines the size of loading doses
Clearance (Cl)
Proportionality
constant
between
the rate of drug elimination from
the body (units = mass/unit time)
and the concentration of the drug in
plasma or blood at the same point
in time
Determines the rate of drug removal
from the system
Half-life (t1/2)
Time taken for the drug concentra-
tion in plasma to fall to half its cur-
rent value
Determines the frequency of admin-
istration and time to reach a steady
state
Table 2: Pharmacokinetic Parameters [53].
Evaluating the Need for Drug Level Testing
To support adjustments in a patient’s treatment plan, drug measurements are employed to detect
medications or substances influencing their clinical presentation, potentially contributing to a med-
ical emergency, such as in cases of clinical toxicology. Ideally, drug levels would only be measured
when there is a clear clinical need or indication for such testing. The circumstances for requesting
TDM are summarized in Table 3 [57].
Suspected toxicity—are toxic levels present?
Insufficient response—could subtherapeutic levels be the cause?
Evaluation of patient adherence to the prescribed medication regimen
Monitoring therapy after a change in the dosing schedule
Potential interactions between drugs following adjustments in concomitant medications
Overlap between symptoms of toxicity and those of the underlying disease
Table 3: Rationale for measuring drug concentrations.
Page 18 of 67
==PAGE:27==
Selection of the Biological Sample
To assess medication levels and guarantee successful therapy, TDM relies on biological sampling,
which is generally performed in blood, plasma or serum with the requirement of the sample concen-
tration having a defined correlation with the drug and its therapeutic effect [54]. Although venous
blood drawing is still the gold standard, it can face difficulties, particularly for young patients and
those who need regular monitoring, due to its intrusive nature. Alternative sample techniques in-
cluding Dried Blood Spot (DBS) and saliva sampling have become a potential option in order to
overcome this issue. DBS sampling is simple to collect, store, and easily sent via e-mail for further
analysis. Alternatively, saliva sampling offers a painless method that has been shown to correlate
with plasma drug levels for particular drugs (e.g.,anticonvulsants) [58]. Other TDM common prac-
tices include matrices such as hair, sweat, cerebrospinal fluid, and exhaled breath condensate [59].
Further details regarding the specific sample method needed for the present study, as well as the
required timing for sample collection in relation to the treatment of interest, can be found in sub-
subsection 5.1.2.
Analytical Laboratory Measurement
The most popular TDM procedures used to measure drug concentrations in biological samples by
clinical laboratories areGas Chromatography (GC), high-performance liquid chromatography with
ultra-violet spectroscopy (HPLC-UV), and Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectroscopy
(LC-MS/MS). Another commonly used approach are immunoassay-based methods, such as En-
zyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) [60]. The selection of a specific method depends on
several factors; qualified employees, laboratory equipment, technical and economic criteria [61]. Al-
though immunoassays offer benefits such as quick turnaround time (TAT), simplicity of use (no
requirement of highly specialized staff), integration, and accessibility; techniques like GC, UV, and
LC-MS/MS remain the preferred choice. This is due to their superior sensitivity, specificity, and
accuracy. Additionally, immunoassays are often limited by the unavailability of certain drugs for
monitoring and the potential for cross-reactivity with metabolites of the parent drug [60, 62].
Laboratory Results
Gross, Annette S., identified several key points regarding how clinical laboratories should display
their data to physicians and the essential information that such reports should include, summarized
as follows:
• The laboratory should prioritize quick results reporting for clinical interpretation.
• The report must identify the analytical technique used, especially when clinical implications
are significant.
• Drug concentrations are reported in mass or molar units; mass units are preferred to align
concentrations to dose.
• The assay results must explicitly indicate the therapeutic concentration range for the measured
drug.
Page 19 of 67
==PAGE:28==
Implementing therapeutic adjustments
The last phase of TDM consists on evaluating possible therapy changes or whether additional moni-
toring is required by interpreting drug concentration data. Increasing evidence supports the efficacy
of TDM-guided dosing in improving treatment outcomes in personalized medicine [63].
5.1
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
Stem cells are undifferentiated cells with a unique dual ability: they can self-renew by generating
identical stem cells and differentiate into specific mature cell types required for the maintenance or
repair of their respective tissues. Among adult stem cells, Hematopoietic Stem Cells (HSCs) have
been the most studied and characterized [64]. HSCs give rise to all blood cells and their offspring,
including immune cells. In mammals, unique microenvironments within the bone marrow, referred
to as niches, are on charge of their regulation [65].
HSCT, commonly referred to as "Bone Marrow Transplantation (BMT)", is primarily involved in the
treatment of hematologic and lymphoid cancers, including acute and chronic leukemia, lymphomas,
multiple myeloma, and myeloproliferative disorders. Additionally, it is employed to address a range
of nonmalignant conditions, such as aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic and various immunodeficiency
syndromes [66].
HSCT can be divided into two categories based on the donor: allogeneic and autologous. The term
autologous refers to the patient acting as their own donor while in the allogenic scenario the stem
cells are obtained from a donor who is distinct from the recipient [66].
5.1.1
HSCT Conditioning Regime
Bu (1,4-butanediol-dimethylsulfonate), a bifunctional DNA alkylating agent, is an essential compo-
nent in various conditioning regimens prior to HSCT (Figure 9.a). Due to its toxic effect in the bone
marrow, it is particularly important in MyeloAblative Conditioning (MAC), previous to autologous
or allogeneic stem cell transplantation [67, 68].
A conditioning regimen, wherein MAC can be found, typically consists of a combination of im-
munosuppressive and myeloablative medications that aims, to avoid rejection, create "space" in the
recipient’s bone marrow for donor cell engraftment and, if necessary, eradicate the root malignancy
[69].
Page 20 of 67
==PAGE:29==
Figure 9: Chemical structures of (a) Bu and (b) Pht.
Bu was originally administered in low doses to treat patients with Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
(CML) due to its ability to target hematopoietic precursors and pluripotent stem cells. Today, it
has become one of the most commonly used chemotherapy drugs in high-dose conditioning regimens
for patients undergoing HSCT. However, due to its poor effect on mature lymphocytes, Bu is not
usually used alone in preparatory regimens. Rather, its myelotoxicity is combined with other agents
that have a stronger toxic effect on mature lymphocytes, like radiation or nitrogen mustards such
as cyclophosphamide or fludarabine [70].
Bu administration is accessible in intravenous and oral forms.
Despite the introduction of in-
travenous Bu to address specific inter-patient variability concerns, inconsistencies in systemic Bu
concentrations even in weight-based dosing remain a concern. Furthermore, the correlation between
Bu plasma levels and treatment outcomes in HSCT patients has led to the ongoing practice of mon-
itoring Bu drug levels to optimize therapy [68].
5.1.2
Current TDM practices for HSCT
Bu’s toxicity profile remains a significant concern. Common adverse effects include fever, myelo-
suppression, mucositis, nausea, and vomiting. Severe toxicities, such as Syndrome/Venooclusive
Disease (SOD/VOD) and neurotoxicity, may lead to multisystem organ failure and fatal outcomes
[71]. Similarly, Pht toxicity, though rarely fatal, requires attention as it is a frequently overlooked
condition. Clinical manifestations range from mild symptoms like nystagmus and ataxia to severe
cases that can progress to coma. Given Pht’s narrow therapeutic range, when signs of toxicity are
suspected, testing serum Pht levels becomes an immediate priority [72].
A body weight-dependent dosing technique is usually used to determine the initial Bu dose. The
recommended intravenously dosage of high-dose Bu for individuals weighing more than 12 kg is 0.8
- 1.0 mg/kg every 6 hours for 4 days in a row with a total of 16 doses (Days -7, -6, -5, and -4). For
those with a body weight of 12 kg or less, the suggested dosage increases to 1.1 mg/kg. Hematopoi-
etic progenitor cells should be infused on Day 0 of treatment [73]. The therapeutic window for Bu,
established from extensive experience in adults and adolescents, defines a target range for AUC of
900–1500 µmol· min with the aim to ensure successful engraftment while reducing the risk of severe
Page 21 of 67
==PAGE:30==
toxicities [74].
At the moment, Bu TDM protocols differ across BMT centers with a significant heterogeneity in
the time and frequency of the measurements as well as the models employed to estimate the AUC
[75]. The AUC0−∞is typically determined by measuring at least six plasma concentrations collected
following the first intravenous dose out of 16. The samples are drawn at 1, 2, 2.25, 2.5, 3, and 6
hours following the 2-hour intravenous infusion of Bu. The plasma concentrations are measured
using HPLC, and the AUC0−∞is calculated using the trapezoidal method [76]. Bu intravenous
dosing and monitoring protocol, including precise plasma sampling and times employed is detailed
in Table 4.
Parameter
Specifications
Target AUC Range
900 - 1500 µmol/L·min, where AUC below 900 can lead to engraftment failure and above 1500 may cause toxicity.
Clearance Range
2.1 - 3.5 mL/min/kg (typical range for patients with normal kidney function).
Dose Information
Intravenous Bu dose: 0.8 mg/kg every 6 hours for 4 consecutive days.
Dosing Schedule
4 doses per day across a 4-day period, for a total of 16 doses.
Plasma Sample Timing
Plasma samples to be collected at the following time-points after the start of each 2-hour Bu infusion:
- First sample: 1 hour post-infusion start (C1).
- Second sample: 2 hours post-infusion start (C2).
- Third sample: 2.25 hours post-infusion start (C2.25).
- Fourth sample: 2.5 hours post-infusion start (C2.5).
- Fifth sample: 3 hours post-infusion start (C3).
- Sixth sample: 6 hours post-infusion start (C6).
Test Method
LC-MS/MS.
Report Timing
Results available the same day or within 1 to 3 days.
Monitoring and Adjustments
Dose adjustments based on AUC and clearance results:
- Consider dose reduction if AUC > 1500 (indicating possible hepatotoxicity).
- Consider dose increase if AUC < 900 (indicating incomplete marrow ablation).
Table 4: Bu IV Dosing and Monitoring Protocol
Watanabe et al. examined the relationship between the actual AUC0−∞(calculated from all avail-
able time-points) and AUC predictions based on specific single time-points. This study revealed
that only the AUC0−∞predicted from the C6 sample (6 hours post-infusion) met the therapeutic
window criteria. In contrast, AUC estimates based on the C1, C2, C2.25, C2.5, or C3 time-points
failed to meet the criteria.
In a comparative study, the target attainment of Bu exposure AUC0−∞was evaluated between two
TDM regimens: one using only day 1 samples (regimen d1) and the other including both day 1
and day 2 samples (regimen d1+2). Both regimens showed similar target attainment rates, with
84.3% for regimen d1 and 90.9% for regimen d1+2. However, using day 2 samples provided a more
accurate estimate of Bu clearance, resulting in smaller variability compared to day 1 alone. Al-
though the addition of day 2 sampling did not significantly improve target attainment, it provided
more precise dosing adjustments, suggesting that sampling on day 2 may lead to better outcomes
in certain cases [75].
An example of a schedule for Bu TDM is presented in Figure 10. TDM is conducted after the
administration of the initial Bu dose. Upon collection, blood samples must be promptly centrifuged
Page 22 of 67
==PAGE:31==
and frozen due to Bu’s poor stability in plasma, before they are shipped to the laboratory. De-
pending on the distance between the hospital and the laboratory, transport may be prolonged,
potentially leading to delays in result availability. As previously mentioned, the laboratory assesses
the pharmacokinetics parameters of the patient and based on these findings, a dose adjustment
is recommended starting from day 2 [77]. If the required adjustment exceeds 25% or significant
variability is expected, a second blood sample may be taken for further analysis.
Figure 10: Proposed schedule for Bu TDM.
In pediatric patients, Bu mean AUC above 900 µmol· min (every-6-hour dosing) lowers the risk of
graft failure. However, an AUC over 1350 µmol· min is linked to an increased risk of SOD/VOD,
especially in children who did not receive preventive prophylactic SOD/VOD treatment [78]. Chil-
dren receiving the same dose based on body weight tend to have lower plasma concentrations
than adults [79]. As a result, to attain the necessary threshold for successful engraftment, children
may need higher doses, as their Bu clearance and volume distribution are greater than in adults [80].
Convulsions are frequent side effects linked to the high-dose Bu conditioning and numerous studies
have shown the significance of anticonvulsant prophylaxis [81]. Currently, Bu is administered at
high dosages compared to the previously utilised to treat CML. Consequently, seizures occur in
roughly 10% of individuals without seizure prophylaxis, with incidence rates varying significantly,
ranging between 1.8% to 40% (see Table 5) [82].
Patient Population
Bu Dose (mg/kg)
Total No. (%) of Patients Experiencing Seizure
Seizure Type
Adult (n=5)
16
2 (40)
Generalized tonic-clonic
Pediatric (n=20)
16
2 (10)
Generalized
Pediatric (n=57)
16
1 (1.8)
Generalized
Pediatric (n=39)
600 mg/m2
6 (15.4)
Generalized
Adult (n=24)
16
2 (8.3)
Generalized tonic-clonic
Table 5: Summary of Studies of Bu-Induced Seizures in Patients Not Receiving Seizure
Prophylaxis.
The preventable nature of the seizures, led to the use of Pht as a treatment for this side effect.
Pht is a frequently prescribed anticonvulsant used for both the acute and long-term treatment of
various seizure disorders and epilepsy treatment [83]. .
Page 23 of 67
==PAGE:32==
Pht, (Figure 9.b) is an hydantoin derivate and non-sedative antiepileptic agent that prevents seizures
by regulating sodium channels in motor cortex neurons. It works by increasing sodium flow out of
these neurons, stabilizing their electrical activity and inhibiting synaptic transmission [84]. While
being an effective antiepileptic drug, Pht faces certain limitations, including its nonlinear pharma-
cokinetics, which result in unpredictable drug elimination and may lead to potential toxicity [85].
Due to its narrow therapeutic window, 10–20 µg/ml (or 40–80 µmol /L) [86], and frequent daily
usage, there is a significant risk of overdose and poisoning, requiring careful dosing [87].
Pht is highly protein-bound (90–93%), factors affecting this binding, such as drug-drug interactions
or conditions like renal impairment, can alter free drug levels and impact efficacy and toxicity. Addi-
tionally, Pht exhibits variable clearance and non-linear pharmacokinetics, where small dose changes
can lead to large fluctuations in drug levels once the enzyme system becomes saturated, with the
saturation thresholds varying considerably between individuals [88, 89].
Pht should be quickly raised to effective levels (within 8 hours) by giving a dose right before starting
Bu. Phrophylaxis should be maintained throughout the Bu regimen for 3–7 days, and continued
for 24 hours after the final dose of Bu [82].
Bu - Analytical Quantification
Various analytical methods have been developed for quantifying Bu in plasma. These techniques,
however, require complex and time-consuming sample preparation procedures, as well as the derivati-
sation of Bu either prior to or during the chromatography process. Liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry techniques, LC-MS and LC-MS–MS, have been routinely used, but the long analysis
time, complicated extraction procedures, and high Limit Of Quantification (LoQ) do not meet re-
quirements for high-throughput, speed, and sensitivity in bio-sample analysis [90].
In a recent study a laboratory compared their (HPLC–UV) and a new one (HPLC–MS/MS). The
HPLC–MS/MS method showed two main advantages: faster, since the derivatisation steps during
samples preparation were no longer necessary and, it required a smaller volume of plasma samples
(100 µL). However, it is known that not all clinical laboratories could invest in a dedicated mass
spectrometer and it requires employees with in-depth technical knowledge [91].
Consequently, alternative methods that are not only affordable but also allow for quick, easy, and
efficient adjustments are critically needed to support routine Bu monitoring during high-dose treat-
ments in a variety of clinical settings.
Pht - Analytical Quantification
Common methods include HPLC/UPLC combined with UV or MS/MS detection, as well as im-
munological techniques. However, LC-MS has become the preferred approach [92]. This technique
focuses on tracking the mass of the drug’s molecular or fragment ions allowing for straightforward
compound identification even in the presence of other substances that may co-elute. MS addresses
the challenges associated with identifying weak UV-absorbing substances, such as Pht, as it does
not rely on the drug UV absorption [93].
Page 24 of 67
==PAGE:33==
5.2
EC-SERS as a potential tool for TDM
This section aims to assess the current advancements in the detection of Pht and Bu to date, fo-
cusing on studies utilizing SERS and electrochemical techniques.
Detection of Pht: Recent work by Wen et al. [94] demonstrated that Pht sodium can be quan-
titatively detected by combining SERS with chemometric methods, including Partial Least Square
(PLS) and linear regression (LR) models. The study screened three different enhancing substrates
to identify the most effective one for rapid quantitative analysis of Pht. However, the focus was
more on the substrates than on the detection process itself, concluding that gold NPs can reduce
the total detection time to under 4 minutes. In a separate investigation, Lee et al. [95] detected
Pht at 1.8 mg·L−1, which is significantly lower than the target therapeutic range of 10–20 g·L−1.
Additionally, another study employed electrochemical methods for Pht detection. The researchers
utilized cyclic voltammetry (CV) and square wave voltammetry (SWV) at a bare gold electrode,
demonstrating high sensitivity to Pht within clinically relevant concentrations (0.5–50 µmol dm−3).
They also investigated the oxidation of two derivatives, revealing an irreversible, diffusion-controlled
process, while computational DFT studies identified N1 as the preferred oxidation site [96].
These studies primarily utilized conventional SERS or electrochemistry alone, highlighting a gap in
the literature regarding the use of EC-SERS as a tool for Pht detection.
Detection of Bu: In the case of Bu, several studies have also demonstrated its detection by using
Raman-based methods. For instance, one study by Parachalil et.al [97] applied Raman spectroscopy
as a label-free approach for TDM in human serum and reported an exceptionally low Limit Of De-
tection (LoD) of 0.0002 ± 0.0001 mg·mL−1. In another study by the same author, they employed
vibrational spectroscopy combined with PLS to determine the Raman intensity and obtained a LoQ
of 0.0008 ± 0.0001 mM [98]. In addition, research by [99] using Raman spectroscopy with Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) was able to detect Bu-induced changes in testicular mice tissue, thereby
indirectly confirming the presence and effects of Bu.
Considering that in the HSCT regime patients may receive both drugs at a time and that TDM
of their plasma levels is critical in terms of dose adjustment and toxicity avoidance, developing a
method for double detection is necessary. Despite these advances in the individual detection, no
prior study has reported simultaneous detection of both drugs, Pht and Bu, in a single SERS assay.
This thesis aims to address this gap by applying EC-SERS for the simultaneous detection of Pht
and Bu.
Page 25 of 67
==PAGE:34==
6
Methodology
6.1
Chemicals, Solutions and Sample Preparation
The following chemicals were utilized: Drugs included Pht sodium powder and Bu powder, both
pharmaceutical primary standards. The salts used were sodium phosphates (Na2HPO4 and NaH2PO4),
potassium chloride (KCl), and sodium chloride (NaCl). The solvents comprised methanol, Milli-Q
water, and acetone. Additionally, a solution of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) was prepared.
The supporting electrolyte was prepared using Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) tablets (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) dissolved in 500 mL of Milli-Q water to achieve pH 7.4. The final PBS, contained
0.01 M sodium phosphates (Na2HPO4 and NaH2PO4), 0.00268 M potassium chloride (KCl), and
0.14 M sodium chloride (NaCl).
mM Pht stock solutions was prepared by dissolving Pht sodium powder (pharmaceutical primary
standard) in 4 mL (3mL of methanol and 1 mL of Milli-Q water) and mM Bu stock solution was
prepared y dissolving Bu powder (pharmaceutical primary standard) in 4 mL of acetone before
adding both of them to PBS pH 7.4 and 12. The pH of the PBS buffer was adjusted to pH 12 with
1M sodium hydroxide (NaOH ≥97.0%). The pH was measured using a pH-meter (Edge, HI2020-
01, HANNA Instruments, Woonsocket, RI, USA). Stock solutions were aliquoted and stored at 4°C
until further use.
A 0.1 M potassium chloride (KCl ≥99%) solution and a 0.05 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH ≥97.0%)
solution were prepared by diluting 1 M stock solutions of each in Milli-Q water.
All chemicals were of analytical grade and were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Merck, Darmstadt,
Germany) unless otherwise stated. Commercial human serum samples were also purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Solutions were prepared using ultra-pure water (18.2
MΩcm) from a Milli-Q purification de-vice (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA).
6.2
SERS Substrates Fabrication
The fabrication of Au-capped NPs SERS Substrates involved a combination of mask-less dry etch-
ing and electron beam deposition of gold and silver as described in [4] and [100] respectively. The
process involved two main steps: (i) reactive ion etching (RIE) of silicon using a PRO ICP system
(SPTS, a KLA company) and (ii) metal deposition. Polished 6-inch and 4-inch silicon wafers were
used for gold and silver substrates respectively.(Siegert Wafer GmbH, Aachen, Germany).
The formation of a dense, randomly distributed array of high-aspect-ratio silicon nanopillars (NPs)
was achieved through maskless dry etching using an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) system (PRO
ICP, SPTS, a KLA company, Newport, UK). Prior to processing, the surfaces were cleaned with
a 60-second oxygen plasma treatment. The metal was then deposited using a Temescal FC-2000
system (Ferrotec, Livermore, CA, USA).
Subsequently, gold deposition is conducted using an electron beam deposition system (Temescal
FC-2000, Ferrotec, Livermore, USA). The process commences under a vacuum pressure of 3 × 10−7
Page 26 of 67
==PAGE:35==
mTorr, during which a layer of 250 nm gold or 225 nm silver is deposited at a controlled rate of 5 Å/s.
A distinction was made between the Au substrates based on their application in this work. For
the Au SERS substrates, the NP density after the DRIE PEG2 etch ranged from 22.6 to 25.8
NPs/µm2, with a height of 640 nm. In the Au EC-SERS, the first batch had an NP density of
about 29 NPs/µm2 and a height of 479 nm, while the second batch had a density between 28.1 and
31.9 NPs/µm2 and a height of around 470 nm. For the Ag substrates, the NP density after the
ASE etch was approximately 20–21 NPs/µm2, with a height of about 635 nm.
Finally, the completed SERS wafers containing the AuNP and AgNP structures are precisely cut
into 6 × 8 and 4 × 4mm chips respectively, using a laser micromachining system (D-09126, 3D-
Micromac AG, Chemnitz, Germany). Wafers were dice from the backside to prevent damage to the
(NPs) surface and stored in a desiccator until needed.
6.3
Substrate characterization
The integration of SERS technology into analytical applications has been hindered by inconsistent
substrate performance. Variations in substrate quality affect hot spot distribution and efficiency,
leading to signal inconsistencies even in identical samples [101]. While strategies like averaging mea-
surements within specific chip regions and applying calibration protocols to individual wafers help
mitigate variability, the relatively large variability between fabrication batches, is more challenging.
Four different batches of wafers were used during this work, each one consisting of a total of six
wafers.
As detailed in [102], the quality of the SERS substrates was assessed by measuring the density and
morphology of (NPs) before metal deposition, as they are directly linked to substrate performance.
The (NPs) density and approximate (NPs) height were extracted by SEM inspection of the geomet-
ric center region of the substrates produced and contrast threshold analysis using ImageJ, with the
target of 40 NPs/µm2 density, 400-500 nm height and 30-60 nm radius. After metal deposition, the
substrates were once again inspected by SEM to ensure the gold and silver deposition process took
place without any problem. In addition, before using a new batch, two replicate measurements were
performed with a well-defined concentration to verify that the expected performance was achieved.
6.4
EC-SERS cell components and assembly
The EC-SERS chamber and detection platform are designed for optical focus enhancement. The
chamber layout is created using CorelDRAW (Corel, Ottawa, Canada) and the key components,
Figure 11, include a Poly(Methyl MethAcrylate (PMMA) base, composed of 0.5 mm sheets, and a
SERS chip that serves as the working electrode in the electrochemical chamber, which is connected
to the potentiostat through the copper tape (Advance Tapes AT526, Leicester, UK). In the middle
of the PMMA base, there is an opening with a measure of 10x8 mm2, that allows the fit of the
SERS chip, which is immobilized to the PMMA base by the use of a single-sided adhesive tape
(Scotch tape, 3M, St.Pail, MN, USA) [4].
Then, a 23x20 mm2 PMMA window is placed on top of the SERS chip, with a 4x4 mm2 cut in the
Page 27 of 67
==PAGE:36==
middle, exposing the working area of the SERS chip. Additionally, to the top of the PMMA cover,
a 20x20 mm2 reservoir (3 mm, Nordisk Plast, Randers, Denmark) is then adhered. The PMMA
components mentioned above were precisely cut using CO2 laser ablation (Epilog Mini 24, 40 W,
Epilog, Golden, CO, USA) and assembled with PSA tape, to build the chamber. A precision blade
cutter (CE4000-40 Plus, Graphtec Corporation, Yokohama, Japan) was used to cut the PSA in the
specified dimensions.
Besides the SERS chip as the working electrode, an electrode plug (contains a reference electrode,
0.5 mm diameter Ag/AgCl wire, GoodFellow, Huntingdon, UK; and counter, 1 mm diameter plat-
inum wire, GoodFellow, Huntingdon, UK,electrodes) completes the design of the electrochemical
cell. The electrode adapter is made of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, Dow Silicones, Wiesbaden,
Germany) and it was prepared from base polymer and curing agent at 1:10 mixing ratio. The
PMMA reservoir design enables the electrode adapter to be easily inserted and removed, effectively
sealing the measuring chamber through its side opening.
Figure 11: (a) Schematic of the electrochemical cell components, (b) Cell components with the
electrodes placement.
6.5
Benchtop Raman Spectrometer with Incorporated Electrochemical Ana-
lyzer
A benchtop scanning Raman microscope and a compact potentiostat were integrated into a single
unit (25 x 30 x 30 cm3,
7 kg). The core components of the Raman microscope are: (i) a fully-
integrated Raman module (Wasatch Photonics, USA), with a 200 - 2100 cm−1 spectral range, 25 µm
slit ( 8 cm−1 spectral resolution), and a multimode laser (785 nm, 450 mW) yielding a 120 µm in
diameter laser spot size at the sample; (ii) a motorized XYZ moving stage based on LT3 (Thorlabs
GmbH, Germany) providing 35 x 35 x 35 mm3 of scanning volume. The scanning Raman micro-
scope was integrated with an OEM potentiostat module EmStat3 (PalmSens BV, Netherlands).
The device control and data analysis software was developed using a combination of Delphi RAD
Studio (Embarcadero Technologies, USA) and Python (Python Software Foundation).
6.6
Electrochemically Assisted SERS Measurements
Once the EC-SERS cell is assembled, it is secured onto a glass support, and the measuring chamber
is positioned under the Raman Microscope equipped with a 780 nm laser and a 10× objective. The
Page 28 of 67
==PAGE:37==
electrodes are carefully inserted into the reservoir with the PDMS support, ensuring a secure fit to
prevent leakage, which could alter the focus during measurements. A volume of 500 µL of solution
is then added into the reservoir.
After placement in the measuring chamber, the working electrode (SERS AuNP), counter elec-
trode (platinum), and reference electrode (Ag/AgCl) are connected to a commercial potentiostat
(CHI1060C, CH Instruments Inc., Austin, USA). The electrochemical method is then selected; dur-
ing this work, two different methods were performed: Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) and Multistep
Amperometry (MSA). The CV parameters used can be found in the Appendix, while the MSA
specifications are described in the individual and double detection sections.
In parallel, an in-house built software is used to control the Raman microscope. The substrate area
is identified by moving along the X and Y axes, and the focus is adjusted with the Z axis. This
region is then scanned before initiating SERS mapping. The scan acquisition parameters, including
laser power, integration time, step size in X and Y, and the scanned area, need to be defined for
each acquisition. A continuous mode allows real-time spectral visualization before scanning. In this
work, an initial potential was applied once the potentiostat and microscope setup were complete.
Upon finishing the application of the first potential, a second potential, referred to as the detection
potential in the experiments, was applied while acquiring the SERS mapping.
Each spectrum in the SERS map is collected through the liquid sample, using a 50 mW laser power
and a 0.1 s exposure time. Measurements are conducted over a 2.5 × 2.5 mm2 and 2 × 2 mm2
areas, with step sizes specified for each experiment.
6.7
Data Preprocessing and Analysis
The SERS data obtained from the commercial instrument (DXRxi) were initially analyzed using
custom software. The spectra were cropped to the range of 400 to 1800 cm−1 and underwent baseline
correction using a rolling-circle filter (radius of 300 and an elliptic coefficient of 15). Subsequently,
the mean peak intensity values for Bu (1028 cm−1) and Pht (998 cm−1 and 1001 cm−1 ) were
calculated from the top 20% of spectra in each SERS map.
Page 29 of 67
==PAGE:38==
7
Results
7.1
Single-Analyte Detection
7.1.1
Reference spectra of Bu and Pht
Reference spectra of Bu and Pht were acquired to identify their signature peaks, and will serve as
reference for their detection and analysis in subsequent experiments.
Bu exhibits characteristic peaks in its SERS spectrum, displayed in Figure 12. The peak at 1030
cm−1 is attributed to C–C stretching [103], while the peak at 1070 cm−1 and 1548 cm−1 correspond
to a CH2 scissoring and C–C stretching modes respectively [16].
Figure 12: Raman spectra of Bu pwder (black), Bu stock on Au EC-SERS substrates (green) and
Ag substrates (red). The vertical dotted black lines highlight its characteristic SERS bands.
Reference Raman and SERS spectra were collected from the powder of Pht sodium and the pre-
pared stock solution (Figure 13). The most characteristic peaks are highlighted in the stock solution
spectra, which were also highly correlated with the ones seen in the powder spectra. These were
observed at at 617, 651, 670, 795, 931, 1001, 1032 cm−1. The peaks at 1001 cm−1 and 1032 cm−1 are
assigned to C5-N1, C4-N3 stretching and C4-C ring stretching, respectively, and have been widely
use as characteristic for Pht detection due to their strong and well-defined peak shapes [104].
Page 30 of 67
==PAGE:39==
Figure 13: Raman spectra of Pht sodium in powder (black) and SERS stock solution on Au EC-
SERS substrates (red). The vertical dotted black lines highlight its characteristic SERS bands.
7.1.2
SERS characterization of Bu and Pht
Drop casting is a technique that involves dropping the desired solution onto a substrate, usually
followed by the evaporation of the solvent.
This method is widely used in electrocatalytic and
electrochemical sensing due to its simplicity and speed [105].
Hydrophobic substrates typically have a high contact angle, causing the droplet to pin at the con-
tact line, which hinders uniform spreading and leads to uneven evaporation. As a result, particles
accumulate at the droplet’s edge, creating the "coffee ring" effect as the sample dries on the sur-
face. However, when a solvent like methanol is added to the solution, the particle distribution can
change. The lower surface tension of methanol reduces the pinning of the contact line, allowing the
droplet to spread more uniformly across the surface, reducing spatial heterogeneity and favoring
more consistent electrode coverage [106].
The pKa and pKb represent the negative logarithms of the acid and base dissociation constants,
respectively.
A lower pKa value indicates a stronger acid, meaning the molecule more readily
donates protons. Alternatively, a lower pKb value reflects a stronger base, as the molecule ac-
cepts protons more easily. Bu is a neutral molecule that does not contain groups that undergo
reversible protonation/deprotonation, and therefore has no pKa or pKb constants. Pht however,
has a pKa value of (8.06) [107], i.e. Pht is protonated (net positive charge) in samples of pH < 8.06
and deprotonated (net negative charge) in samples of pH >8.06 and remains neutral close to pH
8.06. During the preliminary study of Pht and Bu detection, experiments were conducted in PBS
(pH 12.05) and NaOH (pH 13) to explore the role of different supporting electrolytes. Considering
the working pH value, it is clear that Pht would be in its deprotonated form during this experiment.
The analyte solution was applied to the SERS substrate by drop-casting. Each sample was mixed
with methanol, selected for hydrophobicity reduction and because it does not interfere with SERS
measurements, as it does not adsorb onto Au surfaces and exhibits minimal electrochemical reactiv-
ity [105]. For the initial studies, a high Pht and Bu concentration (100 µM) was used exceeding their
respectives therapeutic ranges. Once detection was achieved at (100 µM), the study progressed to
Page 31 of 67
==PAGE:40==
lower concentrations (50 µM) to better align with the therapeutic range.
For drop-cast samples, 6 µL of each solution (50–100 µM Pht and Bu in NaOH or PBS) was
deposited onto different substrates and measured. Each sample was mixed in a ratio of 1:1 with
3 µL of solvent.
All samples were measured using an incident laser power of 50 mW and an
integration time of 100 ms. The mapped region covered was 2.5 × 2.5 mm2, with a step size of
50 µm. To test reproducibility, all experiments were performed with at least three sample replicates.
• Au SERS substrates: No clear correlation between Pht concentration and signal inten-
sity was observed. At (100 µM) the signal in PBS was 100 counts, while the lower (50 µM)
concentration produced a higher signal (498 counts), indicating an inconsistent concentration-
dependent response. In contrast, in NaOH, (100 µM) resulted in 486 counts, while (50 µM)
yielded 113 counts.
Bu was undetectable at both tested concentrations (Figure 14.a).
• Au EC-SERS substrates:
Again, the variability in surface adsorption prevented a consistent correlation between SERS
intensity and concentration. In PBS, (100 µM) produced 947 counts, while (50 µM) gave 578
counts. However, in NaOH, the relationship changed: (100 µM) produced 1028 counts, while
(50 µM) resulted in slightly higher signals (1085 counts).
Bu remained undetectable at both tested concentrations (Figure 14.b).
• Ag SERS substrates: Pht showed low detection in PBS at both concentrations, (45-75
counts), with notably higher counts in NaOH at (50 µM) (745 counts).
Bu showed a strong SERS signal in PBS, reaching 7327 counts at (100 µM) and 2560 counts at
(50 µM). In NaOH, Bu detection was found significantly lower (96-586 counts) for (100 µM)
and (50 µM) respectively (Figure 14.c).
Page 32 of 67
==PAGE:41==
Figure 14: SERS signal band intensity of Pht at 998 cm−1 (red), and Bu, at 1028 cm−1 (blue),
(50 µM) and (100 µM) in PBS and NaOH across three different substrates (Au SERS, Au EC-SERS
and Ag SERS).
The results demonstrated distinct substrate preferences: Bu shows strong detection on Ag SERS
substrates (particularly in PBS), while Pht achieves better signals on Au EC-SERS substrates
despite showing inconsistent concentration responses.
The spectral intensity distribution varied
across the chip surfaces (Figure 15), primarily influenced by two factors: the evaporation patterns
of methanol and the placement of the droplet on the substrate.
Figure 15: Distribution, of the Pht (100 µM) band intensity at 998 cm−1 in PBS (a) on the Au
SERS substrates for (b) Au EC-SERS substrates and (c) Ag SERS substrates and (d) Bu (100 µM)
band intensity at 1028 cm−1 in PBS and Ag substrates. The redder, the higher the intensity, while
the bluer, the lower the intensity. The arrows indicate the scanning direction during mapping.
For individual detection, Au-based substrates demonstrated a high affinity for Pht, while Ag sub-
strates were more suitable for detecting Bu. However, simultaneous detection of both drugs using a
single substrate remains challenging, as Bu was undetectable on gold surfaces and Pht shows limited
detection on Ag substrates. Although EC-SERS experiments were not conducted in this study, it is
possible that substrates with lower efficiency could yield better results. Given the distinct affinities
of each drug for different substrates, it is proposed to use Au EC-SERS substrates, which showed the
strongest affinity for Pht detection, and incorporate Ag ions into the solution to enhance Bu analysis.
Page 33 of 67
==PAGE:42==
The optimization of drug detection is studied separately for Bu and Pht, focusing on their respective
substrates, electrolytes and mapping conditions employed.
7.1.3
Optimization of Parameters for EC-SERS Detection of Bu
Bu lacks both a pKa and pKb and does not contain functional groups that are commonly protonated
or deprotonated, such as amines or carboxyl groups. Instead, its interactions are primarily influenced
by the oxygen atoms in its sulfonate (-SO2) groups. The solution used in this study contains Ag
and bromide ions (Br), which is an approximation of the formulation previously explored by the
IDUN research group in other studies (currently under patent process). Ag ions, will be employed in
the double detection as a strategy to enhance the detection of Bu, as these can undergo reduction,
driven by the reduction potential of Ag 0.8 V, given by the reaction [108]:
Ag+ + e−→Ag0
(7)
Prior to conducting experiments in PBS, an initial study was performed in a simpler medium, KCl,
to better understand the interactions between the Ag ions, Bu, and the electrode surface. Due to
the lower number of ions that compose the electrolyte, it is expected to easily detect Bu in this sce-
nario, as there are fewer competing species that could interfere with its interaction with the Ag ions.
From a previous study in the same laboratory, but with a different experimental set-up, it was
found that the optimal parameters for Bu detection when Ag ions were used, was the application
of 0.9 V during 180s for Ag ions reduction followed by a detection potential of 0.1 V during SERS
mapping. Based on the previous findings, for the first experiment, a solution of Bu (10 µM) in
KCl was prepared. The mapped region covered was 2.5 × 2.5 mm2, with a step size of 100 µm.
The reduction potential was fixed at 0.9 V with an application time of 180 seconds, and a range of
detection potentials, from 0 V to 0.3 V was initially explored (Figure 16.a). Among these, the ap-
plication of a detection potential of 0.2 V resulted in the strongest enhancement of Bu’s SERS signal.
With the detection potential fixed at 0.2 V, the effect of varying the reduction potential of the Ag
ions between 0.7 V and 0.9 V was studied for another period of 180 seconds (Figure 16.b). The
upper limit of the reduction potential was limited to 0.9 V, as higher potentials can cause bubble
formation, disrupting measurements stability and the working electrode performance. The optimal
reduction potential was found to be at 0.9 V.
Finally, with both the reduction potential set at 0.9 V and the detection potential at 0.2 V, the effect
of different reduction potential application times (150, 180, and 210s) was evaluated (Figure 16.c).
The results showed that extending the application time beyond 180s did not improve the SERS
signal enhancement of Bu, with the best results achieved at 180s.
Page 34 of 67
==PAGE:43==
Figure 16: SERS intensity of Bu (10 µM) at 1028 cm−1 was evaluated under different preconditioning
and detection potentials, as well as varying application durations (n=3) in Kcl and PBS. The
conditions that produced the highest Bu SERS intensity were identified and subsequently fixed for
further assay optimization. Fixed parameters for each experiment are displayed within the box of
each graph.
For the second experiment, a solution of Bu (10 µM in PBS pH 7.4) was used. Since the electrolyte
solution and ion concentration differed from the first experiment, that could interfer differently with
the surface, the detection potential was evaluated in this study. The Ag ions reduction potential
and application time were kept the same as the optimal parameters found in the first experiment
0.9 V for 180s with KCl. The detection potential was swept in the range from 0.1 V to 0.3 V, and
the optimal value was also found to be 0.2 V for PBS during SERS mapping (Figure 16.d). The
total acquisition time was ∼4.7 min.
Contrary to the initial hypothesis, due to the higher complexity of the electrolyte, a stronger SERS
signal enhancement was observed when Bu was in PBS solution compared to KCl. These findings
will help guide further analysis of Ag ions interactions with the Au substrates used in related stud-
ies. The optimal parameters were then fixed for further analysis of Bu detection and its potential
analysis in double detection with Pht.
A proposed mechanism of Bu and Ag ions interaction is depicted in Figure 17. Two alternatives
are suggested. The first one, option (a), considers the detection of Bu through the deposits of Ag0
accumulated on the Au NP surface via electrochemical deposition. However, several aspects of this
mechanism remain under investigation: the exact deposition time required for complete Ag ions
Page 35 of 67
==PAGE:44==
reduction, whether sufficient Ag ions are present to achieve uniform coverage of the NPs, and the
possible spatial distribution of the Ag0 deposits. The Ag0 deposits may either form a uniform,
stable layer over the Au NPs (first NP on the figure) or aggregate as isolated islands across its
surface (remaining NP). Further characterization techniques, such as X-Ray Photoelectron Spec-
troscopy (XPS) analysis, would be necessary to track and confirm the presence of both Ag species.
On the other hand, option (b), contemplates the interaction between electron-rich oxygen atoms in
Bu’s (-SO2) groups at the ends of the Bu structure, and the positively charged Ag ions, that have
not undergo reduction. These mechanisms may occur simultaneously, potentially creating a double
contribution that enhances the SERS signal at 1021 cm−1, which corresponds to C-C stretching.
The deposition conditions such as the scan rate and number of deposition cycles play a crucial role
in determining the size, density and homogeneity of Ag ions films, which in turn affect the SERS
enhancement [109]. The study found that, a higher number of deposition cycles leads to an increase
in both size and density of Ag ions, while a higher scan rate results in smaller ions with reduced
aggregation and lower overall coverage. Notably, the strongest SERS effects were observed when
Ag ions form a well-distributed network with high density and low size dispersion.
Figure 17: Proposed Bu and AgBr interaction mechanism
In [110] Bu conformers were estimated by performing 2D Potential Energy Surface (PES) scan
on two selected dihedral angles (C6-O4-S1-C5 and C25-S22-O19-C16) on both sides of the bond
C7-C15 by performing Density Functional Theory (DFT) and Density Functional Theory with
Dispersion (DFT-D). These angles were varied in 20° increments between 0° and 360°. In each of
the 361 available configurations, represented as a node on the grid, the energy was calculated. With
dispersion, the minimums were found at the grid node (1,1) and (4,13), defined as conformers A
and B, respectively. On the other hand, without dispersion, the minimums were found at nodes
(1,1) and (5,14), denominated A1 and B1, respectively. Within these, the most stable conformers,
are B and B1, which are the ones showing the global minimum energy.
Page 36 of 67
==PAGE:45==
Figure 18: Topological molecular structures of all Bu conformers.
As observed in configurations B and B1, these structures can facilitate a more stable interaction
between the molecule and either the Ag0 or Ag+ species. The symmetry and stability of this con-
figuration may contribute to maintaining a consistent signal during scanning, suggesting that the
molecule retains the same conformation throughout the acquisition.
The optimal parameters were investigated for different Bu concentrations (2, 5, 10, 15 and 20 µM)
in PBS (Figure 19).
Figure 19: Bu SERS intensity in PBS at 1028 cm−1 for different concentrations, with the application
of the optimal parameters.
7.1.4
Optimization of Parameters for EC-SERS Detection of Pht
Previous to the optimization, Pht oxidation was investigated. To do so, a referenced paper [111]
was used. The paper employs DFT to examine conformational distributions of Pht and its deriva-
Page 37 of 67
==PAGE:46==
tives on gold electrodes when dissolved in 0.05M NaHCO3 solution (pH 8.4).
Through Cyclic
Voltammetry (CV), experiments conducted across a potential window of 0.6 V to 1.1 V, the study
demonstrates that these compounds undergo irreversible, diffusion-controlled oxidation processes
involving single-electron and single-proton transfer, indicating dynamic molecular configurations.
The analysis identifies three distinct conformational families (R+, RN1, and RN3) each comprising
three distinct configurations: 1, 2 and 3, characterizing the molecular orientation patterns.
In contrast, the present project, performed CVs across a potential range of -0.8 V to 0.8 V. The
results did not reveal the characteristic oxidation peak when comparing control PBS (pH 12.05)
against Pht (10 uM) in PBS solutions, as documented in Figure 33.
The wetting step was evaluated as an adaptation of previous studies [4] using similar substrates,
where preconditioning in PBS was followed by the addition of PBS containing the analyte. A po-
tential range from -0.8 V to 0.8 V was initially investigated. The mapped region covered was 2.5
× 2.5 mm2, with a step size of 100 µm. The higher SERS signal enhancement was obtained when
the preconditioning potentials of E1: -0.1 V for 60s and E2: 0.8 V for 60s were applied.
However, the observed signal intensity was similar to that of the same Pht concentration without
applied potentials. This was hypothesized to result from interfering charged PBS ions during the
application of the preconditioning potentials. To address this, subsequent potential applications
were conducted in the presence of the analyte for further optimization. Firstly, a range of surface
charging potentials were investigated -0.8 V to 0.8 V. The results indicated that the best outcome
was achieved when a high positive potential was applied, followed by a negative detection potential
(data not shown).
Considering these findings, to determine the optimal detection potential, the surface charging poten-
tial was fixed at 0.8 V for 60s in PBS containing Pht. SERS spectra were collected across a detection
potential range with increments of 0.2 V from -0.6 V to 0.2 V (Figure 20.a). Each potential was
applied for 60 seconds. New SERS chips were used for each potential sweep and each measurement
was repeated three times, to ensure reproducibility. Results indicated that the optimal detection
potential was -0.4 V.
With the detection potential fixed at -0.4 V, the effect of the surface charging potential was sub-
sequently investigated. A range of charging potentials (0.4 V, 0.6 V, and 0.8 V) were applied for
60 s to evaluate their impact on attracting the deprotonated form of Pht to the substrate surface
(Figure 20.b).
The highest potential, 0.8 V, produced the strongest enhancement in the SERS
signal, and was fixed as optimal value for further analysis.
Subsequently, the duration of the charging potential application 0.8 V was optimized by testing
durations of 30s, 60s, and 90s. (Figure 20.c). These experiments were performed with the fixed
detection potential of -0.4 V. Results showed that extending the application time of 0.8 V to 90s
yielded superior SERS signal intensity, establishing this time as the optimal duration for surface
charging potential.
Finally, after adjusting the application time of the surface charging potential, the detection potential
was reassessed, as different application times could influence subsequent potentials. The optimal
Page 38 of 67
==PAGE:47==
detection potential remained the same at -0.4 V (Figure 20.d).
Figure 20: SERS intensity of Pht (10 µM) at 998 cm−1 was evaluated under different charging and
detection potentials, as well as varying application durations (n=3). The conditions that produced
the highest Pht SERS intensity were identified and subsequently fixed for further assay optimization.
Fixed parameters for each experiment are displayed within the box of each graph.
These findings indicated that for Pht detection, performing the surface charging and detection steps
directly in the presence of the analyte was more favorable, eliminating the need of previous separate
wetting steps. The optimized protocol therefore included only two steps: surface charging at 0.8 V
for 90s followed by detection at -0.4 V (Figure 34) with a total acquisition time of ∼3.2 min. A
schematic illustrating the EDL behavior on the Au EC-SERS electrode in PBS is shown at (a) a
positive potential of 0.8 V for 90s, followed by (b) a negative potential of -0.4 V (Figure 21)
Page 39 of 67
==PAGE:48==
Figure 21: Schematic EDL behaviour during Pht optimization potentials.
The electrochemical behavior of Pht at the electrode surface can be understood by applying the EDL
theory (subsubsection 4.1.1). Near the Potential of Zero Charge (PZC), the electrode-electrolyte
interface exhibits minimal net surface charge, leading to a relatively unorganized interfacial region.
Under these conditions, the EDL structure is primarily governed by the natural ordering of water
molecules and specifically adsorbed ions, resulting in a weakly organized interface where neither
Pht molecules nor electrolyte ions experience significant driving forces for adsorption.
When the electrode is subjected to positive potentials 0.8 V, the surface acquires a positive charge,
altering the EDL structure. Under these conditions, Cl−from the PBS form a well-defined IHP
through specific adsorption. Although Pht exists in its deprotonated form at pH 12.05 (pKa 8.06)
and should theoretically be attracted to the positively charged surface, it must compete with Cl−
for surface sites. As the positive potential continues attracting the Cl−and these get adsorbed into
the surface, they can form a compact layer, creating an electrostatic barrier that further hinders
Pht’s access to the SERS-active surface. Na+ cations could act as a bridge between the Cl−and
Pht, further distancing it from the surface. This interference explains the unexpectedly weak signal
observed despite the favorable electrostatic conditions between the negatively charged Pht and the
positive surface.
Upon applying a negative potential -0.4 V the initial electrode surface response involves the repul-
sion of Cl−from the IHP, which creates available surface sites for the positive cations adsorption,
bringing Pht closer to the surface, as observed in Area 1 of Figure 22. However, as time progresses,
the IHP becomes increasingly populated with hydrated cations, establishing new interaction sites
for negative species. This leads to a competitive environment between Cl−and Pht molecules.
Given their smaller size and higher mobility, Cl−more readily access these cationic sites, resulting
in the formation of a negatively charged layer. This accumulated negative charge generates electro-
static repulsion forces against Pht molecules, manifesting as a progressive decrease in SERS signal
intensity, as demonstrated when comparing Areas 1, 2, and 3 (Figure 22).
The SERS spectra shown in Figure 22.b exhibit consistent peak positions throughout the mapping
acquisition, suggesting a stable molecular configuration of Pht during the measurement. The most
Page 40 of 67
==PAGE:49==
characteristic peak is at 998 cm−1, attributed to the (C5-N1,C4-N3) stretching mode. The upper
left part of Figure 22.b. illustrates the spatial configuration of Pht relative to the electrode surface,
providing insight into the molecule’s preferred orientation during SERS detection.
Figure 22: Spectra obtained during the application of the optimized potential steps (0.8 V applied
for 90 s, and -0.4 V applied during SERS mapping), focusing on the spectral region of the most
characteristic Pht peak at 998 cm−1. The redder regions indicate higher intensities, while the bluer
regions indicate lower intensities. The arrow show the time scanning direction during the mapping
process.
The optimal parameters were investigated for different Pht concentrations (5, 10, 20, 50 and 80 µM)
in PBS (red), and without applied potentials (black) (Figure 23). The application of the optimal
parameters resulted in up to a five-fold increase in the SERS signal intensity. Unlike the set-up
used in Figure 14, this experiment involved the full assembly of the electrochemical cell, requiring
a sample volume of 500 µL.
Page 41 of 67
==PAGE:50==
Figure 23: Pht SERS intensity in PBS at 998 cm−1 for different concentrations, (a) with and (b)
without the application of the optimal parameters.
7.2
Bu and Pht Simultaneous Detection
7.2.1
First Approach - Whole substrate mapping
After identifying the optimal parameters for the individual detection of Bu and Pht, the next step
was to evaluate their performance during simultaneous detection.
The aim is to first identify one drug using its individual parameters and then detect the second
drug using its respective parameters. In this initial approach, the goal was to determine the most
favorable detection order for the drug with the lowest SERS signal intensity, as it will be the limiting
factor in the analysis. To ensure consistency and reliability, each approach was performed three
times, using a new substrate for each measurement.
In this approach, Pht detection was assessed first, followed by Bu detection. A solution was pre-
pared containing a ratio concetration of (1:1), of Pht (10 µM), and Bu (10 µM) in PBS (pH 7.4).
An initial potential of 0.8 V was applied for 90 seconds, followed by the application of a potential
of -0.4 V throughout the entire scanning process of the chip. The mapped region covered was 2.5
× 2.5 mm2, with a step size of 100 m (∼3.2 min). Once the scan was completed, Ag ions were
added into the solution. The reduction potential of 0.9 V was then applied for 180 seconds. The
same area defined for the first mapping was then re-scanned after with a detection potential of 0.2
V during. An schematic of the process followed is shown in Figure 24.a.
In the second approach, Bu detection was assessed first, followed by Pht detection. The same solu-
tion was used, containing equal concentrations of both drugs, but in this scenario, the Ag ions were
added to the solution prior to voltage application. Initially, the optimal potentials for Bu detection
were applied. A potential of 0.9 V was applied for 180 seconds, followed by a detection potential of
0.2 V maintained throughout the entire scanning of the substrate. The surface area scanned was 2.5
× 2.5 mm2, consistent with the first experiment. Upon completion of the scan, a surface charging
potential of 0.8 V was applied for 90s, followed by a detection potential of -0.4 V during the SERS
mapping, of the same area previously scanned. The representation of this process is illustrated in
Page 42 of 67
==PAGE:51==
Figure 24.b.
Pht detection was considered the limiting factor, since the SERS signal intensity produced by the
highest concentration of Pht within its therapeutic window (80 µM) (Figure 23) was more than two
times lower than the Bu signal at (10 µM) during its optimization in PBS (Figure 16.d). Therefore,
the approach that most enhanced Pht detection was prioritized. The established protocol consisted
on: Detecting Pht first, followed by the addition of Ag ions and subsequent Bu detection.
Figure 24: Schematic of the fist approach for double-detection, with (a) the first whole chip mapping
using Pht optimization parameters and the second using Bu optimization parameters (b) opposite
order.
The SERS spectra of Pht shifted in the double detection compared to its spectra alone, with its
most characteristic peaks now located at 1001 cm−1 and 1027 cm−1, instead of 998 cm−1 and 1024
cm−1.
7.2.2
Second Approach - Half substrate mapping
TDM is rarely implemented in clinical oncology due to cost and time constraints, as well as the
lack of point-of-care instrumentation. Developing rapid-response assays is essential to enable faster
and more accessible drug monitoring in hospital settings [2]. For that reason, minimizing detection
time has been a key priority throughout the project, which was accomplished by using a 100 x 100
µm step size. The step size plays a crucial role in both the quantity of spectra collected and the
resolution of the SERS map. A larger step size may result in the loss of important data, as certain
areas of the substrate are not analyzed. On the other hand, setting the step size too small can
generate an excessive number of data points, which can heavily tax system resources, such as total
measurement duration and available computer memory and post-processing work [112]. Taking
Page 43 of 67
==PAGE:52==
both factors into account, a smaller step size of 70 x 70 µm would allow for the collection of more
data during the mapping, resulting in greater precision without significantly extending the total
measurement time.
Another key parameter to consider is the substrate’s efficiency, as repeated exposure to laser power
and increased local temperature during both the initial scan and rescanning can lead to irreversible
reductions in SERS activity. While higher laser powers can enhance SERS signal intensity, they
also pose the risk of permanently degrading the substrate’s performance [113]. In particular, the
authors investigated higher laser powers (37 mW), and the substrates exhibited irreversible degrada-
tion, although some SERS activity remained. In the present work a laser power of 50 mW has been
emloyed, which may further affect SERS performance and the reliability of re-scanned mappings.
To assess this problem, while keeping in mind a short time of detection and a smaller step size,
the following approach is proposed. For this case, the substrate is divided into two different equal
areas. In the first area Pht will be detected, and in the second one Bu. The same solution than in
the Approach 1 was used: Pht (10 µM), and Bu (10 µM) in PBS at pH 7.4. An initial potential of
0.8 V was applied for 90 seconds, followed by the application of a potential of -0.4 V throughout
the entire scanning process of the first region. A surface area of 2 × 2 mm2 was mapped during
this stage. Once the scan was completed, Ag ions were added into the solution. The reduction
potential of 0.9 V was then applied for 180s, followed by the application of a detection potential
of 0.2 V during the SERS mapping acquisition. The second area of 2 × 2 mm2 was defined, just
under the first one and was then scanned. An schematic of the process followed is shown in Figure 25.
This approach offers three key advantages over the first: (i) it preserves substrate integrity by
eliminating repeated scanning, (ii) improves measurement reliability through increased data points,
(iii) and maintains short acquisition times as the mapping area for each drug has been reduced.
The total time required considering both drugs parameters and mappings is ∼8 min.
Page 44 of 67
==PAGE:53==
Figure 25: Left: Distribution on the Au EC-SERS substrates and PBS, of Pht (10 µM) band
intensity at [1001] cm−1 (top) and Bu (10 µM) band intensity at [1028] cm−1 (bottom). The redder,
the higher the intensity, while the bluer, the lower the intensity. The arrows indicate the scanning
direction during mapping. Middle: Schematic of the second double-detection approach, with the
first region of the chip using Pht optimization parameters and the second using Bu parameters.
Right: SERS spectra obtained with Pht optimal parameters (top) and Bu optimal parameters
(bottom).
7.2.3
Second Approach with clinical scenario concentrations
The second approach was chosen for the following experiment. Based on clinical protocols where
Pht levels must be recahed prior to Bu administration and maintained throughout the treatment
period, including 24 hours after the final Bu dose, a fixed concentration of Pht (60 µM) inside
the therapeutic range was used. This Pht concentration was studied in combination of a range of
concentrations inside the therapeutic window of Bu (2, 5, 10, 15 and 20 µM) in PBS (pH 7.4).
Three measurements were acquired for each combination of Bu concentration with Pht (Figure 26.a).
Based on the individual Pht SERS spectra (Figure 22), the peak at 1024 cm−1 (now located at 1027
cm−1), which overlaps with the characteristic peak of Bu at 1028 cm−1, was calculated. To estimate
the contribution of Pht at this position, three distinctive peaks of Pht’s SERS spectrum in PBS
were selected: 653 cm−1, 673 cm−1, and 1001 cm−1. The intensity ratios of these peaks to the 1027
cm−1 peak were determined. Considering these ratios, the average expected contribution of Pht at
1027 cm−1 was estimated and subtracted from the total measured intensity at 1028 cm−1 position
for the different Bu concentrations (Figure 26.b).
Page 45 of 67
==PAGE:54==
Figure 26: (a) Double detection on Au EC-SERS substrates, SERS intensity Pht (60 µM) (red) at
1001 cm−1 and Bu (2-20 µM) at 1028 cm−1 with Ag ions (blue) and (b) SERS intensity at Bu 1028
cm−1 under these conditions and its predicted value.
A comparative analysis was performed between the EC-SERS method (Figure 26.a) and Ag SERS
substrates by performing drop-casting (Figure 27). Preliminary studies (Figure 14) identified Ag
SERS substrates as the only approach enabling both analytes detection wihtout potentials ap-
plication.
The experiment maintained a fixed Pht concentration of (60 µM) while varying Bu
concentrations (2–20 µM) in PBS (pH 7.4). Results demonstrated that the drop-casting method
failed to establish a linear concentration-response relationship, consistent with preliminary find-
ings. Phenytoin signal intensity was five times lower, and reproducibility was significantly reduced
compared to the EC-SERS approach, as evidenced by greater standard deviations among triplicate
measurements.
Figure 27: Double detection on Ag SERS substrates, SERS intensity at 1001 cm−1 Pht (60 µM)
(red) and Bu at 1028 cm−1 (2-20 µM) (blue).
Page 46 of 67
==PAGE:55==
7.2.4
Detection in Plasma
While PBS is a complex electrolyte often used to simulate human extracellular fluid due to its
similar ionic composition to blood plasma (Table 6), it lacks molecules and ionic species such as
Mg2+, Ca2+, and HCO3- [114]. To better reflect clinical conditions, where the target drugs exist in a
more complex biological matrix, the developed EC-SERS methodology was tested in serum samples.
Firstly, the filter was pre-rinsed with 150 µL of PBS and centrifuged (Eppendorf MiniSpin plus,
Hamburg, Germany) with 10kDa cutoff filter units (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) at 1000
rpm for 20 minutes. The resulting filtrate was removed and 350 µL from commercial human serum
were transferred to the 10kDa filter tubes and left for 30 minutes at 1000 rpm. After ultrafiltration,
the filtered serum was used to prepare samples containing Pht at 60 µM and Bu at its therapeutic
upper limit of 20 µM.
Na+
K+
Mg2+
Ca2+
Cl-
HCO3
-
HPO4
2-
PBS
157.0
4.5
-
-
140.0
-
10.0
Blood Plasma
142.0
5.0
1.5
2.5
103.0
27.0
1.0
Table 6: Ion Concentrations (mM) in PBS and Blood Plasma.
The methodology outlined in subsubsection 7.2.2 was implemented for comparative analysis. Fig-
ure 28 shows the spectral profiles under the optimized conditions of both Pht and Bu. Bu exhibited
higher SERS intensity at 1028 cm−1 when applying Pht-optimized parameters compared to its pa-
rameters with Ag ions, demonstrating a nine-fold signal decrease between mappings. Conversely,
Pht SERS signal was higher under its optimized parameters, with its characteristic peak at 1001
cm−1 showing a ten-fold decrease when Bu parameters were applied. Relative to PBS measure-
ments, Bu SERS intensity under optimized conditions decreased fifty one-fold, while Pht showed a
ten-fold reduction.
Page 47 of 67
==PAGE:56==
Figure 28: Serum SERS spectra on Au EC-SERS substrates of Pht (60 µM) and Bu (20 µM) with
(a) Pht optimal parameters and (b) Bu optimal parameters
7.3
Analytical Detection
7.3.1
Univariate Analysis
Data analysis was initiated by conducting a univariate linear regression, as depicted in Figure 29,
which shows both the regression line (illustrated by the red dotted line) and the coefficient of re-
gression obtained.
The regression coefficient (R2) quantifies the proportion of variance in the dependent variable (in-
tensity) that is explained by the independent variable (Bu concentration). In this case, 91% of the
variance in intensity can be explained by the concentration measures.
The regression analysis was performed using Excel’s Analysis ToolPak. The output indicated a
standard error of 261.53, representing the average distance between the observed values and the
regression line. The high standard error could be attributed to the presence of Pht during the
experimental measurements, which may have interfered with the SERS substrate used for Bu quan-
Page 48 of 67
==PAGE:57==
tification, leading to a greater dispersion of data points around the regression line. Additionally,
the overall p-value obtained of 0.003, which is below the conventional threshold of 0.05, supports
the rejection of the null hypothesis and confirms the presence of a statistically significant linear
relationship between Bu concentration and SERS intensity.
Individual p-values for the slope and intercept were also calculated.
The p-value for the slope
(0.003) confirms that Bu concentration has a significant effect on intensity, whereas the p-value for
the intercept (0.08) does not provide sufficient evidence to reject the hypothesis that the intercept
is zero. Consequently, the regression analysis was repeated with the intercept constrained to zero,
yielding a higher regression coefficient value of 0.95, which offers an improved explanation of the
variance in intensity by Bu concentration. However, the higher SD in this model indicates greater
average deviation in the response variable, leading to the choice of the model with no intersection
at zero (Table 7).
Figure 29: Univariate Analysis, Linear Regression
Once the univariate linear regression is estimated; LoD and LoQ are calculated. The LoD represents
the lowest detected quantity of an analyte that can be reliably distinguished from a blank using a
given analytical technique at a predefined confidence level; while the LoQ is the lowest quantity of
an analyte that can be reliably detected (acceptable precision and accuracy) in, again, a predefined
confidence level.
The LoD were calculated based on the 3.3σ/s formula, where σ represents the standard deviation
and s the slope of the linear regression model. The LoQ were subsequently determined using 10σ/s.
In this case, both LoD and LoQ were calculated for both linear regression models and the following
results were obtained.
No origin intersection (Figure 29)
Origin intersection
SD (µM)
640.63
896.92
LoD (µM)
22.13
24.15
LoQ (µM)
67.07
73.18
Table 7: Univariate Analysis: LoD and LoQ
Page 49 of 67
==PAGE:58==
As shown in Table 7, the LoD and LoQ values obtained for the regression model without intercept
are lower than those obtained when forcing the regression through the origin. This can be explained
due to the dependence of both parameters, LoD and LoQ, and the standard deviation and slope of
the regression models. Moreover, for both regression models, the LoD and LoQ values are relatively
high, which likely results from the presence of Pht as already mentioned before.
7.3.2
Multivariate Analysis
PCA
PCA is a method, which main objective is to reduce the dimensionality of high-dimensional datasets
while retaining the essential information.
By finding a group of orthogonal vectors, named as
principal components, the most variance in the data is retained.
The source for the principal
components is given by the covariance matrix of the dataset. Considering a dataset with N samples,
M features and each sample represented as a row vector xi, the covariance matrix C of the centered
dataset can be calculated as [115]:
C = 1
N ·
X
(x′
i)(x′
i)T = 1
N ·
X
(xi −µ)(xi −µ)T
(8)
where:
• C is the covariance matrix.
• x′
i is the centered dataset and it is estimated as the subtraction of the row vector (xi) and the
mean vector (µ).
PCA was implemented with Matlab (R2024b,MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) to identify major
patterns in the double detection SERS spectra. To achieve this, three replicates were performed
for each of the five concentration combinations, with two mappings per replicate, resulting in a
total of 30 spectra. Each dot in the plot represents one spectrum when the optimal potentials of
Pht or Bu are employed for one of the concentration combinations. The label criteria is: Replicate
number, optimal parameters of the drug, and between parenthesis (), the Bu concentration used.
For instance, 2-Bu(15), is the second replicate of the optimal parameters of Bu (15µM) when it was
in combination with Pht (60µM). The first principal component (PC1) and second principal compo-
nent (PC2) highlight the trends within each data set. Each dataset was clustered while maximizing
covariance. The variance levels in PC1 and PC2 were 50.99% and 39.27%, respectively.
From Figure 30, the scores obtained from the EC-SERS data of the double detection clearly form two
different clusters (blue and pink), distributed in separate areas on the PC1 and PC2 planes. Within
the Bu cluster (blue), further subgroups (green) can be identified. The inter-sample relationships
have the ability to differentiate between the SERS spectra of Pht and Bu, as well as different Bu
concentrations (2, 5, 10, 15 and 20 µM).
Page 50 of 67
==PAGE:59==
Figure 30: Double detection PCA Scores
The corresponding one-dimensional loading plots or loading spectra along the PC1 and PC2 direc-
tion are shown in the left and right panel of the Figure 31, respectively. Loading plots essentially
connect the PC space with the variable space. In spectroscopy, wave numbers constitute the vari-
ables and their largest loadings correspond to the most important diagnostic variables in the range
of the concerned wave number window under investigation. [116].
Interestingly, the one-dimensional loading plots or loading spectra along the direction of PC1 and
PC2 are in close harmony with the difference SERS spectra as shown earlier subsubsection 7.1.1.
These results thus indicate that the loading plots effectively capture key spectral features and their
associated peaks that correspond to the vibrational modes associated with the increased SERS sig-
nal intensity of Bu or Pht. The peaks maximize the difference between the spectra acquired with
the optimal Bu and Pht potentials during the double detection.
PC1 consists of 26 sharp and narrow peaks with both positive and negative values, with the most
relevant appearing at 653 cm−1 and 673 cm−1, characteristic of Pht, and at 1028 cm−1 from Bu.
In contrast, PC2 displays 24 positive peaks and one negative peak. The most significant peaks in
this component are located at 653 cm−1, 673 cm−1, 1001 cm−1, 1032 cm−1, 1184 cm−1, 1543 cm−1,
and 1594 cm−1, all of which correspond to Pht spectrum.
Page 51 of 67
==PAGE:60==
Figure 31: Double detection PCs Loadings.
PLSR
PLSR is a technique that integrates concepts from PCA and multiple regression. The principal goal
is to predict the response variable Y from the predictor variables X and to identify their common
structure. In this case, a set of components, named as latent vectors, are estimated by performing
a simultaneous decomposition of both, X and Y, with the constraint that the latent vectors need
to explain as much as possible of the covariance between X and Y. By doing so, a generalization
of PCA is achieved, followed by a regression step where the decomposition of X is used in order to
predict Y [117].
A PLSR model was built with eighteen Bu spectra (three repetitions for each of the five concen-
trations) (Figure 32) using Matlab (R2024b,MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA), where the regression
coefficient obtained (R2 0.94) indicates that the model could accurately predict the concentration
of Bu. This can also be seen in Table 8, where the difference between reference concentration and
predicted one is low, and the summary of the numerical results obtained doing PLSR can be seen.
Page 52 of 67
==PAGE:61==
Figure 32: PLSR Predicted vs Reference concentrations
Group
Reference conc. (µM)
Predicted conc. (µM)
SD (µM)
RSD (%)
1
0
0.9022
0.1504
18.169
0
0.6523
0
9.9223
2
2
2.5243
1.606
50.325
2
4.7113
2
2.3409
3
5
3.0248
1.378
30.632
5
4.3160
5
6.1506
4
10
12.2456
1.612
16.038
10
9.4823
10
8.4240
5
15
12.8581
1.512
10.404
15
16.3697
15
14.3716
6
20
17.4282
1.651
8.367
20
20.7684
20
20.9843
Table 8: Predicted vs. Reference Concentrations with Standard Deviation and RSD
In effect, PLSR not only builds a predictive model but also provides a measure of sensitivity (de-
noted as SEN), that quantifies the change in the instrumental response per unit change in analyte
Page 53 of 67
==PAGE:62==
concentration. In other words, it describes how effectively an analytical method converts a change
in the analyte concentration into a measurable change in the output signal. It is considered one of
the main analytical figures of merit, being a fundamental parameter to evaluate and compare the
performance of analytical methods and instruments. In univariate analysis, SEN is straighforward
as it is given by the slope of the calibration curve. However, for multivariate analysis, the complex-
ity is higher, and SEN is defined based on the portion of the analyte of interest in the total signal,
known as the net analyte signal (NAS). One way to calculate it is as the uncertainty propagation
in the test sample signal and predicted concentration, as the quotient of the standard deviation of
the instrumental signal (σx) and the standard deviation of calibration concentrations (σy) [118].
Having introduced sensitivity and the estimation of the PLSR model, the LoD and LoQ are esti-
mated. To address the influence of the sample matrix, Allegrini and Olivieri [119] proposed defining
LoD and LoQ as intervals rather than single values. The LoD interval, defined by LoDmin and
LoDmax, is determined using the following equations:
LoDmin = 3.3[SEN−2σ2
N(1 + h0min) + h0minσ2
y,cal]1/2
(9)
LoDmax = 3.3[SEN−2σ2
N(1 + h0max) + h0maxσ2
y,cal]1/2
(10)
where:
• SEN is the sensitivity, defined as the change in instrumental response per unit change in
analyte concentration.
• σ2
x represents the variance of the instrumental signal.
• σ2
y,cal is the variance of analyte concentration within the calibration set.
• h0 corresponds to the leverage of the blank sample.
Similarly, the LoQ interval is calculated using the following expressions:
LoQmin = 10
3.3LoDmin
(11)
LoQmax = 10
3.3LoDmax
(12)
Considering this information, the results obtained were a SEN of 72.27; LoD interval of [1.82, 3.86]
µM and LoQ interval of [5.47, 11.59] µM, inside Bu therapeutic range (2-20 µM). As expected,
multivariate analysis yielded superior detection limits compared to the univariate model (Table 7),
demonstrating the enhanced analytical performance achieved through a broader spectral profile
analysis rather than single-band evaluation.
Page 54 of 67
==PAGE:63==
8
Discussion and Future Perspectives
The efficacy of the EC-SERS based detection was evaluated using optimized parameters for the
quantification of Bu and Pht at various concentrations in PBS. Spectral analysis revealed concentration-
dependent variations in the characteristic peaks at 1028 cm−1 and 998 cm−1 for Bu and Pht, respec-
tively, as shown in Figure 19 and Figure 23. Comparative assessment of Figure 26 and Figure 27
demonstrated the enhanced detection capabilities of the EC-SERS approach. The methodology
yielded a five-fold enhancement in Pht SERS signal intensity, while Bu detection was achieved
through the implementation of optimal parameters and the reduction of Ag ions. Additionally, a
linear response was observed, in contrast to the non-linear behavior detected when comparing 10
µM and 15 µM in conventional SERS detection (Figure 27). The reproducibility of the recorded
SERS signal was also improved, with a reduction of the RSD from 52.31% to 16.74% for Pht and
from 48.7% to 20.38% for Bu.
Univariate analysis yielded a LoD of 22.13 µM and a LoQ of 67.07 µM for Bu in PBS, exceeding
the upper limit of its therapeutic window (2-20 µM). Subsequent multivariate analysis using PCA
successfully distinguished between the two drugs and revealed distinct concentration-dependent
clustering of Bu spectra, demonstrating the advantage of analyzing the complete spectral profile
compared to single-peak analysis of the univariate approach. Moreover, a predictive model was
developed using PLSR considering systematic variation to optimize sensitivity. The LoD and LoQ
ranges for Bu were determined to be [1.82-3.86] µM and [5.47-11.54] µM, respectively, both of which
fall within an acceptable range for clinical applications. The statistical significance of these met-
rics could be enhanced by including a higher number of samples in the calibration dataset, as the
current PLSR model incorporates triplicate measurements across six Bu concentration levels (n=6).
The methodology’s clinical applicability was assessed through analysis of spiked serum samples.
Matrix effects resulted in different SERS enhancement behavior compared to PBS measurements.
Notably, Bu exhibited enhanced SERS response under Pht-optimized parameters compared to its
optimal protocol with Ag ions. Even if the formation of Ag0 was confirmed through observation
of the characteristic 335 cm−1 band, the Ag selectivity towards Bu may have been reduced by
the presence of other metabolites. While 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filtration yielded optimal
results for individual Bu analysis, simultaneous Pht detection may necessitate alternative sample
preparation strategies, including protein precipitation, reduced pore-size filtration, or solid-phase
extraction methodologies. The SERS signal for Pht was significantly lower (ten-fold) under both
its own optimal parameters and those of Bu when compared to PBS. The attenuation of the SERS
signal could be attributed to matrix-induced interference with substrate binding sites and to Pht’s
high affinity for protein binding (90–93%).
Systematic variability was introduced throughout the experimental procedures, primarily due to
factors such as chips cutting, inherent chip-to-chip variation, electrode fabrication and degradation
after repeated cycling, solution composition, and manual electrochemical cell assembly. Addition-
ally, cell volume fluctuations due to minor leakage during measurements may also affected the
mapping focus and reproducibility. Future optimization should target automating the cutting and
cell assembly processes. A recent improvement in batch production involves numbering chips based
on their position relative to the wafer center, where the metallic coating homogeneity is higher.
While this does not eliminate variability within a single wafer, it allows for more consistent experi-
mental conditions when selecting chips from different regions.
Page 55 of 67
==PAGE:64==
Further experimentation is required to optimize the individual and simultaneous detection of Bu
and Pht under different electrolytes and acidic pH conditions, as well as to evaluate the impact of
varying Pht concentrations on the double detection approach. These studies should assess interfer-
ence effects in simultaneous detection, particularly regarding concentration-dependent competition
for active surface sites. Furthermore, detailed characterization of Ag deposition, its distribution
on the surface, and reduction efficiency, will be essential for improving detection accuracy and un-
derstanding molecule-substrate interactions. Substrate efficiency was prioritized during the double
detection, but a a first study of Pht reversibility was conducted by applying a potential of opposite
polarity to the detection potential. Pht SERS signal was reduced in a 23.29 %. Exploring a broader
potential range, particularly at more positive values, may further enhance signal attenuation. Addi-
tionally, further studies are required to evaluate substrate regeneration and determine the maximum
number of reliable analytical cycles.
Page 56 of 67
==PAGE:65==
9
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to develop a methodology for sensitive detection of oncological and
antiepileptic drugs by employing a label-free EC-SERS assay. Using the protocol established in this
project, an innovative approach capable of detecting two drugs, individually and simultaneously,
has been developed.
For the individual detection of Bu and Pht in physiological matrices, two different methodologies
were designed. The approach was implemented with AuNP SERS substrates, selected for its su-
perior chemical stability and low toxicity, as Ag substrates tend to oxidize and react with sulfur
compounds in the atmosphere [27]. During the optimization process, the applied potentials effec-
tively modulated the SERS spectral features, enabling the adjustment of electrochemical parameters
and SERS mapping conditions to enhance the detection and molecular attraction of Pht to the SERS
substrates, resulting in significantly improved sensitivity. This individual approach could also be
applicable to other relevant scenarios in which Pht is administered, such as neuroprotection, wound
healing, and prophylactic use in epilepsy and bipolar disorder [120], [121].
Bu detection was accomplished through strategic incorporation of Ag ions as sensitivity enhancers
on the same AuNP SERS substrates. The application of the Bu method can be extensively utilized
in patients undergoing conditioning regimens, particularly in those for whom total body irradiation
(TBI) is to be avoided.
The double detection EC-SERS methodology, utilizing a common electrode system under opti-
mized conditions, represents a significant advancement in TDM for HSCT protocols. The devel-
oped method addresses critical challenges in current TDM practices by offering rapid, sensitive,
and selective detection capabilities within clinically relevant concentration ranges.
By enabling
frequent sampling, this approach facilitates more accurate patient-specific clearance estimations,
helping maintain effective and safe drug concentrations while minimizing toxicity risks.
While initial results demonstrate promising analytical performance and clinical feasibility, future
optimization through process automation and expanded validation studies with physiological based
solutions will further enhance its practical implementation. Additionally, the established protocols
provide a robust foundation for extending EC-SERS applications to other therapeutic drug combi-
nations requiring simultaneous monitoring, advancing the field of personalized medicine.
Page 57 of 67
==PAGE:66==
References
[1] Ju Seop Kang and Min Ho Lee. Overview of therapeutic drug monitoring. Korean Journal of
Internal Medicine, 24(1):1–10, 2009.
[2] Aleksandra Jaworska, Stefano Fornasaro, Valter Sergo, and Alois Bonifacio.
Potential of
surface enhanced raman spectroscopy (sers) in therapeutic drug monitoring (tdm). a critical
review. Biosensors, 6(3):47, 2016.
[3] Rebeca Moldovan, Elizaveta Vereshchagina, Karolina Milenko, Bogdan-Cezar Iacob, An-
dreea Elena Bodoki, Alexandra Falamas, Nicoleta Tosa, Cristina M Muntean, Cosmin Farcău,
and Ede Bodoki. Review on combining surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy and electrochem-
istry for analytical applications. Analytica Chimica Acta, 1209:339250, 2022.
[4] Yaman Goksel, Elodie Dumont, Roman Slipets, Sriram T Rajendran, Sevde Sarikaya,
Lasse HE Thamdrup, Kjeld Schmiegelow, Tomas Rindzevicius, Kinga Zor, and Anja Boisen.
Methotrexate detection in serum at clinically relevant levels with electrochemically assisted
sers on a benchtop, custom built raman spectrometer. ACS sensors, 7(8):2358–2369, 2022.
[5] D. Pletcher, Z.Q. Tian, and D.E. Williams. Developments in electrochemistry – science in-
spired by martin fleischmann. 2014.
[6] Mamdouh Abdelsalam, Phillip N. Bartlett, Jeremy J. Baumberg, Suzanne Cintra, Tim Kelf,
and Andrea Russell. Electrochemical sers at a structured gold surface. 2005.
[7] Christa L Brosseau, Alvaro Colina, Juan V Perales-Rondon, Andrew J Wilson, Padmanabh B
Joshi, Bin Ren, and Xiang Wang.
Electrochemical surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy.
Nature Reviews Methods Primers, 3(1):79, 2023.
[8] Ruchita S Das and YK Agrawal. Raman spectroscopy: Recent advancements, techniques and
applications. Vibrational spectroscopy, 57(2):163–176, 2011.
[9] Marek
Prochazka
and
Marek
Prochazka.
Basics
of
raman
scattering
(rs)
spec-
troscopy. Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: Bioanalytical, Biomolecular and Medical
Applications, pages 7–19, 2016.
[10] Jisue Moon, Meijun Li, Anibal J Ramirez-Cuesta, and Zili Wu. Raman spectroscopy. In
Springer Handbook of Advanced Catalyst Characterization, pages 75–110. Springer, 2023.
[11] Paul Rostron, Safa Gaber, and Dina Gaber. Raman spectroscopy, review. laser, 21:24, 2016.
[12] Andrew Joseph Zumbusch. Quantification of flow aids in shredded cheese blends using en-
zymatic starch analysis and fourier transform near-infrared spectroscopy.
Master’s thesis,
University of Minnesota, 2017.
[13] Gurvinder Singh Bumbrah and Rakesh Mohan Sharma. Raman spectroscopy–basic principle,
instrumentation and selected applications for the characterization of drugs of abuse. Egyptian
Journal of Forensic Sciences, 6(3):209–215, 2016.
[14] John Coates. Vibrational spectroscopy: instrumentation for infrared and raman spectroscopy.
Applied spectroscopy reviews, 33(4):267–425, 1998.
Page 58 of 67
==PAGE:67==
[15] Craig P Marshall, Howell GM Edwards, and Jan Jehlicka. Understanding the application of
raman spectroscopy to the detection of traces of life. Astrobiology, 10(2):229–243, 2010.
[16] Drishya Rajan Parachalil, Deirdre Commerford, Franck Bonnier, Igor Chourpa, Jennifer McIn-
tyre, and Hugh J Byrne. Raman spectroscopy as a potential tool for label free therapeutic drug
monitoring in human serum: the case of busulfan and methotrexate. Analyst, 144(17):5207–
5214, 2019.
[17] Yingfen Jiang, Da-Wen Sun, Hongbin Pu, and Qingyi Wei. Surface enhanced raman spec-
troscopy (sers): A novel reliable technique for rapid detection of common harmful chemical
residues. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 75:10–22, 2018.
[18] Tineke Vankeirsbilck, Ann Vercauteren, Willy Baeyens, G Van der Weken, Francis Verpoort,
Geert Vergote, and Jean Paul Remon. Applications of raman spectroscopy in pharmaceutical
analysis. TrAC trends in analytical chemistry, 21(12):869–877, 2002.
[19] Anna Muhlig, Dana Cialla-May, and Jurgen Popp. Fundamental sers investigation of pyridine
and its derivates as a function of functional groups, their substitution position, and their
interaction with silver nanoparticles. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 121(4):2323–2332,
2017.
[20] Yanling Zhai, Zhijun Zhu, Susan Zhou, Chengzhou Zhu, and Shaojun Dong. Recent advances
in spectroelectrochemistry. Nanoscale, 10(7):3089–3111, 2018.
[21] Roberto Pilot, Raffaella Signorini, Christian Durante, Laura Orian, Manjari Bhamidipati, and
Laura Fabris. A review on surface-enhanced raman scattering. Biosensors (Basel), 9(2):57,
April 2019.
[22] Zhong-Qun Tian and Xue-Min Zhang.
Electrochemical surface-enhanced raman spec-
troscopy (ec-sers): Early history, principles, methods, and experiments.
Developments in
Electrochemistry: Science Inspired by Martin Fleischmann, pages 113–135, 2014.
[23] Quan-Feng He, Yu-Jin Zhang, Zhi-Lan Yang, Jin-Chao Dong, Xiu-Mei Lin, and Jian-Feng
Li. Surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy: Principles, methods, and applications in energy
systems. Chinese Journal of Chemistry, 41(3):355–369, 2023.
[24] Roberto Pilot, Raffaella Signorini, Christian Durante, Laura Orian, Manjari Bhamidipati, and
Laura Fabris. A review on surface-enhanced raman scattering. Biosensors, 9(2):57, 2019.
[25] Francis Leonard Deepak. Metal nanoparticles and clusters: Advances in synthesis, properties
and applications. Springer, 2017.
[26] A Kudelski and J Bukowska. The chemical effect in surface enhanced raman scattering (sers)
for piperidine adsorbed on a silver electrode. Surface science, 368(1-3):396–400, 1996.
[27] Roberto Pilot, Raffaella Signorini, and Laura Fabris. Surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy:
Principles, substrates, and applications.
Metal nanoparticles and clusters:
advances in
synthesis, properties and applications, pages 89–164, 2018.
[28] Bhavya Sharma, Renee R Frontiera, Anne-Isabelle Henry, Emilie Ringe, and Richard P
Van Duyne. Sers: Materials, applications, and the future. Materials today, 15(1-2):16–25,
2012.
Page 59 of 67
==PAGE:68==
[29] Lei Ouyang, Wen Ren, Lihua Zhu, and Joseph Irudayaraj. Prosperity to challenges: Recent
approaches in sers substrate fabrication. Reviews in Analytical Chemistry, 36(1):20160027,
2017.
[30] Meikun Fan, Gustavo FS Andrade, and Alexandre G Brolo.
A review on the fabrication
of substrates for surface enhanced raman spectroscopy and their applications in analytical
chemistry. Analytica chimica acta, 693(1-2):7–25, 2011.
[31] Bhavya Sharma, M Fernanda Cardinal, Samuel L Kleinman, Nathan G Greeneltch, Renee R
Frontiera, Martin G Blaber, George C Schatz, and Richard P Van Duyne. High-performance
sers substrates: Advances and challenges. MRS bulletin, 38(8):615–624, 2013.
[32] Panangattukara Prabhakaran Praveen Kumar, Shimayali Kaushal, and Dong-Kwon Lim.
Recent advances in nano/microfabricated substrate platforms and artificial intelligence for
practical surface-enhanced raman scattering-based bioanalysis.
Trends Analyt. Chem.,
168(117341):117341, November 2023.
[33] Meikun Fan, Gustavo F S Andrade, and Alexandre G Brolo. A review on the fabrication
of substrates for surface enhanced raman spectroscopy and their applications in analytical
chemistry. Anal. Chim. Acta, 693(1-2):7–25, May 2011.
[34] Abhijit Biswas, Ilker S. Bayer, Alexandru S. Biris, Tao Wang, Enkeleda Dervishi, and Franz
Faupel. Advances in top-down and bottom-up surface nanofabrication: Techniques, applica-
tions and future prospects. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 170(1-2):2–27, 2012.
[35] Horst Weller, A. M. Stoneham, J. Allam, R. A. Abram, and J. H. Harding. Synthesis and
self-assembly of colloidal nanoparticles. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 361(1803):229–240, 2003.
[36] Ota Samek, Silvie Bernatová, and Fadi Dohnal. The potential of sers as an ast methodology
in clinical settings. Nanophotonics, 10(10):2537–2561, 2021.
[37] Lucas A Lane, Ximei Qian, and Shuming Nie. Sers nanoparticles in medicine: from label-free
detection to spectroscopic tagging. Chemical reviews, 115(19):10489–10529, 2015.
[38] Xiao-Shan Zheng, Izabella Jolan Jahn, Karina Weber, Dana Cialla-May, and Jürgen Popp.
Label-free sers in biological and biomedical applications: recent progress, current challenges
and opportunities. Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy,
197:56–77, 2018.
[39] Yunqing Wang, Bing Yan, and Lingxin Chen. Sers tags: novel optical nanoprobes for bio-
analysis. Chemical reviews, 113(3):1391–1428, 2013.
[40] Yow-Kuan Lin, Ruo-Ju Tai, Shu-Chen Wei, and Shyh-Chyang Luo. Electrochemical sers on
2d mapping for metabolites detection. Langmuir, 36(21):5990–5996, 2020.
[41] Matthew A Gebbie, Beichen Liu, Wenxiao Guo, Seth R Anderson, and Samuel G John-
stone. Linking electric double layer formation to electrocatalytic activity. ACS Catalysis,
13(24):16222–16239, 2023.
Page 60 of 67
==PAGE:69==
[42] Christian M Schott, Peter M Schneider, Kun-Ting Song, Haiting Yu, Rainer Götz, Felix
Haimerl, Elena Gubanova, Jian Zhou, Thorsten O Schmidt, Qiwei Zhang, Vitaly Alexandrov,
and Aliaksandr S Bandarenka. How to assess and predict electrical double layer properties.
implications for electrocatalysis. Chem. Rev., 124(22):12391–12462, November 2024.
[43] Marcela Dendisová, Zuzana Němečková, Martin Člupek, and Vadym Prokopec. Ec-sers study
of phenolic acids sorption behavior on au, ag and cu substrates–effect of applied potential and
metal used. Applied Surface Science, 470:716–723, 2019.
[44] Anil Kumar Singh. Raman Spectroscopy. Springer, 2019.
[45] Christa Brosseau.
Principles, characteristics, and applications of electrochemical surface-
enhanced raman spectroscopy. In Surface-and Tip-Enhanced Raman Scattering Spectroscopy:
Bridging Theory and Applications, pages 249–272. Springer, 2024.
[46] Martin Fleischmann.
Developments in electrochemistry :
science inspired by Martin
Fleischmann. Wiley, 2014.
[47] Heidi Fisk, Chloe Westley, Nicholas J Turner, and Royston Goodacre. Achieving optimal sers
through enhanced experimental design. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy, 47(1):59–66, 2016.
[48] De-Yin Wu, Jian-Feng Li, Bin Ren, and Zhong-Qun Tian. Electrochemical surface-enhanced
raman spectroscopy of nanostructures. Chemical Society Reviews, 37(5):1025–1041, 2008.
[49] Xiu Liang, Ning Li, Runhao Zhang, Penggang Yin, Chenmeng Zhang, Nan Yang, Kang Liang,
and Biao Kong. Carbon-based sers biosensor: From substrate design to sensing and bioappli-
cation. NPG Asia Materials, 13(1):8, 2021.
[50] Hulya Yilmaz, Deniz Yilmaz, Irem Culha Taskin, and Mustafa Culha. Pharmaceutical appli-
cations of a nanospectroscopic technique: Surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy. Advanced
Drug Delivery Reviews, 184:114184, 2022.
[51] Erik Eliasson, Jonatan D Lindh, Rickard E Malmström, Olof Beck, and Marja-Liisa Dahl.
Therapeutic drug monitoring for tomorrow. European journal of clinical pharmacology, 69:25–
32, 2013.
[52] Zijun Fang, He Zhang, Jiuchuan Guo, and Jinhong Guo. Overview of therapeutic drug mon-
itoring and clinical practice. Talanta, 266:124996, 2024.
[53] Matthew J Cervelli and Graeme R Russ. Principles of drug therapy, dosing, and prescribing in
chronic kidney disease and renal replacement therapy. In Comprehensive clinical nephrology,
pages 871–893. Elsevier, 2010.
[54] Chinmoyee Deori, Bitupan Kalita, and Tonushyam Sonowal. Therapeutic drug monitoring
(tdm) in clinical practices: Overview. European Journal of Biomedical, 11(2):208–213, 2024.
[55] Simona Pichini, Esther Papaseit, Xavier Joya, Oriol Vall, Magí Farré, Oscar Garcia-Algar,
et al. Pharmacokinetics and therapeutic drug monitoring of psychotropic drugs in pediatrics.
Therapeutic drug monitoring, 31(3):283–318, 2009.
[56] Samir D Undevia, Gonzalo Gomez-Abuin, and Mark J Ratain. Pharmacokinetic variability
of anticancer agents. Nature Reviews Cancer, 5(6):447–458, 2005.
Page 61 of 67
==PAGE:70==
[57] Annette S Gross. Best practice in therapeutic drug monitoring. British journal of clinical
pharmacology, 52(S1):5–9, 2001.
[58] Hannsjörg W Seyberth, Anders Rane, and Matthias Schwab. Pediatric clinical pharmacology,
volume 205. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
[59] Cees Neef, Daniel J Touw, and Leo M Stolk. Therapeutic drug monitoring in clinical research.
Pharmaceutical Medicine, 22:235–244, 2008.
[60] Raffaele Simeoli, Thomas PC Dorlo, Lidwien M Hanff, Alwin DR Huitema, and Erwin
Dreesen. Therapeutic drug monitoring (tdm): A useful tool for pediatric pharmacology ap-
plied to routine clinical practice, 2022.
[61] Gunnar Brandhorst, Michael Oellerich, Gregory Maine, Paul Taylor, Gerhard Veen, and Pierre
Wallemacq. Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry or automated immunoassays:
what are the future trends in therapeutic drug monitoring? Clinical chemistry, 58(5):821–825,
2012.
[62] Adriano Taddeo, Denis Prim, Elena-Diana Bojescu, Jean-Manuel Segura, and Marc E Pfeifer.
Point-of-care therapeutic drug monitoring for precision dosing of immunosuppressive drugs.
The journal of applied laboratory medicine, 5(4):738–761, 2020.
[63] Bushra Salman and Murtadha Al-Khabori. Applications and challenges in therapeutic drug
monitoring of cancer treatment: A review. Journal of Oncology Pharmacy Practice, 27(3):693–
701, 2021.
[64] Anne Wilson and Andreas Trumpp. Bone-marrow haematopoietic-stem-cell niches. Nature
Reviews Immunology, 6(2):93–106, 2006.
[65] Tatsuki Sugiyama and Takashi Nagasawa.
Bone marrow niches for hematopoietic stem
cells and immune cells.
Inflammation & Allergy-Drug Targets (Formerly Current Drug
Targets-Inflammation & Allergy)(Discontinued), 11(3):201–206, 2012.
[66] John R Wingard, Jack Hsu, and John W Hiemenz. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation:
an overview of infection risks and epidemiology. Hematology/Oncology Clinics, 25(1):101–116,
2011.
[67] Jack B Bishop and John S Wassom. Toxicological review of busulfan (myleran). Mutation
research/reviews in genetic toxicology, 168(1):15–45, 1986.
[68] Jeannine S McCune and Leona A Holmberg. Busulfan in hematopoietic stem cell transplant
setting. Expert opinion on drug metabolism & toxicology, 5(8):957–969, 2009.
[69] Marloes H ten Brink, Juliëtte Zwaveling, Jesse J Swen, Robbert GM Bredius, Arjan C
Lankester, and Henk-Jan Guchelaar. Personalized busulfan and treosulfan conditioning for
pediatric stem cell transplantation: the role of pharmacogenetics and pharmacokinetics. Drug
discovery today, 19(10):1572–1586, 2014.
[70] Jeannine S McCune, John P Gibbs, and John T Slattery. Plasma concentration monitoring
of busulfan: does it improve clinical outcome? Clinical pharmacokinetics, 39:155–165, 2000.
Page 62 of 67
==PAGE:71==
[71] Kelly J Gaffney, Theresa A Urban, Mariana Lucena, Faiz Anwer, Robert M Dean, Aaron T
Gerds, Betty K Hamilton, Deepa Jagadeesh, Matt E Kalaycio, Jack Khouri, et al. Toxic-
ity analysis of busulfan pharmacokinetic therapeutic dose monitoring. Journal of Oncology
Pharmacy Practice, page 10781552221104422, 2022.
[72] Syed Haider Imam, Kristen Landry, Viren Kaul, Harvirmbbs Gambhir, Dinesh John, and
Brian Kloss. Free phenytoin toxicity. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 32(10):1301–
1301.e4, 2014.
[73] Raj Patel, Preeti Patel, and Prasanna Tadi. Busulfan. In StatPearls [Internet]. StatPearls
Publishing, 2024.
[74] G Vassal, G Michel, H Esperou, JC Gentet, D Valteau-Couanet, F Doz, F Mechinaud,
C Galambrun, B Neven, H Zouabi, et al. Prospective validation of a novel iv busulfan fixed
dosing for paediatric patients to improve therapeutic auc targeting without drug monitoring.
Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology, 61:113–123, 2008.
[75] Tim Bognàr, JS Kingma, EH Smeijsters, KCM van der Elst, CTM de Kanter, CA Lindemans,
ACG Egberts, IH Bartelink, and Arief Lalmohamed. Busulfan target exposure attainment
in children undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation: a single day versus a
multiday therapeutic drug monitoring regimen. Bone marrow transplantation, 58(7):762–768,
2023.
[76] Erika Watanabe, Takuro Nishikawa, Kazuro Ikawa, Hiroki Yamaguchi, Takanari Abematsu,
Shunsuke Nakagawa, Koichiro Kurauchi, Yuichi Kodama, Takayuki Tanabe, Yuichi Shinkoda,
et al. Trough level monitoring of intravenous busulfan to estimate the area under the plasma
drug concentration–time curve in pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients.
International journal of hematology, 102:611–616, 2015.
[77] David Combarel, Julie Tran, Julia Delahousse, Gilles Vassal, and Angelo Paci. Individualizing
busulfan dose in specific populations and evaluating the risk of pharmacokinetic drug-drug
interactions. Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism & Toxicology, 19(2):75–90, 2023.
[78] Xinying Feng, Yunjiao Wu, Jingru Zhang, Jiapeng Li, Guanghua Zhu, Duanfang Fan,
Changqing Yang, and Libo Zhao. Busulfan systemic exposure and its relationship with effi-
cacy and safety in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in children: a meta-analysis. BMC
pediatrics, 20:1–11, 2020.
[79] AM Bolinger, AB Zangwill, JT Slattery, LJ Risler, DH Sultan, DV Glidden, D Norstad, and
MJ Cowan. Target dose adjustment of busulfan in pediatric patients undergoing bone marrow
transplantation. Bone marrow transplantation, 28(11):1013–1018, 2001.
[80] Louise B Grochow, William Krivit, Chester B Whitley, and Bruce Blazar. Busulfan disposition
in children. Blood, 75(8):1723–1727, 1990.
[81] Chiara La Morgia, S Mondini, M Guarino, F Bonifazi, and Fabio Cirignotta. Busulfan neu-
rotoxicity and eeg abnormalities: a case report. Neurological Sciences, 25:95–97, 2004.
[82] Andrea L Eberly, Gail D Anderson, Joseph S Bubalo, and Jeannine S McCune. Optimal
prevention of seizures induced by high-dose busulfan.
Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of
Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy, 28(12):1502–1510, 2008.
Page 63 of 67
==PAGE:72==
[83] Simon Craig. Phenytoin poisoning. Neurocritical care, 3:161–170, 2005.
[84] https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Phenytoin. Accessed: 2025-2-9.
[85] RS Germeraad, AMP Demandt, and RPW Rouhl.
Phenytoin as seizure prophylaxis in
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation with busulfan conditioning. Frontiers in Neurology,
13:928550, 2022.
[86] Sandrina L von Winckelmann, Isabel Spriet, and Ludo Willems. Therapeutic drug monitoring
of phenytoin in critically ill patients. Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human Pharmacology
and Drug Therapy, 28(11):1391–1400, 2008.
[87] Jiri Patocka, Qinghua Wu, Eugenie Nepovimova, and Kamil Kuca. Phenytoin–an anti-seizure
drug: Overview of its chemistry, pharmacology and toxicology. Food and Chemical Toxicology,
142:111393, 2020.
[88] Melissa Faye Wu and Wai Hing Lim. Phenytoin: a guide to therapeutic drug monitoring.
Proceedings of Singapore Healthcare, 22(3):198–202, 2013.
[89] MJ Eadie.
Therapeutic drug monitoring—antiepileptic drugs.
British journal of clinical
pharmacology, 46(3):185–193, 1998.
[90] Lingyun Chen, Zhifeng Zhou, Mei Shen, and Ande Ma. Quantitative analysis of busulfan in
human plasma by lc-ms–ms. Chromatographia, 70:1727–1732, 2009.
[91] Simona De Gregori, Carmine Tinelli, Federica Manzoni, and Antonella Bartoli. Comparison
of two analytical methods for busulfan therapeutic drug monitoring. European Journal of
Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, 46:155–159, 2021.
[92] Cecilie Johannessen Landmark, Svein I Johannessen, and Philip N Patsalos. Therapeutic
drug monitoring of antiepileptic drugs: current status and future prospects. Expert opinion
on drug metabolism & toxicology, 16(3):227–238, 2020.
[93] Mohammed E Abdel-Hamid. Comparative lc–ms and hplc analyses of selected antiepileptics
and beta-blocking drugs. Il Farmaco, 55(2):136–145, 2000.
[94] Yinghui Wen, Xueyan Wang, Dongguo Li, Qinyan Zhang, Binge Deng, and Yu Chen. Rapid
detection of phenytoin sodium by partial-least squares and linear regression models combined
with surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 223(115160):115160,
January 2023.
[95] Wendy W Y Lee, Colin P McCoy, Ryan F Donnelly, and Steven E J Bell. Swellable polymer
films containing au nanoparticles for point-of-care therapeutic drug monitoring using surface-
enhanced raman spectroscopy. Anal. Chim. Acta, 912:111–116, March 2016.
[96] Nemanja P Trišović, Bojan Dj Božić, Jelena D Lović, Vesna D Vitnik, Željko J Vitnik, Slobo-
dan D Petrović, and Milka L Avramov Ivić. lctrochemical characterization of phenytoin and
its derivatives on bare gold electrode. Electrochimica Acta, 161:378–387, 2015.
[97] Drishya Rajan Parachalil, Deirdre Commerford, Franck Bonnier, Igor Chourpa, Jennifer McIn-
tyre, and Hugh J Byrne. Raman spectroscopy as a potential tool for label free therapeutic drug
monitoring in human serum: the case of busulfan and methotrexate. Analyst, 144(17):5207–
5214, August 2019.
Page 64 of 67
==PAGE:73==
[98] Drishya Rajan Parachalil. Screening of human serum/plasma using vibrational spectroscopy
for early disease diagnostics and therapeutic drug monitoring, 2019.
[99] Anand M Shrivastav, Nagham Ali, Neetika Singh, Eitan Lunenfeld, Ibrahim Abdulhalim,
and Mahmoud Huleihel. Identification of spermatogenesis in individual seminiferous tubules
and testicular tissue of adult normal and busulfan-treated mice employing raman spec-
troscopy and principal component analysis. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc.,
315(124232):124232, July 2024.
[100] Yaman Goksel, Kinga Zor, Tomas Rindzevicius, Bodil Elise Thorhauge Als-Nielsen, Kjeld
Schmiegelow, and Anja Boisen. Quantification of methotrexate in human serum using surface-
enhanced raman scattering—toward therapeutic drug monitoring. ACS sensors, 6(7):2664–
2673, 2021.
[101] Aleksandra Jaworska, Stefano Fornasaro, Valter Sergo, and Alois Bonifacio.
Potential of
surface enhanced raman spectroscopy (sers) in therapeutic drug monitoring (tdm). a critical
review. Biosensors, 6(3):47, 2016.
[102] Yaman Göksel. Towards therapeutic drug monitoring of methotrexate using sers. 2021.
[103] T Karthick, Poonam Tandon, Swapnil Singh, Parag Agarwal, and Anubha Srivastava. Char-
acterization and intramolecular bonding patterns of busulfan: Experimental and quantum
chemical approach. Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy,
173:390–399, 2017.
[104] Yinghui Wen, Xueyan Wang, Dongguo Li, Qinyan Zhang, Binge Deng, and Yu Chen. Rapid
detection of phenytoin sodium by partial-least squares and linear regression models com-
bined with surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical
Analysis, 223:115160, 2023.
[105] Nemanja P. Trišović, Bojan Dj Božić, Jelena D. Lović, Vesna D. Vitnik, Željko J. Vitnik, Slo-
bodan D. Petrović, and Milka L.Avramov Ivić. electrochemical characterization of phenytoin
and its derivatives on bare gold electrode. Electrochimica Acta, 161:378–387, 2015.
[106] Archana Kaliyaraj Selva Kumar, Yifei Zhang, Danlei Li, and Richard G Compton. A mini-
review: How reliable is the drop casting technique?
Electrochemistry Communications,
121:106867, 2020.
[107] Peter A Schwartz, CT Rhodes, and JW Cooper Jr. Solubility and ionization characteristics
of phenytoin. Journal of pharmaceutical sciences, 66(7):994–997, 1977.
[108] Wei Dong Xing, Man Seung Lee, and Seung Hoon Choi. Separation of ag (i) by ion exchange
and cementation from a raffinate containing ag (i), ni (ii) and zn (ii) and traces of cu (ii) and
sn (ii). Processes, 6(8):112, 2018.
[109] Renáta Oriňáková, Lenka Škantárová, Andrej Orinák, Jakub Demko, Miriam Kupková, and
Jan T Andersson.
Electrochemical deposition of sers active nanostructured silver films.
International Journal of Electrochemical Science, 8(1):80–99, 2013.
[110] T Karthick, Poonam Tandon, Swapnil Singh, Parag Agarwal, and Anubha Srivastava. Char-
acterization and intramolecular bonding patterns of busulfan: Experimental and quantum
Page 65 of 67
==PAGE:74==
chemical approach.
Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc., 173:390–399, February
2017.
[111] Nemanja P Trišović, Bojan Dj Božić, Jelena D Lović, Vesna D Vitnik, Željko J Vitnik, Slobo-
dan D Petrović, and Milka L Avramov Ivić. lctrochemical characterization of phenytoin and
its derivatives on bare gold electrode. Electrochim. Acta, 161:378–387, April 2015.
[112] Peter Vandenabeele. Evaluating the influence of step size in macro-raman mapping experi-
ments. The European Physical Journal Plus, 139(10):915, 2024.
[113] Carmen Viets and Wieland Hill. Laser power effects in sers spectroscopy at thin metal films.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 105(27):6330–6336, 2001.
[114] Lupong Kaewsichan, Daungporn Riyapan, Phanida Prommajan, and Jasadee Kaewsrichan.
Effects of sintering temperatures on micro-morphology, mechanical properties, and bioactivity
of bone scaffolds containing calcium silicate. Sci. Asia, 37:240–246, 2011.
[115] Miaomiao Liu, Tingyin Wang, Qiyi Zhang, Changbin Pan, Shuhang Liu, Yuanmei Chen, Duo
Lin, and Shangyuan Feng. An outlier removal method based on pca-dbscan for blood-sers
data analysis. Analytical Methods, 16(6):846–855, 2024.
[116] Sumit Kumar Das, Tara Shankar Bhattacharya, Manash Ghosh, and Joydeep Chowdhury.
Probing blood plasma samples for the detection of diabetes using sers aided by pca and lda
multivariate data analyses. New Journal of Chemistry, 45(5):2670–2682, 2021.
[117] Hervé Abdi. Partial least squares (pls) regression. Technical report, The University of Texas
at Dallas, n.d. Accessed: 2025-02-14.
[118] Hadi Parastar and Dmitry Kirsanov. Analytical figures of merit for multisensor arrays. ACS
sensors, 5(2):580–587, 2020.
[119] Franco Allegrini and Alejandro C. Olivieri. Iupac-consistent approach to the limit of detection
in partial least-squares calibration. Analytical Chemistry, 86(15):7858–7866, 2014.
[120] Silvia Bartollino, Flavia Chiosi, Silvio di Staso, Maurizio Uva, Arduino Pascotto, Michele
Rinaldi, Jan M Keppel Hesselink, and Ciro Costagliola. The retinoprotective role of phenytoin.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy, pages 3485–3489, 2018.
[121] A Mishory, M Winokur, and Yuly Bersudsky. Prophylactic effect of phenytoin in bipolar
disorder: a controlled study. Bipolar Disorders, 5(6):464–467, 2003.
Page 66 of 67
==PAGE:75==
Appendix
Figure 33 displays the control CV recorded for PBS alone (a), followed by the CV obtained for Pht
(10 µM) in PBS (pH 12.05) (b). Measurements were conducted within a potential range of -0.8 V
to 0.8 V, with a step size of 0.01 V, a scan rate of 0.1 V/s, and four scan cycles.
The absence of a distinct oxidation peak suggests that no oxidation of phenytoin were induced under
these experimental conditions.
Figure 33: CV (a) Control in PBS and (b) CV Pht (10µM) in PBS
During the Pht optimization assay (subsubsection 7.1.4), it was found that performing the surface
charging and detection steps in the presence of the analyte was more advantageous, eliminating the
need for separate preconditioning steps. Figure 34 illustrates the optimized protocol.
Figure 34: Schematic of optimal detection parameters for Pht in PBS: applying a charging surface
potential (0.8V, 90s) (left), followed by a negative detection potential (-0.4V) (right).
Page 67 of 67
