==PAGE:1==
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-
Based Settings
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Oscar Werner
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in mathematics, clustering, and algo-
rithms.
Oscar Werner - s223447
Signature
28-02-2025
Date
ii
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Using Tangles as a tool for clustering is largely unexplored, but has shown intriguing
potential in recent research. Its flexibility and adaptability to a wide range of settings
is intriguing, and makes it fitting for more research.
This thesis delves into the use of tangles for clustering in the feature-based setting, and
proposes several adaptions to improve its stability, runtime, and predictive power. Al-
though, the data used in this thesis is limited to gaussian mixtures, some ideas are adapt-
able to other scenarios, improving the general feasibility of tangles for clustering.
More specifically, this thesis presents two efficient cost-functions for clustering with tan-
gles, in some cases reducing the tangles clustering pipeline to be linear in n. Further-
more, we propose one promising adaption to the tangle search tree, which allows it to
find tangles of higher quality, disregarding the previous algorithmic notion that only al-
lowed tangles to be constructed in increasing order of cut costs. Finally, we present one
method to show how the information in the tangle-tree can potentially be post-processed
to automatically find the hierarchy that best characterizes the data.
Overall, the adaptions presented provide improvements to tangles clustering in the gaus-
sian mixture setting. Although, more research is required to further evaluate the adaptions
presented for other settings.
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Karl Magnus Heuer, Assistant Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science
Thank you, Karl, for great supervision throughout this project! The early stages of this
project was met with much frustration, as few ideas yielded the improvements hoped. You
really helped me keep by head cool during the frustrating times, and the project would not
have been the same without you.
iv
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:7==
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
The Tangles Clustering Pipeline
4
2.1
Notation and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Clustering with Tangles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Cut-Finding Algorithms
13
3.1
Equidistant Axis Parallel Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Range Based Axis-Parallel Cuts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Cost-Functions
15
4.1
Quadratic Cost-functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Linear Cost-functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Cost-Function Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Conclusion on Cost-Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Localized Costs - On Recomputing Cut Costs
24
5.1
Recomputing Localized Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Potential Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3
Conclusion and Other Comments on Localized Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6
The Gap Problem and Projection Analysis
34
6.1
The Gap Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.2
Post-Processing: Projection Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7
Discussion
41
7.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.2
Next Steps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
8
Conclusion
43
8.1
Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Bibliography
44
A Projected Data and Impact on Clusters Found for Different Agreement Pa-
rameters
45
vi
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:9==
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Using tangles for clustering applications is a largely unexplored method. Originating from
graph theory, tangles are, loosely speaking, a way to identify regions in graphs that are
intricately connected using collections of cuts that point toward bottlenecks. This con-
struction has later been shown to be adaptable to a wide range of settings, one of which
includes clustering.
More concretely, tangles provide a hierarchical clustering framework by using a large set
of weak cuts in a dataset. Individually, these cuts provide little valuable information about
structure, but in unison can identify the structures within. Clustering with tangles builds
a tangle search tree, which iteratively aggregates these cuts into a tree of increasing
agreement. This results in a hierarchical tree which describes the cluster structure of the
data.
Recent research from [Klepper et al. 2023] showed the flexibility of tangles clustering
by applying them on three different clustering settings: graphs, questionnaires, and the
feature-based setting, providing performance guarantees on each. In this paper we largely
build upon their experiments in the Gaussian feature-based setting, by making adaptions
to the algorithmic pipeline of tangles clustering.
More specifically, in this paper we will present how to use the concept of tangles specif-
ically for the feature-based clustering setting, and explore several adaptions to its clus-
tering pipeline to improve their capabilities in this context. We will present two linear time
cost-functions to evaluate the initial set of cuts, which can in many scenarios reduce the
overall time complexity of the tangles clustering pipeline to linear. Furthermore, it explores
the option of recomputing costs while constructing the tangle search tree, to place less
emphasis on the initial set of costs, allowing the tree to detect tangles of higher quality.
Finally, we explore a projection method to automatically post-process the tangle-search
tree, to automatically find the hierarchy within that best represents the structure of the
data.
1.1
Related Work
Tangles were originally introduced to graph theory by [Robertson and Seymour 1991] as
a way to quantify the separability of the structures within a graph — largely simplified,
the difficulty of’untangling’ an area of a graph. Later, [Grohe and Schweitzer 2015] pro-
vided the algorithmic framework to compute tangles of maximal order, the so called tangle
search tree as referenced in this thesis. Subsequently, [Diestel 2020] developed the idea
of tangles as a paradigm to cluster data by qualities that often occur together.
Reinhard expanded the framework to be applicable in a variety of settings, including the
social sciences [Diestel 2019], characterizing images with tangles [Diestel and Whittle
2017], natural sciences and data science, all of which was later encapsulated in his book,
‘Tangles: a Structural Approach to Artificial Intelligence in the Empirical Sciences’ [Diestel
2024].
More recently, [Klepper et al. 2023] provided theoretical performance guarantees for clus-
tering with tangles in three different setting; questionnaires, graphs, and feature-based
settings, showcasing the flexibility of tangle and their performance capabilities of tangles
in various scenarios.
2
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:11==
Two graphical user-interfaces for tangles have also been developed by [Laustrup and
Nielsen 2023] and [Søndergaard, Helsø, and Mandrupsen 2024], allowing to experiment
with tangles in a variety of settings.
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
3
==PAGE:12==
2
The Tangles Clustering Pipeline
Before getting into the adaptions to the tangles clustering pipeline presented in this paper,
we will show how to use tangles for clustering in feature-based settings. In this chapter, we
will introduce the tangle-search tree, and how it can be used to characterize the structure
of a dataset. Alongside, we will introduce the notations and definitions used in this paper.
2.1
Notation and Definitions
2.1.1
Cuts and Feature Systems
Consider a dataset V = {v1, . . . , vn}. A bipartition, or cut P of V are two disjoint and
non-empty subsets, A and AC, where A ∪AC = V and A ∩AC = ∅. Hence, each
element in V is either in A or AC. We denote A and its complement, AC, as orientations
of the cut P. Figure 2.1a shows an example cut. The initial stage in tangles clustering
consists of computing a set of many such cuts, a feature system, denoted P. Specifically,
P = {{A1, AC
1 }, . . . {Ak, AC
k }}, is a set of k unique cuts on V .
A high quality cut is one that separates dissimilar objects, i.e. one that gives indication
of the cluster structure in the data. As an example, figure 2.1b shows two cuts P1 and
P2. The high quality cut P1 clearly separates the two clusters, and reveals an underlying
cluster structure in its orientations. Meanwhile, P2 is low-quality, as it separates denser
regions in the data.
x
y
P
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
v6
A
AC
(a) The two disjoint orientations of a
cut.
x
y
P1
P2
(b) A strong (P1) and weak (P2) cut.
2.1.2
Computing Cuts
To compute the cuts of our feature system P, we use a cut-finding algorithm. The choice
of cut-finding algorithm is problem dependent, but it is often desirable that it produces a
varied set that covers the range of the data. Actually, to produce good clustering results,
it is often not necessary that the cuts individually have strong separation properties; typ-
ically we use a diverse set of weakly informative cuts that can in unison lead to strong
predictive results. There are many possible choices for cut-finding algorithms to com-
pute P. For example, one cost-effective approach on a d-dimensional data is to create
k/d equidistant axis parallel planes along each axis. Then, for each plane, a cut is con-
structed by assigning each data-point to A and AC depending on what side of the plane
4
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:13==
the data point resides. Essentially this cut-finding algorithm produces a grid on the data
from axis-parallel planes along each axis. This results in a feature system with k cuts.
Throughout the paper, we will typically use k to represent |P|. Cut-finding algorithms will
be touched upon in chapter 3, though it is not the focus of this paper.
2.1.3
Cost-functions
After constructing the cuts of the feature system, it is desirable to evaluate their ability
to separate the cluster structure in our data. Naturally, we are most interested in high-
quality cuts. As we’ll see for the tangle search-tree in 2.2.1, the cuts will be used in order
of increasing cost, so we need to sort the cuts accordingly.
To do this, we introduce a cost-function c : P →R, where a low cost indicates high quality.
The choice of cost-function is naturally dependent on the data’s characteristics. One
possible cost-function on feature-based data is the negative sum of distances between
all points in each orientation A and AC:
c (P) =
∑
v∈A,u∈AC
−||u −v||
To evaluate a cut P = {A, AC}, this cost-function computes the sum of distances from all
points in the set A to all points in the set AC. If the distance is large, then the points in A
and AC are further apart, indicating a larger differentiation between clusters. Similarly, if
the distance is small, then the cut is more likely to separate dense regions in the dataset.
We negate the result, because we want strong cuts to have low costs. This cost-function
can be effective, however is often undesirable as it O(k · n2) time to compute the sum of
distances for k cuts. In section 2.1.3, we delve more into cost-functions for feature-based
data.
2.1.4
Tangles and Consistency
After constructing our feature-system and sorting its cuts according to their cost, we have
the data structures needed to begin the search for tangles. Before getting into the details
of constructing the tangle search tree, we need to define what a tangle is more formally.
Consider our feature system P = {{A1, AC
1 }, . . . {Ak, AC
k }}. A specification of P, also
denoted with OP, is a set that has at most one of the two orientations of each cut in P.
I.e. for each cut Pi ∈P, the specification OP holds at most one of the orientations Ai and
AC
i of Pi. A specification is consistent if the intersection of every triple of subsets in OP
is greater than some agreement parameter, a.
∀A, B, C ∈OP :
|A ∩B ∩C| ≥a
(2.1)
If the specification OP is consistent, it is a tangle. For example, consider a specification
OP = {A1, AC
2 , AC
3 , A4}. With four elements, it is possible to create four unique combina-
tions of three elements. OP is then consistent if all the following hold:
|A1 ∩AC
2 ∩AC
3 | ≥a
|A1 ∩AC
2 ∩A4| ≥a
|A1 ∩AC
3 ∩A4| ≥a
|AC
2 ∩AC
3 ∩A4| ≥a
Thus, if all four equations above hold, the specification OP = {A1, AC
2 , AC
3 , A4} is a tangle.
The core of a tangle τ is defined by the intersection of all its orientations:
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
5
==PAGE:14==
τcore =
∩
A∈τ
A
(2.2)
We consider the set of orientations that narrow the core most to be most restrictive.
2.2
Clustering with Tangles
Clustering with tangles requires 4 independent steps:
1. Construct the set of cuts P
2. Evaluate the cuts with a cost-function c : P →R
3. Use a search tree to find tangles.
4. Convert tangles into soft- and hard predictions.
2.2.1
The Tangle Search Tree
Algorithm 1 Tangle Search Tree
Input: Feature System of cuts P, Cost-function c : P →R, Agreement Parameter a
function is_consistent(subset A, tangle τ)
▷eq. (2.1)
for all combinations B, C ∈τ do
if A ∩B ∩C < a then
return False
end if
end for
return True
end function
T ←empty tree with root
▷Each node holds a Tangle
sort each Pi in P according to c(Pi)
for all Pi ∈P do
Ai, AC
i ←Pi
▷The two orientations of Pi
for each node in the bottom-most layer of T do
τ ←Tangle at node
if is_consistent(Ai, τ) then
Add {Ai} ∪τ as left child of node in T
end if
if is_consistent(AC
i , τ) then
Add {AC
i } ∪τ as right child of node in T
end if
end for
end for
return T
After computing our cuts P and deciding on a cost-function, we can begin our search
for tangles. The naive approach of finding tangles, by checking for consistency on all
6
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:15==
possible specifications of P is infeasible, as there are 3|P| such specifications. Instead,
we look for tangles by constructing a tangle search tree with algorithm 1. In short, the
algorithm begins by constructing a root node which holds an empty tangle. We extend
the tree by checking whether adding either orientations of a cut to the tangle produces
a consistent specification. The intuition is that, as we traverse deeper into the tree, the
tangles iteratively become larger, until adding neither orientations of a cut to the tangle in
the bottom-most layer produces a consistent specification.
We begin the algorithm by initializing a tree with a root node that holds an empty tangle.
Then, we begin iterating over our cuts Pi of P, of which are sorted with respect to our cost-
function. Then, for each tangle τ held in the nodes of the bottom-most layer of the tree
(which is just the root in the first iteration), we construct two new specifications {Ai} ∪τ
and {AC
i } ∪τ. If the specification {Ai} ∪τ is consistent using eq. (2.1), then it is a tangle,
and we add a new leaf with the tangle to the left of the current node. Similarly, if {AC
i } ∪τ
is consistent, we add a new leaf with the tangle to the right of the current node. If both
orientations produce new tangles, the node splits into two new leaf nodes, producing a
separation of the data into two different tangles. Note that the orientations of a tangle that
we check for consistency are the orientations corresponding to the path from the root the
tangle at the node.
The algorithm terminates when we process a cut with a cost larger than some parameter
Ψ, or when we reach a cut of which no orientations can produce new tangles with the
agreement parameter a. The agreement-parameter roughly fixes the size of the smallest
cluster we wish to identify. If a cluster is smaller than a, the algorithm will terminate prior
to finding a tangle that encapsulates the cluster. In this paper we exclude the use of the
parameter Ψ, because the values of costs vary greatly depending on the cost-function
making it difficult to set, and it’s impact on the tangle-search tree can be roughly achieved
by adjusting the agreement parameter.
Figure 2.2: Sampled data with 3 clusters, totaling 1000 data points. The left graph shows
the data with an axis-parallel feature system P = {P1, . . . , P8} sorted by cost. The right
graph shows the resulting orientations (represented by the colored arrows) of each leaf-
node tangle after computing the search tree with algorithm 1.
As an example of the tangle search three, let us consider the dataset as shown in the left
graph in figure 2.2. The dataset contains 1000 data-points with three gaussian clusters
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
7
==PAGE:16==
of roughly equal size. To illustrate the algorithm, we construct a feature-system P =
{P1, . . . , P8} with 4 equidistant, axis-parallel cuts along each axis. These are marked by
the dashed red lines in the graph. The orientations of each cut Ai and AC
i are subsets of
data points that lie on each side of the red lines. The cuts have been sorted according to
their cost, such that c(P1) ≤· · · ≤c(P8); notice that the first four cuts pass through sparse
regions, while the last four pass through dense regions in the data. In this example, the
agreement parameter a is set to 250. Figure 2.3 shows the final tangle tree when the
algorithm terminates. Note, that in practice we would usually generate far more cuts than
8, but this example illustrates the workings of the tree nicely. For the following explanation,
we will denote the i’th layer as being the layer of the tree where Pi is evaluated.
Figure 2.3: The tree is a visual representation of the tangles found from the data and
cuts shown in fig. 2.2. Each node shows in red, the data points that are in the core of
the tangle at the node. The orientations that compose the tangles, can be traced by the
path from the node to the root. The code to generate the graph is adapted from [Diestel,
Blankenhagen, et al. (2024)].
P1 is processed in the first iteration of the algorithm, leading to a split in the tangle-tree
as the specifications OP = {A1} and OP = {AC
1 } are both consistent. At this stage we
cannot construct triples for eq. (2.1), so we simply evaluate whether |A1| ≥a and |AC
1 | ≥a.
For cuts P2, P3, and P4, we find that we can only construct tangles by the orientations that
point towards the majority of the data. These cuts are all near the edges of the data, and
serve to trim off outliers. Their orientations pointing outward are far too small to produce
consistent specifications with a = 250.
At this stage the leaf in the left-most branch of fig. 2.3 holds the tangle τ = {AC
1 , A2, A3, A4}
(The path from the root to the leaf). These orientations are visualized in the right graph
in fig. 2.2 by the purple arrows. Notice that they all ”point” towards the purple cluster.
8
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:17==
Things start to get interesting when evaluating P5. For P5, we evaluate the specifications
τ ∪{A5} and τ ∪{AC
5 }, neither of which are consistent. τ ∪{A5} violates eq. (2.1) because
|AC
1 ∩A3 ∩A5| > 250, and {A5} violates it because |AC
1 ∩A2 ∩A5| > 250. The branch
terminates here.
For the tangle at the right branch we find the opposite to be true. Both orientations of
P5 result in consistent specifications, so the branch splits, separating the upper right and
lower right clusters. Both branches to the right eventually terminate, leaving P8 unused.
2.2.2
Constructing Clusters from Tangles
After computing our tangles with algorithm 1, we need to transform them into predictions.
Before we can accomplish this, we must identify the distinguishing cuts. Distinguishing
cuts are, as the name suggests, cuts that distinguish different tangles from each other. Or
in other words, cuts where both it’s orientations are used to construct different tangles. An
intuitive example can be seen in fig. 2.2; the distinguishing cuts are the ones with arrows
pointing in both directions. P1 is distinguishing, because it separates the purple tangle
from the green and orange tangles. P4 and P5 are distinguishing, because they separate
the green and orange tangles.
(a) Contracted Tree
(b) Distinguished Tree
At this stage it is beneficial to contract the tangle search tree, that is, merge nodes that do
not split the tree. This leaves us with a more compact representation of the tangle tree, as
well as helps us to identify distinguished cuts. The tree can be contracted in a bottom up
manner by removing all nodes with one child, and transferring its orientation to the child.
From the contracted tree, we can easily identify distinguishing cuts. At each internal node
we identify the contracted orientations at each child. The distinguishing cuts are then the
orientations that differ at each child. For example, to compute the distinguishing cuts in the
root of the trees in section 2.2.2, we compare the contracted orientations of the children
{AC
1 , A2, A3, A4} and {A1, A2, A3, A4}. These two specifications differ with orientations
A1 and AC
1 , meaning that P1 distinguishes them.
Using the distinguishing cuts, we can compute our soft predictions. At each splitting
node we compute the probability of each data point being a part of the left, and right
sub-structures. Specifically, for a data point v, and a set of distinguishing cuts D, the
probabilities of belonging to a cluster in the left and right substructures are
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
9
==PAGE:18==
pleft(v) = pnode(v) ·
∑
P∈{P∈D|v∈Pl} h(c(P))
∑
P∈D h(c(P))
(2.3)
pright(v) = pnode(v) · (1 −pleft(v))
(2.4)
where h is a non-increasing weighting function, and where Pl corresponds to the orienta-
tions of the distinguished cuts that the point is in. In the root of the tree pnode(vi) = 1 for
all vi ∈V . More intuitively, eq. (2.3) calculates the probability of a data-point v belong-
ing to the left and right substructures by dividing the sum of the weights of the costs of
the distinguished cuts of which their orientations hold v, by the total sum of weights of all
distinguished cuts. In the implementation used in this paper we use
h(c(Pi)) = e−c(Pi)−min(C)
max(C)−min(C)
as the weighting function, where C is our sequence of costs. This assigns a probability for
each data point to each tangle in the tree, where each tangle at the leaves represents our
clusters. To convert this into hard-predictions, we simply assign points to clusters based
on which leaf-node tangle its probability is the highest.
2.2.3
Time Complexity — Tangle Search Tree
We analyze the time complexity in terms of l, k, and n. l specifies the amount of leaf
nodes in the tree, also equivalent to the amount of clusters found. k specifies the height
of the tree, which is bound by the amount of cuts |P|, as each cut represents one layer in
the tree. n specifies the size of the data.
The tangle-tree is bound by O(l·k) nodes. In each node, we must evaluate triplets per the
consistency equation (eq. (2.1)). This evaluation has complexity O(n · k2). The k2 factor
comes from the fact that we only have to check triplets that contain the new orientation;
all other triplets have already been evaluated as consistent previously in the tree. For
example, consider the process of checking consistency between a new orientation A and
the tangle τ. We already know that the specification that makes τ is consistent from
earlier computations in the tree, thus we only need to construct triplets that include the
new orientation A. Finding all triplets that include A reduces the problem to finding every
pair of elements in τ, because adding A to each pair forms a triplet. Checking a triplet for
consistency involves finding the intersection of three sets bound by O(n), and there are
k2 such triplets. Thus, verifying a new tangle has complexity O(n · k2). As stated earlier,
this computation must be repeated for O(l · k) nodes, resulting in a final complexity of
O(l · k) · O(n · k2) = O(n · l · k3)
This bound is often pessimistic, as most branches terminate prior to reaching a depth of
k. Furthermore, as we will see in the next section, the cubic complexity over k number of
cuts can in some conditions be reduced in practice.
Optimizing with Tangle Cores
As stated in the previous section, checking for consistency between a tangle τ and an
orientation has complexity O(n · k2). At first glance it seems like this computational load
becomes expensive as k increases. However, in practice, we only have to check for
consistency with the core of the tangle as in eq. (2.2).
10
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:19==
x
y
A4
A3
A2
A1
A′
(a) We can deduce that adding A′ to
the tangle will be consistent because
A1 ⊂A′. We can ignore A′ in future
computations.
x
y
A4
A3
A2
A′
A1
(b) If adding A′ is consistent, then we
can ignore A1 in future computations,
because A′ ⊂A1, and thus is more re-
strictive.
To evaluate that this is true, let us consider an orientation A′ and a tangle τ = {A1, A2, A3, A4}.
We wish to test if the new specification
OP = τ ∪{A′} = {A1, A2, A3, A4, A′}
is consistent. Also, assume that A1 ⊆A′. If |A1 ∩A2 ∩A3| ≥a, then |A′ ∩A2 ∩A3| ≥a
must also hold, because A1 is a subset A′, and thus restricts the intersection more than A′.
Instead of constructing all possible triplets with A′, we can deduce that it will be consistent,
because all triplets with A1 are consistent. We know that all triplets with A1 are consistent,
otherwise it wouldn’t be a tangle.
The intuition becomes clear in fig. 2.4a. We already know that τ = {A1, A2, A3, A4} is
consistent, and A1 is more restrictive than A′, thus τ ∪{A′} must be consistent as well.
Let’s now consider another scenario shown in fig. 2.4b, where A′ ⊂A1. In this case,
the opposite holds. If we find that adding A′ results in a consistent specification, we can
ultimately exclude A1 from all future consistency checks in the search tree, because the
fact that A′ is a part of the new tangle implies that all consistent triplets formed with A′ will
also hold for A1.
Utilizing these methods, the practical computation time is drastically reduced. In the case
of fig. 2.4a, we only have to perform an O(n · k) operation to check that an orientation in
the tangle is a subset of A′.
Furthermore, under favorable conditions, the set of most restrictive orientations is small.
For example, in the case of axis-parallel cuts on a two-dimensional dataset, the most
restrictive set holds no more than 4 orientations — the inner square formed by the orien-
tations.
Overall, these implementation details drastically reduce the practical runtime of the tangle-
search tree.
2.2.4
Space Complexity - Tangle Search Tree
Implementation-wise, the orientations of a cut Pi are implemented as a binary array of
length n, each element indicating whether a data-points resides in Ai or AC
i . Thus, storing
the cuts require O(k ·n) space where k = |P|. As mentioned earlier, the amount of nodes
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
11
==PAGE:20==
in the tree is bound by O(l · k). The tangles at each node stores their cores. The size of
the core is bound by O(k), represented as pointers to the feature system of cuts P. Thus,
the overall space complexity of the tangle search tree is
O(k · n) + O(l · k2)
In practice, l ≪k and k ≪n, yielding O(k · n) as the dominant term.
12
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:21==
3
Cut-Finding Algorithms
This thesis will not delve into new cut-funding algorithms, however to understand our ex-
periments in future chapters, we will present two simple, but surprisingly effective methods
for feature-based data.
One important detail to note about cut-finding algorithms, is the balance of data points in a
cut’s orientations do not need to be equal. In fact, a diverse set of cuts is often desirable.
Highly unbalanced cuts on the edges of the datasets serve an important role in tangles
clustering. While individually they give no insight into the structure of the data, they trim
off outliers from the data, allowing the tangles to identify the structures of the data more
accurately.
We will use k to represent the amount of cuts generated in cut-finding algorithms. k = |P|.
3.1
Equidistant Axis Parallel Cuts
As briefly mentioned in section 2.1.2, one cost-effective approach on d-dimensional data,
is to generate k/d equidistant axis-parallel planes along each axis — the data-points are
then assigned to the subsets A and AC depending on what side of the plane it resides.
Figure 3.1 shows an example with k = 20.
Figure 3.1: Dataset with 20 equidistant parallel cuts, 10 along each axis. Each cut Pi =
{Ai, AC
i } is represented by the data on each side of the red lines.
Find the minimum and maximum and computing k/d equidistant splitting points along
each axis is O(n) complexity. Assigning each point to each Ai and AC
i for i = 0, . . . , k is
O(n · k) complexity. Thus, computing equidistant axis-parallel cuts is very cost-efficient,
with an overall complexity of O(n · k).
Equidistant axis-parallel cuts struggle with sensitivity to the agreement parameter. If k
isn’t chosen high enough compared to the agreement parameter, we find that many cuts
become orientable in both directions, leading to spurious tangles. Consider three cuts
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
13
==PAGE:22==
P1, P2, and P3 of which are next to each other along the x-axis with splitting points s1, s2,
and s3, where s3 −s2 = s2 −s1 (they are equidistant). If P1, P2, P3 pass through a very
dense region of points, then P2 is likely to be orientable in both directions unless the
agreement parameter is set higher than the amount of points within the ranges [s1, s2)
and [s2, s3). This issue becomes increasingly prevalent in unbalanced datasets, as we
want the agreement parameter to be small enough to capture the smallest clusters.
Chapter 6 looks into this issue in more detail.
3.2
Range Based Axis-Parallel Cuts
Range based Axis-Parallel cuts mitigate the issue of spurious tangles by spacing axis-
parallel cuts by a range of data-points instead of a fixed distance. Namely, between each
cut along each axis, we space the cuts such that there is at most a−1 data-points between
them. Figure 3.2 illustrates the effect this has on the cuts. As the cuts near dense regions,
they are spaced closer to ensure that spurious tangles are less likely. In sparse regions,
the cuts are placed further apart.
Figure 3.2: An example of 40 range-based axis-parallel cuts. There are at most a = 50
data points between each cut along each axis.
To compute range based axis-parallel cuts, the data must be sorted along each axis to
select splitting points that are a −1 data points apart. For a d-dimensional data set, this
has complexity O(d · n log n). Using the splitting points, assigning each point to either of
Ai and AC
i for i = 0, . . . , k is O(n · k) complexity. Thus, the total complexity is
O(d · n log n + k · n)
In practice, we find that sorting is the dominating term for small k.
14
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:23==
4
Cost-Functions
While computing the tangles themselves is fast, the bottleneck of tangles clustering is
often in computing the costs of the cuts. [Klepper et al. 2023] showed that tangles clus-
tering outperformed K-means on gaussian feature-based data, while only being slightly
slower in speed. However, they precomputed cuts and costs for the experiments, utilizing
a quadratic time cost-function over n, omitting these calculations from the timing of the
algorithm.
At the current stage of tangles clustering, we do not know of a cost-function that provides
linear complexity in n and which can be used with any cut-function. Nevertheless, in this
chapter we will propose two linear cost-function which are useful in many cases, however
each comes with their own restrictions, requiring certain conditions for their feasibility.
4.1
Quadratic Cost-functions
Before getting into the linear cost-functions, let us define the notion of a similarity measure
in the feature based setting. A similarity measure is then any function σ that takes any
two points in Rd and outputs a value. The similarity measure is symmetric, in the sense
that if σ(u, v) = σ(v, u), and serves two compare the similarity of objects in datasets.
4.1.1
Negative Sum of Distances
As quickly touched upon in section 2.1.3 one natural choice for the cost-function on
feature-based data is the similarity-measure σ(u, v) = −||u −v||, simply the negative
distance between the points. The cost of a cut P is then the negative distance between
all pairs of points in its orientations:
c (P) =
∑
v∈A,u∈AC
−||u −v||
If the average distance between two subsets of data is large, then the cut has stronger
separation properties. While this function is a strong choice, it has some drawbacks. For
each cut Pi ∈P, there is a quadratic summation over all pairs of points between Ai and
AC
i , resulting in a computational complexity of O(k · n2).
4.1.2
Similarity Matrix
One adaption to the negative sum of distances is to only punish the cost on points that
are close to each other in the feature-space. This adaption ensures that the cost is mainly
punished when the cut separates areas that are dense. The Similarity Matrix cost-function
addresses this by defining a similarity measure that assigns a similarity of 0 to all distances
over some threshold t:
σ (u, v) =
{
0
if ||u −v|| > t
1 −||u−v||
t
if ||u −v|| ≤t
(4.1)
For this similarity measure, the possible values range from 0 to 1. Identical points will get
a similarity of 1, and points where the distance exceeds the threshold t are assigned a
similarity of 0. All points in between are linearly transformed in the range 0 to 1. The cost
for a cut P is then:
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
15
==PAGE:24==
c (P) =
∑
v∈A,u∈AC
σ (u, v)
(4.2)
Intuitively, it can be thought of as the pairs of points near the boundary of the cut. fig. 4.1
illustrates this nicely. All points smaller than t on either side of the cut are connected
with a gray line. The cost is then the sum of the similarities between all points that are
connected. The left graph shows that there are few connections when the cut passes
through spare areas of the graph, leading to a small cost. The right graph shows a cut
that passes through a dense region, leading to a very large cost.
Figure 4.1: The left graph shows a very low-cost cut. To the right is a very high-cost cut.
The cost of the cuts is the sum of similarities between all points connected by the gray
lines.
Similarly to the Sum of Distances cost function, for k cuts an O(n2) summation is required
to compute the cost between every pair of points in Ai and AC
i , thus, the complexity of
the algorithm is O(k · n2).
For all uses of this cost-function in the remainder of the paper, we set t to be 0.1, after
uniformly normalizing the data along each axis.
4.2
Linear Cost-functions
4.2.1
Border Similarity
We can construct an O(n · k) cost-function by adjusting the pair of points property of the
similarity measure used in eq. (4.1). Instead of computing the similarity between every
pair of points between A and AC, we can adjust it such that we compute the similarity
for every point and the closest points on the decision boundary that separates A and AC.
However, this cost-function comes with a caveat — It requires the following two conditions
to be true:
1. It requires that there exists a decision boundary that separates the orientations of a
cut.
2. If condition (1) is true, it requires that we can compute the shortest distance from a
data-point to the decision boundary in constant time.
One example of a cut that violates condition (1) is simply the random cut, where data
points are randomly assigned to A and AC. Satisfying condition (2) for axis-parallel cuts
16
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:25==
is trivial; let sx be the split point of an axis-parallel cut on the x-axis, and let vx be the
x-value of a point v. Then the shortest distance is simply abs(sx −vx).
More concretely, let l be the point on the line of a cut that is closest to a point u. Then we
can compute a similarity measure as
σ (u, l) =
{
0
if ||u −l|| > t
1 −||u−l||
t
if ||u −l|| ≤t
Where the cost of a cut P is then:
c (P) =
∑
u∈A
σ (u, l) +
∑
v∈AC
σ (v, l)
(4.3)
The intuition is similar to the Similarity Matrix cost-function. Points on the line of the cut
be assigned a similarity of 1, and thus punish the cost. Points further than the threshold
t will be assigned a similarity of 0, and not affect the cost.
Figure 4.2 shows an intuitive example of this cost-function. All points with a similarity
larger than 0 to the point on the line are marked by the gray lines.
Figure 4.2: Border Similarity cost-function. The left graph shows a low-cost cut. To the
right is a high-cost cut. The cost of the cuts is the sum of similarities between the data-
points and the closest point on the line. Points that punish the cost are marked by the
gray line to the cut.
For all uses of this cost-function in the remainder of the paper, we set t to be 0.05, after
normalizing data to be uniformly normalizing the data along each axis.
4.2.2
Region-aggregation: Quadratic to Linear
This paper proposes a region-aggregation method to transform cost-functions with qua-
dratic complexity in the number of points into cost-functions that are quadratic in the num-
ber of regions. Regions R in this sense, are the naturally occurring areas that arise from
our feature system of cuts, that is, the areas formed from the orientations of the cuts with
data-points (the three colors in fig. 4.3, or simply the squares of the grid resulting from
axis-parallel cuts). More formally, a region R is a specification that holds |P| orientations,
and where the intersection of its orientations isn’t empty:
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
17
==PAGE:26==
R = OP
if
∩
A∈OP
A ̸= ∅
and
|OP| = |P|.
The idea behind region-aggregation is to approximate the cost of a cut by aggregating the
data-points in each region. Then, instead of computing our similarity measure on pairs
of points, it is computed on pairs of aggregated values of the regions. If the method to
aggregate the data points in each region is linear, and the similarity measure is constant,
then the complexity of the algorithm will in many cases be linear in the number of data
points.
The Algorithm
Algorithm 2 Region-aggregation cost-function
Input: Cuts P, Similarity function σ, Aggregation function a
Regions R ←groups of unique columns of P
▷Step 1
M ←|R| × |R| matrix
aggregations ←array of length |R|
Costs C ←array of length |C|
for all Ri ∈R do
▷Step 2
aggregations[i] ←a(Ri, Rj)
end for
for i = 1 to |R| do
▷Step 3
for j = i + 1 to |R| do
M[i, j] ←σ (aggregations[i], aggregations[j])
end for
end for
for k = 0 to |P| do
▷Step 4
leftRegions, rightRegions ←The indices of the regions on each side of Pk
for all i ∈leftRegions do
for all j ∈rightRegions do
C[k] ←C[k] + M[i][j]
end for
end for
end for
return C
Algorithm 4.2.2 shows the steps to aggregate regions and approximate costs.
In step 1 of the algorithm, we identify the regions created from our cuts. Despite there
being 2|P| possible specifications of length P, finding the regions is straight-forward. In
fact, they are already indirectly encoded in P. Consider fig. 4.3. The left graph shows a
dataset of 6 points with three cuts, P = {P1, P2, P3}. The right matrix shows our feature
system P, the i’th row corresponding to Pi. Each cut is represented as a binary array,
depending on which side of the cut the data-points reside. For P1 for example, only v1
lies above the cut, resulting in a 0 for the first element in P1. The rest are below, resulting
18
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:27==
in 1’s. The data points that share the same region will be on the same sides of all cuts.
Each data-point is represented by the columns of the matrix, specifying which orientation
of each cut it resides in. Thus, computing the regions of our data is equivalent to finding
the unique columns in P (Note that there are three unique columns and three regions).
For a binary matrix, computing the unique columns can be done in O(k · n), where k is
the amount of cuts, for example by parsing each column as a sequence in a binary tree.
The unique columns are then all paths from the root to the leaves.
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
v6
P1
P2
P3
P =
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
v6
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
A =
v0
v0
v0
v0
v0
v0
0
1
1
2
2
1
v0
v0
v0
v0
v0
v0
Figure 4.3: An example data set with 6 data-points and 3 cuts showing the resulting
regions. Each region is color-coded. The right matrix shows how the regions are encoded
in P. Each data-point in each region are identical in the columns, as seen by the colors.
The assignment array A maps data points to their regions.
In Step 2 of the algorithm, the data points in each region are aggregated using the ag-
gregation function a. The choice of aggregation function is data-dependent, however on
feature based data, especially with axis-parallel cuts, simply computing the mean is a
good choice. To ensure the total complexity of the algorithm stays linear, the aggregation
function must also be linear in its input.
In step 3, the similarities between all regions are computed and stored in a |R| × |R|
matrix. Note that this step is similar to computing a similarity matrix between all pairs of
our data-points, but instead we compute a similarity matrix across the aggregated values
of the regions. This step has O(r2) complexity where r = |R|, given a constant time
similarity measure such as eq. (4.1).
In step 4 we compute the actual cost for each cut. The steps prior have constructed a sim-
ilarity matrix over the regions; now the similarities are summed over every pair of regions
on either side of the cuts. The indices of the regions on each side of a cut (leftRegions
and rightRegions in the pseudo-code) can be found by extracting the unique values of the
assignment array A corresponding to the positions of the 1’s and 0’s of Pi. For example,
looking at fig. 4.3, for the array of P1, we find that the 1’s correspond to the blue and
purple regions in A, and the 0’s correspond to the orange region. Looking at the graph
of data-points, this coincides with the regions above and below the cut P1. Computing
leftRegions and rightRegions for all cuts is O(k · n), and summing the cost for each cut is
O(k · r2) resulting in O(k · n + k · r2).
Combining the four steps, the total complexity of the cost-function is:
O(k · n) + O(n) + O(r2) + O(k · n + k · r2) = O(k · n + k · r2)
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
19
==PAGE:28==
Use-case Analysis
The amount of regions depends heavily on the data dimensionality, the choice of cut-
finding algorithm, and the amount of cuts. However, the amount of regions is bound by
the amount of data-points: |R| ≤|V |. This is a nice property — the quadratic term will
always be smaller than O(n2). Furthermore, in low dimensionality, the complexity and
amount of cuts often depends on the complexity of the cluster structure we are trying to
identify, and not the amount of data-points. This means that even massive datasets in
low dimensions require few regions to evaluate the cost, making the quadratic term in the
complexity small.
To illustrate, consider the graphs in fig. 4.4. We experiment on datasets of varying sizes
with 5 random gaussian distributions in a 2D space. For each size, 100 datasets are
generated. The distributions to generate the data are the same across different data
sizes. That is, for every data size, the 100 sets of means and variances to generate the
datasets are the same; the only difference is amount of sampled data points. For every
dataset, we generate 100 equidistant axis-parallel cuts, 50 across each dimension. This
keeps the amount of regions somewhat constant, regardless of the size of the dataset.
For the region-aggregation cost-function, we compute the mean of each region as an
aggregation function. To adequately compare with the Similarity Matrix cost-function, we
use its similarity measure as in eq. (4.1).
Figure 4.4: Performance and run-time for the tangles-clustering with two different cost-
functions. Each Data Size consists of 5 Gaussian clusters, generated 100 times. The
left graph shows the NMI of tangles clustering with 1 standard deviation shaded. The
right graph shows the average run-time of the clustering algorithm for each cost-function.
Due to the quadratic runtime, the Similarity Matrix cost-function was capped at 7000 data
points.
Observing the left graph in fig. 4.4, we find that the regions generated from 100 cuts is suf-
ficient to achieve more or less identical performance to the Similarity Matrix cost-function.
Furthermore, we find that performance is stagnant as the data size increases. The regions
sufficiently approximate the Similarity Matrix cost-function the cluster structure. This is be-
cause the complexity of the clusters we are trying to identify are the same, meaning the
same cut generating process can be used for the algorithm. The right graph shows the
average runtime of the two cost-functions. As the amount of regions in this case is bound
by 512, the amount of squares in the grid that 100 axis-parallel cuts overlays on the data.
With a fixed upper limit on the regions, we find that the runtime of the Region Aggregation
20
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:29==
cost-function is indeed linear under these conditions.
While region aggregation can be a great method when the amount of potential regions is
small, it suffers greatly from the curse of dimensionality. As the amount of dimensions of
the data increases, the data becomes far more sparse, leading to an exponential increase
in the amount of bounding regions. The graphs in fig. 4.7 show the amount of regions
with 100 axis-parallel cuts, evenly distributed along each axis. The left graph shows that
in two dimensions, the amount of regions quickly flattens as the datasets become larger.
However, in the right graph we find that the amount of regions quickly converges to the
amount of data points as the dimensionality increases. In a uniform scenario of d and k
axis parallel cuts, we find that the probability of two random data-points be assigned the
same region to be (k/d)d. (k/d stems from the fact that there are k/d cuts along each
axis). Thus, as dimensionality increases, the pros of region-aggregation exponentially
diminish, and the complexity essentially becomes equal to its quadratic equivalent.
Figure 4.5: The amount of regions with 100 axis parallel cuts. The dataset is one Gaussian
with variance 1. The left graph shows how the amount of regions flattens when data size
increases in fixed dimensions. The right graph shows that the amount of regions quickly
approaches the amount of data points in high dimensions due to the sparsity of the data.
The curse of dimensionality effectively limits the benefits of region-aggregation to lower
dimensional settings. Anything more and dimensionality reduction techniques like princi-
pal component analysis will be needed before region-aggregation is effective. However,
when the benefits of region-aggregation are possible, it effectively transforms quadratic
similarity based cost-functions into linear complexity, while still equalling the performance
of its quadratic counterpart. Nevertheless, the amount of regions never exceeds n, so the
quadratic component will always be smaller.
4.3
Cost-Function Comparison
To compare the cost-functions, we generate 200 gaussian datasets with varying amounts
of clusters of roughly equal size. Each mean is randomly sampled in the range [0, 10] —
to ensure there is some separability in the data, we resample if any two means are within
3 of each other. The scale of each gaussian along each axis is randomly selected from
[0.5, 2], yielding a 50% chance of isotropic gaussians. The data is uniformly normalized to
the range of [0 −1]. All parameters are fixed — we use 100 axis-parallel cuts for tangles
clustering, and set the agreement parameter to 40% of the smallest cluster size. For
a frame of reference, we include K-Means in the experiment. K-Means is implemented
using Numpy instead of using Scikit-Learn’s implementation, as Scikit-Learn is largely
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
21
==PAGE:30==
written in C. This would give an unfair advantage against the tangles algorithms, which
are implemented in Python with Numpy. K-Means is given the correct amount of clusters in
advance. We will use the Normalized Mutual Information Score to compare performance,
because of its flexibility with varied numbers of predicted clusters.
For region-aggregation, we aggregate the points in each region with the mean, and use
the similarity measure as in eq. (4.1).
Figure 4.6: Box-plot of the NMI of tangles-clustering with different cost-functions.
Under these conditions, we find that the linear Border Distances and Region Aggregation
yield more or less equal performance to the Similarity Matrix. They all base their costs
on the same property — cuts that pass through dense regions in the data are assigned
a higher cost than the sparse counterparts. Overall, we find that performance is roughly
equal to K-Means. Tangles clustering yields a slightly higher median NMI than K-Means
for 2 and 3 clusters. For 5 and 7 clusters, the opposite is true. However, tangles are not
given the amount of clusters in the data — they infer it based on the orientations of the
cuts. In general, tangles are relatively sensitive to their parameters, seen by the higher
variation in NMI. In cases where it performs comparably low, the agreement-parameter
can typically be tuned to result in a better characterization of the data. Tuning parameters,
however, is undesirable. Chapter 6 delves into this in more detail.
Note the outliers for tangles in 2 and 3 clusters where the NMI is 0. These are cases
where the tangle-search tree found no cuts that were orientable in both directions, and
thus classifying the entire dataset as the same cluster. In these scenarios, we would in
practice lower the agreement-parameter and re-run the tangle tree to encourage more
splits.
Comparing the average run-time under the same conditions, tangles clustering with linear
cost-functions yield an impressive improvement in runtime compared to their quadratic
counterparts. Especially Border Distances, being slower than K-Means by just a factor of
2. While this is an impressive run-time, these conditions are in reality ideal for tangles.
For axis-parallel cuts, the core of the tangles is made of at most 4 orientations. When
computing the tangle-tree, this leads to an efficient consistency check of specifications as
22
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:31==
per the optimization in section 2.2.3. For higher dimensions, the amount of orientations
that make up the core of the tangles will increase, which will lead to a higher disparity in
overall runtime vs. K-Means.
Figure 4.7: Average runtime of tangles clustering with different cost-functions vs.
K-
means. The runtime is averaged over 10 iterations on 3 clusters.
4.4
Conclusion on Cost-Functions
This chapter presented 2 new cost-functions that can potentially be used to scale tangles-
clustering to larger datasets: Border Similarities and the Region Aggregation technique.
Unfortunately, each come with their caveats — Border Similarities requires that cuts have
a decision boundary in the data-space of which we can compute the similarity with in con-
stant time. For axis-parallel cuts, this is highly effective, but limits its use to less complex
cut-finding algorithms.
Region Aggregation can also be effective, as under the right conditions it can transform
any quadratic cost-function that utilizes a similarity measure between pairs of data-points
to quadratic complexity in the number of regions. Unfortunately, as dimensionality in-
creases, the amount of regions quickly grows to be equivalent to the amount of data-points
limiting its use to lower-dimensional spaces. Furthermore, at this stage it has only been
evaluated on axis-parallel cuts. Axis parallel cuts creates a useful ‘grid’ on the datasets, of
which aggregating with the mean is often representative of the data-points in the region.
We are unsure how it reacts when the shapes of the regions defined by the cuts become
more complex.
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
23
==PAGE:32==
5
Localized Costs - On Recomputing Cut
Costs
Tangles Clustering in its current form only computes an initial set of cuts and costs, and
evaluates the cuts exclusively in order of their cost. The tangle search-tree constructs
tangles from cuts in order of their initial strength. In practice, this means that we only
consider specifications of P that include cuts in increasing order. For example, given
the sorted feature system of initial cuts P = {{A1, AC
1 }, . . . {Ak, AC
k }}, it will never test a
specification such as OP = {A1, AC
3 , A4}. The tangles are constructed in increasing order,
meaning that the orientations of P3 will always be considered before P4. Intuitively, adding
a cut with a lower overall cost should always result in a more high-quality specification,
but this is not always the case.
Figure 5.1: Dataset with 3 clusters and 4 cuts
.
To illustrate an example, consider the (very crude) scenario in fig. 5.1, with 3 unbalanced
clusters of 500, 500 and 150 data-points. The feature system of cuts P = {P1, · · · , P4} are
sorted with respect to their cost. The agreement parameter is set to 66. Visually, it is easy
to see that P2 is poor, as it passes through the center of the lower cluster. Unfortunately,
due to the dense nature of the upper clusters, P3 and P4 are assigned a higher cost,
despite the cuts being near the clusters’ perimeters. Fig. 5.2 shows a potential outcome
of the tangles-search tree with a poorly chosen agreement parameter. The left graph
shows the resulting cores of the found tangles overlaid on the dataset. The right graph
shows the corresponding tangle search tree. In the first iteration of the algorithm, parsing
P1 results in two consistent specifications {A1} and {AC
1 }, leading to a split in the tangle
search tree. This is trivially a good cut, because it separates the upper clusters from the
bottom cluster. In the second pass of the algorithm, however, parsing P2 results in an
unfortunate split of the bottom cluster as both specifications {A1, A2} and {A1, AC
2 } are
consistent. This split results in the algorithm detecting four clusters instead of the correct
three.
24
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:33==
Root
AC
1
AC
2
AC
3
AC
4
A2
A3
A4
A1
AC
2
A2
A3
Figure 5.2: The tree to the right shows the resulting tangle tree from the tangle-search
algorithm. The plot to the left shows the cores of the tangles at the leaf-nodes. Brown
data points are not part of the cores.
From our feature system and agreement-parameter, there does exist a tangle that encap-
sulate the bottom cluster without splitting it: {A1, A3, AC
4 }. Unfortunately, this tangle can
never be captured by the tangles search tree, because cuts are always evaluated in in-
creasing order of their cost. In this example, setting a larger agreement parameter would
also have correctly captured the bottom cluster, as both orientations of P2 would result in
inconsistent specifications, yielding {A1} as a maximal tangle and terminating the branch.
Fine-tuning parameters is not a desirable solution, however, as we often know very little
about structure of the data that we are trying to structure.
Note that the example in fig. 5.2 illustrates the problem nicely, however in practice it
rarely comes to light this clearly. A more fine-grained set of cuts or an adjustment to
the agreement-parameter would both have resolved the issue in this example. Further-
more, this example illustrates the worst case scenario of cuts exclusively being parsed
in order of their costs. In practice, even when clusters are captured correctly, there may
exist tangles that encapsulate the clusters more precisely, which would lead to a more
accurate characterization of the data’s structure.
5.1
Recomputing Localized Costs
In light of this issue, we propose an adjustment to the tangle search-tree algorithm —
recomputing costs while constructing the tangles search tree. In the example in fig. 5.2,
the issue arose from the fact that the global cost of P3 and P4 was larger than P2. After
the initial split of the tangle-search tree, if we instead recompute the costs on the localized
arising datasets, we can construct a more flexible tree. Localized in this sense refers to
the subsets A1 and AC
1 , or, more visually intuitive, the subsets of data that lie on either
side of P1.
Consider the same dataset as shown previously, but fig. 5.3. Instead of parsing the cuts
exclusively with respect to their initial cost, they are no re-evaluated after each splitting
node. In fig. 5.3, after the first split in the tree, recomputing the costs for the left branch
(On the subset of data A1, i.e. the data below the line of P1) yields a new order for the re-
maining cuts: {P4, P3, P2}. The branch now continues as previously but parses the cuts in
a new order. When P2 is finally parsed, its orientations lead to inconsistent specifications,
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
25
==PAGE:34==
terminating the branch. For the right branch, the costs are also recomputed on the subset
AC
1 , as well as on AC
1 ∩A2 and AC
1 ∩AC
2 in the second split, though these re-computations
lead to little difference in the costs of the remaining cuts, and the order the cuts are parsed
is largely the same.
Root
AC
1
AC
2
AC
4
AC
3
A2
A3
A4
A1
AC
4
A3
Figure 5.3: The tree to the right shows the resulting tree from the tangle-search algorithm
when re-evaluating costs. The plot to the left shows the cores of the tangles at the leaf-
nodes. Brown data points are not part of the cores.
Recomputing the costs in this localized manner allows the algorithm to ignore noise that
is not relevant to current partitioning in the data. After the first split in the tree in fig. 5.3,
the data on either side of P1 largely serves as noise to the cost-computation.
5.1.1
Tangle Search Tree with Localized Costs
Algorithm algorithm 3 shows the adjustment to the tangle search tree algorithm to adjust
the tree with localized costs. The algorithm is largely similar to the original tangle search
tree algorithm (algorithm 1), with a revised iteration of the cuts. With the tangles at each
node, we also store a local cost order. The cost order maintains the indices that would
sort the unused cuts at the current node according to the cost-function. Furthermore,
each split narrows down the dataset on which the costs are recomputed. The costs are
recomputed on the cores of the tangles. Recall that the core of a tangle is the intersection
of all its orientations; the orientations in the path from the root to the node.
This adaption to the tangle search tree also requires an adaption to the step of translating
tangles into clusters. When encountering a splitting node, the same cut will have different
costs for each subtree, and thus the probability of a data-point belonging to the left- and
right substructures will not sum to 1. The probability of a data-point belonging to the left
and right substructures is computed with their localized costs:
pleft
unnormalized(v) = pnode(v) ·
∑
P∈{P∈D|v∈Pl} h(cl(P))
∑
P∈D h(cl(P))
pright
unnormalized(v) = pnode(v) ·
∑
P∈{P∈D|v∈Pr} h(cr(P))
∑
P∈D h(cr(P))
26
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:35==
Algorithm 3 Tangle Search Tree with Localized Costs
Input: Partitions P, Cost-function c : P →R, Agreement Parameter a
root.cost_order ←indices which would sort P according to c(Pi)
T ←empty tree with root
for 0 to |P| do
for each node in the bottom-most layer of T do
index i ←cut corresponding to first index in node.cost_order
Remove first element in node.cost_order
Ai, AC
i ←Pi
τ ←Tangle at node
if is_consistent(Ai, τ) then
τ left ←{AC
i } ∪τ
Add τ left with node.cost_order as left child of node in T
end if
if is_consistent(AC
i , τ) then
τ right ←{AC
i } ∪τ
Add τ right with node.cost_order as right child of node in T
end if
if node has left child and node has right child then
▷Recompute costs
Punused ←unused cuts in this branch
left_child.cost_order ←indices which would sort Punused on τ left
core
right_child.cost_order ←indices which would sort Punused on τ right
core
end if
end for
end for
return T
Here cl and cr correspond to the costs of the cuts in the left and right substructures. The
probabilities are then normalized to ensure the probabilities sum to one:
pleft =
pleft
unnormalized
pleft
unnormalized + pright
unnormalized
pright =
pright
unnormalized
pleft
unnormalized + pright
unnormalized
5.1.2
Performance
To understand how using localized costs can improve performance on more complex data,
consider fig. 5.4. The left graph shows the ground truth clusters on a challenging dataset
with 5 gaussian clusters. The middle and right graphs show the resulting predictions with
tangles clustering with and without recomputing localized costs, respectively. For both
experiments, we use 100 axis parallel cuts, to more easily interpret the results. The cuts,
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
27
==PAGE:36==
cost-function, and agreement-parameter used in both cases is the same. The indices of
the cuts shown in the plots are according to their initial costs; i.e. for the feature system
P = {P1, · · · , P100} it holds that c(P1) ≤· · · ≤c(P100). Important cuts P49, P62, P83, and
P85 have been overlaid on the data. Note that in the middle graph P83 and P85 do not
result in splitting nodes, but have been added for illustrative purposes.
Figure 5.4: Example with a difficult dataset, on how the tangle-search tree struggles to
find the 5 clusters vs. the tangles search tree with localized costs. To the left is the ground
truth dataset. The middle dataset shows the predictions on the dataset with the vanilla
tangles search-tree. The cuts P83 and P85 are unused in the vanilla tangle-search tree.
The right graph shows the predictions when using the tangle search-tree with localized
costs.
In both cases, the first 48 cuts do not result in a splitting node — they serve to trim outliers.
In the middle graph, P49 splits the tree into two branches, one of which is subsequently split
with P62. As noted by their indices, the cuts P83 and P85 have a very high initial cost. This
is because they both pass through the dense center of the middle cluster. P83 separates
the two clusters to the right, so ideally this cut (or a cut near it) should subsequently split
the tree once more. But in practice, observing the left contracted tree in fig. 5.5, we find
that the cost of P85 is so large that it is never even evaluated. The right branch terminates
when reaching P69, as both of its orientations lead to inconsistent specifications. With
localized costs (right contracted tree), we find that the reordered cuts leads to P83 being
evaluated much sooner because it’s cost in the localized data on the right side of P49 is
low compared to the remaining sequence of cuts.
We find a similar pattern on the left side of P49. Both models find consistent tangles with
both orientations of P62, leading to splits in the data. However, only the tangle search-tree
with localized costs finds the split with P85, due to its early evaluation.
Note that, as seen on the graphs, the cuts that lead to splits are not hard decision bound-
aries. Rather, there are several cuts that distinguish the tangles, and the probability of
individual data points are assigned based on the sides of these distinguished cuts of which
the points reside, and the weight of these distinguishing cuts.
Performance Improvement
To gauge the overall impact on performance, we set up an experiment with 2, 3, 5, and
7 gaussian clusters. The centers are uniformly randomly sampled from 0 to 10. If the
distance between two cluster centers is within 3 of each other they are resampled. The
scale along each axis for each cluster is randomly sampled from [0.5, 0.2]; i.e. there
28
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:37==
P49
P69
P62
P84
P97
34
21
12
19
P49
P83
P87
P61
17
6
P62
P90
P85
P64
P98
29
10
8
32
10
16
Figure 5.5: The contracted trees of the tangle search tree with (right) and without (left)
recomputing localized costs. The internal nodes specify the cuts which lead to a split. The
leaf nodes specify the final processed cut. The edges specify the amount of processed
cuts between the nodes.
is a 50% chance of an isotropic gaussian. Each dataset consists of 1000 data-points,
roughly uniformly distributed among the clusters. For each cluster size, 100 datasets are
generated. For Tangles with and without localized costs, we use 100 axis-parallel cuts,
and we use the linear Border Distance cost function. The agreement parameter is set to
0.4 of the smallest cluster size. For K-Means, the data is uniformly scaled to 0-1 before
fitting, and is given the correct amount of clusters. Figure 5.6 shows the results of this
experiments.
Figure 5.6: Boxplot of performance on Tangles with and without Localized Costs for 2, 3, 5,
and 7 clusters. Both algorithms use the Border Similarity cost-function and 50 equidistant
axis-parallel cuts. We compare with K-Means for a frame of reference.
.
Overall, we find a very nice improvement to the tangles algorithm. In all scenarios, the
median and lower quartile are higher when recomputing localized costs, indicating that
the model finds more representative tangles. The upper quartiles are largely unchanged.
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
29
==PAGE:38==
This is because the original tangles algorithm often already finds a set of high-quality tan-
gles — the localized costs would yield a largely unchanging cost order in this scenario.
Interestingly, for 2 clusters, we also find a slight improvement in the NMI with localized
costs. We would expect that the performance would be unchanged, because the costs are
only recomputed after the first split. This is perhaps in scenarios where the original tan-
gle algorithm found 3 clusters, and recomputing costs lead to a higher-quality evaluation
order, ensuring that the second split in the tree didn’t occur.
For a frame of reference, we also compare the results with K-Means. Using localized
costs also produces better results across the board, despite K-means knowing the correct
cluster count.
Figure 5.7: Boxplot of run-time on Tangles with and without Localized Costs.
.
Figure 5.7 shows the run-time of the three algorithms. We include all steps of tangles-
clustering; the initial cut-finding process, ordering the cuts based on their cost, computing
the tangle tree, and making predictions on the data. In this plot, we find that the localized
costs puts an additional strain on the computation time. This makes sense — under
conditions with axis-parallel cuts in a 2-dimensional setting, computing the consistency
of tangles with the optimization in section 2.2.3 is fast. Thus, the majority of the practical
runtime comes from computing costs. This aligns with the results in fig. 5.7. We find the
ratio between the computation time increases as there are more clusters. When there
are more clusters, the resulting tangle tree has more splitting nodes, each triggering a
localized cost-computation. In the worst case for very unbalanced contracted trees, this
results in O(l) re-computations over the entire dataset. Unsurprisingly, when including
cut-finding and costs in the computation time, neither model can compete with K-Means.
Though, with a linear cost-function and cut-finding algorithm as used here, the overall
complexity of the tangle pipeline still remains linear in n.
5.1.3
Resilience to the Agreement Parameter
As we will see in the next chapter, the depth of which the tangle-search tree terminates,
and consequently the amount of clusters found, is largely sensitive to the choice of agree-
ment parameter. This next experiment serves to evaluate the quality of the clusters found
by evaluating the NMI and the likelihood of detecting the correct amount of clusters over
a wide range of the agreement parameters.
30
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:39==
Fig. 5.8 shows the NMI and probability of finding the correct amount of clusters, when
running the same experiment as in fig. 5.6 for 5 clusters with variations in the agreement
parameter a (represented as a fraction of the smallest cluster size). We find that as the
agreement fraction nears 1, both models struggle to find the correct amount of clusters.
This makes sense, because the consistency equation in eq. (2.1) requires the intersection
of all triples to exceed a.
Figure 5.8: The dotted lines show the NMI of tangles with and without localized costs.
The filled lines show the probability of finding 5 clusters for both algorithms.
.
Using localized costs results in more consistent results than without, giving a higher prob-
ability of finding the correct amount of clusters for all values of a ≥0.35. Interestingly,
the probability of finding 5 clusters seems to drop drastically in lower agreement-ranges.
This might be because recomputing costs encourage more splits in the data — when
the agreement parameter is very low, equidistant cuts as used here are more likely be
orientable in both directions. The next chapter delves into this more thoroughly.
Note that this experiment is biased. Just because an algorithm finds the correct amount
of clusters, does not mean that they are the correct clusters. Regardless, using localized
costs resulted in a higher median NMI across the board even when the probability of
finding 5 clusters is lower, indicating that the quality of the tangles it found were higher.
5.1.4
Complexity
As seen from our time comparison in fig. 5.7, computing localized costs adds a computa-
tional strain to the tangle search tree. In the best case, where the contracted tangle-tree
is balanced, each layer of the tree computes the cost on O(n) data-points, leading to
O(log l) computations on O(n) data points, where l is the amount of leaf-nodes. How-
ever, in unbalanced trees, we find the amount of layers is bound by O(l), leading to O(l)
computations on O(n) data points.
Starting at the original complexity for the tangle search tree:
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
31
==PAGE:40==
O(n · l · k3)
adding this factor for the cost results in a complexity of
O(c(P) · l) + O(n · l · k3)
Where c(P) is the cost of the cost-function on our feature system of cuts, P, and k is the
amount of cuts |P|, also equivalent to height of the tree.
Using a cost-function such as the border-similarity from section 4.2.1, we can reduce the
expression —
O(n · k · l) + O(n · l · k3) = O(n · l · k3)
For quadratic cost-functions such as the Similarity Matrix we find the complexity of con-
structing the tree to be:
O(n2 · k · l) + O(n · l · k3)
We cannot reduce the complexity further without making assumptions on the relationship
between k2 and n. However, for practical applications with low-dimensional axis-parallel
cuts, the cost computations O(n2 · k · l) are far dominating.
5.2
Potential Improvements
5.2.1
On the Subset of Data
Currently, the tangle search tree with localized costs is implemented to recompute costs
on the cores of tangles, but this might be overly restricting. The cores of a tangle is the
intersection of all orientations A ∈τ, however, tangles are specifications evaluated over
every triple of elements as in eq. (2.1). This means, that after recomputing cuts on the
core of a tangle, the tangles are evaluated on data which was not used to evaluate the
cuts.
Consider fig. 5.9. In this scenario, the core of the tangle is in fact empty. Every triple is
consistent with a ≤3, with the most restrictive triple being A1 ∩A3 ∩A4. When the core
is empty (albeit very rarely) in the current implementation, the cost-order of the parent is
transferred to child.
To reduce the effects of this, it might be beneficial to recompute costs on the data defined
just by the intersection of the splitting orientations. For example, observing the right tree
in fig. 5.5, when costs are recomputed after processing P49, the cores of the resulting
tangles are defined by orientations from the cuts P1 to P49. Instead, the cuts could be
recomputed just on the orientations of splitting cuts from the parent to the node — in this
case, just the subsets A49 and AC
49. And in the next right split of the tree (the path to P83),
on the subsets AC
49 ∩A83 and AC
49 ∩AC
83. In this case, future tangles can still be evaluated
on data which is not part of the subsets, but the data is far less restrictive, which might
result in a stronger evaluation of the cuts.
Implementing this, we would find a practical increase in the runtime of the algorithm be-
cause the subsets of data are larger. Furthermore, while it might lead to a stronger order of
cuts, the performance increase in exchange for the increased runtime may be negligible,
because a splitting node can only occur when both orientations of a cut are consistent with
their specifications. This can only occur with cuts that pass through the core of tangles.
32
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:41==
x
y
A1
A2
A3
A4
Figure 5.9: A tangle with 4 orientations. The core of the tangle is empty, but its specifica-
tion is consistent with every triple for a ≤3
5.2.2
Feasibility
Computing costs is most often the most computationally expensive step in the tangle
search-tree, so in many practical scenarios, this adaption may be infeasible. One of the
benefits of tangles, is that often the cuts and costs only need to be computed once. Many
tangle trees can efficiently be constructed from the same set of cuts and costs, by varying
its parameters and observing the effect. Thus, the computational burden of localized costs
may place restrictions on the exploratory nature tangles. Effective linear cost-functions
may not always be available for the problem at hand.
One potential way to mitigate this issue, is to only recompute costs on a subset of the
original cuts. E.g. by only reordering the first j cuts in P. In a similar nature, we expect
that recomputing costs has most effect in the early splits in the tree, as this is where the
structure of the data represented by the underlying sub-trees changes the most. Thus,
by limiting the effective amount of times we recompute costs, we may still get most of the
benefits for a reduced cost.
5.3
Conclusion and Other Comments on Localized Costs
Overall, this adaption to the tangle search tree resulted in a significant performance in-
crease in the gaussian setting, indicating that it allows the algorithm to find higher quality
tangles. Naturally, this was just one setting in which localized costs were tested, and
other situations may draw out other potential drawbacks. Regardless, the idea seems
promising. Furthermore, it is generally adaptable to other settings. It only requires that
we can construct a subset of the data as induced by the orientations, of which we can
compute localized costs on.
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
33
==PAGE:42==
6
The Gap Problem and Projection
Analysis
6.1
The Gap Problem
As briefly mentioned in section 5.1.3, the depth of the tangle search tree, and conse-
quently the amount of clusters found, is sensitive to the agreement parameter. In most
cases, the agreement parameter must be smaller than the size of the smallest structure
we wish to capture, otherwise a tangle would become inconsistent before the cluster is
captured. However, if the agreement parameter is too small, spurious tangles can start to
appear — many cuts result in consistent specifications of both orientations, and the algo-
rithm starts detecting unwanted tangles. [Klepper et al. 2023] described this problem as
‘the gap problem’ — when large ‘gaps’ appear in the cost of a cut in relation to its nearby
cuts.
Figure 6.1: Unbalanced Dataset with 8000 points and 5 clusters. Cluster 5 holds 60% of
the points, and remaining clusters each hold 10%.
In highly unbalanced datasets, this sensitivity becomes increasingly prevalent. We want
the agreement parameter to be set such that it captures the smaller clusters, however, this
increases the likelihood of cuts being orientable in both orientations, resulting in unwanted
consistent tangles.
Let us consider an example with the highly unbalanced dataset in fig. 6.1. Cluster 5 holds
the majority; 4800 data-points. The remaining clusters each hold 800 data points. To
ensure the smaller clusters are captured, the agreement parameter must be ≤800. Now
consider fig. 6.2. This graph shows the amount of clusters found for varying agreements
in the range [161, 800] for the equidistant and range based cut-finding algorithms. For both
algorithms we generate 100 cuts, 50 along each axis — for the range method this ensures
that each cut is separated by 160 values along each axis, which is always smaller than the
agreement parameter. For both cut-finding algorithms, we find that the range of values
in which the correct amount of clusters found is very small (a ∈[558, 637] for equidistant
cuts, and a ∈[590, 636] for range based cuts). In fact, for range based cuts, even when 5
clusters are found, we find that they are incorrect.
34
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.2: The amount of clusters found for different values of the agreement parameter
on the dataset in fig. 6.1. The red line shows the correct amount of clusters.
Figure 6.3: The cores of the tangles at the leaf nodes for varying agreement parameters.
The problematic splitting cut P51 is marked on the graphs.
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
35
==PAGE:44==
For equidistant cuts, we find that as the agreement parameter nears the lower end, the
amount of clusters found explodes. As the cuts are equidistant, the amount of data-
points between each cut becomes large if it passes through the yellow cluster, and we
find that these cuts are mostly always orientable in both directions. When the agreement
parameter nears 800, the size of the smallest clusters, the model is unable to encapsulate
them properly, and the algorithm finds too few clusters.
For the range based cuts, the relationship is more complex. For all values of the agree-
ment parameter, the amount of data-points between each cut never exceeds a, leaving
most cuts in the yellow cluster to only be orientable in one direction. We see this in the
right graph in fig. 6.2. The amount of clusters found is drastically smaller than for equidis-
tant cuts for low ranges of a. However, we still find too many clusters. To understand why
this is the case, let us look at the leaf-node tangles found at varying levels of a. Figure
6.4 shows the cores of tangles at the leaf-nodes for agreements 250, 350, 600, and 800.
We find that in all cases, the cut P51 leads to a split in the search tree, resulting in multiple
leaf-node tangles characterizing the same cluster.
The issue lies in the fact that there is a large gap in the costs of cuts (hence why [Klepper
et al. 2023] named it ’the gap problem’). The parallel cuts near P51 have significantly
larger costs, leading to a large gap in their evaluation order. This intuitively makes sense
in this dataset. Parallel cuts just to the right of P51 move further into the clusters 1 and
4, leading to a significantly higher cost. Parallel cuts just to the left of P51 move into the
denser regions of clusters 5 and 2, which leads also leads to a significantly higher cost.
When P51 is finally evaluated in the tree, none of the nearby parallel cuts have been
evaluated, which leads to P51 being orientable in both directions, except for large values
of a. Large values which we effectively cannot use, as we would then fail to capture
smaller clusters.
6.2
Post-Processing: Projection Analysis
Figure 6.4 shows the contracted tree for range-based cuts with a = 600. The names of the
internal nodes correspond to the cuts that lead to a split, and in the leaf nodes correspond
to the tangles shown in fig. 6.3. E.g. the tangle core 1 marked in fig. 6.3 corresponds
to the tangle τ1. Here we find that there indeed exists a hierarchy in the tangle tree in
which Cluster 1 corresponds to one tangle. Namely, if the leaves holding τ3 and τ4 were
removed, the tangle at node P51 would characterize encapsulate Cluster 5.
P1
P4
P5
τ5
P51
τ4
τ3
τ2
τ1
Figure 6.4: The contracted tree for range based cuts with a = 600. The internal nodes
specify the cut that lead to the split. The leaf nodes specify the 5 leaf-node tangles shown
in the bottom left graph in fig. 6.3
36
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:45==
The tangle search tree holds a lot of information about the cluster structure which we can
utilize. Recall that when computing soft predictions on the contracted tree, each node
holds a probability over each data point of how likely the point is to be part of the clus-
ter characterized by the tangle. Furthermore, at each node, we compute the probability
arrays pleft and pright which assign the probability of each data point corresponding to the
left and right substructures. The goal of this section is to show one possible approach to
utilize this information in the tree, to make a more intelligent guess of whether the tangles
in the substructures characterize different tangles. More concretely in the scenario from
the tree in fig. 6.4, we wish to deduce that the tangles τ3 and τ4 characterize the same
cluster.
One such approach is to project the data on the line connected by the weighted means of
each sub-structures, convert the data into a histogram, and evaluate the amount of peaks
in the histogram. If there is only one peak in the histogram, the left and right sub-structures
of the node are likely to characterize the same cluster.
We begin this process by computing two weighted means given by the probability arrays
pleft and pright, namely
µleft =
∑n
i=0
(
pleft
i
· vi
)
∑n
i=0 pleft
i
,
µright =
∑n
i=0
(
pright
i
· vi
)
∑n
i=0 pright
i
We find the direction vector d between the two means, and compute the projection of each
data-point on the vector —
d = µright −µleft
projd(vi) = (vi −µleft) · d
∥d∥
Afterwards, we construct a histogram with h bins from the projected data.
We add the following decision rule on the resulting histogram: If the histogram contains
more than one peak, then the left and right substructures are likely to characterize differ-
ent clusters. If the histogram contains just one peak, then the left and right substructures
are likely to characterize the same cluster. The intuition of why this works becomes clear
in fig. 6.5 and fig. 6.6. Figure 6.5 shows the process in the root of the contracted tree. At
the root, all data points have probability one. The red dots in the left graph red show the
weighted means µleft and µright based on the probability arrays pleft and pright. Data-points
are colored blue and light blue corresponding to which substructure it is most likely to re-
side. We compute the direction vector corresponding to the dashed black line, and project
the data onto it. The constructed histogram from the projection shows some interesting
insights. The histogram has 4 peaks, which indicates that the tangles in the substructures
characterizes more than one cluster.
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
37
==PAGE:46==
Data Projection and Histogram of Root Node (Marked P1)
Figure 6.5: Projection of data onto the line connecting the two weighted means in red for
the root of the contracted tree. To the right is a histogram of the projection of the data
onto the line. There are 4 peaks in the histogram.
Data Projection and Histogram of Node with Split (Marked P51)
Figure 6.6: Projection of data onto the line connecting the two means in red for the tangle
formed node with the split cause by P51. Data points shown are ones with p > 0 at the
node. To the right is a histogram of the projection of the data onto the line. There is 1
peak in the histogram, indicatating one cluster.
Figure 6.6 shows the same process on the problematic splitting node. The points shown
in the graph are all data points with pnode > 0; i.e. the nodes that contribute to the weighted
means. After projection, we find a smooth curve in the histogram — there is only one peak,
indicating that the left and right substructures characterize the same cluster. We thus re-
move the substructures. Appendix A shows the resulting projections and histograms for
all 4 internal nodes. It also includes the results on the same experiment as in fig. 6.2
and fig. 6.3, when using this approach. In general, we found that for both cut-finding algo-
rithms, the projection correctly identified the nodes that split into tangles characterizing the
same cluster. So forth the agreement parameter was low enough to identify the 5 clusters,
the projection analysis correctly identified the hierarchy in the tangle tree corresponding
to the 5 clusters.
The amount of bins h to use to construct the histogram depends on the volume of the
38
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:47==
data. If h is set too low the histogram struggles to find the variations in the data through its
peaks, and will lead to more false positives. If h is set too high, natural random variation
will result in many peaks, and substructures will always be identified as characterizing
different clusters. In general, it is better to set h in the higher end, as false positives can
be detrimental to the resulting tree.
6.2.1
Complexity
In terms of the amount of leaf nodes in the tangle tree, this approach is run on l−1 nodes,
equivalent to the amount of internal nodes in the contracted tree. At each internal node, we
must compute the weighted means, and project the data onto the line that connects them.
Computing the means are O(n). Projecting the data is O(d · n) on d dimensions, since
the dot product involves summing d terms. Overall, this adds a complexity of O(d · n · l)
to the tangle search tree resulting in an overall complexity of:
O(n · d · l) + O(n · l · k3)
For most practical applications, we find d ≪k3 resulting in O(n · l · k3).
6.2.2
Performance Impact
Figure 6.7 shows the impact that the projection analysis has a post-processing step. We
generate 100 random datasets under the same conditions as in section 5.1.3, but with
8000 data points. The left graph shows the impact on balanced datasets, and the right
graph shows the impact on highly unbalanced datasets. Unsurprisingly, on balanced
datasets the impact is negligible. Spurious tangles under these conditions rarely arise
- especially because the clusters are reasonably separated; they are resampled if any
distance between means < 3. Furthermore, the probability of finding 5 clusters is more or
less identical. This indicates that under these conditions, there are very few false positives
where the removed substructures correspond to different clusters.
Probability of Finding 5 clusters + Median NMI
Figure 6.7: The graphs show the probability of the tangles clustering algorithm finding the
correct amount of clusters (5), with and without projection as a post-processing step.
The median NMI has also been overlaid to compare.
The left graph shows for per-
fectly balanced cluster sizes. To the right is for unbalanced datasets with a weight of
[0.6, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1].
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
39
==PAGE:48==
Interestingly, for unbalanced data we found the opposite of the expected outcome. The
post-processing of the tangle tree actually leads to a lower probability of finding 5 clus-
ters. Yet even with a lower probability of finding 5 clusters, we find that the median NMI
is slightly higher over all ranges of a. In settings as unbalanced as this, tangles clustering
struggles to capture all clusters. The higher NMI indicates that when the projection anal-
ysis leads to removing substructures, it does so correctly. However, that does not imply
that there existed a hierarchy in the tree that correctly encapsulated the 5 clusters in the
first place. We find a prime example when revisiting our tree in fig. 6.4. Here, the tangles
algorithm found 5 leaf-node tangles, however they did not correspond to the actual clus-
ters in the data (bottom left cluster is not captured). The projection analysis performed
on the tree yielded a smaller tree, with just 4 leaf-node tangles, of which are more correct
than the original 5. Furthermore, we observed that the average amount of clusters found
for the vanilla algorithm on unbalanced datasets to be 4.5 (agreement fraction 0.5). The
projection analysis can never yield more clusters, it only serves to find a hierarchy in the
tree of which is more representative of the data.
6.2.3
Concluding Remarks on The Gap Problem
This chapter proposed one way to deal with the Gap Problem on feature-based data. In
most cases, tuning parameters would allow the algorithm to correctly encapsulate the
data, however in clustering, we generally know very little about the nature of the data and
its structure within. Tuning parameters is undesirable, and finding ways to circumvent
poor results from unfortunate parameter choices is desirable. Of course, the bin count h
is yet another parameter, however, it is much easier to set; if h is set in the higher end, it
will very rarely lead to false positives, especially in the upper layers of the tree.
There are many ways in which the post-processing analyses could be made on the tangle
tree, and this is just one such way to show how the data can be utilized, which works quite
well on feature-based gaussian data. Naturally, this method assumes that a cluster can be
characterized by a mean, and that data points become less likely further from the mean.
Furthermore, it assumes the data is convex. If these are not true, then the histogram
would be less likely to result in a bell curve, rendering the method obsolete. There is
a lot of information in the tree, however, which we believe can be utilized to analyze the
resulting hierarchy. In reality, any statistical method that determines whether two datasets
stem from the same distribution can be used.
Furthermore, to actually capture a curve that’s beneficial to the post-processing analysis,
the data requires a certain volume, otherwise random variations in the data prevents the
histogram from representing the bell shape. Fortunately, for smaller datasets, we find a
higher likelihood of more peaks in the histogram, caused by random variation. This means
that low volume data doesn’t negatively impact the tangle tree for this approach, rather it
will just have no effect.
40
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion
In the previous Chapters we have introduced several ideas on how to improve the perfor-
mance of tangles clustering in feature based contexts. This chapter discusses the pros
and cons of the approach we have taken throughout the paper. Furthermore, we will
discuss some of the next-steps to further progress tangles clustering in feature based
contexts.
7.1
Limitations
7.1.1
Data
The experiments used in this paper are only conducted on gaussian data. This is natu-
rally a limiting way of speaking of the overall capabilities of tangles clustering on feature-
based data. Results can vary wildly depending on the nature of the data. Real data is
typically of much higher-dimensionality, and far more messy, which will lead to new chal-
lenges regarding tangles clustering. The quadratic cost-functions are a prime example —
it will struggle on any datasets of significant size. While this paper proposed two linear
cost-functions, they have their only limitations which affect their usability in the general
case. For Border-Similarities, it requires that we can compute the distance to the deci-
sion boundary of the cut that separates its orientations, a boundary which may not exist for
more complex cut-finding algorithms. While it is extremely fast for axis-parallel cuts, it may
be more difficult to compute as cuts take a different shape. For Region-Aggregation cut-
finding, it’s currently limited to only lower-dimensional data. Furthermore, while it works
well on axis-parallel cuts, the shape of regions may be very diverse with other cut-finding
algorithms, leading to a worse approximation.
In a sense, the data of the experiments have been idealized to shows the benefits of the
tangle adaptions presented, and at this time we are unsure of the benefits when applying
these methods to more complex scenarios, and on real-world datasets. Doing this would
likely reveal new pros and cons of the adaptions.
7.1.2
Cut-finding
Cut-finding algorithms discussed have been limited to just two variations of axis-parallel
cuts — they allow for easy post-interpretation of the tangle tree, which makes it much
easier to present adaptions to the algorithms in an understandable and intuitive way. On
Gaussian data, as has been used throughout the paper, this works really well. The tan-
gle search-tree induces the orientations of the cuts to point towards the centers of the
gaussians — the regions defined by the cores of the tangle usually encapsulating them
perfectly. When the shapes of the true clusters diverge from being of convex nature, we
expect that axis-parallel cuts will suffer, due to the grid-like nature the cuts impose on
the data. The orientations of cuts all point towards the core defined which will always be
rectangular in nature.
7.2
Next Steps
Computing Localized Costs seems especially promising. In the Gaussian setting, we
found a significant performance increase, and it is generally adaptable to all settings —
It only requires that we can construct a subset of the original data, as induced by the
partitioning in the tangle tree, of which we can compute localized costs. The downside is
the increased runtime to compute the tangle-tree. This additional complexity is undesir-
able, as computing costs (especially in the feature based context) generally takes up the
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
41
==PAGE:50==
majority of the computation time. Regardless, it would be especially interesting to apply
localized costs to other settings properly gauge its overall impact on performance.
This paper mentions very few comparisons to other clustering algorithms, and relies more
on comparisons with previous version of itself to evaluate improvements. From the stand-
point of raw predictive power [Klepper et al. 2023] mentioned that stronger theoretical
guarantees exist for other models in the gaussian mixture-, graph, and questionnaire set-
ting. Regardless, the tangles approach to clustering has many desirable properties. It is
highly flexible, fast, hierarchical, and can produce soft-predictions. It would be interest-
ing to find scenarios and settings where tangles exceed comparably to other clustering
methods.
42
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:51==
8
Conclusion
This paper presented several adaptions to the tangles clustering pipeline in the feature-
based settings.
The practical application for tangles with linear time cost-functions has been limited thus
far. This paper presented two efficient cost-functions, both of which produce strong re-
sults, matching their quadratic counterparts for low-dimensionality gaussian mixtures.
Both cost-functions come with restrictions, however, limiting their usefulness. The Border-
Similarities cost-function requires a decision boundary of which we can compute the short-
est distance to in constant time. The Region Aggregation cost-function is more flexi-
ble in this sense, but suffers in datasets of high dimensionality. Furthermore, region-
aggregation has only been evaluated on axis-parallel cuts — it’s approximation of quadratic
functions may be worse when cuts become non-linear in nature. Regardless, both func-
tions proved useful in the gaussian mixture setting.
This paper also presented an adaption to the construction of the tangle-search tree. By
recomputing costs on the localized subsets of data induced by the hierarchy, it allowed
the algorithm to find tangles of higher quality. Previously, tangles were bound by specifi-
cations of increasing size according to their initial costs. This adaption allows for a more
flexible algorithm, finding tangles which the original tree cannot, by relaxing the restraint
on parsing cuts exclusively in order of their initial cost. On the Gaussian Mixture setting,
this approach resulted in a significant improvement. Though the datasets it has been
tested on is limited, we believe that this adaption is a strong addition to the tangle tree,
and has potential for future research.
Finally, we presented one possible way to utilize the information in the tangle-tree in the
post-processing phase of the algorithm. By post-analyzing the distributions of data likely to
be characterized by a tangle, we developed one method to identify whether substructures
distinguish clusters. In this sense, it allowed the algorithm to automatically find a hierarchy
in the tree that represents the data more fittingly. This specific adaption is likely only
relevant for gaussian mixtures, but nevertheless it gives an idea into how the information
in the tangle tree can be used in a post-processing step to improve its characterization of
the data.
Overall, the adaptions presented provide improvements to tangles clustering in the gaus-
sian mixture setting. Although, more research is required to further evaluate the adaptions
presented.
8.1
Code
Code for the implementation is on GitHub: https://github.com/theoscarwerner/TanglesClustering/
— All experiments are reproducible in the notebooks within.
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
43
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
Klepper, Solveig et al. (2023). “Clustering with Tangles: Algorithmic Framework and The-
oretical Guarantees”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 24.190, pp. 1–56. url:
http://jmlr.org/papers/v24/21-1160.html.
Robertson, Neil and P. D. Seymour (1991). “Graph minors. X. Obstructions to tree-decomposition”.
English (US). In: Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 52.2, pp. 153–190. issn:
0095-8956. doi: 10.1016/0095-8956(91)90061-N.
Grohe, Martin and Pascal Schweitzer (2015). “Computing with Tangles”. In: CoRR abs/1503.00190.
arXiv: 1503.00190. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.00190.
Diestel, Reinhard (June 2020). Tangles: a new paradigm for clusters and types. doi: 10.
48550/arXiv.2006.01830.
– (2019). Tangles in the social sciences. arXiv: 1907.07341 [math.CO]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1907.07341.
Diestel, Reinhard and Geoff Whittle (2017). Tangles and the Mona Lisa. arXiv: 1603.06652
[math.CO]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.06652.
Diestel, Reinhard (2024). Tangles: a structural approach to artificial intelligence in the
empirical sciences. arXiv: 2006.01830 [cs.AI]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.01830.
Laustrup, Jens Collatz and Michael Fog Nielsen (2023). “A Computational Framework
for Testing Clustering Based on Tangles”. In: url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
64b3358de568e691523b4555.
Søndergaard, Rasmus, Morten Lindhardt Helsø, and Oscar Wulff Mandrupsen (2024).
“Implementation of a Testing Environment for a Clustering Algorithm Based on Tangles”.
In: url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/668496ed48b8d81cdf365cf6.
Diestel, Reinhard, Domninik Blankenhagen, et al. (May 2, 2024). Tangles-Software. Ver-
sion 1.1.0. url: https://github.com/tangle-software/tangles.
44
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:53==
A
Projected Data and Impact on Clusters
Found for Different Agreement
Parameters
Figure A.1: The sample unbalanced dataset used in Chapter 6.
P1
P4
P5
τ5
P51
τ4
τ3
τ2
τ1
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
45
==PAGE:54==
Data Projection and Histogram of Root Node (P1)
Data Projection and Histogram of Node Marked (P5)
Data Projection and Histogram of Node Marked (P5)
Data Projection and Histogram of Node Marked (P51)
46
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.2: The amount of clusters found for different values of the agreement parameter
on the dataset in fig. 6.1 with projection analysis. The red line shows the correct amount
of clusters.
Figure A.3: The cores of the tangles at the leaf nodes for varying agreement parame-
ters for range based axis-parallel cuts. Projection Analysis has merged the problematic
splitting nodes we observed in fig. 6.3.
Improvements to Tangles Clustering in Feature-Based Settings
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.compute.dtu.dk
