==PAGE:1==
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems
for Modern Automobiles
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Lucien Kiven Tamo
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibli-
ographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Richard Petersens
Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Computer Science and Cyber Security.
Lucien Kiven Tamo - s184448
Signature
Date
ii
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
24/02/2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) are essential for securing automotive communication networks, es-
pecially In-Vehicle Networks (IVNs). However, a key challenge persists: the high rate of false positives,
where legitimate activities are mistakenly flagged as malicious. This issue is further compounded by rigid
detection rules, evolving traffic patterns due to software updates, and the misinterpretation of routine di-
agnostics as threats. Such high false positive rates overwhelm security teams with excessive alerts, leading
to desensitization and undermining the IDS’s overall effectiveness.
This thesis builds on the work of Lampe and Meng’s can-IoC [1], which evaluated Indicators of Com-
promise (IoCs) through simulated attack scenarios, correction of false positives during real attacks, and
testing against the can-train-and-test dataset to assess their practicality. Our goal is to enhance
their rule-based IDS by introducing additional detection mechanisms that strengthen security while
minimizing false positives. Specifically, we explore how variations in payload sizes within Controller
Area Network (CAN) traffic can serve as effective indicators of compromise. Additionally, we examine
the role of field classification in IDS implementations, assessing its impact on detection accuracy and its
potential for reducing false positives. By systematically analyzing whether rigid field classification leads
to false positives, we propose methods to improve adaptability to dynamic IVN traffic patterns.
Our proposed rules show promising results, with high detection accuracy and, in the case of Pattern #1,
exceptional precision while maintaining a low false positive rate. In 8 of 16 experiments, no false posi-
tives were detected. By refining rule-based detection strategies and incorporating adaptive mechanisms,
this work contributes to the development of more reliable and real-world-deployable IDS solutions for
modern vehicle networks.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to extend our deepest gratitude to my supervisor Weizhi Meng for his guidance through-
out this research.
In addition, we would like to thank the cosupervisor for the thesis: Brooke Elizabeth Kidmose for her
invaluablesupportduringourregularmeetingsandherconstructivefeedback, whichgreatlycontributed
to refining the content and focus of this work.
Moreover, I would also like to acknowledge the academic community for providing valuable research
materials that have greatly enhanced my understanding and enriched the analysis in this thesis.
On a personal note, I would like to express my heartfelt appreciation to my family—especially my parents
and siblings—for their continual understanding, patience, and unwavering support throughout the pro-
cess of formulating and writing this thesis. Their encouragement has been a constant source of strength.
Lastly, I would like to extend my gratitude to my friends, who have been a great source of emotional sup-
port, motivation, and camaraderie. Their presence in my life has made this journey much more enjoyable
and fulfilling.
iv
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:7==
Author:
Lucien Kiven Tamo, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Main Supervisor:
Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Co-supervisor:
Brooke Elizabeth Kidmose
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
General Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
4
2.1
Controller Area Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
CAN Bus Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1.1
Nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1.2
Bus Wires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Message Format
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Message Arbitration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Message Types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Error Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.6
Error Confinement Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Automotive Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Intrusion Detection Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
IDS detection approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
IDS deployment strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Related Works
18
3.1
Non-Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Traditional Machine Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Deep Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Implementation
23
4.1
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Pattern #1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.1
Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Pattern #2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.1
Field Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.2
Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Evaluation
33
5.1
Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
can-train-and-test-v1.5 Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.1
Why the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Performance Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Results and Discussion
42
6.1
Pattern #1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
vii
==PAGE:10==
6.2
Pattern #2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7
Conclusion & Future Work
47
7.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Bibliography
49
A Appendix
53
A.1
Code Snippet #1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2
Code Snippet #2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
viii
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The rapid evolution of modern vehicles into complex, interconnected systems has revolutionized the au-
tomotive industry. Vehicles are no longer mere modes of transportation; they have become intelligent
platforms with advanced computing and communication capabilities. These innovations significantly
enhance the driving experience by integrating features such as precise driver assistance and extensive me-
dia access. What were once isolated mechanical machines have evolved into integrated networks of elec-
tronic components, communicating through in-vehicle networks (IVNs) systems such as the Controller
Area Network (CAN) bus, automotive Ethernet and Local Interconnect Network (LIN). At the heart
of these systems are Electronic Control Units (ECUs), embedded computers that manage key vehicle
functions. Modern vehicles can contain over 100 ECUs [2], each responsible for specific tasks such as
managing the engine’s performance, controlling transmission shifts, handling telematics systems for nav-
igation and communication, and even managing door locks and window functions.
These advanced systems, however, are increasingly vulnerable to cyberattacks, raising concerns that have
garnered substantial attention from the research community. According to the National Automotive
Dealers Association (NADA), data breaches across various industries, including the automotive sector,
surged by a staggering 72% between 2021 and 2023, with each breach causing an estimated average loss
of $5.09 million [3]. A notable example of the risks posed by such vulnerabilities is the 2015 demonstra-
tion by security researchers Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek [4, 5], who successfully executed a remote
cyberattack on a 2014 Jeep Cherokee. This incident highlighted critical weaknesses in the vehicle’s inter-
connected systems.
Miller and Valasek gained control over essential functions of the 2014 Jeep Cherokee, including the
brakes, steering (at low speeds), engine, and transmission, by exploiting the Uconnect infotainment sys-
tem, which was linked to the vehicle’s CAN bus. This connection allowed them to send malicious CAN
messages to various ECUs. During their demonstration, they disabled the engine and manipulated the
steering while the vehicle was in motion, illustrating the potential dangers to both drivers and passengers.
Their research prompted Fiat Chrysler to recall 1.4 million vehicles later that year to rectify these security
flaws [6, 7].
In 2016, leveraging their understanding of the CAN bus, Miller and Valasek [8] conducted even more
dangerous attacks on the 2014 Jeep Cherokee. They demonstrated the ability to disarm or engage the
vehicle’s brakes at high speeds, command the vehicle to accelerate, and sharply turn the steering wheel
while the vehicle was in motion.
Another example of increasing vulnerability to cyberattacks occurred in 2016 when researchers from
Keen Security Lab, a cybersecurity team within Tencent, executed a notable hack on a Tesla Model S
[9, 10], exposing serious weaknesses in the vehicle’s connected systems. By exploiting a vulnerability in
the car’s web browser, the team gained remote access to various components without needing physical
proximity to the vehicle. This access enabled the researchers to interact with critical functions interfac-
ing with the CAN bus, allowing them to send malicious commands to various ECUs. As a result, they
successfully took control of essential vehicle functions, including the brakes, door locks, dashboard dis-
play, and acceleration. The ability to manipulate these critical systems raised significant safety concerns,
particularly regarding the potential for remote braking and acceleration.
The hack was publicly showcased at the Black Hat security conference in Las Vegas [11], where the re-
searchers live-demonstrated the exploits, effectively highlighting the risks associated with modern con-
nectedvehicles. Inresponse, Teslaactedswiftly, issuinganover-the-air(OTA)softwareupdatetoaddress
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
1
==PAGE:12==
the vulnerabilities identified by the researchers [9].
The Keen Security Lab hack of the Tesla Model S, much like the earlier attacks on the 2014 Jeep Chero-
kee, served as a wake-up call for the automotive industry, emphasizing the urgent need for manufacturers
to prioritize cybersecurity in their connected vehicle designs. These incidents, along with a growing list
of observed attacks, demonstrate the necessity of integrating robust security measures into automotive
systems to protect against evolving cyber threats.
To effectively address these vulnerabilities, it is essential to monitor for malicious behavior within auto-
motivesystems. Inpreviousyears,thismonitoringwasperformedthroughmanualeventandloganalysis.
However, this approach is becoming increasingly inadequate given the complexity and sophistication of
moderncyberthreats, asmanuallymonitoringsuchsystemscanbeextremelychallenging. Asaresult, the
development of automated monitoring systems—known as Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)—has
become essential for enhancing security and improving response times to potential threats.
Automotive IDSs play a key role in securing communication within IVNs, which facilitate the exchange
of data between various ECUs responsible for essential vehicle functions. By continuously monitoring
network traffic, IDSs can detect potential security threats by analyzing data for unusual patterns, unau-
thorized messages, or known attack signatures. When suspicious activity is identified, the IDS raises an
alert, enabling operators to respond promptly.
Several factors contribute to the effectiveness of IDSs in detecting malicious behavior in vehicles. Their
light-weight design, real-time monitoring capabilities, and adaptability to automotive communication
protocols make them well-suited for integration into existing systems [12, 13, 14, 15]. In-vehicle net-
works, such as the CAN bus, are resource-constrained and operate under strict timing requirements,
which necessitates efficient IDS solutions that impose minimal impact on overall performance [12, 16].
This ensures that the critical functions of the vehicle—such as steering, braking, and acceleration—
remain unaffected while enhancing the security framework against emerging cyber threats.
1.2
Problem Statement
Despite the well-documented effectiveness of IDSs in securing automotive communication networks, a
major challenge they face is the high rate of false positives generated by these systems. False positives
occur when legitimate network activities are incorrectly identified as malicious threats. In IVNs, this
issue often arises from overly rigid or inaccurate detection rules, changes in traffic patterns from software
updates, or routine actions, such as diagnostics, being misinterpreted as threats.
The impact of false positives is particularly pronounced in IVNs. Given the interconnected nature of
vehicle systems, even a modest false positive rate can lead to thousands of alerts per day across a fleet of
vehicles. For instance, if a rule-based IDS deployed in a fleet of one million vehicles generates just one
false positive per vehicle per year, this would result in over 2,700 alerts each day. Such a high volume of
alerts creates an unsustainable burden for security teams, who must investigate each one to determine its
legitimacy. The impracticality of managing such a high volume of false positives can lead to alert fatigue,
where security personnel become desensitized to warnings, increasing the likelihood of genuine threats
being missed. Furthermore, excessive false positives can erode trust in the IDS, prompting operators to
ignore or disable alerts, thereby exposing the system to vulnerabilities.
With this background established, the primary focus of this thesis is to enhance an existing rule-based
automotive IDS by developing additional rules that improve detection capabilities while maintaining an
extremely low false positive rate, thereby strengthening the overall security of the IVN.
2
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:13==
To achieve these objectives, the thesis will seek to answer the following research questions:
• In what ways can changes in payload sizes in CAN data serve as effective compromise indicators
in an IDS?
• How can field classification in CAN data be implemented within an IDS to identify intrusions?
• What role does field classification in CAN data play in improving intrusion detection, and how
does it affect detection accuracy?
• Does a rigid application of field classification in an IDS lead to false positives, and how can it be
made more adaptable to changing traffic patterns in In-Vehicle Networks (IVNs)?
1.3
General Outline
The remainder of this thesis report is structured as follows: Chapter 2 presents the foundational back-
ground, covering the Controller Area Network (CAN) protocol, common automotive attacks, and In-
trusion Detection Systems (IDS), including their various classifications. Chapter 3 explores the current
state of research on automotive IDS, with a focus on both CAN bus security and broader systems like
in-vehicle networks and intelligent transportation systems. Chapter 4 introduces the proposed patterns
and details their implementation. Chapter 5 presents the evaluation methodology for the Intrusion De-
tection System (IDS), discussing the evaluation metrics and datasets used, followed by Chapter 6, which
provides the evaluation results and an in-depth discussion of the experimental findings. Finally, Chap-
ter 7 concludes the thesis, summarizing key insights and offering reflections on potential directions for
future research.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
3
==PAGE:14==
2
Background
This chapter aims to provide a comprehensive background on the critical concepts that influence vehicle
functionality and security, which will be further explored throughout the thesis. Section 2.1 introduces
the Controller Area Network (CAN), delving into its architecture, frame format, message arbitration,
various message types, and mechanisms for error checking and confinement. This foundational knowl-
edge is essential for understanding how Electronic Control Units (ECUs) communicate and interact
within automotive systems.
In Section 2.2, we discuss a wide range of automotive attacks, examining the diverse tactics employed by
malicious actors to compromise vehicle security. This analysis highlights the vulnerabilities that can arise
from increased connectivity and automation.
Finally, Section 2.3 presents an overview of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), discussing various detec-
tion approaches and methodologies, as well as deployment strategies that enhance their effectiveness in
real-world applications. Together, these sections lay the groundwork for a deeper understanding of the
interplay between vehicle communication systems, security threats, and protective measures.
4
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:15==
2.1
Controller Area Network
In 1983, the German company Robert Bosch GmbH, a pioneer in automotive control systems, intro-
duced the Controller Area Network (CAN) protocol, which revolutionized the way control compo-
nents communicate within automotive vehicles [17].
Previously, systems such as engine management, anti-lock brakes, and traction control each required
dedicated wiring for individual components. As these systems grew increasingly complex, this approach
became impractical, resulting in limitations regarding the number of wires and the size of connectors
necessary to accommodate them [17]. To address these challenges, the CAN protocol was developed
with three key objectives:
• Low Latency: Ensuring rapid communication between nodes with minimal delay, especially for
high-priority messages.
• High Throughput: Optimizing data transmission efficiency to handle a large volume of mes-
sages, despite the limited bandwidth of the network.
• Reliability: Incorporating robust error detection, fault tolerance, and isolation mechanisms to
ensure consistent and dependable communication, even in noisy or harsh environments like those
in automotive systems.
The implementation of the CAN bus significantly reduced wiring complexity by enabling multiple de-
vices to communicate and exchange data over a single pair of wires. This innovative approach quickly
gained traction, and by 1993, the CAN protocol was officially standardized as ISO 11898 [18, 19].
Today, CAN is widely used not only in the automotive industry but also in areas such as agricultural
machinery, medical equipment, elevator controls, public transportation, and industrial automation. As
the leading standard for in-vehicle networks, CAN is praised for its efficiency and reliability in enabling
communication between various vehicle systems.
2.1.1
CAN Bus Architecture
The architecture of a CAN bus system is designed to enable efficient communication among multiple
nodes. At its core, a CAN bus system comprises of two wires: CAN-High (or CANH) and CAN-Low
(or CANL), as depicted in Figure 2.1. These wires connect all nodes in the network and carry differential
signals that represent the transmitted data.
Figure 2.1: A CAN Bus System.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
5
==PAGE:16==
2.1.1.1
Nodes
In a CAN bus system, a node refers to any device connected to the bus that can both send and receive
messages. Each node is equipped with a controller, which handles data processing and message framing,
and a transceiver, which converts digital signals from the controller into differential signals for the bus
and vice versa. This setup enables seamless communication across the network. Nodes can range from
simple devices like sensors or actuators to more complex components, such as Engine Control Units
(ECUs).
Each node transmits data whenever the bus is idle. Data is transmitted in the form of frames, which
include both the data itself and an identifier that indicates the content and priority of the message. All
other nodes on the bus receive this frame and determine whether to process it, based on the value of the
identifier.
Additionally, nodes in a CAN bus system play a critical role in error detection. They check incoming
frames for errors using methods such as bit monitoring and frame check sequences. If a node detects an
error, it sends an Error Frame to notify all other nodes on the bus of the error.
2.1.1.2
Bus Wires
The bus wires serve as the physical medium through which data is transmitted between nodes in a CAN
bus system. There are two bus wires, CAN-High and CAN-Low, which carry complementary signals.
To reduce electromagnetic interference and improve signal integrity, these wires are typically twisted
together, forming a twisted pair.
Differential signaling in CAN bus systems offers the following advantages:
• Improved Noise Immunity. By ensuring that any external noise affects both bus lines equally,
the system effectively cancels out common-mode noise, allowing the receiving node to focus solely
on the voltage difference between the lines.
• Minimized Electromagnetic Interference. The complementary signals create equal and oppo-
site currents in each line, which reduces the net magnetic field generated and further diminishes
electromagnetic interference.
In a CAN bus system, the bus wires are terminated at both ends with resistors, usually 120 Ohms, which
match the characteristic impedance of the wires [20]. This termination is essential for preventing signal
reflections that can lead to data transmission errors. Furthermore, biasing resistors may be used to ensure
that the bus wires remain in a known state when no nodes are actively transmitting. These resistors pull
the bus wires to a recessive state, preventing them from floating and minimizing the risk of communica-
tion errors.
The performance of a CAN bus system can be influenced by the length of the bus wires and the number
of connected nodes. Longer bus lines and more nodes increase capacitance, slowing the signal’s rise and
fall times, which can limit the bus’s maximum data rate. To address this, the CAN bus specification
defines various data rates and maximum bus lengths, enabling system designers to select the optimal
configuration for their applications [21].
2.1.2
Message Format
The CAN protocol uses a message-based communication system, where data is transmitted through
structured units called frames (often referred to as CAN messages). Each frame consists of control, data,
and error-checking information, enabling robust communication between nodes on the network. There
are four main types of CAN frames, each serving a unique purpose and varying in structure and length.
These include the Data Frame (Figure 2.4), Remote Frame (Figure 2.5), Error Frame, and Overload
Frame. EachtypeplaysavitalroleinensuringtheproperfunctioningandreliabilityoftheCANnetwork
(as discussed further in Section 2.1.4).
6
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:17==
A CAN network can be configured to use two distinct message formats: the standard (or base) frame
formatandtheextended frame format. TheoriginalCANprotocol, knownasCAN2.0, includesboth
ofthese formats in its two versions: CAN 2.0A and CAN 2.0B [22]. The standard frame format, defined
in both CAN 2.0A and CAN 2.0B, uses an 11-bit identifier. The extended frame format, defined in
CAN2.0B,usesa29-bitidentifier, consistingofthe11-bitbaseidentifierfollowedbyan18-bitextension.
The distinction between standard and extended frames is determined by the Identifier Extension (IDE)
bit: in standard frames, the IDE bit is transmitted as dominant, indicating the use of an 11-bit identifier,
while in extended frames, the IDE bit is recessive, signaling the use of a 29-bit identifier. This mechanism
allows CAN controllers to distinguish between the two formats during communication.
CAN controllers that support the extended frame format are backward-compatible and can transmit
and receive both standard (11-bit) and extended (29-bit) frames, ensuring flexibility and interoperability
across different network configurations. Regardless of the format, all CAN frames begin with a Start-of-
Frame (SOF) bit, which marks the beginning of the frame transmission and synchronizes the nodes on
the network.
Figure 2.2: CAN Bus frame format.
The bit fields shown in Figure 2.2 are described as follows:
1. Start-of-Frame (SOF) [1 bit]
The SOF bit marks the beginning of the frame transmission and is always dominant (0). This bit
helps synchronize the nodes on the network and prepares them for data reception.
2. Identifier [11 bits]
The 11-bit identifier is used to indicate the priority of the message. Lower numerical values of the
identifier have higher priority. This arbitration process ensures that the message with the highest
priority gains access to the bus when multiple messages are transmitted simultaneously.
3. Remote Transmission Request (RTR) [1 bit]
The RTR bit distinguishes between data and remote frames. In data frames, the RTR bit is dom-
inant (0), signaling that the frame contains data. In remote frames, this bit is recessive (1), indicat-
ing a request for data from other nodes on the network.
4. Identifier Extension (IDE) [1 bit]
The IDE bit differentiates between the standard (11-bit) and extended (29-bit) identifier formats.
For standard frames, this bit is always dominant (0), signaling the use of an 11-bit identifier.
5. Reserved (r0) [1 bit]
The reserved bit (r0) is always transmitted as dominant (0) in standard CAN frames. It is reserved
for future expansions of the protocol and ensures compatibility with extended frame formats.
6. Data Length Code (DLC) [4 bits]
The DLC field specifies the number of data bytes being transmitted in the frame. It can range
from 0 to 8, indicating that the payload may contain up to 8 bytes of data.
7. Data Field [0–64 bits]
The Data Field carries the actual payload being transmitted. The number of bits in this field de-
pends on the value of the DLC. If the DLC specifies 8, for example, the Data Field will contain
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
7
==PAGE:18==
64 bits (8 bytes).
8. Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) [15 bits]
The CRC field is used for error detection. It ensures data integrity by calculating a checksum
based on the contents of the frame. The receiver also calculates a CRC value and compares it to
the transmitted value to detect any transmission errors.
9. CRC Delimiter [1 bit]
The CRC Delimiter bit is always recessive (1) and follows the CRC field. It separates the CRC
from the Acknowledge field.
10. Acknowledge (ACK) [2 bits]
The Acknowledge field consists of two bits:
• ACK Slot [1 bit]: The transmitter sends a recessive bit in this field, and any receiver that
successfully receives the frame overwrites it with a dominant bit to indicate acknowledg-
ment.
• ACK Delimiter [1 bit]: Always recessive (1), this bit separates the ACK Slot from the next
field.
11. End-of-Frame (EOF) [7 bits]
TheEOFfieldconsistsof7recessivebitsandindicatestheendoftheframetransmission. Itensures
that the frame is properly terminated and that the bus is free for new transmissions.
2.1.3
Message Arbitration
Arbitration is a fundamental feature of CAN systems, essential for managing communication among
multiple devices—such as ECUs vehicles. In modern automobiles, this mechanism ensures that only
one device can transmit its message at any given time, while others defer to prevent data collisions.
Traditional digital systems typically use logic high to represent a binary 1 and logic low to represent a
binary 0. However, the CAN bus system employs a different approach. Instead of directly represent-
ing binary values, the CAN bus uses logic states to manage communication priorities through arbitra-
tion and signal dominance. This method, known as CSMA/NBA (Carrier Sense Multiple Access with
Nondestructive Bitwise Arbitration) [23], allows multiple devices to communicate on the bus without
interference while ensuring that higher-priority messages are prioritized in the transmission process.
In a CAN bus system, access is event-driven rather than pre-scheduled (takes place randomly). Trans-
mission begins when a CAN controller or node detects an idle bus. When multiple nodes attempt to
transmit at the same time, arbitration occurs through a nondestructive, bit-wise process. During this
process, the node with the highest priority, indicated by the dominant signal, continues its transmission.
Nodes with lower priority will halt their transmission without causing any corruption or loss of data in
the ongoing message.
When the CAN bus is idle, with no node, ECU, or device actively transmitting, it is said to be in the
recessive state. This state, characterized by a high voltage level on the bus lines, represents the default or
neutral condition of the bus. In this state, the bus is in a high-impedance condition, meaning it does not
actively drive the voltage but remains available for communication.
The recessive state corresponds to a logical 1 (one) in the CAN data frame and is crucial for maintaining
bus neutrality, ensuring that any device can initiate communication without interference.
Conversely, when a node is actively transmitting, the bus enters the dominant state, where the bus lines
are driven to a low voltage level. The dominant state asserts control and plays a key role in the arbitration
process. It overrides any recessive state, ensuring that the message from the transmitting device is priori-
tized and recognized by all devices on the network. The dominant state corresponds to a logical 0 (zero)
8
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:19==
in the CAN data frame and is essential for resolving transmission conflicts, allowing the highest-priority
device to transmit while other devices pause their transmissions, maintaining the integrity and efficiency
of communication.
By asserting dominance, the bus prioritizes high-priority messages and defers lower-priority messages,
ensuring effective and reliable network communication.
Figure 2.3 provides an illustration of both the recessive and dominant states.
Figure 2.3: Differential Bus showing dominant and recessive states.
2.1.4
Message Types
In a CAN bus network, communication is managed through four main types of frames/messages: Data
Frames, Remote Frames, Error Frames, and Overload Frames [24, 25]. Each frame serves a distinct pur-
pose, such as transmitting data, requesting data, signaling errors, or indicating temporary processing
delays. To ensure reliable communication, a message is considered error-free if the final bit of the End
of Frame (EOF) field is received in the recessive state. If a dominant bit is detected instead, it triggers a
re-transmission of the message to correct any transmission errors.
1. Data Frame
The Data Frame is the primary message type for transmitting data between nodes in a CAN bus
network [25]. It starts with an arbitration field that sets the message’s priority, crucial when mul-
tiple nodes compete for bus access. Next is the control field, which indicates the length of the data
payload, which can be up to 8 bytes. The payload contains the actual data being sent, and the
frame ends with a cyclic redundancy check (CRC) field, which verifies data integrity by detect-
ing transmission errors (see Figure 2.4). Data Frames are essential for real-time communication,
enabling efficient and reliable data exchange among networked nodes.
Figure 2.4: Data Frame architecture.
2. Remote Frame
The Remote Frame is designed to request data from a specific node within a CAN network. It
allows nodes to query the status or retrieve data from other nodes without transmitting any data
itself. Structurally, a Remote Frame is similar to a Data Frame but does not include the data pay-
load; instead, it is indicated by the Remote Transmission Request (RTR) bit being set to 1 (see
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5). The frame contains only the arbitration field, which specifies the Data Frame that is
being requested. Upon receiving a Remote Frame, the targeted node responds by sending a Data
Frame with the requested information. This mechanism is essential for on-demand data retrieval,
enabling efficient and dynamic communication across the network.
Figure 2.5: Remote Frame architecture (without data payload).
3. Error Frame
An Error Frame is generated to signal that a problem has occurred on the CAN network, helping
to maintain communication integrity. This message type is crucial for detecting and addressing
faults that might affect network performance. An error frame consists of an error flag and an error
delimiter, which are sent by a node that detects an anomaly, such as a bit error or a frame error.
The transmission of an error frame prompts other nodes to acknowledge the issue, potentially
triggering error handling routines to correct the problem. By signaling errors, this frame helps
ensure that communication continues smoothly despite occasional issues.
4. Overload Frame
TheOverloadFrameisusedtoindicatethatanodeorthenetworkistemporarilyunabletoprocess
incoming messages promptly. This message type is particularly important for managing network
traffic and ensuring that nodes are not overwhelmed. The overload frame includes overload flags
and delimiters, which signal the need for additional processing time. When a node detects that it
requires more time to handle messages, it sends an overload frame to inform other nodes of the
delay. This mechanism helps maintain network efficiency and prevents message collisions or data
loss by allowing nodes to manage their workload more effectively.
2.1.5
Error Checking
Error checking in a CAN bus system is essential for ensuring reliable data transmission and maintain-
ing communication integrity. The CAN bus employs both bit-level and message-level error-checking
mechanisms [26].
At the bit-level, an error is detected if there is a discrepancy between the transmitted bit and the one
observed on the bus. This mechanism is critical for detecting transmission errors in real-time during
bit-wise arbitration.
Atthemessage-level,error-checkingmechanismsincludeframechecksovertheacknowledgment(ACK),
cyclic redundancy check (CRC), and end of frame (EOF) fields:
• After transmitting a frame, the transmitter node sends a recessive bit in the ACK field. If a re-
ceiving node successfully receives the message without errors, it overwrites the ACK field with a
dominant bit to acknowledge the reception. If no acknowledgment is received (i.e., the ACK field
remains recessive), this indicates a transmission error, and the message is retransmitted.
• Each CAN frame includes a CRC field (up to 21 bits) to ensure data integrity. The CRC is cal-
culated by both the transmitter and receiver. If any node calculates a different CRC than the one
transmitted, it detects an error and sends an error flag to the network.
• The CRC delimiter, ACK delimiter, and EOF bits have fixed values that must always be recessive.
During frame validation, if any of these bits are received as dominant, a format error is generated,
triggering error handling mechanisms.
10
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:21==
2.1.6
Error Confinement Mechanism
An Error Confinement Mechanism (ECM) is implemented in CAN bus systems to protect the network
fromfaultynodesbyisolatingthemfrombustraffic, preventingthespreadoferrors(seeFigure2.6). Each
CAN controller manages two error counters: the Receive Error Counter (REC) and the Transmit Error
Counter(TEC) [26, 27]. These counterstrack the frequencyoferrorsduringreceptionandtransmission,
respectively.
• Transmit Error Counter (TEC): This counter tracks the number of errors detected during the
transmission of frames by the node.
• Receive Error Counter (REC): This counter tracks the number of errors detected during the
reception of frames by the node.
Each time a frame is successfully transmitted or received by a node, the corresponding error counter
decreases by 1, unless it is already at zero. Conversely, when a transmission error is detected, the rele-
vant counter increases. Based on the error counter values, the node may operate in three different states
namely:
• Error Active (REC<128 and TEC<128) : This is the normal operating state where the node can
send and receive frames without restrictions. It is the controller’s default state when initialized.
• Error Passive ((REC>127 or TEC>127) and TEC≤255 : In this state, the node can still emit
frames but must wait an additional 8 bits after the end of the last transmitted frame. As a result,
frames sent by the node may not always meet the worst-case response times predicted through
schedulability analysis.
• Bus-off (TEC>255) : In this state, the node is automatically disconnected from the bus and can-
not send or receive frames. A node can exit the Bus-Off state only after a hardware or software
reset (normal mode request) and after successfully monitoring 128 occurrences of 11 consecutive
recessive bits (a sequence corresponding to the ACK, EOF, and the intermission field of a data
frame that has not been corrupted) [27, 28].
Figure 2.6: CAN Bus Error states.
2.2
Automotive Attacks
Asvehiclesbecomemoreinterconnectedandreliantonadvancedelectronicsystems, thethreatlandscape
surrounding automotive security has evolved significantly. Modern vehicles are equipped with numer-
ous Electronic Control Units (ECUs) that communicate via protocols such as Controller Area Network
(CAN), enabling functionalities that enhance safety, efficiency, and user experience. However, this in-
terconnectivity also presents new vulnerabilities that malicious actors can exploit.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
11
==PAGE:22==
Automotive attacks can manifest in various forms, ranging from data manipulation and spoofing to so-
phisticated intrusion attempts that target critical vehicle systems. These attacks not only compromise
the integrity and functionality of automotive systems but also pose serious risks to passenger safety and
public security. As the automotive industry transitions towards more autonomous and connected vehi-
cles, understanding the nature of these attacks, their potential consequences, and the countermeasures
that can be implemented is paramount.
Brooke and Meng [29] have identified several key factors contributing to the vulnerabilities in IVNs,
particularly within CAN bus systems. These include:
• Lack of Integrity: The absence of mechanisms to verify the integrity of transmitted data enables
attackers to alter messages undetected. Although IVNs like the CAN bus use a cyclic redundancy
checksum (CRC) for data integrity, this only functions effectively under attack-free conditions.
As a result, attackers can easily modify a CAN frame and recalculate the checksum, bypassing
these integrity protections during an attack. Without stronger integrity controls, the CAN bus
remains vulnerable to tampering, making it impossible to verify the origins of messages.
• Lack of Authentication: This vulnerability allows malicious nodes to impersonate legitimate
ECUs by using their arbitration IDs, enabling them to inject malicious messages or CAN frames
into the network. Without a mechanism to verify the message source, there is no way to determine
whether a message originates from the expected ECU or an attacker. Implementing authentica-
tion measures would help prevent these masquerade attacks.
• Lack of Encryption: Communications on IVNs like the CAN bus are unencrypted and trans-
parent, allowing attackers to easily intercept and exploit messages. Although data in CAN frames
is encoded (e.g., wheel speeds in hexadecimal), it can often be easily decoded. The broadcast na-
ture of the protocol means every message is sent to all nodes. If attackers access the CAN bus or
compromise a single ECU, they can read and decode all messages, enabling them to craft spoofed
messages or replay captured ones.
• Lack of Authorization: The absence of authorization controls in CAN networks allows any
connected ECUs to freely send CAN frames beyond its designated functions, creating significant
security vulnerabilities. This risk is heightened if an attacker gains physical or remote access to the
network. A notable instance of this vulnerability was demonstrated by Miller and Valasek [4, 5],
who compromised a Jeep Cherokee’s infotainment ECU, enabling them to execute cyber-physical
attacks on the vehicle’s systems. If authorization measures had been in place, the compromised
ECUwouldhavebeenrestrictedtotransmittingonlyinformationrelevanttoitsfunction, thereby
significantly mitigating the potential for malicious exploitation.
Various types of automotive attacks, along with their mechanisms and implications for vehicle security,
are discussed below:
1. Denial of Service (DoS) attack
Denial of Service (DoS) attacks are among the most common cyberattacks targeting communica-
tion networks in automotive systems. These attacks aim to disrupt network availability by flood-
ing the communication network, such as the CAN bus, with an overwhelming volume of illegiti-
mate messages—thereby interrupting normal vehicle operations. This approach can monopolize
the bus with repeated high-priority commands, resulting in the delay or blockage of legitimate
messages and hindering effective communication among critical vehicle functions.
The consequences can be severe, ranging from the failure of safety-critical systems like braking
and steering to complete system shutdowns. This not only compromises vehicle safety but also
undermines reliability, particularly in non-critical systems such as infotainment, where perfor-
mance may significantly degrade. Furthermore, DoS attacks can serve as a precursor to more so-
12
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:23==
phisticated cyberattacks, exploiting system vulnerabilities to inject malicious commands or gain
unauthorized control.
2. Replay attack
Replay attacks pose a significant breach of authenticity, confidentiality, and integrity. This type
of attack involves capturing valid communication messages (packets) exchanged between vehicle
components and re-transmitting them at a later time, often to deceive the system into executing
actions that are no longer valid. Attackers may use this method to carry out information spoofing
or impersonation attacks, allowing them to mimic legitimate commands and potentially trigger
unintended behaviors in the vehicle.
Replay attacks can have severe consequences, particularly when critical systems, such as the engine
control or braking system, are targeted. For instance, if a previously captured braking command
is replayed, it could cause the vehicle to brake unexpectedly, posing serious safety risks.
Moreover, replay attacks are challenging to detect because the messages themselves remain unal-
tered; only their timing and context are manipulated. This subtlety makes replay attacks a potent
threat to automotive security, especially in vehicles that lack robust authentication mechanisms.
As such, it is crucial for automotive systems to implement stringent security measures to safeguard
against these types of attacks.
3. Spoofing
Spoofing occurs when a compromised ECU sends CAN data frames with a forged ID field, in-
tendingtoimpersonatedataorinstructionsfromalegitimateECUnode. Bydoingso, theattacker
deceives the vehicle’s systems, potentially causing it to execute unintended actions or misinterpret
critical information, thereby jeopardizing vehicle safety and functionality.
The consequences of a spoofing attack can be severe, impacting a wide array of functions ranging
from minor inconveniences, such as incorrect information displayed on the dashboard, to critical
safetyconcerns, like sending falsesignals to the brakingorsteeringsystems. Forinstance, aspoofed
command could trigger unwanted acceleration or braking without driver input, posing significant
safety hazards. Ultimately, spoofing attacks undermine both the integrity and authenticity of the
vehicle’s internal communication, leading to unpredictable and potentially dangerous outcomes.
4. Sybil attack
In Sybil attacks, an attacker creates several pseudonymous fake identities (referred to as Sybil
nodes) to convincingly impersonate multiple legitimate components within a network [12]. By
sending messages from these forged IDs, the malicious entity can manipulate network behavior.
For instance, an attacker could exploit the numerous fake identities to falsely report a severe traf-
fic jam at certain locations, misleading vehicles into changing their routes to avoid the congested
area. Additionally, SybilattackscanfacilitateDistributedDenialofService(DDoS)attacks, where
multiple Sybil nodes flood the target with massive amounts of illegitimate traffic, potentially in-
capacitating the entire system’s functionalities.
Sybil attacks can result in various serious consequences, ranging from inaccurate sensor data and
erraticvehiclebehaviortocriticalsystem-widemalfunctionsinautonomousandsemi-autonomous
vehicles. By impersonating multiple identities, attackers compromise the network’s integrity and
trust, making it difficult to distinguish between legitimate and fraudulent messages. This poses
substantial risks in highly interconnected transportation systems, where precise communication
is vital for ensuring safety and operational effectiveness.
5. Masquerade attack
Masquerade attacks occur when an attacker transmits frames at expected intervals, replacing le-
gitimate ones with malicious payloads. This is typically done by first suspending frames with a
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
13
==PAGE:24==
specific ID, then injecting spoofed frames that alter the content rather than the timing patterns,
or by capturing and replaying the legitimate ECU’s frames to mimic its communication. These
spoofed or replayed frames often clash with the legitimate ECU’s frames. To resolve this, the ma-
licious node suppresses the legitimate frames, preventing the ECU from communicating. Once
the legitimate ECU is silenced, the malicious node transmits frames using the ECU’s arbitration
ID, effectively masquerading as the legitimate ECU [29].
The consequences of such attacks can be severe, as critical vehicle systems may receive manipu-
lated commands, resulting in erratic or dangerous behavior—such as unintended acceleration,
brake failure, or impaired steering control. This not only endangers vehicle safety but also puts
passengers at significant risk.
6. Fuzzy attack
Fuzzy attacks involve an attacker sending random or malformed CAN IDs and data into the CAN
network, typically without prior knowledge of the specific vehicle systems or target components.
These attacks exploit the lack of security features in the CAN protocol, such as the absence of
authentication or message integrity checks. By injecting messages that mimic the structure of
legitimate CAN messages but contain arbitrary or altered data, attackers can disrupt the normal
functioning of vehicle systems.
A more sophisticated variant of this attack, known as the Ulterior Fuzzy attack [30], can be ex-
ecuted by a more knowledgeable attacker. In this scenario, the attacker first eavesdrops on bus
traffic to gain prior knowledge of valid CAN IDs used within the target vehicle. By narrowing
down the random data based on this information, the attacker increases the efficiency of the at-
tack. An even more advanced version involves sending messages with known, valid CAN IDs but
with random or manipulated data fields, making the attack harder to detect and potentially more
damaging.
Fuzzy attacks on the CAN bus disrupt vehicle systems by injecting random or malformed mes-
sages, causing erratic behavior in non-critical systems (like infotainment) or even critical func-
tions like braking and steering. In basic fuzzy attacks, the disruptions are unpredictable but often
less targeted. On the other hand, Ulterior Fuzzy attacks are more dangerous, as attackers use the
knowledge gained from eavesdropping to craft targeted messages with valid CAN IDs. These
targeted messages can cause more precise and severe disruptions, leading to harder-to-detect mal-
functions and possibly widespread failures in vehicle systems.
Unlike DoS attacks, which flood the CAN bus and overwhelm the network, leading to complete
system unresponsiveness, fuzzy attacks integrate malicious traffic with legitimate messages. This
blending can result in subtle malfunctions that may persist or worsen over time. Instead of oc-
cupying the bus and blocking normal message delivery as DoS attacks do, fuzzy attacks disrupt
vehicle functionality by causing abnormal or erratic behavior in ECUs without completely para-
lyzing the system.
7. Wormhole attack
In wormhole attacks, messages are maliciously relayed between different parts of a vehicle’s net-
work (such as nodes) or across connected vehicles in a manner that deceives the communication
systemaboutthetruelocationortimingofthedata. Theseattackstypicallyrequireatleasttwocol-
luding nodes that are geographically separated, which create a tunnel (wormhole link) to forward
packets between each other for end-to-end communication [31]. By modifying the logical topol-
ogy of the network, wormhole attacks prevent nodes from discovering alternative paths, forcing
all traffic through the malicious nodes. This positioning enables attackers to control and manip-
ulate network traffic, potentially compromising data integrity, confidentiality, and overall system
security.
14
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:25==
The consequences of a wormhole attack can be particularly dangerous in vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V)
or vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, as the manipulation of traffic flow can lead to
increased packet loss [12, 32]. For instance, in autonomous or semi-autonomous driving scenar-
ios, false proximity data relayed by a wormhole attack could result in incorrect decisions regarding
speed, braking, ormaneuveringbasedontheassumptionthatothervehiclesorobjectsarecloseror
farther than they really are. Similarly, relaying falsified or mislocated sensor data within the vehicle
could cause ECUs to misinterpret the vehicle’s environment, leading to erratic behavior or failures
in critical systems. Wormhole attacks undermine the integrity of time-sensitive and location-based
communication, making them particularly difficult to detect, as the relayed messages themselves
may appear authentic.
2.3
Intrusion Detection Systems
An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is a passive hardware or software solution that automates [33] the
monitoring and analysis of events [34] within a host system or local network, detecting potential secu-
rity threats or unauthorized activities. Its purpose is to facilitate the effective detection and subsequent
reporting of potential intrusions [33], which may indicate violations of established security policies [35,
36], to security administrators.
Thus, the main objective of an IDS is to identify attempts to breach the perimeter of a local network or
host system, which could jeopardize its integrity, confidentiality, or availability [35] – and to achieve this
with the utmost accuracy. With the increasing complexity of modern security threats, IDSs have become
indispensable for institutions, organizations, and enterprise networks. They provide an additional layer
of security beyond existing firewalls [33], enhancing the overall protection of network infrastructure
[35].
IDSs are also instrumental in detecting both known and novel/unknown intrusions from internal and
external sources within networks [33]. Consequently, continuous monitoring for signs of intrusion is
essential for maintaining the proper functioning of contemporary devices.
IDSs are generally classified into two main types based on the system they monitor and protect: Network-
based Intrusion Detection System (NIDS), and Host-based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS).
• Network-based Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) is typically deployed at strategic points
within a network—either at a single location or multiple locations—to monitor and analyze both
inbound and outbound network traffic [33]. It generally has lower computational overhead since
it only monitors the passing network traffic rather than internal host activity.
• Host-based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS), in contrast, is installed on individual hosts or
devices to monitor and analyze activity specific to that host. It tracks various host properties and
activities, such as file access and modifications, process executions, and configuration changes, to
detect potential threat. This can result in higher computational overhead on each individual de-
vice, especially in a large enterprise, potentially affecting the overall performance of the monitored
host system [35]. HIDS alerts the competent authority when unusual activity is detected.
2.3.1
IDS detection approach
Furthermore, IDS can be categorized based on their intrusion detection methodologies. The two pri-
mary categories are:
• Signature-based Intrusion Detection
In signature-based (IDS), also referred to as misuse detection, a pattern-matching technique is em-
ployed to scrutinize observed events against a database of known attack signatures [33]. These
signatures represent specific patterns or sequences associated with known attacks. The IDS uses
these predefined signatures to evaluate network traffic. When a match is detected, the system
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
15
==PAGE:26==
triggers an alert or generates an additional report to inform security administrators of a potential
threat. Common examples of signature based IDS are SNORT [33, 35] and SURICATA [35, 37]
Signature-based IDSs are generally easy to use and tend to have a low falsepositive rate [38], as they
rely on matching observed events to a database of known attack signatures. This approach makes
them highly effective at identifying established threats. However, they struggle with detecting
novel or unknown attacks (e.g., zero-day attack) that do not have corresponding signatures [38].
Even minor modifications to known attack patterns can evade detection. Therefore, it is crucial
to regularly update the signature database with new and evolving attack patterns to maintain high
detection rates [34].
• Anomaly-based Intrusion Detection
Anomaly-based IDSs operate on the principle that intrusions exhibit patterns distinct from nor-
mal network behavior [34]. Initially, an anomaly-based IDS establishes a baseline of ‘normal’ net-
work traffic characteristics. It then monitors network activity, flagging any deviations from this
baseline as potential intrusions. Unlike signature-based IDSs, which rely on predefined attack
signatures, anomaly-based IDSs do not require specific signatures for each type of attack. This
enables them to detect previously unknown threats, including Zero-Day exploits [38].
However, this detection method often encounters a higher rate of false positives, where normal
but unusual activity is incorrectly flagged as malicious. In contrast, signature-based IDSs, which
rely on predefined attack signatures, typically have lower false positive rates but may miss new or
unknown threats, resulting in a higher rate of false negatives [35].
An overview of IDS classifications is depicted in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Classification of Intrusion Detection System
2.3.2
IDS deployment strategy
Technological advancements in modern vehicles have resulted in increasingly complex in-vehicle com-
munication networks due to the integration of various subsystems, sensors, actuators, and control units.
These components communicate using protocols like the Controller Area Network (CAN), FlexRay,
Ethernet, and the Local Interconnect Network (LIN) [39]. As vehicle connectivity grows, so does the at-
tack surface, making them more vulnerable to cybersecurity threats. Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)
16
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:27==
play a critical role in detecting and mitigating these threats. However, their deployment must be care-
fully planned to accommodate the vehicle’s architecture, performance limitations, and communication
protocols.
Based on the findings in [39, 40, 41, 42], three key locations are highlighted for IDS deployment in auto-
motive environments (as illustrated in Figure 2.8): (A) the CAN network, (B) Electronic Control Units
(ECUs), and (C) central gateways. Deploying IDS on individual ECUs (as a Host-based IDS) provides
detailed visibility into internal activities, enabling the detection of malicious code during runtime. Al-
ternatively, positioning IDS on the CAN network or at central gateways, which connect multiple com-
munication buses, functions as a Network-based IDS. This placement allows the system to monitor and
analyze network traffic as it flows between different segments, detecting and responding to active attacks
in the vehicle’s communication system.
When designing an IDS for in-vehicle networks, several key factors must be considered, particularly the
placementofECUsandtheassociatedsecurityrisks. StudiesbyKoscheretal. [43]emphasizethatattacks
on the CAN network and central gateways pose a far greater threat than attacks on individual ECUs.
This is because compromised networks and gateways control the flow of data packets to various ECU
domains, giving attackers the ability to manipulate or disrupt communications across multiple critical
vehicle systems. In contrast, a compromised ECU would have a more localized impact, limited to that
specific unit. Therefore, securing the CAN network and central gateways is crucial when designing an
IDS, as vulnerabilities in these areas could expose the entire vehicle system to more widespread and severe
risks.
Figure 2.8: Examples of IDS deployment points in a modern automotive network architecture: (A)
CAN, (B) ECU, and (C) gateways.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
17
==PAGE:28==
3
Related Works
This chapter examines the current landscape of automotive intrusion detection system (IDS) research,
focusingonbothcontrollerareanetworks(CAN)andbroadersystemslikein-vehiclenetworksandintel-
ligent transportation systems. It provides a comprehensive overview of recent developments and trends
shaping the field. The literature is categorized into three main approaches:
• Non-learning (Section 3.1)
• Traditional machine learning (Section 3.2)
• Deep learning (Section 3.3).
Non-learning IDSs are analyzed based on detection methods like timing, and sequence, while traditional
machine learning IDSs use techniques like decision trees, clustering, and support vector machines. Deep
learning IDSs use architectures such as convolutional neural networks, feed-forward neural networks,
and deep transfer learning.
18
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:29==
3.1
Non-Learning Methods
Zhao et al. [44] developed ClockIDS, a timing-based IDS specifically designed to protect the Controller
Area Network (CAN) in vehicles. ClockIDS operates by capturing the content of CAN messages and
recording their arrival times. It then estimates the clock skews of each Electronic Control Unit (ECU) to
generate a unique fingerprint for each ECU, which is stored in a fingerprint library. These fingerprints
enable the system not only to detect intrusions but also to identify the source of an attack. ClockIDS
achieves this by using the empirical rule algorithm for intrusion detection and the dynamic time warping
algorithm to attribute attacks to the responsible ECU. The effectiveness of the proposed approach was
evaluated using two vehicles, the Luxgen U5 and the Buick Regal, against a range of attack scenarios,
including spoofing and masquerade attacks. In CAN networks, spoofing attacks are relatively straight-
forward, typically targeting a specific arbitration ID and falsifying the data field. These attacks can have
significant impact vehicle performance, such as disrupting gear shifting or acceleration [45, 46]. In the
evaluation, ClockIDS demonstrated false positive rates (FPR) of 0.0027 for the Luxgen U5 and 0.77 for
the Buick Regal. Additionally, ClockIDS demonstrated the ability to detect and attribute an attack in
1.99 milliseconds, with a detection accuracy of 98% and a source attribution accuracy of 92% for spoof-
ing and masquerade attacks.
Marchetti and Stabili [47] proposed an ID sequence-based Intrusion Detection System (IDS) designed
to identify malicious CAN messages injected by attackers into the CAN bus of modern vehicles. Their
approachworksbymonitoringsequencesoftwoconsecutivemessages,referredtoas”transitions.”When
the first message, associated with one arbitration ID, finishes transmitting, the system observes a ”tran-
sition” to the next message with the following arbitration ID (which can be the same as the first). These
valid transitions are represented in a square matrix, where the rows and columns correspond to the
unique arbitration IDs captured in the trace. In the training phase, the transition matrix is initialized
with FALSE values. As valid transitions occur, the matrix is updated, marking the corresponding ar-
bitration ID pairs as TRUE. In the monitoring phase, the IDS continuously reads sequences of two
successive messages from the CAN bus and checks their corresponding position in the matrix. Transi-
tions marked as TRUE are considered normal, while those marked as FALSE are flagged as anomalous,
indicating potential malicious activity. In comparison to timing-based IDSs, this scheme is more resilient
to delays and message queuing; however, it remains vulnerable to packet loss [12].
Islam et al. [48] leveraged graph theory for attack detection in this approach. They highlighted the vul-
nerability of Marchetti and Stabili’s [47] ID sequence-based IDS to intelligent attacks and used it as the
foundation for their proposed IDS. The raw CAN frames appearing within a pre-determined window
are captured and integrated into graph structures. After collecting a sufficient number of windows, the
IDS generates a ”population window” that represents the expected distribution of traffic patterns. Dur-
ing the monitoring phase, the IDS continuously captures traffic and computes its distribution. The sys-
tem then uses the chi-squared test to determine whether the observed distribution matches the expected
distribution. If the two distributions are similar, the traffic is considered normal; if not, it is flagged
as anomalous. The IDS successfully detected and distinguished between DoS, fuzzing, spoofing, and
replay attacks, with very low misclassification rates of 5.26%, 10.00%, 0.00%, and 4.76% [12].
In their approach, Alnabulsi and Islam [49] applied the Snort IDS to address the problem of code injec-
tion attacks in intelligent transportation systems. They analyzed existing Snort rules, identified gaps, and
proposed three custom rules specifically designed to detect various attacks, including cross-site script-
ing (XSS) and structured query language (SQL) injection. When evaluated using their self-constructed
dataset, all three rules performed well in terms of recall, with no false negatives. However, false positives
were observed for rules 1 and 2, resulting in precision values of 0.8301 and 0.9462, respectively. Rule 3,
on the other hand, yielded no false positives, achieving a perfect precision of 1.0.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
19
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Traditional Machine Learning Methods
Yang et al. [50] proposed an automotive intrusion detection system for both in-vehicle networks (IVNs)
and intelligent transportation systems (ITSs), exploring four tree-based machine learning methods: de-
cision tree (DT), random forest (RF), extra trees (ET), and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost). A DT
usesadivide-and-conquerapproachwithdecisionandleafnodes, RFusesensemblelearningtoaggregate
the results of multiple decision trees, and ET uses randomized decision trees to facilitate ensemble learn-
ing. XGBoostcombinesmultipledecisiontreesusinggradientdescentoptimization. Tofurtherimprove
accuracy, two ensemble learning techniques—stacking and feature selection—were integrated into the
IDS design. To evaluate the proposed IDS, two datasets were used: the HCRL Car-Hacking dataset,
representing IVNs with five scenarios—attack-free, DoS, fuzzing, RPM spoofing, and gear spoofing;
and the CICIDS2017 dataset for ITSs, featuring seven types of network traffic—attack-free, DoS, port
scanning, brute-force, web attacks, botnet, and infiltration. Upon evaluation, all four tree-based IDSs
performed similarly on the HCRL dataset, with accuracy values of 0.9999 for the DT-, RF-, and ET-
basedIDSs, and0.9998fortheXGBoost-basedIDS.AllfourIDSsachievedanF1-scoreof0.999. Greater
variation was observed in the CICIDS2017 dataset, with accuracy scores of 0.9972, 0.9837, 0.9343, and
0.9978 for DT, RF, ET, and XGBoost, respectively, and corresponding F1-scores of 0.998, 0.983, 0.934,
and 0.997.
Cabelin et al. [51] developed a support vector machine (SVM)-based intrusion detection system specif-
ically designed for Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANET), a subcategory of intelligent transportation
systems. Their approach focuses on the detection of false data injection attacks, categorizing attackers by
intent: selfish attackers aim to manipulate traffic flow for personal gain, while malicious attackers seek to
cause traffic disruptions or accidents [12]. Upon receiving a VANET packet, the IDS performs feature
extraction to create a feature vector, which the machine learning classifier then uses to classify packets as
eithertrustedormalicious. Forevaluation, theauthorssimulatedanintelligenttransportationsystemus-
ing NS3 and MATLAB, conducting experiments with varying numbers of vehicles, attackers, and road
conditions (traffic congestion, no traffic congestion). With simulated traffic congestion, the detection
rate remains nearly 100% for 30 to 50 vehicles, showing a slight decline as the vehicle count approaches
60. In contrast, without congestion, the detection rate starts at just above 90% for 30 vehicles and rises to
just below 100% at 60 vehicles. Detection times with congestion range from 0.0145 to 0.1999 seconds,
while those without congestion vary from 0.0001 to 0.1798 seconds.
D’Angelo et al. [52] proposed an intrusion detection system for CAN bus that utilizes a clustering ap-
proach, specifically employing the k-means algorithm. In the k-means partitioning process, the number
of clusters, k, is predetermined, and initial centroids are selected. Each object is assigned to the nearest
centroid, which is then updated accordingly. The IDS constructs an internal representation of nor-
mal CAN traffic through a two-step process: first, it extracts and stores arbitration IDs and command
parameters from the data field; second, it uses k-means clustering to group arbitration IDs with their
corresponding command parameters, enabling the identification of valid parameters while flagging any
invalid ones. For detection, a data-centric algorithm assesses whether a given CAN frame belongs to one
or more pre-computed clusters. If the frame does not fit any cluster based on its data field, it is classified
as anomalous. Conversely, if it does fit, the IDS checks whether the frame’s arbitration ID matches that
of at least one relevant cluster; a lack of match also results in an anomalous classification. For evaluation,
the authors used five datasets provided by the Hacking and Countermeasure Research Lab (HCRL),
with each dataset representing one of the following scenarios: (1) attack-free, (2) DoS attack, (3) fuzzing
attack, (4) RPM spoofing attack, and (5) gear spoofing attack. Across all datasets, the IDS performed
well, achieving an accuracy of 1.0000 in the attack-free state and during the DoS attack, 0.9996 during
the fuzzing attack, 0.9999 during the RPM spoofing attack, and 0.9998 during the gear spoofing attack.
While the DoS and spoofing attacks yielded perfect recall scores, the fuzzing attack’s recall was slightly
lower at 0.9999, highlighting a consistent challenge in detecting fuzzing attacks.
20
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:31==
Alshammari et al. [53] presented an intrusion detection system based on the k-nearest neighbors (KNN)
algorithm, specificallydesignedfortheCANbusenvironmentinintelligenttransportationsystems. The
numberofneighbors, k, ispredefined, andwhenanewdatapointisintroduced, adistancefunction(e.g.,
Euclidean) identifies the nearest k neighbors. These neighbors then vote on the classification, with the
majority’s class determining the final classification of the new data point. The system assigns the point
to the majority class of its nearest neighbors. For analysis, two car-hacking datasets from the Hacking
and Countermeasure Research Lab (HCRL) were used: “DoS dataset” and “fuzzy dataset.”. The system
achievedapproximately0.975 accuracy, 1.000 precision, 0.970recall, and0.985F1-scoreforDoSattacks,
while for fuzzing attacks, all metrics approached 1.000. Additionally, the authors developed an SVM-
based approach [53] targeting the same attacks as the KNN-based system (DoS and fuzzing attacks).
During evaluation, both approaches yielded comparable scores for the DoS attack; however, the KNN-
based IDS significantly outperformed the SVM-based counterpart during the fuzzing attack.
3.3
Deep Learning Methods
Weietal. [54]introducedtheAttentionMechanismandAutoEncoderforIntrusionDetection(AMAEID),
a novel approach for detecting malicious activity within CAN bus systems. This model uses a combi-
nation of an autoencoder and an attention mechanism to enhance real-time intrusion detection accu-
racy. In the preprocessing stage, CAN messages are converted to a suitable binary format. The autoen-
coder, utilizing a multi-layer denoising encoder, encodes and decodes the message data while applying
the dropout netwwork layer to obtain hidden feature representations. Finally, AMAEID uses a single-
layer fully connected network to output a prediction, indicating whether the message is normal (0) or
abnormal (1). This method was validated using the OTIDS [55] dataset, demonstrating high perfor-
mance. However, the evaluation was primarily compared against traditional machine learning methods
such as Decision Trees (DT), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), and Support Vector Machines (SVM). Fur-
thermore, the results have not been analyzed in comparison to other literature utilizing autoencoders,
which could help substantiate the achieved results more comprehensively [56].
Sami et al. [57] proposed the Network Embedded System Laboratory’s Intrusion Detection System
(NESLIDS), built on a fully-connected feed-forward neural network (FFNN) architecture with two hid-
den layers and one output layer. To improve detection accuracy and reduce the false positive rate (FPR),
the authors adjusted parameters such as the number of neurons in the hidden layers, batch size, and ac-
tivation functions. The system was trained on curated datasets from the Hacking Countermeasures and
Research Lab (HCRL) [25] and the OBD-II port of a Mercedes ML350. This technique targeted three
attack types: Denial of Service (DoS), fuzzy, and impersonation attacks— with the first two included
in training data and the latter reserved for evaluation. NESLIDS achieved accuracy rates of 0.9999 for
the HCRL dataset and 0.9860 for the ML350 dataset, with precision, recall, and F1-scores consistently
exceeding 0.99 across various detection thresholds.
Song et al. [58] designed an IDS called Reduced Inception-ResNet, specifically tailored for the 29-bit
CAN bus. This system uses a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to detect anomalies in CAN
traffic by transforming the data into 29x29 matrices, where each matrix represents 29 successive arbi-
tration IDs in binary form. These matrices are processed like images in traditional CNNs, allowing the
system to classify the data as normal or anomalous. The IDS was evaluated offline, showing strong per-
formanceagainstDenialofService(DoS)andspoofingattacks, withslightlylowersuccessagainstfuzzing
attacks. F1-scores for DoS, RPM spoofing, and gear spoofing were 0.9995, 0.9996, and 0.9994, respec-
tively, while fuzzing achieved an F1-score of 0.9980. The detection latency was found to depend on the
batch size.
Sudo et al. [59] developed a supervised recurrent neural network (RNN)-based IDS for in-vehicle net-
works, focusing on detecting altered or mixed CAN frames. Their IDS analyzes frames using two key
features: content information and periodicity. By leveraging the RNN’s ability to compare inputs over
time, the system accurately evaluated periodic variations in traffic without generating excessive false posi-
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
21
==PAGE:32==
tives. They tested it against arbitration ID modification, data field alteration, and flooding (DoS) attacks.
Using plotted graphs, the authors presented accuracy values for flood attack across coefficients of varia-
tion. However, the paper did not provide metrics such as precision, recall, or F1-scores.
22
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:33==
4
Implementation
Thischapterprovidesadetailedoverviewoftheimplementationprocessforthenovelpatternsdeveloped
as part of this thesis. These patterns are designed to identify anomalous frames in CAN bus traffic data
through the proposed rule-based rule-based Intrusion Detection System (IDS).
The source code for the developed IDS is available for inspection in the following Bitbucket repository:
bitbucket.org/tlucien/can-ids/
The following sections outline the key steps involved in the development of the model:
Section 4.1 covers the essential preprocessing steps applied to the dataset, which form the foundation for
the subsequent training and testing phases of the IDS model. This includes cleaning and transforming
the data to ensure it is suitable for training, handling missing or corrupted data, normalizing numerical
values, and encoding categorical variables. The preprocessing phase ensures consistency and optimizes
the model’s performance during training. By the end of this section, the dataset is fully prepared for the
next stages of the modeling process.
Section 4.2 introduces the first of the proposed patterns, Pattern #1, and discusses its role in recognizing
normal behavior within the CAN bus traffic. This section focuses on the training process for Pattern #1,
with an emphasis on how the model distinguishe between typical traffic and potential anomalies. It also
includes the establishment of benchmark behavior characteristic of normal CAN bus communication,
as well as the development of validation checks to identify mismatches indicative of potential attacks.
These checks are critical for ensuring the model’s effectiveness in detecting anomalous frames during the
testing.
Section 4.3 presents the second proposed pattern, Pattern #2, which uses the concept of field type clas-
sification as a key component of the anomaly detection process. This pattern builds upon the work of
Markovitz and Wool [60], who introduced field classification in CAN bus traffic to distinguish between
normal and anomalous CAN frames. We describe the implementation of this classification and its role
in detecting anomalies, particularly those that may result from manipulated or spoofed field types. This
section also elaborates on the model’s training process for Pattern #2, highlighting how the system recog-
nizes normal behavior in the context of these classified field types, and outlines the necessary validation
checks to ensure the reliable detection of malicious activity.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
23
==PAGE:34==
4.1
Preprocessing
The data preprocessing phase involves reading and preparing datasets stored as CSV files within the
can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset describedin Section 5.2. The read_dataset() functiontakes
the directory path as input, recursively accesses the directory and its subdirectories, and locates the rel-
evant CSV files. It initializes an empty DataFrame, df, to hold the combined data from all files. Using
a concatenation process, it merges data from multiple files. If debugging is enabled, the function filters
rows based on the 'attack' column to limit the number of attack and non-attack samples, provid-
ing a debug-limited subset. The function returns a DataFrame containing either the full dataset or the
reduced debug subset, depending on the configuration.
Following this, the clean_dataset() function refines the raw CAN bus data by cleaning and stan-
dardizing it within the DataFrame. This involves removing rows with missing values to ensure data in-
tegrity and performing data type conversions, such as converting 'timestamp' values into Python
'datetime' objects and transforming 'arbitration_id' values from hexadecimal to decimal for
easier numerical analysis. The function also processes the 'data_field' column by standardizing its
format, calculating its size, and extracting byte-level representations. Additionally, it computes time in-
tervals between consecutive frames and removes invalid entries, such as those with non-positive intervals.
Finally, the clean_dataset() function selects and organizes relevant columns, including processed
fields and attack labels, into a streamlined DataFrame, ready for the subsequent training and testing
phases.
4.2
Pattern #1
The CAN frame’s data field, as the primary information carrier in a vehicle’s network, makes it a po-
tential entry point for malicious activities. Its pivotal role in communication between ECUs presents
opportunities for attackers to inject, modify, or replay data, potentially compromising vehicle systems
and security. Given its importance, any anomalies in the data field must be carefully monitored to safe-
guard the system.
In most CAN systems, each message ID is linked to a fixed or predictable payload size, determined by
the system’s design and application requirements. A deviation from the expected size—such as a message
ID that typically transmits 8 bytes suddenly transmitting more or fewer—can signal operational failures,
such as hardware malfunctions, software bugs, or memory corruption. These irregularities can lead to
diagnostic errors, misinterpretation of data, or system instability. However, such deviations can also
serve as early indicators of potential security threats, such as:
• Message Spoofing: Attackers may inject frames with unexpected payload sizes to impersonate
legitimate messages, disrupting system operations.
• Flooding Attacks: Frames with altered payload sizes could increase bus load, degrading commu-
nication performance and affecting critical real-time functions.
• Data Manipulation: Unusual payload sizes may be designed to exploit vulnerabilities in the re-
ceiving system, potentially causing buffer overflows or triggering other security breaches.
To address these risks, Pattern #1 in our developed rule-based IDS has been designed to continuously
apply learned patterns to monitor payload size patterns across the network. By detecting deviations in
CAN frame payload sizes, the IDS can effectively identify anomalies that may indicate security threats,
thereby strengthening the system’s resilience against malicious activities.
4.2.1
Training
Uponcompletionofthepreprocessingphase,thedatasetsarereadyfortraining. Thetrain_01_attack
_free sub-dataset from the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset is used to train the IDS, allowing it
to learn the typical communication patterns of the CAN bus network.
24
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:35==
During the training phase for Pattern #1, a mapping is created between each 'arbitration_id' and
itsassociateduniquepayloadsizes(inbytes). Thisisdonebygroupingthedatasetby'arbitration_id',
extracting the distinct payload size values ('data_field_size') for each group, and storing them in
a dictionary. The resulting mapping serves as a reference for identifying deviations during testing, help-
ing the IDS detect potential anomalies. The training process is timed for performance tracking, with a
confirmation message displayed once the mapping is successfully generated.
Examples of arbitration IDs stored in the mapping along with their associated payload sizes are given as:
Mapping:
'0C1': [8],
'0C5': [8],
'0C9': [7],
'0F1': [4],
'0F9': [8],
'120': [5],
'4F1': [8],
'500': [4],
'514': [8],
'771': [7],
Byestablishingabaselineofexpectedpayloadsizesforeach'arbitration_id',theIDSiswell-equipped
to identify deviations and enhance the security of the CAN bus network.
4.2.2
Validation
To determine whether a data row, representing a CAN frame, matches Pattern #1, a set of validation
rules is applied. Any violation of these rules indicates a failure to match Pattern #1. The results of this
assessment are stored in a new column, 'attack_4', where:
• 1 indicates the row is flagged as an attack.
• 0 indicates the row is classified as non-attack.
The classification is based on the following conditions:
• Invalid Arbitration ID: If the 'arbitration_id' is not found in the mapping dictionary
created during training, the row is flagged as an attack.
• Missing Payload Size: If the 'data_field_size' value is missing (NaN), the row is considered
invalid and marked as an attack.
• Non-Integer Payload Size: Ensures the 'data_field_size' is of type integer. Rows with
non-integer payload sizes are flagged as attacks.
• Unexpected Payload Size: Checks if the 'data_field_size' is not one of the expected values
associatedwiththecorresponding'arbitration_id'inthemapping. Ifnot, therowisflagged
as an attack.
The following Python code snippet demonstrates the rules’ implementation in the developed IDS:
if pattern_4:
data['attack_4'] = data.apply(
lambda row: 1 if row['arbitration_id'] not in mapping
or pd.isnull(row['data_field_size'])
or not isinstance(row['data_field_size'], int)
or row['data_field_size'] not in mapping[row['
arbitration_id']]
else 0,
axis=1
)
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
25
==PAGE:36==
By applying these rules systematically, the system identifies anomalies in the CAN bus traffic data, mark-
ing rows that deviate from expected communication patterns as attacks. This provides a suitable mech-
anism for detecting deviations commonly associated with malicious activity in the CAN bus network.
4.3
Pattern #2
The data field is a key component of a CAN frame, responsible for carrying the payload being transmit-
ted. As outlined in Subsection 2.1.2, the data field can accommodate up to 8 bytes (64 bits) in Classical
CAN, while in CAN FD (Flexible Data-rate), this capacity expands to 64 bytes (512 bits) [61].
The data field may encode one or more pieces of information, with its size ranging from zero to the
maximum byte limit. For example, a single message could contain data for both vehicle speed and engine
revolutions per minute (RPM), each represented as a 32-bit integer. In such a case, the speed data could
occupy the first 4 bytes, and the RPM data in the remaining 4 bytes. It is common, however, for not
all bits within the data field to be utilized. Depending on the application, unused bits are often padded
with default or zero values to ensure alignment or compliance with message structure requirements.
These encoding practices introduce a logical substructure within the CAN frame’s data field, where
multiple fields with distinct semantics are concatenated to carry different types of information.
ToidentifythesepotentialstructuresintheCANframes—andspecificallywithinthedatafield—Markovitz
and Wool [60] put forward a field identification algorithm designed to detect semantically meaningful
patterns in CAN messages when ECU specifications are unavailable. The algorithm treats the struc-
ture of messages as a sequence of positional bit fields, typically of fixed or consistent length. By analyzing
CAN traffic logs, the authors suggested that the fields within the data frames could be classified into four
types with distinct semantic properties: constant, multi-value, counter, and sensor (see Section 4.3.1).
This classification is based on factors such as the length of each candidate field and the distribution of
unique bit values across the data [60, 62, 63].
Markovitz and Wool, in their paper [60], suggested that while their work primarily focused on field iden-
tification and classification, their approach could aid in anomaly detection by providing a structured way
to analyze deviations in CAN messages. However, they did not develop or evaluate an IDS based on this
classification.
In Pattern #2, we implement aspects of their field classification algorithm as part of an IDS model and
evaluate its effectiveness for intrusion detection using the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset.
Following their approach, Pattern #2 focuses on identifying and classifying fields within the data fields
of CAN frames. This byte-level classification process establishs benchmarks for field-type behavior an-
alyzing sequential hexadecimal values in CAN payloads and recognizing meaningful structural patterns
from traffic logs. By defining this baseline, our IDS will be able to detect anomalies—deviations from
expected patterns—and flag potential attacks for further investigation.
4.3.1
Field Types
The substructures of each data field, identified by the developed IDS, are classified into one of the fol-
lowing distinct types:
1. Constant
Represents fields where sets of bytes consistently hold the same value across different messages
(i.e., the values do not change over time). This is denoted as 'constant'
2. Counter
Describesfieldscontainingvaluesthatincrementordecrementinacyclicmanner, typicallywithin
a defined range between a minimum and maximum value. This cyclic counter behavior is divided
into two categories in our implementation:
26
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:37==
• Down-Cyclic Counter: This counter decreases incrementally until it reaches the specified
minimum value. Upon reaching the minimum, it wraps around and resets to the maximum
value, effectively restarting the count downwards. The range is from 255 (maximum) to 0
(minimum). This is denoted as 'Dcounter'.
• Up-Cyclic Counter: Thiscounterincreasesincrementallyuntilitreachesthespecifiedmax-
imum value. Upon reaching the maximum, it wraps around and resets to the minimum
value, effectively restarting the count upwards. The range is from 0 (minimum) to 255
(maximum). This is denoted as 'Ucounter'.
Figure 4.1 shows both a Down-cyclic counter field and an Up-cyclic counter field.
Figure 4.1: Counter Fields : The top curve shows a Down-Cyclic Counter cycling over 16 values, and
the bottom curve shows an Up-Cyclic Counter over 32 values. [60].
3. Multi-Value
Represents fields that exhibit a small, finite set of distinct values, where these values may represent
multiple possible states. This is denoted as 'multiValue'.
Figure 4.2 shows two multi-value fields that have only two different values each.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.2: Two Multi-value Fields [60].
An example of a multi-value field type, as discussed by Markovitz and Wool, can be found in the
captured CAN messages from the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset. Specifically, under
arbitration ID 'IF5' for the 2016 Chevrolet Silverado, the transmission state data represents a
finite set of operational modes, as the vehicle is equipped with an automatic transmission. This is
demonstrated in Listing 4.1, where the fourth byte (bits 32 to 39) of the CAN frame’s datafield
encodes the vehicle’s transmission state, with each value corresponding to a distinct transmission
mode. The states observed in this example are:
• Park (P): Represented by the value 1
• Reverse (R): Represented by the value 2
• Neutral (N): Represented by the value 3
• Drive (D): Represented by the value 4
• Low (L): Represented by the value 6
Thus, the substructure (i.e., the fourth byte) in the arbitration_id, IF5’s data field, can be
classified as being of type: 'multiValue'.
0-7
8-15
24-31
32-39
40-47
8-15
48-55
56-63
IF5#0F0F000100000000 impala
0F
0F
00
01
00
00
00
00
IF5#4404000400000100 impala
44
04
00
04
00
00
01
00
IF5#0F0F002100000300 silverado
0F
0F
00
21
00
00
03
00
IF5#0D0D000300000800 silverado
0D
0D
00
03
00
00
08
00
IF5#4606000400000900 silverado
46
06
00
04
00
00
09
00
IF5#0101100900020900 silverado
01
01
10
09
00
02
09
00
Listing 4.1: Labeled attack-Free traffic data (accessory mode).
For this project, the following set of values were chosen as the finite list of multi-values:
• 2 : Represents ON and OFF states, which can be observed in systems such as the vehicle’s
door status (closed/open) or the seatbelt warning system (fastened/unfastened).
28
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:39==
• 3 : RepresentsLOW,MEDIUMandHIGHstates, observedinsystemssuchasthevehicle’s
climate control (off/heating/cooling).
• 4 : Represents the 4 forward gear states found in certain trims of 2011 Chevrolet Impala.
• 5 : Represents the different transmission modes i.e. (P, R, N, D, L)
• 6 : Representsthe6 forwardgearstatesfoundinthe2011ChevroletTraverse,2016Chevro-
let Silverado, and 2017 Subaru Forester.
4. Sensor
Represents fields that measure a physical quantity, typically exhibiting continuous values. These
values can be influenced by noise and jitter, making them more variable (dynamic) and less pre-
dictable than other field types such as constant field type or counter field types.
Markovitz and Wool [60] acknowledge the possibility of fields that do not conform to any of the
other three field types (constant, multi-value, or counter). In our implementation, we categorize
these outlier fields as part of a combined category of sensor fields and unclassified field types, de-
noted as 'sensor/other'.
Figure 4.3 is a visual representation of sensor field behavior.
Figure 4.3: Four Sensor Fields [60].
4.3.2
Training
In the training phase for Pattern #2, the preprocessed 'train_01_attack_free' sub-dataset from
the 'can-train-and-test-v1.5' dataset was used as input to train the IDS model. The dataset
was grouped by its respective arbitration IDs, ensuring that frames with the same ID were processed
together. Within each group, the 'data_field_bytes' column contained lists of byte values, which
were extracted from the data field of the CAN frame.
Within each group, the data_field_bytes_filled column contained lists of byte values extracted
from the CAN frame data field. For each byte position (index) in these lists, values across multiple
frames were analyzed and classified into predefined field types—originally proposed by Markovitz and
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
29
==PAGE:40==
Wool[60]anddetailedinSection4.3.1. Thesefieldtypesincludeconstant, multiValue, Ucounter,
Dcounter, and sensor/other, determined based on observed value transitions.
Once the classification was complete, a mapping was created for each arbitration ID, associating it with
the list of classified field types derived from its 'data_field_bytes_filled' column. This map-
ping was stored in a dictionary, 'classification_dict', which serves as a reference for anomaly
detection during the testing phase.
Examples of arbitration IDs stored in the 'classification_dict' dictionary, along with their cor-
responding sequences of field types, are as follows:
Classification Dictionary:
'0C9': ['constant', 'constant', 'constant', 'counter', 'constant',
'constant', 'constant'],
'19D': ['sensor/other', 'multiValue', 'multiValue', 'sensor/other',
'multiValue', 'multiValue', 'sensor/other', 'sensor/other',
'sensor/other'],
'199': ['counter', 'constant', 'constant', 'constant', 'multiValue',
'counter', 'constant', 'constant'],
'1C7': ['constant', 'constant', 'Ucounter', 'Dcounter', 'constant',
'constant', 'constant'],
'4E9': ['sensor/other', 'sensor/other', 'sensor/other', 'sensor/other',
'sensor/other'],
By establishing a benchmark sequence of expected field types (behavioral patterns) for each arbitration
ID’S’s data field, the IDS is trained to identify deviations that may indicate potential security threats,
from within the CAN bus traffic data.
4.3.3
Validation
To determine whether a CAN frame is malicious, Pattern #2 must have a set of validation criteria, just
like Pattern #1. Any violation of these criteria indicates a deviation and immediately classifies the CAN
frame as anomalous. The results of these checks are stored in a new column named 'attack_5' where:
• 1 indicates the row is flagged as an attack.
• 0 indicates the row is classified as non-attack.
Using the frame’s data field and the field classification dictionary generated during model training, we
perform behavior-based validation on successive CAN frames with the same arbitration ID.
For each frame, we retrieve the expected behavior for its arbitration ID from the classification dictionary.
We then perform byte-wise checks to ensure that each byte at its respective index follows the predefined
behavior. Specifically, for the same arbitration ID, the byte at index 0 must match the expected behav-
ior for index 0, the byte at index 1 for index 1, and so on. If all checks pass, the frame is classified as
non-malicious. However, if any check fails, the frame is immediately marked as malicious, and further
validation stops. This classification signifies that the CAN frame has deviated from the expected behav-
ior, as learned during model training, for its arbitration ID.
Each byte field is validated against one of the following rules (see their implementations in Appendix
30
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:41==
A.1), which are encapsulated in the behavior checks:
• 'Ucounter': For successive CAN frames with the same arbitration ID, the byte values at the
specified index positions (column index) in the data field must either increase in value or wrap
around from 255 to 0.
• 'Dcounter': For successive CAN frames with the same arbitration ID, the byte values at the
specified index positions (column index) in the data field must either decrease in value or wrap
around from 0 to 255.
• 'constant': For successive CAN frames with the same arbitration ID, the byte values at the
specified index positions (column index) in the data field must remain unchanged.
• 'multiValue': For successive CAN frames with the same arbitration ID, the byte values at the
specifiedindexpositions(columnindex)inthedatafieldmustbelongtoafinitesetofmulti-values.
• 'sensor/other': This rule is treated as a special case that permits byte values at the specified
indexpositionsinsuccessiveCANframeswiththesamearbitrationIDtobypass validation. This
behaviorisanalogoustothe “don’tcare”( * )symbolintheTernaryContentAddressableMemory
(TCAM) 1, as described in Markovitz and Wool’s proposed anomaly detection model [60].
The following Python code snippet illustrates the implementation of this pattern #2’s validation process
in the IDS model:
if pattern_5:
last_valid_rows = {}
# Stores last valid row per ID
data['bool_results'] = data.apply(lambda row: validate_row(
row, last_valid_rows), axis=1)
data['attack_5'] = np.where(data['bool_results'], 0, 1)
data.drop(columns=['bool_results'], inplace=True)
The validation process operates on two levels: row-level validation and DataFrame-wide application.
• Row-Level Validation
At the core of the validation process is the validate_row() function (refer to Appendix A.2),
which determines whether a given row adheres to its expected behavior pattern. Each row is eval-
uated based on predefined classification rules associated with its arbitration ID.
The function first performs initial checks to identify invalid data. If the 'data_field_bytes
_filled' column entry contains a list or if the arbitration ID does not have a corresponding
behavior pattern, the row is immediately marked as invalid. If these checks pass, the function
retrieves the last valid row for the same arbitration ID from last_valid_rows dictionary.
Once a previous valid row is found, the validate_row() function iterates through each index
where a behavior is defined. It then verifies whether the byte values at each index conform to their
expected behavior. Depending on the classification, the values must fulfill one of the behavior
rules: 'constant', 'Ucounter', 'Dcounter', 'sensor/other', or 'multiValue'. If
1TCAM is a high-speed memory used in modern switches and routers for fast lookups and packet classification. It stores
three states per bit—0, 1, and “don’t care” (*), enabling flexible matching for tasks like IP address and network rule processing.
TCAM performs searches in a single clock cycle, ensuring rapid decision-making.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
31
==PAGE:42==
anyofthesechecksfail,therowisclassifiedasinvalid. Otherwise,itisstoredinlast_valid_rows,
replacing the previous reference for future comparisons.
• Applying Validation to the DataFrame
To systematically validate the dataset, validate_row() is applied to each row in sequence using
data.apply(). A dictionary, last_valid_rows, is maintained to track the most recent valid
row for each arbitration ID, ensuring that new rows are validated against their last known correct
state.
This practice of always validating against the last known correct or valid row is essential for main-
taining validation integrity. By isolating compromised frames and effectively quarantining at-
tacks, the model prevents them from influencing future validations. Referencing the last known
non-attack row allows the system to maintain a consistent baseline of expected behavior, reduc-
ing the impact of attacks on subsequent rows. Additionally, this approach strengthens defenses
against advanced persistent threats (APTs), preventing malicious alterations from propagating
through the system.
Eachrowisthenprocessedthroughvalidate_row(),andthevalidationresults(‘True‘forvalid,
‘False‘ for invalid) are stored in a temporary 'bool_results' column. These results are then
converted into an attack indicator column, 'attack_5', using 'np.where()'. A value of '0'
indicates a valid row (no attack detected), while '1' marks an invalid row (potential attack).
Finally,afterclassificationiscomplete,thetemporary'bool_results'columnisremoved,leav-
ing only the attack indicator. This structured validation approach ensures that each row is evalu-
ated based on historical behavior while efficiently processing the entire dataset.
Together, these two validation levels ensure that each row follows expected behavioral patterns and that
deviations are systematically identified across the dataset.
32
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:43==
5
Evaluation
This chapter focuses on the evaluation of the Intrusion Detection System (IDS) and the dataset used in
thisthesis. Thechapterisdividedintotwomainsections: anin-depthdiscussionofthecan-train-and
-test-v1.5 dataset, including the rationale for its selection, and the performance metrics used to eval-
uate the IDS’s effectiveness.
The chapter begins in Section 5.1, providing an overview of the experimental setup for the thesis project,
including the software tools selected for use.
Section 5.2 introduces the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset, describing its structure and content.
Subsection 5.2.1 highlights the specific reasons for selecting this dataset, emphasizing its suitability for
training and testing anomaly-based IDS systems.
Section 5.3 outlines the performance metrics used to assess the IDS. Standard evaluation metrics such as
accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, and false positive rate (FPR) are discussed. Each metric is defined in
detail
By combining a robust dataset and well-defined evaluation metrics, this chapter provides a comprehen-
sive framework for assessing the IDS’s performance and its ability to generalize effectively to real-world
scenarios.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
33
==PAGE:44==
5.1
Experimental Setup
The software tools were chosen for their robustness, versatility, and ability to enhance the development
process, with each playing a key role in different aspects of the project. The following software was uti-
lized throughout the course of this work:
• Python 3.12.3 1
• Pandas 2.1.4 (Library for Python) 2
• Numpy 1.26.4 (Library for Python) 3
• scikit-learn 1.4.1 (Library for Python) 4
• Ubuntu 24.04 LTS 5
5.2
can-train-and-test-v1.5 Dataset
To effectively evaluate the capabilities and performance of the developed intrusion detection system,
the can-train-and-test-v1.5 [64] dataset is utilized. Created by Lampe and Meng [29, 64], this
dataset is specifically designed to support IDS testing in vehicular networks. It builds on the earlier cu-
rated can-train-and-test [29] dataset, introducing more complex evaluation scenarios through the
test_05_suppress and test_06_masquerade datasets, thus enhancing its suitability for compre-
hensive IDS assessments.
To ensure data diversity, the CAN data in the can-train-and-test dataset was gathered from live,
on-the-road sessions with four different vehicles representing a range of makes, models, and types, specif-
ically:
• 2011 Chevrolet Impala — A four-door sedan
• 2011 Chevrolet Traverse — A full-size sport utility vehicle (SUV)
• 2016 Chevrolet Silverado — A four-door pickup truck
• 2017 Subaru Forester — A compact SUV
These vehicles represent a range of manufacturers (Chevrolet and Subaru), models (Impala, Traverse,
Silverado, Forester), and types (sedan, SUV, pickup truck)—thus providing a broad range of data for
IDS evaluation [29].
Each vehicle’s onboard diagnostic (OBD-II) port [16] (see Figure 5.1) provided access to its CAN bus,
thus allowing the effective capture of live CAN traffic data during normal vehicle driving conditions.
This setup allowed for the logging of authentic CAN messages, providing a baseline of legitimate traf-
fic patterns across different vehicle systems and driving conditions. Additionally, to simulate potential
attack scenarios, data was injected directly into the CAN bus, creating instances of manipulated to chal-
lenge IDS detection capabilities. This dual approach—capturing live data and introducing synthetic
anomalies allowed—resulted in a comprehensive dataset that is particularly valuable for developing and
testing IDS models capable of distinguishing between normal and malicious CAN traffic.
The following attack types were introduced during the logging of CAN bus traffic for the curation of
the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset:
1Available at: https://www.python.org/downloads/
2Available at: https://pandas.pydata.org/
3Available at: https://numpy.org/doc/stable/
4Available at: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/install.html
5Available at: https://releases.ubuntu.com/
34
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:45==
1. Denial of Service (DoS)
2. Fuzzing
3. Systematic
4. Gear Spoofing
5. RPM Spoofing
6. Speed Spoofing
7. Combined Spoofing (i.e. Double Spoofing and Triple Spoofing)
8. Standstill
9. Interval
10. Suppress
11. Masquerade
The can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset is organized into four main sets of CAN bus data: set_01,
set_02, set_03 and set_04. Given that the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset includes traffic
from a variety of vehicles, the distinction between known and unknown vehicles becomes a key aspect
of the data collection process. Known vehicles are those whose CAN traffic patterns are included in the
training dataset, enabling the IDS to detect attacks based on familiar vehicle types. In contrast, unknown
vehicles are those with CAN traffic patterns not present in the training dataset, challenging the IDS
to generalize and identify attacks from unfamiliar vehicle types. Similarly, Known attacks refer to pre-
defined attack patterns that are present in the training data, enabling the IDS to learn and recognize these
familiarthreats. Conversely, unknownattacksarenovelorpreviouslyunseenattackpatternsthattheIDS
has not encountered during training, testing the system’s ability to detect new and unexpected threats.
The pairing of known and unknown vehicles used during the data collection process is as follows:
1. set_01
• known vehicle — Chevrolet Impala
• unknown vehicle — Chevrolet Silverado
2. set_02
• known vehicle — Chevrolet Traverse
• unknown vehicle — Subaru Forester
3. set_03
• known vehicle — Chevrolet Silverado
• unknown vehicle — Subaru Forester
4. set_04
• known vehicle — Subaru Forester
• unknown vehicle — Chevrolet Traverse
Each of these sets consists of eight sub-datasets designed to support a variety of evaluation scenarios that
simulate real-world conditions in which an IDS might operate. Below is an overview of each sub-dataset
and its intended purpose:
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.1: Close-up view of the OBD-II port in a 2011 Chevrolet Impala, located beneath the dash-
board, providing access to the vehicle’s CAN bus for diagnostics and data logging [65].
1. train_01_attack_free
• Purpose: To provide a dataset for training the IDS with only legitimate, attack-free traffic.
• Contents: Contains CAN bus frames representing benign traffic, allowing the IDS to learn
the normal behavior of network communication.
2. train_02_with_attacks
• Purpose: To train the IDS using both legitimate and attack traffic, introducing malicious
patterns in a controlled way.
• Contents: This sub-dataset includes both benign and attack data, exposing the IDS to a
variety of attack signatures while still providing a baseline of normal behavior.
3. test_01_known_vehicle_known_attack
• Purpose: To evaluate the IDS’s effectiveness in identifying known attacks in a familiar en-
vironment.
• Contents: Contains attack traffic similar to those seen in training, using a known vehicle
profile.
4. test_02_unknown_vehicle_known_attack
• Purpose: To assess the IDS’s adaptability by testing it against a known attack within an
unfamiliar vehicle profile.
• Contents: Known attack traffic presented in the context of an unknown vehicle configura-
tion.
5. test_03_known_vehicle_unknown_attack
• Purpose: To test the IDS’s capacity to detect new attacks within a known environment.
36
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:47==
• Contents: This sub-dataset includes previously unobserved attack traffic, tested in the
context of a known vehicle profile.
6. test_04_Unknown_vehicle_unknown_attack
• Purpose: To evaluate the IDS under the most challenging conditions, involving both an
unknown attack and an unfamiliar vehicle profile.
• Contents: Contains attack data of previously unseen types, embedded within traffic from
an unknown vehicle configuration.
7. test_05_suppress
• Purpose: To evaluate the IDS’s ability to detect suppression attacks, where specific CAN
messages are deliberately omitted to disrupt critical communication.
• Contents: Includes attack traffic with intentionally suppressed CAN frames, targeting key
vehicle functions like braking or steering.
8. test_06_masquerade
• Purpose: To assess the IDS’s ability to detect masquerade attacks, where an attacker imper-
sonates a legitimate vehicle or network participant.
• Contents: Contains traffic where an attacker mimics legitimate CAN frames, using altered
identifiers or payloads to blend in with normal traffic.
The attack-free CAN bus data was recorded under two distinct vehicle operation conditions: while the
vehicle was in motion (driving mode) and while it was stationary/parked (accessory mode) [16, 29]. This
approach ensured the capture of a comprehensive range of traffic patterns across different vehicle states,
accounting for variations in CAN bus activity based on factors such as speed, engine load, and system
usage. Listing 5.1 displays attack-free traffic data captured in accessory mode.
(1672084671.303575) can0 184#000300000000
(1672084671.303820) can0 1C7#0652F9AB00003F
(1672084671.304057) can0 1CD#0000000000
(1672084671.304271) can0 1E5#46FF1AA00000E501
(1672084671.304519) can0 1E9#0000000C00020000
(1672084671.307894) can0 0F9#0000400000000015
(1672084671.308120) can0 0C9#0000000D004008
(1672084671.308271) can0 0F1#1C030040
(1672084671.308515) can0 191#0650065006500000
(1672084671.308762) can0 199#4FFF0FFFF00000FF
(1672084671.311977) can0 0C1#2000000420000004
(1672084671.312260) can0 0C5#2000000420000004
(1672084671.312469) can0 1E5#46FF1AC00000E401
(1672084671.314897) can0 334#0000
(1672084671.315117) can0 3ED#8000000000FF0000
(1672084671.318277) can0 0F1#28030040
(1672084671.318700) can0 12A#4700000837513FFF
(1672084671.320170) can0 0F9#0000400000000015
(1672084671.320502) can0 199#8FFF0FFFEFFF00FF
(1672084671.320721) can0 0C9#00000000004008
(1672084671.320950) can0 19D#C0003FFD000000FF
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
37
==PAGE:48==
(1672084671.321119) can0 134#00001000
(1672084671.321369) can0 0C1#3000000430000004
(1672084671.321617) can0 191#0650065006500000
(1672084671.321899) can0 0C5#3000000430000004
(1672084671.322095) can0 1A1#00100000000000
(1672084671.322343) can0 17D#04E8000078000100
Listing 5.1: Attack-Free traffic data captured as CAN frames
Each data frame in both the can-train-and-test and can-train-and-test-v1.5 datasets cor-
responds to a CAN bus frame, capturing the key fields:
• Timestamp: A numerical variable that denotes the time when the message was transmitted. It
follows Unix time (also known as POSIX time or Unix epoch time), which counts the number of
seconds elapsed since midnight on January 1st, 1970.
• Arbitration identifier: A hexadecimal value that uniquely identifies the message.
• Data field: The payload of the message, represented in hexadecimal format.
Once captured, the CAN frames are labeled, standardized, and stored in .csv files with an additional
field:
• attack: A binary field where 0 indicates an attack-free frame, and 1 indicates an attack.
This structure provides a clear and standardized format for analyzing CAN bus frames and distinguish-
ing between normal and malicious messages. Listing 5.2 provides an example of attack-free traffic data
collected in accessory mode, stored in a labeled .csv file.
timestamp ,arbitration_id ,data_field ,attack
1672531278.528475,1E5,46FFC2C000003C00 ,0
1672531278.5285978,334,0000,0
1672531278.529332,3C9,0766000000000000,0
1672531278.530348,1EB,004C,0
1672531278.531728,19D,80003FFE000000FF ,0
1672531278.5318758,1AF,000000,0
1672531278.532122,1F5,0F0F000100000300 ,0
1672531278.533824,0C9,0000000D00000000 ,0
1672531278.534054,191,063C091D091D0000 ,0
1672531278.534302,1ED,0000000000000800,0
1672531278.53445,1CB,100000,0
1672531278.534608,1EF,00000032,0
1672531278.5348709,1A1,0010010000000000,0
1672531278.5350928,1C3,063C063C00000000 ,0
1672531278.5363278,0C7,03FE0000 ,0
1672531278.536567,0F9,00004000000000FF,0
1672531278.536823,189,4FFF0FFF300000FF ,0
1672531278.5369968,0F1,00030040,0
1672531278.537278,199,4FFF0E70F18F00FF ,0
1672531278.538121,0C1,20000000200320A7,0
1672531278.538378,0C5,2005FE612002C863 ,0
1672531278.538575,184,0003000001FD,0
1672531278.5388029,1C7,0FFFEFFE03FF3F ,0
38
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:49==
1672531278.5389879,1CD,47FF08007F ,0
1672531278.5392818,1E5,46FFC2E000003B00 ,0
1672531278.5394258,1E1,00FE120040 ,0
1672531278.539672,1E9,0FFF000C00000000 ,0
Listing 5.2: Labeled attack-Free traffic data (accessory mode).
Lampe and Meng [29] note that the remaining fields, such as SOF, CRC, and others, can be reconstructed
using the captured fields and the standard CAN frame specifications.
The curated datasets are available for access through the following links:
• can-train-and-test: bitbucket.org/brooke-lampe/can-train-and-test/
• can-train-and-test-v1.5: bitbucket.org/brooke-lampe/can-train-and-test-v1.5/
5.2.1
Why the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset?
Severalfactorscontributedtothedecisiontoselectthecan-train-and-test-v1.5datasetoverother
available options. These include:
• Sufficient Attack-free data
A major advantage of the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset is its provision of sufficient
attack-free data, which is essential for training effective anomaly-based IDSs. Establishing a base-
line of normal behavior is crucial for an IDS to flag deviations that may indicate attacks. Unfor-
tunately, many publicly available datasets lack sufficient attack-free data, limiting their utility for
training such systems. The can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset overcomes this limitation by
offering a total of more than 91,827,504 attack-free samples (i.e., captured CAN frames) with
each vehicle in the dataset contributing at least 10,000,000 attack-free samples [29]. This ensures
a solid foundation for training and establishing reliable baselines.
• Diverse Vehicle Representation
Another compelling reason for choosing this dataset is its diverse representation of vehicle types—
four different models from two manufacturers: Chevrolet and Subaru. This variety is crucial be-
cause CAN implementations differ significantly between manufacturers and even among models
from the same manufacturer. An IDS trained on data from just one vehicle type may struggle to
generalize to others with distinct CAN message structures, limiting its effectiveness.
In comparison to other datasets, such as the HCRL Survival Analysis dataset [66], which includes
onlythreevehiclesfromthreemanufacturers(Chevrolet,Hyundai,andKia),thecan-train-and-
test-v1.5 dataset provides a wider range of models for testing. This expanded diversity allows
for a more thorough evaluation of an IDS’s ability to detect attacks across various vehicle config-
urations, addressing concerns about generalization and vehicle-specific variations.
By offering both manufacturer and model diversity, the can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset is
ideally suited for developing and assessing IDS systems capable of handling the complexities and
variability of real-world vehicle fleets.
• Wide Range of Attack Scenarios
The can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset also stands out for its wide range of attack scenarios.
Anomaly-based IDSs require exposure to a variety of attack types in order to detect deviations
from normal behavior effectively. Without sufficient attack variation, these systems cannot be
adequately trained or tested, as they would be limited to just one attack type, or none at all.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
39
==PAGE:50==
Thecan-train-and-test-v1.5datasetincludes11uniqueattacktypes,offeringawiderange
of attack scenarios for training and evaluating anomaly-based IDSs. This diversity ensures that the
IDS can be rigorously tested, allowing it to detect a broad spectrum of anomalous behavior and
enhancing its robustness in real-world applications.
• Complete Labeling
The can-train-and-test-v1.5 dataset was chosen for its complete labeling, addressing a key
limitation in many existing datasets. Unlike others that lack consistent labels, this dataset provides
clear annotations: “0” for attack-free (normal) traffic and “1” for attack traffic. This complete la-
beling ensures that the dataset is ideal for supervised learning, enabling precise training and perfor-
mance evaluation of the developed intrusion detection system. It eliminates the need for manual
labeling, streamlining the system development process and ensuring accurate assessments of its
effectiveness.
5.3
Performance Metrics
The effectiveness of an IDS relies on accurate and comprehensive evaluation metrics to assess how well it
distinguishes between normal and anomalous behavior. Such metrics are crucial for ensuring the IDS’s
reliability and applicability in real-world scenarios.
A foundational tool for this evaluation is the confusion matrix, obtained using the scikit-learn library,
which categorizes the IDS’s outcomes into four components:
• True Positive (TP): Instances where the IDS correctly detects an intrusion.
• False Negative (FN): Instances where the IDS fails to detect an intrusion.
• False Positive (FP): Normal traffic incorrectly flagged as an intrusion.
• True Negative (TN): Instances where the IDS correctly identifies normal traffic.
Each component of the confusion matrix contributes to the calculation of various performance metrics,
which provide insights into the IDS’s detection capabilities and limitations.
The key performance metrics derived from the confusion matrix and used in this thesis include:
1. Accuracy
Accuracy represents the proportion of correctly classified instances (both intrusions and normal
traffic) relative to the total number of instances. . In other words, it is the ratio of correct predic-
tions (both true positives and true negatives) to the total number of predictions made by the IDS
[67]. Its formula is given in equation 5.1.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(5.1)
2. Precision
Precision indicates the proportion of instances identified as intrusions that were actually correct
i.e. of the observations predicted as anomalous, it measures the percentage that were actually
anomalous [68]. Its formula is given in equation 5.2.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(5.2)
40
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:51==
3. Recall (True Positive Rate)
Recall measures the proportion of actual intrusions that were successfully detected, highlighting
the IDS’s ability to minimize missed detections. The formula for recall is given in equation 5.3.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(5.3)
4. F1 score
The F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a single metric that balances
both. This means it reflects how well the classifier performs in terms of both recall (minimizing
false negatives) and precision (minimizing false positives). The F1 score ranges from 0 to 1, with
1 being the best possible score and 0 the worst. Its formula is given in equation 5.4.
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
(5.4)
5. False Positive Rate (FPR)
False Positive Rate (FPR) measures the proportion of legitimate (normal) instances that are incor-
rectly identified as intrusions by the IDS. It quantifies how often the IDS incorrectly flags normal,
non-malicious activity as anomalous. The formula for False Positive Rate (FPR) is given in equa-
tion 5.5
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(5.5)
These metrics collectively provide a robust framework for assessing the performance of the proposed
IDS, enabling a thorough evaluation of its ability to detect intrusions, minimize false alarms, and gener-
alize effectively to real-world traffic.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
41
==PAGE:52==
6
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, we present the findings from evaluating the developed IDS model. The evaluation was
conducted using two primary subsets from the can_train_and_test_v1.5 dataset:
• test_01_known_vehicle_known_attack
• test_03_known_vehicle_unknown_attack
The test_01_known_vehicle_known_attack subset, uses a known vehicle and introduces attacks
that the IDS has already encountered during training. This test evaluates the model’s ability to recognize
and detect previously seen attacks, ensuring reliable identification of known threats.
In contrast, the test_03_known_vehicle_unknown_attack also uses a known vehicle, but the at-
tacks in this subset were not part of the training data. This test is crucial for assessing the IDS’s gener-
alization capabilities, specifically its ability to detect novel attacks that were not included in the training
phase. Detecting previously unseen threats is essential for ensuring the IDS’s effectiveness in real-world
environments, where new attack vectors constantly emerge.
By testing the IDS on both known and unknown attacks, this evaluation measures its ability to balance
detecting familiar threats while adapting to new, unforeseen risks. This dual approach is critical for con-
firming that the IDS is not overfitting to the training data, but is capable of providing robust security
against a broad range of potential attacks.
6.1
Pattern #1
The experimental results evaluating the IDS model’s performance on Pattern #1 are summarized in Table
6.1.
Sub-dataset,
Testing subset
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
(TPR)
F1-Score
FPR
False
positives
#1, #1
0.9896
1.0
0.0611
0.1152
0.0
0
#1, #3
0.9984
1.0
0.3211
0.4861
0.0
0
#2, #1
0.9996
1.0
0.5809
0.7349
0.0
0
#2, #3
0.9976
NaN
0.0
NaN
0.0
0
#3, #1
0.9921
1.0
0.5721
0.7278
0.0
0
#3, #3
0.9982
1.0
0.0383
0.0738
0.0
0
#4, #1
0.98
1.0
0.0735
0.1369
0.0
0
#4, #3
0.9841
1.0
0.2902
0.4499
0.0
0
Table 6.1: Experimental Results for Pattern #1: Evaluation of Performance Metrics across Various Test
Cases
The model demonstrates strong accuracy across all test scenarios, consistently exceeding 98%, indicating
that the IDS effectively classifies the majority of CAN frames within the dataset (expected as an imbal-
anced dataset is used). Moreover, precision remains perfect (1.0) whenever defined, meaning all detected
attacks are legitimate, with no false positives observed in any test case. This is further supported by a
42
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:53==
consistent false positive rate (FPR) of 0.0 across all scenarios, ensuring that normal traffic is never mis-
classified as an attack. This characteristic is vital for maintaining system reliability, a quality that would
be advantageous in real-world deployments.
However, recall values show considerable variation across different dataset pairings, revealing the IDS’s
struggle to balance precision and recall, especially in scenarios where recall is low. As expected, the system
performs better in detecting known attacks, with recall values ranging from 0.0611 to 0.5809, than in
detecting unknown attacks, which range from 0.0 to 0.3211. This discrepancy reflects the IDS’s depen-
dence on its training data and highlights its inability to generalize effectively to novel threats. The IDS’s
performance with unknown attacks is particularly concerning in Sub-dataset #2, where recall is 0.0, and
Sub-dataset #3, where it is only 0.0383, indicating a significant weakness in its ability to identify new and
previously unseen attack patterns.
Interestingly, Sub-datasets #1 and #4 showbetter recallforunknownattacks than forknownones, which
contrasts with the general trend observed in the other sub-datasets. This inconsistency suggests that the
IDS’s effectiveness may be highly dependent on specific vehicle and attack profiles, and that the learned
patterns may be more applicable or transferable to certain scenarios than others.
By examining the table, it becomes evident that Sub-dataset #2 (Chevrolet Traverse) struggled to detect
frames containing unknown attacks. Further analysis of this sub-dataset revealed that while test subset
#3 included attack frames, the field sizes of these frames fell within the valid range observed during train-
ing for the corresponding arbitration IDs. In other words, while these frames exhibited typical signs of
malicious behavior, such as flooding attacks, they did not deviate from the expected payload sizes. As
a result, the IDS failed to flag these frames as anomalies, leading to a scenario where precision was un-
defined (NaN) and recall was 0.0, due to the absence of true positives (TP = 0) and the presence of false
negatives (FN > 0).
Forexample, arbitrationID0C1intheDoS-3.csvfileoftestsubset#3ofsub-dataset#2containsseveral
attack frames with three or more successive messages sharing the same arbitration ID, which is charac-
teristic of DoS attacks (see traffic data in Listing 6.1 showing these malicious frames). However, the data
field size for all instances of this attack remained at 8 bytes, matching the payload size observed during
training. Consequently, Pattern #1 was unable to detect these frames as malicious, since it only identified
attacks based on deviations in payload size.
timestamp ,arbitration_id ,data_field ,attack
1672531320.6962812,348,07A607A1 ,0
1672531320.696294,34A,07B807AC ,0
1672531320.6966062,0C1,23F612A62309F450,1
1672531320.6976202,0C1,23F612A62309F450,1
1672531320.698838,0C1,23F612A62309F450,1
1672531320.699481,1EB,0145,0
1672531320.699583,0C1,23F612A62309F450,1
1672531320.7005482,0C1,23F612A62309F450,1
1672531320.701452,0C1,23F612A62309F450,1
1672531320.702542,0C1,23F612A62309F450,1
1672531320.702665,0F1,00060040,0
1672531320.702677,1CB,10DD00 ,0
1672531320.7036982,0C1,23F612A62309F450,1
1672531320.704704,0C1,23F612A62309F450,1
1672531320.704802,0C1,22E17F4422E9ADD0 ,0
1672531320.704812,0C9,802255162D000000 ,0
Listing 6.1: CAN frames indicating malicious DoS attack activity.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
43
==PAGE:54==
This example highlights a critical limitation of relying solely on payload size—or, more broadly, on a
single rule—as attacks that do not deviate from expected payload sizes can go undetected. For example,
an attacker could craft malicious messages with valid payload sizes, bypassing the IDS’s detection mecha-
nisms. This vulnerability underscores the importance of a multi-layered approach to anomaly detection
and the need for a combination of rules to minimize the risk of attack frames going unnoticed.
To address this limitation, Pattern #1 (which detects deviations in payload sizes) works in conjunction
with earlier developed Indicators of Compromise (IoCs). These IoCs cater to other types of deviations,
such as anomalies in message timing, frequency, or content, which are not addressed by Pattern #1. By
integrating multiple detection mechanisms, the IDS enhances its ability to identify malicious activity on
the CAN bus, even when attacks do not involve deviations in payload size.
6.2
Pattern #2
Table 6.2 summarizes the experimental results assessing the IDS model’s performance on Pattern #2.
Sub-dataset,
Testing subset
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
(TPR)
F1-Score
FPR
False
positives
#1, #1
0.8497
0.0069
0.0884
0.0128
0.1418
799806
#1, #3
0.9519
0.016
0.322
0.0305
0.0466
401193
#2, #1
0.968
0.0204
0.6319
0.0395
0.0316
417544
#2, #3
0.9811
0.0002
0.0012
0.0003
0.0166
201147
#3, #1
0.9323
0.1578
0.6113
0.2508
0.0617
518850
#3, #3
0.9718
0.0119
0.1687
0.0222
0.0266
251263
#4, #1
0.4307
0.0072
0.184
0.0139
0.5638
3803683
#4, #3
0.8084
0.0381
0.3124
0.0679
0.1802
1206979
Table 6.2: Experimental Results for Pattern #2: Evaluation of Performance Metrics across Various Test
Cases
Overall, accuracy remains high in most cases, exceeding 90% in six out of eight test scenarios. Notably,
the highest accuracy (98.11%) is recorded for the Chevrolet Traverse (Sub-dataset #2, Testing subset #3),
whichinvolvesunknownattacks. Incontrast, accuracytendstobelowerwhentestingforknownattacks,
with the lowest score (43.07%) observed for the Subaru Forester in Testing Subset #1. However, preci-
sion remains consistently low across all test cases, ranging from 0.0002 to 0.1578, indicating frequent
misclassification of normal traffic as anomalous. This is particularly evident in Sub-dataset #2, Testing
Subset #3, where the lowest precision is recorded, suggesting a failure to distinguish attack frames in this
case.
Pattern #2’s effectiveness in correctly identifying true attack frames varies significantly across test cases.
The Chevrolet Traverse (Sub-dataset #2) achieves the highest recall (0.6319) when tested against known
attacks (Testing subset #1), demonstrating strong performance in familiar scenarios. However, its per-
formance drops drastically when exposed to unknown attacks (Testing subset #3), yielding the lowest
recall among all test cases (0.0012). A similar trend is observed in the F1-score, which peaks at 0.2508 in
Sub-dataset #3, Testing subset #1—where both recall and precision are relatively higher—and falls to its
lowest value (0.0003) in Sub-dataset #2, Testing subset #3. This confirms the IDS’s significant difficulty
in handling this specific subset with regards to Pattern #2.
Given this context, it is unsurprising that Pattern #2 exhibited a significant number of false positives
44
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:55==
during evaluation. The false positive rate was exceptionally high, making it impractical for real-world
deployment. This outcome directly contradicted the intended goal of maintaining a low false positive
rate, prompting a deeper analysis into the underlying causes. Below, we outline several factors that may
have contributed to the elevated false positive rate.
One of the reasons for the high false positives observed for Pattern #2 lies in the definition of the rules
that govern the behavior of the distinct byte fields observed in the frame data fields. These rules are based
on the work of Markovitz and Wool [60], who provided precise definitions for different field types. Pat-
tern #2 builds on their work and attempts to implement key aspects of their field classification algorithm.
However, in hindsight, the behavior rules for most of these field types appear to be overly rigid, as evi-
denced by the high false positive rates observed in the results.
An example of this rigidity is the wrap-around behavior for cyclic counters, such as the transition from
255 to 0 in Ucounter fields and from 0 to 255 in Dcounter fields. While this rule is necessary to
uphold the expected cyclic counter behavior, its strict enforcement may lead to false positives if the IDS
misinterprets valid but uncommon variations as anomalies.
To address this issue, it may be beneficial to explore alternative wrap-around rules or more flexible thresh-
olds for cyclic counters. For instance, allowing for minor deviations or alternative patterns in wrap-
around behavior could reduce the number of frames currently being marked as attacks, thereby lowering
the false positive rate. However, such changes must be carefully implemented to ensure that the IDS’s
ability to detect actual anomalies is not compromised.
Another possible reason for the high false positives lies in the very design and implementation of Pattern
#2. Given that the IDS is developed for automotive CAN networks—which are connected to critical
systems essential for passenger and vehicle safety, as well as the smooth functioning of the vehicle—this
pattern adopts an all-or-nothing approach to its behavior rules application. This means that if at least
one validation check for a given arbitration ID’s behavior sequence fails, the entire frame is deemed mali-
cious and flagged for further investigation to confirm an ongoing attack and initiate mitigation measures.
This design choice eliminates gray areas, making it harder for adversaries to manipulate the system. It
also aligns with the nature of rule-based IDS, where each rule represents a strict expectation of behavior.
If one rule fails, it signals a clear violation of expected patterns, warranting a full rejection of the frame.
While this approach enhances security by minimizing the risk of missing potential attacks, it can also lead
to high false positives, as even minor deviations from expected behavior are flagged as anomalies.
To balance precision with low false positives, it may be beneficial to adopt a threshold-based validation
approach. Instead of requiring all rules to pass, the IDS could set a threshold (e.g., at least 80% of checks
must pass) for a frame to be considered normal. Alternatively, a weighted scoring system could be used
to assign higher importance to critical rules while allowing minor deviations in less critical ones. This
approach would reduce false positives without significantly compromising the IDS’s ability to detect
actual attacks.
Upon further analysis, we also noticed that the Multi-Value (mV) threshold, T mv, plays a crucial role in
determining whether a field is classified as multi-value or flagged as an anomaly. The selection of this
threshold directly influences the number of false positives (FPs) in a dataset. In the case of Pattern #2,
the chosen threshold of 5 unique values in is_multiValue()—based on different ECU states and
discussed in Section 4.3.1—was, in hindsight, too low and overly restrictive. As a result, normal fields
exhibiting natural variation may have frequently exceeded this threshold, leading to incorrect anomaly
classifications and contributing to the high false positive rate observed in the experiment.
To address this issue and improve the effectiveness of intrusion detection, a more data-driven approach
is needed. By analyzing historical normal behavior, an adaptive threshold can be established to accom-
modate natural variations in multi-value fields while still detecting actual anomalies. This could involve
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
45
==PAGE:56==
statistical analysis or machine learning techniques to dynamically determine the optimal threshold for
each arbitration ID and index, thereby reducing false positives without compromising the IDS’s attack
detection capabilities.
Overall, in8outof16experiments, nofalsepositiveswereobserved. Fromapracticalstandpoint, Pattern
#1canbedeemedhighlyeffectiveinitscurrentform, asitproducednofalsepositives. Incontrast, Pattern
#2 generated a significant number of false positives across multiple test cases. To improve its practical
applicability, Pattern #2 will require further tuning, starting with the proposed measures to address the
underlying causes of this high number of false positives.
46
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:57==
7
Conclusion & Future Work
7.1
Conclusion
With advancements in communication networks—particularly in modern vehicles—the threat of ad-
versaries seeking to exploit these systems for malicious purposes remains ever-present. As a result, intru-
sion detection systems and techniques will play an increasingly critical role in identifying and mitigating
these threats. The continuous evolution of these systems is essential to ensuring the security, safety and
resilience of vehicle communication networks.
In line with this, the primary goal of this work was to enhance one such existing intrusion detection
system by proposing and implementing improved detection capabilities while maintaining an extremely
low false positive rate. By achieving this balance, we aimed to strengthen the overall security of in-vehicle
networks (IVNs) and ensure their robustness against emerging threats.
To achieve this, this thesis provides a comprehensive overview of Controller Area Networks (CAN), dis-
cussing their architecture and the various automotive attacks they have faced. Additionally, it includes
an extensive review of recent developments and trends in Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) for CAN,
covering both non-learning methods, traditional machine learning techniques, and deep learning ap-
proaches that are shaping the field.
Notably, we introduced and implemented two proposals aimed at improving the detection capabilities
of a rule-based IDS, focused on:
• ThemonitoringofdatafieldsizechangesinCANmessagesasaneffectiveindicatorofcompromise
within an IDS.
• The use of data field classification and behavior-based validation to identify anomalous activity in
CAN traffic.
Through both proposals, we have thoroughly evaluated and discussed their implementations, effective-
ness, and the observed limitations in the context of intrusion detection. Additionally, we examined how
theseapproacheshelpreducefalsepositives,leveragingthecarefullycuratedcan-train-and-test-v1.5
dataset.
Our results show that monitoring changes in data field sizes effectively detects deviations in payload
sizes while maintaining a low rate of false positives. While data field classification and behavior-based
validation offer a solid approach for identifying anomalies that deviate from expected patterns, further
fine-tuning is necessary. This would help balance strong anomaly detection capabilities with a reduc-
tion in false positives, which is crucial for ensuring the practicality and reliability of IDS in real-world
deployments.
However, our work also highlights the limitations of relying solely on rule-based systems, particularly in
detectingnovelthreatsthatdonotdeviatefromexpectedpayloadsizesorbehaviors. Thisunderscoresthe
need for a multi-layered approach to intrusion detection, combining rule-based methods with advanced
techniques such as machine learning to address a wider range of threats.
Overall, throughout this report—particularly in Chapters 4 and 6—we have provided well-founded re-
sponses to our research questions and conducted a comprehensive study on CAN bus security using a
rule-based IDS.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
47
==PAGE:58==
7.2
Future Work
Looking ahead, future research could:
• First and foremost, refine the rules in Pattern #2’s implementation to optimize its intrusion detec-
tion capabilities while simultaneously minimizing the occurrence of false positives.
• Research could investigate the integration of additional features, such as message timing, fre-
quency, and content, to enhance the IDS’s ability to detect sophisticated attacks.
• Regarding multi-value field types, future work could explore how the order of distinct multi-
values impacts the behavioral patterns of bytes in data fields and their effectiveness in reducing
false positives, thereby supporting the real-world deployment of these proposals.
• Additionally, the development of adaptive rule-based systems that dynamically update their rules
in response to evolving threats could significantly strengthen the resilience of IVNs.
By continuing to innovate and refine these systems, we can ensure that vehicle communication networks
remain secure against increasingly complex and dynamic threats.
48
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Brooke Lampe and Weizhi Meng. “can-IoC: Practicable Automotive Intrusion Detection via In-
dicators of Compromise”. In: (2024).
[2]
Automotive Electronic Control Unit Market - Size, Share Industry Analysis [Latest]. Sept. 2024.
url: https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/industry-reports/automotive-electronic-
control-unit-ecu-market-101595.
[3]
Cyber Attacks Shift Gears: The Growing Threat to Automotive Technology. July 2024. url: https:
//www.nada.org/nada/nada-headlines/cyber-attacks-shift-gears-growing-threat-
automotive-technology.
[4]
CharlieMiller.“Remoteexploitationofanunalteredpassengervehicle”.In:BlackHatUSA(2015).
[5]
Andy Greenberg. Hackers remotely kill a Jeep on the highway-with me in it. July 2015. url: https:
//www.wired.com/2015/07/hackers-remotely-kill-jeep-highway/.
[6]
Fiat Chrysler recalls 1.4 million cars after Jeep hack. July 2015. url: https://www.bbc.com/
news/technology-33650491.
[7]
AndyGreenberg.AfterJeepHack,Chryslerrecalls1.4mvehiclesforBugFix.July2015.url:https:
//www.wired.com/2015/07/jeep-hack-chrysler-recalls-1-4m-vehicles-bug-fix/.
[8]
Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek. Can message injection: OG Dynamite Edition. June 2016. url:
https://illmatics.com/can%20message%20injection.pdf.
[9]
Sen Nie, Ling Liu, and Yuefeng Du. “Free-fall: Hacking tesla from wireless to can bus”. In: Brief-
ing, Black Hat USA 25.1 (2017), p. 16.
[10]
Sen Nie, Ling Liu, and Yuefeng Du. 2016. url: https://www.blackhat.com/docs/us-
17/thursday/us-17-Nie-Free-Fall-Hacking-Tesla-From-Wireless-To-CAN-Bus.pdf.
[11]
Jeffrey Esposito. Tesla Model X Hacked. Aug. 2017. url: https://www.kaspersky.com/blog/
hacking-tesla-model-x/17874/.
[12]
Brooke Lampe and Weizhi Meng. “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain: A comprehen-
sive review”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials (2023).
[13]
Georgios Karopoulos et al. “Demystifying in-vehicle intrusion detection systems: A survey of sur-
veys and a meta-taxonomy”. In: Electronics 11.7 (2022), p. 1072.
[14]
Dapeng Man et al. “AI-based intrusion detection for intelligence internet of vehicles”. In: IEEE
Consumer Electronics Magazine 12.1 (2021), pp. 109–116.
[15]
Sampath Rajapaksha et al. “Ai-based intrusion detection systems for in-vehicle networks: A sur-
vey”. In: ACM Computing Surveys 55.11 (2023), pp. 1–40.
[16]
BrookeLampeandWeizhiMeng.“IDSforCAN:ApracticalintrusiondetectionsystemforCAN
bussecurity”.In:GLOBECOM2022-2022IEEEGlobalCommunicationsConference.IEEE.2022,
pp. 1782–1787.
[17]
Mohammad Farsi, Karl Ratcliff, and Manuel Barbosa. “An overview of controller area network”.
In: Computing & Control Engineering Journal 10.3 (1999), pp. 113–120.
[18]
ISO Standard. “11898: Road vehicles—interchange of digital information—controller area net-
work (can) for high-speed communication”. In: International Standards Organization, Switzer-
land (1993).
[19]
IanFosterandKarl Koscher. “Exploringcontrollerareanetworks”.In:login.USENIXAssociation
40.6 (2015).
[20]
John GRIFFITH. “Why are termination networks in CAN transceivers so important”. In: Texas
Instruments (2016).
[21]
Shreyas Sharma. Understanding can bus: A comprehensive guide. Nov. 2023. url: https://www.
wevolver.com/article/understanding-can-bus-a-comprehensive-guide#basic-principles-
of-can-bus.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
49
==PAGE:60==
[22]
JA Cook and JS Freudenberg. “Controller area network (can)”. In: EECS 461 (2007), pp. 1–5.
[23]
SH Hong and W-H Kim. “Bandwidth allocation scheme in CAN protocol”. In: IEE Proceedings-
Control Theory and Applications 147.1 (2000), pp. 37–44.
[24]
Wonsuk Choi et al. “Identifying ecus using inimitable characteristics of signals in controller area
networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 67.6 (2018), pp. 4757–4770.
[25]
Hyunsung Lee, Seong Hoon Jeong, and Huy Kang Kim. “OTIDS: A novel intrusion detection
system for in-vehicle network by using remote frame”. In: 2017 15th Annual Conference on Pri-
vacy, Security and Trust (PST). IEEE. 2017, pp. 57–5709.
[26]
Mehmet Bozdal et al. “Evaluation of can bus security challenges”. In: Sensors 20.8 (2020), p. 2364.
[27]
Bruno Gaujal and Nicolas Navet. “Fault confinement mechanisms on CAN: analysis and im-
provements”. In: IEEE transactions on vehicular technology 54.3 (2005), pp. 1103–1113.
[28]
Mehmet Bozdal, Mohammad Samie, and Ian Jennions. “A survey on can bus protocol: Attacks,
challenges, and potential solutions”. In: 2018 International Conference on Computing, Electronics
& Communications Engineering (iCCECE). IEEE. 2018, pp. 201–205.
[29]
Brooke Lampe and Weizhi Meng. “can-train-and-test: A Curated CAN Dataset for Automotive
Intrusion Detection”. In: Computers & Security 140 (2024), p. 103777.
[30]
Zixiang Bi et al. “Intrusion Detection Method for In-Vehicle CAN Bus Based on Message and
Time Transfer Matrix”. In: Security and Communication Networks 2022.1 (2022), p. 2554280.
[31]
Tarak Nandy et al. “A review of security attacks and intrusion detection in the vehicular net-
works”.In:JournalofKingSaudUniversity-ComputerandInformationSciences(2024),p.101945.
[32]
Muhammad Arif et al. “A survey on security attacks in VANETs: Communication, applications
and challenges”. In: Vehicular Communications 19 (2019), p. 100179.
[33]
Merve Ozkan-Okay et al. “A comprehensive systematic literature review on intrusion detection
systems”. In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pp. 157727–157760.
[34]
Carlos Garcia Cordero et al. “On generating network traffic datasets with synthetic attacks for
intrusion detection”. In: ACM Transactions on Privacy and Security (TOPS) 24.2 (2021), pp. 1–
39.
[35]
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis et al. “Taxonomy and survey of collaborative intrusion detection”.
In: ACM computing surveys (CSUR) 47.4 (2015), pp. 1–33.
[36]
Abdirisaq Abdiqadir Mohamud Farah and Martin Daniel Nielsen. “Towards developing realistic
datasets for evaluating intrusion detection systems”. und. 2023.
[37]
VinodKumarandOmPrakashSangwan.“SignaturebasedintrusiondetectionsystemusingSNORT”.
In: International Journal of Computer Applications & Information Technology 1.3 (2012), pp. 35–
41.
[38]
Omar Y Al-Jarrah et al. “Intrusion detection systems for intra-vehicle networks: A review”. In:
Ieee Access 7 (2019), pp. 21266–21289.
[39]
Tobias Hoppe, Stefan Kiltz, and Jana Dittmann. “Applying intrusion detection to automotive it-
early insights and remaining challenges”. In: Journal of Information Assurance and Security (JIAS)
4.6 (2009), pp. 226–235.
[40]
Ivan Studnia et al. “A language-based intrusion detection approach for automotive embedded
networks”. In: International Journal of Embedded Systems 10.1 (2018), pp. 1–12.
[41]
LudovicApvrilleetal.“Secureautomotiveon-boardelectronicsnetworkarchitecture”.In:FISITA
2010 world automotive congress, Budapest, Hungary. Vol. 8. 2010.
[42]
Siti-Farhana Lokman, Abu Talib Othman, and Muhammad-Husaini Abu-Bakar. “Intrusion de-
tectionsystemforautomotiveControllerAreaNetwork(CAN)bussystem:areview”.In:EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 2019.1 (2019), pp. 1–17.
[43]
Karl Koscher et al. “Experimental security analysis of a modern automobile”. In: 2010 IEEE sym-
posium on security and privacy. IEEE. 2010, pp. 447–462.
[44]
Yilin Zhao, Yijie Xun, and Jiajia Liu. “ClockIDS: A real-time vehicle intrusion detection system
based on clock skew”. In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal 9.17 (2022), pp. 15593–15606.
50
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:61==
[45]
Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek. “Advanced CAN injection techniques for vehicle networks”.
In: black hat USA 6 (2016).
[46]
Chris Valasek and Charlie Miller. “CAN Message Injection: OG Dynamite Edition”. In: last
checked on 5.04 (2017).
[47]
Mirco Marchetti and Dario Stabili. “Anomaly detection of CAN bus messages through analysis
of ID sequences”. In: 2017 IEEE intelligent vehicles symposium (IV). IEEE. 2017, pp. 1577–1583.
[48]
Riadul Islam et al. “Graph-based intrusion detection system for controller area networks”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23.3 (2020), pp. 1727–1736.
[49]
Hussein Alnabulsi and Rafiqul Islam. “Protecting code injection attacks in intelligent transporta-
tion system”. In: 2019 18th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In
Computing And Communications/13th IEEE International Conference On Big Data Science And
Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE). IEEE. 2019, pp. 799–806.
[50]
Li Yang et al. “Tree-based intelligent intrusion detection system in internet of vehicles”. In: 2019
IEEE global communications conference (GLOBECOM). IEEE. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[51]
Joe Diether Cabelin, Paul Vincent Alpano, and Jhoanna Rhodette Pedrasa. “SVM-based detec-
tion of false data injection in intelligent transportation system”. In: 2021 international conference
on information networking (ICOIN). IEEE. 2021, pp. 279–284.
[52]
Gianni D’Angelo, Arcangelo Castiglione, and Francesco Palmieri. “A cluster-based multidimen-
sional approach for detecting attacks on connected vehicles”. In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal
8.16 (2020), pp. 12518–12527.
[53]
Abdulaziz Alshammari et al. “Classification approach for intrusion detection in vehicle systems”.
In: Wireless Engineering and Technology 9.4 (2018), pp. 79–94.
[54]
Pengcheng Wei et al. “A novel intrusion detection model for the CAN bus packet of in-vehicle
network based on attention mechanism and autoencoder”. In: Digital Communications and Net-
works 9.1 (2023), pp. 14–21.
[55]
Aymen Boudguiga et al. “A simple intrusion detection method for controller area network”. In:
2016 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC). 2016, pp. 1–7. doi: 10.1109/
ICC.2016.7511098.
[56]
FengLuoetal.“In-vehiclenetworkintrusiondetectionsystems:asystematicsurveyofdeeplearning-
based approaches”. In: PeerJ Computer Science 9 (2023), e1648.
[57]
Muhammad Sami et al. “Rapid, multi-vehicle and feed-forward neural network based intrusion
detection system for controller area network bus”. In: 2020 IEEE Green Energy and Smart Sys-
tems Conference (IGESSC). IEEE. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[58]
Hyun Min Song, Jiyoung Woo, and Huy Kang Kim. “In-vehicle network intrusion detection
using deep convolutional neural network”. In: Vehicular Communications 21 (2020), p. 100198.
[59]
Hiroki Suda, Masanori Natsui, and Takahiro Hanyu. “Systematic intrusion detection technique
for an in-vehicle network based on time-series feature extraction”. In: 2018 IEEE 48th interna-
tional symposium on multiple-valued logic (ISMVL). IEEE. 2018, pp. 56–61.
[60]
Moti Markovitz and Avishai Wool. “Field classification, modeling and anomaly detection in un-
known CAN bus networks”. In: Vehicular Communications 9 (2017), pp. 43–52.
[61]
Samuel Woo et al. “A practical security architecture for in-vehicle CAN-FD”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 17.8 (2016), pp. 2248–2261.
[62]
DANIELHUMBERTONOVAVALCARCEL.“AnomalydetectionsystemforautomotiveCAN
using LSTM autoencoders”. In: (2018).
[63]
Brooke Lampe and Weizhi Meng. “A survey of deep learning-based intrusion detection in auto-
motive applications”. In: Expert Systems with Applications 221 (2023), p. 119771.
[64]
Brooke Kidmose and Weizhi Meng. “can-sleuth: Investigating and Evaluating Automotive Intru-
sion Detection Datasets”. In: European Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity Conference. 2024, pp. 19–
28.
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
51
==PAGE:62==
[65]
Simple Auto Info. 2011 Chevrolet Impala OBD2 Port Location. 2023. url: https : / / www .
youtube.com/watch?v=ngcYUw8BQGM.
[66]
Mee Lan Han, Byung Il Kwak, and Huy Kang Kim. “Anomaly intrusion detection method for
vehicular networks based on survival analysis”. In: Vehicular communications 14 (2018), pp. 52–
63.
[67]
Yazan Otoum, Dandan Liu, and Amiya Nayak. “DL-IDS: a deep learning–based intrusion detec-
tion framework for securing IoT”. In: Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies
33.3 (2022), e3803.
[68]
Jorge Granjal, João M Silva, and Nuno Lourenço. “Intrusion detection and prevention in CoAP
wireless sensor networks using anomaly detection”. In: Sensors 18.8 (2018), p. 2445.
52
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.1
Code Snippet #1
#**** Pattern #2 relevant source code ****
#
Behavior Rules implementations
def is_increasing(prev, curr):
# Ucounter
return (curr > prev or (prev == 255 and curr == 0))
def is_decreasing(prev, curr):
# Dcounter
return (curr < prev or (prev == 0 and curr == 255))
def is_constant(prev, curr):
# constant
return curr == prev
def is_sensor(prev, curr):
# sensor/other
return True
def is_multiValue(prev, curr, index):
# multiValue
# Initialize stored_values set if it doesn't exist for the
given id
if not hasattr(is_multiValue , "stored_values"):
is_multiValue.stored_values = {}
# Store values per id
# Initialize the set for this id if it doesn't exist yet
if prev['arbitration_id_upd'] not in is_multiValue.
stored_values:
is_multiValue.stored_values[prev['arbitration_id_upd']]
= {}
# Initialize the set for this index if it doesn't exist yet
if index not in is_multiValue.stored_values[prev['
arbitration_id_upd']]:
is_multiValue.stored_values[prev['arbitration_id_upd']][
index] = set()
# Add the prev and curr values to the set for the current
index
is_multiValue.stored_values[prev['arbitration_id_upd']][
index].update([prev['val'], curr])
# Check if the set size for this index is within the valid
range
if len(is_multiValue.stored_values[prev['arbitration_id_upd'
]][index]) in {2, 3, 4, 5, 6}:
return True
# multiValue check passes
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
53
==PAGE:64==
# If the set size is not valid, discard the current value (
curr)
is_multiValue.stored_values[prev['arbitration_id_upd']][
index].discard(curr)
return False
A.2
Code Snippet #2
# Classification Dictionary
def get_behaviors_for_id(id_value):
return classification_dict.get(id_value , None)
# Checks if any value in the a provided 'data_field_bytes_filled
' entry is a list
def contains_list(values):
return any(isinstance(val, list) for val in values)
# Function to validate a single row
def validate_row(row, last_valid_rows):
# Check if 'data_field_bytes_filled' entry contains a list
if contains_list(row['data_field_bytes_filled']):
return False
# Mark row as invalid if Yes (contains a
list)
behaviors = get_behaviors_for_id(row['arbitration_id_upd'])
if behaviors is None:
return False
# If ID is not in the classification
dictionary , mark as False
prev_row = last_valid_rows.get(row['arbitration_id_upd'])
#
Get the last valid row for the ID
if prev_row is not None:
prev_vals = prev_row['data_field_bytes_filled']
curr_vals = row['data_field_bytes_filled']
for idx, behavior in enumerate(behaviors):
if idx >= len(prev_vals) or idx >= len(curr_vals):
return False
# If index is out of range,
validation fails
prev_val , curr_val = prev_vals[idx], curr_vals[idx]
if behavior == 'constant' and not is_constant(
prev_val , curr_val):
return False
elif behavior == 'Ucounter' and not is_increasing(
prev_val , curr_val):
return False
54
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
==PAGE:65==
elif behavior == 'Dcounter' and not is_decreasing(
prev_val , curr_val):
return False
elif behavior == 'multiValue' and not is_multiValue
({'arbitration_id_upd': row['arbitration_id_upd'
], 'val': prev_val}, curr_val , idx):
return False
elif behavior == 'sensor/other' and not is_sensor(
prev_val , curr_val):
return False
# If all checks pass, update last_valid_rows
last_valid_rows[row['arbitration_id_upd']] = row.copy()
return True
A Practical Rule-based Intrusion Detection Systems for Modern Automobiles
55
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. +45 45 25 30 31
www.compute.dtu.dk
