==PAGE:1==
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribu­
tion
Evaluating Human and LLM­Generated Texts
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
Evaluating Human and LLM­Generated Texts
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Piotr Kalota
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and machine
learning.
Piotr Kalota ­ s222914
Signature
Date
ii
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The recent development of large language models (LLMs) has applications in various
domains, enhancing daily human tasks in fields like software engineering and medical
care. Nevertheless, similar models enable the creation of harmful solutions, like generat­
ing fake news. It revitalized the research on authorship attribution, a potential preventive
mechanism against such misuse. While multiple methodologies, ranging from LLM output
probabilities analysis to linguistic feature examination, have been developed to address
the classification challenge, fewer efforts have concentrated on exploring writing style
analysis. This thesis investigates the question: Do large language models exhibit novel
writing styles? To achieve this, we employ stylometric analysis within the framework of the
authorship attribution problem, leveraging our own dataset comprising texts authored by
ten human novelists and texts generated by five LLMs prompted to mimic these authors.
Our findings show that human and LLM­generated texts exhibit distinct stylistic patterns,
with human authors displaying higher variability and originality. LLM outputs rely on aver­
aged writing styles and predictable linguistic patterns. While classification within the novel
domain is effective, the approach struggles to generalize to other text domains, highlight­
ing domain dependence. These results underscore the creative limitations of LLMs and
the challenges of cross­domain stylometric attribution.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Prof. Sune Lehmann and Assistant Prof.
Jonas L. Juul for their invaluable guidance, support, and insights throughout the devel­
opment of this thesis. Their expertise and encouragement were instrumental in shaping
this work. I also extend my sincere thanks to DTU for funding the creation of the custom
dataset used in this thesis, which was pivotal for the research and its outcomes.
I acknowledge the use of ChatGPT 1, according to DTU’s AI referencing rules 2, to edit
my master thesis in order to improve its readability. I affirm that all facts, concepts, and
numbers have been delivered by me and have been verified for accuracy after the editing
process. Each initial paragraph was provided to ChatGPT with the prompt, ”Edit it in the
way that it fits the jargon of a master thesis, use active voice ’we’.” The resulting edits
have been utilized either in full or in part.
1OpenAI, https://chat.openai.com
2https://www.bibliotek.dtu.dk/en/publishing/reference­management/kunstig­intelligens
iv
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Large Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Impacts of Large Language Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Author Attribution and Writing Style analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Datasets
7
3.1
Authors’ Writing Style Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
DAIGT­V4 Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Global News Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Legal Contracts Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5
Twitter and Reddit Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Methods and Results
15
4.1
Principal Components Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Information Content Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Discussion
39
5.1
Principal Component Analysis Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3
Information Content Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
Do large language models exhibit novelty in their writing styles?
. . . . . . 42
5.5
Ethical Implications and Societal Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Conclusions
45
7
Future Work
47
Bibliography
49
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The advent of text generation capabilities through Large Language Models (LLMs) has
revolutionized the way artificial intelligence interacts with natural language. These mod­
els, powered by advanced architectures such as transformers [1], can generate coherent,
contextually relevant text across diverse applications. LLM­generated text finds utility in
domains such as personalized education [2], legal documentation [3], and software devel­
opment [4], showcasing significant potential to enhance human productivity and innova­
tion. However, alongside these benefits, the proliferation of LLM­generated content raises
concerns regarding its misuse [5][6] . From propagating misinformation and biases to ob­
scuring the line between authentic and synthetic text, the societal and ethical implications
of LLMs necessitate a nuanced understanding of their strengths and vulnerabilities. This
duality underscores the need for rigorous study, particularly in areas like authorship attri­
bution, to better manage the risks associated with LLM­generated text while leveraging
its transformative capabilities.
The current state of research demonstrates significant progress in the domains of gen­
erated text detection and authorship attribution. These approaches aim to identify, with
minimal or no prior knowledge about the text, the specific author or source. One prominent
solution involves fine­tuned detectors [7][8][9], where large language models are further
trained to classify text as either human­written or model­generated based on the source
material. Alternative methodologies leverage statistical analysis of output probabilities
generated by models [10][11] or use linguistic features of the text as input for various
classification algorithms [12] [13][14]. While these methods achieve varying degrees of
success, they often address authorship attribution within a constrained scope, either lim­
ited to a specific set of authors or lacking the adaptability required to keep pace with rapid
advancements in artificial intelligence.
Despite their contributions, these solutions generally approach writing style analysis as a
secondary concern rather than a primary focus. However, early works [15][16] analyzed
the writing styles of different authors, showing the effectiveness of function words for au­
thorship attribution tasks. These foundational insights can be further extended through
the analysis of texts generated by large language models. An emerging, though rela­
tively underexplored, area of research examines the ability of large language models to
emulate requested writing styles. This line of inquiry is particularly relevant as it probes
whether LLMs possess a human­like understanding of writing styles, enabling them to
convincingly imitate human authors and potentially deceive human evaluators. Studies
in this domain [17][18][19] applied different forms of prompting to generate the texts of
very specific genres, like poems. The works indicate that large language models exhibit
proficiency in replicating the structural and linguistic features of requested styles. How­
ever, they also emphasize that such models lack the originality inherent to human authors,
highlighting an essential distinction between human and machine­generated texts.
Despite progress in generated text detection and stylistic analysis, current solutions of­
ten fall short in cross­domain generalizability and the nuanced understanding of writing
styles [20]. This thesis addresses these gaps by investigating whether large language
models exhibit unique writing styles. By exploring these distinctions, we aim to enhance
authorship attribution methodologies and describe the stylistic tendencies of LLMs.
Through a combination of later discussed methods, this work has implications for improv­
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
1
==PAGE:10==
ing detection algorithms and explainability of its decisions in sensitive applications, such
as regulatory compliance in academic institutions, countering disinformation in media, and
safeguarding intellectual property in publishing. Furthermore, the findings underscore the
importance of interdisciplinary approaches that balance technological innovation with eth­
ical considerations.
In this thesis, we aim to explore the novelty of the investigated texts, focusing on their
uniqueness and unpredictability in writing style.
In subsequent chapters we propose
statistical definition of this term. Our primary goal is to answer the question: Do large
language models exhibit novelty in their writing styles? Previous studies, although
focusing on other objectives, also explore this question to some extent. These studies
serve as a baseline and a source of inspiration for the experiments we conduct. To ad­
dress this, we created a dataset called the Authors’ Writing Style dataset, which includes
texts from ten different novelists alongside texts generated by five large language models.
We generated these texts by prompting the models to write in the style of one of the ten
human authors. This dataset serves as the central resource for examining whether large
language models are capable of comprehending and reproducing human writing styles,
or whether their outputs are inherently characterized by distinct, model­specific stylistic
tendencies.
To enrich our analysis and evaluate the generalizability of our findings, we incorporated
additional datasets, including legal [21], social media [22] and news [23] domains. These
supplementary datasets allowed us to validate our methods across different contexts and
ensure robustness in our conclusions.
To address the research question, we analyzed linguistic features and visualized the re­
sults to find out how various texts cluster together. We also examined metrics such as
the Information Content of linguistic attributes and other measures commonly used in nat­
ural language processing to uncover stylistic differences between human­authored and
machine­generated texts.
Next, we used the most informative features from these analyses in classification exper­
iments to test their ability to reliably distinguish between the various text sources. To
evaluate the domain­independence of our approach, we applied these methods to an ad­
ditional dataset, DAIGT­V4 [24], which was created specially for classification tasks. In
the final chapter, we interpret our experiments’ results, and present the conclusions, and
key insights gained from this research.
2
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
This chapter explores the foundational concepts of Large Language Models (LLMs), their
societal and scientific impacts, and the specific areas of Authorship Attribution and Writing
Style Analysis relevant to this thesis. The chapter concludes by highlighting research gaps
that this work seeks to address.
2.1
Large Language Models
Large Language Models (LLMs), a subdomain of artificial intelligence within Natural Lan­
guage Processing (NLP), generates natural language text. The advent of transformer­
based architectures, as proposed by Vaswani et al. [1], marked a paradigm shift in NLP.
Models such as GPT [25] and BERT [26] adopt this architecture at their core, achieving
unprecedented performance on a wide range of NLP tasks.
The effectiveness of LLMs stems from their ability to process vast corpora of text, en­
abling unsupervised learning of linguistic features. Once trained, these models function
as systems that accept user queries in natural language and provide coherent, contex­
tually relevant responses. Their potential to revolutionize various domains underscores
their significance [27].
2.2
Impacts of Large Language Models
2.2.1
Benefits of Employing Large Language Models
LLMs have catalyzed advancements across diverse fields by efficiently handling tasks
otherwise infeasible for human labor. Singhal et al. [28] demonstrated this by fine­tuning
the PaLM model to develop Med­PaLM, which addresses medical queries and aids in re­
port generation and diagnosis. Similarly, Peng [4], highlighted the effectiveness of GitHub
Copilot in enhancing the productivity of software engineers.
Other applications include legal assistance [3], personalized education systems [2], and
beyond. Current research exposes multiple fields, which are or might be positively af­
fected by introduction of LLMs. Collectively, these contributions underscore the transfor­
mative societal benefits of LLMs.
2.2.2
Risks Associated with Large Language Models
However, LLMs pose significant risks due to their accessibility and ability to generate con­
tent at scale. For instance, Sun et al. [5] revealed that LLMs could easily produce fake
news indistinguishable from authentic content, creating a potential for societal harm. Sim­
ilarly, Mosca et al. [6] showcased how LLMs could author scientific articles, which, while
credible on in­domain tasks, risk spreading false information and undermining trust in sci­
entific publications. On the other hand, Huang et al. [29] highlight that LLM hallucinations,
can share knowledge that is not based on facts, reflecting an undesirable aspect of these
models.
Efforts to mitigate these risks include developing robust LLM­generated text detection,
advancing authorship attribution techniques, and improving writing style analysis, all of
which are discussed in the subsequent sections.
2.3
Author Attribution and Writing Style analysis
Authorship Attribution and Writing Style Analysis are closely related fields that address
key challenges associated with LLM­generated text. While text detection systems aim to
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
3
==PAGE:12==
distinguish human­written content from machine­generated outputs, authorship attribution
identifies the specific author of a text. Writing Style Analysis delves deeper into linguistic
patterns, providing insights into the stylistic features that characterize individual authors.
2.3.1
Historical Foundations
Authorship attribution has a long history predating the advent of LLMs. A seminal study
by Mosteller and Wallace [15] employed Bayesian inference and function word analysis to
attribute the authorship of 12 disputed Federalist Papers to Alexander Hamilton or James
Madison. Their methodology was validated on undisputed texts, establishing a strong
foundation for stylometric analysis.
Binongo [16] extended this approach to resolve authorship disputes surrounding books by
Ruth Plumly Thompson and L. Frank Baum. Using Principal Component Analysis (PCA),
Binongo visualized function word distributions, producing clear separations between au­
thors in a two­dimensional plot. These foundational works laid the groundwork for modern
stylometry, now revitalized by the emergence of LLMs.
2.3.2
Fine Tuned Detectors
The detection of LLM­generated texts has garnered significant attention in recent years,
with numerous studies leveraging fine­tuning techniques on transformer­based models
to address this challenge. Z. Lai et al. [7] developed detectors based on an ensem­
ble of fine­tuned transformers. Their approach achieved high accuracy across both in­
distribution and out­of­distribution test sets, showcasing the adaptability of transformers
in this domain. The ensemble method combined predictions from multiple models, miti­
gating overfitting and enhancing generalization to unseen text distributions.
Similarly, S. F. Ebrahimi [8] and T. Marchitan et al. [9] adopted comparable approaches,
utilizing state­of­the­art transformers fine­tuned for binary classification tasks to identify
machine­generated content. Both studies reported impressive results, underscoring the
efficacy of fine­tuning strategies for this purpose. Marchitan et al. also experimented
with hybrid architectures, integrating features from traditional machine learning and deep
learning methods, further refining the detection process.
While these methods offer robust tools for addressing the problem of LLM­generated text
detection, they primarily focus on binary classification rather than delving into the stylistic
characteristics that differentiate human and machine­generated text. The lack of an anal­
ysis explaining why and how these texts differ stylistically leaves a gap in understanding
the broader implications of LLM outputs and their alignment with human­written norms.
2.3.3
LLM Output Probabilities Methods
An alternative approach to detecting machine­generated text involves analyzing the log
probabilities assigned by language models. GLTR (Giant Language Model Test Room)
[10] exemplifies this methodology, utilizing pretrained language models to identify statis­
tical anomalies in token distributions. By highlighting improbable or unexpected tokens,
GLTR can effectively flag text that is likely generated by a machine. This token­level anal­
ysis provides a detailed view of the distributional differences between human­written and
LLM­generated text.
A more recent innovation, DetectGPT [11], introduces a zero­shot detection approach that
does not require any prior fine­tuning or additional labeled examples. It focuses on the
curvature of log probabilities rather than individual token probabilities. DetectGPT relies
on the observation that small perturbations in machine­generated text typically reduce its
overall log probability—a behavior not commonly observed in human­authored text. This
4
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:13==
method eliminates the need for additional fine­tuning, making it computationally efficient
and versatile across different LLMs.
While both GLTR and DetectGPT are effective for identifying machine­generated text,
they are limited in scope. These methods generally analyze individual LLMs and focus
on statistical patterns, offering little insight into the stylistic nuances that distinguish texts
across diverse authors or models. This limitation restricts their applicability in tasks that
require a deeper understanding of stylistic variation.
2.3.4
Linguistic Features Classifiers
A complementary line of research investigates the linguistic differences between LLM­
generated and human­authored texts, emphasizing lexical, syntactic, and structural fea­
tures. T. Kumurage and H. Liu [30] explored such features, leveraging them as inputs
for various classifiers. Their study compared open­source and proprietary LLMs, using
SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) [12] to identify the most impactful features. The
results highlighted lexical diversity and structural features as key discriminators, not only
between human and machine texts but also among different LLMs.
A. Shah et al. [13] further expanded this line of inquiry, incorporating Local Interpretable
Model­Agnostic Explanations (LIME) [31] alongside SHAP to analyze feature importance.
Their findings emphasized the role of readability scores and vocabulary richness in distin­
guishing human from machine texts. This study also underscored the potential for inter­
pretability techniques like SHAP and LIME to provide insights into model behavior, making
the classification process more transparent.
A more focused analysis by A. Muñoz­Ortiz et al. [14] examined the stylistic features
of news articles, comparing original human­written content with LLM­generated outputs.
Despite the linguistic fluency of machine­generated texts, their findings revealed distinct
patterns, such as reduced vocabulary diversity and a lack of emotional realism. These
characteristics not only distinguish LLM outputs from human writing but also expose stylis­
tic differences across various LLMs, providing a more granular understanding of their lim­
itations and capabilities.
2.3.5
Emulating Styles Investigation
An emerging research direction involves prompting LLMs to emulate specific writing styles,
which offers valuable insights into their ability to replicate human creativity and stylis­
tic nuance. Bhandarkar et al. [17] explored this topic by employing diverse prompting
techniques, ranging from simple instructions with brief author excerpts to sophisticated
prompts incorporating detailed linguistic attributes. Their findings highlighted significant
challenges for LLMs in accurately replicating writing styles, particularly in maintaining con­
sistent punctuation, lexical diversity, and coherence over longer texts.
Other studies have examined style emulation in poetic contexts, such as the work by
Walsh [18] and the GPT Poetry project [19]. These studies employed structured prompts
specifying both the topic and desired poetic style, with human evaluators assessing the
quality of the outputs. While LLMs demonstrated an ability to mimic structural elements of
poetry, they often fell short in producing the novelty and creativity characteristic of human
poets. These findings suggest that LLMs, while adept at structural mimicry, continue to
struggle with the subtleties of stylistic originality.
2.4
Summary
While current approaches enable the detect and analysis of LLM­generated texts, they still
leave several gaps. Fine­tuned models excel in classification tasks but provide limited in­
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
5
==PAGE:14==
sights into stylistic variations. Log­probability approaches are computationally efficient yet
lack nuance, while linguistic feature­based methods focus predominantly on binary dis­
tinctions rather than cross­author or cross­model comparisons. Finally, studies on style
emulation highlight LLMs’ challenges in replicating human creativity and originality. Ad­
dressing these gaps is crucial to advancing the field and ensuring responsible deployment
of LLM technologies.
6
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:15==
3
Datasets
In our research, we use multiple datasets, with our own Authors’ Writing Style dataset
serving as the cornerstone of our analysis. To enhance and broaden our investigation,
we supplement this primary dataset with four additional datasets: the Twitter and Reddit
dataset [22], the Global News dataset [23], the Legal Contracts dataset [21], and the
DAIGT­V4 dataset [24]. These supplementary datasets provide diverse perspectives and
information beyond our core dataset. In particular, we leverage the DAIGT­V4 dataset
[24], specifically designed for human versus model text classification, to incorporate an
additional domain dimension into our classification tasks.
3.1
Authors’ Writing Style Dataset
We created the Authors’ Writing Style dataset using two corpora: a collection of books
written by human authors and corresponding texts generated by large language models,
instructed to mimic the writing style of different authors. For the human­authored texts, we
used books from the open­source Gutenberg Project, a well­known repository of classic
literary works. Given the expansive nature of this collection, we selected a subset of
authors to ensure manageability and relevance to our research goals. To generate the
machine­authored texts, we employed five large language models: gpt­3.5­turbo­0125
(OpenAI), gpt­4o (OpenAI), gemini­1.5­flash (Google), open­mixtral­8x7b (MistralAI), and
claude­3­haiku­20240307 (Anthropic).
3.1.1
Project Guthenberg Books
The Gutenberg Project is a digital library offering free access to thousands of eBooks,
primarily classic literary works whose copyrights have expired. It provides an extensive
source of human­written text, making it highly suitable for our study. For this research,
we used the curated version provided by L. Shibamouli [32], which includes 3,036 En­
glish books written by 142 authors. The text volumes for individual authors range from
approximately 6,000 words to 9.5 million words, offering a diverse and substantial corpus.
To extract text, we employed a method of splitting the content by whitespaces, under the
assumption that the minor inaccuracies of this approach would not impact the selection
process. We carefully cleaned the downloaded texts by removing metadata, licensing
information, and transcribers’ notes wherever possible, ensuring that the resulting corpus
is well­suited for stylistic analysis.
The ”Inference in an Authorship Problem” paper [15] employs around 200,000 words for
its stylometric analysis, which serves as the minimum threshold for author selection, nar­
rowing the pool to 114 candidates. The analysis was planned to be conducted on a single
domain, which led as to choose only the novels books, which further limited the number
of considered authors. Generation of such corpora comes with a cost of requests to the
LLM provider’s API and the processing time of our analysis. Due to our resources avail­
ability we limited the analysis to 10 authors. Since explained criteria yielded more than
ten authors, the rest of authors where excluded arbitrarily. Table 3.1 presents selected
authors and corresponding number of words from all the available books. All the writings
has been saved in the the form of files named [author]___[title].txt.
3.1.2
LLM­generated Corpora
For the purpose of this analysis we selected five models ­ gpt­3.5­turbo­0125 (OpenAI),
gpt­4o (OpenAI), gemini­1.5­flash (Google), open­mixtral­8x7b (MistralAI), and claude­3­
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
7
==PAGE:16==
Author
Words Count
Mark Twain
3M
Zane Grey
2M
Joseph Conrad
2M
George Eliot
2M
Benjamin Disraeli
2M
Lucy Maud Montgomery
1M
William Henry Hudson
1M
Howard Pyle
755k
Virginia Woolf
375k
Lewis Carroll
299k
Table 3.1: Word counts for selected authors from Authors’ Writing Style dataset. Numbers
are rounded to either the nearest millions (M) or thousands (k).
haiku­20240307 (Anthropic). These models were among the most popular, at the moment
of data collection process, LLMs developed by various providers, ensuring a comprehen­
sive analysis. To generate the data, which includes diverse sequences of text, 400 one­
sentence queries were prepared. These queries are abstract and universal to avoid the
use of references from other sources. The first five queries are listed below:
Describe the most peculiar meal you've ever encountered.
Explain the finer points of etiquette for a barnyard gathering.
Convince a grumpy mule to pull a rickety carriage.
Debate the merits of a mustache versus a beard.
Write a love letter from a lovesick cactus to a blooming rose.
Each query is accompanied by additional instructions on how the final answer should be
formatted. The following prompt has been used to generate text for the authors:
Come up with the answer in [author]'s writing style.
Don't use direct references and citations of [author].
Answer in plain text format. Use 3000 words.
[query]
In this prompt, the placeholder [author] is replaced by the name of the specific author, and
[query] is replaced by one of the queries mentioned above. The prompt aims to achieve
several key objectives:
1. Ensure the text follows the writing style of the author, making the analysis more chal­
lenging. It is assumed that language models are familiar with the books of requested
authors, due to the training processes and open­sourced availability of these texts.
2. Prevent direct citations from the author’s writings, as these LLMs are likely trained
on these books among other sources.
3. Require the LLM to return the text in a simple, plain format for technical reasons.
4. Instruct the LLM to use only 3000 words to maintain context, acknowledging that
LLMs often do not strictly adhere to this constraint but generally aim to stay within
it.
Despite of single deviations explained at the end of this sub­section such a prompting
strategy resulted in comprehensive stories generated by large language models. An­
8
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:17==
swers have followed the requested topics and the 400 queries were sufficient to reach
the desired threshold of 200k words for each of the collections.
For each combination of model, author, and query (5 models * 10 authors * 400 queries),
requests were made, and the responses were saved in a defined JSON format, as dis­
played below:
{
"id": ...,
"requested_number_of_words": ...,
"response_length": ...,
"model": ...,
"created_at": ...,
"author": ...,
"prompt_template": ...,
"query": ...,
"response": ...
}
During generation the default settings of providers’ API [33][34][35][36] were used. The
temperature parameter, which controls the randomness of the output, was set to its default
value (ranging from 0.7 to 1 depending on the provider). Lower temperature values make
the model’s responses more deterministic and focused, while higher values increase the
diversity and creativity of the responses. To allow the LLMs maximum flexibility, the top
p parameter was set to 1, meaning the model considers all possible tokens for genera­
tion, thus not restricting token selection based on cumulative probability. The max tokens
parameter, which controls the maximum number of tokens generated, was left unset, as
there were no strict constraints on the length of the answers. Other parameters, deemed
less relevant to the project’s objectives, were also set to their default values.
Tuning these parameters could affect the response length or the choice of tokens, which
are integral to the writing style of LLMs. Additionally, it could influence the content of the
generated answers. To remain objective and account for uncertainty about the optimal
configuration, we used the default parameter values, as this is likely the most common
setup chosen by researchers.
For each model­author pair, approximately 280,000 words were generated, surpassing
the minimum threshold of 200,000 words to accommodate potential word losses during
future cleaning processes. The exception is the
claude­3­haiku­20240307 model, which generated around 600,000 words for each author
across 400 queries, showing the biggest lack of discipline in the number of generated
words. As depicted in table 3.2, the final word counts vary due to the irregular lengths
of responses from the Language Model (LLM). Similar to authors selection, text was split
into words using whitespace, as we consider this simple method sufficient to present the
overview of the text generation.
All generated responses are stored within directories labeled by
{model_name}/{author_name}. To share an understanding of the structure of responses,
presented below are two responses 1 generated by gpt­4o for the query:
Describe the most peculiar meal you've ever encountered.
1Due to visual reasons responses are truncated.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
9
==PAGE:18==
Author
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Mark Twain
267k
322k
296k
251k
689k
Zane Grey
291k
340k
311k
251k
630k
Joseph Conrad
310k
342k
318k
289k
608k
George Eliot
303k
302k
280k
260k
559k
Benjamin Disraeli
273k
253k
252k
252k
558k
Lucy Maud Montgomery
290k
276k
278k
266k
547k
William Henry Hudson
299k
269k
286k
252k
589k
Howard Pyle
294k
260k
279k
251k
481k
Virginia Woolf
290k
251k
278k
251k
470k
Lewis Carroll
300k
262k
263k
251k
608k
Table 3.2: Number of words generated by various models for each author, rounded to the
nearest thousand and expressed in thousands (k). Models are enumerated in the follow­
ing order: gpt­3.5­turbo­0125, gpt­4o, gemini­1.5­flash, open­mixtral­8x7b, and claude­3­
haiku­20240307
Response 2 in Mark Twain’s style:
Well now, let me tell you about the most peculiar meal
I ever did encounter. It happened on a hot summer's day,
the kind where the sun seems to hang lazily...
Response 3 in George Eliot’s style:
It was in a modest village, tucked away amidst rolling hills
and meandering streams, that I stumbled upon the most
peculiar meal I have ever encountered...
Even though it was not a big obstacle, it is worth highlighting that LLMs do not adhere
to the request regarding the output length. For instance, around 200 requests out of
3660 gemini­1.5­flash resulted in an empty string, with no apparent cause discerned from
the investigation, whereas other LLMs did not exhibit this issue. A particular query Write
a newspaper article announcing the invention of the internet. appeared to be
confusing for many of the LLMs. Instead of writing the article models were returning
only the headline of it. Despite these edge cases, the models generally performed as
expected, providing comprehensive responses. Although prompt engineering suggests
tailoring prompts for each model, the quality of generated stories demonstrated that a
single, universal prompt suffices for such a task. Notably, no instances of response refusal
due to perceived harmful content were encountered during the process.
3.2
DAIGT­V4 Dataset
The DAIGT­V4 dataset [24] is a carefully constructed and comprehensive dataset de­
signed for the ”Detect AI­Generated Text” competition hosted on Kaggle [37]. Created in
January 2024, this dataset serves as a benchmark for developing classifiers capable of
distinguishing between human­written and LLM­generated text. The dataset comprises
73,573 essays, generated either by humans or by models from the following families:
mistral, llama, gpt, claude, falcon, palm, cohere, ada, babbage, curie, and davinci.
2File: res/datasets/writing-style/raw/models/gpt-4o/Mark Twain/1717948495.json
3File: res/datasets/writing-style/raw/models/gpt-4o/George Eliot/1717948549.json
10
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:19==
Collection
Words count
human
10M
mistral
7M
llama
6M
gpt
1M
claude
690k
falcon
2M
palm
770k
cohere
130k
ada
150k
babbage
150k
curie
170k
davinci
620k
Table 3.3: Number of words in various DAIGT­V4 dataset collections, rounded to the
nearest thousand and expressed in millions (M) or thousands (k).
As shown in Table 3.3, the word count for each collection ranges from approximately
120,000 to 10 million. Each row in the dataset includes the following attributes:
1. text: The content of the essay.
2. label: A binary indicator where 0 denotes human­generated text and 1 indicates
LLM­generated text.
3. prompt name: The topic of the essay, injected into the prompt template.
4. RDizzl3 seven: A boolean flag indicating whether the essay is based on prompts
included in the hidden test set of the competition.
5. source: Specifies the exact name of the model used to generate the text or stores
persuade corpus for human­written essays.
6. model: A string representing the family of the model identified in the source column.
The DAIGT­V4 dataset uniquely combines a diverse set of texts sourced from multiple
open­source and proprietary large language models (LLMs) alongside a substantial col­
lection of labeled human­written and AI­generated content. This rich diversity makes it an
exceptional resource for evaluating domain­independence in classification tasks. Beyond
its primary role in investigating classification performance, as described in later chapters,
the dataset also contributes significantly to the analysis of global word distribution, a con­
cept that will be thoroughly explained in subsequent sections.
3.3
Global News Dataset
The Global News dataset [23] comprises news articles collected over several months and
shared on Kaggle platform. The primary motivation behind curating this dataset was to
develop and experiment with various natural language processing (NLP) models. The
data is sourced from the NewsAPI 4, a comprehensive and up­to­date news aggregation
service. The API provides access to a wide range of news articles from various reputable
sources, making it a valuable resource for constructing a diverse and informative dataset.
The dataset consists of 100k articles, each containing the following fields:
4https://newsapi.org/
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
11
==PAGE:20==
1. article id: Unique article id
2. source id: Source title
3. source name: Source name
4. author: The author of the article
5. title: The headline or title of the article.
6. description: A description or snippet from the article.
7. url: The direct URL to the article.
8. url to image: The URL to a relevant image for the article.
9. published at: The date and time that the article was published, in UTC.
10. content: The unformatted content of the article, where available. Truncated to 200
characters.
11. category: The category of the article
12. full content: The unformatted full content of the article, where available
The dataset contains over 53 million words in the full content field. It serves as a rich
resource for capturing domain­specific vocabulary and linguistic patterns pertinent to the
news domain. These characteristics play a critical role in modeling and defining global
word distribution.
3.4
Legal Contracts Dataset
The Legal Contracts dataset [21], also hosted on Kaggle, is a specialized corpus con­
sisting of over 13,000 labeled spans across 510 commercial legal contracts. These an­
notations were curated manually by The Atticus Project, identifying 41 categories of key
legal clauses commonly reviewed by professionals in contract analysis. The dataset is
provided in various formats to accommodate diverse research applications:
1. full contract txt: Plain­text files containing the raw content of all 510 contracts, useful
for textual reference and analysis.
2. full contract pdf: PDF versions of the contracts, mirroring the content in full contract
txt.
3. master clauses.csv: A CSV file with 83 columns and 510 rows, where each row
represents a contract. This file provides detailed metadata and manually labeled text
spans corresponding to 41 predefined clause categories, including contract name,
annotated clause text, and human­labeled data for clause categorization.
4. SQuAD style JSON: A JSON file formatted akin to the SQuAD 2.0 dataset, designed
for training and evaluating question­answering models. This file maps contract para­
graphs to clause categories, enabling clause prediction tasks.
This dataset encompasses 3 million words across its plain­text contract files and is a
significant resource for defining global word distribution. Its detailed annotations provide
valuable insights into legal language usage, supporting both domain­specific and cross­
domain analyses.
12
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:21==
3.5
Twitter and Reddit Dataset
The Twitter and Reddit dataset was developed as part of a university project on Sentiment
Analysis Across Multi­Source Social Media Platforms. It consists of two subsets: tweets
from Twitter and comments from Reddit, both annotated with sentiment labels. These
datasets focus on public discourse around Indian political leaders and general public opin­
ions about the 2019 Indian General Elections. The data was sourced using the Tweepy 5
and PRAW 6 APIs, which enable the extraction of tweets and comments, respectively.
Each tweet and comment is labeled with a sentiment score based on the following schema:
1. 1: Positive sentiment.
2. 0: Neutral sentiment.
3. ­1: Negative sentiment.
The dataset is composed of two sub­datasets:
1. Twitter dataset: Contains 163,000 tweets, comprising approximately 3 million words.
2. Reddit dataset: Includes 37,000 comments, with a total of 1 million words.
Before analysis, the textual data was preprocessed using Python’s re library and NLP
techniques to remove noise. These datasets contribute an additional 4 million words to
the global word distribution definition. By encapsulating sentiment­driven language from
diverse social media platforms, this dataset enriches the linguistic variety necessary for
our analysis.
5https://www.tweepy.org/
6https://praw.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:23==
4
Methods and Results
In this chapter, we present the experiments conducted and the results obtained. Our anal­
ysis is divided into three key sections: Principal Components Analysis, Classification and,
Information Content analysis. Each section provides detailed insights into the methodolo­
gies and outcomes specific to its focus. Before delving into the analysis, it is essential to
define certain terms that may be interpreted differently across various academic works:
1. Word: A sequence of characters containing Latin letters, such as father or head­
dress. This definition aligns with the conventional concept of a word in English.
2. Token: Any segment resulting from the tokenization process. Tokens may include
words, punctuation marks, numbers, or other meaningful units, such as father, !, or
23.
3. Complex Word: A word consisting of at least three syllables, indicating greater lin­
guistic or phonetic complexity.
As outlined in the introduction, our primary objective is to address the overarching ques­
tion: Do large language models exhibit novelty in their writing styles?. We break this
question down into smaller, more manageable sub­questions, systematically answering
each to build toward a comprehensive conclusion. In the following sections, we introduce
these sub­problems and describe our approach to tackling them.
4.1
Principal Components Analysis
We aimed to determine whether it is possible to distinguish human­written texts from
model­generated ones. This fundamental hypothesis can be investigated through vari­
ous methods. Drawing inspiration from previous studies, like the one of Binongo [16], we
explored the potential of leveraging linguistic features combined with Principal Compo­
nents Analysis (PCA) to uncover patterns through dimensionality­reduced plots.
We adopted this approach as the initial step in our investigation. It provided us with first
insights and allowed us to validate our assumptions, which we further explored through
subsequent methods. The process, which uses the Authors’ Writing Style dataset, began
with rigorous data cleaning, preprocessing and metrics extraction, detailed in the following
subsections. These preparatory steps ensured that our analysis was robust and yielded
meaningful insights.
4.1.1
Data Cleaning
First, we loaded the Authors’ Writing Style dataset, as described in the previous chap­
ter. For each of the ten selected authors and six collections (human­written and five
model­generated corpora), we loaded the corresponding texts. To ensure the reliability of
our analysis, we performed a cleaning process on the dataset. Recognizing the unique
sources of noise present in books and LLM­generated content, we applied distinct clean­
ing procedures tailored to each type of text.
For the books, we identified and removed the following sources of noise:
1. Italic formatting: Words surrounded by * characters, which indicate italic formatting,
were stripped of these characters.
2. Dividers: Section or chapter separators, often represented as sequences of * char­
acters, were removed to maintain textual continuity.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
15
==PAGE:24==
3. Illustration annotations: Images within the books, replaced by annotations such as
[Illustration: ...] in the text format, were removed as they do not contribute
to the narrative content.
4. Note annotations: Footnotes, represented by superscript numbers in the original
text and rendered as {}­enclosed annotations in the digital version, were removed.
Since these notes are typically added by publishers rather than the authors, we
excluded them to preserve the authenticity of the text.
For LLM­generated texts, we identified several forms of noise and applied the following
cleaning steps:
1. Small chunks Texts shorter than 100 words were excluded, as these were likely
generated due to the language model failing to comprehend the task, resulting in
irrelevant responses.
2. Repeated substrings We removed texts that ended with repeated substrings, such
as:
This is my story about the apple the apple the apple...
Specifically, texts with at least three repeated substrings, each consisting of a mini­
mum of two words, were excluded to avoid introducing biases.
3. Emojis: All emoji encodings were removed from the texts to maintain consistency
in formatting and focus on semantic content.
4. @ Signs: Texts containing the @ symbol were cleaned to remove these symbols
5. HTML Tags: In some cases, generated texts contained HTML tags used for format­
ting. We removed all such tags to standardize the text structure.
6. Bold formatting: Words or sequences formatted using bold syntax (**...**) were
stripped of the formatting characters.
The cleaning process removed approximately 1% of the raw dataset. These procedures
were essential for eliminating irrelevant or redundant content, which removed outliers
encountered during the development.
4.1.2
Data Preprocessing
We transformed the texts as a preparatory step for subsequent analysis. For the books,
we defined a ”text” as an entire book, whereas for the models, we defined a ”text” as a
single response generated for a prompt. To segment these texts into sentences, we used
the sent_tokenize function from the nltk.tokenize module, specifically employing the
PunktSentenceTokenizer. To prepare the data for analysis, we first divided the texts into
raw segments, which served as intermediate units for further processing:
1. Model­generated texts: Each response, being a distinct and self­contained logical
unit, was treated as a single raw segment.
2. Books: To ensure contextual integrity, we divided books into raw segments of ap­
proximately 25,000 characters (equivalent to roughly 5,000 words), carefully avoid­
ing arbitrary sentence truncation. By adopting a character­based segmentation ap­
proach, we minimized the computational burden associated with tokenizing entire
books at this stage. While this method introduces slight imprecision, it remains ac­
ceptable for subsequent tasks that accept unequal segmentation of the texts.
16
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.1: The figure illustrates the chunking pipeline for author­collection pairs. For
books, the process involves: (1) segmentation into raw segments, (2) shuffling the raw
segments, and (3) chunking into uniform sizes of approximately 5,000 tokens. For model
collections, step (1) is skipped, proceeding directly to steps (2) and (3).
Next, we shuffled these raw segments within each author­collection pair to ensure bal­
anced representation. For model­generated texts, shuffling had minimal impact because
the raw segments were already independent. However, for books, shuffling was critical to
avoid sampling only from a single book when selecting raw segments for an author. This
approach ensured that token blocks were distributed proportionally across all books in the
author’s collection, reducing potential biases introduced by focusing on a single storyline.
After shuffling, we processed the raw segments to create the final token blocks required
for our analysis:
1. Each sentence within a raw segment was tokenized into words using the
nltk.word_tokenize function and the PunktWordTokenizer.
2. The tokenized sentences were subsequently merged into sequential blocks of ap­
proximately 5,000 tokens each. Minor deviations from the target size were allowed
to avoid splitting sentences and preserve their integrity.
3. We repeated this process until each collection­author pair reached exactly 40 blocks,
totaling around 200,000 tokens.
This pipeline produced a standardized text segmentation, with each collection­author
pair containing approximately 200,000 tokens, divided into uniform 5,000­token blocks,
hereafter referred to as chunks. It leaves as with 2400 chunks totaling around 480M to­
kens for our investigation. Analyzing these chunks, rather than entire texts, enabled us
to explore within­text variability more effectively.
In the next step each chunk was transformed to the following structure:
1. Text: Raw chunk’s text
2. Sentences: List of all chunk’s sentences
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
17
==PAGE:26==
3. Tokens: List of all chunk’s tokens
4. Words: List of all chunk’s words
5. Syllables number: Number of syllables in the chunk
6. Complex words number: Number of complex words in the chunk
The first three objects—text, sentences, and tokens—were preprocessed in the earlier
steps. Subsequently, we filtered words from the tokens using Python’s regex function
with the pattern [a-zA-Z]. On average, this filtering retained 87.5% of the token set. To
extract syllables for each word, we used the nltk.corpus.CMUDictCorpusReader. For
words without syllable matches in this resource, we employed pyphen.Pyphen configured
for the English language as a backup solution. The extracted syllables were counted and
stored in the respective variables of the data structure. Simultaneously, we counted the
number of complex words—defined as words containing at least three syllables.
Author
Collection
Sentences
Tokens
Words
Syllables
Complex Words
Mark Twain
books
8342
200708
173078
237421
14378
Mark Twain
gemini­1.5­flash
9861
200452
169394
231999
13291
Joseph Conrad
books
11007
200555
171924
240832
15488
George Eliot
gpt­4o
8306
200529
174380
271276
24182
George Eliot
open­mixtral­8x7b
6044
200623
177382
273435
24562
Zane Grey
gpt­3.5­turbo­0125
7865
200521
178652
264370
19744
Table 4.1: Preprocessing statistics for six randomly selected chunks from a total of 2400.
Table 4.1 presents the preprocessing statistics for six randomly selected chunks, illustrat­
ing the general distribution of specific language measures. As visible on the table, our
pipeline results in the chunks of roughly 200k tokens, without the lost of any information.
Instead, the texts are sliced into smaller, independent analysis pieces that help as check
the variability within a single text. This concludes the preprocessing stage and provides
an overview of the data structure that will be used in the subsequent analysis.
4.1.3
Metrics and Features Extraction
To perform PCA, we first needed to determine which linguistic metrics to use as input
features. To make this decision, we reviewed relevant literature addressing similar chal­
lenges. Many studies have used metrics related to word, sentence, or paragraph lengths
[14][13][30]. Other approaches have analyzed distributions of parts of speech or em­
ployed various text scores that reflect either vocabulary richness or text readability. Addi­
tionally, researchers have examined structural aspects of texts, such as stopword usage
or punctuation patterns.
In selecting the metrics for our study, we aimed to balance their utility and the computa­
tional resources required. We chose to focus on fundamental metrics, such as average
word length and syllables per word, which provide a numerical overview of a text chunk’s
structure. Furthermore, we incorporated established readability and richness scores to
gain deeper insights into text characteristics. Given the potential influence of punctuation
on our task, we also included punctuation counts as a feature. Lastly, we considered the
frequency of function words, as prior studies indicate that the usage patterns of these
context­independent words (e.g., ”of,” ”a,” ”the”) can reveal stylistic tendencies. Below,
we provide a detailed list of all metrics extracted for each text chunk:
1. Unique Word Number: The number of unique words within the text chunk.
18
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:27==
2. Average Word Length: The mean length of words in the text chunk, measured in
characters.
3. Average Sentence Length: The mean length of sentences in the text chunk, mea­
sured in words.
4. Average Syllables Per Word: The mean number of syllables per word in the text
chunk.
5. Function Words Counts: A dictionary where keys represent specific function words
(e.g., ”of,” ”the”) and values indicate their frequency within the text chunk.
6. Puncutations Counts: A dictionary where keys represent specific punctuation marks
(e.g., ”.”, ”,”) and values indicate their frequency within the text chunk.
7. Flesch Reading Ease: A readability metric that evaluates the ease of comprehen­
sion of the text. Scores range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating easier
readability.
206.835−1.015(N
S )−84.6(SL
N )
Where N is the total number of words, S is the number of sentences and SL is the
total number of syllables.
8. Flesch Kincaid Grade Level: A readability metric estimating the U.S. school grade
level required to understand the text. Lower scores indicate simpler text.
0.39(N
S )−11.8(SL
N ) −15.59
Where N is the total number of words, S is the number of sentences and SL is the
total number of syllables.
9. Gunning Fog Index: A readability metric assessing the number of years of formal
education needed to comprehend the text. Scores range from 0 to 20, with lower
scores indicating simpler text.
0.4[(N
S ) + 100( C
N )]
Where N is the total number of words, S is the number of sentences and C is the
total number of complex words.
10. Yules Characteristic K: A measure of text ”disorderliness” based on word frequency
distribution. Lower values indicate greater vocabulary diversity, while higher values
suggest more repetition.
104
N2
V
∑
i=1
(ni −c)2
Where N is the total number of words, V is the vocabulary size, ni is the frequency
of the i −th word, and c is the mean frequency of all words.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
19
==PAGE:28==
11. Herdan’s C: A measure quantifying word frequency distribution and vocabulary rich­
ness.
logV
logN
Where N is the total number of words, V is the vocabulary size.
12. Maas: A measure of vocabulary richness, assessing the proportional expansion of
unique words relative to the total number of words. Lower scores indicate greater
richness.
logN −logV
log(N2)
Where N is the total number of words, V is the vocabulary size.
13. Simpsons index: A measure quantifying the likelihood of two randomly selected
words being identical. Values range from 0 (high diversity) to 1 (low diversity).
1 −
V
∑
i=1
(ni
N )2
Where, V , ni and N are as defined above.
To define the set of function words, we used the Python functionwords.FunctionWords
instance for the English language, which provides a total of 512 function words. Simi­
larly, we extracted punctuation characters using the punctuation from Python’s string
, yielding 32 unique punctuation marks. By considering the counts of each function word
and punctuation mark as individual metrics, along with the other metrics outlined in the
previous section, we initially defined a model with 555 metrics.
To address the potential noise introduced by rarely used punctuation marks, we imple­
mented a filtering strategy. For each text chunk, we identified the five most frequently
occurring punctuation marks and merged these sets across all chunks. This resulted in
a final selection of seven punctuation marks: . (period) , (comma) ? (question mark) ;
(semicolon) ­ (hyphen) ” (double apostrophe) and ’ (apostrophe).
Function words have gone under similar strategy, but this time we chose ten function
words with the highest count number in each chunk. It resulted in the following 23 function
words after the merge: ”you”, ”that”, ”it”, ”as”, ”a”, ”had”, ”she”, ”said”, ”and”, ”of”, ”her”,
”their”, ”its”, ”our”, ”was”, ”he”, ”my”, ”in”, ”his”, ”the”, ”to”, ”is”, ”with”.
Through this process, we reduced the dimensionality of the dataset from 555 to 44 met­
rics, which we now refer to as features. These features form the basis for the Principal
Component Analysis discussed in the following section. They are further used in other,
later presented methods, which results show that this set does not translates well to other
text domains. The reasons and potential solutions for that are presented in Discussion
and Future Work chapters.
20
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:29==
4.1.4
Results
We employed Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to gain initial insights into the distinc­
tions between human­written and model­generated texts, utilizing the features extracted in
the preceding steps. We used an implementation of PCA from the sklearn.decomposition
package, coupled with StandardScaler from sklearn.discriminant_analysis for fea­
ture scaling. In each experiment, we reduced the 44 features to two principal components,
which we subsequently visualized on a scatter plot.
Figure 4.2: Scatter plot visualizes each text chunk as a single point, derived from a Princi­
pal Component Analysis (PCA) performed on all available chunks in the Authors’ Writing
Style dataset. Points are colored according to their collection of origin.
Figure 4.3: Scatter plot visualizes each text chunk as a single point, derived from a Princi­
pal Component Analysis (PCA) performed on all available chunks in the Authors’ Writing
Style dataset. Points are colored according to their author of origin.
Our initial PCA experiment encompassed all 2400 available text chunks from all authors
and collections.
Figures 4.2 and 4.3 depict each chunk as a single point on a two­
dimensional plot. While the underlying data remains consistent, we marked the points
by their corresponding collection in Figure 4.2 and by their author in Figure 4.3. The
first two principal components explained 46% of the variance in the data—35% by PC1
and 11% by PC2—suggesting their potential efficacy in representing the full feature set.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
21
==PAGE:30==
The plot readily distinguishes a cluster of human­written texts (books) from the model­
generated texts. The models clustered together, forming a larger group within which fur­
ther sub­clustering by individual model could be attempted, however, presenting a more
challenging task. Conversely, the plot colored by author revealed no discernible patterns
of points clustering around specific authors. We observed that Mark Twain’s writing style,
and the style mimicking him, exhibited greater similarity to other authors in the dataset
compared to the remaining authors within the dataset.
Figure 4.4: Bar plots display top ten feature importances of each principal component
from the PCA performed on all text chunks from Authors’ Writing Style dataset.
Furthermore, we investigated the contribution of each feature to the PCA results. Figure
4.4 presents the top ten features for both principal components. We observed that various
scores applied to the text chunks and the frequency of function words played a significant
role in determining the position of each point.
Figure 4.5: Scatter plot displays the results of PCA applied to text chunks of Benjamin
Disraeli from Authors’ Writing Style dataset, with each point representing a single chunk.
In a subsequent experiment, we applied a similar PCA process, but confined the analysis
to individual authors. This involved training a separate PCA model on the text chunks of
each author (240 chunks per author) and visualizing the results on a scatter plot. Figure
22
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:31==
4.5, depicting the results for Benjamin Disraeli, serves as a representative example of the
observed pattern across all authors. We found that within the narrowed scope of a single
author, the distinction between human­written and model­generated texts becomes even
more pronounced, facilitating clearer clustering.
Figure 4.6: Scatter plot displays the results of PCA applied to text chunks of the books
collection from Authors’ Writing Style dataset, with each point representing a single chunk.
Our final set of PCA experiments focused on analyzing text chunks within the scope of
individual collections. Figure 4.6 presents the results of this analysis for the book collec­
tion. We confirmed the observations from the plot of all chunks marked by author, namely
the absence of clear clustering and the overlap of features from different authors. We
observed similar behavior across the remaining collections under this focused analysis.
4.2
Classification
In the following experiments, we focus on classifying the chunks from the Authors’ Writing
Style dataset, as previously defined. Our objective is to employ various classification algo­
rithms with different input features and target labels. It helps us validate our insights from
Principal Component Analysis, which uncover the differences between human­written and
llm­generated texts. This analysis aims to further investigate the writing styles of differ­
ent sources and assess whether our approach is applicable across diverse domains. To
examine its generalizability, we applied our methodology to the DAIGT­V4 dataset [24],
which comprises essays authored by humans and various language models. Moreover,
we will investigate the differences between the writing style of various authors rather than
collections.
4.2.1
Authors’ Writing Style Dataset ­ Core Classification
The PCA results revealed clear separations between human­written and model­generated
texts, particularly when analyzed at the collection level. However, these findings primarily
provide a visual and exploratory understanding. To quantitatively validate these distinc­
tions, we next employ classification algorithms to assess how effectively these patterns
can be used to predict text origins.
We applied the principal components obtained earlier to three classification algorithms:
Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machines (SVM), and Decision Tree. Each of these
algorithms was chosen to provide different perspectives on the classification task, ensur­
ing the robustness of our findings. Logistic Regression is a statistical method often used
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
23
==PAGE:32==
for binary classification tasks. It models the probability of a sample belonging to a specific
class by fitting a logistic function to the data. This algorithm is particularly effective when
the relationship between the features and the target variable is linear.
Support Vector Machines (SVM) is a powerful supervised learning algorithm designed
to find the hyperplane that best separates data points from different classes in a high­
dimensional space. It aims to maximize the margin between the classes, which makes
it robust to outliers and effective for non­linear classification tasks when used with kernel
functions.
Decision Trees, on the other hand, are intuitive and interpretable models that split the data
into subsets based on feature thresholds. They create a tree­like structure where each
node represents a decision based on a feature, and each leaf represents a class label.
Decision Trees are particularly suited for capturing non­linear patterns and interactions
between features.
By using these diverse algorithms, we aimed to validate previously gathered insights re­
garding the principal components’ ability to capture meaningful patterns in the data. Fur­
thermore, comparing their performance allowed us to assess the extent to which different
modeling approaches can leverage the same feature space.
The classification pipeline was consistent across all models. First, we extracted two, pre­
viously computed principal components from all text chunks, which served as inputs. The
collection column was mapped to a binary label, assigning human for book collections
and llm for texts generated by language models. The dataset was then split into train­
ing (80%) and test (20%) subsets using sklearn.model_selection.train_test_split
with standard arguments. The sklearn implementations of the selected algorithms were
trained on the training set, and their accuracy was evaluated on the test set. The trained
models were saved for future use.
In the next experiment, we analyzed all chunks using the full set of 44 features defined
in Section 4.1.3. As in the previous classification experiment, we labeled the chunks as
either human or llm, with numerical labels 0 and 1 assigned respectively. Unlike the earlier
approach, we used all 44 features instead of relying on principal components. We applied
the same data split strategy, dividing the data into training and test sets.
For this experiment, we employed the XGBoost algorithm from sklearn, configured with
the Logistic Regression loss function, which is designed for binary classification tasks.
XGBoost (Extreme Gradient Boosting) is a highly efficient and scalable implementation of
gradient­boosted decision trees. It builds an ensemble of weak learners (decision trees)
sequentially, where each tree corrects the errors of the previous one. This approach
often results in high predictive accuracy and is particularly effective for structured data.
XGBoost is also well­known for its ability to handle missing data, regularization to prevent
overfitting, and parallel processing capabilities, making it a powerful tool for this classifi­
cation task.
To interpret the model’s predictions and assess the importance of individual features, we
used the shap.TreeExplainer implementation. SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations)
is a game­theoretic approach to explain the output of machine learning models. It as­
signs each feature a Shapley value, quantifying its contribution to the model’s prediction.
SHAP values allow us to understand how each feature influences the classification of
a particular instance. The shap.TreeExplainer is specifically optimized for tree­based
models, such as XGBoost, providing efficient and interpretable visualizations of feature
importance. By analyzing SHAP values, we gained insights into how specific features im­
24
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:33==
pacted the model’s decision­making process, allowing us to identify patterns and validate
the relevance of the selected features. These experiments encompass the core classi­
fication tasks applied to the Authors’ Writing Style dataset and, as detailed in the next
section, extend to the DAIGT­V4 dataset.
4.2.2
DAIGT­V4 ­ Core Classification
The classification results on the custom dataset might highlight the efficacy of our fea­
tures and algorithms within the novel domain. However, these findings raise an important
question: are these patterns domain­specific, or do they generalize to other text types?
To address this, we extend our analysis to the DAIGT­V4 dataset, which includes essays
from diverse sources.
Figure 4.7: Schema of PCA Classification for the DAIGT­V4 dataset, illustrating depen­
dencies on the Authors’ Writing Style (AWS) pipeline: 1) Feature set defined during AWS
preprocessing is reused, 2) AWS PCA models are applied for dimensionality reduction,
and 3) Pre­trained classification models (Logistic Regression, SVM and, Decision Tree)
from AWS are used for DAIGT­V4 classification.
We followed the same preprocessing pipeline as described for the Authors’ Writing Style
dataset in Section 4.1. After loading the data, we cleaned the model­generated texts using
the same process as outlined previously. Texts written by humans were left untouched,
as the initial investigation did not indicate a need for modification. The cleaning process
removed 4,490 rows out of 73,573 (6.1%) identified as model­generated texts. To define
our collections, we used the model column, which included categories such as human,
mistral, llama, gpt, claude, falcon, palm, cohere, ada, babbage, curie, and davinci. In this
experiment, models are grouped into families rather than specific versions; for instance,
gpt may include gpt3.5­turbo­01250 or other GPT variants. While this dataset does not
provide specific author information, such as the human authors included in the Authors’
Writing Style dataset, this limitation does not affect our experiment since the classifica­
tion focuses on the original collection. The chunking preprocessing followed the same
procedure as that described for model­generated texts in Section 4.1.3.
We reused the same features as in the previous experiment. Specifically, we applied
the previously calculated top punctuation and function words without recalculating them.
These features served as inputs to the principal component space and scaler from the
earlier analysis, resulting in a two­dimensional input alongside the collection column. For
the classification task, we transformed the collection column to llm for all values except
human. Additionally, we reused the three pre­trained models—Logistic Regression, SVM,
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
25
==PAGE:34==
and Decision Tree—without retraining them to classify all chunks obtained during the pre­
processing stage. These steps aimed to evaluate whether our analysis generalizes to
other domains or overfits to a specific domain.
Figure 4.8: Schema of All Features Classification for the DAIGT­V4 dataset, illustrating
dependencies on the Authors’ Writing Style (AWS) pipeline: 1) Feature set defined during
AWS preprocessing is reused, 2) Pre­trained XGBoost classification model from AWS are
used for DAIGT­V4 classification.
We followed the same approach regarding the XGBoost algorithm with all features as
input. The set of features was the same as defined in Section 4.1.3, and we reused the
model trained on the Authors’ Writing Style dataset.
The final experiment, extending beyond the scope of Authors’ Writing Style ­ Core Clas­
sification, involved training and predicting the label of each DAIGT­V4 chunk utilizing all
available features. In this task, we adopted a similar methodology to the previous ex­
periment; however, we trained the model on the essays domain instead of reusing the
model trained on the novel domain. Following a consistent procedure, we incorporated
all chunks and the complete set of 44 features, divided the data into training and test sets
using an 80:20 split strategy, assessed the accuracy of the predictions on the test set,
and analyzed feature impacts through SHAP values. This experiment aimed to evaluate
the classification performance on this dataset under a straightforward scenario.
4.2.3
Authors’ Writing Style Dataset ­ Additional Classification
Experiments
While the core classification experiments could demonstrate high accuracy in distinguish­
ing text origins, they primarily operated at the collection level. To further investigate the
granularity of writing styles, we explore classification at the author level. This deeper
analysis seeks to understand whether distinct authorial styles remain discernible within
individual collections.
Initially, we focused on a scenario where PCA was applied separately to chunks from each
collection. The goal was to classify chunks into one of ten authors within the constraints
of a single collection’s scope. Following the standard methodology, we split the chunks
into training and test sets and applied three previously described classification models
­ Logistic Regression, SVM and, Decision Tree. This experiment aimed to evaluate the
feasibility and efficiency of author classification under controlled conditions.
In the subsequent step, we further simplified the classification problem by selecting chunks
from only two specific authors within a single collection, reducing the task to binary classi­
26
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:35==
fication. By focusing on this more relaxed scenario, we sought to understand how easily
specific authors could be distinguished within the same collection. These additional ex­
periments were designed to provide deeper insights into the granularity of author­level
distinctions, complementing our broader analyses.
4.2.4
Results
Our initial experiments on the custom Authors’ Writing Style dataset confirmed that dis­
tinguishing between human­generated and model­generated texts is feasible. Using the
principal components of each chunk as input, enabled us to successfully learn various
models distinguish human and model texts. Evaluated the classification performance of
the three models, the results were as follows:
1. Logistic Regression: 99.6%
2. SVM: 99.3%
3. Decision Tree: 98.3%
The consistently high accuracy (around 99%) across all algorithms indicates that the ex­
tracted features, reduced via PCA, effectively abstract the text chunks and allow accurate
classification of their origins. These results validate the suitability of our feature extraction
and reduction approach for in­domain data.
Figure 4.9: Scatter plot visualizes each text chunk as a single point, derived from a Prin­
cipal Component Analysis (PCA) performed on all available chunks from Authors’ Writing
Style dataset. Points are colored blue for the books collection and red otherwise. Addi­
tionally, the decision boundary of trained logistic regression model is displayed.
The XGBoost model achieved an accuracy of 100% on the classification task, demonstrat­
ing that a more comprehensive feature set combined with a robust algorithm results in su­
perior performance. Additionally, the use of SHAP allowed us to interpret the influence of
individual features, as shown in Figure 4.10. The results indicate that decisions were pri­
marily influenced by punctuation, function words, and textual score metrics. Specifically,
high frequencies of punctuation marks, such as the period (.), dash (­), and semicolon
(;), are characteristic of human­generated texts. However, function words presented a
more nuanced pattern: while certain function words, such as ”was,” ”said,” and ”he,” were
more typical of human writing, others, like ”our,” were more frequently associated with
model­generated texts.
Further analysis of Yule’s Characteristic K and Simpson’s Index revealed that human­
written texts exhibit higher lexical richness, characterized by less repetition and more
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
27
==PAGE:36==
varied word usage. It also tells us that human writing styles also tend to align with a
more even distribution of word frequencies, demonstrating greater diversity in word choice
compared to model­generated texts.
Figure 4.10: Beeswarm plot illustrating the impact of the ten most influential features on
the XGBoost model’s decisions trained and tested on Authors’ Writing Style dataset. The
visualization, generated using SHAP, is based on the test set of the full dataset comprising
all chunks.
An important observation from the SHAP plot is the distribution of feature values. Features
that pushed predictions toward model­generated texts (right­hand side of the plot) often
exhibited low variance, as seen in ”­”, ”was,” ”simpson_index,” and ”said.” Conversely,
human­generated texts displayed much greater variability in feature values, particularly for
the top­ranked features. In general, features with higher variance had the most significant
impact on the model’s predictions. This highlights the diversity inherent in human­written
texts, as opposed to the more uniform and averaged style of model­generated outputs.
These findings align with our observations from the PCA visualization of all chunks by
collection (4.2), further supporting the notion that human writing styles are more diverse
than those generated by language models.
In the next experiment, we classified the principal components of DAIGT­V4 chunks using
models pre­trained on our custom dataset. The results revealed a lack of flexibility in our
approach. The final accuracies for each model were as follows:
1. Logistic Regression: 59.7%
28
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:37==
2. SVM: 60.3%
3. Decision Tree: 60%
We observed that the current setup achieved an accuracy of only around 60% for out­
of­domain data, which can be considered very low compared to our in­domain results.
Moreover, the pre­trained XGBoost model with all features as input achieved only 66%
accuracy, further highlighting the failure of this approach. However, the XGBoost model
trained on the DAIGT­V4 full­featured data and tested on the same dataset achieved a
high accuracy of 93%, demonstrating the potential for strong performance on this data.
Top
Authors’ Writing Style
DAIGT­V4
1
;
averages_syllables_per_word
2
a
gunning_fox_index
3
­
,
4
was
unique_word_count
5
yules_characteristic_k
.
Table 4.2: Top five features according to SHAP analysis for two datasets trained and
tested on in­domain data — Authors’ Writing Style dataset and DAIGT­V4 dataset.
These results indicate that our approach overfits to a specific domain. One reason for
this could be the choice of features. Table 4.2 highlights the top five features according
to SHAP analysis for both datasets. It underscores the importance of different features,
emphasizing numerical metrics of text structure such as ”averages_syllables_per_word”
and ”unique_word_count for DAIGT­V4 dataset”. SHAP analysis reveals that human texts
exhibit less sophisticated features, such as a low ”gunning_fox_index,” which aligns with
the human writers being 6th­12th grade students. Moreover, punctuation signs also play
a significant role, however, a different set of these characters is considered.
Collection
Logistic Regression
SVM
Decision Tree
books
0.4
0.4
0.375
gpt­3.5­turbo­0125
0.325
0.2375
0.1875
gpt­4o
0.275
0.3
0.15
gemini­1.5­flash
0.3125
0.325
0.2875
open­mixtral­8x7b
0.2
0.225
0.1875
claude­3­haiku­20240307
0.3
0.325
0.2625
Table 4.3: The accuracy of classifying one of ten authors in the scope of each collection
listed on the left. The same experiment has been repeated for three models listed on the
top row.
To analyze the granularity of writing styles, we conducted author­level classification exper­
iments within individual collections. These experiments aimed to evaluate whether distinct
authorial styles are discernible, using PCA for dimensionality reduction and three classi­
fiers (Logistic Regression, SVM, and Decision Tree). By testing both multi­class classi­
fication across ten authors and binary classification for two authors, we gained deeper
insights into the feasibility and precision of distinguishing authors within the same col­
lection. In this final experiments, we observed that distinguishing authors’ writing styles
within the scope of a single collection was infeasible. The average accuracies across
collections were as follows: 30.2% for Logistic Regression, 30.2% for SVM, and 24.2%
for Decision Tree. The detailed accuracies are presented in Table 4.3. These results
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
29
==PAGE:38==
fall significantly below a satisfactory performance threshold, indicating that our current
setup cannot effectively differentiate between authors’ texts. However, we observed that
the accuracies for the books collection were slightly higher compared to the others. This
trend may support the finding about greater variability in human writing styles, potentially
making it easier for our architecture to distinguish between authors in this context.
Figure 4.11: Heatmap representing the accuracy of classifying book chunks from Authors’
Writing Style dataset between two authors. Values are the result of Logistic Regression
model.
In contrast, when we focused on a simpler scenario—classifying chunks from a single
collection between only two authors—we achieved significantly better results. However,
as shown in Figure 4.11, classifying certain author pairs remains challenging. These
results were consistent across models. Interestingly, regardless of the model provider,
the generated texts exhibited a similar level of difficulty in binary author classification, and
in some cases, performance was even lower.
The findings from these classification experiments either corroborate previous results or
provide new insights. These outcomes serve as a foundation for the third part of our study,
which we elaborate on in the next section.
4.3
Information Content Analysis
In the third part of our analysis, we investigate the novelty present in human­written and
model­generated texts within the Authors’ Writing Style dataset. To begin, we present
two chunks in Figure 4.12, carefully selected to represent central characteristics of their
respective collections. We invite the reader to examine these chunks closely and try to
guess which one is human­written and why. These specific chunks were chosen be­
cause they highlight key stylistic and structural differences between human and model­
generated texts, making them ideal for this exploration. Throughout this section, we ana­
lyze these differences in detail, ultimately revealing the origins of the chunks. Specifically,
we quantify the diversity and unpredictability of the text, which provides a measure of its
uniqueness. To achieve this, we apply Information Content Theory, as introduced by
James V. Stone [38]. This theoretical framework enables us to mathematically quantify
the amount of information within an entity, measured in bits, making it particularly suited
for analyzing textual features.
We employ Shannon Information Content (SIC) [38] to estimate the information encoded
in linguistic features within chunks of text. SIC provides a precise way to quantify how
30
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.12: Truncated beginning of two chunks. One originates from model­generated
text and the other from human­written text (not necessarily in the display order). Due to
the post­merge operation, the original spacing may be altered.
much information is conveyed by an event, such as the occurrence of specific linguistic
attributes. In our context, it allows us to determine how unexpected or novel a text chunk
is based on the probability of its linguistic properties.
The Shannon Information Content is defined mathematically as:
bits = −log2(p(x))
(4.1)
where p(x) represents the probability of an event, which in our analysis corresponds to the
likelihood of linguistic features appearing within a chunk of text. This approach enables
us to evaluate text novelty by capturing the unpredictability of linguistic elements, provid­
ing valuable insights into the differences between human­authored and model­generated
texts.
4.3.1
Text features
We focus on various linguistic attributes, starting with the chunk features introduced in
Section 4.1.3. Specifically, we used all 44 features extracted from the 2400 text chunks
in our dataset. To facilitate further analysis, we discretize the feature values by mapping
them into bins. For each feature, we determine its minimum and maximum values across
the 2400 chunks and divide this range into 100 equally spaced bins. This approach allows
us to construct probability distributions for each feature based on the entire dataset.
Next, we compute the Shannon Information Content (SIC) for each chunk, processing the
features individually. For each feature, we identify the corresponding bin for the feature
value and extract its probability from the precomputed distribution. The extracted proba­
bility is then substituted into Equation 4.1, yielding a numerical SIC value. This systematic
approach ensures that we quantify the information content for each chunk in a consistent
and reproducible manner. By doing so, we assess how unique the features of a specific
chunk are, thereby highlighting its level of novelty within the dataset.
4.3.2
Words distributions
The next step involves investigating word usage within the gathered texts. To achieve
this, we construct two probability distributions: a local word probability distribution based
on the Authors’ Writing Style dataset and a global word probability distribution derived
from all the datasets listed in Section 3. These distributions enable us to analyze the
uniqueness and rarity of word usage across different corpora.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
31
==PAGE:40==
The local word probability distribution is computed using all the words present in the
chunks, each with approximately 200,000 words, produced by the preprocessing pipeline
described in Section 4.1.2. We aggregate repeated words and calculate their probabilities
of occurrence based on the total number of words in the dataset. This process results in
a distribution of approximately 67,000 unique words, which have been lowered before the
process. The purpose of this distribution is to examine how specific sources—whether
collections of texts or individual authors—exhibit distinct word usage patterns, thereby
highlighting their uniqueness within the corpus.
The global word probability distribution is constructed using all the words from the com­
bined datasets: Authors’ Writing Style, DAIGT­V4, Global News, Legal Contracts, Twitter,
and Reddit. This diverse collection of datasets spans various domains, ensuring that the
resulting distribution captures a wide range of language use and enhances the robust­
ness of the analysis. To tokenize the text, we employ a simple whitespace­based split
instead of a dedicated tokenizer. While this method may introduce minor errors, these
are negligible compared to the computational efficiency it provides, allowing us to handle
the large­scale data effectively. In total, the global corpus includes approximately 641
million words, all lowered before the further steps, offering a comprehensive basis for
constructing the probability distribution. As with the local distribution, repeated words are
aggregated, and probabilities are calculated based on their frequencies within the corpus.
This distribution provides insights into the rarity and commonality of words in the analyzed
texts, enabling a deeper understanding of linguistic patterns.
At this stage, we extend the set of features’ SIC scores by incorporating two additional
attributes: the Local Word Probability Distribution and the Global Word Probability Distri­
bution. For each chunk, we iterate through its lowered words, summing the probabilities
of each word based on the respective local and global distributions. We then divide the
total probability by the number of words in the chunk, yielding a normalized probability
for each attribute. Finally, we apply Equation 4.1 to these normalized probabilities, ex­
tracting SIC scores for the local and global word probability distribution attributes. This
enhanced feature set allows us to evaluate the information content of each chunk, con­
sidering both local uniqueness and global rarity in word usage. Resulting SIC scores of
these distribution are presented in the later subsections.
4.3.3
Words sequence
The final attribute we incorporate is the sequence entropy, which quantifies the number
of bits required to encode a sequence of words. This measure is based on the work of
James P. Bagrow [39], who analyzed tweets to study information flow in social networks.
One of the key metrics used in his research is the sequence entropy rate (h), defined as
the average number of bits needed to encode the next word in a sequence, given the
preceding words. We adopt this metric as an additional information content (IC) attribute
for our analysis.
The sequence entropy rate is calculated using the following formula:
h = NlogN
∑N
i=1 Λi
(4.2)
where N is the length of the sequence of words and Λi is the match length of the prefix at
position i, that is, it is the length of the shortest subsequence (of words) starting at i that
has not previously appeared. All words are lowered for the matching process.
To illustrate, consider the example word sequence:
32
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:41==
Example sequence presenting example sequence entropy.
The corresponding match lengths (Λ) are as follows:
[1, 1, 1, 3, 2, 1]
We apply this method to the list of words in each chunk, calculating the sequence entropy
for each. This results in a new attribute, referred to as sequence IC, which provides addi­
tional insights into the degree of repetition within the analyzed texts. By capturing patterns
of word recurrence, this attribute complements the other characteristics and enhances our
understanding of the information dynamics of the text.
4.3.4
Average Samples
Previously, we introduced several attributes—Feature SIC, Local and Global Word Dis­
tribution SIC, and Sequence IC—that collectively form the set of information content (IC)
attributes used in our analysis. Once the IC values for each chunk have been calculated,
we identify the average sample for each collection by computing the mean and standard
deviation for each attribute across all chunks within the collection.
To calculate the mean for an attribute, we use the following formula:
m = 1
n
n
∑
j=1
yj
where n represents the total number of chunks in the collection, and yj is the IC attribute
value for the jth chunk.
The standard deviation is calculated as:
S =
√
s2
n
where s, the sample standard deviation, is defined as:
s =
√∑n
j=1(yj −m)2
n −1
is the standard deviation for the sample.
With the mean (m) and standard deviation (S) for each IC attribute computed, we pro­
ceed to calculate the weighted distance for each chunk. This distance quantifies how
far a chunk’s IC attributes values deviate from the average sample of its collection. The
weighted distance is defined as:
d =
∑
a∈A
1
Sa
∗(xa −ma)2
where A is the set of IC attributes, Sa is the standard error for attribute a, xa is the IC value
of attribute a for a specific chunk, and ma is the mean IC value of attribute a.
The weighting by
1
Sa mitigates the impact of attributes with inherently higher variance,
ensuring that the contributions of all attributes are balanced. This prevents the results
from being skewed due to differences in attribute variability.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
33
==PAGE:42==
We compute the weighted distance d for every chunk within a collection. The average
sample for each collection is then identified as the chunk with the smallest distance d
from the mean.
This representative sample provides a central point for each collection and serves as the
foundation for visualizations in the results section. Using this approach, we ensure that the
visualized chunks accurately reflect the typical information content attributes of their re­
spective collections. First, we present the Sequence IC Visualization, where we highlight
each token based on its match length (Λ). Tokens with a match length of 2 or higher are
shaded in yellow, with darker shades indicating higher match lengths. Next, we introduce
the Displayable SIC Features Visualization, focusing on function words and punctuation.
From these features, we select the top ten based on their SIC values, representing the
features most unique to each chunk. It is important to note that displayable SIC features
do not include other metrics such as average word length or the Simpson index, as these
cannot be visualized on the token level.
4.3.5
Results
In the preceding analysis, we explored several information content (IC) attributes, includ­
ing feature SIC, Local and Global Word Distribution SIC, and Sequence IC, across various
collections. Here, we aim to deepen the insights by examining the distributions of these
IC attributes across collections and highlighting key stylistic differences between human­
written and model­generated texts.
Figure 4.13 and 4.14 presents the IC value distributions for two representative collections:
books and gpt­4o. The distributions for gpt­4o align largely with those of other model­
generated collections, showcasing relatively consistent patterns. However, the books
collection stands out with noticeably higher variance across most attributes. This higher
variance indicates that the linguistic attributes in the books collection are more diverse
and less predictable compared to those in model­generated texts.
Particularly noteworthy are the last three attributes—Sequence IC, Local Word Distribu­
tion, and Global Word Distribution—which exhibit minimal variance across all collections.
This observation suggests a lack of repetitive patterns in the texts and a comparable dis­
tribution of word usage. Such consistency in these attributes further underscores the
similarities in the linguistic styles of the model­generated collections. On the other hand,
similar variance observed in the books collection indicates that human­written texts do
not stand out in this dimension.
Figure 4.15 provides a heatmap of IC values for the average chunk of each collection.
The average chunk, as described earlier, serves as a representative sample for the entire
collection. By analyzing these values, we can infer the stylistic characteristics of each
collection. The heatmap confirms the observations from the variance analysis, show­
ing that the last three attributes are consistently similar across collections. Notably, the
books collection stands out with higher IC values across multiple attributes, emphasizing
its uniqueness.
Interestingly, certain function words and punctuation marks play a significant role in dis­
tinguishing the books collection. Words such as ”of,” ”she,” ”her,” and ”he,” along with
punctuation marks like the semicolon (;) and double quotation marks (”), are more preva­
lent in the books collection compared to the model­generated collections. These findings
align with the trends observed in the earlier analyses. While there are some exceptions—
for example, the elevated IC value of the word ”she” in the claude­3­haiku­20240307 and
gpt­3.5­turbo­0125 collections, or ”the” in claude­3­haiku­20240307—the overall distribu­
34
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.13: Books collection’s IC values distribution.
Figure 4.14: Gpt­4o collection’s IC values distribution.
tion of IC values across model­generated collections is relatively uniform.
Figure 4.16 explores further the sequence IC attribute by presenting truncated samples
of the average chunks from the books and gpt­4o collections. We observe that neither
chunk demonstrates significant token repetition, apart from the natural repetition expected
in language. The sequence IC values for these chunks, 6.43 for books and 6.25 for gpt­
4o, confirm the similarity in token repetition patterns across collections. This result sug­
gests that the model­generated texts are constructed in a way that avoids excessive token
repetition, reflecting a well­engineered balance in their generative processes, simulating
human style in this regard.
Figure 4.17 further examines the linguistic attributes by highlighting the top ten displayable
features (function words and punctuation marks) in the average chunks of books and gpt­
4o. A key distinction is the higher frequency of semicolon usage (;) in the books collection,
compared to the frequent use of the function word ”of” in the gpt­4o collection. Addition­
ally, while not immediately visible in the figure, the books collection also demonstrates
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.15: Heatmap representing IC value for each attribute for each collection’s aver­
age chunk.
Figure 4.16: Truncated beginning of two average chunks of books and gpt­4o collections
respectively. Visualization is marked by the values of match lengths (Λ) of each token.
36
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.17: Truncated beginning of two average chunks of books and gpt­4o collections
respectively. Visualization is marked by the top ten displayable features (function words
and punctuation characters) IC values, which tokens are highlighted.
a higher frequency of feminine words such as ”her” and ”she,” further aligning with the
trends observed in the heatmap (Figure 4.15).
In summary, our analysis reveals significant differences between human­written and model­
generated texts. Human­written texts, as represented by the books collection, exhibit
greater variability, uniqueness, and unpredictability across IC attributes. In contrast, model­
generated texts display a more uniform style, characterized by lower variance in linguis­
tic features. These findings highlight the nuanced stylistic differences between human
authorship and machine­generated texts, providing valuable insights into the linguistic
characteristics of these two distinct text sources.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
37
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
5
Discussion
In this chapter, we delve into the key findings of our study, analyzing the outcomes of vari­
ous experiments and their implications for understanding the stylistic differences between
human and LLM­generated texts. By leveraging techniques such as Principal Component
Analysis, Classification Models, and Information Content analysis, we explore the distinc­
tive patterns in writing styles and assess the capabilities and limitations of language mod­
els in emulating human authorship, and moreover, the novelty of generated texts. This
discussion contextualizes the results within existing literature, highlights the challenges
faced, and underscores the broader significance of our findings for authorship attribution
and stylometric analysis.
5.1
Principal Component Analysis Results
Through our application of PCA, we sought to address the question: Can we distinguish
human­written texts from model­generated ones? Using our custom dataset, the Authors’
Writing Style dataset, we observed clear visual separation between model­generated and
human­written texts, as illustrated in Figure 4.2. This result confirms our hypothesis, high­
lighting distinct differences between these two groups. Interestingly, we identified two
prominent clusters—one for human­written texts and another for model­generated texts—
rather than six distinct clusters representing individual models, analogical to the human
authors clusters in the research of Binongo [16]. This finding suggests that generated
texts exhibit notable stylistic similarities, irrespective of their source. This uniformity indi­
cates that different large language models (LLMs) share common stylistic habits, which
is a critical observation for addressing subsequent research questions.
We observed that the texts generated by gemini­1.5­flash were slightly separated from the
other model­generated texts, forming a unique model­generated group that partially over­
laps with the main cluster. This divergence, along with the observed similarities among
other models, may be influenced by differences in the underlying architectures or the cor­
pora used for training. Models trained on overlapping open­source datasets may exhibit
similar stylistic patterns, while models with access to unique or proprietary datasets might
develop distinctive characteristics. Additionally, shared architectural designs could con­
tribute to the uniformity seen in some models, whereas variations in design principles or
implementation, as in the case of gemini­1.5­flash, may account for the observed stylistic
differences. However, since most of these models remain proprietary, we are unable to
definitively determine the specific factors driving these variations.
We further examined the clustering of chunks based on authorship, as shown in Figure
4.3, but found no clear clusters corresponding to specific authors. This result suggests
that the writing styles of different human authors overlap significantly, making it challeng­
ing to distinguish individual authors’ chunks. This overlap may indicate limitations in our
feature selection, which might not sufficiently capture the nuanced characteristics of indi­
vidual writing styles. Alternatively, it could reflect the influence of the single­domain nature
of our dataset, where the shared characteristics of novels obscure distinctions between
authors.
Additionally, we observed that requesting a specific author’s writing style had no dis­
cernible effect on clustering within the larger group of model­generated texts. It appears
that this aspect of the prompt was either ignored or did not meaningfully influence the
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
39
==PAGE:48==
models’ outputs. The lack of clear distinctions between human authors’ styles might also
contribute to this phenomenon, as it limits the models’ ability to mimic specific authors
effectively within the constraints of the dataset.
We visualized the importance of the top ten features for the first and second principal
components, which provided initial insights into the key elements defining a chunk’s writing
style. Our analysis revealed that scores derived from metrics such as the number of
words, syllables, sentences, and complex words play a crucial role in distinguishing writing
styles. We also identified the significant contribution of function words, emphasizing their
importance in our classification approach. These findings underscore the relevance of
linguistic and structural features in differentiating between human and model­generated
texts.
5.2
Classification
Through our classification experiments, we aimed to validate and extend the insights ob­
tained from PCA analysis, while shedding light on the distinguishing writing features be­
tween human­written and LLM­generated texts. The first phase of our experiments pro­
vided quantitative evidence that the visual clusters observed in PCA translate into high
classification accuracy. This confirmed the feasibility of distinguishing human­written texts
from model­generated ones. Moreover, through SHAP analysis, we observed that human
writers tend to use punctuation more frequently and demonstrate higher lexical richness,
which aligns with findings of Bhandarkar et al [17]. These factors emerged as the primary
features separating the two types of text. Additionally, SHAP analysis revealed greater
variance in feature values for human­generated texts, reflecting their diversity and lack of
adherence to a single writing style. In contrast, model­generated texts displayed a more
averaged and consistent writing pattern, shared across models.
Subsequent experiments, however, highlighted the limitations of our approach when ap­
plied to other domains. The low accuracies observed on the DAIGT­V4 dataset exposed
the domain­specificity of our solution, which is tailored to novelistic texts. We found that
a different feature set is more effective for the essay domain. This discrepancy likely
arises from the differing backgrounds of the writers—professional novelists in one case
versus lower­grade students in the other—or from the genres themselves. Novels, for
instance, frequently include dialogue and punctuation like hyphens, alongside past­tense
language, as reflected in the importance of the function word “was.” These features are
less prominent in essays, making our chosen features less applicable. Moreover, the dy­
namic nature of languages and its writing might also be the factor of domain definition.
Authors’ Writing Style dataset uses mostly classical literature from 20th century, which
language might significantly differ from tweets or Reddit posts.
Prompt engineering within the datasets may also enforce specific writing styles, introduc­
ing new dimensionality to the domain itself. Additionally, the DAIGT­V4 dataset’s use
of various language models likely introduces further variability. Overall, these experi­
ments demonstrated that our chosen features lack generalizability and are not transfer­
able across domains.
In the final phase of our classification experiments, we explored the challenge of author
classification. Here, we attempted to distinguish both human and model authors based
on their writing styles. These experiments revealed that distinguishing authors—whether
human or model—is a challenging task. While the solution performed satisfactorily in sim­
plified binary classification scenarios, real­world applications involving numerous authors
from diverse sources proved far more difficult. Our analysis did not uncover features that
40
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:49==
could effectively differentiate the writing styles of ten authors. Interestingly, we also found
no evidence that models consistently adhered to specific requested writing styles. PCA
plots, such as Figure 4.8, indicated that model­generated texts do not overlap with human
texts and followed model’s averaged writing tendencies.
In summary, our experiments confirmed key differences between human and LLM­generated
texts, such as greater lexical diversity in human writing, but revealed the domain­specific
limitations of our features. Author classification proved challenging, with LLMs exhibiting
averaged styles rather than distinct emulation of human authors. These findings highlight
the need for more adaptable features or different approach.
5.3
Information Content Analysis
Through the lens of Information Content (IC) analysis, we investigate the level of novelty
exhibited by each collection. Our findings indicate that the books collection demonstrates
significantly higher unpredictability across a wide range of linguistic attributes. This in­
creased unpredictability highlights the uniqueness and diversity inherent in human­written
texts. The most striking contrasts are observed in the use of punctuation characters, sim­
ilar to findings of T. Kumurage and H. Liu [30] and feminine function words, such as ”she”
and ”her.” These observations may partly reflect the nature of the selected novels, which
could feature plots that include a significant number of female characters.
Conversely, the comparatively low occurrence of these words in the model­generated
texts may suggest a bias in the training data or a reflection of the global distribution of
written content, where masculine language—frequently encountered in domains such as
scientific literature, or other formal writings—tends to dominate. This finding aligns with
broader discussions on the limitations and biases inherent in large language models, par­
ticularly regarding their training corpora.
Despite these distinctions, certain attributes, such as Sequence IC and Local and Global
Word Distribution IC, reveal that model­generated texts align closely with the books col­
lection in these aspects. This alignment underscores the effectiveness of the underly­
ing generative architectures in emulating human­like linguistic patterns, which opposes
A. Muñoz Ortiz et al. [14] statement of model’s reduced vocabulary diversity. Similarly,
other linguistic attributes, including Herdan’s C score, exhibit comparable trends, suggest­
ing that language models are well­trained to reproduce human­like text characteristics in
some dimensions.
When we turn our attention specifically to the model­generated texts, a striking pattern
emerges: these texts display a high degree of similarity to one another. This consistency
confirms insights from earlier analyses and reinforces the notion that model­generated
texts are governed by a probabilistic framework. The low variance observed across IC
attributes for these texts indicates a lack of significant unpredictability, reflecting the av­
eraged, generalized patterns typical of language models. Importantly, this suggests that
while individual language models might incorporate subtle stylistic differences, their over­
all writing style converges toward a shared, predictable norm.
Overall, our analysis demonstrates that model­generated texts are both highly predictable
and relatively homogeneous in style. In contrast, human­written texts exhibit far greater
variability and uniqueness, characterized by the rarity and unpredictability of certain lin­
guistic features. These findings highlight the novelty inherent in human authorship, which
distinguishes it from the systematic, probabilistic outputs of machine­generated content.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
41
==PAGE:50==
5.4
Do large language models exhibit novelty in their writing
styles?
The concept of novelty in text is inherently subjective, shaped by the reader’s perception
like in the works of Walsh [18] and GPT Poetry project [19]. However, throughout our
research, we aimed to identify measurable linguistic attributes that could provide an ob­
jective framework for analyzing this phenomenon. To achieve this, we concentrated on
the set of attributes defined in Section 4.3, including features introduced in Section 4.1.3.
Our analysis focused on the chunks extracted from the Authors’ Writing Style dataset,
where we tasked language models with generating texts that emulate the writing styles of
various human authors. This inquiry had two primary objectives: first, to assess whether
language models are capable of replicating specific human authors’ stylistic nuances, and
second, to determine the extent to which model­generated texts resemble one another.
Using methods such as Principal Component Analysis, classification, and Information
Content (IC) analysis, we observed that language models fail to effectively capture and
reproduce the stylistic complexity of individual human authors. Furthermore, the texts
generated by five different language models clustered closely together across multiple
dimensions, with only minor deviations. This clustering suggests that the generated texts
lack novelty and instead adhere to an averaged, generalized writing style.
Our findings also highlight the challenges inherent in statistically defining and analyzing
human writing styles. Not only did language models struggle to emulate these styles,
but our analytical approach encountered similar difficulties in isolating definitive stylistic
markers. This observation underscores the inherent complexity and elusiveness of human
writing style and novelty, which likely contribute to the limitations of language models in
this domain.
In summary, human­authored texts exhibit significantly greater unpredictability, charac­
terized by the uniqueness and rarity of their stylistic elements—qualities that are closely
tied to the notion of novelty. By contrast, large language models produce outputs that con­
form to predictable patterns, lacking the distinctiveness and variability that define human
writing. This reinforces the conclusion that while language models excel at generating co­
herent and plausible text, they fall short in replicating the nuanced creativity and novelty
inherent in human­authored content.
5.5
Ethical Implications and Societal Impact
The findings of this research carry significant ethical and societal implications, particularly
in the context of the increasing prevalence of AI­generated content. As demonstrated,
large language models exhibit limited creativity and originality compared to human au­
thors, and their stylistic patterns can often be predicted. This opens opportunities for
robust detection algorithms and authorship attribution methods that can enhance trust
and accountability in digital content.
Authorship attribution plays a vital role in addressing the challenges posed by AI­generated
texts. By distinguishing human­authored content from machine­generated outputs, these
methods empower fact­checking organizations, news outlets, and regulatory bodies to
combat the proliferation of misinformation and ensure the integrity of published material.
Lastly, the cross­domain limitations observed in this study highlight challenges in apply­
ing detection methods across diverse contexts. While our approach shows promise within
specific domains, its ability to generalize to others remains constrained. This finding em­
phasizes the need for continued refinement of detection methodologies to ensure their
42
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:51==
applicability in varied and high­stakes environments.
By addressing these ethical considerations, this research underscores the importance of
advancing authorship attribution techniques and highlights the need for interdisciplinary
collaboration to guide the responsible development and deployment of language models,
balancing innovation with societal values.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:53==
6
Conclusions
Throughout our research, based on the Authors’ Writing Style dataset, we demonstrate
that our approach, which incorporates multiple methods and relies on features such as lin­
guistic scores, punctuation characters, and function words, is sufficient to classify human­
written texts and model­generated ones. These classifications highlight the distinct writing
styles exhibited by the two groups. Moreover, our findings indicate that all five language
models analyzed display similar linguistic patterns, leading to the clustering of their texts.
Specifically, we observe that punctuation characters such as semicolons (;) and hyphens
(­) occur significantly more often in human­written texts. This pattern may be influenced
by the novel­focused domain of our dataset, while language models exhibit an averaged
writing style that is less reflective of typical novel conventions. Furthermore, we identify
that specific function words, such as ”she” and ”her,” are more prevalent in human texts,
likely due to the dataset’s inclusion of novels featuring female protagonists. In contrast,
language models tend to favor masculine expressions, reflecting the dominance of mas­
culine language in internet text sources.
We acknowledge, however, that our approach does not generalize well to other domains,
such as essay datasets introduced via DAIGT­V4 in our classification experiments. Our
analysis in these domains yielded low performance in distinguishing human­written from
model­generated texts. This limitation appears to stem from the feature set’s overfitting to
the novel domain, where these features do not hold the same significance in other genres.
Additionally, we evaluated whether our approach could distinguish texts authored by mul­
tiple human authors. While related studies suggest that methods similar to ours perform
well with a limited number of authors, our findings reveal challenges in correctly assign­
ing texts to the appropriate human author in cases involving a larger number of authors.
Similarly, for model­generated texts, even when we prompted models to emulate specific
authors’ writing styles, their outputs retained the generic, averaged writing style charac­
teristic of language models. This suggests that the task of producing text reflective of
a specific author’s linguistic features remains ambiguous for language models, possibly
due to misdefinitions of ”style” in our framework and language model architectures itself,
or limitations in prompt engineering that failed to enforce stylistic specificity.
Lastly, we explored the novelty of model­generated texts, an area that remains under­
researched.
Defining novelty as the presence of rare and unpredictable linguistic at­
tributes, we employed Information Content Theory to evaluate this dimension. Our anal­
ysis reveals that model­generated texts lack novelty compared to human­authored texts.
Human authors consistently demonstrate higher originality in their writing, whereas lan­
guage models produce texts characterized by highly probable and predictable patterns.
These findings underscore that while language models excel in human­machine textual
interaction and effectively convey information to some extent, they fall short in producing
original and unique content—a hallmark of human writing.
This research emphasizes both the potential and limitations of language models in stylistic
and creative contexts, providing a foundation for future studies aimed at enhancing the
authenticity and diversity of model­generated texts.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:55==
7
Future Work
In this thesis, we presented and concluded our research; however, some ideas could not
be pursued due to limited resources or arose during the development process but were
set aside due to time constraints. One such idea involves extending the Authors’ Writing
Style dataset by incorporating text generated from prompts that do not explicitly request
a specific author’s style. This approach would use identical prompts while allowing the
language model (LLM) to generate content without stylistic constraints. By analyzing out­
puts from these two types of prompts, we could investigate whether explicitly requesting
a writing style influences the output and if this adjustment aligns the generated text closer
to the original author’s style. Such an analysis would help us determine whether LLMs,
despite not perfectly replicating a style, exhibit an initial understanding of stylistic features.
Another avenue for future work involves refining the feature set used in our analysis.
Some features, such as the average number of syllables per word and the Flesch Read­
ing Ease score, are highly correlated since the latter depends on metrics like syllables and
word counts. Identifying and addressing such correlations would allow us to reduce the
feature set to its most essential components, improving efficiency and interpretability. Ad­
ditionally, incorporating features from a broader range of domains could result in a more
generalized cross­domain feature set applicable to diverse text types. Finally, exploring
new features, such as part­of­speech (POS) tags commonly used in related works, could
further enhance our analysis.
The size of text chunks used in our analysis presents another potential area for improve­
ment. Our research used 5,000­token chunks; however, evaluating the approach’s ro­
bustness with smaller chunks, such as the size of a tweet, would provide valuable insights.
This investigation could reveal whether chunk size should be treated as a hyperparameter
significantly influencing the overall performance of the architecture.
Lastly, we recommend applying cross­validation in certain classification tasks to ensure
more robust results. For example, in the classification task involving two authors from
the same collection, the limited number of chunks may result in biased outcomes. Cross­
validation would offer a more rigorous evaluation framework, yielding fairer and more
reliable results.
By addressing these areas, future research can build upon our findings to develop a more
comprehensive understanding of writing style analysis and further refine the methodolo­
gies employed.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[2]
Shen Wang et al. Large Language Models for Education: A Survey and Outlook.
2024. arXiv: 2403.18105 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18105.
[3]
Jinqi Lai et al. “Large language models in law: A survey”. In: AI Open 5 (2024),
pp. 181–196. ISSN: 2666­6510. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiopen.2024.09.002.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666651024000172.
[4]
Sida Peng et al. The Impact of AI on Developer Productivity: Evidence from GitHub
Copilot. 2023. arXiv: 2302.06590 [cs.SE]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06590.
[5]
Yanshen Sun et al. Exploring the Deceptive Power of LLM­Generated Fake News: A
Study of Real­World Detection Challenges. 2024. arXiv: 2403.18249 [cs.CL]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18249.
[6]
Edoardo Mosca et al. “Distinguishing Fact from Fiction: A Benchmark Dataset for
Identifying Machine­Generated Scientific Papers in the LLM Era.” In: Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on Trustworthy Natural Language Processing (TrustNLP 2023).
Ed. by Anaelia Ovalle et al. Toronto, Canada: Association for Computational Lin­
guistics, July 2023, pp. 190–207. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2023.trustnlp-1.17. URL: https:
//aclanthology.org/2023.trustnlp-1.17.
[7]
Zhixin Lai, Xuesheng Zhang, and Suiyao Chen. Adaptive Ensembles of Fine­Tuned
Transformers for LLM­Generated Text Detection. 2024. arXiv: 2403.13335 [cs.LG].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.13335.
[8]
Seyedeh Fatemeh Ebrahimi et al. Sharif­MGTD at SemEval­2024 Task 8: A Transformer­
Based Approach to Detect Machine Generated Text. 2024. arXiv: 2407.11774 [cs.CL].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11774.
[9]
Teodor­George Marchitan, Claudiu Creanga, and Liviu P. Dinu. Transformer and
Hybrid Deep Learning Based Models for Machine­Generated Text Detection. 2024.
arXiv: 2405.17964 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17964.
[10]
Sebastian Gehrmann, Hendrik Strobelt, and Alexander M. Rush. GLTR: Statistical
Detection and Visualization of Generated Text. 2019. arXiv: 1906.04043 [cs.CL].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04043.
[11]
Eric Mitchell et al. “DetectGPT: Zero­Shot Machine­Generated Text Detection us­
ing Probability Curvature”. In: Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
Machine Learning. Ed. by Andreas Krause et al. Vol. 202. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research. PMLR, July 2023, pp. 24950–24962. URL: https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v202/mitchell23a.html.
[12]
Scott Lundberg and Su­In Lee. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predic­
tions. 2017. arXiv: 1705.07874 [cs.AI]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.07874.
[13]
Aditya Shah et al. “Detecting and Unmasking AI­Generated Texts through Explain­
able Artificial Intelligence using Stylistic Features”. In: International Journal of Ad­
vanced Computer Science and Applications 14.10 (2023). DOI: 10.14569/IJACSA.
2023.01410110. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2023.01410110.
[14]
Alberto Muñoz­Ortiz, Carlos Gómez­Rodríguez, and David Vilares. “Contrasting
Linguistic Patterns in Human and LLM­Generated News Text”. In: Artificial Intelli­
gence Review 57.10 (2024), p. 265. ISSN: 1573­7462. DOI: 10.1007/s10462-024-
10903-2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-024-10903-2.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
49
==PAGE:58==
[15]
Frederick Mosteller and David L. Wallace. “Inference in an Authorship Problem”.
In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 58.302 (1963), pp. 275–309.
ISSN: 01621459, 1537274X. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2283270 (visited
on 11/28/2024).
[16]
José Nilo G. Binongo. “Who Wrote the 15th Book of Oz? An Application of Multi­
variate Analysis to Authorship Attribution”. In: CHANCE 16.2 (2003), pp. 9–17. DOI:
10.1080/09332480.2003.10554843. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/09332480.2003.
10554843. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/09332480.2003.10554843.
[17]
Avanti Bhandarkar et al. “Emulating Author Style: A Feasibility Study of Prompt­
enabled Text Stylization with Off­the­Shelf LLMs”. In: Proceedings of the 1st Work­
shop on Personalization of Generative AI Systems (PERSONALIZE 2024). Ed. by
Ameet Deshpande et al. St. Julians, Malta: Association for Computational Linguis­
tics, Mar. 2024, pp. 76–82. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2024.personalize-1.6.
[18]
Melanie Walsh, Anna Preus, and Elizabeth Gronski. Does ChatGPT Have a Poetic
Style? 2024. arXiv: 2410.15299 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.15299.
[19]
Ernest Davis. ChatGPT’s Poetry is Incompetent and Banal: A Discussion of (Porter
and Machery, 2024). Nov. 2024. URL: https://cs.nyu.edu/~davise/papers/GPT-
Poetry.pdf.
[20]
Jad Doughman et al. Exploring the Limitations of Detecting Machine­Generated
Text. 2024. arXiv: 2406.11073 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11073.
[21]
Konrad Banachewicz. Atticus Open Contract Dataset. 2023. URL: https://www.
kaggle.com/datasets/konradb/atticus-open-contract-dataset-aok-beta.
[22]
Charan Gowda et al. Twitter and Reddit Sentimental analysis Dataset. 2019. DOI:
10.34740/KAGGLE/DS/429085. URL: https://www.kaggle.com/ds/429085.
[23]
Kumar Saksham. Global News Dataset. 2023. DOI: 10 . 34740 / KAGGLE / DSV /
7105651. URL: https://www.kaggle.com/dsv/7105651.
[24]
Darek Kłeczek. DAIGT­v4 Train Dataset. 2022. URL: https://www.kaggle.com/
datasets/thedrcat/daigt-v4-train-dataset.
[25]
Alec Radford et al. “Improving language understanding by generative pre­training”.
In: (2018).
[26]
Jacob Devlin et al. BERT: Pre­training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Lan­
guage Understanding. 2019. arXiv: 1810.04805 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1810.04805.
[27]
Tyna Eloundou et al. GPTs are GPTs: An Early Look at the Labor Market Impact
Potential of Large Language Models. 2023. arXiv: 2303 . 10130 [econ.GN]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.10130.
[28]
Karan Singhal et al. Large Language Models Encode Clinical Knowledge. 2022.
arXiv: 2212.13138 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.13138.
[29]
Lei Huang et al. “A Survey on Hallucination in Large Language Models: Principles,
Taxonomy, Challenges, and Open Questions”. In: ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. (Nov. 2024).
Just Accepted. ISSN: 1046­8188. DOI: 10.1145/3703155. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3703155.
[30]
Tharindu Kumarage and Huan Liu. “Neural Authorship Attribution: Stylometric Anal­
ysis on Large Language Models”. In: 2023 International Conference on Cyber­
Enabled Distributed Computing and Knowledge Discovery (CyberC). 2023, pp. 51–
54. DOI: 10.1109/CyberC58899.2023.00019.
[31]
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “”Why Should I Trust
You?”: Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
KDD ’16. San Francisco, California, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
50
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
==PAGE:59==
2016, pp. 1135–1144. ISBN: 9781450342322. DOI: 10.1145/2939672.2939778. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939778.
[32]
Shibamouli Lahiri. “Complexity of Word Collocation Networks: A Preliminary Struc­
tural Analysis”. In: Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop at the 14th Con­
ference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Gothenburg, Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics, Apr. 2014, pp. 96–
105. URL: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/E14-3011.
[33]
OpenAI. OpenAI API Reference. https://platform.openai.com/docs/api­reference/chat.
June 2024.
[34]
Google DeepMind. Gemini API Reference. https://cloud.google.com/vertex­ai/generative­
ai/docs/model­reference/gemini. June 2024.
[35]
Mistral AI. Mistral AI API Reference. https://docs.mistral.ai/api. June 2024.
[36]
Anthropic. Anthropic API Reference. https://docs.anthropic.com/en/api/messages.
June 2024.
[37]
Kaggle. LLM­Detect: AI­Generated Text Detection. https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/
llm-detect-ai-generated-text. Kaggle Competition. 2024. URL: https://www.kaggle.
com/competitions/llm-detect-ai-generated-text.
[38]
James V Stone. Information Theory: A Tutorial Introduction. 2019. arXiv: 1802.05968
[cs.IT]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.05968.
[39]
James P. Bagrow, Xipei Liu, and Lewis Mitchell. “Information flow reveals predic­
tion limits in online social activity”. In: Nature Human Behaviour 3.2 (Jan. 2019),
pp. 122–128. ISSN: 2397­3374. DOI: 10 . 1038 / s41562 - 018 - 0510 - 5. URL: http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-0510-5.
Stylometric Analysis for Authorship Attribution
51
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
