==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS PROJECT REPORT
Investment model for a Power-to-X
plant over a 30-year period
Supervisors
Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen, Assistant Professor, DTU Management
Nicolas Jean Bernard Campion, Postdoc Researcher, DTU Management
Marco Saretta, Industrial PhD, Rambøll, DTU
Author
Pablo Gutiérrez Mordini s222850
February 23, 2025
==PAGE:2==
February 23, 2025
Acknowledgements
This project would have been nothing without all the people around me that pushed me forward
and gave me the energy and motivation I needed to keep going.
Special thanks to Marco for all the help and support during all those 45-minute meetings that we
had during the last six months. With you I not only learned the technical stuff but also about
the importance of communication and be clear with what is wanted to express.
Thank you Nicolas, for being flexible an adapting the work to where I desired. I am aware that
it might not were your comfort zone, but you always kept helping.
I also want to thank Rasmus, for being my main supervisor at DTU and allowed me to start the
thesis under your department.
I do not want to forget Søren Møller Thomsen, who believed in me and gave me the opportunity
to establish the collaboration with Rambøll.
To my mother who was always there, from the beginning to the very end (literally). Paula who
always had something nice to say and fill me with energy. And Ñaño, for bearing together with
stressful deadlines.
Finally, I want to thank Jonas, who was always happy to help and have infinite patience, Marco
for his constant support and motivating messages, and Marina who was with me when I sent the
email to Søren that set off the first domino.
i
==PAGE:3==
February 23, 2025
Contents
1
Executive summary
1
2
Introduction
2
2.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Shipping fuel. Compatibility with current industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Method overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Methanol plant design
5
4
Demand market. Location identification. Resource assessments
9
4.1
Demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Location identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Wind and Solar resource . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Electricity prices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.5
CO2 availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.6
Electrolyzer. Water availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Costs review. Data inputs
14
5.1
Associated cost for each asset and technology specifics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Variable Renewable Energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Electricity and CO2 pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Financial parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Model formulation. Decomposition techniques
25
6.1
Mathematical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
Decomposition techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2.1
Benders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2.2
Dantzig-Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7
Results
38
7.1
Output production and operation of the plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.2
Comparison of the two model configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3
Levelized Cost of Methanol (LCOM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.4
Results related to decomposition techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.5
Computational values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8
Sensitivity analysis
52
8.1
Grid connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.2
Electricity prices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9
Limitations and possible improvements
54
10 Conclusion
55
ii
==PAGE:4==
February 23, 2025
1
Executive summary
This study develops an optimization model to determine the optimal asset sizing for a methanol
production plant over a 30-year period. The model aims to minimize total costs while ensuring
the efficient and sustainable production of methanol. The research is motivated by the need for
decarbonization in the shipping industry, where methanol presents a promising alternative fuel
due to its compatibility with existing infrastructure and relatively lower emissions.
The optimization framework incorporates a detailed representation of asset investments, includ-
ing renewable electricity generation, hydrogen production, CO2 capture, and methanol synthesis.
A significant portion of capital expenditure (56%–74%) is allocated to electricity production,
with wind and solar capacities remaining stable across different model configurations. The study
also explores two decomposition techniques: Benders and Dantzig - Wolfe decomposition. While
Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition faced infeasibility issues due to state-of-charge (SOC) constraints
for the storages, Benders decomposition proved computationally feasible but highly demanding.
The latter technique may provide greater benefits in stochastic optimization scenarios, where the
problem naturally decomposes into multiple subproblems.
Grid connection was identified as a crucial factor in cost minimization. A scenario with limited
grid access led to significant oversizing of renewable generation assets, increasing capital expen-
diture. A sensitivity analysis suggested that maintaining a minimum grid connection of 30 MW
would be optimal, while further expansion beyond this threshold would not result in substantial
cost reductions. The Levelized Cost of Methanol (LCOM) was estimated at 1387 €/ton with grid
connection and 2558 €/ton in the off-grid model configuration, aligning with external references.
The study also highlights the limited role of certain assets. Hydrogen storage tanks and Na-Cl
batteries were found to be uneconomical due to their high costs. Auxiliary equipment, such as
desalinators, heaters, and compressors, had a minimal impact on system performance and could
be excluded from future implementations to simplify the model.
From an energy perspective, electricity curtailment was significantly higher in the off-grid configu-
ration (66%) compared to the grid-connected case (12%), emphasizing the challenge of integrating
variable renewable energy sources. The analysis of electricity price sensitivity showed that invest-
ment decisions were more influenced by grid electricity availability rather than price fluctuations.
Even when electricity prices were doubled, total investment costs increased by only 4%, demon-
strating that the model is robust to electricity price volatility.
Finally, the study provides a strong foundation for future research on stochastic optimization and
improved energy market integration, ensuring the feasibility of large-scale methanol production
under variable renewable energy conditions. By refining asset sizing strategies and optimizing grid
interactions, future work can further enhance cost efficiency and operational flexibility. The re-
sults emphasize the importance of balancing renewable generation, storage, and grid connectivity
to achieve a sustainable and economically viable Power-to-X system.
Page 1 of 55
==PAGE:5==
February 23, 2025
2
Introduction
2.1
Motivation
Addressing climate change and advancing decarbonization are essential for protecting our planet
and ensuring sustainable growth. Climate change, fuelled by greenhouse gas emissions, threatens
ecosystems, economies, and human health. Decarbonization - through cleaner energy, efficiency,
and technologies such as Power-to-X (PtX) - is the key to mitigating these effects.
Global
achievements, like the Paris Agreement, which aims to limit global warming to 1.5°C, highlight
international efforts to combat climate change[1]. However, for real progress, this transition must
be economically feasible. Affordable, scalable solutions make it easier for industries and societies
to adopt low-carbon practices without sacrificing economic stability. By balancing environmental
goals with financial viability, we can create a prosperous and sustainable future for all.
Focusing on a relevant source of global Greenhouse Gases (GHG) emissions, international mar-
itime transport accounts for 90% of global trade and almost 3% GHG emissions [2][3]. Emphasiz-
ing the economic importance and environmental impact of the sector highlights the urgent need
for innovation and sustainable practices in maritime transport to balance global trade demands
with climate goals. By 2050, the International Maritime Organization (IMO)[4] targets reducing
the carbon intensity and GHG emissions of shipping by 70% and 50%, respectively, compared to
2008. Furthermore, large companies such as Maersk have set themselves the goal of becoming
net-zero by 2040.[5][6]
2.2
Shipping fuel. Compatibility with current industry
The path towards decarbonization encompasses biofuels that may come from renewable energy
sources. Because of that, PtX technologies are to become even more necessary towards decar-
bonization. Many different possibilities have been considered for this purpose. These were the
main ones:: Ammonia, Methanol, Dimethyl ether, bio-LNG[7]. In order to make the selection,
comparisons based on the Technology Readiness Levels (TRL) and the production costs were
made. [8]
Due to its compatibility with existing engine technologies, Methanol was chosen as the fuel to
be produced, which allows for a smoother transition to cleaner fuels without requiring signifi-
cant modifications to ships[9]. Additionally, e-methanol is safer to handle than alternatives like
ammonia or hydrogen, as it is less toxic and easier to store. Its global availability potential,
combined with regulatory support for cleaner shipping fuels, makes e-methanol a practical and
scalable solution for achieving sustainability in maritime transport. It is worth mentioning that
Ammonia was the most ambitious option towards net zero, as it lacks carbon particles, but due
to its Technology Readiness Level, it was discarded. [10][11]
In order to produce large amounts of methanol, it is necessary to have a comprehensive and
detailed approach that addresses both the demand side and the optimal sizing and integration
of production assets. Understanding the demand for methanol, particularly as a sustainable fuel
in industries like shipping, is essential to determine the scale of production and infrastructure
needed. Equally important is the design and sizing of assets, including wind and solar farms,
electrolyzers, methanol reactors, and storage systems, to ensure efficient, cost-effective, and sus-
tainable operations. Since the overarching goal is to decarbonize the sector, all energy used in
methanol production should come from renewable sources such as wind and solar to minimize
carbon footprints. Furthermore, as e-methanol contains carbon particles that are released into
the atmosphere when burned, the integration of Carbon Capture Systems (CCS) is vital[12].
These systems ensure that the carbon required for methanol production is sourced — whether
from industrial emissions or direct air capture — creating a circular carbon cycle that become
carbon neutral or carbon negative. This approach enhances the environmental credibility of e-
Page 2 of 55
==PAGE:6==
February 23, 2025
methanol as a viable and scalable solution for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in shipping and
other sectors. [13][14]
To achieve these objectives, it is essential to develop robust large-scale optimization models
that enhance operational efficiency while minimizing costs. Methanol production involves com-
plex interdependent processes, including hydrogen generation, carbon capture, and renewable
energy integration, all of which require precise coordination to ensure feasibility and profitability.
Given the complexity of these systems, decomposition techniques such as Benders decomposition
and Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition provide powerful methods for solving large-scale optimization
problems[15]. These techniques enable the breakdown of complex models into smaller, more man-
ageable subproblems, improving computational efficiency and facilitating better decision-making.
By applying these optimization approaches, it becomes possible to determine the optimal asset
sizing and ensure economic feasibility.
2.3
Research question
Main question
How can large scale optimization models and decomposition techniques be applied to determine
the optimal asset sizing for a Power-to-X plant over a 30-year horizon under variable renewable
energy inputs?
Sub-question
How does grid connection availability influence asset dimensions and total investment cost in a
Power-to-X methanol production system?
2.4
Method overview
The methodology used to determine the optimal sizing of assets in a methanol plant is grounded
in minimizing the total cost of the power plant, implemented through a linear optimization
model. This approach accounts for a wide range of costs that are integral to the development,
operation, and sustainability of the plant. Initial investment costs, such as development expendi-
tures (DEVEX) and capital expenditures (CAPEX), represent the upfront financial commitment
required to establish the necessary infrastructure. Operational costs (OPEX), including main-
tenance, labor, and energy consumption, reflect the ongoing expenses associated with running
the plant. In addition, abatement costs (ABEX) are considered to address the environmental
impact, particularly in capturing and reducing carbon emissions, which are critical to achieving
the decarbonization goals of the project. Furthermore, the cost of feedstocks, such as carbon
dioxide (CO2), has been incorporated, as the carbon used in methanol production need to be
captured from sustainable sources to align with emissions reduction targets.
In large-scale optimization problems, such as those used to model a methanol plant, computa-
tional efficiency becomes a key challenge due to the high-dimensional nature of the problem. This
is where decomposition techniques, like Benders and Dantzig-Wolfe decompositions, come into
play [16]. These methods are invaluable in breaking down a complex problem into smaller, more
tractable subproblems. By partitioning the optimization task, decomposition techniques enhance
the scalability and robustness of the model, making it computationally feasible to tackle even the
most intricate systems. This is especially critical in power plants that rely on variable renewable
energy inputs, such as wind and solar power, where the supply can fluctuate due to weather
conditions, and the energy market can be volatile. These uncertainties make it challenging to
predict energy costs and consumption accurately over the plant’s operational lifespan.
By applying decomposition, the optimization model can focus on solving smaller subproblems
that represent specific aspects of the plant’s operation or infrastructure, such as energy generation,
Page 3 of 55
==PAGE:7==
February 23, 2025
storage, or feedstock management. The solutions to these subproblems are then coordinated and
integrated to provide a global optimal solution for the entire plant. This decomposition approach
not only mitigates the computational burden of solving large-scale problems but also allows for
more flexible and dynamic adaptation to changing conditions. For example, it facilitates adjust-
ments to energy prices, fluctuations in renewable energy supply, or advancements in technology,
ensuring the model remains responsive to evolving market and operational dynamics.
The application of decomposition techniques ensures that the optimization process is not only
computationally efficient but also capable of generating solutions that are economically viable
and environmentally sustainable. By enabling a dynamic response to uncertainties, these meth-
ods optimize long-term investment decisions and operational strategies for methanol production.
This ensures that the plant operates efficiently, minimizes costs, and contributes to global decar-
bonization goals, making it a key component of sustainable and resilient energy systems in the
future.
Benders decomposition is highly effective in handling scenarios with uncertainty by separating
decision-making into two stages: a master problem that addresses strategic first-stage decisions,
such as asset investments and sizing, and subproblems that capture second-stage scenarios, such
as renewable energy variability and market price fluctuations. This two-stage approach is partic-
ularly advantageous for problems that naturally divide into long-term strategic and short-term
operational decisions, as seen in methanol plant optimization. By focusing the master problem on
long-term investments and leaving the subproblems to handle specific operational adjustments,
Benders decomposition significantly reduces computational complexity while still accounting for
uncertainties. Moreover, this method enables efficient scenario management, allowing for dynamic
adaptation to changing conditions without overwhelming computational resources. When com-
bined with scenario reduction techniques [17], Benders decomposition helps manage the "curse of
dimensionality," ensuring that the methanol production system remains stable, adaptable, and
optimized for both cost-efficiency and sustainability in uncertain environments.
Meanwhile, Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition is highly effective in handling large-scale, structured
linear programs by reformulating the original problem into a master problem and smaller subprob-
lems, allowing for more efficient solving through column generation. This approach is particularly
useful in optimizing methanol production, where fluctuations in energy supply from renewable
sources and volatile market prices introduce significant uncertainty. By managing each subprob-
lem independently, Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition offers a structured way to handle the "curse
of dimensionality" typically associated with stochastic optimization, ensuring that the system
remains stable and convergent even under complex conditions. Stabilized versions of Dantzig-
Wolfe decomposition, as outlined in research[18], further enhance the method’s robustness and
convergence, addressing instabilities in traditional stochastic methods. This makes the plant’s
operations more resilient, efficient, and computationally feasible, ensuring optimal performance
even in fluctuating and uncertain scenarios.
Page 4 of 55
==PAGE:8==
February 23, 2025
3
Methanol plant design
Methanol is a final product synthesized from hydrogen (H2) and carbon dioxide (CO2). The
primary objective of this report is to analyze the cost of methanol production under different
electricity sourcing scenarios. The classification of methanol as blue or green depends on the
source of electricity and CO2 used in its production:
• Green methanol is a fully renewable methanol produced using hydrogen from electrolysis
powered by renewable energy and CO2 sourced from biogenic processes or Direct Air Cap-
ture (DAC). It qualifies as a Renewable Fuel of Non-Biological Origin (RFNBO) under EU
regulations, meeting strict GHG reduction criteria. [19]
• Blue methanol is produced using hydrogen from renewable or fossil sources and CO2 cap-
tured from fossil-based industrial emissions, such as CHP plants. While it reduces emissions
compared to conventional methanol, it does not qualify as fully renewable under EU regu-
lations. Instead, it is considered a transitional fuel, supporting decarbonization efforts by
utilizing carbon capture.[19]
Since the grid energy mix typically includes fossil-fuel-based power generation, methanol pro-
duced using grid electricity cannot be fully classified as green, leading to its classification as blue
methanol.
To begin with the production of the primary components required for methanol synthesis, hydro-
gen and carbon dioxide must be obtained. Among these, hydrogen production demands the most
attention, as it can be highly expensive and offers multiple technological configurations. Since
hydrogen is produced via an electrolyzer powered by electricity, the location of the renewable
energy source in relation to the electrolyzer becomes a key factor in determining overall costs.
Several configurations can be considered:
• Offshore Wind-Powered Electrolyzer: Placing an electrolyzer alongside an offshore wind
farm would result in high infrastructure costs, as a specialized platform would be required.
Additionally, transporting hydrogen via pipelines would add further expenses, making this
option less economically viable.
• Solar-Powered Electrolyzer: If the electrolyzer is powered by solar panels, positioning them
far from the consumption site would significantly increase investment costs, as extensive
cabling infrastructure would be needed to transmit electricity over long distances.
• Decoupled Production and Consumption: Hydrogen does not necessarily need to be con-
sumed on-site; it can be transported to its final destination. However, this also raises costs,
as it would require expensive pipelines and dedicated hydrogen storage facilities at the
end-use location.
Ultimately, the choice of hydrogen production strategy has a significant impact on overall costs.
A careful evaluation of location, energy transmission, and transportation expenses is necessary
to determine the most cost-effective and efficient configuration.
All the previously mentioned configurations, along with any additional feasible alternatives,
should be analyzed in detail. To properly compare these options, feasibility studies would be
conducted to assess their viability and ultimately determine the most optimal configuration.
However, the focus of this report is not to conduct such an analysis, but rather to optimize the
size of the assets within the power plant. As a result, certain assumptions will need to be made
to simplify the modeling process. These assumptions are outlined in the following section.
Page 5 of 55
==PAGE:9==
February 23, 2025
Figure 1: Methanol plant scheme
Although hydrogen is the most expensive component in methanol production, the source of car-
bon dioxide also requires careful consideration. It is essential to stay focused on the primary
objective—producing renewable methanol. To achieve this, the CO2 source must either be cap-
tured directly from the atmosphere or prevented from being emitted into the environment. This
requirement stems from the fact that methanol, when used as a fuel, releases CO2. To prevent
an overall increase in emissions, carbon must be captured and reintroduced into the production
cycle, ensuring a net-zero carbon footprint. Two primary CO2 sourcing methods are considered
and will be analyzed in the next section:
1. Direct Air Capture (DAC) – Extracting CO2 directly from the atmosphere.
2. Carbon Capture from a Combined Heat and Power (CHP) Plant – Capturing emissions
from an industrial facility before they are released.
While the location and configuration of these carbon capture systems require further detailed
study, assumptions and simplifications will be applied in this report to facilitate the optimization
process.
Once the sources of hydrogen and carbon dioxide are established, the methanol production pro-
cess can begin. Although the overall production pathway can be complex, certain simplifications
have been made for the purpose of this report. At the core of the procedure, the synthesis gas
(syngas) is first fed into the reactor, where raw methanol is produced. This raw methanol con-
sists of a mixture of methanol and water. Since excess water content is undesirable, the next step
involves a distillation column, where water is separated from methanol, leaving pure methanol as
the final output.
Main equations for the process:
CO + 2H2 ⇀
↽CH3OH
(1)
(3.1)
CO2 + 3H2 ⇀
↽CH3OH + H2O
∆H298K = −49 kJ/mol
(2)
(3.2)
CO2 + H2 ⇀
↽CO + H2O
∆H298K = +41 kJ/mol
(3)
(3.3)
Page 6 of 55
==PAGE:10==
February 23, 2025
Figure 2: Simplified sketch of a hydrogen to methanol production plant.
Once the main process has been established, several auxiliary components become essential to
ensure the smooth operation of the plant.
These components primarily function as storage
systems, which provide flexibility in plant operations. Without storage, the entire plant would
need to operate at a constant output, which would - as it is shown below - raise significantly
the costs. To enhance operational flexibility, five different storage systems have been considered.
Each of them aims to improve different aspects of the plant’s operation, but this does not imply
that every storage system will necessarily be part of the final configuration. Since the objective
of this report is to determine the optimal asset sizes, some storage capacities may be zero,
meaning that certain storage systems might not be implemented. These storage systems play a
crucial role in optimizing plant performance by managing fluctuations, enhancing flexibility, and
reducing operational constraints. However, their inclusion in the final configuration depends on
cost-effectiveness and overall system efficiency.
• Battery Storage: batteries provide flexibility in electricity usage, enabling the plant to
store excess electricity generated by variable renewable energy sources and use it during
periods of low availability.
• Hydrogen Storage: while electrolyzers offer considerable operational flexibility, they are
more adaptable than the reactor. This means that the electrolyzer can adjust its operating
point according to the availability of electricity, producing and storing excess hydrogen
when the electricity supply is high. However, it is important to note that hydrogen storage
systems are generally expensive.
• CO2 Storage Tank: before carbon dioxide is mixed to produce syngas, it can be stored
to help balance fluctuations in the reactor’s operational levels.
• Raw Methanol Storage: the reactor has greater flexibility in adjusting its operational
point than the distillation column. To improve plant optimization, an intermediate storage
system for raw methanol can help manage fluctuations between these two processes.
• Pure Methanol Storage: before meeting methanol demand, the final product can be
stored. As production can sometimes exceed demand, excess methanol can be stored to
balance output and consumption over time.
Page 7 of 55
==PAGE:11==
February 23, 2025
The main components of the plant have been described already, but some additional assets are
necessary for the correct working of the plant. These components are the: compressor, desalinator
and heater.
•
Compressor: prior to enter in the reactor, syn gas needs to be compressed in order to
meet some specific conditions in terms of temperature and pressure. This has an impact
on the model in a matter that making this compression requires additional demand of
electricity.
•
Desalinator: the electrolyzer requires water to work, as it would separate the molecules
and then extract the hydrogen by an electrolysis process. This water needs to be treated
previously, and therefore there will be an electricity demand associated with its consump-
tion.
•
Heater: both the reactor and the distillation column have a heating demand associated
with their consumption. As a result, an auxiliary asset is set in turn would also require
additional electricity demand
Page 8 of 55
==PAGE:12==
February 23, 2025
4
Demand market. Location identification. Resource assessments
Once the core structure of the investment model has been established, the next step is to provide
the necessary input data. The primary objective of the model is to minimize the cost of producing
a predetermined amount of methanol. If this production level were not specified, the model would
naturally set all asset sizes to zero, being this result the lowest possible cost. To prevent this, a
constant demand is enforced, ensuring that methanol production remains active. Following this,
the location of the plant must be determined. In a comprehensive study, site selection would
require an extensive evaluation, considering multiple potential locations alongside Environmental
Impact Assessments. However, as mentioned above, site selection is not the focus of this study.
Instead, both the plant location and renewable energy asset placement have been chosen based on
simplified criteria. The chosen location, as detailed in the following sections, meets all necessary
requirements while also offering access to valuable datasets that contribute to the robustness of
the final results.
4.1
Demand
In the current landscape, Power-to-X technologies and the green transition are facing significant
uncertainties, driven not only by economic factors but also by political influences that will shape
the path toward decarbonization. As a result, many projects have been put on hold or even can-
celed altogether. A notable example is the cancellation of the FlagshipONE project in August
2024, which was developed by Ørsted and Liquid Wind AB[20][21]. This project represented a
major investment in green e-methanol production, demonstrating its ambitious scale and impor-
tance in the sector. To replicate key characteristics of this project and establish baseline values,
the demand used in this study has been set accordingly. Specifically, the annual methanol pro-
duction target has been set at 50,000 tonnes, with production being evenly distributed across all
operational hours of the plant.
Project details
The FlagshipONE project aimed to produce approximately 50,000 tonnes of e-methanol per year,
relying on renewable hydrogen and biogenic CO2. The facility was designed to have an electrolyzer
capacity of around 70 MW, enabling large-scale green methanol production. By the time of its
cancellation, interest in e-methanol as a sustainable fuel had been growing significantly, with over
110 e-methanol vessels ordered or in operation, up from 80 at the end of 2022. [22]
The project was planned to be located on the grounds of the biomass-fired combined heat and
power (CHP) plant Hörneborgsverket in Örnsköldsvik, Sweden.
The e-methanol production
would have been powered by renewable electricity, while biogenic carbon dioxide would have
been captured from the Hörneborgsverket CHP plant. As a substitute for fossil fuels, the project
had the potential to reduce CO2 emissions in shipping by 100,000 tonnes per year. Additionally,
Liquid Wind estimated that the facility would upcycle up to 70,000 tonnes of CO2 annually.
Finally, hydrogen for the process would have been produced through electrolysis, powered by a
75 MW onshore wind facility. The overall plant was expected to generate 140 tonnes of renewable
methanol per day, contributing significantly to decarbonization efforts in the maritime sector.
4.2
Location identification
The location of both the methanol plant and the renewable energy assets must meet certain
requirements to ensure that cost estimations remain realistic and not overestimated. The plant
will be powered by an offshore wind farm and the produced e-methanol will be used as fuel
for shipping, a coastal location is necessary. This ensures proximity to both the energy source
and shipping infrastructure, optimizing logistics and reducing additional transportation costs.
Additionally, because offshore wind energy represents a significant portion of the total costs,
Page 9 of 55
==PAGE:13==
February 23, 2025
the selected location must meet two key criteria: it must be permitted for offshore wind farm
development. and it must have high wind resources to ensure optimal power generation. The
following two figures illustrate a map displaying the relative costs of offshore energy in different
regions, and a list of potential locations for offshore wind farms.
Considering these factors, the chosen location for the methanol plant is near Esbjerg, as it meets
the technical, logistical, and economic requirements for an optimal implementation.
Figure 3: Relative lowest cost of offshore
Figure 4: Possible locations for new offshore wind farm where Esbjerg is marked with a star
Page 10 of 55
==PAGE:14==
February 23, 2025
4.3
Wind and Solar resource
Once the location was selected, the next step involved retrieving historical data for the region.
In this regard, an important assumption was made:
Wind and solar resources have remained unchanged over time, meaning that wind
speeds and solar irradiance from the past 30 years are assumed to be representative
of future conditions.
To obtain this historical data, Renewables Ninja was used as the primary source. However, when
extracting data from Renewables Ninja, both wind and solar datasets require tuning to ensure
realistic results.
For instance, when retrieving wind data, the following parameters must be
specified:
• Wind farm capacity
• Hub height
• Turbine model
These parameters were selected to match the capacity factor reported by The Danish Energy
Agency, ensuring that the cost assumptions of these assets align with their actual levelized cost
of energy (LCOE). This assumption and methodology were applied consistently to both wind
and solar capacities, ensuring that the model remains cost-reflective and aligned with real-world
energy production conditions.
4.4
Electricity prices
Unlike the assumption made for wind and solar resources, the same approach cannot be applied to
electricity prices, as they tend to fluctuate over time and follow a general upward trend. Moreover,
electricity prices are often influenced by renewable energy generation, particularly wind and solar
production. The cross-correlation between wind, solar, and electricity prices over the past ten
years provides insight into these relationships:
• A negative correlation exists between wind generation and both solar generation and elec-
tricity prices. This aligns with expectations, as higher wind generation generally leads to
lower electricity prices and reduced solar output, and vice versa.
• However, solar generation shows no significant correlation with electricity prices. That can
be attributed to the relatively low penetration of solar capacity in Denmark, meaning that
its influence on electricity prices remains limited.
These trends emphasize the interaction between renewable energy availability and market elec-
tricity prices, highlighting the importance of accurate price modeling when determining asset
sizing and operational strategies.
Page 11 of 55
==PAGE:15==
February 23, 2025
Figure 5: Correlation matrix heatmap
Accurately modeling electricity prices would require a detailed study, potentially using seasonal
ARMA models that incorporate correlations with other relevant parameters. However, since the
objective of this report is not to delve into advanced modeling projections of electricity prices,
a simplification has been applied.
Additionally, establishing a correlation between electricity
prices and wind or solar production would introduce significant complexity, making it difficult to
implement within the scope of this study. As a result, this correlation has not been included in
the model. Instead, a simplified approach has been adopted:
• A random time series has been generated to represent electricity prices.
• The average value of this series is set equal to the mean electricity price from the past two
years.
• Random noise has been added to reflect the natural fluctuations in electricity prices.
This approach should provide a reasonable approximation of electricity price behavior while
keeping the model computationally manageable.
4.5
CO2 availability
When planning the carbon dioxide source, it is essential to ensure a reliable and continuous
supply. To achieve this, two main possibilities have been considered:
• CO2 from a Power Plant: this approach provides a constant stream of CO2 at a fixed
price, feeding the methanol plant. The sustainability of this solution depends on the type of
power plant. If CO2 is sourced from biogas plants or waste-to-energy facilities, the process
could be carbon-neutral or even carbon-negative. However, this solution is dependent on
biomass or waste availability, which may impose supply limitations.
Page 12 of 55
==PAGE:16==
February 23, 2025
• Direct Air Capture (DAC): This method extracts CO2 directly from ambient air
through chemical absorption. While it presents a fully decarbonized solution, the main
drawback is its high energy intensity, making it currently impractical in terms of energy
costs and efficiency.
Given these considerations, a constant CO2 supply from a CHP plant has been adopted as the
preferred solution.
While this approach may not always be carbon-neutral if fossil fuels are
involved, it ensures:
• A stable and continuous CO2 stream, which is critical for methanol production.
• The use of established carbon capture technology, reducing uncertainty.
• Alignment with the FlagshipONE project, which follows the same approach.
This choice balances feasibility, reliability, and technology maturity, ensuring that the methanol
production process remains consistent and economically viable.
4.6
Electrolyzer. Water availability
In the study “Water Electrolyzer Operation Scheduling for Green Hydrogen Production”[23], four
different electrolyzer technologies were compared:
• Alkaline Water Electrolysis (AWE)
• Proton Exchange Membrane Water Electrolysis (PEMWE)
• Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell (SOEC)
• Anion Exchange Membrane Water Electrolysis (AEMWE)
The selection of the most suitable electrolyzer was based on several key factors, including: Tech-
nology readiness level (TRL), development stage, average efficiency, durability and Capital ex-
penditure (CAPEX). Among all the technologies analyzed, AWE demonstrated the best overall
performance, excelling in efficiency, durability, and cost-effectiveness. As a result, AWE was cho-
sen as the preferred electrolyzer for this study. Below is a list of the key properties of the AWE
electrolyzer, detailing its operational characteristics and performance metrics.
Type
Technology
Readiness Level
Development Stage
Durability
(Full Load Hours)
CAPEX
(USD,$)
AWE
TRL-9
More than 1 GW
60,000 – 100,000 h
500-1400/kW
Table 1: Specifications of the AWE Electrolyzer
In alignment with the chosen electrolyzer, a constant water supply is required to sustain hydrogen
production. Given that the selected location for the methanol plant is near the sea, an abundant
water source is available, ensuring that water extraction does not negatively impact the environ-
ment. However, the use of seawater presents a technical challenge: it must be processed before
use to meet the purity requirements of the electrolyzer. To address this, a desalination unit must
be integrated into the system, to ensure that the water supply is suitable for electrolysis and does
not compromise equipment performance. Electrochemical reactions of the electrolyzer:
At the anode:
4OH−→O2(g) + 2H2O + 4e−
(4.1)
At the cathode:
4H2O + 4e−→2H2 + 4OH−
(4.2)
Overall reaction:
2H2O(l) →2H2(g) + O2(g)
(4.3)
Page 13 of 55
==PAGE:17==
February 23, 2025
5
Costs review. Data inputs
After establishing the foundations of the investment model, it is necessary to define the associ-
ated costs for each asset and the operational limitations that influence the system. Since money
and time are closely linked, costs change over time due to factors like inflation, technological
advancements, and market fluctuations. To ensure consistency, all costs must be expressed in
terms of a specific reference year. The first assumption in this regard is that the project is set
to begin in 2030. Therefore, all investment costs are considered in 2030 values, making 2030 the
baseline (Year 0).
Most of the cost and technical data used in this study have been obtained from the Danish Energy
Agency. Notably, some of the dataset were last updated in February 2025, which means that
the values used in this report are based on data prior to such update. By ensuring that costs
are framed consistently over time, this approach improves the reliability and comparability of
investment projections.
5.1
Associated cost for each asset and technology specifics
For each asset, four types of costs have been included in the model[24]:
• DEVEX (Development Expenditure): Costs incurred during the early stages of a project,
including feasibility studies, permitting, engineering, and project planning.
• CAPEX (Capital Expenditure): Initial investment costs for acquiring, upgrading, or con-
structing physical assets, such as equipment, infrastructure, and facilities.
• OPEX (Operational Expenditure): Recurring costs associated with the day-to-day opera-
tion and maintenance of a facility, including utilities, labor, and consumables.
• ABEX (Abandonment Expenditure): Costs related to decommissioning, dismantling, and
site restoration at the end of a project’s lifecycle.
Depending on the stage of the project, each cost has been considered: DEVEX and CAPEX were
implemented in the early stages of the project. OPEX applies annually throughout the operation
period. ABEX was considered after the final year of operation.
Finally DEVEX and ABEX are often unspecified in financial models. The Danish Energy Agency
admits considering those values as a percentage of the CAPEX. Therefore, due to the lack of exact
percentages an assumption had to be made[25]:
• DEVEX is estimated to be 20% of the total CAPEX.
• ABEX is assumed to be 10% of the total CAPEX.
Offshore windfarm
To start with, an offshore wind farm has been arbitrarily selected as the source of wind energy
production, based on the assumption that it holds the most potential for future development.
Therefore, according to the Danish Energy Agency[26], the associated costs have been determined
based on three key factors:
• Turbine size: Larger turbines generally offer higher efficiency and lower costs per MW but
require greater initial investments.
• Water depth: Deeper waters increase installation and maintenance costs due to the com-
plexity of foundations and support structures.
Page 14 of 55
==PAGE:18==
February 23, 2025
• Distance to shore: Greater distances lead to higher transmission costs, affecting cabling,
grid connection, and maintenance logistics. These factors are crucial in determining the
final cost structure of the offshore wind farm and its impact on the overall investment
model.
Figure 6: Detailed cost breakdown for future wind farms without learning rates
Figure 7: Learning rate-based cost reduction factors
Page 15 of 55
==PAGE:19==
February 23, 2025
For this study, a turbine size of 20 MW, a water depth of 30 meters, and a distance to shore of
30 km have been selected.
Generating capacity for one unit (MW)
20
Technical lifetime (years)
30
Planned outage (weeks/year)
0.5
Construction time (years)
2.5
Average annual full-load hours (MWh/MW)
4800
CAPEX (M€/MW)
1.8
OPEX (€/MW/year)
39,000
DEVEX (M€/MW)
0.36
ABEX (M€/MW)
0.18
Table 2: Technical specification and cost details of the offshore windfarm
Photovoltaic solar farm
As for the PV panels, many different configurations could have been considered. The number
of axes in the tracking system affects the capacity factor and therefore the full load hours. Ad-
ditionally, panels can be monofacial or bifacial, with bifacial panels benefiting from reflection
and scattered light, increasing the received irradiance. Due to the variety of configurations, a
utility-scale, ground-mounted PV system has been selected. To maintain the actual cost of the
panels, the full load hours have been preserved without adjusting for efficiency improvements.
Furthermore, no land price has been considered, acknowledging the uncertainty this introduces.
As a result, the values used in the study may be biased.
Generating capacity for one unit (MW)
40
Technical lifetime (years)
40
Planned outage (weeks/year)
0
Construction time (years)
0.5
Average annual full-load hours (MWh/MW)
1484
CAPEX (M€/MW)
0.38
OPEX (€/MW/year)
9,500
DEVEX (M€/MW)
76,000
ABEX (M€/MW)
38,000
Table 3: Technical specification and cost details of the solar farm[26]
Electrolyzer AWE
Cost estimation and parameter inputs are based on both the Danish Energy Agency [27] and
“Water electrolyzer operation scheduling for green hydrogen production”[23]. For the estimations,
an AWE electrolyzer with a capacity of around 100 MW has been selected. “Internal Ramboll
estimates yearly OPEX are 4 % for AEC”[27]. Technical and cost parameters are set forth below:
Page 16 of 55
==PAGE:20==
February 23, 2025
Figure 8: Table extracted from DEA: summary of all CAPEX values for AEC electrolyzers
Figure 9: Cost distribution for AEC electroyzers
Technical lifetime (years)
25 - 30
Planned outage (days/year)
11
Construction time (years)
2
Water consumption per 1 kg produced (kg)
15
Electricity consumption (KWh/kg-H2)
48.6
Frequency of stack replacement (h)
92,500
Ramp Up (%)
100*
Ramp Down (%))
100*
Minimum operation point (%)
15
CAPEX (M€/MW)
0.55
Stack replacement CAPEX (M€/MW)
0.115
OPEX (€/MW/year)
22,000
DEVEX (M€/MW)
110,000
ABEX (M€/MW)
55,000
Table 4: Technical specification and cost details of the electrolyzer[27]
* Note: ramp rate was defined as following: 0.17 %/s - 0.33%/s, which implies that along one
hour, it can change 100% its operation point.
Page 17 of 55
==PAGE:21==
February 23, 2025
Reactor
The following table presents the financial data and characteristics of the reactor. It is important
to note that the Danish Energy Agency[27] has grouped the financial parameters of both the
reactor and distillation column under a single category. Therefore, both components are shown
together in the same table. However, in the model implementation, these two assets must be
treated separately. To achieve this, a cost division has been applied, assuming that the assets
related to the distillation column accounts for 70% of the total cost of the reactor[28].
Generating capacity for one unit (TPD)
150
Technical lifetime (years)
30
Planned outage (weeks/year)
3
Construction time (years)
2
CO2 input (ton/ton-MeOH)
1.4
H2 input (ton/ton-MeOH)
0.19
Electricity consumption (MWh/ton-MeOH)
0.0014
Heat consumption (MWh/ton-MeOH)
0.0013
Ramp Up (%)
50
Ramp Down (%)
50
Minimum operation point (%)
20
Table 5: Technical specification for the reactor[8]
* Note: in the model, units have been converted from MW to tons per day (TPD) in order to
make results more intuitive.
CAPEX (M€/TPD)*
0.25
OPEX (M€/(1,000 TPD/year)*
7
DEVEX (M€/TPD)*
0.05
ABEX (M€/TPD)*
0.025
Table 6: Financial parameters for both reactor and distillator.
Distillation column
As it has been mentioned above, financial parameters of the distillation column are shared with
the reactor. In the following table the technological specifications of the distillator are being
shown.
Page 18 of 55
==PAGE:22==
February 23, 2025
Generating capacity for one unit (TPD)
150
Technical lifetime (years)
30
Planned outage (weeks/year)
3
Construction time (years)
2
Pure MeOH input (ton-MeOH /ton)
1.565
Water output (ton/ton-MeOH)
0.550
Heat consumption (MWh/ton-MeOH)
0.002
Efficiency (%)
99.85
Ramp Up (%)
20
Ramp Down (%)
20
Minimum operation point (%)
20
Table 7: Technical specification for the distillation column
Battery
Batteries provide flexibility and versatility in the operation of the plant. Given that the system
relies on variable renewable energy sources, batteries play a crucial role in balancing fluctuations,
storing excess electricity during peak production and supplying it during periods of scarcity.
However, scalability remains a key challenge for many battery technologies. Most commercially
available options are power-intensive, meaning they can store large amounts of electricity but
only for short durations. In contrast, this project requires an energy-intensive battery capable of
ensuring stable operation over extended periods.
To meet these requirements, a sodium-sulfur (Na-S) battery has been selected. This technology
offers high energy density and the ability to store electricity on the scale of hundreds of megawatt-
hours, making it a suitable choice for long-duration energy storage in this application.
Energy storage capacity for one unit (MWh)
300
Output capacity for one unit (MW)
50
Input capacity for one unit (MW)
50
Technical lifetime (years)
24
Planned outage (days/year)
0
Construction time (years)
0.5
Round trip efficiency (%)
85
Minimum operation point (%)
10
Maximum operation point (%)
100
C rate
0.1667
CAPEX (M€/MW)
0.2446
OPEX (€/MW/year)
1.5
DEVEX (M€/MW)
44,900
ABEX (M€/MW)
22,450
Table 8: Technical specification and cost details of the battery[27]
Page 19 of 55
==PAGE:23==
February 23, 2025
Hydrogen storage
Hydrogen storage is known to be very expensive, primarily due to the cooling and compression
processes, which significantly increase costs. While alternative storage methods, such as cavern
storage, may offer a cheaper solution, they are not applicable for the current purpose.[27]
For this study, seamless steel or aluminum tanks have been selected as the preferred storage
option. These tanks are designed for stationary applications and offer the lowest average cost
among the available hydrogen storage technologies, which makes them them the most feasible
option for this project.
Energy storage capacity for one unit (MWh)
16.7
Output capacity for one unit (MW)
-
Input capacity for one unit (MW)
0.09
Technical lifetime (years)
30
Planned outage (weeks/year)
2
Construction time (years)
0.4
Round trip efficiency (%)
88
Minimum operation point (%)
10
Maximum operation point (%)
100
C rate
0.05
CAPEX (€/kg)
500
OPEX (€/MW/year)
531.7*
DEVEX (€/kg)
100
ABEX (€/kg)
50
Table 9: Technical specification and cost details of the hydrogen storage[29]
Note: accounts for the compressor, which is assumed to be 100 kW.
CO2 storage tank
As previously mentioned, the CO2 source for this project will be a CHP plant, which will supply
a constant stream of carbon dioxide. However, since the plant’s operation point can fluctuate,
there may be instances of CO2 excess or scarcity. To address this variability, a storage solution
is required to balance supply and demand.
For this purpose, pressurized tanks have been selected as an intermediate CO2 storage solution.
Those tanks will allow the plant to store excess CO2 when supply exceeds demand and release it
when needed, ensuring a stable and continuous methanol production process.
Page 20 of 55
==PAGE:24==
February 23, 2025
Energy storage capacity for one unit (m3)
120
Technical lifetime (years)
25
Planned outage (weeks/year)
0
Construction time (years)
1.5
Round trip efficiency (%)
95
Minimum operation point (%)
5
Maximum operation point (%)
85
CAPEX (€/ton-CO2)
3800
OPEX (€/ton-CO2/year)
114
DEVEX (€/ton-CO2)
760
ABEX (€/ton-CO2)
380
Table 10: Technical specification and cost details of the carbon dioxide storage[30]
Liquid raw and pure methanol storage
Due to the lack of specific cost data for methanol storage tanks, certain assumptions have been
made to estimate their costs. The price of methanol tanks has been extrapolated from CO2 tank
costs, taking into account the following considerations:
• Methanol storage is simpler, as it remains in liquid form under ambient conditions, unlike
CO2, which requires high-pressure or cryogenic storage.
• CO2 tanks are more complex and expensive, given their need for pressure control and
insulation, whereas methanol storage primarily focuses on fire safety measures.
• Methanol tanks require less specialized containment, making them cheaper to manufacture
and maintain compared to CO2 storage.
Hence, it has been estimated that the cost of methanol storage corresponds to 50% of the cost
of CO2 storage.
Energy storage capacity for one unit (m3)
120
Technical lifetime (years)
25
Planned outage (weeks/year)
0
Construction time (years)
1.5
Round trip efficiency (%)
95
Minimum operation point (%)
5
Maximum operation point (%)
95
CAPEX (€/ton-MeOH)
1900
OPEX (€/ton-MeOH/year)
57
DEVEX (€/ton-MeOH)
380
ABEX (€/ton-MeOH)
190
Table 11: Technical specification and cost details of methanol storages
Page 21 of 55
==PAGE:25==
February 23, 2025
Auxiliary equipment
Even though the investment costs for auxiliary equipment have been neglected, an additional cost
associated with its energy consumption has been considered. This ensures that the operational
impact of auxiliary systems is accounted for in the model, reflecting a more accurate estimation
of total energy requirements and expenses.
Compressor
To compress the syngas required for the reactor, an additional amount of energy
is necessary. Specifically, for every ton of syngas, 0.144 MWh of electricity is required. That
energy consumption has been accounted for in the model to ensure an accurate estimation of
operational costs and energy requirements.
Desalinator
AWE electrolyzers require pure water for hydrogen production. Purified water
can be sourced from the sea and treated before use.
To account for the energy required for
desalination and purification, an additional energy demand of 0.02 MWh per cubic meter of
water has been considered in the model.
Heater
Finally, to maintain the operation of both the reactor and the distillation column, an
additional heating demand is needed. To generate heat, the model assumes an efficiency of 110%
for converting electricity into heat, reflecting the use of high-efficiency electrical heating systems.
5.2
Variable Renewable Energy
As previously mentioned, solar and wind profiles have been obtained from the webpage Renew-
ables Ninja. To ensure consistency with the associated costs, the capacity factor and turbine
properties have been carefully respected. Consequently, thirty years of historical data have been
extracted, which are assumed to be representative of the next thirty years of production.
For computational purposes, the processed data appears dimensionless. Thus, the actual elec-
tricity generation per hour is calculated as the installed capacity of the asset multiplied by the
respective time series values. This approach allows for direct scaling of generation profiles based
on the selected system capacities.
Wind generation
Offshore wind generation operates at 4,800 full load hours per year, which corresponds to a
capacity factor of 0.548. The graph below represents the first year of data in per unit, providing
insight into the hourly variation of wind power generation. For simplicity, only the first year
is displayed, but it is important to note that all 30 years under consideration exhibit a similar
capacity factor to the one stated, which indicates that the time follow similar trends across all
years.
Figure 10: Time series of one year of offshore wind generation
Page 22 of 55
==PAGE:26==
February 23, 2025
Solar generation
O the other hand, we there is the solar generation, which has 1484 of full load hours, which
corresponds to a capacity factor of 0.169. Similar to wind power generation, only the first year
is shown.
Figure 11: Time series of one year of photovoltaic solar generation
5.3
Electricity and CO2 pricing
Electricity prices
To start with, it is important to stress that electricity prices play a crucial role in any investment
model of this kind. Given their significant impact on project feasibility, a detailed study should
ideally be conducted to obtain the most realistic results. However, due to time constraints, certain
simplifications have been applied.
Thus, no correlation has been assumed between electricity generation and market prices, acknowl-
edging the bias this introduces into the model. Instead, a steady-progressing time series with
random noise has been generated to simulate realistic price fluctuations. Since electricity prices
generally follow an upward trend driven by inflation, the chosen approach was to:
• Start with an average value
• Increase it annually based on the inflation rate,
• Introduce random noise to make the series more comparable to actual electricity price
behavior.
The initial electricity price estimate was based on historical data from previous years. The first
consideration was to use data from the last 10 years, which resulted in an average price of 65
€/MWh. However, this value was too outdated compared to the expected operation date of the
project. A second approach was to use the last 5 years of data, but the inclusion of 2021 and
2022 (energy crisis years) led to unrealistically high values, with an average price of 97 €/MWh.
To balance accuracy and realism, the final assumption was to take the average of 2023 and 2024,
leading to an electricity price of 77 €/MWh as the base value.
Lastly, the inflation rate of Europe has been considered, as electricity markets across different
countries are interconnected. The average annual inflation rate over the last 10 years is 2.1%[31],
which has been applied to project future increases in electricity prices.
On the graphs below, there can be seen the difference between the synthetic time series generated
and the actual electricity prices on years 2023 and 2024.
Page 23 of 55
==PAGE:27==
February 23, 2025
Figure 12: Time series of one year of electricity prices
Figure 13: Time series of electricity prices in 2023 and 2024
CO2 prices
The price of carbon dioxide has been assumed to remain constant throughout the entire opera-
tional period. Given the significant uncertainty surrounding future CO2 prices and the absence
of a well-established market, a fixed price has been adopted to maintain consistency in cost
estimation.
To align with reliable sources, the model uses the CO2 price proposed by the Danish Energy
Agency, which is set at 100 €/ton. This assumption ensures that the economic evaluation remains
transparent and comparable across different scenarios.
5.4
Financial parameters
Lastly, it is well known that assets and money depreciate over time. Therefore, it is necessary to
annualize all costs to the point of the initial investment, referred to as Year Zero. Both invest-
ment costs and operational costs must be adjusted accordingly to ensure a consistent economic
evaluation.
To perform this annualization, an investment rate is required.
The value of this parameter
can fluctuate depending on various factors, such as risk tolerance, financing conditions, and the
expected profitability of the project.
Finally, the Danish Energy Agency applies a 4% discount rate for public projects, where financial
risks are lower due to government backing. However, private projects face higher investment
risks, including market fluctuations and financing costs. Therefore, using an 8% discount rate
for this study is reasonable, as it better reflects the real cost of capital and aligns with industry
practices for privately funded renewable energy projects.[32]
Page 24 of 55
==PAGE:28==
February 23, 2025
6
Model formulation. Decomposition techniques
The objective of the model is to minimize the total costs of the plant while ensuring a constant
demand is met. The model operates on an hourly time step, meaning that all constraints and
operational conditions must be satisfied at each hour. Electricity generation from variable re-
newable sources follows the time series data previously introduced. Additionally, the plant has
the option to purchase electricity from the grid, though selling back to the grid is not permitted.
Throughout the operational period, outputs can be stored, provided that all technical constraints
related to storage assets are met. The key assets involved in methanol production, including
the electrolyzer, reactor, and distillator, must comply with ramping constraints while operating
within their respective capacity limits. At the end of the process, the constant demand is fulfilled.
The model incorporates four distinct scenarios that account for grid limitations and maintenance
constraints, influencing both operational strategies and investment decisions. These scenarios
are structured as two-by-two combinations, where the plant must undergo scheduled shutdown
periods due to planned outages. Despite these interruptions, the total annual demand remains
constant, meaning that during operational periods, the daily production rate must increase to
compensate for downtime.
The second aspect of the scenarios involves the source of electricity. Initially, a fully connected
grid without limitations was assumed, allowing the plant to operate seamlessly, even during
dunkelflaute conditions—periods when neither wind nor solar power is available. However, the
source of electricity also affects the classification of the produced methanol.
• If the plant draws electricity from the grid mix, which may include fossil fuel-based gener-
ation, the produced methanol cannot be fully labeled as green, as it has been mentioned
above.
• On the other hand, by avoiding grid dependency and relying solely on renewable sources,
the plant gains energy independence while ensuring that the methanol produced qualifies
as green methanol.
During the initial formulation of this problem, various model configurations were evaluated,
considering trade-offs between solution quality and computational cost.
These configurations
explored different levels of model complexity to balance accuracy and efficiency.
Ultimately,
an intermediate approach was chosen, allowing for a manageable computational burden while
maintaining solution reliability. Additionally, the model was designed with the flexibility to in-
corporate decomposition techniques, enabling improved computational efficiency and facilitating
future enhancements.
Different possibilities of models, deterministic one year, deterministic 30 years, stochastic with a
large number of scenarios*:
Solution complexity
Computational Cost
Deterministic with one year period
Low
Low
Deterministic with 30 years period
Medium
Medium
Stochastic model
High
High
Table 12: Comparison of model configurations
Note*: The number of scenarios in a stochastic model depends on its configuration and scope.
If the model represents one year of operation, where each scenario introduces variations in that
year, a dataset of around 50 different scenarios would be considered large. On the other hand, if
the model operates over a 30-year period, where each scenario alters inputs across all years, then
even as few as three scenarios would already represent a large-scale stochastic setup.
Page 25 of 55
==PAGE:29==
February 23, 2025
6.1
Mathematical model
Objective function
The objective function minimizes the total fixed and operational costs of the model, where dis-
counted factors have been considered. Total costs correspond to all the expenditures such as
CAPEX, fixed OPEX, ABEX and DEVEX. Alternatively, the variable costs considered have
been the ones associated with the electricity imported from the grid and the costs of CO2.
min
Capacitiesc, Elec_gridt,CO2,imp,t
 
C
X
c=1
Capacitiesc · Total_Costsc
+
T
X
t=1
Elec_gridt · El_pricet +
T
X
t=1
CO2, imp, t · CO2 pricet
!
It is important to note that the terms Total_Costsc, El_pricet and CO2 pricet have already been
annualized and discounted over the years. To do so, the expression of the Net Present Value have
been implemented, where r accounts for the discount rate and t for the number of years:
NPV =
n
X
t=0
Costst
(1 + r)t
(6.1)
Constraints
Power Flow
This constraint enforces the energy balance, which ensures that the total energy consumption
matches the available energy supply. It is worth mentioning that the model considers the possi-
bility of energy curtail.
VRE_elect+Elec_gridt+Elec_from_battt = Elec_const+Elec_to_battt+Elec_curtt
∀t ∈T
Maximum Capacities
Even if some assets can be easily scalable, like storage tanks, it is necessary to implement some
physical limitations. Therefore, a maximum size for each asset has been implemented. It is worth
mentioning that this constraint may help convergence, as it reduces the hull.
Capacitiesc ≤Max_Capacities
Storage constraints
These constraints has been implemented for all five storages included in the model - battery
included as it is a type of storage. In order to group all the constraints and make the writing more
efficient, constraints have been grouped, as all the storages have to follow the mass conservation
principle and C-rate considerations.
Boundary conditions
With the aim of not oversize the assets, and also to avoid speculation
with the stored products, an initial and equal state of charge had been established. This value
corresponds to every storage to 50% of the maximum capacity. Equally, a final state of charge
after 30 years of operation has been imposed.
SOCinitial = 0.5 · Capstorage
SOCfinal ≥0.5 · Capstorage
Page 26 of 55
==PAGE:30==
February 23, 2025
Operational limits
For every storage, there are some operational limits that do not allow it
to be fully charged or discharged. Therefore, these values have to be stated in the equations. It
is worth mentioning that, depending on the type of storage, these operational limits may change.
SOCt ≤MaxOperation · Capstorage
∀t ∈T
SOCt ≥MinOperation · Capstorage
∀t ∈T
Mass balance - State of Charge (SOC)
This constraint defines the dynamic mass balance
of the storage system, ensuring that the stored quantity is continuously updated at each time
step by balancing inflows, outflows, and efficiency losses. It maintains continuity in the storage
system by accurately tracking storage levels over time, preventing discrepancies in mass or energy
accounting. At each hourly interval, the storage updates its state by considering the amount
entering and leaving, multiplied by efficiency factors that account for losses. Depending on the
type of storage, the units vary; batteries are measured in megawatt-hours (MWh) to represent
electrical energy storage, while hydrogen, CO2, and methanol storages are measured in tons,
tracking the mass of stored material.
SOCt+1 = SOCt + Chat · effin −Dist · effout
∀t ∈T
C-rate
The C-rate for storages defines the rate at which a storage system can be charged or
discharged relative to its total capacity. A 1C rate implies that the entire storage capacity is
charged or discharged in one hour, while a 0.5C rate means that it takes two hours to fully charge
or discharge.
Chat ≤Storage_Cap · C-rate
∀t ∈T
Dist ≤Storage_Cap · C-rate
∀t ∈T
Electrolyzer operation
The key aspects when modeling an electrolyzer’s operation focus on ensuring its feasibility and
efficiency. It is crucial to enforce operational limits, maintain adherence to ramp constraints, and
guarantee that input and output requirements are met at every time step.
energy_elect ≤MaxOperation · Capelectrolyzer
∀t ∈T
energy_elect ≥MinOperation · Capelectrolyzer
∀t ∈T
H2_outputt · Elec_eff = energy_elect
∀t ∈T
H2O_inputt · H2O_consumption = energy_elect
∀t ∈T
energy_elect+1 −energy_elect ≤Capelectrolyzer · Ramp_Up
∀t ∈T
energy_elect −energy_elect+1 ≤Capelectrolyzer · Ramp_Down
∀t ∈T
Reactor and Distillator operation
Similar to the electrolyzer, the reactor and distillator operate within their defined operational
limits. Both units ensure mass and energy balance equations are maintained while adhering to
ramping constraints to guarantee stable and efficient performance. For simplicity, only the reactor
Page 27 of 55
==PAGE:31==
February 23, 2025
equations are presented, as they share similar operational constraints and balance equations with
the distillator.
MeOH_outputt ≤MaxOperation · Capreactor
∀t ∈T
MeOH_outputt ≥MinOperation · Capreactor
∀t ∈T
MeOH_outputt · effH2 = massH2,reactor,t + massH2,storage,t
∀t ∈T
MeOH_outputt · effCO2 = massCO2,stream,t + massCO2,storage,t
∀t ∈T
MeOH_outputt · effelectricity = electricityreactor,t
∀t ∈T
MeOH_outputt · effheat = heatreactor,t
∀t ∈T
MeOH_outputt+1 −MeOH_outputt ≤Capreactor · Ramp_Up
∀t ∈T
MeOH_outputt −MeOH_outputt+1 ≤Capreactor · Ramp_Down
∀t ∈T
Demand fulfillment
Lastly, the meeting demand constraint ensures that a constant demand is met at every time step.
This requirement drives investment in various assets, as the model must allocate resources to fulfill
demand. Without this constraint, the optimal solution would result in zero asset investment.
Demand ≤MeOHdischarged
Additional constraints based on different scenarios
Grid limitation
This constraint sets an upper limit on the amount of electricity that can be
imported from the grid, ensuring that grid energy purchases remain within the defined capacity.
In certain configurations mentioned earlier, this import limit is set to zero, effectively preventing
any electricity extraction from the grid and enforcing complete reliance on variable renewable
energy sources.
electricity_gridt ≤Max_import,
∀t ∈T
Scheduled maintenance
Every asset has specific planned outage periods, requiring a min-
imum number of shutdown days per year. To enhance efficiency, all planned outages are syn-
chronized, with the total shutdown period determined by the asset with the longest outage
requirement—in this case, the reactor, which has a planned outage of three weeks.
To model this shutdown period, an auxiliary binary variable was introduced, where 1 represents
operational status and 0 represents a shutdown. Direct multiplication of these binary variables
would introduce non-linearity into the model, which is best avoided. To maintain a linear formu-
lation, additional auxiliary variables were introduced.
Since shutting down the electrolyzer, reactor, and distillator effectively shuts down the entire
plant, only these assets are constrained. For simplicity, the electrolyzer’s formulation is presented
below.
The initial plan was to schedule the shutdown period during winter, when solar production is at
its minimum. This approach aimed to minimize the impact on electricity availability. However,
after running several simulations, the shutdown period was rescheduled to summer. Despite solar
capacity peaking during this time, wind production, which contributes a larger share of total
electricity generation, tends to have lower average output during summer months. As a result,
Page 28 of 55
==PAGE:32==
February 23, 2025
shifting the shutdown to this period allows for a better balance in overall energy availability while
minimizing disruptions to the system.
mt = Maintenanceperiod(binary)
∀t ∈T
zelec,t ≤Capelectrolyzer
∀t ∈T
zelec,t ≤MaxCapelectrolyzer · m
∀t ∈T
zelec,t ≥Capelectrolyzer −(1 −m) · MaxCapelectrolyzer
∀t ∈T
zelec,t ≥0
∀t ∈T
6.2
Decomposition techniques
The model is structured for a 30-year operational period, equivalent to 262,968 hours. Given
the scale of the problem, decomposition techniques were initially considered to manage computa-
tional complexity. The core principle behind decomposition is to divide a large-scale problem into
multiple smaller subproblems, hereby mitigating the curse of dimensionality. It is well established
that computational requirements grow exponentially with problem size, making decomposition a
valuable tool for improving solution feasibility and efficiency [33].
However, it is also important to highlight that the model was solvable without decomposition in
its original form. Therefore, while not strictly necessary, decomposition was implemented pri-
marily to facilitate further studies and benchmark results against alternative solution approaches.
This allows for more flexible problem-solving methodologies and enhances the comparability of
outcomes across different computational strategies.
Decomposition explanation
As previously mentioned, the goal of decomposition techniques is to break down a large-scale
or complex problem into multiple smaller, more manageable subproblems. Through an iterative
process, these subproblems are solved independently and provide feedback to a Master problem,
which then updates the decision variables and refines the solution in subsequent iterations.
For decomposition to be effective, the problem must exhibit a block-angular structure, ensur-
ing that each subproblem can be solved independently without direct dependencies on other
subproblems. However, many real-world problems do not naturally exhibit this structure, re-
quiring modifications to eliminate interdependencies between subproblems. To achieve this, two
decomposition techniques have been implemented:
• Benders’ Decomposition: This method handles complicating variables, meaning it separates
investment decisions (handled in the Master problem) from operational decisions (solved in
the subproblems).
• Dantzig-Wolfe Decomposition: This approach manages complicating constraints, reformu-
lating the problem so that each subproblem can be solved independently while ensuring
feasibility through a column-generation process.
The main goal of combining these two techniques is to achieve a block-angular structure, allowing
for efficient parallel computation of subproblems. By implementing these decomposition methods,
the computational burden is significantly reduced, enabling the model to efficiently handle large-
scale optimization over its 30-year horizon.
Page 29 of 55
==PAGE:33==
February 23, 2025
Figure 14: Block angular structure
Complicating variables
Complicating variables are those that appear in all subproblems, creating dependencies between
them. In the present case, these variables correspond to asset sizes, such as the capacity of the
electrolyzer, reactor, distillation column, and storage units. These variables are called compli-
cating because their values remain fixed across all hours of operation, causing interdependencies
that prevent the subproblems from being solved independently.
For instance, consider the size of the electrolyzer. If this variable were directly included in each
subproblem, it would create a link between all time steps, requiring the subproblems to be solved
as a single large problem. To eliminate this dependency and achieve decomposability, the asset
size variables are moved to the Master problem, where they are optimized. In the subproblems,
they remain as fixed parameters rather than decision variables, ensuring that each subproblem
can be solved independently while still respecting the investment decisions made at the Master
level.
energyelectrolyzer,h ≤Capacityelectrolyzer,
∀h
(6.2)
Complicating constraints
Similarly, complicating constraints also create interdependencies between subproblems, but in
a different manner.
Instead of linking subproblems through shared decision variables, these
constraints connect time steps sequentially, forming a chain-like dependency that prevents inde-
pendent resolution of each subproblem.
A key example of such a constraint is the mass balance equation for storage systems, which
governs the state of charge (SOC) dynamics. This equation ensures that the stored quantity
at each hour depends on the previous hour’s state while accounting for inflows, outflows, and
efficiency losses. Mathematically, it can be expressed as:
SOCh = SOCh−1 + ηin · Inflowh −ηout · Outflowh,
∀h
(6.3)
Because SOC is present in both hour h and h −1, it links all subproblems across time, making
them inseparable. To enable decomposition, these constraints are removed from the subproblems
and handled by introducing auxiliary variables or relaxing constraints at the Master problem
level. By doing so, each subproblem can be solved independently.
Page 30 of 55
==PAGE:34==
February 23, 2025
6.2.1
Benders
Benders decomposition relies on an iterative process using cutting planes to refine the solution
of a large-scale problem. These cutting planes, generated by subproblems, add constraints to the
Master problem, thereby improving the overall solution at each iteration. The subproblem also
provides dual variables, which update dynamically in each iteration, guiding the Master problem
towards optimality.
To implement this algorithm, the original optimization problem is divided into a Master problem
and a subproblem. As previously defined, complicating variables — such as the size of assets —
belong to the Master problem, while all other operational variables are part of the subproblem.
However, at this stage, the subproblem remains indivisible because it still includes complicating
constraints that create interdependencies.
The key role of the subproblem is to generate cutting planes, which iteratively enhance the
solution of the Master problem. These cutting planes are derived from the dual problem, an
optimization formulation obtained from the primal problem that seeks to maximize or minimize
a bound on the primal solution using Lagrange multipliers.
Through iterative process, the Master problem determines investment decisions, such as asset
sizes, and passes these values as parameters to the subproblem. The subproblem is then optimized
under these fixed conditions, producing dual variables that are sent back to the Master problem
in the form of a new cutting plane (constraint). Each iteration refines the feasible space of the
Master problem. The algorithm concludes when the gap between the Master problem’s objective
value and the subproblem’s objective value reaches a specified threshold, ensuring convergence
to an optimal solution.
Figure 15: Benders algorithm scheme
Finally, it is important to highlight an additional consideration.
In some cases, the solution
provided by the Master problem may lead to an unbounded subproblem, meaning that the sub-
problem fails to find a feasible solution. When this occurs, instead of solving the subproblem in
its original form, a ray problem is formulated and solved.
The ray problem differs from the standard subproblem in that its right-hand side constraints are
set to zero, effectively identifying infeasibilities rather than optimizing for an objective function.
Instead of generating an optimality cut, the ray problem produces a feasibility cut, which is then
Page 31 of 55
==PAGE:35==
February 23, 2025
added to the Master problem. This feasibility cut ensures that future iterations of the Master
problem avoid selecting solutions that would lead to infeasibility in the subproblem.
For simplification, the detailed formulation of the subproblem has been omitted, but it is impor-
tant to note that the feasibility cut is a key component in ensuring convergence and feasibility
within the Benders’ decomposition algorithm.
Model formulation
In order to implement the algorithm, two main models have been added - three if ray problem is
considered.
Master problem
Objective function
The objective function accounts for the cost of every asset plus the q value that comes from
the subproblem. q is an auxiliary variable that englobes all the variable costs and composes the
cutting planes.
min
Capacitiesc · Total_Costsc + q
(6.4)
Constraints
This first constraint enforces maximum capacities for the assets.
Capacitiesc ≤maxCapacities,
∀c
(6.5)
The constraint below ensures that the recourse variable q captures the system feasibility, incorpo-
rating storage dynamics, demand balance, ramping constraints, and overall operational feasibility.
Within this constraint, all terms except pcap, which represents the asset capacities, are treated
as fixed parameters.
Since pcap is a decision variable in the Master problem, each iteration refines its value, leading to a
progressively constrained feasible space. As the solution evolves, newly generated asset capacities
become increasingly restricted, improving the overall optimality of the solution.
q ≥
X
t
h
pflow · (Wind · pcap,0 + Solar · pcap,1) −max_grid · grid_max
+ initbat · pcap,5 · Batteryinit + finbat · pcap,5 · Batteryfinal
+ batmin · pcap,5 · Batterymin −batmax · pcap,5 · Batterymax
−Cbat,1 · pcap,5 · BatteryC −Cbat,2 · pcap,5 · BatteryC
−elecmax · pcap,2 + elecmin · pcap,2 · opelec,min
−elecramp,up · pcap,2 · opelec,ramp,up −elecramp,down · pcap,2 · opelec,ramp,down
+ balance · Demand + inith2 · pcap,6 · H2init + finh2 · pcap,6 · H2final
+ h2min · pcap,6 · H2min −h2max · pcap,6 · H2max
−Crate,h2,1 · pcap,6 · H2C −Crate,h2,2 · pcap,6 · H2C
−reacmax · pcap,3 + reacmin · pcap,3 · opreac,min
−reacramp,up · pcap,3 · opreac,ramp,up −reacramp,down · pcap,3 · opreac,ramp,down
−destmax · pcap,4 + destmin · pcap,4 · opdest,min
−destramp,up · pcap,4 · opdest,ramp,up −destramp,down · pcap,4 · opdest,ramp,down
+ initMeOH,sto · pcap,7 · MeOHinit + finMeOH,sto · pcap,7 · MeOHfinal
+ MeOHmin · pcap,7 · MeOHmin −MeOHmax · pcap,7 · MeOHmax
i
,
∀t
(6.6)
Page 32 of 55
==PAGE:36==
February 23, 2025
Sub problem
In the dual problem the constraints become variables and vice versa. The right hand side of the
original problem becomes part of the dual objective function.
Objective Function
The objective function is formulated as:
max
q =
X
h
pflow,h · (Wind · Pcap,0 + Solar · Pcap,1)
−
X
h
(max_grid · grid_max)
+ init_bat · Pcap,5 · Battery2 + fin_bat · Pcap,5 · Battery3
+
X
h
h
bat_min · Pcap,5 · Battery4 −bat_max · Pcap,5 · Battery5
−C_bat_1 · Pcap,5 · Battery6 −C_bat_2 · Pcap,5 · Battery6
i
+
X
h
h
−elec_max · Pcap,2 + elec_min · Pcap,2 · op_elec2
−elec_ramp_up · Pcap,2 · op_elec0 −elec_ramp_down · Pcap,2 · op_elec1
i
+
X
h
balance · Demand
+ init_h2 · Pcap,6 · H2storage2 + fin_h2 · Pcap,6 · H2storage3
+
X
h
h
h2_min · Pcap,6 · H2storage4 −h2_max · Pcap,6 · H2storage5
−C_rate_h2_1 · Pcap,6 · H2storage6 −C_rate_h2_2 · Pcap,6 · H2storage6
i
+ init_CO2 · Pcap,8 · CO2storage2 + fin_CO2 · Pcap,8 · CO2storage3
+
X
h
h
CO2_min · Pcap,8 · CO2storage4 −CO2_max · Pcap,8 · CO2storage5
+ CO2_str_min · CO2storage6 −CO2_str_max · CO2storage7
i
+
X
h
h
−reac_max · Pcap,3 + reac_min · Pcap,3 · op_reac2
−Reac_ramp_up · Pcap,3 · op_reac0 −Reac_ramp_down · Pcap,3 · op_reac1
i
+ init_MeOH_sto · Pcap,7 · raw_MeOH_sto2 + fin_MeOH_sto · Pcap,7 · raw_MeOH_sto3
+
X
h
h
raw_MeOH_min · Pcap,7 · raw_MeOH_sto4
−raw_MeOH_max · Pcap,7 · raw_MeOH_sto5
i
+
X
h
h
−dest_max · Pcap,4 + dest_min · Pcap,4 · op_dest2
−dest_ramp_up · Pcap,4 · op_dest0 −dest_ramp_down · Pcap,4 · op_dest1
i
+ init_pure · Pcap,9 · Pure_MeOH_sto2 + fin_pure · Pcap,9 · Pure_MeOH_sto3
+
X
h
h
MeOH_min · Pcap,9 · Pure_MeOH_sto4
−MeOH_max · Pcap,9 · Pure_MeOH_sto5
i
(6.7)
Page 33 of 55
==PAGE:37==
February 23, 2025
Constraints
The following constraints define the dual problem of the original formulation,
where the original variables now appear within the constraints.
The right-hand side of the
subproblem consists of elements from the original objective function, specifically electricity prices
and CO2 prices. Since the equations have been previously detailed, only the dual formulation is
presented without further explanation.
−pflow −max_grid ≤Prices
(Electricity Purchase)
(6.8)
pflow ≤0
(Electricity Sell Constraint)
(6.9)
initbat −batsto,0 + batmin,0 −batmax,0 ≤0
(Battery SOC at t = 0)
(6.10)
batsto,t −batsto,t+1 + batmin,t+1 −batmax,t+1 ≤0
(Battery SOC Balance)
(6.11)
−batsto,t · ηbat + pflow,t −Cbat,1,t ≤0
(Battery Charging Limit)
(6.12)
batsto,t/ηbat −pflow,t −Cbat,2,t ≤0
(Battery Discharging Limit)
(6.13)
pflow,t−elecmax,t+elecmin,t−elecop,t−elecramp-up,t−1+elecramp-down,t−1 ≤0
(Electrolyzer Operation)
(6.14)
elecop,t · ηelec + compressorH2,t ≤0
(Hydrogen Production from Electrolyzer)
(6.15)
initH2 −h2sto,0 + h2min,0 −h2max,0 ≤0
(Initial Hydrogen Storage)
(6.16)
h2sto,t −h2sto,t+1 + h2min,t+1 −h2max,t+1 ≤0
(Hydrogen Storage Balance)
(6.17)
−h2sto,t · ηH2 −Crate,H2,1,t −compressorH2,t ≤0
(Hydrogen Charging Constraint)
(6.18)
h2sto,t/ηH2 −Crate,H2,2,t −reacH2,t ≤0
(Hydrogen Discharging Constraint)
(6.19)
initCO2 −CO2sto,0 + CO2min,0 −CO2max,0 ≤0
(Initial CO2 Storage)
(6.20)
CO2sto,t −CO2sto,t+1 + CO2min,t+1 −CO2max,t+1 ≤0
(CO2 Storage Balance)
(6.21)
CO2str,min −CO2str,max + CO2comp,t ≤CO2 Prices
(CO2 Purchase Constraint)
(6.22)
−compressorH2,t −reacH2,t ≤0
(Hydrogen Input to Reactor)
(6.23)
−CO2comp,t −reacCO2,t ≤0
(CO2 Input to Reactor)
(6.24)
−reacmax,t + reacmin,t + reacH2,t · α + reacCO2,t · β ≤0
(Reactor Operation Constraint) (6.25)
Page 34 of 55
==PAGE:38==
February 23, 2025
initMeOH −MeOHsto,0 + MeOHmin,0 −MeOHmax,0 ≤0
(Initial Methanol Storage)
(6.26)
−MeOHsto,t+1 + MeOHsto,t + MeOHmin,t+1 −MeOHmax,t+1 ≤0
(Methanol Storage Balance)
(6.27)
−comprMeOH,t −destrawMeOH,t ≤0
(Methanol Processing)
(6.28)
−destmax,t + destmin,t + destrawMeOH,t · ηdest ≤0
(Methanol Distillation Constraint)
(6.29)
6.2.2
Dantzig-Wolfe
Once the first decomposition method is implemented, the second one can be applied. The starting
point is the subproblem obtained from the first decomposition algorithm, which has already elim-
inated complicating variables. By further removing the complicating constraints, the resulting
subproblem can be fully decomposed into multiple independent subproblems. This transforma-
tion would allow for a more efficient solution process, maximizing the computational benefits of
decomposition techniques.
The Dantzig-Wolfe algorithm relies on the Minkowski-Weyl Theorem and column generation.
• The Minkowski-Weyl theorem states that any point within a convex polyhedron can be
expressed as a combination of its extreme points. This principle allows feasible solutions
to be represented in terms of a limited set of key points rather than handling the entire
problem at once.
• Column generation is an iterative optimization technique that starts with a restricted set of
decision variables and dynamically introduces new ones that improve the objective function.
These new variables are identified by solving a subproblem, known as the pricing problem
based on the minimum reduced cost, which finds the most promising column to be added.
The master problem is then re-optimized until no further improvement can be made.
Figure 16: Dantzig-Wolfe algorithm scheme
Page 35 of 55
==PAGE:39==
February 23, 2025
The initial approach for implementing the Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition was to create a subprob-
lem for each hour of operation. However, this proved to be highly inefficient, as the computational
overhead of managing such a vast number of subproblems outweighed the benefits of decompo-
sition. Given that the model processes over 250,000 hours, even if each subproblem took just
0.01 seconds to solve, the total runtime would still be excessively long. To address this, the
problem was instead divided into segments of 1,000 hours. This adjustment significantly reduced
the number of subproblems while maintaining fast solution times for each, striking a balance
between efficiency and computational feasibility.
Model formulation
Unlike the Benders algorithm, the Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition does not require dualizing*
the problem but instead divides the problem and strategically assigns constraints to either the
master problem or the subproblems. In this case, as previously mentioned, complicating con-
straints—such as mass balance equations and ramping constraints for the methanol production
assets—are handled within the master problem, while the subproblems are solved independently.
By removing these constraints, subproblems are grouped and solved in 1000-hour intervals, feed-
ing their solutions back to the master problem. The termination condition of the algorithm is
based on column generation and the minimum reduced cost criterion, meaning that the process
stops when the objective value of the subproblem reaches zero (or a near-zero threshold), indi-
cating that no further columns need to be generated. This ensures computational efficiency while
still achieving optimality.
Note: as it can be seen in 16, the model extract the dual variables π and κ from the Master
problem, but this does not mean that the problem has been dualized.
Master problem
The master problem incorporates a term λ that accounts for the solutions retrieved from the
subproblems.
Objective function
The objective function has already been defined in the previous subproblem. The only term that
implements this time is the element λ, which represents the combination of solutions extracted
from the subproblem.
max
X
k
λk · qk
(6.30)
Constraints
Lambda
X
k
λk = 1
(6.31)
Battery State of Charge Constraints
X
k
λk

SOCk
bat,t−1 −SOCk
bat,t + batk
min,t −batk
max,t

≤0,
∀t = 1000, 2000, ..., T
(6.32)
Page 36 of 55
==PAGE:40==
February 23, 2025
Electrolyzer Operational Constraints
X
k
λk

pk
flow,t −
k
max
elec,t +
k
min
elec,t −eleck
op,t −eleck
ramp-up,t−1
+eleck
ramp-down,t−1 + eleck
ramp-up,t −eleck
ramp-down,t

≤0,
∀t = 1000, 2000, ..., T
(6.33)
Hydrogen Storage Balance Constraints
X
k
λk

SOCk
H2,t−1 −SOCk
H2,t + H2k
min,t −H2k
max,t

≤0,
∀t = 1000, 2000, ..., T
(6.34)
CO Storage Balance Constraints
X
k
λk

SOCk
CO2,t−1 −SOCk
CO2,t + CO2k
min,t −CO2k
max,t

≤0,
∀t = 1000, 2000, ..., T
(6.35)
Methanol Reactor Constraints
X
k
λk

−
k
max
reac,t +
k
min
reac,t +Hk
2 reac,t + COk
2reac,t + Ek
reac,t + Qk
reac,t
−Reack
ramp-up,t−1 + Reack
ramp-down,t−1 + Reack
ramp-up,t
−Reack
ramp-down,t + comprk
MeOH,t

≤0,
∀t = 1000, 2000, ..., T
(6.36)
Raw Methanol Storage Balance Constraints
X
k
λk

SOCk
rawMeOH,t−1 −SOCk
rawMeOH,t
+rawMeOHk
min,t −rawMeOHk
max,t

≤0,
∀t = 1000, 2000, ..., T
(6.37)
Methanol Distillation Constraints
X
k
λk

−
k
max
dist,t +
k
min
dist,t +rawMeOHk
dist,t · η + H2Ok
dist,t + Qk
dist,t · θ + SOCk
dist,t −distk
ramp-up,t−1
+distk
ramp-down,t−1 + distk
ramp-up,t −distk
ramp-down,t

≤0,
∀t = 1000, 2000, ..., T
(6.38)
Pure Methanol Storage Balance Constraints
X
k
λk

SOCk
MeOH,t−1 −SOCk
MeOH,t + MeOHk
min,t −MeOHk
max,t

≤0,
∀t = 1000, 2000, ..., T
(6.39)
Sub problem
To sum up, the remaining subproblems retain all the equations from the original subproblem
but the ones defined in the master problem. However, since they are no longer linked by com-
plicating constraints, each subproblem can now be solved independently, significantly reducing
computational complexity.
Page 37 of 55
==PAGE:41==
February 23, 2025
7
Results
The results are based on the two model configurations, each defined by the possibility of importing
electricity from the grid. Additionally, given the large-scale nature of the model, computational
time is a critical factor. Consequently, a dedicated analysis on computational performance has
been carried out. Lastly, since decomposition techniques have been implemented, their effective-
ness and impact on performance have also been assessed.
7.1
Output production and operation of the plant
To start with, it is important to emphasize that the plant operates for a total of thirty years. How-
ever, for practical reasons, only the first year of operation is presented, as it exhibits similarities
with the subsequent years. Nonetheless, it is essential to note that simulating thirty independent
years instead of a single repeated year with typical weather data would yield different results.
This is primarily because storage systems would not have the ability to regulate across multiple
years, and the plant would not be able to compensate for fluctuations in renewable energy input
using the same asset sizing.
Since a maintenance schedule is incorporated into the model, it can be observed that the plant
shuts down approximately between hour 4500 and 5000. This is a cyclical condition, meaning
that every year, the plant is forced to shut down during this period.
Model configuration with grid connection
The first three plots represent the outputs of assets directly involved in methanol production.
At first sight, the graphs may appear almost identical, but they differ in the variation of their
operational points. As a reminder, the ramp rates of the electrolyzer, reactor, and distillation
column are 100%, 50%, and 20% per hour, respectively.
Therefore, it can be seen that the
electrolyzer and reactor frequently adjust their operational points, while the distillation column
remains relatively stable.
Another key reason for this variability is that both the electrolyzer and the reactor are influenced
by renewable energy production, whereas the distillation column is not. Although all these assets
have storage systems before their operation, only raw methanol storage provides enough buffering
capacity to stabilize the distillation column’s operation point. In contrast, battery and hydrogen
storage do not have sufficient capacity to fully stabilize the operation of the electrolyzer and
reactor. In theory, grid electricity could provide a stable energy supply, reducing the variability
in operational points. However, as will be explained further, relying on the grid would significantly
increase costs, making it an economically unfavorable option.
Figure 17: First year of hourly hydrogen production with grid connection
Page 38 of 55
==PAGE:42==
February 23, 2025
Figure 18: First year of hourly raw methanol production
Figure 19: First year of hourly pure methanol production
Related to the import of electricity and CO2, a clear correlation can be observed between both
graphs. This correlation is directly linked to the operational level of the plant. When the plant
has ample renewable energy supply from the solar and wind farms, its operational point reaches
its maximum, leading to a higher CO2 intake from the available stream. In these conditions,
there is no need to purchase electricity from the grid, as the locally produced renewable energy
is sufficient to sustain operations.
Conversely, when renewable energy production is low, the model prefers to reduce the opera-
tional level to optimize efficiency. However, since the plant must maintain minimum operational
points and fulfill the required methanol demand, grid electricity imports become necessary. This
results in a lower CO2 intake, as the plant does not operate at full capacity, reflecting the direct
relationship between CO2 import and electricity availability.
Finally, the variation in the state of charge of different storage systems is directly influenced
by the previous trends observed in electricity and CO2 imports. The relationship between CO2
imported from the CHP plant and the CO2 stored becomes particularly intuitive. When the
CO2 flow from the stream reaches its maximum value, the state of charge of the CO2 storage
decreases. This occurs because the reactor is operating at a high point, demanding large amounts
of CO2 to sustain methanol production.
Page 39 of 55
==PAGE:43==
February 23, 2025
Figure 20: First year of hourly electricity imported from the grid
Figure 21: First year of hourly CO2 stream from the CHP plant
Another notable observation is that the CO2 storage and raw methanol storage behave as mir-
rored systems. As previously discussed, when the reactor operates at a high point, CO2 storage
is being depleted, while raw methanol storage is being filled. This reflects the natural flow of
materials within the system, where increased reactor operation results in higher methanol pro-
duction and higher CO2 consumption.
Lastly, the pure methanol storage exhibits more stable variations compared to other storage
systems.
This is because it is primarily responsible for continuously supplying the methanol
demand, while its replenishment depends on the distillation column, which operates at a steady
level. The more stable operation of the distillation process ensures that pure methanol storage
follows a smooth and predictable pattern, unlike the more dynamic variations observed in CO2
and raw methanol storage.
Figure 22: State of charge of the CO2 storage
Page 40 of 55
==PAGE:44==
February 23, 2025
Figure 23: State of charge of the raw methanol storage
Figure 24: State of charge of the pure methanol storage
Model configuration with no grid connection
The model with no grid connection is entirely constrained by the minimum operational point,
making this factor the primary driver of all results. As shown below, in order to meet the minimum
operational point requirements, electricity production must be oversized. Consequently, there is
an abundance of electricity during most hours, as excess energy cannot be sold back to the grid.
Due to these constraints, the assets directly involved in methanol production are sized to the
minimum required capacity while being forced to operate at the highest possible utilization rate.
Unlike the previous configuration, where production assets may have operated at varying levels,
in this case, all methanol production assets operate simultaneously to ensure the plant meets its
production requirements despite the limited energy flexibility.
Figure 25: First year hourly production of elements directly involved with methanol
Page 41 of 55
==PAGE:45==
February 23, 2025
Contrary to the model configuration with grid connection, in this scenario, there is no advantage
in continuously adjusting the operational point of the reactor or in varying the CO2 stream
flow from the CHP plant. Since the plant must operate within its minimum constraints and
cannot rely on external electricity sources, maintaining a steady operational profile becomes the
most efficient approach. As a result, the stability of methanol production assets directly impacts
the feedstock purchase strategy. With fewer fluctuations in production levels, CO2 and hydrogen
consumption remain more consistent, leading to a more predictable and stable feedstock demand.
Figure 26: First year of hourly CO2 stream from the CHP plant no grid connection
The behavior of the battery may not seem immediately intuitive, but upon closer examination,
there is a clear rationale behind it. Given that the model has an excess of electricity and operates
with perfect foresight, there is no need to keep the battery fully charged at all times. Instead,
when additional electricity is required, the model charges the battery in the preceding hours and
then discharges it as needed. As a result, the battery remains at approximately 50% charge for
most of the time, optimizing its utilization without unnecessary storage.
Similar to the previous model configuration, the CO2 purchased from the CHP plant is correlated
with the battery operation. It can be observed that battery discharges coincide with periods
where the CO2 stream reaches its minimum value, indicating that methanol production is at its
lowest during these moments. This relationship suggests that the battery plays a crucial role in
balancing fluctuations in methanol production, ensuring that the energy supply is aligned with
the availability of feedstock.
Figure 27: First year of hourly battery operation
Finally, in concordance with the previous observations, storage assets exhibit a more stable vari-
ation compared to the model configuration with grid connection.
This behavior aligns with
expectations, as the state of charge of the storages is directly dependent on the operation of the
production assets. With no external electricity imports, the system is forced to operate within
its own energy balance, leading to less fluctuation in storage levels.
Page 42 of 55
==PAGE:46==
February 23, 2025
It is also worth noting that this model configuration includes a significant hydrogen storage
capacity, which plays a role in supporting the battery to ensure compliance with the minimum
operational point constraint.
The hydrogen storage serves as an additional buffer, providing
flexibility to maintain steady methanol production, particularly when renewable generation is
not sufficient to meet demand directly.
Figure 28: Combined state of charge of the storages with no grid connection
7.2
Comparison of the two model configurations
To begin with, the initial comparison focuses on the objective values, which represent the to-
tal cost across different model configurations. One of the most significant observations is that
allowing electricity imports from the grid nearly doubles the total cost of the model.
Figure 29: Comparison of costs for every model configuration
In this context, the cost difference primarily stems from the grid connection, which plays a
crucial role in balancing peak demand and compensating for electricity shortages during scarcity
hours. Without grid access, the reliance on energy storage solutions becomes more significant, di-
rectly impacting the total system cost. Due to the necessity of maintaining minimum operational
points, the model must oversize renewable generation assets to ensure a continuous energy supply.
Without grid connections, situations where neither wind nor solar produce electricity—commonly
referred to as dunkelflaute—become a critical cost driver for the total investment. In such cases,
the model must compensate for prolonged periods of low renewable generation, requiring larger
Page 43 of 55
==PAGE:47==
February 23, 2025
energy storage capacities and over-dimensioned renewable assets, significantly increasing overall
costs.
Regarding variable renewable generation, it is noteworthy that solar and wind capacity remain
approximately the same across both model configurations. Although the offshore wind farm has
a capacity factor nearly three times higher than that of the solar farm, its cost is approximately
five times greater. Despite this cost disparity, the model continues to invest in wind genera-
tion, as the methanol plant operates continuously, including nighttime hours, when solar energy
is unavailable. Furthermore, the difference between solar and wind capacity becomes less pro-
nounced because the configurations account for maintenance periods. This is due to the fact that
maintenance is scheduled during summer, when daylight hours are at their highest, reducing the
reliance on solar energy and making wind energy a more critical source to sustain operations.
As a result, the model prioritizes wind capacity in these configurations, ensuring a stable energy
supply throughout the year.
Figure 30: Comparison of capacities of the assets. Blue grid connection. Green no grid connection
The size of the assets directly involved in methanol production, such as the electrolyzer, reactor,
and distillation column, is significantly larger in models that include maintenance periods. This
is because these assets must compensate for downtime by increasing production within a shorter
operational window. In contrast, when electricity imports from the grid are not allowed, the asset
sizes tend to be smaller. This reduction occurs due to the greater investment in battery storage,
which stabilizes the energy supply. As a result, production assets can operate at a more stable
and optimized level, reducing the need for oversized capacity.
Storage capacities vary significantly depending on the model configuration. In general, the model
tends to oversize storage assets to increase operational flexibility. However, it is important to
note that the model is driven solely by the objective value, meaning it always seeks the most
cost-effective configuration to achieve the minimum total cost. Examining the cost distribution
in graph XXX, it is evident that the costs associated with storage assets are nearly negligible.
The primary reason storage capacities are not even larger is that the model derives no additional
economic benefit from further expansion. As a result, storage investment is optimized purely
based on cost-efficiency, rather than any inherent preference for larger capacities.
Page 44 of 55
==PAGE:48==
February 23, 2025
Figure 31: Cost distribution for both model configurations
Cost distribution
In order to analyze how the model allocates investments, the distribution of costs can be catego-
rized into four main groups.
1. The first group represents the costs associated with electricity production, which account
for 56% and 74% respectively of the total investment. This includes expenses related to
the wind farm, solar farm, and electricity purchases from the grid. Among all categories,
this group has the largest optimization potential, as electricity production offers multiple
alternatives that the model can adjust to minimize costs.
2. The second group consists of CO2 costs, which remain constant across all model configura-
tions. The reason behind this is that CO2 is supplied as a fixed-price stream, meaning the
model cannot optimize or reduce its cost. The expense associated with CO2 represents be-
tween 9% and 16% of the total investment, making it a significant but inflexible component
of the cost structure.
3. The third group includes the assets directly involved in methanol production, specifically
the electrolyzer, reactor, and distillation column. The size and cost of these assets vary
depending on the model configuration, particularly in relation to electricity availability. In
scenarios without grid connection, these assets tend to be smaller, as the system prioritizes
energy stability over maximizing production capacity. The total cost of this category ranges
between 12% and 26% of the total investment.
4. The fourth and final group consists of the five storage assets considered in the model. One
of the most striking observations is that storage costs are almost negligible compared to
the overall investment. As a result, the model tends to oversize storage assets without
significant financial implications. The total cost of storage systems can reach up to 5% of
the total investment, depending on the specific model configuration.
Distribution of electricity production
To start with, when analyzing energy production, it is evident that, given the same installed
capacity for wind and solar, and considering that wind has a capacity factor approximately three
times higher than solar, the relationship between their total electricity generation follows a similar
pattern. However, a key observation is the significance of electricity purchased from the grid in
the overall energy mix.
A particularly notable comparison is between solar-generated electricity and grid-purchased elec-
tricity. The total electricity produced by solar farms is around four to five times higher than the
Page 45 of 55
==PAGE:49==
February 23, 2025
electricity imported from the grid. However, when comparing costs, it becomes clear that the
total investment in solar panels is similar than the total cost of electricity purchased from the
grid.
This finding emphasizes the economic impact of grid reliance, as continuously purchasing elec-
tricity can result in higher long-term expenses compared to an upfront investment in renewable
assets. The following section presents a breakdown of electricity costs from different sources,
further highlighting the financial trade-offs between on-site generation and grid dependency.
Source
LCOE
Wind
483 €/MWh
Solar
332 €/MWh
Grid
1440 €/MWh
Table 13: Levelized Cost Of Electricity
This this leads to two main conclusions:
• Electricity produced by the solar panels can be up to four times lower than the one pro-
ceeding from the grid.
• The cost of electricity availability can be extremely high when it is required, and therefore,
the model cannot cut down in expenses related to this point.
Figure 32: Source of electricity production across model configurations
Distribution of electricity consumption
Regarding energy consumption, two key aspects should be highlighted:
• First and foremost, the vast majority of electricity is consumed by the electrolyzer. Other
demands, such as heating and desalination, become negligible in comparison to the energy
required for hydrogen production. Given this, in a large-scale model or further analyses,
these smaller energy demands could be omitted without significantly affecting the overall
results.
• The second important point is the amount of electricity that must be curtailed, as selling
electricity back to the grid is not permitted in this model.
It can be observed that in
configurations where no grid connection is considered, the curtailed electricity can reach up
to two-thirds of the total production. Additionally, grid imports also influence electricity
curtailment. Since the methanol plant must meet a constant demand every hour, electricity
production assets must be oversized to ensure reliability. As a result, during periods of
maximum production, an extremely amount of excess electricity is wasted.
Page 46 of 55
==PAGE:50==
February 23, 2025
Figure 33: Electricity consumption across model configurations
7.3
Levelized Cost of Methanol (LCOM)
LCOM represents the total cost of producing methanol over the lifetime of a plant. It is calculated
using the following formula:
LCOM =
P Total Costs(CAPEX + OPEX + Feedstock + Energy)
P Total Methanol Produced Over Lifetime
(7.1)
Since four different model configurations have been implemented, four different LCOM values
have been obtained. It is important to note that the total methanol produced over time also
needs to be annualized.
Grid connection
No Grid connection
LCOM (€/ton)
1387
2558
Table 14: Levelized Cost of Methanol (LCOM) for Different Model Configurations
Validation of results
After accounting the LCOM, next step is to compare results with external sources and analyze
if they are realistic and feasible.
Hence, validation has been based on two different sources.
These surces are IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency)[34] and the Royal Society of
Chemistry[35]. Thus, the LCOM that these sources apport are reflected in the following table:
IRENA
RS of Chemistry
LCOM (€/ton)
760 - 1540*
600 – 680
Table 15: Levelized Cost of Methanol (LCOM) based on literature
*Note: currency conversion has been applied by 0.95€ corresponding to 1 USD.
It is worth mentioning that, according to IRENA, the current production cost of e-methanol
is estimated to be in the range of USD 800-1,600 per ton, assuming that CO2 is sourced from
BECCS at a cost of 10-50 USD per ton.
For the Royal Society of Chemistry, the adopted assumption has been based on a Levelized Cost
of Electricity (LCOE) in the range of 94–107 € per MWh.
Based on these results, the model configuration aligns with IRENA’s estimated cost range, sug-
gesting that the assumptions made for CO2 sourcing and electricity costs are consistent with
global projections. However, the model does not fall within the cost range proposed by the Royal
Page 47 of 55
==PAGE:51==
February 23, 2025
Society of Chemistry, likely due to differences in assumed electricity prices or additional cost fac-
tors considered in the study. Additionally, the configuration without grid connection significantly
exceeds these cost estimates, primarily due to the higher capital expenditure required for over-
sized renewable generation and storage assets to ensure continuous operation without external
electricity imports.
7.4
Results related to decomposition techniques
To begin with, the implementation of the full algorithm, incorporating both decomposition tech-
niques, was unsuccessful. To address this issue, an analysis was conducted, as the real issue
would have been failing to identify the root cause of the failure. The immediate reason for the
error was that the CPU ran out of memory, causing the process to stop. This occurred because
the Master problem in the Dantzig-Wolfe algorithm accumulated too many constraints without
making sufficient progress.
Upon deeper analysis, it was determined that the issue stemmed
from the state of charge (SOC) constraint of the storage systems 6.1. The equality constraint
enforced identical SOC values in both subproblems at the points where they were linked in the
master problem. However, due to precision limitations, the SOC values never matched exactly,
preventing the model from converging. Following this realization, it was decided to proceed with
an alternative decomposition approach. While it was demonstrated that Dantzig-Wolfe was not
effective, this did not rule out the possibility that Benders decomposition could still prove to be
a viable solution.
The results for Benders decomposition were different from another nature than those of Dantzig-
Wolfe. The main issue with this approach was the long running times. Since the subproblem
could not be further divided into smaller parts, the algorithm ended up with a small Master
problem — which is desired — but a very large subproblem. As a result, solving the subproblem
took longer than expected. It is also important to note that Benders subproblems must be solved
to optimality. If they were not, the solutions they provide would not help improve the Master
problem’s solution, making the whole process ineffective.
When solving the problem on the same laptop used for the original implementation, the simu-
lation continued running for more than four days without reaching a final solution. Although
the solution was improving with each iteration, the progress was not fast enough. As a result,
a larger computing system was required. Utilizing the university’s supercomputer, the problem
was running within the 24-hour time limit imposed by the system. It is important to note that
the algorithm allows for stopping and resuming from the last iteration if needed. However, this
was not considered necessary in this case. Instead, to demonstrate the full implementation of the
model, a one-year simulation was conducted, having scaled electricity and CO2 prices over the
running period. The results provide insights into the evolution of the assets, as well as the upper
and lower bounds of the solution. As a note, the asset sizes are represented in per-unit values,
meaning that the values shown indicate the ratio between the actual asset size and its maximum
possible capacity.
In the first two graphs, the results from the initial XX iterations are presented. It can be observed
that the solution continuously improves after each iteration, as expected. One key observation
is that, at the beginning, the model prioritizes maximizing the size of the storage assets without
initially considering the need to invest in assets directly involved in methanol production. This
behavior suggests that the algorithm first seeks to increase storage capacity before optimizing
the overall system investment strategy.
Page 48 of 55
==PAGE:52==
February 23, 2025
Figure 34: Evolution of the asset sizes for the whole model
Figure 35: Lower bound evolution for the whole model
During the execution of the algorithm, the model initially prioritizes upgrading storage assets.
This is because, at the start, the model takes a myopic approach, where investing in storage
provides a quick solution to meet demand, given that storage assets begin at 50% capacity.
After several iterations, the model recognizes the need to invest in assets directly related to
methanol production since it is also required to maintain storage at 50% capacity at the end of
the simulation period. Finally, the model shifts its focus toward investing in electricity generation
capacity. Initially, it relies entirely on electricity from the grid, but over time, it determines that
this is not the most effective strategy and allocates resources to energy assets to improve efficiency
and reduce dependency on external electricity sources.
Page 49 of 55
==PAGE:53==
February 23, 2025
Figure 36: Evolution of the asset sizes for the one-year model
Figure 37: Evolution of the storage asset sizes for the one-year model
Figure 38: Bounds evolution for the one-year model
Page 50 of 55
==PAGE:54==
February 23, 2025
In the bounds evolution graph, it is intuitive to see how the lower bound — defined by the mas-
ter problem — starts at zero. This occurs because, in the first iteration, the master problem is
unconstrained, leading to a minimum objective value where all asset capacities are set to zero.
With each iteration, as constraints are added and asset capacities are adjusted, the lower bound
increases. On the other hand, the upper bound is determined by the subproblem, which is a
maximization problem. During the first few iterations, the subproblem remains infeasible, pre-
venting the definition of an upper bound. However, after a few iterations, the assets grow large
enough to make the subproblem feasible, allowing it to provide a valid upper bound.
Lastly, an interesting observation is that forcing a minimum asset size does not provide any
benefit. Before solving the problem, an initial estimation suggested that a minimum capacity
for methanol production assets — such as the electrolyzer, reactor, and distillation column —
would be necessary. However, implementing this constraint did not improve the solution. The
model still followed the same investment pattern, first prioritizing storage assets before expanding
production-related capacities.
More importantly, the number of iterations required to reach
optimality remained nearly the same, indicating that adding a minimum capacity constraint did
not significantly impact the convergence behavior.
7.5
Computational values
The original model is composed by 16,829,961 rows, 9,466,858 columns and 42,995,302 non-zeros,
where the rows represent constraints, the columns correspond to variables, and the non-zero val-
ues represent the elements within the entire model. The solution process took approximately
between 1.5 to 2 hours.
The model was solved using a laptop with the following properties:
CPU model:
Intel(R)
Core(TM) i7-8550U CPU @ 1.80GHz, instruction set [SSE2|AVX|AVX2] Thread count: 4 physi-
cal cores, 8 logical processors, using up to 8 threads.
The Benders decomposition model run for 24 hours in DTU’s supercomputer with the follow-
ing properties: CPU model: Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2660 v3 @ 2.60GHz, instruction set
[SSE2|AVX|AVX2] Thread count: 20 physical cores, 20 logical processors, using up to 20 threads.
Page 51 of 55
==PAGE:55==
February 23, 2025
8
Sensitivity analysis
In order to assess the relevance of different parameters in the model, sensitivity analyses must
be performed. These analyses focus on factors that exhibit high variability or uncertainty while
also being critical to the model’s outcomes.
For this study, the impact of grid connection and electricity prices has been analyzed, as both
factors directly influence the overall system cost and operational feasibility. The grid connection
determines whether the plant can import electricity, affecting renewable asset sizing and storage
requirements. Meanwhile, electricity prices are subject to market fluctuations and policy changes,
making them a key driver of production costs.
By conducting sensitivity analyses on these parameters, the study aims to quantify their impact
on the model’s economic performance and identify potential cost optimization strategies.
8.1
Grid connection
As demonstrated above, the possibility of importing electricity from the grid is a key driver of
the model’s economic performance. Among the two analyzed configurations, it has been shown
that not establishing a constant flow of electricity is compensated by oversizing renewable gen-
eration assets. This trade-off highlights how the absence of grid access leads to higher capital
expenditures in local generation and storage.
However, what has not yet been analyzed is the maximum grid import capacity required to
stabilize costs without significantly increasing the total investment. To assess this, grid connection
has been progressively constrained using various limiting parameters, allowing for an evaluation
of its implications and correlation with the overall investment cost of the model. This analysis
helps determine an optimal grid import capacity, balancing cost efficiency and system reliability.
The grid variation has been assessed in increments of 10 MW, allowing for a detailed evaluation
of its impact on total system costs and operational efficiency.
Figure 39: Comparison between maximum electricity import from the grid and total investment
cost
Page 52 of 55
==PAGE:56==
February 23, 2025
From the results observed in the graph above, it can be noted that the curve remains flat for grid
import limits above 30 MW. This indicates that strengthening the grid connection beyond this
threshold does not provide significant additional benefits, as instances where electricity imports
exceed this value are rare. In other words, further increasing grid capacity would not substantially
reduce total investment costs, as the model does not frequently require imports beyond this level.
Additionally, a comparison can be made between the maximum electricity imported from the
grid and the size of the electrolyzer, which represents the maximum electricity demand of the
system. The electrolyzer capacity is approximately 120 MW, with small variations depending on
the grid limit. Based on this, it can be inferred that a reasonable assumption for grid connection
capacity should be at least one-fourth of the electrolyzer capacity. Furthermore, it is important
to recall that the minimum operational point of the electrolyzer is 15% of its total capacity, which
corresponds to an hourly electricity consumption of approximately 18 MW. This reinforces the
idea that a grid connection limit significantly below one-third of the electrolyzer capacity could
introduce operational constraints, while higher values may offer limited economic advantages.
8.2
Electricity prices
To assess the impact of average electricity prices on the model, a sensitivity analysis was conducted
by modifying the input electricity price data using a scaling factor. The analysis focused on the
energy generation sector, as this was the most affected area. The results were evaluated based
on changes in overall investment cost, wind capacity, and solar capacity, with comparisons made
against the base case (no price variation).
The results indicate that the impact of electricity price variation is asymmetrical. A 25% re-
duction in electricity prices caused a greater variation in investment decisions compared to a
25% increase. The reason behind this is that lower electricity prices encouraged the model to
reduce investments in renewable generation assets, reallocating capital toward purchasing more
electricity from the grid. Conversely, an increase in electricity prices had a limited impact on
total investment, as the model maintained a similar asset allocation strategy.
In the most extreme scenario—where electricity prices were doubled—the total investment cost
increased by only 4%, suggesting that electricity price levels do not strongly influence the model’s
overall cost structure. Instead, the availability of grid electricity plays a more crucial role in
determining investment decisions.
Overall, the findings show that generation asset sizes change more significantly when electricity
prices decrease by 25% than when they increase by 100%, implying that the model is robust to
electricity price volatility.
Figure 40: Comparison between electricity prices variation with base case model
Page 53 of 55
==PAGE:57==
February 23, 2025
9
Limitations and possible improvements
To critically evaluate the assumptions made in the model, an analysis of its limitations and
possible improvements has been conducted. The most relevant points are outlined below:
1. Perfect Forecast Over 30 Years
The model assumes perfect knowledge of future conditions, as input data remains unchanged
over time.
Improvement: Introduce stochastic optimization and scenario-based projections to ac-
count for uncertainty and long-term variability.
2. No Correlation in Electricity Prices
The model treats electricity prices as independent variables, unrelated to wind and solar
generation.
Improvement: Implement time series analysis to establish correlations between electricity
prices and renewable generation for a more realistic approach.
3. Uncertainty in Offshore Wind Costs
Due to market fluctuations and evolving technology, offshore wind costs can vary signifi-
cantly.
Improvement: Conduct a detailed cost analysis incorporating current market trends and
project-specific conditions.
4. Solar Capacity Does Not Consider Land Cost and Space Availability
Land requirements for solar installations are not factored into the model, potentially un-
derestimating real-world constraints.
Improvement: Include land cost and spatial availability constraints when modeling solar
capacity.
5. CO2 Cost Variability
CO2 costs lack a well-defined market, leading to large uncertainties depending on the source.
Improvement: Study existing projects to obtain more accurate cost estimates for CO2 as
a feedstock.
6. Oversized Storage Capacity
Due to its relatively low cost compared to the overall system, storage tends to be oversized
in the model.
Improvement: Introduce space availability constraints to prevent unrealistic storage ex-
pansion.
7. Fixed and Uncertain Demand
The model assumes a fixed demand, despite the uncertainty in the future methanol market
due to political and economic factors.
Improvement: Implement scenario-based demand forecasting to account for policy changes
and market development.
8. Simplifications in Asset Operation
The model does not consider efficiency variations across different operational points, leading
to simplified performance assumptions.
Improvement: Increase model complexity by incorporating operational efficiency curves,
if computationally feasible.
9. Simplified Asset Investment Costs
Investment costs are modeled as solely dependent on asset size, without considering feasi-
bility constraints or real-world construction costs.
Improvement: Perform detailed feasibility studies to refine asset investment cost assump-
tions.
Page 54 of 55
==PAGE:58==
February 23, 2025
10
Conclusion
The study successfully developed an optimization model to determine the optimal sizing of assets
for a methanol production plant. The largest share of the investment (56% to 74%) was allocated
to electricity production, with wind and solar capacities remaining similar across model configu-
rations.
The application of Benders and Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition techniques was explored. While
Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition faced infeasibility issues due to State of Charge (SOC) constraints
in storages, Benders decomposition proved to be a feasible approach but required high com-
putational effort. Furthermore, Benders decomposition could become more advantageous when
stochastic optimization is introduced, as the problem would naturally decompose into multiple
subproblems, enhancing computational efficiency and scalability.
In the grid-connected model configuration, approximately 12% of the produced electricity is cur-
tailed, whereas in the off-grid configuration, nearly 66% of the generated electricity needed to
be curtailed. This significant difference highlights the inefficiency of excess renewable energy
production in an off-grid scenario, where the inability to sell surplus electricity or optimize its
usage leads to substantial energy wastage.
A key finding was that grid electricity availability significantly affects cost minimization. In sce-
narios where grid imports were restricted, the model had to oversize renewable generation assets,
leading to higher capital investments. A sensitivity analysis revealed that a minimum grid con-
nection of 30 MW is recommended, as further increasing the grid import capacity beyond this
value did not provide additional benefits.
It was revealed through a sensitivity analysis that electricity price variations have a limited im-
pact on total investment costs, with grid availability playing a more crucial role. A 25% price
reduction led to greater shifts in investment than a 100% increase, as lower prices encouraged
grid reliance over renewable investments. Even when electricity prices doubled, total investment
costs rose by only 4%, suggesting that the model is robust to price volatility, with grid access
being a stronger determinant of cost efficiency.
When determining optimal asset sizing, the model avoided investments in hydrogen storage tanks
and Na-Cl batteries due to their high cost relative to their benefits. Additionally, auxiliary equip-
ment such as the desalinator, heater, and compressor had minimal influence on the model’s per-
formance. To reduce computational complexity, these components could be excluded from future
model implementations.
Finally, the Levelized Cost of Methanol (LCOM) calculated by the model aligns with external
sources such as IRENA. The results indicate that LCOM depends strongly on grid connection
availability, with values of 1387 €/ton for grid-connected configurations and 2558 €/ton for off-
grid configurations. These findings reinforce the feasibility of large-scale methanol production as
a viable pathway for decarbonization, adding hope that sustainable fuels can play a key role in
the green transition and a cleaner future for the maritime sector.
Page 55 of 55
==PAGE:59==
February 23, 2025
References
[1]
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. “Key Aspects of the Paris
Agreement”. In: (). url: https://unfccc.int/most-requested/key-aspects-of-the-
paris-agreement.
[2]
International Maritime Organization. Fourth IMO GHG study 2020. International Maritime
Organization, 2020.
[3]
International Chamber of Shipping. Reducing CO2 emissions to zero: the ‘Paris Agreement
for Shipping’. International Chamber of Shipping, 2018.
[4]
International Maritime Organization. Resolution MEPC.304(72). International Maritime
Organization, 2018.
[5]
A.P. Moller - Maersk. “A.P. Moller - Maersk accelerates net-zero emission targets to 2040
and sets milestone 2030 targets”. In: (2022). url: https : / / www . maersk . com / news /
articles/2022/01/12/apmm-accelerates-net-zero-emission-targets-to-2040-and-
sets-milestone-2030-targets.
[6]
Reuters. “Container shippers hedging green transition with dual-fuel vessel orders”. In:
(2023). url: https://www.reuters.com/sustainability/climate-energy/container-
shippers-hedging-green-transition-with-dual-fuel-vessel-orders-2024-11-21/.
[7]
Nicolas Campion et al. “Techno-economic assessment of green ammonia production with
different wind and solar potentials”. en. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
173 (Mar. 2023), p. 113057. issn: 13640321. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2022.113057. url:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1364032122009388 (visited on
02/23/2025).
[8]
Simone Mucci, Alexander Mitsos, and Dominik Bongartz. “Cost-optimal Power-to-Methanol:
Flexible operation or intermediate storage?” en. In: Journal of Energy Storage 72 (Nov.
2023), p. 108614. issn: 2352152X. doi: 10.1016/j.est.2023.108614. url: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2352152X2302011X (visited on 02/21/2025).
[9]
Wärtsilä. “Methanol Engines: A Sustainable Fuel Solution for Maritime Applications”. In:
(2023). url: https://www.wartsila.com/marine/products/engines-and-generating-
sets/methanol-engines.
[10]
Georgia Voniati et al. “Ammonia as a Marine Fuel towards Decarbonization: Emission
Control Challenges”. en. In: Sustainability 15.21 (Nov. 2023), p. 15565. issn: 2071-1050.
doi: 10.3390/su152115565. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/15/21/15565
(visited on 02/23/2025).
[11]
K. Machaj et al. “Ammonia as a potential marine fuel: A review”. en. In: Energy Strategy
Reviews 44 (Nov. 2022), p. 100926. issn: 2211467X. doi: 10.1016/j.esr.2022.100926.
url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2211467X22001201 (visited on
02/23/2025).
[12]
ACS Publications. “Carbon Capture for Methanol Production: Enabling a Circular Carbon
Economy”. In: Energy & Fuels (2022). url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.2c00620.
[13]
The Guardian. “Denmark Showing the World What is Possible with North Sea Green
Power Plant”. In: (2025). url: https://www.theguardian.com/delivering-the-energy-
transition/2025/feb/04/denmark- showing- world- possible- north- sea- green-
power-plant-europe.
[14]
Statista. “Forecasted Supply of Methanol as Fuel in the Shipping Industry”. In: (2024).
url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1367302/forecasted-supply-methanol-
fuel-shipping-industry/.
==PAGE:60==
February 23, 2025
[15]
INRIA. “Efficient Optimization of Large-Scale Systems Using Decomposition Methods”. In:
(2022). url: https://inria.hal.science/hal-03521369v1/document.
[16]
Rodolphe Griset et al. “Combining Dantzig-Wolfe and Benders decompositions to solve
a large-scale nuclear outage planning problem”. en. In: European Journal of Operational
Research 298.3 (May 2022), pp. 1067–1083. issn: 03772217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2021.
07.018. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0377221721006135
(visited on 02/23/2025).
[17]
A. Zakaria et al. “Uncertainty models for stochastic optimization in renewable energy ap-
plications”. en. In: Renewable Energy 145 (Jan. 2020), pp. 1543–1571. issn: 09601481. doi:
10.1016/j.renene.2019.07.081. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0960148119311012 (visited on 02/23/2025).
[18]
Antonio Frangioni and Bernard Gendron. “A stabilized structured Dantzig–Wolfe decom-
position method”. en. In: Mathematical Programming 140.1 (Aug. 2013), pp. 45–76. issn:
0025-5610, 1436-4646. doi: 10.1007/s10107-012-0626-8. url: http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/s10107-012-0626-8 (visited on 02/23/2025).
[19]
Gregor Erbach and Sara Svensson. EU rules for renewable hydrogen. Apr. 2023. url: https:
//www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2023/747085/EPRS_BRI(2023)
747085_EN.pdf.
[20]
S&P Global. “Ørsted Scraps Swedish FlagshipONE E-Methanol Project”. In: (2024). url:
https://www.spglobal.com/commodity-insights/en/news-research/latest-news/
energy - transition / 081524 - orsted - scraps - swedish - flagshipone - e - methanol -
project-under-development.
[21]
Industry Decarbonization. “The Canceled Swedish E-Methanol Factory May Rise from the
Ashes”. In: (2024). url: https://industrydecarbonization.com/news/the-canceled-
swedish-e-methanol-factory-may-rise-from-the-ashes.html.
[22]
Ørsted. “Ørsted Partners with Liquid Wind and Expands Presence in Green Fuels”. In:
(2022). url: https://orsted.com/en/media/news/2022/01/orsted-partners-with-
liquid-wind-and-expands-presence-in-green-fuels-with.
[23]
Jingbo Wang et al. “Water electrolyzer operation scheduling for green hydrogen production:
A review”. en. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 203 (Oct. 2024), p. 114779.
issn: 13640321. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . rser . 2024 . 114779. url: https : / / linkinghub .
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1364032124005057 (visited on 02/21/2025).
[24]
Megavind. “LCOE Model Guidelines and Documentation”. In: (2020). url: https : / /
hvlopen.brage.unit.no/hvlopen-xmlui/bitstream/handle/11250/2679327/Megavind%
20LCOE%20Model%20Guidelines%20and%20documentations.pdf?sequence=2.
[25]
Danish Energy Agency. “Offshore Wind Potential in the North Sea”. In: (2024). url: https:
//ens.dk/media/2414/download.
[26]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data for Generation of Electricity and District Heating.
Apr. 2024. url: https://ens.dk/en/analyses-and-statistics/technology-data-
generation-electricity-and-district-heating.
[27]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data for Energy Storage. Sept. 2018. url: https :
//ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/technology-data/technology-
data-energy-storage.
[28]
Donald R. Woods. Rules of thumb in engineering practice. eng. Chichester: John Wiley
[distributor], 2007. isbn: 978-3-527-31220-7 978-3-527-61112-6 978-3-527-61111-9. doi: 10.
1002/9783527611119.
[29]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data for Carbon Capture, Transport and Storage. Nov.
2021. url: https://ens.dk/en/analyses-and-statistics/technology-data-carbon-
capture-transport-and-storage.
==PAGE:61==
February 23, 2025
[30]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data for Renewable Fuels. Sept. 2018. url: https:
//ens.dk/en/analyses-and-statistics/technology-data-renewable-fuels.
[31]
Eurostat. Consumer Prices - Inflation. url: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php?title=Consumer_prices_-_inflation.
[32]
Danish Energy Agency. “The Danish Levelized Cost of Energy Calculator”. In: (2024). url:
https://ens.dk/media/5653/download.
[33]
S. Jalal Kazempour and Antonio J. Conejo. “Strategic Generation Investment Under Un-
certainty Via Benders Decomposition”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 27.1 (Feb.
2012), pp. 424–432. issn: 0885-8950, 1558-0679. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2011.2159251. url:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5937035/ (visited on 02/22/2025).
[34]
Seungwoo Kang et al. Innovation outlook: renewable methanol. eng. Ed. by Dolf Gielen and
Greg Dolan. Abu Dhabi: International Renewable Energy Agency, 2021. isbn: 978-92-9260-
320-5.
[35]
Fangfang Li et al. “Energy, Cost, and Environmental Assessments of Methanol Production
via Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 from Biosyngas”. en. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry
& Engineering 11.7 (Feb. 2023), pp. 2810–2818. issn: 2168-0485, 2168-0485. doi: 10.1021/
acssuschemeng.2c05968. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acssuschemeng.
2c05968 (visited on 02/21/2025).
