==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
An Investigation of Phosphate anion adsorption
on Platinum and Platinum Alloy Catalyst
surfaces and the effect on the kinetics of oxygen
reduction
Master Thesis
Nanna Breinbjerg
s183882
Supervisor
Associate Professor Yang Hu
Co-supervisor
PHD Student Lisa Maria Seidl
Professor Qingfeng Li
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this study a conventional half-cell RDE set-up was used to study the adsorption of phosphate anions
to the surface of three electrocatalysts and the effects on the oxygen reduction reaction. The catalysts
in question where Platinum, Platinum-Cobalt and Platinum(V)Neodymium. The catalyst surfaces were
studied in four different testing environments namly 0.1 M HClO4, 0.1 M H3PO4 and 2.0 M H3PO4 at
room temperature and at 60 oC. Surface trends where studied by reviewing the cyclovoltammogram
of the surface in argon saturated electrolyte and the correlation between the catalyst’s resistance to
phosphate anion adsorption and oxygen reduction activity was studied by comparing the Tafel plots
of the kinetic data from the oxygen reduction. All catalyst showed 10 fold decrease in the activity in
phosphoric acid and a oxidation of phosphorous acid was observed in the cyclovoltammograms which
increased with increasing temperature.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgment
This thesis was greatly influenced by the expertize and intelligence of Associate Professor Yang Hu
and PHD student Lisa Marie Seidl. To Assoc. Prof. Yang Hu I would like to express my sincere appreci-
ation for the honest feedback on my progress and the ready availability of your academic experience and
ability. I would also like to thank him for giving me the opportunity to make this thesis within his excel-
lent group at the Department of Energy Conversion and Storage. TEM images and size measurements
of the Platinum and Platinum-Cobalt catalyst were provided by Assoc. Prof. Yang Hu as well.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Lisa Seidl and say thank you for the continuous encour-
agement and support throughout this project. Lisa Seild also provided assistance with X-ray diffraction
measurements and she also provided the TEM images of the synthesized Platinum(V)Neodymium cata-
lyst.
It is also important for me to say thank you to Prof. Qingfeng Li for taking over my supervisor meetings
as Assoc. Prof. Yang Hu went on parental leave. Thank you for your guidance.
All three people mentioned above also provide excellent feedback on the first drafts of my thesis.
In addition I also want to say thank you to PHD student Mathias Hommelgaard, PHD student Greta
Giarola, and Post doc. Mar´ıa Paula Salinas-Quezada for all the time you took out of your busy schedules
to conduct several informal discussions with me about my progress, results and approach to the project.
Furthermore Greta Giarola was an indispensable help and provided the necessary SEM and EDX mea-
surement of the synthesized Platinum(V)Neodymium catalyst.
Also a special thank you to Research Engineer Amado Velazquez-Palenzuela for sharing his knowledge
about the synthesis of Platinum(V)Neodymium and for help and support within lab.
Thank you!
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
The oxygen reduction reaction and the electrocatalyst surface structure . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Phosohoric Acid poisoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Pt-alloys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Transition metals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Rare Earth metals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
RDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Experimental
10
2.1
Synthesis of Pt-alloys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
X-ray diffraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Scanning electron microscope and Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Transmission Electron Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Electrochemical testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Ink preperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Spraying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Electrochemical testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Study 1 - Preparation of thin-film catalyst using spray coating
16
3.1
Spray fabrication of thin-film . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Study 2 - Pt/C in four different electrolyte conditions
21
4.1
PtC electrocatalyst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
PtC in 0.1 M Perchloric Acid electrolyte at room temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Electrolyte and concentration effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Temperature effects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
CO stripping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6
Oxygen reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Study 3 - Comparison of Pt/C, PtCo/C and Pt5Nd/C in four different electrolyte
conditions
34
5.1
Platinum-Cobalt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Platinum(V)Neodymium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Comparison of the results of Pt/C, PtCo/C and Pt5Nd/C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
ORR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusion
51
Appendices
56
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
The proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) was developed by General Electrics in the 1960s.
The early versions were used in the NASA Gemini spacecraft but were opted out in return for other rival
types of fuel cells due to challenges related to water management. In the 1970s and early 1980s further
development of the PEMFC was down prioritized however in the late 1980s and early 1990s the interest
rekindled [20] and today the PEMFC is becoming a major player in the green transition.
There are both low temperature (LT)-PEMFCs and high temperature (HT)-PEMFCs which use water
and phosphoric acid (PA) as the proton carrier respectively. LT-PEMFCs work below 120oC and have
been developed for decades to the point where they are slowly reaching the stage of commercialization.
Some of the advantages of LT-PEMFCs are the easy start up, the broad options for selecting construction
materials and the slow degradation time due to the low temperatures. Some disadvantages are the required
complex water management systems and low tolerance to poisoning, which necessitate the usage of high
purity hydrogen.
HT-PEMFCs operate at elevated temperatures (>120oC) and have the advantages
of faster kinetics of the reactions taking place at the electrodes as well as higher tolerance to catalyst
poisoning from the fuel, however the acidic electrolyte used in HT-PEMFCs has shown to adsorb to the
surface of the catalyst and subsequently lower the active site utilization during diffusion into the catalyst
layer.[24]
In recent years two main strategies for accommodating the most important disadvantages of the
PEMFC catalyst have been established.
One is to develop Pt-alloys which show enhanced activity
and durability. The other is to produce Pt group metal-free catalyst (PGM-free) from more abundant
elements, however the activity of these types of catalysts is far from satisfactory.[35]
Countless combinations of alloys and intermetallic catalysts for the PEMFCs have been investigated
and tested over the last few decades. Many of these show excellent performance in the well-established
RDE-method however the performance noticeably decreases in the MEA of the fuel cell. This decrease
can be attributed to many different factors which will be further elaborated on in the subsequent sections
however the fact remains that there is a need for bridging this gap between RDE and MEA.[9]
1.1
The Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell
The PEMFC consists of two electrodes separated by a membrane in order to avoid mixing of gasses
and short circuiting (Figure 1). It is an open system which exchange both matter and energy with the
surroundings in the form of fuels, reaction products, and electric current. The fuel cell utilizes hydrogen
at the anode and oxygen at the cathode which is oxidized and reduced respectively into protons and oxide
ions. These ions then combine into water as written in equation 1
2H2 + O2 →H2O + energy
(1)
1
==PAGE:6==
Figure 1: The figure show a schematic representation of the Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell. The
picture was taken from the book Fuel Cell Systems Explained.[20]
The theoretical voltage of the fuel cell is 1.23 V regardless of the electrolyte being acidic or alkaline,
and it is a measure of the energy available to drive charge through the external circuit between the
electrodes. However the real voltage is always lower depending on the concentration of the electrolyte,
temperature, purity of the fuels and overpotentials within the cell. [2] [28]
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode is well known to have sluggish kinetic, which
makes it the limiting factor for cell performance.[35] As mentioned above one of the main advantages of
the HT-PEMFC is the expected accelerated reaction kinetics due to higher operating temperatures.
Still LT-PEMFC remain a significantly more popular technology.
The main difference between the
LT-PEMFC and the HT-PEMFC lie in the membrane which separates the electrodes. The preferred
membrane used in LT-PEMFC is a perfluorinated polymer called Nafion.
Nafion exibiht high ionic
conductivity when it is fully hydrated in water.
This effectively limits the operating temperature of
the LT-PEMFC to below 100oC.
In order to increase the operating temperature a Phosphoric Acid
(PA)-doped Polybenzimidazole (PBI) membrane is used in HT-PEMFCs.
While the PA acts as the
charge carrier it also causes a decrease in electrocatalytic activity due to PA poisoning on the active
surface. Therefore high Pt-loadings are required in order to compensate for this poisoning effect which
effectively makes the HT-PEMFC less attractive. Still the PBI membrane has som crucial advantages
over the Nafion: i) The PBI membrane is much cheaper to produce and ii) it posses better mechanical
strength. The PBI/PA membrane combination use a ”Grotthus mechanism” where the breaking and
recombination of hydrogen bonds between PA and PBI transport protons across the membrane to the
cathode side.Therefore understanding the mechanism behind PA poisoning and potentially increase the
tolerance towards the harsh phosphate acid environment within the fuel cell is crucial. [38][26][30]
1.1.1
The oxygen reduction reaction and the electrocatalyst surface structure
The over all mechanism of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is shown in equation 2
2O2 + 4e−+ 4H+ →H2O, Eo = +1.23
(2)
Of all the transition metals Platinum is the most active catalyst for ORR. This can be seen from a
volcano plot of the relationship between catalytic activity of ORR and different transition metals, where
2
==PAGE:7==
platinum is located closest to the top. [36] The ORR is a multi-electron process with several intermediates
(see equations below) which makes it difficult to optimize the surface for different binding energies due
to the interdependent scaling relations [7].
O2(g) + ∗−→O ∗+O∗
O ∗+H+ −→OH∗
OH ∗+H+ −→H2O(g) + ∗
For high activity and durability, electrocatalysts in the form of nanoparticles on high surface area supports
are needed as it is well known that activity and durability is dependent on reaction surface area, particle
size and structure of the support material [34]. The nanoparticles usually adopt a closed packed structure
illustrated by Nørskov et al. [25] in figure 2. The closed packed structure display several geometric lattice
planes which are labeled by Miller indices
Figure 2: Figure 2.13 borrowed from [25].
The figure shows steps/edges, corners and facets of a Pt
particle consisting of 561 atoms
A regular crystal lattice contain different adjacent rows of atoms and depending on how the lat-
tice is divided the distance between rows changes. This distance is referred to as d-spacing by Bragg’s
Law of diffraction. The d-spacing characterizing a specific plane influence the energy of adsorption to
the plane, and since adsorption is the precursor to catalysis, different crystal planes exhibit different
catalytic proprieties. This means that the adsorbate is adsorbed more or less tightly depending on the
plane. Besides the regular planes a catalyst surface also has special defect sites such as edges and steps.[25]
Over the past years several structures have been developed to improve the morphology of the Pt-based
catalyst such as core-shell, porous, and nano structures downsizing the particles all the way to Pt single
atom electrocatalysts. Besides morphology the actual size of the Pt-particles also influence the activity
of the catalyst since particles that are too small are unstable while particles that are too large reduce the
active surface area of the catalyst. [24][29]
Another important lesson which can be deducted from the volcano plot is that platinum, even though
it is closest to the top, it is not exactly at the top of the volcano, which leaves room for improvement.
One way to improve the activity is to alloy Pt with other metals. The enhanced activity in Pt-alloys
stems from the modification of the electronic and geometric properties of the metal lattice due to the
3
==PAGE:8==
mismatched atomic radii between the platinum and alloy metal. The general understanding is that an
optimal catalyst should bind the reaction intermediates ∼0.2 eV more weakly than the optimized Pt(111)
surface if the O adsorption energy is used as the descriptor, and ∼0.1 eV more weakly if OH adsorption
energy is used [7].
The most common way of synthesizing Pt-alloys is through co-reduction or impregnation-reduction
via an annealing process under a reductive atmosphere. During this stage of phase transformation control
of the particle size is important to avoid sintering of the metal into large particles [35]. For Pt alloys of
the Pt-Rare Earth (RE) type the alloying is made difficult by the different standard reduction potentials
of the metals [17]. In 2016 Escribano et al. wrote that Pt-RE materials where among the most active
polycrystalline Pt based catalysts. The Pt-RE alloy form a stable intermetallic compound (Pt5M) with a
hexagonal structure [8]. In [17] Hu et al. reported a solid state route to prepare Pt-RE nanoalloys which
was employed in the present work and will be described in detail in section 2.1.
In their extensive review Xiao Xia Wang et al. points to some of the significant challenges regarding
further development of the PEMFC. In-depth understanding of the ORR mechanism is key to develop
successful Pt-alloy catalysts since the adsorption/desorption of reactants and intermediates is heavily
influenced by the electronic structure of the catalyst surface [35]. This also includes an in dept under-
standing of the physical properties of the surface of the metal catalyst, so as to be able to engineer
the desired catalytic activity and selectivity on the atomic level.[13] Furthermore more attention should
be paid to the influence of the support material. Here they specifically point towards graphitization
and porosity of the support as important factors influencing the activity and durability. Also bridging
the gap of the performance of the ORR catalyst between RDE and MEA is a hindering factor in the
commercialization of HT-PEMFCs.[35]
Figure 3: Volcano plot taken from [25].
1.1.2
Phosohoric Acid poisoning
As was previously stated the development of a cathode catalyst which is stable in Phosphoric acid (PA)
and simultaneously show sufficient activity for ORR is one of the key challenges before HT-PEMFCs can
4
==PAGE:9==
penetrate the market.[36] During the initial activation period of the fuel cell PA diffuse into the catalyst
layer to form the three phase boundary [24]. PA molecules are bound to the polymer chains of the PBI
membrane by strong hydrogen bonding, and they also exist as free molecules serving as proton carriers
between the electrodes. Free PA molecules can react with the product water at the cathode and hydrolyze
to H2PO−
4 which at the anode can react with protons to reform into PA (H3PO4). This cycle result in
a redistribution of PA causing acid flooding and occupation of active sites in the catalytic layer [36].
Another inhibiting factor is the reduced reactant transport and poor oxygen solubility in concentrated
PA. Fleige et al. conducted a study of the PA temperature and concentration effects on oxygen solubility
and diffusivity. They concluded that increasing the electrolyte concentration led to a decrease in both O2
diffusivity, O2 concentration and oxygen reduction activity. Though an increase in temperature led to an
increase in the O2 diffusivity this was not the case for O2 concentration, which only decreased further[10].
In [22] Lin et al. reported an additional reduction reaction in the 0.05-0.4 V vs RHE range on platinum
in phosphoric acid electrolyte which generated a phosphorus acid species H3PO3 (see equation 3). This
species was subsequently oxidized at higher potentials giving rise to an anodic peak around 0.7 V vs
RHE.
H3PO4 + 2H+ + 2e−→H3PO3 + H2O
(3)
In [14] He et al. showed how the ORR activity on single crystal surfaces decreased significantly as
small amounts of H3PO4 was added to the 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte. The decrease followed the order
Pt(111) > Pt(110) > Pt(100). Based on their voltammetric studies they concluded that adsorption of
phosphate was most pronounced on the 3-fold sites of the Pt(111) plane.
In addition to the above mentioned phosphate adsorption is also believed to affect the electronic
surface of neighboring sites due to electrostatic interactions and orbital overlaps which could influence
the binding of other reaction species [22].
1.2
Pt-alloys
As has been described above it is possible to tune the ORR activity of the catalyst by manipulating
the atomic structure of the surface through alloying Pt with other metals. A lot of efforts have been put
into identifying alternative catalyst materials for the oxygen reduction reaction in PEMFCs including
non-precious metals such as metal-oxides, metal-carbides, and metal-nitrogen-doped carbon materials.
These types of systems include PtC catalysts, Pt-based alloy catalysts, Pt-based intermetallic compounds
and Pt-based single-atom catalysts. Alloying Pt with other metals show promising results in in reducing
the amount of Pt needed due to improved activity. [37] Some results from literature regarding specific
Pt-alloys is presented in the following.
1.2.1
Transition metals
Even though the exact mechanistics of the ORR is not yet fully understood it is well know that the
ORR activity is correlated with the adsorption energies of O and OH to the catalyst surface. The disso-
5
==PAGE:10==
ciation energy of the O-O bond is 494 kJ/mol which is why reduction only is observed on some metals.
In [21] Wei Li et al. reported that alloying Pt with transition metals showed better resistance to the
phosphoric acid poisoning however these Pt transition metal alloys are pron to corrode during start-up
and shut-down voltages and they tend to degrade in long term tests via dealloying [8]. Still studies show
promising room for improvement in these systems though further research is still required. Of these
non-precious Pt-alloys Fe, Co and Ni-based catalysts is the most studied transition metal catalysts for
PEMFC and they have shown superior performance especially in research related to LT-PEMFC [36]. In
a study from 2016 [7] Colic et al. reviewed the activity trends for platinum alloyed with either transi-
tion metals or lanthanide elements. They used available voltammetric data from literature to estimate
surface binding energies of OH on various Pt alloy surfaces.
For the Pt alloy fcc(111) single crystal
systems the authors reported that Pt3Ni(111) showed the best improvements compared to Pt(111) with
a 10 times increase in activity. The binding energy of the OH to the surface of Pt3Ni(111) was
0.13
eV weaker than Pt(111) which is in agreement with the theoretical expectations.
To move into the
domain of more realistic catalyst surfaces the authors investigated stepped single-crystal alloys of the
type Pt −X(n(111)x(111)) and Pt −X(n(111)x(100)) with step and terrace defects of different lengths.
The stepped crystals showed a dependence of step density where the catalytic activity initially increases
until reaching a maximum after which it started to decrease with the highest relative activity displayed
by the Pt3Ni(3(111)x(100)) though the increase in activity was less than predicted for the more simple
case of the fcc(111) single-crystal catalyst. The authors finally investigated the polycrystalline surfaces
with randomly distributed defects. The authors reported that the improved activity further decreases
for the Pt3Ni(pc) with a 5-fold drop in the activity from the initial 10-fold increase off the Pt3Ni(111)
counterpart, and the theoretically predicted optimal catalyst Pt3Sc(pc) showed only a 1.5 improvement
to the pure Pt catalyst. These results made the authors conclude that the catalytic activity is more
closely linked to the structural variables rather than the energetics of the specific Pt(hkl) plane when it
comes to polycrystaline and nanoparticle electrocatalysts. As the surfaces become more complex the pc
surfaces are more vulnerable toward dealloying as this process primarily takes place at defect sites. The
dealloying of the top surface layers introduce a straining effect into the Pt-rich top layers, which means
that the electronic structure and thus the catalytic activity is controlled by the lattice strain in these
types of alloys and therefore by changing the strain the activity can be tuned [7]. In fact this strain
effect is considered to have a more significant role compared with other effects such as the ligand effect,
which is negligible after only 3 atomic layers and is therefor sensitive to dealloying. Another type of a
transition metal alloy is a multi-element solid solution alloy refereed to as a high entropy alloy (HEA).
In [5] Chen et al. synthesized PtFeCoNiCu with uniform dispersion and small particle size. The group
reported that the PFCNC-HEA showed higher mass activity and more outstanding ORR kinetics com-
pared to the state-of-the-art PtC. However the authors also pointed to the complicated and both energy
and time consuming preparation methods of these HEAs as an obstacle for the practical application of
such alloys. Also Pt-free catalysts have been researched in literature. In [15] Yang Hu et al. synthesized
a Fe-N-C catalyst and used it to study the effect of the adsorption of different commonly seen anions
in electrocatalyst screening namely ClO−
4 , Cl−, HSO−
4 , and H2PO−
4 . This catalyst showed negligible
6
==PAGE:11==
poisoning effect in H3PO4 and good performance which was comparable with that of PtC. In return the
catalyst showed to be pron to poisoning from perchloric acid.
1.2.2
Rare Earth metals
One of the advantages of Pt-Rare Earth alloys is the fact that they exhibit large negative alloying
energies which makes them more resistant towards degradation. [32] [7]
In a resent article from 2023 [23] Jiaqi Lin et al. reported a PtCe alloy exhibiting outstanding activity
and stability in the MEA. According to DFT calculations the binding energy of OH to the surface was the
optimum 0.1 eV weaker than that of Pt(111). PtCe showed a high negative heat of formation improving
the kinetic barrier governing the metal dissolution of the Pt-based catalyst. [23]
In [8] Escudero-Escribano et al. demonstrated how the lanthanide contraction can be used to control
the strain effect and tune activity and reactivity. The group evaluated the electrocatalytic properties of
polycrystalline Pt5M (M=Tb, Gd, Y, Sm, Ca, Dy, Tm, Ce, Y, and La) which showed improved ORR
activity compared to Pt3Ni and Pt3Co. The bulk strain introduced by the lanthanides was reported to
correlate with the increased ORR activity as the bulk strain is imposed onto the Pt overlayer, however
beyond a certain level of bulk strain the Pt overlayer is destabilized which accelerates surface diffusion.
Although countless studies in literature show enhanced performance of numerous Pt-alloy catalysts
these results are inadequate when considering electrocatalysts for the HT-PEMFC as the experimental
conditions are quite different from operating conditions.[23] The conventional testing method for screening
new electrocatalyst is presented below.
1.3
RDE
As electrocatalysts are usually synthesized in small quantities in research laboratories and therefore
not suitable for large scale testing, the rotating disk electrode (RDE) method is the preferred half-cell
technique used for screening novel catalyst candidates for the PEMFC [31] [33]. The main objective is to
study the relationship between current and potential. This is done through a three electrode set-up which
consists of a working electrode (WE) equipped with the electrocatalyst, a counter electrode (CE), and
a reference electrode against which the potential is measured. The WE electrode consists of an electron
conducting core with a smooth cross-section surface surrounded by an insulating layer which is typically
a material such as Teflon. The electrode is connected to a potentiostat through a rotating shaft and sub-
merged into a glass cell containing the electrolyte where the rotation of the shaft, and thus the electrode,
helps to ensure a uniform flow of mass to the surface, which is constant as long as the bulk concentration
does not change with time.[11] In order to study reactions taking place in the electrolytic cell electricity
is supplied from the potentiostat. Some of the main advantages of the RDE method is i) the high out-put
of information about performance of electrocatalyst candidates, ii) the small amounts of catalyst needed
to conduct the test, and iii) the commercial availability. However different testing conditions makes it
complicated to compare RDE results across research groups and laboratories as the ORR activity mea-
sured is a function of both testing protocols, ink formulations, the degree of dispersion of the catalyst,
7
==PAGE:12==
and the resulting quality of the electro catalytic film [31] [33]. Numerous studies have been conducted to
investigate the influence of these different testing variables. Takahashi et al. [33] investigated the impact
of catalyst ink formulation on the ECSA and ORR activitites. The group used commercially available
catalysts, Mili-Q water, isopropanol (IPA) and 5wt.% Nafion solution to prepare inks. The ratio between
the IPA and MiliQ water was varied in order to obtain the best dispersion of the catalyst and thus the
highest ECSA from the cyclic voltammograms. The group concluded that knowledge of the hydrophobic
nature of the catalyst can serve as a guideline for the IPA/Mili-Q ratio as less hydrophobic catalysts
are less sensitive to the IPA content, whilst more hydrophobic catalyst could benefit from a higher IPA
content. Still an IPA content above 40% showed to decrease the ECSA of even the more hydrophobic
catalyst due to a less uniform film, which the group attributed to the highly viscous alcohol rich ink.
Furthermore the group concluded that sonication times between 10-15 min were sufficient to produce
reproducible results. Shinozaki et al. demonstrated in their work that the drying technique applied for
the fabrication of the thin film also had an influence on the ORR activity by an increase of 1.6 x higher for
a film that dried using a rotational air drying technique rather than conventional stationary air drying [31].
A preferred electrolyte for conducting RDE tests is the 0.1 M perchloric acid electrolyte (HClO4) as
it is known not to adsorb significantly to the surface of the catalyst. However, since the electrolyte used
in the HT-PEMFC cell is phosphoric acid (H3PO4), which as mentioned previously tends to absorb to
the active sites of the catalyst and thus lowering the activity, the results from RDE tests in HClO4 could
potentially be overestimated. In a resent study by Zhang et al. the group investigated the influence of
electrolyte composition on the ORR activity results. The group tested a commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst
in 0.1 M HClO4 with varying levels of PA. By comparing voltammograms obtained from the different
electrolytes the group noticed a significant decrease in the area of the hydrogen desorption peak and
the ECSA showed a trend of decline following the addition of PA. Furthermore a shift towards a more
positive potential for the oxygen formation species was observed indicating the formation of a robust
bond between the platinum and the PA anions leading to a blocking of the active sites. For the impact
on the ORR performance the group illustrated that the polarization curve for continuous addition of PA
lead to a negative shift in the kinetic current and a positive shift in the upwards direction for the limiting
current. This trend was not observed for the same addition of additional HClO4 to the electrolyte [38].
Table1 summerizes some of the results from literature.
8
==PAGE:13==
Sample
T (C)
Electrolyte
d (nm)
SA
MA
sweep rate
reference
46wt% Pt/HSC (TKK)
25
0.1 M HClO4
2.0
292
266
10
[33]
46wt% Pt/HSC (TKK)
25
0.5 M H3PO4
2.0
29
28
10
[33]
26.1wt% Pt/HSC (TKK)
23
0.1 M HClO4
-
296
419
20
[31]
46wt% Pt/G-HSC (TKK)
23
0.1 M HClO4
-
550
360
20
[31]
46.1wt% Pt/Ketjen (TKK)
25
0.1 M HClO4
-
∼900
∼725
20
[18]
PtC
25
0.1 M HClO4/
0.1 M H3PO4
-
440
-
[22]
PtC
160
0.1 M HClO4/
0.1 M H3PO4
-
930
-
[22]
40wt% PtCo/Volcan
25
0.1 M HClO4/
0.1 M H3PO4
-
860
-
[22]
40wt% PtCo/Volcan
160
0.1 M HClO4/
0.1 M H3PO4
-
3,050
-
[22]
20% Pt/C
25
0.1 M HClO4
5.0
-
116
10
[5]
PFCNC-HEA
25
0.1 M HClO4
-
2,700
1,730
10
[5]
Table 1: RDE results from litterature. The SA is given in µA/cm2
Pt and MA in mA/mgPt.
9
==PAGE:14==
2
Experimental
2.1
Synthesis of Pt-alloys
A platinum-neodymium on ketjen black was synthesized employing a solid state synthesis route pre-
viously described by Hu et al. [17]. The first step in the synthesis of Pt5Nd was to mix the respective
metals with a C-N rich compound and subsequently deposite it onto the carbon support. For the present
synthesis the hydrated salts of PtCl6 · 6H2O and NdCl3 · 7H2O (Sigma-Aldrich) was used and the C-N
rich compound source was CN2H2 (cyanamide, 99%, Aldrich). The purpose of mixing the metal salts
with the cyanamide is to achieve a thorough dispersion of the metal atoms within the C-N matrix which
when it is heated stabilize the metals and effectively suppresses the oxidation to metal oxides.[17] Table
2 summarize the weighed amounts of the precursors and figure 4 shows a schematic representation of the
synthesis route.
Figure 4: A schematic representation of the synthesis process taken from Yang Hu et al. [17]
Substance
Target [mg]
Actual [mg]
Molar mass [g/mol]
Moles [mol]
PtCl6 · 6H2O
333.4
333.3
515.09
6.47 · 10−4
NdCl3 · 7H2O
348.0
348.2
376.72
9.24 · 10−4
CN2H2
1,334.0
1,343.4
42.05
3.20 · 10−2
Ketjen-Black
200.0
204.9
12.01
9.76 · 10−4
Total
2,215.4
2,229.8
-
-
Table 2: The weighed amount of precursor which were mixed together in a agate mortar to form the
initial solid mixture.
Thus initially 333.3 mg of PtCl6 · 6H2O and 348.2 mg of NdCl3 · 7H2O followed by 1,343.4 mg of
cyanamide, and finally 204.9 mg of KJ-300 carbon was weighed out and added in portions into a agate
mortar where it was grinded extensively each time until the solid mixture appeared homogeneous. The
resulting compound mixture was collected and the final weight obtained was 2,052.8 mg thus 177 mg
was lost in the preparation. 2,051.9 mg of the sample was then transferred to a glass crucible and placed
in a furnace where it was heated to 650oC in a 200 ml/min argon flow following the scheme presented
in figure 5a. During this first heat treatment a CxNyHz network forms from a condensation reaction
10
==PAGE:15==
releasing ammonia (NH3) which subsequently forms ammonium chloride NH3Cl with the Cl−ions in
the salts. The CxNyHz network forms an amorphous phase in which the Pt and Nd ions are effectively
coordinated. After this initial heat treatment the sample was then collected from the furnace (yield:
1.099.9 mg) and grinded to a fine powder in the agate mortar. After grinding 191.3 mg was transferred to
the crucible and placed back into the furnace for the second heating step (650oC) under a reducing flow
of 3% H2/N2 following the scheme presented in figure 5b. After the reduction the sample now containing
the metallic particles were carefully collected and the final yield was measured to 126 mg.
(a) The first heat treatment in the synthesis was
done in a 200 ml/min flow of Ar.
(b) The second heat treatment which was done in a 320
ml/min flow of 3% H2/N2.
Figure 5: The figure show the thermal heat treatment schemes of the solid state synthesis route.
Following the reduction the catalyst was leached in 0.5 M H2SO4 made from ultra pure water (MiliQ,
ρ=18.2 MΩ) and concentrated sulfuric acid (96%, Merck, Suprapur). It was left on a heating plate for 2
h at 70oC under constant stirring. It was subsequently thoroughly washed with MiliQ water four times
each time separating the catalyst from the water using a centrifuge (Multifuge X Pro Series) and finally
dried in an drying cabinet over night at 80oC.
2.2
Characterization
The obtained Pt5Nd catalyst was analyzed using powder X-ray diffraction, scanning electron mi-
croscopy in combination with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy.
The methods are briefly described below and the results are presented in section 5.2.
2.2.1
X-ray diffraction
Powder x-ray diffraction was done on a powder diffractometer (Aeris Panalytical) to confirm the
presence of the target crytalline phase, Pt5Nd , and to ensure the presence of a single phase. In the
diffractometer the sample is exposed to an X-ray beam with a defined wavelength and a characteristic
diffraction pattern is produced from the diffraction of the incident wave by the electron density of the
outer shell of the atoms. In powder X-ray diffraction the characteristic diffraction pattern can be used
for identification of crystalline phases by comparing it to a reference patterns of known crystals. The
diffraction pattern and identification peaks can be viewed in figure 26. The Rigaku data analysis sofware
PDXL 2 was used to refine and identify the pattern.
11
==PAGE:16==
2.2.2
Scanning electron microscope and Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi S-4700) was used to obtain a high resolution image
of the Pt5Nd electrocatalyst for analysis of the atomic composition using a Energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (Aztec Software). Several areas of the catalyst surface was analyzed and the dispersion of
atomic species turned out to be similar across all areas. From table 2 it is evident that Nd is added
in excess when considering the final atomic composition of the catalyst (Pt5Nd). From the mole of the
different components we expect to have 6.47 · 10−4 M of Pt and thus a fifth of that (1.2 · 10−4 M) of Nd
after acid leaching assuming that we have a single phase consisting of Pt5Nd. This should result in a Pt
loading of approximately 31 wt%.
2.2.3
Transmission Electron Microscopy
To obtain high resolution images on the nanoscale traditional microscopes using wavelengths of visible
light is insufficient. Instead an electron microscope is used which cast a beam of electrons with a well-
defined de Broglie wavelength onto the specimen.
In Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) the
electron beam passes through the sample and the resulting image is collected on the screen [1]. In the
present work a TEM microscope was used to obtain high resolution images for analyzing the particle size
distribution of the Pt5Nd catalyst.
2.3
Electrochemical testing
In this work cyclicvoltammetry was used to study the surface of three different electrocatalysts namely
commercial Platinum (JM-Pt/C 20 wt% ), commercial platinum cobalt (PtCo TKK) and the in-house
synthesized platinum neodymium. The thin Film Rotating Disk Electrode (TF-RDE) method, which
was described in section 1.3, was used to provide the data to estimate the electronically active surface
area (ECSA) as well as the specific activity (is) and mass activity (im), and for the study of the surface
trends related to the changing conditions of the electrolyte.
2.3.1
Ink preperation
Each catalyst was used to prepare inks for the fabrication of the thin film onto the glassy carbon
(GC) electrode (Pine instruments). The ink used for drop casting was made with formic acid (≥98%
Sigma-Aldrich) while a mixture of MiliQ water and isopropanol (Sigma-Aldrich) in the ratio 1:3 was used
for the spray casting. A weighted amount of catalyst was transferred to a 4 ml clear vial with screw
top, solid cap and PTFE liner (Supelco, USA) which had been cleaned with ethanol (99.99 absolute
ethanol, Kiilto Clean A/S, Denmark) and dried with N2 gas before the transfer. In every case MiliQ
water was added to the catalyst before any acid or alcohol in order to avoid incinerating it in the viale
and then the remaining solvent was added. A calculated amount of 5wt% Nafion solution (Alfa Aesar)
based on a target ratio between dry nafion and carbon of 0.2 was added to all inks. The role of the Nafion
ionomer is to hold the catalyst film together and to make it hold on the electrode surface during high
rotation speeds.[33] For drop casting the applied loading on the GC electrode was 15 µgPt · cm−2 hence
12
==PAGE:17==
the total volume of the ink was calculated from the weight of the catalyst, the area of the GC electrode
(0.196 cm2) and an applied drop casting volume of 5 µl. Once all the solvents had been added the solution
was shaken on a vortex (2 S000 IKA, Germany) in order to break up any larger particles. Afterwards
he viale containing the ink was placed in a sonicator (Sonication, Lab solutions) and left until the ink
appeared homogeneous. For drop casting a 10 µl pipette (Thermo Scientific) was used to deposit the ink
on the GC electrode and left to air dry while the spray casted film was deposited using an airbrush (0.2
Green Stuff World SL, Spain). An overview of the inks can be viewed in table 3
Catalyst
Catalyst[mg]
IPA [ml]
formic acid [ml]
H2O [ml]
Nafion 5% [ml]
Pt-C(20wt%)
8.8
none
2.836
0.1
0.031
Pt-C(20wt%)
5.36
1.353
none
0.451
0.019
Pt-Co(46.4/5.8wt%)
4.8
none
3.678
0.1
0.010
Pt-Co(46.4/5.8wt%)
4.45
2.956
none
0.985
0.009
Pt5Nd(28.5/4.5wt%)
2.91
1.050
none
0.353
0.008
Table 3: An overview of the inks utilized to fabricate the films tested and presented in the present work.
2.3.2
Spraying
For the spraying a 3-D printed plastic cap was used to cover the Teflon surrounding the glassy carbon.
The optimal protection of the Teflon was made difficult by a small gap between the electrode cross section
and the rough plastic cap.
Figure 6: A schematic representation of the glassy carbon electrode and the plastic cap used to protect
the Teflon from the sprayed ink.
Therefore tiny spattering of microscopic ink droplets onto the Teflon was inevitable using this method.
The limited printing precision also made is difficult to obtain a perfectly circular hole for the exposition
of the glassy carbon. The spraying was optimized to address these challenges to the authors best effort.
A very small pressure was employed, and the airbrush tip was held directly vertical over the electrode
surface at a distance of approximately 7 cm. This was done to ensure the immediate drying of the ink
on the electrode surface to avoid any capillary effect of the wet ink. In order to obtain a similar loading
for each sprayed electrode 400 ul of ink was transferred to the chamber of the airbrush and sprayed over
the covered electrode. Before spraying the electrode was screwed onto a metal plate which was heated
on a digital hot plate (RCT5 IKA, Germany) in the effort to further remedy the rapid drying of the ink.
13
==PAGE:18==
2.3.3
Electrochemical testing
For the electrochemical testing a three electrode set-up was employed. A carbon rod was used as
counter electrode (CE), as the reference electrode (RE) an in-house constructed Reversible Hydrogen
Electrode (RHE) was used, and the working electrode (WE) was the RDE tip with the thin electrocatalyst
film depositied on the GC. The RE consisted of a platinum wire concealed in a glass tube which was
open in one end and shut close with epoxy in the other end. This tube was first filled with hydrogen
saturated electrolyte and subsequently hydrogen gas was allowed to enter the tube in order to establish
the equilibrium potential of the RHE. The tube was contained in a glass tube with a frit in the bottom
end which had likewise been filled with hydrogen saturated electrolyte and closed tightly with the inner
glass tube to prevent any outside gasses from entering. Before beginning any cyclicvoltammetry the RE
was calibrated in the cell. The electrolyte was saturated with hydrogen and the OCV of the system was
measured between a platinum wire and the CE against the RE. The criterium for an acceptable OCV
and thus an acceptable RE was less than 1 mV. The OCV value was used to correct the data during the
analysis. The testing workflow consisted of firstly testing the electrocatalyst in 0.1 M HClO3 in room
temperature followed by 0.1 M H3PO4 at room temperature, 2.0 M H3PO4 at room temperature and
finally concluded with a measurement in 2.0 M H3PO4 at elevated temperature (60oC). A chart of the
workflow is presented in figure 7
Figure 7: The figure show the step by step representation of the workflow for testing the different
electrocatalysts.
As a first step activation of the electrocatalytic surface was ensured through a thorough cleaning in
order to remove any impurities from the surface. This was done by scanning the WE in a potential range
between 0.025-1.20 V (PtC) and 0.025-1.10 V (PtCo and Pt5Nd) with a scan rate of 100 mV/s a stable
CV had been obtained.
After this initial conditioning the electrolyte was replaced with fresh electrolyte to avoid recontamina-
tion of the surface. The electrolyte were made from MiliQ water and 65-71% Perchloric Acid (Honeywell)
or ≥85% Phosphoric acid (Sigma-Aldrich). After the electrolyte had been replaced and saturated with
argon gas approximately 10 cycles where recorded at 50 and 20 mV/s scan rate respectively in the range
0.050-1.02 V vs. RHE additionally an impedance measurement was done in order to correct for electrolyte
resistance (R) following equation 4
Emeasured = EW E −IR
(4)
After the recording of the CV’s in argon the electrolyte was saturated with O2 and the ORR was
14
==PAGE:19==
recorded for approximately 10 cycles in the same range as for the argon CV at 20 mV/s and with a
rotation rate of 1600 rpm. The RDE tip was only rotated during the measurement of the ORR. Finally
CO stripping was employed accordingly. A small flow of CO was allowed to flow for 5 min before setting
the potential of the WE to 0.05 V vs RHE in order to allow for adsorption of CO to the electrocatalyst
surface. After 10 min the flow was replaced by argon in order to remove all remaining CO from the
electrolyte. This flow was maintained for 10-15 min before 3 cycles where recorded in the same range
as for the ORR. Each time before moving on to the next electrolyte the tip of the WE was dipped
into a beaker containing MiliQ water to wash it free of the previous electrolyte. The conditioning was
repeated in all electrolytes but the most thorough conditioning was done in the beginning in HClO4.
Otherwise testing in all four electrolyte conditions followed the same protocol. For the last condition (2.0
M H3PO4/60oC) the cell was placed in an oil bath which was heated using a digital hot plate (RCT5
IKA, Germany). Constant rotation of the RDE was employed for all steps during this last condition to
ensure a uniform temperature throughout the cell.
The potentiostat used was a VSP Potentiostat from Biologic and the software was EC lab also from
Biologic.
15
==PAGE:20==
3
Study 1 - Preparation of thin-film catalyst using spray coating
This section go through the experiences gained from using the spray technique to fabricate the film
on the glassy carbon (GC) electrode and areas to improve.
3.1
Spray fabrication of thin-film
The usual way to deposit the ink to form the electrocatalyst thin-film on the GC electrode is by
drop casting a known amount of ink which allows for precise knowledge of the loading onto the surface.
The uniformity of the deposited film is crucial for precise and reproducible ORR activity measurements
something which is not easily obtained with the drop casting procedure as the final film quality depend
on many factors as described in section 1.3. In an article [18] Inaba et al. suggested a novel way of
depositing the film by spraying it on the electrode using an ultrasonic atomizer. The group reported that
spraying the ink on the electrode presented a facile method of fabricating highly uniform electrocatalyst
thin films without having to optimize the fabrication conditions for each new catalyst. This method was
adopted in the following work and the procedure was described in section 2.3.2
In order to analyze the activity of the catalyst the loading needs to be known. In [18] the group
produced a calibration line by measuring the ECSA of several electrocatalyst thin films with different
known loadings which were fabricated by the usual drop casting method. In the present work the loading
was obtained from the ratio between the double layer charging current between the CV from a sprayed
electrocatalyst film and that of a calibration CV from a film fabricated by drop casting with a know
loading of 15 ugPt/cm2. Thus the assumption was that the loading of the sprayed electrode could be
obtained from the calibration CV with known loading (15 ugPt/cm2) and the ratio between the two
double layer charging regions following equation 5
15 = x · ratio
(5)
where x is the unknown loading of the sprayed electrocatalyst film. The calculated loading was then
multiplied by the area of the electrode (0.196 cm2) to obtain the amount Pt on the GC.
In figure 8 some images taken with a microscope (RS Pro USB Digital Microscope) are presented. The
microscope was used to evaluate the immediate quality of the film. The loose criteria for an acceptable
film was a minimum of ink spattering and a uniform surface which covered the entire GC surface as
exemplified by pictures 8a and 8b.
16
==PAGE:21==
(a) Electrolcatalyst thin film of Pt5ND which have been
fabricated by spraying.
(b) Close-up image of the surface of the Pt5Nd thin film
fabricated by spraying.
(c) The resulting film of PtC by drop casting using the
ink made with formic acid.
(d) The resulting film of PtC by drop casting using the
ink made with a isopropanol and MiliQ water.
Figure 8: Images taken of several different electrocatalyst thin film fabricated through either drop casting
or spraying.
Pictures 8c and 8d show two examples of a PtC electrocatalyst thin-film fabricated using drop casting.
In picture 8c it can be seen that the film doesn’t cover the entire GC surface and therefor the film would
be insufficient for evaluating ORR activity. However it was sufficient to determine the charging current
for a loading of 15 ugPt/cm2 as the charging current does not depend on the area but is proportional to
the scan rate following equation 6 where C is the double layer capacitance[11]
ic = C · dV
dt
(6)
Picture 8d show the thin-film from drop casting an ink made with isopropanol and MiliQ water. It
can be seen how the ink is insufficiently dispersed over the GC surface which was caused by the fast
drying of the alcohol.
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 9: Cyclovoltammograms of the PtC electrocatalyst film drop casted and spray casted unto the GC
electrode respectively. The CVs were recorded in unstirred Argon saturated 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte,
ν=20 mV/s. The drop casted electrocatalyst film had a known loading of 15 ugPt/cm2 which was used
to obtain the loading of the spray casted electrocatalyst film by fitting it in the charging region to the
calibration CV.
In figure 9 the calibration CV of PtC is shown together with the fitting of the sprayed electrode. Form
the fitting the ratio of the charging region was determined to be 1.23 which gave a loading of 12.2 µg/cm2
and a total amount of Pt on the GC surface of 2.39 ug. Table 4 summarize the calculated loadings for
all three electrocatalysts
Catalyst
-
PtC
PtCo
Pt5Nd
Method
Drop cast
Spray
Spray
Spray
Ratio
1
1.23
0.79
1.6
Loading (µg/cm2)
15
12.2
19.0
9.4
Pt (µg)
2.94
2.39
3.72
1.84
Table 4: The calculated loadings of the different sprayed electrocatalyst thin-films.
In figure 10 the fitting of the sprayed PtCo electrocatalyst film is presented. It can be seen that
the initial CV of the sprayed electrocatalyst film was larger than the calibration CV indicating that the
loading was higher. This makes sense as the volume which was sprayed over the electrode was the same
for all catalysts though the wt% of platinum was significantly higher for the PtCo catalyst.
18
==PAGE:23==
Figure 10: Cyclovoltammograms of the PtCo electrocatalyst film drop casted and spray casted unto the
GC electrode respectively. The CVs were recorded in unstirred Argon saturated 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte,
ν=20 mV/s. The drop casted electrocatalyst film had a known loading of 15 ugPt/cm2 which was used
to obtain the loading of the spray casted electrocatalyst film by fitting it in the charging region to the
calibration CV.
In figure 11 the fitting of the Pt5Nd CV is shown. Like for PtC the loading is smaller than on the
drop casted electrode. It can be seen that even after the attempted fitting to the charging region the
current profile doesn’t follow the same curve as the calibration CV. Furthermore the current related to
desorption in bothe the hydrogen and oxygen region is lower than on the drop casted electrode. The
loading was the smallest of the three and was calculated to 9.4 ug/cm2 which is lower than the typical
range of 10-20 µg/cm2.[16]. This was also seen for a electrocatalyst film of the PtC which had an even
smaller loading which is shown in figure 40 in the appendices. The fitting seems to improve slightly if a
faster scan rate is used. This was also the case for the PtC film.
(a) CVs of Pt5Nd recorded in unstirred Ar satu-
rated 0.1 M HClO3 electrolyte and recorded with a
scan rate of 20 mV · s−1
(b) Conditioning scans of the Pt5Nd electrocata-
lyst recorded with a scan rate of 100 mV · s−1 in
unstirred Ar saturated 0.1 M HClO3 electrolyte.
Figure 11: Cyclovoltammograms of the Pt5Nd electrocatalyst film drop casted and spray casted unto the
GC electrode respectively.
19
==PAGE:24==
3.2
Summary
The great advantages of the spray casting was the fast drying time of the film and the uniform surfaces
which were obtained. Some disadvantages was the inability to properly control the loading onto the GC
which had to be calibrated afterwards. Furthermore the optimal thickness of the layer is something which
have been extensively research in literature and thus it could be helpful to optimize the protocol for the
amount which should be sprayed over the electrode in order to obtain a loading within the typical range
of 10-20 µg/cm2. This is however a time consuming trial an error process. Furthermore as described
in section 2.3.2 micro spattering onto the teflon was inevitable. It is unclear to the author whether the
tiny spattering on the teflon along the edge of the GC potentially could still have electrical contact with
the carbon and therefor make the area artificially larger than the 0.196 cm2 cm2, but optimizing the
protection of the teflon with a more precisely engineered cap to ensure better contact between the cap
and the electrode could be a useful solution.
20
==PAGE:25==
4
Study 2 - Pt/C in four different electrolyte conditions
4.1
PtC electrocatalyst
The platinum on carbon (PtC) catalyst is the preferred catalyst used in PEMFC and is therefore the
most extensively discussed. The currents response to the change in potential was studied in four different
environments namely 0.1 M HClO4, 0.1 M H3PO4, 2.0 M H3PO4 at room temperature and 2.0 M H3PO4
at 60oC. This was done in order to gain insight into what happens with the electrocatalyst surface as the
conditions are changed from the conventional testing environment of the RDE to conditions resembling
those in the HT-PEMFC.
Figure 12: TEM image and the calculated size distribution of the JM-PtC 20 wt% Pt/C commercial
catalyst. Average size we 3.06 nm.
In figure 12 the TEM image of the Pt/C catalyst and the size distribution is presented. In both images
it can be seen how the particles have a uniform size around 3 nm and how they are equally dispersed on
the carbon support.
4.2
PtC in 0.1 M Perchloric Acid electrolyte at room temperature
The cyclovoltammogram of the Pt/C electrocatalyst in argon saturated 0.1 M HClO4 can be viewed
in figure 13. As the potential of the working electrode is changed the surface experience adsorption and
desorption of species from the electrolyte where electrons are either passed to or from the adsorbate. The
resulting current waves and peaks can be explained from the interaction between these ionic and solvent
species in the electrolyte and the surface of the catalyst. The relevant electrolyte species in this condition
are thus H+, OH−, ClO−, H3O+, and H2O.
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 13: The picture shows the cyclovoltammogram of PtC in 0.1 M HClO3, scan rate 20 mV/s in the
potential range 0.05 V - 1.02 V vs RHE.
When the electrolyte is saturated with an inert gas the adsorption of hydrogen to the surface can be
used to define the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA). The total charge corresponding to the
hydrogen adsorption can be calculated from the integral of the curve marking the area referred to as the
hydrogen underpotential deposition (Hupd) following equation 7
Q = 1
ν ·
Z E2
E1
I dE
(7)
where ν is the scan rate at which the curve was obtained. [3].Thus b y assuming that a monolayer of hy-
drogen adsorbes to the Pt active sites in the stoichiometric ratio 1:1 the charge which can be determined
from the integration of the Hupd is translated into the ECSA by the factor 210 uC/cm2. Thus the ECSA
is a measure of the sites available for any reaction and is usually reported in m2/g(Pt).
The total current below zero represent the sum of the reduction and charging current. As the potential
is brought to lower values the energy of the electrons in the electrode increase in energy. The opposite is
true above zero where the increasing potential lowers the energy level of the electrons and the current is
thus the sum of oxidation and charging.
The potential range from 0.50-0.40 V vs RHE is the so called charging region. Here charge accumulate
in the electrode and the build up charge is counter acted by the specifically absorbed ions in the electrolyte
forming the so-called double layer. At this stage the interface resemble a capacitor and no faradic processes
take place, therefore any current is related to the charging of the double layer.
In the potential range from 0.4 to 0.05 V vs RHE the adsorption of hydrogen to the surface going
22
==PAGE:27==
in the negative scan direction is clearly visible. The resulting faradic current arise from the transfer of
electrons to the hydrogen that adsorbs to the surface (H + +e−→Hads). As the potential is reversed the
adsorbed hydrogen (Hads) are oxidized and released from the surface resulting in the faradic current above
the zero current line (Hads →H + +e−). Hydrogen adsorption and subsequent oxidation and release from
the catalyst surface happens many magnitudes faster than oxygen reduction. The fast coverage of the
platinum active sites by chemically adsorbed hydrogen from the electrolyte is represented by the sharp
peak with a peak maximum at 0.12 V vs RHE and an oxidation peak maximum at 0.13 V vs RHE.
Besides the sharp peak a gradual increase in current from 0.4 to 0.2 V vs. RHE. Besides the sharp peak
a small wave is observed preceding the sharp peak as is pointed out in figure 14. The same gradual
decrease in current also follows the oxidation peak. The fact that the potential peaks of both adsorption
and oxidation coincide is an indication that the rate of attainment of surface equilibrium is greater than
the perturbation rate (scan rate) thus the adsorption/oxidation is reversible around the current maxi-
mum which is an indication of fast kinetics. In [19] Kinishita et al. refereed to this as quasi-equilibrium
conditions.
After the cathodic deposition of hydrogen the current rapidly decrease just after 0.05 V vs RHE.
Decreasing the potential below this value would result in an exponentially increasing current from the
hydrogen evolution reaction where bound hydrogen atoms associate to form molecular hydrogen.
2 ∗+2H+ + 2e−→2H∗
(8)
2H∗→H2(g) + 2∗
(9)
In the potential range 0.6-1.02 V vs. RHE water species are know to adsorb and react with the
platinum surface. The dissociation of water (Eq. 10) creates hydroxyl groups which adsorb to the surface
and is the beginning step leading to oxide formation (Eq. 11)
H2O →OH−+ H+ + e−
(10)
At higher potential values the platinum is oxidized and form platinum-oxide
Pt(s) + H2O →PtO + 2H+ + 2e−
(11)
In contrast to the adsorption and oxidation of hydrogen the corresponding anodic and cathodic waves
of hydroxyl adsorption and reduction is not symmetrical. The anodic current rises exponentially before it
peaks at 0.82 V vs. RHE where it ever so slightly falls to a plateau of constant current until the potential
is reversed. Upon reversion of the potential direction the cathodic current increases over the potential
range 1.0 V-0.76 where it peaks before it slowly decrease to the charging current level.
23
==PAGE:28==
Figure 14: The different adsorption and desorption reactions taking place at the electrocatalyst surface
has been assigned to the corresponding current waves observed in the cyclovoltammogram. The curve
was obtained in 0.1 M HClO4 with a scan rate of 20 mV/s in the potential range 0.05 V - 1.02 V vs RHE.
4.3
Electrolyte and concentration effects
In figure 15 the current profile in 0.1 M HClO4 (dotted blue line) is shown together with the current
profiles in 0.1 M H3PO4 (red solid line) and 2.0 M H3PO4 (green solid line) to illustrate the changes
associated with changing the electrolyte from perchloric acid to phosphoric acid and changing the con-
centration of the latter. The change in concentration was done gradually in order to observe any gradual
changes to the surface.
It can be seen that the appearance of the peak at higher potential in the Hupd has become significantly
more distinct. This double peak in the Hupd is also seen on cyclovoltammograms obtained in H2SO4 where
they were attributed to weakly and strongly bound hydrogen [19]. As the H3PO4 concentration is raised
the peaks seems to move slightly to lower potential both in the reductive and oxidative current. In 0.1
M H3PO4 the peaks maintain the same peak hight as in 0.1 M HClO4 but as the concentration is raised
this current is lowered.
24
==PAGE:29==
Figure 15: The PtC electrocatalyst 0.1 M HClO4 (blue dotted line), 0.1 M H3PO4 (red sold line) and 2.0
H3PO4 (green solid line) at room temperature. The CV’s were obtained in argon saturated electrolyte.
Scan rate ν=20 mV/s
In the oxide region two new peaks have appeared around ∼0.55 V vs. RHE at the expense of the
capacitive charging region in 0.1 M H3PO4 . This peak looks unaffected by the concentration increase of
H3PO4 in the negative scan direction but in the positive scan direction the current profile now continues
to rise from 0.4 V vs RHE to 0.77 V vs RHE where it reaches a plateau before it starts to rise again
following the same profile as in 0.1 M H3PO4 until the potential scan is reversed.
Furthermore the
anodic plateau seen in 0.1 M HClO4 which was the adsorption of hydroxide to the surface is no longer
visible instead the current rises as mentioned from approximately 0.85 V vs RHE but doesn’t seem to
reach a maximum before the potential scan is reversed indicating that the adsorption of hydroxide it
competing with another oxidation reaction since the onset of this reaction has clearly been shifted to
higher potentials.
The peak in the anodic current from the reduction of adsorbed hydroxyl species from the surface is
also lower in 2.0 M H3PO4 than in 0.1 M H3PO4. Furthermore it is evident that this peak significantly
decreased all together once the electrolyte was changed from perchloric acid. Overall the Oupd seems
much more affected by the presence of H3PO4 than the Hupd
4.4
Temperature effects
In figure 16 the current profiles for the 0.1 M HClO4 and 2.0 M H3PO4 at two different temperatures
is presented. While the current profile of the electrocatalyst in H3PO4 at different concentrations and
room temperature had clear distinguishable peaks in the hydrogen region this is not the case once the
temperature is raised. At 60oC in 2.0 M H3PO4 the peaks are barely detectable.
25
==PAGE:30==
All though both adsorption and desorption is increasingly suppressed as the concentration is raised
and specially once the temperature is increased there is a clear asymmetry of the areas which could
indicate that an additional reduction reaction is contributing to the larger adsorption area. Lin et al.
[22] suggested that this could stem from the reduction of H3PO4 following the equation below
H3PO4 + H+ + 2e−→H3PO3 + H2O
with a corresponding oxidation peak around 0.7 V vs. RHE. If this is the case then protons are consumed
in the reaction which could explain the decrease in anodic current in the potential range associated with
hydrogen desorption.
In 42 in the appendix an additional graph can be viewed where the current profile of a separate Pt/C
electrode film in 0.1 M H3PO4 at 60oC has been included. It can be seen that the asymmetry of the
hydrogen adsorption/desorption area is less pronounced in the lower concentration of H3PO4 at 60oC .
The corresponding oxidation peak at around 0.7 V is also a lot smaller than in 2.0 M H3PO4 where this
peak is more pronounced and the hydrogen desorption peak is clearly suppressed.
Figure 16: The PtC electrocatalyst in 0.1 M HClO4 at room temperature (blue dotted line), 2.0 M H3PO4
at room temperature (green solid line), and 2.0 M H3PO4 at 60oC (purple solid line). All CV’s were
obtained in argon saturated electrolyte. Scan rate ν=20 mV/s.
This increase in the peak around 0.7 V with temperature is consistent with observations done by Lin
et al. who tested a Pt disk in pure H3PO4 at 80, 120, and 160 oC where they saw the same trend that
the peak around 0.7 V became stronger when it was obtained at higher temperature.[22]
The peak at 0.7 V is followed by a rapid rise in current which continues to rise to the point where the
potential is reversed. This rise in current is not as steep and it does not reach the same hight in room
temperature as it does at 60oC. The rapid increase at 60oC could be due to the increased temperature
26
==PAGE:31==
improving the kinetics of platinum oxidation. In the cathodic current where hydroxyls are usually reduced
from the platinum surface it can be observed how the current in 2.0 M H3PO4 is decreasing and almost
drops to zero at 0.7 V in 60oC. Lin et al. made the observation that this peak around 0.7 V was observed
in both the anodic and cathodic scans so this might be what is observed here as well that the drop in
current is due to the oxidation of H3PO3. In table 5 the evolution of the ECSA which was calculated
from the Hudp is summarized. It can be seen how the ECSA gradually decreases while the biggest loss of
ECSA happens once the temperature is raised.
Test
Integral [C]
ECSA [m2/gPt]
Area [cm2]
0.1 M HClO4(25)
3.24 · 10−4
64
1.54
0.1 M H3PO4(25)
2.96 · 10−4
59
1.41
2.0 M H3PO4(25)
2.42 · 10−4
48
1.15
2.0 M H3PO4(60)
1.37 · 10−4
28
0.65
Table 5: The charged passed during hydrogen adsorption and the evolution of the ECSA calculated on
the bases of the charge and also the surface area calculated from a total amount of Pt on the GC of 2.4
ug which was obtaiened from the fitting of the CV.
4.5
CO stripping
Another way to asses the ECSA is by CO stripping. This is done by integrating the oxidation peak
of CO to obtain the charge which is then translated into the ESCA by the factor 410 uC/cm2. The CO
stripping is especially useful in elevated temperatures as the increase in temperature affects the weak
Pt-H bond so that ECSA is not properly described by the Hudp.
CO is a poison to the platinum catalyst in the PEM-FC on the anode side as CO adsorbs strongly
to the surface and oxidation only starts above 0.6 V vs. RHE. The reaction that takes place during CO
stripping follow a mechanism involving both adsorbed CO and oxygenated species
CO∗+ H2O →CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−+ ∗
(12)
On well-defined low index single crystals the peak from CO oxidation is narrow whereas oxidation of
CO on the surface of nanoparticles may produce multiple peaks or broad peaks. CO oxidation is thus a
structure sensitive reaction which means that the potential at which the peak appears is related to the
type of crystallographic plane and the concentration and types of defects. [6]
On the Pt(111) surface CO binds via the carbon either on top of one Pt, bridged between two Pt
atoms or to a hallow site. The preferred binding site is the on-top site. [12].
In figure 17 the peaks of the CO stripping of PtC is shown. For 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M H3PO4
additional peaks are clearly visible in addition to the main peak whereas for the 2.0 M H3PO4 at both
25oC and 60oC only one distinct peak can be observed but the peak in these conditions is both smaller
and more broad. The largest shift is from the increase in temperature where the oxidation peak moves
39 mV towards lower potential.
27
==PAGE:32==
Figure 17: Electrochemical CO stripping peaks on PtC in four different conditions. All peaks have been
corrected for resistance and reference potential.
Table 6 summarizes the evolution of the ECSA which was calculated based on the integral of the CO
oxidation peak.
Test
Integral [C]
ECSA
Area [cm2]
0.1 M HClO4
6.56 · 10−4
67
1.60
0.1 M H3PO4
5.98 · 10−4
61
1.46
2.0 M H3PO4(25)
4.94 · 10−4
50
1.20
2.0 M H3PO4(60)
4.23 · 10−4
43
1.03
Table 6: ECSA calculated based on the charge passed during CO oxidation on the surface of PtC in
different electrolyte conditions. The decreasing trend was observed.
It can be seen that both the ECSA and electrode area is larger when calculated on the basis of CO
stripping rather than on the Hupd. This difference is most pronounced in higher temperature indicating
that the ECSA calculation on the basis of the Hupd is unreliable at this condition.
4.6
Oxygen reduction
In order to study the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) oxygen was bubbled through the electrolyte
to saturate it before any measurement was done. When the electrode is submerge into oxygen saturated
electrolyte a cyclic voltammogram of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) can be measured. The result-
ing voltammogram can be used to analyze for the kinetic ORR current (ik).[16]
The current profile of the ORR consists of a kinetic controlled region, a diffusion controlled region
and a region where the ORR current is co-dominated by both mass transfer and surface reaction kinetics.
28
==PAGE:33==
At infinitely fast mass transfer the current density is described by the Butler-Volmer equation shown in
13
ik = i0

−exp
−α · n · F
RT
· η

+ exp
(1 −α) · n · F
RT
· η

(13)
where i0 is the exchange current density, F is the Faraday constant, n is the number of electrons trans-
ferred, η is the overpotential, α is the exchange coefficient and R and T are the universal gas constant
and the temperature respectively.
The current associated with the mass transport region is called the limiting current and is described
by the Levich equation shown in 14
il = 0.62 · n · F · A · D2/3 · ν−1/6 · ω1/2 · Cbulk
(14)
Here ν and ω is the scan rate and rotation speed of the electrode respectively, again n is the number of
electrons transferred and F is Faraday’s constant. Since n, F, ν and ω were the same for all measurements
the variables that should be considered when explaining the difference in current across the potential range
of the limiting current is the diffusion constant, the area and the concentration of oxygen in the electrolyte.
The full current profile of the ORR is co-affected by both surface reaction kinetics and mass transfer,
thus the actual current density is described by the Koutecky-Levich equation shown in 15
1
i = 1
il
+ 1
ik
(15)
At high potentials the overpotenital is not sufficient to overcome the reaction barrier and the onset of
the reaction is therefor not seen until a high enough overpotential is reached. As the potential is moved
towards lower potential the current eventually converges to a constant level. Here any additional increase
in overpotential does not result in a higher current since the limiting factor is now the transport of
reactive species from the bulk to the surface. In figure 18 the different regions have been highlighted.
29
==PAGE:34==
Figure 18: The regions of the ORR curve where different factors dominate the electrocatalytic process.
In figure 19 the The ORR on the Pt/C electrocatalyst is presented in all four testing conditions All
of the ORR curves have been corrected for electrolyte resistance and reference potential. It can be seen
that changing the electrolyte from 0.1 M HClO4 to 0.1 M H3PO4 greatly influence the kinetic region and
mixed region of the current. The onset of the reaction is moved to lower potential and the mixed current
region is likewise shifted to more negative potentials, thus a higher overpotential is needed to reach the
same currents as in the 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte. In figure 15 it was seen how the rise in current related
to the adsorption of oxygen species to the surface was moved to higher potentials and the desorption area
was correspondingly smaller. Overall it can be seen in table 11 that the change of electrolyte is associated
with a 10-fold drop in activity.
The limiting current is also affected slightly by the change of electrolyte to 0.1MH3PO4. The concen-
tration of phosphoric acid is still quite low so oxygen concentration and diffusivity is not necessarily the
factors causing the lowered activity seen in table 11.
30
==PAGE:35==
Figure 19: The ORR curves for in 0.1 M HClO4 at 25 degrees celcius (Blue), 0.1 M H3PO4 at 25 degrees
celcius (red), 2.0 M HClO4 at 25 degrees celcius (green) and 2.0 M HClO4 at 60 degrees celcius (purple).
The curves were obtained in oxygen saturated electrolyte. Scan rate ν=20 mV/s.
As the concentration of H3PO4 is increased to 2.0 M both the kinetic and limiting current is affected.
The mixed current continues to move to lower potentials and the onset of the ORR is also moved further
towards a larger overpotential. Furthermore the limiting current has moved upwards by 0.48 mA. In
figure 15 it was seen how an additional peak appeared around ∼0.7 V vs RHE in 2.0 M H3PO4. This
peak was related to the oxidation of the a phosphoric acid species while the current related to adsorption
of oxygen species was shifted to even higher potentials.
Fleige et al. did a study on the solubility and diffusivity of oxygen in phosphoric acid where they
reported that an increase in the phosphoric acid electrolyte concentration led to a decrease of both O2
solubility and diffusivity and also ORR activity.[10] Thus the large drop in limiting current should be
attributed to the poor solubility and diffusion of O2 in phosphoric acid.
However a small improvement in limiting current is observed when the temperature is raised and the
specific activity is similar to that calculated in 0.1 M H3PO4. This could be attributed to the fact that at
higher temperature the peak from phosphoric acid oxidation experienced a significant shift from around
0.79 V to 0.7 V vs RHE. As the acid is oxidized this frees active sites for oxygen adsorption which could
be why the activity improves with temperature. Furthermore a general improvement of the kinetics is
expected as the temperature is increased.
In figure 43 in the appendices it can be seen how a large wave on the oxygen reduction current in the
anodic scan direction is visible in 2.0 M H3PO4 at 60oC. Even after correcting for background current
this wave still persisted. This phenomenon was also observed in [10] where the authors noticed that a
process in the positive scan direction disturbed the establishing of a well defined limiting current in the
31
==PAGE:36==
positive scan direction. As was describe above this wave was associated with the oxidation of H3PO3.
In figure 20 the tafel slopes of PtC is compared in all four testing conditions. According to the Tafel
equation 16 the surface over potential (η) is linearly depending on the current density.
η = a + b · log(i)
(16)
The surface overpotential is defined as η ≡V −U where V is the measured potential and U is the
equilibrium potential. The equilibrium potential depends on temperature. According to [27] the potential
of O2 + 4H+ + 4e−→2H2O changes -8.46 mV/10 oC thus the equlibrium potential for the ORR at 60oC
is 1.20 V rather than 1.23 V and therefore this was the potential used for the Tafel analysis in 2.0 M
H3PO4 at 60oC. The constant b in equation 16 is the tafel slope and it is the number of mVs required
to increase the current by a factor of 10. This means that a low Tafel slope value is an indication of an
active catalyst, as a smaller overpotential is required to reach a higher current density. Thus it can be
seen that PtC is most active in 0.1 M HClO4 and least active in 2.0 M H3PO4 at room temperature.
The activity decrease as the concentration of phosphoric acid is raised but improves slightly once the
temperature is increased.
Figure 20: The picture show the Tafel slopes of the PtC catalyst in all four testing conditions. The
current density have been corrected for mass transfer and the slope was obtained by linear fitting to the
data marked by the black dotted line.
Most noticeable is the large change in the tafel slope which increases with 30.6 mV/decade when the
electrolyte is changed from perchloric acid to phosphoric acid. In figure 19 the mixed and kinetic current
moved to lower potential which is in agreement with the increase in the tafel slope. Thus the reason for
the large drop in activity seen in table 11 must originate from a change in the reaction mechanism.
32
==PAGE:37==
4.7
Summary
In this chapter the observations and analysis results from the Pt/C electrocatalyst have been presented
and discussed. The starting point for the investigation was the cyclovoltammetry recorded in 0.1 M HClO4
where the Hupd and Oupd was identified. When the electrolyte was changed to 0.1 M H3PO4 peaks
related to phosphate adsorption appeared in the charging region, the adsoption peak from oxygenated
species was shifted 89 mV and the desorption area was significantly suppressed. Furthermore additional
peaks appeared in the Hupd region. The change in electrolyte also affected the ORR curve which was
shifted to lower potential and the Tafel slope increased with 30.6 mV/decade. The limiting current also
moved slightly upwards from -1.19 mA to -1.17 mA. These changes were attributed to the blocking of
active sites from the phosphate adsorption or from a possible change of the reaction mechanism. As
the concentration was increased these peaks were shifted to lower potential and a peak related to the
oxidation of phosphorous acid (H3PO3) to phosphoric acid (H3PO4) was observed around 0.79 V vs
RHE. The limiting current experienced a significant decrease while the Tafel slope remained more or less
unchanged thus the significant decrease in limiting current was attributed to the low solubility of O2 in
phosphoric acid. The rise in temperature improved both the Tafel slope and the limiting current but it
also increased the electrochemistry of the phosphoric acid which was seen from the large oxidation peak
around 0.7 V vs RHE.
33
==PAGE:38==
5
Study 3 - Comparison of Pt/C, PtCo/C and Pt5Nd/C in four
different electrolyte conditions
In this section three different Pt surfaces namely PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd is compared. The section
begins with a description of the two alloy catalyst individually and then the comparison between the
three catalysts will be presented.
5.1
Platinum-Cobalt
Figure 21: TEM image and size distribution of PtCo TKK. Average size was 5 nm.
Above a TEM image and the size distribution of the PtCo/C catalyst is shown. The particles varied
in size from 3-9 nm with an average size of 5 nm. From the TEM image some agglomeration is observable
but overall it can be seen that the particles are dispersed throughout the carbon support .
In figure 22 the cyclovoltammogram of PtCo in 0.1 M HClO4, 0.1 M H3PO4, and 2.0 MH3PO4 is
presented. Again the hydrogen region and oxygen region shows characteristic features of adsorption and
desorption and they are separated by a charging region between 0.4-0.6 V vs RHE. At ∼0.75 vs RHE the
current display a short but rapid increase before it falls back into a more flat rise which is maintained until
the potential is reversed. This is similar to the pure platinum catalyst where the current also saw a slow
rise before increasing rapidly to a stable plateau. In the negative scan direction no current is observed
outside the charging region before 0.9 V vs RHE where it increases until ∼0.78 V vs RHE after which
it slowly levels off to the charging region. Unlike the Pt/C the PtCo/C doesn’t show any sharp peak
from hydrogen adsorption and desorption instead the current increase continuously in the negative scan
direction from 0.4 V - 0.010 V where the current seems to set out to a rapid increase which represents
the beginning of hydrogen evolution before the potential scan is reversed. In the positive scan direction
the current slowly descents and shortly goes through a plateau at 0.25 V vs RHE before it falls quickly
34
==PAGE:39==
to the charging current level.
When moving on to the 0.1 M H3PO4 electrolyte the peaks in the hydrogen adsorption region become
more pronounced but they are still less distinguishable compared to Pt/C. Like for PtC the Hupd does
not appear to be suppressed by the change of electrolyte from HClO4 to H3PO4 before the concentration
of H3PO4 is increased to 2.0 M. Here the hydrogen region becomes smaller and the peaks around ∼0.25
V shifts slightly to lower potential. In the CV in 0.1 M H3PO4 a small raise in current is observed around
∼0.6 V which is probably from the phosphate adsorption.
As the concentration is increased a peak
emerges around ∼0.77 V vs RHE in the positive scan direction. In the oxygen region the rise in current
from the adsorption of hydroxyls is shifted ∼71 mV to higer potential and the desorption is decreased
both when the electrolyte is changed and when the concentration is raised.
Figure 22: Cyclovoltammogram of PtCo in unstirred Argon saturated 0.1 M HClO4, 0.1 M H3PO4 and
2.0 M H3PO4 electrolyte at room temperature. Recorded with a scan rate of ν = 20 mV/s between 0.050
-1.02 V vs RHE.
In figure 23 the effect of the rise in temperature is presented. It can be seen how the current imme-
diately increase in the positive scan direction, as the potential leave the hydrogen desorption region. At
∼0.68 V vs RHE the current reach a peak maximum after which it decreases until ∼0.80 vs RHE and
then it increases again rapidly until the potential is reversed. In the negative scan direction no current
is observed outside the charging region. In fact between ∼0.75 V and ∼0.65 V vs RHE the current cross
the zero current line into the positive current region. As the potential is brought to lower potential the
current slowly increase by -0.06 mA from 0.50 V to 0.3 V vs RHE before it increase rapidly until the
potential is reversed again.
35
==PAGE:40==
Figure 23: Cyclovoltammogram of PtCo in unstirred Argon saturated 0.1 M HClO4 and 2.0 M H3PO4
electrolyte at room temperature and at 60 oC. Recorded with a scan rate of ν = 20 mV/s between 0.050
-1.02 V vs RHE.
It is evident that the two adsorption areas are larger than the desorption areas and it looks like the
potential for hydrogen generation has moved to a higher potential. In fact the rapid increase in current
might indicate that reduction of hydrogen happens immediately over the whole potential range from 0.3
V vs RHE and until the potential is reversed since no peak or plateau is visible from adsorption. Also
the onset of platinum oxidation may have moved to lower potential indicated by the rapid increase in
current and the significant decrease in desorption area in the negative scan direction.
In figure 24 the ORR currents are presented for oxygen reduction on PtCo/C. Again the three regions
may be identified as the kinetic current region at high potentials, the mixed diffusion-kinetic region from
0.9 V to ∼0.7 V and the diffusion controlled region below 0.7 V. The trend is very similar to that of
Pt/C where we see a decrease in activity when the electrolyte is changed from 0.1 M HClO4 to 0.1 M
H3Po4. This fall in activity continues as the concentration of H3Po4 is increased and the limiting current
rises significantly from -1.06 mA to -0.59 mA and then moves downward again to -0.65 mA when the
temperature is increased.
36
==PAGE:41==
Figure 24: ORR on PtCo in 0.1 M HClO4, 0.1 M H3PO4, and 2.0 M H3PO4 at room temperature and
60oC. The curves where obtained in oxygen saturated electrolyte between 0.050-1.02 V vs RHE. Scan
rate ν=20 mV/s.
In figure 25 the peaks from CO stripping on PtCo/C can be seen. Again the trends is quite similar to
that of Pt/C where we see a small shift in the peak potential in the positive direction when the electrolyte
is changed from 0.1 M HClO4 to 0.1 M H3PO4. This shift is counter acted as the concentration of H3PO4
is increased and once again the biggest shift is observed for 2.0 M H3PO4 at 60oC. For PtCo/C however
no peak multiplicity is seen. All current profiles only show one peak.
Figure 25: The peaks from CO stripping on PtCo.
37
==PAGE:42==
5.2
Platinum(V)Neodymium
The Pt5Nd catalyst was synthsized followering the discribtion in section 2.1. The resulting pattern
from the XRD analysis was refined using the sofware PDXL 2 from Rigaku. It was identified as Pt5Nd
using a reference pattern from the database. As can be seen all peaks are explained by the reference
pattern with the results for the refinement presented in table 7
Figure 26: The pattern of the synthesized Pt5Nd sample and the peaks of the reference pattern.
Rwp:
Rp:
Re:
S:
χ2
Maximum shift/e.s.d.:
2.44%
1.81%
1.18%
2.0570
4.2313
0.0023
Table 7: The refinement is evaluated based on the R are Rwp and Re which are the weighted value
and the expected value respectively. Ideally these to values should be as close as possible and thus the
χ2 = Rwp
Rexp and should be as close to 1 as possible.
In the EDS measurement the substances identified were carbon, platinum, neodymium, oxygen and
trace amounts of sulfur and chloride. The trace of impurities can be explained from unreacted Cl−ions
which could still persist and reside in the carbon. Sulfur is a common contaminant as sulfur is omnipresent
in most environments. Furthermore since the catalyst was leached in sulfuric acid it is possible that the
trace amount of sulfur could stem from there. An average of the weight percent and atomic percent was
calculated from the various measurements and is presented in table 8
Average
C
Pt
Nd
O
S
Cl
wt%
64.2
28.5
4.5
2.2
0.5
0.3
σ
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.1
0.1
at%
94.5
2.6
0.6
2.2
0.2
0.2
Table 8: The average values of the wt% and at% of each element identified by the EDS. Several spectra
at multiple sites of the surface was used to obtain the overall average.
38
==PAGE:43==
From table 8 it can be seen that the atomic ratio of platinum and neodymium is 4.33 which is a little
less than the expected 5 for the clean phase of Pt5Nd however the calibration of the EDS with a platinum
reference of known wt% showed that the EDS was approximately measuring 2% less than expected thus
this could explain this small discrepancy. Images from the SEM and an example of the EDS results can
be viewed in picture 41 in the appendices.
In picture figure 27 large agglomerates are clearly visible though smaller particles can also be observed
throughout the carbon support. It can be concluded that the size distribution is far from satisfactory for
the optimal electrocatalyst, however optimizing the synthesis is complicated, time consuming and out of
the scope of this work. Since the XRD results confirmed a pure phase of the Pt5Nd it was decided to go
ahead with the testing of the synthesized catalyst.
Figure 27: The image taken by the TEM and the size distribution of the Pt5Nd nanoparticles. It can
be seen from the distribution that most of the particles are in the size range 2-5 nm and then there is
another size population around 6-8 nm. The distribution was based on a total number of counts (N)
N=363.
In figure 28 the current profile of Pt5Nd/C in 0.1 M HClO4, 0.1 M H3PO4 and 2.0 M H3PO4 both at
room temperature and in 60 oC are presented. It can be seen that a pronounced asymmetry of both the
hydrogen and oxygen region exists. In 0.1 M HClO4 the rise in current is steady from ∼0.4-0.75 V vs RHE
after which it continues to rise more rapidly until the potential scan is reversed. The current profile show
almost no current outside the charging region in the negative scan direction before the potential reach
∼0.4 V vs RHE where the current starts to rise until ∼0.15 V vs RHE where it hits a distinct plateau
before the beginning of hydrogen evolution. In 0.1 M H3PO4 it can be seen that unlike for Pt/C and
PtCO/C the Hupd is suppressed as soon at the electrolyte is changed at least in the adsorption region,
however increasing the concentration does not seem to suppress it further which was the case for PtC/C
and PtCo/C.
39
==PAGE:44==
Figure 28: Cyclovoltammogram of Pt5Nd in unstirred Argon saturated in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M H3PO4
and 2.0 M H3PO4 at room temperature and at 60oC. Recorded with a scan rate of ν = 20 mV/s between
0.050 -1.02 V vs RHE.
In the oxygen region the adsorption of oxygenated species is suppressed and shifted to higher potential
but no obvious adsorption peak from phosphate adsorption appear in the region 0.4-0.6 V like for Pt/C
and PtCo/C. Additionally as the concentration is raised a new peak starts to emerge around ∼0.75 V
which again is taken to be the oxidation of H3PO3. It can also be seen that as the temperature is raised
this peak shifts to lower potential and the Hupd region becomes an exponential rise in current without
any distinct features just as was the case for Pt/C and PtCo/C.
Looking at the oxygen reduction current profiles in figure 29 the current onset and mixed current
region is once again shifted significantly to the left as the electrolyte is changed from 0.1 M HClO4 to
0.1 M H3PO4. and the limiting current has moved upwards. As the concentration is raised we see a
severe decrease in both limiting current and onset potential. This is again counter acted by the increase
in temperature which lower the limiting current and improves on the mixed current region
Looking at the CO stripping peaks of the Pt5Nd/C in figure 30 it can be seen how the peak in HClO4
has a shoulder to the left like the Pt/C. The peaks also show shoulders to the right of the peak. Instead
of dropping symmetrycally around the peak like it was the case for PtCo/C it almost seems to slide to the
the left in higher concentration of H3PO4. Another difference it that in 2.0 M H3PO4 the peak maintains
the same peak height at in lower concentration which was not the case for Pt/C and PtCo/C
40
==PAGE:45==
Figure 29: ORR curves of Pt5Nd in oxygen saturated 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M H3PO4 and 2.0 M H3PO4
at room temperature and at 60oC. Recorded with a scan rate of ν = 20 mV/s between 0.050 -1.02 V vs
RHE.
Figure 30: The CO peaks of the Pt5Nd/C catalyst. Scan rate ν =20 mV/s.
5.3
Comparison of the results of Pt/C, PtCo/C and Pt5Nd/C
In figure 31 the current profiles of Pt/C, PtCo/C and Pt5Nd/C are presented in 0.1 M HClO4. The
curve have been fitted to reflect a loading of 15 ug(Pt)/cm2. It can be seen that the Hupd is smaller for the
41
==PAGE:46==
Pt-alloys relative to the pure Pt but from but the calulated ECSAs where also smaller. For PtCo/C and
Pt5Nd/C the ECSA calculated from the CO stripping was significantly larger than the ECSA calculated
based on the Hupd. This was not the case for Pt/C. In [4] it was reported that alloying weakens the Pt-H
bond because of the change in electronic structure thus this could serve at an explanation for the different
current profiles. The current from the OHads also show different profiles. The beginning of the adsorption
seems to have been shifted to higher potential for the PtCo/C while the Pt5Nd/C diplay a more flat rise
in current and doesn’t reach a plateau like Pt/C and PtCo/C. However Pt5Nd/C eventually reach the
same current level as Pt/C while PtCo/C maintain a lower current until the potential is reversed.
Figure 31: Cyclovoltammogram of PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 0.1 M HClO4, scan rate 20 mV/s, potential
range 0.05-1.02 V vs. RHE. All current profiles have been fitted to resemble a loading of 15 ug(Pt)/cm2
and corrected for resistance and reference potential.
In figure 32 the electrolyte have been changed from 0.1 M HClO4 to 0.1 M H3PO4. Like for the peaks
related to hydrogen adsorption the peaks which were attributed to phosphate adsorption around ∼0.55 V
are also smaller on the Pt-alloys compared to pure Pt/C. On PtC/Co they seem to have shifted slightly
to a higher potential (∼0.6 V) while the Pt5Nd/C current profile seem unchanged in the positive scan
direction from 0.4 V to 0.6 V. In the potential range from 0.6-1.02 V the current profile of the Pt-alloys
is very flat in both the positive and negative scan direction with only a small increase in current from
around 0.9 V. Here it can also be seen how the adsorption current in the Hupd region on the Pt5Nd is
lowered to the level of that for PtCo/C, whereas Pt/C and PtCo/C maintain their current hight even
though the current profile changes.
In figure 34 it can be seen that as the concentration is raised the peak which was attributed to the
oxidation of phosphorous acid becomes visible and the subsequent rise in current probably related to Pt
42
==PAGE:47==
oxidation is seen from 0.9 V vs RHE for all three catalysts though the current is smaller for the alloys
and smallest for PtCo/C. In figure 33 a closer look at the peaks related to phosphate adsorption in 0.1
M H3PO4 and H3PO3 oxidation in 2.0 H3PO4 can be viewed.
Figure 32: Cyclovoltammogram of PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 0.1 M H3PO4, scan rate 20 mV/s, potential
range 0.05-1.02 V vs. RHE. All current profiles have been fitted to resemble a loading of 15 ug(Pt)/cm2
and corrected for resistance and reference potential.
Figure 33: Left: PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 0.1 M H3PO4 at room temperature. Scan rate 20 mV/s.
The arrows indicate the current peaks from phosphate adsorbtion. Right:PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 2.0
M H3PO4 at room temperature. Scan rate 20 mV/s. The arrows indicate the current from oxidation of
H3PO3.
43
==PAGE:48==
Figure 34: Cyclovoltammogram of PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 2.0 M H3PO4 at room temperature, scan
rate 20 mV/s, potential range 0.05-1.02 V vs. RHE. All current profiles have been fitted to resemble a
loading of 15 ug(Pt)/cm2 and corrected for resistance and reference potential
Finally in figure 35 it can be seen that any characteristic peaks of the the Hupd has disappeared
completely as the temperature is raised. Interestingly the individually current profiles of all three catalysts
have become very similar and display only the oxidation of H3PO3, Pt oxidation and a sharp peak at low
potentials which is the evolution of hydrogen.
Figure 35: Cyclovoltammogram of PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 2.0 M H3PO4 at 60oC, scan rate 20 mV/s,
potential range 0.05-1.02 V vs. RHE. All current profiles have been fitted to resemble a loading of 15
ug(Pt)/cm2 and corrected for resistance and reference potential
44
==PAGE:49==
(a) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 0.1 M HClO4
(b) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 0.1 M H3PO4
(c) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 2.0 M H3PO4 25oC
(d) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 2.0 M H3PO4 60oC
Figure 36: CO peaks for all testing conditions. All current profiles have been corrected for resistance and
reference potential.
From the figures in 36 the different profiles of the CO surves becomes a testimony as to how alloying
changes the surface structure as CO oxidation is a very stucture dependent[6]. The fact that the peak
changes with each new electrolyte environment also shows that the conditions of the surface changes.
5.4
ORR
In figure 37 the ORR curves of Pt/C, PtCo/C and Pt5Nd/C in 0.1 M HClO4, 0.1 M H3PO4, and 2.0
M H3PO4 at room temperature and at 60oC are presented. Here it becomes clear how all three catalysts
follow the same trend. The kinetic and mixed current regions shifts to lower potential once the electrolyte
is changed from the the 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte to 0.1 M H3PO4 electrolyte. At low concentration of
H3PO4 the limiting current is only slightly moved to lower currents but as the concentration is raised it
drops significantly because of the poor solubility and diffusion of oxygen which to some degree is improved
by the increase in temperature. A widely adopted way to determine ORR performance is by evaluation
of the half-wave potential (E1/2). Higher(E1/2) means that a lower overpotential is necessary to reach
the specific current density.[34] With this in mind PtCo/C shows the highest ORR performance while
Pt5Nd/C and PtC/C seems to express similar performance in 0.1 M HClO4. Furthermore Pt5Nd/C
display the lowest ORR performance when the electrolyte is changes to H3PO4. However, the problem
with using this method is that kinetic activity and mass transfer capability is not decoupled properly
[34].
45
==PAGE:50==
(a) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 0.1 M HClO4
(b) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 0.1 M H3PO4
(c) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 2.0 M H3PO4 25oC
(d) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 2.0 M H3PO4 60oC
Figure 37: ORR in the negative scan direction for all testing conditions. All current profiles have been
corrected for resistance and reference potential.
A more accurate way to compare the catalysts is to conduct a Tafel analysis and compare the individual
exchange current densities. Before the Tafel analysis the ORR data was corrected for background, IR,
reference potential and mass transfer by use of the KL equation 15. The ECSA from the CO stripping
was used to obtain the current density as the active surface area was higher when calculated based on the
CO stripping relative to that based on the Hupd. After correction the kinetic current was plotted against
the overpotential. The Tafel equation 16 was fitted to the linear part of the curve in order to obtain the
slope and to calculate the exchange current density by setting the overpotential to zero. The Tafel plots
are presented in figure 38 and the slopes and exchange current densities are summarized in table 9 and
10 respectively.
0.1 M HClO4
0.1 M H3PO4
2.0 M H3PO4(25)
2.0 M H3PO4(60)
PtC
-51.7
-82.3
-84.7
-76.8
PtCo
-54.3
-80.7
-81.7
-85.8
Pt5Nd
-46.2
-72.8
-74.1
-69.7
Table 9: The calculated Tafel slopes of the three electrocatalysts is reported in mV/decade.
46
==PAGE:51==
0.1 M HClO4
0.1 M H3PO4
2.0 M H3PO4(25)
2.0 M H3PO4(60)
PtC
0.52
0.36
0.39
0.38
PtCo
0.46
0.31
0.41
0.28
Pt5Nd
0.55
0.44
0.52
0.46
Table 10: Calculated exchange current desities based on the tafel equation and an over potential of zero.
Densities are reported in mA/cm2
(a) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 0.1 M HClO4
(b) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 0.1 M H3PO4
(c) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 2.0 M H3PO4 25oC
(d) PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in 2.0 M H3PO4 60oC
Figure 38: The figure compare the calculated Tafel slopes of PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd in the four different
electrolyte conditions. All slopes have been corrected for mass transfer current. The overpotential was
calculated with the equation η = V −U, where the over potential U was 1.23 V in room temperature and
1.20 in 60oC. The Tafel slope where fitted to the data marked by the black dotted lines.
From table 9 it can be seen how the tafel slope increase 30.6, 26.4, and 26.4 mV/decade for Pt/C,
PtCo/C and Pt5Nd/C respectively as the electrolyte is changed from 0.1 M HClO4 to 0.1 M HClO4
electrolyte. The PtCo/C also showed the highest preservation of activity if the activities are taken to be
the ones showed in table 39. The increase in concentration of the H3PO4 does not influence the kinetic
current further but it could be seen in figure 37 that the limiting current was significantly decreased as
the concentration was raised.
According to the values of the exchange current densities the Pt5Nd/C is the most active catalyst
followed by the Pt/C except in 2.0 M H3PO4. However when the activities where calculated at 0.9 V vs
RHE PtCo/C displayed a higher activity than Pt/C which can be seen in table 11
47
==PAGE:52==
Figure 39: The calculated specific activities at 0.9 V vs RHE. They where calculated besed on the
corrected ORR curves and the ECSA of the CO stripping.
In figure 39 The specific activities (SA) calculated using the KL equation 15 at 0.9 V is compared.
Pt5Nd/C display the highest SA in HClO4 but experience the biggest loss of activity as the electrolyte
is changed to H3PO4 while PtCo/C maintain the highest activity in H3PO4 across temperature and
concentration as can be seen in table 11. A smililar plot of the mass activities is available to consult in
the appendices 44
48
==PAGE:53==
Catalyst(wt%)
Elecrolyte
ECSA (Hupd )
ECSA (CO)
Crystallite size XRD (nm)
IM (mA/mg(Pt))
IS(uA/cm2)
Pt-C(20 t%)
0.1 M HClO4
3.06
64
67
337.9
559.4
Pt-C(20 t%)
0.1 M H3PO4
3.06
59
61
32.3
53.0
Pt-C(20 t%)
2.0 M H3PO4(25)
3.06
48
50
13.5
27.0
Pt-C(20 t%)
2.0 M H3PO4(60)
3.06
27
43
14.6
34.0
Pt-Co(46.4/5.8wt%)
0.1 M HClO4
5
40
55
487.4
889.8
Pt-Co(46.4/5.8wt%)
0.1 MH3PO4
5
35
51
59.5
116.8
Pt-Co(46.4/5.8wt%)
2.0 M H3PO4(25)
5
28
41
12.0
29.4
Pt-Co(46.4/5.8wt%)
2.0 M H3PO4(60)
5
21
34
15.1
45.2
Pt5Nd(28.5/4.5wt%)
0.1 M HClO4
3.97
45
51
518.0
1,022.2
Pt5Nd(28.5/4.5wt%) )
0.1 M H3PO4
3.97
35
43
20.2
47.3
Pt5Nd(28.5/4.5wt%)
2.0 MH3PO4(25)
3.97
28
33
2.9
8.8
Pt5Nd(28.5/4.5wt%)
2.0 M H3PO4(60)
3.97
25
32
7.5
23.2
Table 11: The table summarize the ECSA and activity for the catalysts PtC, PtCo and Pt5Nd. The specific activity were calculated based on the ECSA from
CO stripping.
49
==PAGE:54==
5.5
Summary
In this chapter the current profiles of PtCo/C and Pt5Nd/C where studied in 0.1 M HClO3, 0.1 M
H3PO3 and 2.0 M H3PO3 at room temperature and 60 oC. The observations were then compared to
those made in the prvious chapter about Pt/C. In the oxygen region the alloys expressed trends as that of
Pt/C. The Oads was significantly suppressed by the presence of phosphoric acid and the adsorption peak
for oxygenated species shifted to higer potential. Aditionally Pt/C showed the adsorption/desorption
peaks of phosphate in the 0.4-0.6 V. In 2.0 M H3PO4 all catalysts displayed the same current profile
which consisted of a large peak around 0.7 V and exponentially raising currents from 0.8 - 1.02 V ans
0.2 - 0.05 V regardless of the differences observed in previous conditions. From the ORR curves and the
activity calculations it could be seen that the kinetic activity is significantly decreased as soon as the
electrolyte was changed from perchloric acid to phosphoric acid. As the concentration was increased the
limiting current dropped by half. Discrepancies where noted in the kinetic analysis when the catalysts
were compared but it is unclear to the author how this should be interpreted. It may be taken into
account that possible calculation errors could have been made.
50
==PAGE:55==
6
Conclusion
The High Temperature Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell is a promising technology for next gen-
eration energy storage systems. It has the advantage of being able to function at elevated temperatures
which improves the kinetics of the sluggish oxygen reduction reaction, and it is more resistant to CO
poisoning at the anode. However the phosphoric acid, which is the proton carrier in the in HT-PEMFC,
is limiting the efficiency of the catalyst layer by adsorbing to the surface causing the catalyst to under
perform in the fuel cell. New catalysts have been developed in the effort to improve the activity and thus
lower the loading of the catalyst in th HT-PEMFC. However, conventional screening conditions does not
properly reflect the conditions in the fuel cell and therefor in this work a new protocol for testing was
introduced. This included testing the same electrocatalyst thin film under different conditions in the well
known three electrode RDE set-up, to investigate the phosphate anion adsorption and to understand the
influence it has on the oxygen reduction performance. The testing conditions included 0.1 M HClO4 at
room temperature, which is the preferred testing electrolyte in TF-RDE, 0.1 M H3PO4 at room temper-
ature, and 2.0 M H3PO4 both at room temperature and at 60 oC. This made it possible to observe the
gradual changes of the catalytic performance and the surface trends.
Three electrocatalyst where studied under these conditions. Two commercial catalysts namely JM-
Pt/C (20wt%) and a PtCo/C-TKK(46.4/5.8wt%). Furthermore a Pt5Nd/C(28.5/4.5) were succesfully
synthesized and charaterized using a solid state method. First the adsorption of species from the solution
where studied in argon saturate electrolyte, followed by ORR in oxygen saturated electrolyte to obtain
the mass activity and specific activity of the catalysts, and finally CO stripping was conducted in order
to obtain the electrochemically active surface area.
For the cyclovoltammograms in argon saturated
electrolyte it could be seen how the Oupd where oxygenated species are know to adsorpt to the surface
was suppressed and the peaks where shifted to higher potential as soon at the electrolyte was changed
from 0.1 M HClO4 to 0.1 M H3PO4. From the ORR curves it was clear that the presence of phosphate
anions resulted in a large shift of the curve to lower potentials resulting in a 10 fold drop in activity
across all catalysts. The tafel slopes increased around 30 mV/decade moving the onset potential of the
reaction to higher overpotentials. Furthermore peaks related to phosphate adsorption appeared in the
charging region between 0.50 - 0.06 V vs RHE. As the concentration was increased to 2.0 M H3PO4 this
peak shifted to ∼0.75 V RHE. From the ORR curves it was seen how the limiting current was shifted
some 40 mV upward due to a significant decrease in the solubility and difusivity of the oxygen in the
electrolyte. As the temperature was raised from room temperature to 60oC the peak at ∼0.75 V vs
RHE increased significantly indicating that this was an oxidation reaction related to phosphoric acid.
The Hupd displayed distinct current profiles for each catalyst in all electrolytes at room temperature but
converged to the same similar looking current profile as the temperature was raised. Furthermore all
catalysts showed similar low activities in 2.0 M H3PO4 and the peak from platinum oxidation shifted to
lower potentials. The significant decrease in the tafel slope for all catalysts indicate that the mechanism
of the reaction is probably changing in the H3PO4 electrolyte which show electrochemical properties in
51
==PAGE:56==
the potential range between 0.050-1.02 V vs RHE. The CO stripping revealed a decreasing trend for the
ECSA going from 0.1 M HClO4 at room temperature to 2.0 M H3PO4 at 60oC, which correlated with
the assumption that phosphate anions adsorb to the active sites of the catalyst and cause blocking.
52
==PAGE:57==
References
[1]
Peter Atkins, Julio de Paula, and James Keeler. Atkins Physical Chemistry. Oxford University
Press, 2018.
[2]
Allen J. Bard and Larry R. Faulkner. Electrochemical Methods Fundamentals and Applications.
John Wiley and Sons INC, 2. edition, 2001.
[3]
Biologic. Calculation of the active surface of platinum (Fuel cell ECSA) Corrosion – Application
Note 11. Last accessed 08-10-2024. 2023. url: https://www.biologic.net/documents/fuel-
cell-ecsa-electrochemistry-application-note-11/.
[4]
Carlos A. Campos-Rold´an et al. “Lanthanide contraction effect on alkaline hydrogen evolution and
oxidation reactions activity in platinum - rare earth nanoalloys”. In: Journal of Materials Chemistry
A 12 (]2024).
[5]
Tao Chen et al. “PtFeCoNiCu high-entropy solid solution alloy as highly efficient electrocatalyst
for oxygen reduction reaction”. In: iScience 26 (2023).
[6]
Eduardo G. Ciapina, Sydney F. Santos, and Ernesto R. Gonzalez. “Electrochemical CO stripping
on naosized Pt surfaces in acid media: A review on the issue of peak multiplicity”. In: Journal of
Electroanalytical Chemistry 815 (2018), pp. 47–60.
[7]
Viktor Colic and Aliaksandr S. Bandarenka. “Pt Alloy Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Reduc-
tion Reaction: From Model Surfaces to Nanostructured Systems”. In: ACS Catalysis,6, 5370-5385
(2016).
[8]
Mar´ıa Escudero-Escribano et al. “Tuning the activity of Pt alloy electrocatalysts by means of the
lanthanide contranction”. In: Sciencemag.org (2016).
[9]
Jiantao Fan et al. “Bridging the gap between highly active oxygen reduction reaction catalysts and
effective catalyst layers for proton exchange membrane fuel cells”. In: Nature Energy vol. 6 (2021),
pp. 475–486.
[10]
Michael Fleige et al. “Evaluation of temperature and electrolyte concentration dependent Oxygen
solubility an diffusivity in phosphoric acid”. In: Electrochimica Acta 209 (2016), pp. 399–406.
[11]
Thomas F. Fuller and John N. Harb. Electrochemical Engineering. Wiley, 2018.
[12]
Lakshmikanth K. G., Ishak Kundappaden, and Raghu Chatanathodi. “A DFT study of CO ad-
sorption on Pt(111) using van der Waals functionals”. In: Surface Science 681 (2019), pp. 143–
148.
[13]
B. Hammer and J.K. Nørskov. “Electronic factors determining the reactivity of metal surfaces”. In:
Surface Science 343 (1995), pp. 211–220.
[14]
Qinggang He et al. “Influence of phosphate anion adsorption on the kinetics of oxygen electrore-
duction on low index Pt(hkl) single crystals”. In: Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (2010).
[15]
Yang Hu et al. “Immunity of the Fe-N-C catalyst to electrolyte adsorption: Phosphate but not
perchloric anions”. In: Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 234 (2018), pp. 357–364.
53
==PAGE:58==
[16]
Yang Hu et al. “Revealing the genuine stability of the reference Pt/C electrocatalyst towards ORR”.
In: Electrochimica Acta 391 (2021).
[17]
Yang Hu et al. “Synthesis of PtRare Earth Metal Nanoalloys”. In: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142 (2020),
pp. 953–961.
[18]
Masanori Inaba, Yuij Kamitaka, and Kensaku Kodama. “Eliminating the need for craftmanship:
Facile and precise determination of oxygen reduction reaction activity by spraying catalyst ink on
rotating disk electrode”. In: Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 886 (2021).
[19]
K. Kinoshita, J. Lundquist, and P. Stonehart. “Hydrogen Adsorption on High SUrface Area Plat-
inum Crystallites”. In: Journal of Catalysis 31 (1973), pp. 325–234.
[20]
James Larminie and Andrew Dicks. Fuel Cell Systems Explained. 2nd edition. Wiley, 2003.
[21]
Wei Li et al. “Doping-Modulated Strain Enhancing the Phosphate Tolerance on PtFe Alloys for
High-Temperature Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells”. In: Adv.Funct.Mater, 32 (2022).
[22]
Honghong Lin et al. “High-Temperature Rotating Disk Electrode Study of Platinum Bimetallic
Catalysts in Phosphoric Acid”. In: ACS Catalysis 13 (2023), pp. 5635–5642.
[23]
Jiqi Lin et al. “Pt-Based Rare Earth Alloy as Efficient and Robust Electrocatalyst for High-
Temperature Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells”. In: Chem Asian J. (2023).
[24]
Quentin Meyer et al. “Overcoming the Electrode Challenges of High-Temperature Proton Exchange
Membrane Fuel Cells”. In: Electrochemical Energy Reviews (2023).
[25]
Jens K. Nørskov et al. Fendamental concepts in heterogeneous catalysis. Wiley, 2014.
[26]
Ryan O’hayre et al. Fuel Cell Fundamentals 3rd edition. John Wiley and Sons, 2016.
[27]
Hayley A. Petersen et al. “On the Temperature Sensitivity of Electrochemical Reaction Thermo-
dynamics”. In: ACS Physical Chemistry 3 (2023), pp. 241–251.
[28]
Slododan Petrovic. Electrochemistry Crash Course for Engineers. Springer, 2021.
[29]
Xuefeng Ren et al. “Current progress and performance imporovment of Pt/C catalysts for fuel
cells”. In: Journal of Materials Chemistry A (2020).
[30]
R.E. Rosli et al. “A review of high-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cell (HT-PEMFC)
system”. In: International Journal of HYdrogen Energy 42 (2017), pp. 9293–9314.
[31]
Kazuma Shinozaki et al. “Benchmarking the oxygen reduction reaction activity of Pt-based catalysts
using standardized rotating disk electrode methods”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
40 (2015), pp. 16820–16830.
[32]
Vojislav Stamenkovic et al. “Changing the Activity of Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Reduction by
Tuning the Surface Electronic Structure”. In: Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 45 (2006), pp. 2897–2901.
[33]
Ikuma Takahashi and Shyam S. Kocha. “Examination of the activity and durability of PEMFC
catalysts in liquid electrolytes”. In: Journal of Power Sources 195 (2010), pp. 6312–6322.
[34]
Chunmei Wang, Nilesh Dale, and Kev Adjemian. “Rotating Disk Electrode Investigation of Pt/Carbon
Electrocatalyst Activity and Durability”. In: ECS Transactions 41 (2011), pp. 2245–2253.
54
==PAGE:59==
[35]
Xiao Xia Wang et al. “Pt alloy oxygen-reduction electrocatalysts: Synthesis, structure, and prop-
erty”. In: Chinese Journal of Catalysis (2020), pp. 739–755.
[36]
Dongping Xue and Jia-Nan Zhang. “Recent progress of antipoisoning catalytic materials for high
temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells doped with phosphoric acid”. In: Industrial
Chemistry and Materials 2, 173 (2024).
[37]
Feng Zhan et al. “Recent progress of Pt-based oxygen reduction reaction catalysts for proton ex-
change membrane fuel cells”. In: Rare Metals 43(6):2444-2468 (2024).
[38]
Hong Zhang et al. “Investigation of phosphoric acid influence on the oxygen reduction reaction on
carbon supported platinum electrocatalyst via rotating disk electrodes”. In: Electrochimica Acta
496 (2024).
55
==PAGE:60==
Appendices
Spray casting
Figure 40: The picture show the fitting of a PtC electrocatalyst film with a loading of calculated to 5.45
ug/cm2. It can be how the charging current int cathodic scan direction is dose not follow the same current
profile as the calibration curve. Furthermore both the Hupd desorption preak and Oupd desorption are
suppressed. The cyclovoltammogram was obtained in 0.1 M HClO4 with a scan rate of 20 mV/s in the
potential range 0.050-1.02 V vs RHE.
56
==PAGE:61==
SEM/EDS
Figure 41: The figure show the SEM image and an example of the elements found by the EDS in one of
the spectra obtained.
57
==PAGE:62==
Pt/C in argon saturated electrolyte
Figure 42: The Pt/C electrocatalyst in argon saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at room temperature, 0.1 M H3PO4
at 60oC, 2.0 M H3PO4 at room temperature, and 2.0 M H3PO4 at 60oC. Scan rate ν = 20mV/s.
Figure 43: The ORR curve of Pt/C in oxygen saturated 2.0 M H3PO4 at 60oC. Scan rate ν = 20mV/s.
The ORR curve display a peak on the anodic scan even after background correction.
58
==PAGE:63==
Mass activity
Figure 44: The calculated mass activities at 0.9 V vs RHE. They where calculated based on the corrected
ORR curves and the amount of Pt obtained from the fitting of the argon CVs.
The electrochemical cell
Figure 45: The half cell set-up in he lab with the WE,RE and CE
59
