==PAGE:1==
Vibro-acoustic prediction model
for impact sound insulation of
cross-laminated timber floors
Master thesis
Written by:
Melanie Førsterling Gotfredsen
DTU, Lyngby
February 2025
==PAGE:2==
Master thesis
February 2025
Project:
Master thesis
Study:
MSc Engineering Acoustics
English title:
Vibro-acoustic prediction model for impact sound insulation of cross-laminated tim-
ber floors
Danish title:
Vibro-akustisk prædiktionsmodel for trinlydsisolering af krydslaminerede tømmer
elementer
Language:
English (UK)
ECTS points:
30
Student:
Melanie Førsterling Gotfredsen, s193948
Supervisors:
Jonas Brunskog, Associate Professor at DTU
Christoffer Andreas Weitze, Acoustic Specialist at NIRAS
Handover:
23rd February 2025
Department:
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Pl. Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.electro.dtu.dk
Melanie Førsterling Gotfredsen
s193948
Date
i
23-02-25
==PAGE:3==
Master thesis
February 2025
Abstract
The use of cross-laminated timber has increased rapidly over the last few decades,
however, if used on its own, it is associated with poor sound insulation proper-
ties. There is a lack of computational prediction models for the sound insulation
of lightweight built-up floors that is not dependent on empirical data. Hence, this
project seeks to develop a prediction model for impact sound insulation of cross-
laminated timber floors, using finite element methods in COMSOL. Multiple anal-
yses have been conducted in the laboratory and computationally.
The material
properties of cross-laminated timber and the laboratory boundary conditions have
been investigated by modal analysis and compared by the modal assurance criterion.
The excitation force spectrum from a tapping machine has been simulated in time
domain and used for the prediction of the impact sound insulation in the frequency
domain. A good fit with material properties was found, however it was not possible
to achieve a satisfactory fit with the modelled boundary conditions for the labora-
tory frame. The excitation force spectrum from one tapping machine hammer was
successfully determined, and used to predict the impact sound insulation, which was
compared to measurements. A good fit was found for the general impact sound level,
however two deviating peaks was observed in the low frequency range. Additionally
the model was used to predict the impact sound insulation of an arbitrary 5 layer
CLT floor, for which only the dimensions and measurement data was available, and
a good fit was achieved from 160 Hz and up.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis
February 2025
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Christoffer Andreas Weitze for our weekly meetings and your interest
in this project. Also, thanks to my other colleagues at NIRAS for your interest and
support in my master thesis.
Thank you, Henrik Hvidberg, for helping me on so many practical matters re-
garding this project and its many experimental parts. Also, thank you for your
honest and straightforward persona and eager to be of help to others.
A special thanks is also in order for Jonas Brunskog, the main-supervisor of this
project. Thank you for our weekly meetings and great guidance, and to never express
tiredness of my many questions and interruptions.
A great thanks should be given to Julie Bech Liengaard, a dear friend and fellow
student, who persuaded me to write a bachelor thesis in building acoustics with her,
though our shared background was in architectural engineering. Since then we have
conducted many experiments and projects together, and what a world of difference
that has made for my life, as I’ve now dedicated my studies and professional career
to the matter. Eternal thanks, for the countless hours in your company over the
past three years, in the lab, at the office, and also beyond campus.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis
February 2025
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory and Methodology
2
2.1
Mechanical properties of wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
The finite element method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Experimental analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3.1
Equipment and calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3.2
The CLT specimen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.3
The longitudinal wave speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.4
Experimental modal analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.5
Loss factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.6
Impact sound insulation measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Computational analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
Modal analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Excitation force model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.3
Impact sound insulation model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.4
Model verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Results and Analysis
20
3.1
Longitudinal wave speed and elastic modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Modal analyses and MAC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Simply supported . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
In-frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Loss factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Excitation force . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5
Impact sound insulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.5.1
Model verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Discussion
46
4.1
Material properties of CLT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.1
Elastic moduli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.2
Poisson’s ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Modal analyses and MAC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Simulated impact sound insulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
iv
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis
February 2025
4.5
Model verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6
Further work and more complex models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
52
A Frequency response and coherence for each measurement position
for the floor being simply supported
54
B Frequency response and coherence for each measurement position
for the floor in-frame
60
C COMSOL models
66
D Boundary conditions for in-frame modal analysis
72
v
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis
February 2025
1.
Introduction
Along with the increasing interest to built more sustainably, the use of light-weight
floor systems has also increased. The cross-laminated timber (CLT) structure is
especially favoured for its customizability and load-bearing abilities, while being a
light-weight material. However, a well-known challenge with lightweight floors is its
poor sound insulating properties, as it has also been shown in [1, 2, 3, 4].
It is therefore of interest to be able to predict the sound insulating properties of
a CLT floor, along with possible built-up systems containing CLT. Though many
of the current impact sound prediction models available today are based on the
homogenous and isotropic concrete slab. The CLT floor is an orthotropic mate-
rial, making the prediction of sound insulating properties much more complex [5].
Multiple studies have investigated different computational prediction models on the
impact sound insulation (ISI) of lightweight floors [6, 7, 8, 9], but still there is a
need for improvement in this field.
In this project a 10 m2 7 layered CLT specimen will be investigated using experi-
ments, calculations and simulations, the latter using COMSOL multi-physics, where
also the ISI will be attempted to be predicted using the finite element method
(FEM). As stated in [6], and also executed in [7, 8, 9], such a prediction model is of-
ten separated into three stages: the excitation, the system and the response. In this
project a similar approach is used, where the following will be investigated: firstly,
the material properties of the floor and boundary conditions (BCs) of the labora-
tory frame (system), secondly, the excitation force spectrum of the standard tapping
machine (excitation) and lastly, a prediction model that with post-processing can
estimate the ISI (response).
In parallel to this project another master thesis project was conducted by Julie B.
Liengaard. Liengaard has performed multiple experimental tests on the same CLT
floor specimen, many of which have been performed in corporation with this project,
while other experiments has been conducted by one and the data provided for both
projects. In these cases, where data is presented from Liengaard’s work, a reference
to Liengaard’s master thesis will be made as [10].
1
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
February 2025
2.
Theory and Methodology
Many experiments were conducted in this project, mainly in order to determine the
material properties of the CLT element. The material properties were compared to
values from the literature, and adjusted through multiple analyses to achieve the
best fit with experimental measurements. In this chapter the methodology for the
different studies and the numerical model are described.
2.1
Mechanical properties of wood
Wood is an orthotropic material, meaning that it has unique and independent me-
chanical properties for different directions. Commonly for wood these directions are
described as the longitudinal, tangential and radial. The longitudinal direction be-
ing parallel to the grain, the tangential being perpendicular to the grain and tangent
to the growth rings, and the radial being perpendicular to the grain and normal to
the growth rings. The directions are sketched in Figure 2.1. Due to the orthotropic
properties of wood, a total of twelve constants, whereas nine are independent, are
needed to fully describe the wave propagation in wood. The constants are three
Young’s moduli, E, three shear moduli, G, and six Poisson’s ratios, ν [11]. The
three Young’s moduli are in this report denoted as EL, ET, and ER for the longitu-
dinal, the tangential and the radial direction, respectively. The three shear moduli
are denoted GLT, GTR and GLR and are the elastic constants for the LT, TR and
LR plane, respectively. The six different Poisson’s ratios are theoretically denoted
νLT, νTL, νLR, νRL, νRT, and νTR, however, in this report the Poisson’s ratio has
been simplified to one common value and is denoted ν. Despite this simplification
there were yet seven independent material properties to be defined for wood in this
project.
Figure 2.1: Sketch of the longitudinal, tangential and radial direction in wood.
2
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
February 2025
Data for these material properties are often in lack, both from producers and in the
literature. This is partly due to the difficulty related to measuring these properties,
but also that these properties can vary considerably within the same sort of wood,
because wood is a natural material that is subject to changing ambient conditions
during growth. Additionally, wood is hygroscopic, meaning it can absorb humidity
from the air. The moisture content of wood also changes the mechanical properties
as shown in [12] and described by [11]. Hence the mechanical properties of wood
are tied to large uncertainties.
2.2
The finite element method
The FEM is a numerical approach to solve differential equations for complex prob-
lems, e.g.
wave propagation in structures.
In FEM the system is divided into
smaller and simpler elements, which are connected to the surrounding elements
through shared nodes. The discretization of the system are implemented by a mesh
generation, which resolution can very depending on the problem. So-called shape
functions (or basis functions) are used to interpolate the governing equations within
each element, using different forms of interpolation. The differential equations are
then rewritten in weak form, from which it is possible to discretize the the equations
to numerical model equations. One method that is often used for this discretization
is the Galerkin method, which is an approximate solution [13].
In the structural mechanics physics interface, the discretization of the CLT floor
structure was made with quadratic serendipity elements; second-order elements,
that in 3 dimensional problems each has 20 nodes. The quadratic serendipity is
a good trade-off between accuracy and computational efficiency. Using FEM for
structural mechanics, the displacement in each element is approximated by shape
functions, Ni(x), and the nodal displacements, ui, as described in
u(x) =
X
i
Ni(x)ui.
(2.1)
For wave propagation in solids the resulting system of equations comes in the form:
M¨u + C ˙u + Ku = F,
(2.2)
where M is the mass matrix, C is the damping matrix and K is the stiffness matrix.
In the pressure acoustics interface the discretization of the air domain and PML
was made with quadratic Lagrange elements, that is also second-order elements,
but with more nodes than the quadratic serendipity elements. It has 27 nodes per
element when used for a 3-dimensional problem. The extra nodes make them less
computational efficient, however they are more accurate. These are usually used for
pressure acoustics where the phase accuracy is of importance. Similarly, the acoustic
pressure field is also approximated by shape functions for each element,
p(x) =
X
i
Ni(x)pi,
(2.3)
3
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
February 2025
and in general an excited pressure acoustic field is governed by the second-order
inhomogeneous Helmholtz equation,
∇2p + k2p = −jρωq,
(2.4)
where p is the sound pressure, k = ω/c is the wave number, ω = 2πf is the angular
frequency, c is the speed of sound in the medium, j is the imaginary unit and q is
the source term.
For this project, the FEM software COMSOL Multiphysics [14] (hereafter called
COMSOL) was used to estimate the ISI of the CLT floor, and both the structural
mechanics and the pressure acoustic module were used together with multiple stud-
ies; eigenfrequency study, time dependent study and frequency domain study. More
information about the studies and the use of them are given in Section 2.4.
2.3
Experimental analyses
2.3.1
Equipment and calibration
The equipment used to conduct the different experiments are listed below:
• Bruel & Kjær accelerometer type 4367
• Bruel & Kjær impact hammer type 8202
• Bruel & Kjær vibration exciter type 4809
• Bruel & Kjær Force transducer type 8200
• Bruel & Kjær PULSE Software
• Bruel & Kjær Data Acquisition Front-end type 3560-B-130
• Bruel & Kjær Nexus Conditioning Amplifier type 2692-0I4
• Exciter Amplifier
• Bruel & Kjær Calibration Exciter type 4294
• Bruel & Kjær Mini shaker type 4810
For the calibration of the accelerometer, the calibration exciter and the PULSE soft-
ware were used. A flat-top window was applied to the non-integrated accelerometer
signal. For the fast Fourier transform (FFT) analyser a total of 6400 frequency lines
were used on a 800 Hz frequency span with a 0% overlap. The calibration exciter
excites the accelerometer with 10 m/s2 at 159.2 Hz, which should appear in the
accelerometers autospectrum in the PULSE software. The gain was adjusted until
a satisfactory result of 10 m/s2 at 159.2 Hz was achieved.
To calibrate the force transducer the calibrated accelerometer, a known mass and
a mini shaker were used.
The total weight of the accelerometer and the known
mass was noted to be 115 grams. Utilizing the known mass and the relationship
stated in Newton’s second law, F = ma, the expected relationship between force
and acceleration can be calculated. In this case it was
1
m = a
F ⇒
1
0.115 = 8.7 kg−1,
and again the gain was adjusted to match this value.
4
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
February 2025
2.3.2
The CLT specimen
In this project, several experiments were conducted on a CLT floor specimen, which
was a leftover piece archived in DTU’s laboratory, hence no information about the
floor or producer was available. The floor consisted of two CLT elements, each of
which had a width of 2.98 m, a length of 1.69 m, a height of 0.24 m, and a density
of 460.4 kg/m3. To join the two parts into one floor element, they were placed
up against each other, such that the whole floor measured 2.98 x 3.34 x 0.24 m,
and they were then screwed diagonally together by the junction with 35 uniformly
distributed 240 mm screws.
The floor was composed of seven layers of timber,
where each layer was oriented orthogonally to the adjacent layers. As timber is an
orthotropic material this means that the stiffest direction of the timber was rotated
90 degrees from layer to layer, making the material very strong and hence suitable
for load-bearing constructions.
In the remaining of this report, the mentions of a CLT element refers to just one
CLT element (not joined), whereas, the mentions of the CLT floor is referring to
the two CLT elements joined together.
Experiments were conducted on the floor using mainly two BCs; simply supporting
points and in the laboratory steel frame.
The simply supported points are im-
plemented using brass cones with an upper surface diameter of roughly 1 cm and
bottom diameter of roughly 6 cm. The cone simply supports will be denoted as just
simply support, not to be confused with a simply supported line. Likewise, when the
floor was inserted into the laboratory specimen opening, it is referred to as being
in-frame.
2.3.3
The longitudinal wave speed
The longitudinal wave speed was found experimentally in order to estimate the
Young’s modulus of the CLT floor.
Rewriting the equation for the longitudinal
wave speed in plates provides an expression for the Young’s modulus, E,
cl =
s
E
ρ(1 −ν2) ⇒E = c2
l ρ(1 −ν2),
(2.5)
where cl is the longitudinal wave speed, ν is the Poisson’s ratio and ρ is the density
of the slab.
To measure the longitudinal wave speed the floor was excited by an impact hammer
on one side of the floor, and the impulse response was measured by an accelerometer
on the opposite side of the floor. The measurement set-up can be seen in Figure 2.2.
The hammer excited the same layer of timber as the accelerometer was attached to
with beeswax. As the orientation of the grain in the CLT layers was orthogonal to
the adjacent layers, the layer was chosen such that the direct path between source
and receiver position was along the grain, i.e. in the stiffest direction. The signals
from the impact hammer and accelerometer were both processed in the B&K PULSE
software. The impulse response was then analysed in order to identify the time of
arrival of the first wavefront at the accelerometer position. Then the wave speed
5
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
February 2025
(a) B&K accelerometer attached
with beeswax
(b) B&K Impact hammer exciting
the floor
(c) Measurement setup to identify the longitudinal wave speed.
Figure 2.2: The used equipment and measurement set-up to measure the longitudinal
wave speed
could be found by knowing the distance the wave had travelled. In the analysis
of the impulse response, one would expect to see many peaks (or wavefronts), due
to the different types of waves present in a solid medium (longitudinal, shear and
bending waves), and also reflections from any changes and boundaries of the medium.
The longitudinal wave in the stiffest direction was identified by being the very first
wavefront, as it is known that longitudinal waves travel faster than shear and bending
waves. The first wavefront would also be from the direct path (and not a reflection),
as this is the one with the shortest distance to travel.
Due to the orthogonal composition of the CLT layers, it is only possible to measure
the Young’s modulus for the strongest direction, e.g. parallel to the grain, EL. The
results from the longitudinal experiment and the calculated Young’s modulus are
presented in Section 3.1.
2.3.4
Experimental modal analysis
Several experimental modal analyses were conducted on the floor in order to compare
the mode shapes and natural frequencies found computationally with the measured
ones. The modal analyses were done both for the simply supported and the in-frame
floor. The goal was to validate the computational model of the CLT material, the
6
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
February 2025
junction between the two elements and the BCs in-frame. To experimentally identify
the natural frequencies and the corresponding mode shapes, the floor was excited
by a Bruel & Kjær vibration exciter, while the response was measured in a grid
of accelerometers, see Figures 2.3 and 2.4. During the measurements, the Bruel &
(a) B&K vibration exciter
attached to a piano string
that is attached to the
force transducer.
(b) B&K Force transducer
screwed to a metal plate
that was screwed to the
floor.
(c)
B&K
Accelerometer
placed with beeswax on a
metal plate that were glued
to the floor.
Figure 2.3: Measurement setup for modal analysis of the floor while being simply
supported.
Kjær software PULSE was used to check the coherence and the frequency response.
The frequency response was measured as the transfer mobility, that is, the ratio of
the velocity response at the accelerometer, to the excitation force at the shaker. The
PULSE settings were sat to capture 6400 lines across a 400 Hz frequency span (0
to 400 Hz), resulting in a frequency resolution of 0.0625 Hz and each measurement
took 16 seconds to complete.Unfortunately, construction work just outside the lab
caused considerable background vibrations during the measurement period. The
quality of the measurements was given by the corresponding coherence, and a total
of at least 50 averages per measurement position helped eliminate the effects of these
background vibrations.
The frequency response function (FRF) for each measurement position was esti-
mated by taking the average for each excitation position. Resulting in a total of 30
FRFs, e.g. one for each measurement position. When analysing the FRFs for ex-
citation position S1 for the simply supported floor, measurement positions A1 and
A2 were significantly different from all the other FRFs, with an almost constant
broadband magnitude difference of approximately 20 dB, as it is seen in Appendix
A. This was assumed to be due to measurement errors, and the two FRFs were
excluded prior to the averaging. The error could occur due to the floor’s corner not
being resting on the simple support, however this was not checked. The FRFs were
then plotted in a grid corresponding to the measurement grid, to manually analyse
patterns in the natural frequencies, e.g. the frequencies with the greatest response
to the excitation. Common peaks in the FRFs were then identified as resonance
frequencies, the FRFs were then analysed to obtain an estimate of the correspond-
ing mode shapes. This was done in MATLAB using the built-in mesh-function,
that takes in the inputs X, Y, and C. The X and Y inputs were matrices with the
7
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure 2.4: Sketch of the measurement (blue) and excitation (orange) positions for
the modal analysis measurements. As well as the location of the junction (grey
dashed line). The simply supports were located approx. 5 cm from each corner of
each CLT element (purple triangles). The edge of the measurement grid was 10
cm from the floor’s edge, and the additional measurement positions were uniformly
distributed between these points.
x- and y-coordinates for the measurement grid, as shown in Figure 2.4, and the C
input was a matrix of the amplitude for a specific frequency at each measurement
point. Using linear regression in the areas between the grid points, an estimation
of the mode shape was found. The complex amplitude needed to be real valued
in order to visualise the mode shape. In order to include the phase information,
the complex matrixes C1 and C2 (for respectively, excitation position S1 and S2)
were normalised. The normalisation was done by finding the maximum value across
both matrices and normalise each matrix with the value in that element. Meaning
that the normalisation could provide values above 1, if the position that hold the
common maximum value, did not hold the individual maximum value for the other
matrix. For the simply supported floor, note that, the data in position A1 and A2
for excitation position 1 were excluded due to errors. Hence if either of the two
positions were found to be the one with the maximum response. The value, which
matrix C1 were normalised by, would be the value in that position in matrix C2.
8
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure 2.5: Simplified 2D sketch of the BCs in the laboratory. The floor was resting
on roughly 5 cm of the steel frame, the additional space between the frame and floor
was filled with mineral wool and sealed with duct-tape.
Finally, the two normalised matrices were averaged into one single matrix, C, and
the real value from this matrix were then given as the input to the mesh function.
The function will make a linear interpolation between the points, so the mode shapes
could easily be compared to the numerically found mode shapes.
An experimental modal analysis was likewise performed on the floor under labora-
tory conditions. The procedure was the same as described above, however the BCs
had changed, e.g. the floor was resting on a resilient steel frame, with an overlap
of approximately 5 cm, and a gap between the steel frame’s side and the side of
the CLT floor of approximately 5 cm, which was filled with mineral wool and sealed
with duct-tape. A simplified sketch can be seen in Figure 2.5.
The results of the experimental modal analyses are presented in 3.2.
2.3.5
Loss factor
Another unknown property of the CLT floor was the loss factor. The total loss
factor is the sum of the internal and coupling loss factors, the latter including sound
radiation and structural couplings. In the book Sound Insulation by Carl Hopkins
[15, Sec. 2.6.5] the expected total loss factor is frequency dependent, and for the
laboratory frame it should follow the expression,
ηtotal = ηii + 0.3
√f ,
(2.6)
where ηii is the internal loss factor. The radiation losses are considered neglectable
small, and are thus not included in Eq. 2.6. The same formula is also presented
in the International Standard Organisation (ISO) 10140-5 [16] for the total loss
factor. In this project the loss factor will be estimated by experimental data, and
the same trend for the frequency dependency is expected. The internal loss factor
will likewise be estimated by experimental data, and a rather constant behaviour is
expected across the frequency spectrum.
The internal and total loss factor will be estimated by both the 3 dB-bandwidth
method and the structural reverberation time. The latter being data from Lien-
gaard’s master thesis in [10].
9
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
February 2025
Loss factor from the 3 dB-bandwidth method
The 3 dB-bandwidth method works by finding the resonance frequencies in the
measured FRF, and then analyse the shape of the peaks. Depending on the damping
of the structure, the bandwidth of the peak will change, such that greater damping
resolves in a lower but broader peak, and less damping resolves in a higher but
sharper peak. The bandwidth at half the power (-3 dB) is measured and divided by
the natural frequency
ηn = fn,upper −fn,lower
fn
,
(2.7)
where fn is the resonance frequency, and fn,upper and fn,lower are the upper and lower
limit for the -3 dB bandwidth, respectively [15, Eq. 3.204]. The estimated loss factor
is, however, restricted to the specific resonance frequencies. The loss factor are thus
not a continuously estimation along the frequency spectrum. The FRFs used for the
3 dB-bandwidth method are the same as the one measured for the modal analysis
described previously.
Loss factor from the structural reverberation time
The loss factor of the floor can also be experimentally estimated by its structural re-
verberation time. In accordance with ISO 12354-1:2017, Annex C [17], the following
relationship between the loss factor and structural reverberation time holds
ηtot(ω) = 6ln(10)
ωTs
.
(2.8)
The structural reverberation time can be analysed by the impulse response (IR) that
was measured for each measurement position simultaneously with the FRFs (which
was described in Section 2.3.4). The structural reverberation time is defined by the
time it takes the acceleration level to decay with 60 dB. The integrated impulse
response method as described in ISO 3382 can be used to evaluate this [18].
For this project the data from the measured IRs were processed by Liengaard in
[10], and the results were kindly provided for this project. The provided structural
reverberation times for the simply supported and the in-frame floor are reprinted in
Table 3.4.
The results of the loss factor using both methods are presented in Section 3.3.
2.3.6
Impact sound insulation measurements
Laboratory measurements of the normalised impact sound level (Ln) should be car-
ried out in accordance to the ISO 10140 series, specifically part 3 is regarding ISI
measurements [19]. The data used for the measured ISI of the CLT floor was ac-
quired by Liengaard in [10]. The measurement was conducted at DTU’s transmission
room. The test specimen was the same floor as described in detail in Section 2.3.2.
In accordance to [19] the floor should be weighted to simulate the weight of people
and furniture. However, the simulated ISI was made without weights, and hence
the measured data acquired was without weights. The standard tapping machine
was used as the impact source. See [10] for further details on the impact ISI mea-
surement.
10
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
February 2025
2.4
Computational analyses
The computational model was made in COMSOL, where both the acoustic module
and the structural mechanics module were used. The primary goal of this project
was to predict the ISI of a CLT floor. The computational process was subdivided
into three parts:
1. Several computational modal analyses were conducted to validate the material
properties of the floor and also the influence of the junction between the CLT
elements.
2. Simulate the excitation force provided by the tapping machine in the time do-
main, with the objective of obtaining the frequency spectrum for the repeated
impact.
3. Simulate the ISI in the frequency domain by exciting the floor with the calcu-
lated force spectrum in five points (corresponding to five different excitation
positions of the tapping machine), and integrate the intensity over the surface
of the bottom of the floor to estimate the radiated power, which can be used
to calculate the ISI.
2.4.1
Modal analyses
The computational modal analyses were conducted in COMSOL using the structural
mechanics module and the eigenfrequency study.
COMSOL Model
The CLT floor was modelled in COMSOL using the structural mechanics module,
and is based on the COMSOL geometry from [7]. The floor’s dimensions, junction
and density were as described in Sec. 2.3.2. The junction between the two parts was
ignored in the computational model, as it was shown that a good fit between the
natural frequencies and mode shapes could be found without. From the measured
data, it was also seen that the coherence of the frequency response (Figures A.1
and A.2) were not severely affected by the split for frequencies below approximately
5000 Hz. Therefore it was found to be neglectable within the scope of this project.
For the geometry of the floor a ’block’ element was made in the 3D modal wizard
for COMSOL. Hereafter, the block was divided into 7 layers to represent the layers
of CLT. In the structural mechanics panel 2 elastic layers were made. They were
both orthotropic, but the direction dependent Young’s moduli were chosen such that
the stiffest direction rotated 90 degrees for each layer. In practise this was done by
making the stiffest direction in the global x-direction for the first elastic layer, and
in the global y-direction for the second elastic layer, and then assign every other
layer to the different elastic layers. One should be aware that the stiffest direction
in the first layer corresponds to the actual dimension, that the grain of the first layer
is oriented in. If the orientation of the stiffest direction was accidentally rotated by
90 degrees, the resulting mode shapes would also be rotated 90 degrees, and thus
the natural frequencies would have been skewed due to the slightly different lengths
11
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
February 2025
of the two dimensions in-plane. The final geometry for the model are showed in
Appendix C, Figures C.1 and C.2.
The material properties of the floor were investigated through several modal analy-
ses, and the material properties that provided the best fit with measured data was
chosen. The results of which will be apparent in Section 3.2.1.
To model the floor with simple supports, 8 points were made along the edge of the
bottom surface of the block, placed approximately the same place as the simple
support cones were (illustrated in Figure 2.4). In the structural mechanics panel
these points were chosen to have a prescribed displacement in all directions of 0 m.
The BC for the floor in-frame was more complicated to model, and as will become
apparent in Section 3.2.2 different approaches were tested, though a satisfactory
model for the BC was not achieved.
For the eigenfrequency study that was used for the modal analysis the mesh of the
floor was generated by a physics-controlled mesh with element size extra coarse.
The eigenfrequency study
The settings for the eigenfrequency study in COMSOL were the ARPACK solver
with a rectangle search and approximately 20 eigenfrequencies. The rectangle search
was in the region between 1 to 300 Hz for the real part of the eigenfrequencies. After
the computation an export tab was made in the results panel. The displacement
for each mode was evaluated in a grid of points corresponding to the measurement
positions used in the experimental modal analysis. The displacements in these points
and the corresponding resonance frequency were then exported and processed in
MATLAB. In MATLAB the data was used to make the modal vector for each mode,
that was later compared to the measured modal vector by the modal assurance
criterion, as described in the next section.
Modal assurance criterion (MAC)
To subjectively investigate whether the mode shapes of the measured and simulated
modes were similar would be very time consuming and the quality would be ques-
tionable. Therefore, the measured and simulated mode shapes were compared using
the objective value called the modal assurance criterion (MAC) [20]. The MAC
value is calculated by
MAC =
ΨT
mΨ∗
c
2
ΨT
mΨ∗
mΨT
c Ψ∗
c
,
(2.9)
where Ψm is the measured modal vector and Ψc is the computed modal vector. The
modal vector is a vector describing the shape of the mode, it is not important if this
value is normalised, or whether it is representing displacements, velocities or even
the mobility. This is due to the nature of the equation, any normalisation constant
or units for different types of values will be cancelled out due to the fraction. For this
project, the computed modal vectors were displacements and the measured modal
vectors were the given as the mobility in the same grid points. These were then
normalised to the maximum value in the grid and hence dimensionless. Though, the
12
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
February 2025
two modal vectors had different units, the shape of the mode would still be present
in both, and hence, they can be used to compare the shape.
The experienced signal processor will quickly realise that this equation is similar to
the formula for deriving the coherence between two signals. Just like the coherence,
the MAC takes a value between unity and zero, with unity implying that the mode
shapes are identical. Though, a MAC value above 0.9 is considered satisfactory.
Below 0.1 the two modes will be considered to have no comparability at all. Ad-
ditionally, for this project, a MAC value under 0.5 was considered too uncertain
to show comparability between the two modal vectors. The MAC is an objective
quantity for validating the mode shapes, but it should be noted that it does not
validate the natural frequency for which the mode were found at [9, 20, 21].
A MATLAB script was made to compare all possible combinations of measured and
computed mode shapes. An example from the simply supported floor: 11 measured
modes were found, spanning from 30 to 217 Hz, and 17 computed modes were found
in the same region, resulting in 11 · 17 = 187 MAC values. These were then plotted
in a scatter plot with the x-axis being the computed mode number and the y-axis
being the measured mode number. The mode numbers corresponding to the order
of appearance. Hereafter the points in the plot were coloured to match their value,
so any MAC above 0.9 would be marked with black, any MAC between 0.9 to 0.8
would be a bit lighter and so on. If modelled perfectly, this would result in a perfect
diagonal line, where any (n,n) mode would be black, because the n’th measured
and n’th computed mode shapes would match perfectly (have MAC value of unity).
However, this is not realistic, as some of the computed modes will not be found in the
measured modes. Firstly, if two modes were very close to each other, the measured
mode will be a combination of these, whereas COMSOL will compute these as two
individual mode shapes very close to each other in frequency. Another aspect was
the different types of waves. In the measurement, transverse and bending waves were
excited the most, because the shaker was exciting in the z-direction (perpendicular
to the surface plane). Likewise, the accelerometers were also measuring in the z-
direction, and thus any potential longitudinal waves in the floor (in-plane waves)
would neither be excited nor measured, and thus the probability of finding them
was extremely low.
As mentioned, the different modal analyses were conducted to validate the material
properties, the modelling of the floor and the BCs. There are many mechanical
properties in an orthotropic material; Young’s and shear moduli for each direction,
as well as six Poisson’s ratios, though for this project the Poisson’s ratio has been
simplified to just one value. In the literature the mechanical properties of wood are
often given as a ratio of the Young’s modulus in the stiffest direction (EL). The
material properties from the literature were tested computationally and evaluated
with the MAC. Additionally, a manual grid-search inversion approach was used to
optimise the material properties to give the closest fit with the measured resonance
frequencies.
The results of the computational modal analyses are presented in 3.2.
13
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
February 2025
2.4.2
Excitation force model
The ISO standard tapping machine has five hammers equally spaced along a 40 cm
line. Each hammer has a mass of M =0.5 kg and is dropped from a height of h=4
cm. Each hammer has a repetition rate of 2 Hz, so the tapping machine as a system
impacts the floor with a repetition rate of fr=10 Hz, e.g. a repetition time of Tr=0.1
s. From [22] it is apparent that the repeated force spectrum can be expressed by
FR(f) =
∞
X
n=−∞
Fnδ(f −nfr),
(2.10)
where each amplitude, Fn, is given by
Fn = 1/Tr
Z Tr
0
f1(t)e−i2πnt/Tr
(2.11)
where f1(t) is the time history of a single hammer impact. Hence the time history
from a single impact can be used to estimate the repeated excitation force. For
simplicity reasons the five hammers with repetition rate 2 Hz were modelled as one
hammer with a repetition rate of 10 Hz, the effects of which have been investigated
in [23].
The impact velocity from the hammer is (2gh)
1
2 = 0.886m/s, and as explained in
[22] the two extreme cases of impact, i.e. purely damped and purely elastic, result in
a low frequency asymptote of the repeated force spectrum between 4.430 and 8.859
N, respectively.
Because, the repeated impact force spectrum is the result of the single impact force
spectrum convolved with a fr line spectrum, the frequency resolution needed to have
lines at every 10 Hz after the FFT. The frequency line components after the FFT
can be expressed by the sampling frequency
fk = Fs
M k,
(2.12)
for some integer k, where M is the number of samples in the signal, and Fs is the
sampling frequency which can be found by
Fs = 1
∆t
(2.13)
where ∆t is the time resolution.
COMSOL Model
The excitation force was simulated using COMSOL. The CLT floor was modelled
as described in Section 2.4.1 but with a coarse element size for the mesh instead.
The tapping machine hammer was simulated as a 4 cm circle on the floor that was
extruded to a certain height, such that when the built-in material steel was applied
on the hammer, it would have the mass of 0.5 kg. An initial velocity was applied
on the hammer in the negative z-direction of 0.886 ms. The final geometry for the
14
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
February 2025
model are shown in Appendix C Figures C.3 and C.4. The position of the hammer
changed such that it represented different excitation positions. The five excitation
positions were labelled by Roman numerals from I to V, and their placements are
visualised in 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Placement of the five excitation positions on top of the CLT floor in
COMSOL
Time dependent study
The time history of the impact force was found in a time dependent study in COM-
SOL with a time resolution of 1e-5 s, the force impact was found by a surface integral
of the normal stress in the shared boundary between the hammer and floor. The
simulated force pulse was exported to MATLAB. Because no damping was intro-
duced in this time dependent study, there is a risk of introducing high frequency
spurious oscillations to the force pulse. This is an error than can be avoided with
high-frequency damping in the COMSOL model. However, for this project (with
inspiration from [24]), a 6000 Hz low-pass filter was applied to the force pulse to
eliminate this error. The simulated force pulse with and without the filtering is
presented in figure 3.22. As seen from Eq. 2.11 only one impact was needed to find
the force spectrum magnitude, hence the force pulse was truncated after the first
zero-crossing. The signal was then zero-padded to M =50,000 samples, e.g. 0.5 s, to
achieve a satisfactory frequency resolution after the FFT. From Eqs. 2.12 and 2.13
15
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
February 2025
the frequency line spectrum will have lines at every 2 Hz,
fk = (1e−5)−1
50000
k = 2k Hz,
(2.14)
and thereby also line components at every 10 Hz, as needed.
From Eq. 2.11 the single impact force spectrum, Fn was found by a FFT of the
single force pulse. As evident from Eq. 2.10 the repeated impact force spectrum, Fr
can be described as the complex magnitudes of Fn repeated with a 10 Hz interval.
This was implemented in the frequency domain model described in Section 2.4.3 by
exciting the floor with the complex Fn and solve for every 10 Hz.
The results of the simulated excitation force are presented in Section 3.4.
2.4.3
Impact sound insulation model
Using the formulation from [6] the impact sound level can be expressed as
Ln = 10log
 
Πrad 4ρc
p2
refA0
!
(2.15)
where ρ and c are the density and speed of sound in air, respectively, pref = 20·10−6
is the reference pressure, A0=10 m2 is the reference absorption area and Πrad is the
radiated power, which can be expressed by
Πrad = ⟨p2⟩A
4ρc ,
(2.16)
where ⟨p2⟩is the mean square pressure and A is the absorption area in the receiver
room. For the purpose of this project Πrad will be simulated in COMSOL, as the
integral of the intensity beneath the excited floor. The frequency components will
then be summed for each one-third octave band and used in Eq. 2.15. Because
the excitation force was complex and hence two-sided, yet the radiated power was
only solved for the one-sided frequency spectrum, the radiated power in each octave
band should be multiplied by 2, in order to include the energy contributions from
the negative frequencies.
In the ISI model the goal was to obtain the radiated power across the frequency
spectrum, and then add the one-third octave band components to represent the
radiated power for each one-third octave band. Eq. 2.15 was then used to predict
the ISI of the floor. The same procedure was used in [7].
COMSOL Model
For the ISI model the CLT floor was modelled as described earlier in Section 2.4.1.
The excitation for this model was simplified to a point force with the force spectrum
found from the methods described in 2.4.2 in the five excitation positions shown
in Figure 2.6. The excitation was implemented in two different ways; firstly, five
individual models were made for each excitation position and the radiated power
16
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
February 2025
was then averaged afterwards. Secondly, one model was made with all five excitation
positions simultaneously, the complex force spectrum was then given a random phase
shift to simulate a time delay in the frequency domain. The radiated power was then
divided by the number of excitation positions to get the averaged ISI. The results
were compared in Section 3.5
For this model an air domain under the CLT floor was needed, along with a sur-
round perfectly matched layer (PML) that simulated full absorption of the outgoing
acoustic waves. The air domain was modelled as a second box under the CLT floor
with inspiration from [7]. The thickness was half the wavelength of the maximum
frequency 1120 Hz. The width and length corresponded to the width and length
of the CLT floor plus the air domain’s thickness on each side. The PML domain
had a thickness of one-third of the wavelength of 1120 Hz and surrounded the air
domain on all four sides and the bottom. This was to simulate the receiver room
as semi-infinite, i.e. it had no reflecting waves. The PML node had a scaling factor
of 1 and scaling curvature parameter of 3. The final geometry for the model are
showed in Appendix C Figures C.5 and C.6.
The mesh for this model was custom made to have a maximum element size de-
pendent on the smallest bending wavelength for the CLT domain and the smallest
wavelength in air for the air and PML domain. The bending wavelength can be
calculated by
cb = 4
s
ω2B
ρhclt
.
(2.17)
Besides the constrain of the maximum element size, the mesh for the CLT and air
domain were made with the free tetrahedral mesh generator and the PML domain
with the swept mesh generator. Damping was introduce in the Linear Elastic Ma-
terial nodes as a Damping sub-node. The damping was applied in terms of the loss
factor (see Section 2.3.5).
Frequency domain study
A frequency domain study was used to simulate the radiated power from five excita-
tion positions with the force spectrum simulated with the procedure from 2.4.2. To
implement this force as the repeated force spectrum, i.e. a 10 Hz tonal spectrum,
the study was set to sweep across every 10th Hz. The study was sat to solve for
frequencies between 10 and 1120 Hz, in order to cover all one-third octave bands
up to the 1000 Hz band. Solving for a larger frequency range was not tested as the
focus of this project was to predict the low frequency ISI. After the computation the
normal intensity beneath the floor was integrated over the surface, as this will result
in the radiated power. The radiated power for every tenth Hz were then exported
to MATLAB, where the frequency components for each one-third octave band was
summed and multiplied by 2, and the ISI was predicted using Eq. 2.15. The ISI
was compared to measured values from [10]. In the case for the five concurrent
excitation positions with phase shift, the radiated power was also divided by 5 to
get the average power.
The results of the ISI are presented in Section 3.5.
17
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
February 2025
2.4.4
Model verification
For computational models using FEM it is good etiquette to verify the chosen resolu-
tion or mesh generation. Because, the approach is an approximation, too few or too
badly generated meshes can create falsely results. It is always the assumption that
a finer mesh or elements with more nodes will provide the most accurate solution.
To verify the ISI model in this project, the mesh generation for the CLT domain,
the mesh resolution of the air domain, and also the thickness and mesh resolution
of the PML domain were tested. The order of the verification and also the desired
output can be seen in Figure 2.7. Only the mesh resolution for the air domain was
made as a convergence study, for which it is expected that the solution will converge
at a given value for finer resolutions. The convergence study was made in terms of
the radiated power, but the differences in the absolute values were so small that the
relative difference was studied instead, that is, the relative difference to the finest
resolution. The other aspects of the verification process was evaluated based upon
comparison studies of the ISI.
Figure 2.7: Overview of the verification process for the impact sound insulation
model
For the CLT mesh two different mesh generators were used, the Swept and Free
tetrahedral, and two versions of each was tested. For the swept mesh the two versions
differed in the number of elements per CLT layer, so the first only had one element
per CLT layer and the other had two per layer, resulting in a total of 7 and 14
elements through the floor’s thickness. For the free tetrahedral mesh the difference
was only in the first layer of CLT, which is the layer that was excited.
Rapid
changes in force (such as an impact) is best modelled by having high resolution near
the excitation point. Hence in one version the floor was purely tetrahedral, and in
the other the first layer of CLT was made as a boundary layer instead. This is a
mesh generator where the elements are smallest nearest the boundary (the surface
of excitation) and gradually increases in size. The CLT mesh that was assessed to
be the best compromise between computation time and accuracy was chosen and
the verification process continued to the next step of Figure 2.7.
The verification of the mesh resolution, i.e. the maximum element size used, was
initially meant to be for the whole system. Such that the maximum element size
was dependent to the bending wavelength in the CLT and the wavelength in air
for the air and PML domain. However, it was later realised that per default the
18
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
February 2025
elements in the CLT domain were already much smaller than any of the maximum
element sizes, and hence the resolution did not change as intended. Instead the
verification of the element size only covered the air and PML domain. The tested
maximum element sizes were 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 elements per smallest wavelength
(wavelength for maximum frequency of 1120 Hz). Since the rule of thumb is to have
at least 5 second-order elements per wavelength for wave propagation in solids [25],
the mesh resolution for the CLT domain was assessed to be satisfactory, since it had
more than 8 elements per smallest wavelength. The mesh resolution with the best
compromise between computational load and accuracy was chosen and used for the
following verifications.
The PML mesh resolution and thickness were also verified in terms of differences in
the ISI. The number of elements along the thickness was initially 4 elements, and
this was compared to 8 elements as well. The thickness was later doubled, the same
sizes of elements were tested again, i.e. 8 and 16 elements along the thickness due
to the doubling.
Additionally, the model was verified by introducing another arbitrary CLT floor to
it. From [2] measured values for a five layer CLT floor was accessible. The CLT
floor in the model was changed to the dimensions given in [2] and a new excitation
force was simulated and used as the force for the 5 layer ISI.
The results of the verification process are presented in Section 3.5.1.
19
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
February 2025
3.
Results and Analysis
3.1
Longitudinal wave speed and elastic modulus
To experimentally find the longitudinal wave speed, the floor was excited by an
impact hammer and the response was measured with an accelerometer on the op-
posite side of the floor. The goal was to measure the time of arrival for the first
longitudinal wavefront. Under the assumption that the longitudinal wave is fastest
in the stiffest direction and no other wave type is faster, this should appear as a
significantly increase in magnitude in the impulse response. The resulting impulse
response is shown in Figure 3.1. The red star indicates the last time sample before
the magnitude increases significantly. Meaning that the sound had travelled 2.98 m
in 0.66 ms, corresponding to a longitudinal speed of sound of 4515 m/s.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Time (s)
10-3
0
1
2
3
4
Magnitude
Measured impulse response
Figure 3.1: The measured transfer impulse response of the CLT floor, when mea-
suring the excitation from an impact hammer with an accelerometer on the other
side of the floor. The red star is indicating time of arrival of the first longitudinal
wavefront.
From Equation 2.5 Young’s modulus can be estimated by knowing the longitudinal
wave speed, Poisson’s ratio and the density of the medium. The longitudinal wave
speed were found to be 4515 m/s, and the density of the floor was 460.4 kg/m3,
assuming a Poisson’s ratio of 0.3, the resulting Young’s modulus is 8.5 GPa. Take
20
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
February 2025
notice that the longitudinal wave speed was found for the stiffest direction of the
timber, i.e. parallel to the grain (EL). Because every other layer is orthogonal in
regards to the adjacent layers, it was not possible to measure the weaker direction
perpendicular to the grain (ET), as the stiffest direction (e.g. in the adjacent layers)
would be dominating. It should also be noted that only one measurement for the
longitudinal wave speed was conducted, and hence there hasn’t been taken any
averages.
To verify the experimentally determined Young’s modulus it was compared to values
from the literature. Unfortunately, it is not known exactly what type of wood the
CLT floor was made of, though it is assumed to be spruce. To get an idea of the
material properties of spruce from literature, the book Wood Engineering Handbook
(edited by Mahoney) [11] were used. The book lists mechanical properties for six
different kinds of spruce, and because the specific kind is not known, an average of EL
was found to be 10.5 GPa with values varying from 9 GPa to 11.3 GPa. Indicating
that the experimentally determined Young’s modulus was a bit underestimated. The
book also lists ratios for the Young’s moduli perpendicular to the grain (ET) and to
the vein rings (ER), as a function of EL. This could be used to estimate ET and ER
as a function of the calculated EL.
In the white paper written by Otani et al. in [26] the relationship between ET and
ER are also given as a function of EL. Additionally, the paper presents a table
with the elastic moduli with varying EL going from 6 to 18 GPa, indicating that
the experimentally determined EL was within range. The values for which EL are
8 GPa and 11 GPa are later reprinted in Section 3.2.1 Table 3.1, and referred to
as ’Otani et al.’, along with the values from the aforementioned Wood Handbook,
referred to as ’Mahoney’. These properties will later be used to investigate which
material properties result in the best fit with measured data.
Given the experimentally determined EL together with values from [11] and [26], a
good initial idea of the elastic moduli was established. Later for the modal analysis,
these values will be investigated further and theoretical combinations of the material
properties will be tested as well, with the object of achieving a better fit with mode
shapes and resonance frequencies.
3.2
Modal analyses and MAC
As described in Section 2.3.4 an experimental modal analysis were conducted on the
CLT floor in two different conditions; the floor with simply supported BCs and the
floor with the laboratory BCs (referred to as ’in-frame’).
3.2.1
Simply supported
The averaged frequency response for each measurement position of the CLT floor,
while being simply supported, are shown in Figure A.5 in Appendix A. A close up
example of the FRF for one position, namely C3, is shown in Figure 3.2.
21
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
February 2025
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Frequency (Hz)
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
Transfer Mobility (dB)
Averaged frequency response at position C3
Figure 3.2: The averaged measured frequency response function at position C3 for
both excitation positions, while the floor was simply supported.
The graph is showing the average of the measured transfer mobility between the two
excitation positions. Multiple peaks can be seen on the curve, indicating that the
mobility at these frequencies are high. These are known as the resonance frequencies,
meaning that the floor’s response to excitation is higher at these frequencies. It is
apparent from the graph, that even though a minimum of 50 averages were taken,
the response at the lowest frequencies are noisy, as compared to the smooth curve
seen after approximately 100 Hz. The quality of the measurement is evident from
the coherence. The coherence for all positions are given in Figure A.1 and A.2 in
Appendix A for excitation positions 1 and 2, respectively. A close up example for
measurement position C3 and excitation position 1 is shown in Figure 3.3.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Frequency (Hz)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Coherence (-)
Coherence at position C3
Figure 3.3: The coherence measured at position C3, while the floor was simply
supported and excited in position 1.
It can be seen that there is a poor coherence below 30 Hz, implying poor measure-
ment quality. Between 30 and 100 Hz the coherence is also noisy yet decent enough
22
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
February 2025
for the purpose of the modal analysis; for which the very first resonances are of high
importance, and as seen on the frequency response the first resonance frequency is
around 30 Hz.
At each resonance frequency it is expected to find a characteristic mode shape, which
can be estimated by the transfer mobility throughout the measurement grid at a
given resonance frequency, as described in Section 2.3.4. A rough visualisation of
the mode shape can be made with linear integration between the grid points. The
shape of the first 10 measured modes are visualized in Figure 3.4 and in an xy-plane
view in Figure 3.5. The shape of the very first mode corresponds well with what is
theoretically expected. Likewise, the next couple of modes are very near textbook
examples of modes in plates, though around 109 Hz the shapes get more complicated
and more difficult to foresee analytically, however, very good and clear mode shapes
are apparent in all the modes.
(a) 31.06 Hz
(b) 36.50 Hz
(c) 50.88 Hz
(d) 61.19 Hz
(e) 68.06 Hz
(f) 109.13 Hz
(g) 121.69 Hz
(h) 127.75 Hz
(i) 145.63 Hz
(j) 157.38 Hz
(k) 217.81 Hz
Figure 3.4: The first 11 modes found from the measured FRFs of the simply sup-
ported floor
(a) 31.06 Hz
(b) 36.50 Hz
(c) 50.88 Hz
(d) 61.19 Hz
(e) 68.06 Hz
(f) 109.13 Hz
(g) 121.69 Hz
(h) 127.75 Hz
(i) 145.63 Hz
(j) 157.38 Hz
(k) 217.81 Hz
Figure 3.5: The first 11 modes found from the measured FRFs of the simply sup-
ported floor (xy-plane view)
A modal analysis was also conducted in the numerical software COMSOL, for which
23
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
February 2025
the goal was to compute similar (or ideally identical) mode shapes and natural
frequencies. The computed model needed extensive information about the material
properties, and the computed mode shapes and natural frequencies were highly
dependent on these values. This is one of the key challenges for simulating acoustics
using the complicated material wood, that holds many elastic moduli for multiple
directions, and often this information is lacking.
The material properties from the aforementioned references in [11] (Mahoney) and
[26] (Otani et. al) were used in the computational model to investigate the fit with
the measured mode shapes and natural frequencies. As mentioned, the base for this
computational method was built on a paper by C. Balmes and J. Brunskog in [7].
In this paper, a reference to [26] was also made and the values for which EL = 11
GPa was used in the model, hence, this combination was tested as well. Due to the
calculated Young’s modulus from the longitudinal wave speed experiment being 8.5
GPa, the values for which EL = 8 GPa in [26] were also tested. In [11] the rest of
the elastic moduli were only expressed as ratios of EL, and as described earlier an
average value for EL was found to be 10.5 GPa for spruce. The ratios were applied
to this value and tested as well. Additionally, these ratios were also applied to an
arbitrary stiffer elastic modulus of 12 GPa. Additionally, three other combinations
were tested as well, for curiosity reasons. All of the tested combinations are listed
in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Material properties used to test comparability (MAC) between measured
and computed mode shapes.
No.
Test
EL
ET
ER
GLT
GTR
GLR
v
(GPa)
(GPa)
(GPa)
(GPa)
(GPa)
(GPa)
(-)
1
Mahoney 10.5 GPa [11]
10.5
0.45
0.82
0.67
0.64
0.03
0.1*
2
Mahoney 12 GPa [11]**
12
0.52
0.94
0.77
0.73
0.04
0.1*
3
Otani et al. 8 GPa [26]
8
0.79
0.45
0.70
0.65
0.06
0.1*
4
Otani et al. 11 GPa [26]
11
0.89
0.55
0.76
0.71
0.07
0.1*
5
Test A
12
0.40
0.20
1.00
0.10
0.10
0.1
6
Test B
12
1.00
0.5
0.8
0.75
0.08
0.1
7
Test C
8
1.00
0.45
0.70
0.10
0.06
0.1
* Multiple values given in [11] and [26], whereas this project, for now, is simplified to one value.
** Using arbitrary stiffer EL of 12 GPa, with the same ratios from [11] for the remaining values.
In order to objectively assess the comparability of the computed and measured mode
shapes, the MAC values were also calculated. The procedure for calculating and
plotting the MAC values has been described in Section 2.4.1. The computed mode
shapes are considered not to be comparable if the MAC is less than 0.5. Further,
a satisfactory MAC value would exceed 0.8 as a minimum, and values higher than
0.9 are considered to be a very good fit. For the rest of this section the mention of
a ’mode’ is referring to a measured mode, otherwise it is stated to be a computed
mode.
24
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
February 2025
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a) Mahoney, EL = 10.5 GPa
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) Mahoney, EL = 12 GPa
Figure 3.6: Modal assurance criterion values for every combination of measured and
computed modes, using the ratios for the material properties given in [11] for spruce,
with EL being, respectively, 10.5 and 12 GPa.
In Figure 3.6 the resulting MAC for combination 1 and 2 from Table 3.1 are shown.
The first combination uses the averaged value for EL for spruce and the material
property ratios given in [11]. A good fit for the first 5 modes are observed, where
the values range from 0.84 to 0.93. Similarities are also found for modes 7 to 10,
however the values only range from 0.67 to 0.79. The 6th and 11th mode are not
considered to be comparable with any of the computed mode shapes. Overall, the
tendency of a diagonal line is present as, stated earlier, is a good indication that the
modes appear in the same order.
The same ratios between the different elastic moduli were tested in the second
combination, but with a stiffer EL of 12 GPa. The result is very similar to the first
combination, again with the first five modes ranging from 0.84 to 0.93 and modes
7 to 11 ranging from 0.70 to 0.79. The main difference being the 11th mode was
considered to be comparable, though the MAC value is only 0.68. The similarities
of Figures 3.6a and 3.6b indicate that the mode shapes are more dependent on the
ratio between the material properties, than their magnitudes.
25
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
February 2025
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a) Otani et. al, EL = 8 GPa
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) Otani et. al, EL = 11 GPa
Figure 3.7: Modal assurance criterion values for every combination of measured
and computed modes, using the material properties given in [26] for EL being,
respectively, 8 and 11 GPa.
The third combination of material properties given in Table 3.1 were based on
[26] for a EL of 8 GPa, which was the closest value to the one calculated in the
longitudinal wave speed experiment. The resulting MAC can be seen in Figure 3.7a.
Again, a very good fit is observed between the measured and computed mode shapes.
Comparable mode shapes where found for all modes, except for the 6th. With the
exception of mode 7 the rest of the MAC values range from 0.80 to 0.95, indicating
a satisfactory result for many of the computed modes. The largest difference, when
compared to the two previous combinations, being the 11th mode that now has a
MAC of 0.91.
Again using the material properties given by [26], but with a higher EL of 11 GPa,
as was also used in [7] from which the model are based upon. The resulting MAC
can be seen in Figure 3.7b. Similar results were obtained despite the stiffer elastic
modulus. Modes 1 to 5 and 8 to 11 were ranging from 0.86 to 0.95. Mode 6 is still
not comparable and mode 7 sill has an unsatisfactory MAC of 0.71.
In the process of investigating the different material properties a wish to investigate
theoretical combinations appeared. The combinations for some of these tests can
be seen in Table 3.1, where they are named ’Test A-C’. The resulting MAC values
for test A can be seen in Figure 3.8a. The properties for this test was found from
a rough grid-search inversion process, where only the fit with resonance frequencies
were taken into account. As will be apparent later in Table 3.2 the combination did
indeed give a good fit in natural frequencies for the first 5 modes. Considering the
MAC values, there was also a good fit with the computed mode shapes, however, the
diagonal tendency is less defined, when compared to the previous figures. The MAC
values were ranging from 0.84 to 0.98 for modes 1 to 5 and 8 to 11, and the values for
mode 6 and 7 were 0.76 and 0.71, respectively. Note that all of the modes, including
mode 6, are considered comparable. Another interesting observation is that mode
11 has a MAC of 0.97, the highest MAC achieved for any of the combinations.
26
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
February 2025
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a) Test A, EL = 12 GPa
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) Test B, EL = 12 GPa
Figure 3.8: Modal assurance criterion values for every combination of measured and
computed modes, using values for ’Test A’ and ’Test B’ (both with EL = 12 GPa).
For test B a specific ratio for the elastic moduli were considered. Looking at test
A’s properties, the ratio between the shear moduli were much different compared to
any of the other combinations from the literature. For test B the ratios were hold
similar to the literature, in order to see how the ratios between the shear moduli
impact the mode shapes. The result can be seen in Figure 3.8b. Note that the
diagonal tendency is again more apparent in this figure, which could indicate, once
again, that the ratio between the material properties are more important than the
magnitudes. That is of course, if only comparability between the mode shapes are
considered, and not the resonance frequencies they are found at. The values range
from 0.82 to 0.96 for modes 1 to 5 and modes 8 to 11. Mode 6 are not found and
mode 7 has a MAC of 0.72.
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 3.9: Modal assurance criterion values for every combination of measured and
computed modes, using values for ’Test C’ (EL = 8 GPa).
Lastly in the 7th combination in Table 3.1, named ’Test C’, the ratio for the shear
moduli were again investigated. The material properties were chosen with a start-
27
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
February 2025
ing point in the Otani et al. 8 GPa values, but the ratio between GLT and GTR
were similar to the one from test A. This combination were wished to be investi-
gated, because the best fit in regards to the natural frequencies was with the test A
combination, (as apparent from Table 3.2), however, the best fit in regards to the
MAC values were found with Otani et al. 8 GPa. The resulting MAC can be seen
in Figure 3.9. It can be seen that the diagonal tendency is less apparent than in
Figure 3.7a (Otani et al. 8 GPa), but more apparent than in Figure 3.8a (test A).
The values are in general significantly less than for the previous found MAC values.
Mode 1 to 11, except for mode 6 which was not found, range from 0.64 to 0.96; with
only the first two modes being above 0.9.
As a reminder, the MAC can only be used to assess comparability between the mode
shapes, and it holds no information about the natural frequencies. The computed
natural frequencies for each combination given in Table 3.1, as well as the measured
natural frequencies, are listed in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Measured and computed natural frequencies using the different combina-
tions listed in Table 3.1.
Measured
Mahoney
Otani et al.
Test A
Test B
Test C
10.5 GPa
12 GPa
8 GPa
11 GPa
(Hz)
(Hz)
(Hz)
(Hz)
(Hz)
(Hz)
(Hz)
(Hz)
31.06
36.23
40.05
37.97
42.27
33.59
43.74
32.99
36.50
39.46
43.57
41.39
45.66
36.2
47.13
35.99
50.88
68.27
75.26
71.73
79.50
71.61
82.64
65.57
61.19
68.66
76.21
74.37
81.40
61.23
83.78
63.56
68.08
70.46
77.99
75.87
83.95
67.96
85.61
67.09
109.13
-*
-*
-*
-*
113.69
145.00
-*
121.69
95.22
105.71
104.84
117.04
112.69
123.08
98.29
127.75
109.50
121.68
119.61
133.17
116.67
138.96
106.25
145.63
121.34
135.00
134.53
148.31
131.91
154.67
119.93
157.38
133.00
147.90
148.54
162.85
144.71
169.63
131.73
217.81
-*
198.48
207.51
220.11
192.02
228.98
174.84
* Too low or too uncertain MAC values to find the corresponding natural frequency
The difference between the measured and computed natural frequencies are plotted
in Figure 3.10. It can be seen that mode 6 (measured at 109.13 Hz) are not found
for most of the computed combinations, e.g. the MAC value were under 0.5, and
therefore assumed not to be comparable to the mode shape found at 109.13 Hz. It
is interesting that the differences for most of the combinations have a tendency to
increase with the mode number; and especially around the 7th mode, there is a shift
in whether the natural frequency was overestimated or underestimated. This is a
good example of how difficult it is to make a perfect fit with the measured mode
shapes by controlling the material properties. For most of the tested combinations,
if the fit for the lowest modes was getting better, the fit for the higher modes got
worse. The best fit with the natural frequencies were obtained for test A, however
this combination had the least apparent diagonal tendency in the corresponding
28
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
February 2025
MAC values (Figure 3.8a). A good compromise for the overall best fit with the
naturel frequencies and the MAC were found to be the 3rd combination in Table
3.1, also referred to as Otani et al. 8 GPa. The MAC values for this combination
gave a clear diagonal tendency and many of the modes were close to unity, while
the resonance frequencies were overall reasonable.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Measured mode no.
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Frequency (Hz)
Difference in natural frequencies compared to the measured modes
Otani 8GPa
Otani 11 GPa
Mahoney 10.5 GPa
Mahoney 12 GPa
Test A 12 GPa
Test B 12 GPa
Test C 8 GPa
Figure 3.10: Differences in measured and computed natural frequencies for all com-
binations of material properties shown in Table 3.1. The natural frequencies were
chosen based on the MAC, such that the natural frequency of the computed mode
with the highest MAC value was chosen. If the MAC value was below 0.5, it was
assumed to be too uncertain to find the corresponding natural frequency, which was
the case for the 6th mode for most of the combinations.
A single example of the computed mode shapes will suffice. In Figures 3.11 and 3.12
selected mode shapes and natural frequencies for the material property combination
Otani et al. 8 GPa are shown. The mode shapes have been chosen based on the
MAC values from Figure 3.7a, such that the mode shape closets to unity for each
measured mode are visualised. It should be noted that the measured mode 6 was
not found computationally according to the MAC values, hence only ten computed
modes are displayed in the figures.
29
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
February 2025
(a) 37.97 Hz
(b) 41.38 Hz
(c) 71.73 Hz
(d) 74.36 Hz
(e) 75.87 Hz
(f) 104.84 Hz
(g) 119.61 Hz
(h) 134.53 Hz
(i) 148.54 Hz
(j) 201.79 Hz
Figure 3.11: The 10 computed mode shapes, that based on the MAC values in
Figure 3.7a have the best fit with the measured mode shapes shown in Figure 3.4.
(a) 37.97 Hz
(b) 41.38 Hz
(c) 71.73 Hz
(d) 74.36 Hz
(e) 75.87 Hz
(f) 104.84 Hz
(g) 119.61 Hz
(h) 134.53 Hz
(i) 148.54 Hz
(j) 201.79 Hz
Figure 3.12: The 10 computed mode shapes, that based on the MAC values in
Figure 3.7a have the best fit with the measured mode shapes shown in Figure 3.5
(xy-plane view).
3.2.2
In-frame
The results presented for the simply supported floor were used to validate the mate-
rial properties and the junction between the two CLT parts. Hereafter, the modelling
of the laboratory’s BCs was investigated. A similar modal analysis was made for the
floor in-frame, using measurements from the laboratory and a computational model.
The material properties were assumed to be satisfactory and it was shown that a rea-
sonable fit with mode shapes and the first natural frequencies were achieved under
simplified and controlled BCs, using the third combination of material properties,
Otani et. al. 8 GPa, from Table 3.1. Therefore, only the BCs will be changed in
the forthcoming section.
30
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
February 2025
The measured frequency responses for each measurement position of the in-frame
floor are shown in Figure B.5 in Appendix B. An averaged frequency response was
obtained by averaging the FRFs for the two excitation positions at each measure-
ment position. A close up example of the averaged FRF for one position, namely
C3, is shown in Figure 3.13. The corresponding coherence measured simultaneously
is apparent in Figure 3.14.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Frequency (Hz)
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
Transfer Mobility (dB)
Averaged frequency response at position C3
Figure 3.13: The measured frequency response function at position C3, while the
floor was in-frame.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Frequency (Hz)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Coherence (-)
Coherence at position C3
Figure 3.14: The coherence measured at position C3, while the floor was in-frame
and excited in position 1.
Again, as for the simply supported floor, multiple peaks were apparent in the transfer
mobility, indicating high mobility for these frequencies at position C3.
Another
similarity was the noise present at very low frequencies, as was also supported by
the coherence.
Again, the very first modes were very important for the modal
analysis, and the coherence down to around 40 Hz was reasonable and was used for
31
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
February 2025
the following investigations. The corresponding measured mode shapes can be seen
in Figures 3.15 and 3.16, in 3D and in the xy-plane view, respectively. The figures
are visualising the normalised mobility at each position, the areas between the grid
points have been filled using linear interpolation.
(a) 50.00 Hz
(b) 64.25 Hz
(c) 78.00 Hz
(d) 86.31 Hz
(e) 108.25 Hz
(f) 125.50 Hz
(g) 137.88 Hz
(h) 143.75 Hz
(i) 190.25 Hz
(j) 229.44 Hz
Figure 3.15: First 10 modes found in the measurements for the floor in-frame
(a) 50.00 Hz
(b) 64.25 Hz
(c) 78.00 Hz
(d) 86.31 Hz
(e) 108.25 Hz
(f) 125.50 Hz
(g) 137.88 Hz
(h) 143.75 Hz
(i) 190.25 Hz
(j) 229.44 Hz
Figure 3.16: First 10 modes found in measurements for floor in-frame (xy-plane
view)
For the first computation the in-frame BCs were simplified to a fixed line around the
edge, with an offset of 5 cm, to simulate the edge of the steel (for reference see Figure
2.5). The calculated MAC values for the measured and computed mode shapes,
using this BC, can be seen in Figure 3.17a. It is seen that a poor comparability was
achieved, and multiple modes had comparabilities with multiple of the computed
modes. This implies that the fixed line was too much of a simplification for the
in-frame BC.
32
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
February 2025
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measured mode number
MAC
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
(a) Fixed line
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) Periodic fixed-free line
Figure 3.17: Modal assurance criterion values for every combination of measured
and computed modes for the floor with different boundary conditions: a) fixed line
5 cm from the edge and b) a periodic fixed-free line 5 cm from the edge.
With inspiration from [9] a closer look into the BCs was made. For now, it was
assumed that the BCs were fixed along the whole edge of the steel frame, when in
reality, the floor was simply resting on the steel frame. Neither the steel frame nor
the floor were perfectly smooth, and these irregularities could cause an uneven load
distribution, resulting in a non-uniform BC. A periodic fixed-free BC was tested,
where each side was divided into five uniform parts. Then every other part changed
BC between fixed and free. The BC can be seen in Figure D.2 in the appendix and
the resulting MAC in Figure 3.17b. It can be seen that this periodic BC resulted in
a slightly better MAC diagram, with more comparability in the higher modes and
slightly higher values, however, the values were still not satisfactory.
Still restricted to a fixed-free line along the edge, another approach for determining
which parts should be fixed or free was used. To objectively choose which parts of
the line to be fixed or free, the transfer mobility for each measurement point along
the edge was averaged across the frequency range 0 to 400 Hz and plotted. As a
result, some positions had a higher average mobility than other positions, as seen in
Figure 3.18.
33
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
February 2025
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
B1
B5
C1
C5
D1
D5
E1
E5
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
Edge Position
-100
-98
-96
-94
-92
Averaged transfer mobility (dB)
Figure 3.18: Average of the measured mobility for every measurement position along
the edge of floor. The average has been made from 0 to 400 Hz.
An arbitrary choice of -97 dB were used for the transition line between free and
fixed parts of the edge (see Appendix D for further details). The resulting MAC
can be seen in Figure 3.19a. Other values for the transition line were also tested,
but -97 were found to give the best MAC. As seen, the result was not improved, in
any case it became worse when compared to the periodic fixed-free line BC. It can
be seen that the diagonal tendency are less clear than for the periodic BC.
A last attempt was made to improve the modelled BC. For this BC the steel frame
was modelled underneath the floor, the frame was modelled as a flat frame for which
the floor was resting on. The side of the frame was then fixed, to represent the
frame’s attachment to the laboratory’s structure, the modelled is shown in Figure
D.4, and the resulting MAC values are shown in Figure 3.19b.
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a) Fixed line
0
5
10
15
Simulated mode number
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measured mode number
MAC
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) Modelled steel frame
Figure 3.19: Modal assurance criterion values for every combination of measured
and computed modes for the floor with different boundary conditions: a) mixed
fixed-free line 5 cm from the edge (depending on the measured mobility from Fig.
3.18) and b) floor resting on a modelled steel frame, which side was fixed
34
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
February 2025
Yet again, the MAC values are below the criterion for comparison of 0.5, and though
the diagonal tendency are stronger than for the previous MAC diagram, the com-
parison to the highest mode shapes are below 0.1 (and therefore not plotted).
It can be concluded that none of the BCs tested for the in-frame model were satisfac-
tory, though the periodic fixed-free BC gave the highest MAC values, thus this was
used for the following investigations. Since none of the modelled BCs gave satisfac-
tory MAC values, it doesn’t make sense to plot the mode shapes that compared best
to the measured from Figures 3.15 and 3.16. Despite the poor fit with measurements
the computed resonance frequencies for the periodic fixed-free BC are presented in
Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: The first 12 computed resonance frequencies for the floor in-frame using
the periodic fixed-free boundary condition
Resonance frequencies (Hz)
56.30
101.16
111.89
147.99
173.59
180.7
194.54
194.94
214.76
216.66
237.77
241.92
3.3
Loss factor
The loss factor was estimated using the 3 dB-bandwidth method, and the results
were compared to the structural reverberation time method from Liengaard [10].
Liengaard’s results for the internal (simply supported) and total (in-frame) loss
factor, found by the structural reverberation time method, are reprinted in Table
3.4.
Table 3.4: Structural reverberation time, η for each 1/3-octave band for the simply
supported and the in-frame floor. The centre frequencies, fc are given in Hz. Data
processed and provided by Liengaard in [10].
Simply supported
fc
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
η
0.11
0.07
0.056
0.042
0.034
0.03
0.03
0.027
0.025
0.022
0.022
fc
630
800
1000
1250
1600
2000
2500
3150
4000
5000
η
0.022
0.021
0.021
0.019
0.02
0.025
0.024
0.023
0.023
0.019
In-frame
fc
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
η
0.090
0.078
0.055
0.045
0.036
0.033
0.033
0.029
0.026
0.025
0.025
fc
630
800
1000
1250
1600
2000
2500
3150
4000
5000
η
0.025
0.026
0.022
0.024
0.025
0.025
0.023
0.021
0.020
0.014
The results for the 3 dB-bandwidth method are presented in Figure 3.20 for the
internal loss factor, the structural reverberation time loss factors have also been
35
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis
February 2025
plotted for comparison. In order for the 3 dB-bandwidth method to be reliable, the
102
103
Frequency (Hz)
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Internal loss factor, int (-)
Estimated internal loss factor using two methods
3 dB bandwidth
Structural reverberation time
Constant at 0.021
Figure 3.20: Estimated internal loss factor using two different methods. The 3 dB
bandwidth method (blue), and the structural reverberation time method using data
from [10] (red).
peaks of the FRFs need to be symmetrical and not overlap with other peaks for at
least 3 dB. For most of the peaks it were challenging to fulfil these requirements,
partly due to a too coarse resolution in the FRFs. Where satisfactory peaks were
achieved the loss factor was estimated, and averaged over multiple measurement
positions. The internal loss factor could only be estimated up to the 125 Hz one-
third octave band. Significant differences was observed between the two methods
at low frequencies. For the internal loss factor a rather constant loss factor was
expected, and hence an approximation of a constant loss factor of 0.021 was used
for the further investigations.
The internal loss factor was applied in COMSOL as a material specific property.
However, in order for the model to take the coupling loss factor into account, the
laboratory’s heavy concrete structure would need to be modelled, as well as, a cor-
responding PML domain. To avoid any redundant computational cost, the total
loss factor was found experimentally for the purpose of applying that to the model
without the need of modelling the laboratory. The total loss factor for the 3 dB-
bandwidth method and the structural reverberation time method are presented in
Figure 3.21. The total loss factor for both methods have an increase at low fre-
quencies, as it was also expected according to Section 2.3.5.
Unfortunately, the
resolution and number of peaks in the lowest frequencies, limited the range for the 3
dB-bandwidth method to only three one-third octave bands. Therefore, the numbers
from the structural reverberation time method were used, without modification, for
the total loss factor for simulation purposes.
36
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis
February 2025
102
103
Frequency (Hz)
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Total loss factor, tot (-)
Estimated total loss factor using two methods
3 dB bandwidth
Structural reverberation time
Figure 3.21: Estimated total loss factor using two different methods. The 3 dB
bandwidth method (blue), and the structural reverberation time method using data
from [10] (red).
3.4
Excitation force
The excitation force was simulated using the approach from section 2.4.2.
The
resulting time profile of the excitation force is presented in 3.22, along with a 6000
Hz and 2500 Hz low-pass filtered version of the signal. As it is seen, the original signal
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Time (s)
10-3
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Force (N)
Simulated force by one standard tapping machine hammer
Original
Low-pass filtered, 6000 Hz
Low-pass filtered, 2500 Hz
Figure 3.22: The simulated force’s time profile for one standard tapping machine
hammer, without filtering, with a low-pass filter at 6000 Hz and a low-pass filter at
2500 Hz. Note that negative values correspond to the hammer lifting itself off the
floor.
had spurious oscillations in the beginning of the simulation. This can happen due
to numerical instabilities, due to lack of damping. COMSOL therefore recommends
to introduce high-frequency damping to suppress these oscillations [27]. However,
damping was not introduced in the time domain part of this model, and hence to
37
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis
February 2025
avoid the effect of this problem a low-pass filter was applied on the excitation signal,
with inspiration from [24]. It can be seen that the filter introduce a time delay in
the excitation signal, however, the area underneath the curves were appearing to
be similar, which was important due to the upcoming FFT. The frequency range
of interest for building acoustics is up to 5000 Hz, and therefore a low-pass filter
of 6000 Hz was used to include the transition bandwidth. It can be seen that the
effects of the spurious oscillations are still present, however it was decided to suffice
for the purpose. The 2500 Hz low-pass filtered version of the signal were plotted to
visualise the theoretically expected excitation signal with no visible effect from the
spurious oscillations.
The excitation signal was also simulated for different BCs in order to investigate
the effect of these, the result is presented in figure 3.23. The different BCs did not
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Time (s)
10-3
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Force (N)
Simulated force with different boundary conditions
Free
Simply supported
Fixed line around edge
Steel frame around edge
Figure 3.23: The simulated force’s time profile for one standard tapping machine
hammer, with a low-pass filter at 6000 Hz and different boundary conditions. Note
that negative values correspond to the hammer lifting itself off the floor.
change the excitation signal significantly, indicating that the excitation force from
one STM hammer is not sensitive to the BCs, but rather only the local mobility of
the floor. This might change if the excitation position would be nearer the floor’s
boundaries, or the floor was very thin. However, for this project’s purpose the BCs
were assumed to be neglectable, and the excitation signal for the free BC was used
for further investigations.
In Figure 3.24 the truncated, zero-padded excitation signal for the five different
excitation positions are plotted. As explained in Section 2.4.2 only the first pulse
of one hammer was needed, and hence the signal was truncated after the first zero-
crossing. To obtain a satisfactory frequency resolution in the coming FFT, the signal
was zero-padded to half a second, e.g. 50000 samples.
Some differences between the excitation positions were observed. The area under-
neath the curves were however appearing to be the same, which would result in a
close to identical force magnitude in the frequency domain. An FFT was applied on
each excitation signal for each of the excitation position. The result can be seen in
38
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis
February 2025
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Time (s)
10-3
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Force (N)
Simulated single force pulse for different excitation positions
I
II
III
IV
V
Figure 3.24: Simulated single force pulses for one standard tapping machine hammer,
with a low-pass filter at 6000 Hz, truncated after first zero-crossing and zero-padded
to 0.5 seconds for the five different excitation positions.
Figure 3.25, where also the theoretical low frequency asymptotes are plotted with
red stars, indicating the theoretical maximum and minimum force one STM hammer
can apply to a floor depending on the floors damping.
Figure 3.25: The simulated one-sided force magnitude spectrum |Fn| for one stan-
dard tapping machine hammer at each excitation position, and the theoretical limits
for the low frequency asymptotes (red stars).
The force spectra for the different excitation positions were almost identical, only
differing with approximately 0.06 N. For simplicity, the force spectrum for excitation
position I was used for the following analyses.
39
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis
February 2025
3.5
Impact sound insulation
After the model of CLT material had been investigated, along with the laboratory
BCs and an excitation signal had been estimated, the primary ISI model was built-
up in a frequency dependent study in COMSOL. The initial idea of the model was
to replicate the procedure for measurements in the laboratory, as described in the
ISO 10140-3 ([19]). Therefore, multiple excitation positions were used across the
floor and an average was taken of the resulting radiated powers. The simulated ISI
for each excitation position and their corresponding average can be seen in Figure
3.26, the positions are corresponding to those presented in Figure 2.6.
102
103
Frequency (Hz)
65
70
75
80
85
Impact sound pressure level (dB)
Impact sound level - Each excitation position and average
I
II
III
IV
V
Average
Measured
Figure 3.26: Simulated impact sound level for five different excitation positions and
the average of the five. Additionally, the measured values from [10] in black.
The different excitation positions do result in different ISI, as was also expected
however the results did not differ as much as indicated in [7]. Except for the cen-
tred excitation, the other excitation positions follow roughly the same tendencies
and magnitudes. It was expected that the centred excitation would differ from the
others, as the local mobility of the floor must be significantly different in the cen-
tre. Additionally, two very significant peaks were observed in the one-third octave
bands 63 Hz and 125 Hz. In general the simulated ISI had a decent fit with the
measurements however slightly overestimated.
To simulate the 5 individual excitation positions, 5 individual models were needed,
which each took approximately 5.5 to 6.5 hours to simulate. Resulting in a total
of 27.5 to 32.5 hours of computation time. It was of course of interest to lower the
computation time. The approach for this was to make one model with five time
delayed excitation positions. As the model was made in the frequency domain, this
was done by introducing a phase shift to the complex excitation force. The resulting
ISI from this approach can be seen in Figure 3.27, where also the average of the five
individual excitations have been plotted for comparison. It should be noted that the
radiated power was divided by the number of excitation positions, in order to get
the average radiated power. The approach gave a reasonable fit to the average of
the five individual excitations, and the computation time was reduced to 5.5 hours,
hence this approach was used for the further investigations.
40
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis
February 2025
102
103
Frequency (Hz)
65
70
75
80
85
Impact sound pressure level (dB)
Impact sound level - 5 individual vs. 5 concurrent excitations
Average of 5 individual excitations
5 concurrent excitations with phase shift
Measured
Figure 3.27: Simulated impact sound level using two different approaches. Solid dark
red being an average of five individual models with each one excitation position, and
blue being one model with 5 concurrent excitation positions with complex excitation
force with different phase shifts (corresponding to a time shift in the excitation).
Additionally, the measured values from [10] in black.
As it was mentioned earlier the loss factor in COMSOL was material specific to
the CLT material, and hence only the internal loss factor was used for the previous
results. However, as the model was not including the actual frame and the heavy
structures of the laboratory, the coupling loss factor was not included in the current
model. Hence the total loss factor, as presented in Table 3.4, were applied to the
CLT material in COMSOL to compensate for this. The resulting ISI is shown in
Figure 3.28. As expected, the higher loss factor decreased the ISI across most of the
102
103
Frequency (Hz)
65
70
75
80
85
Impact sound pressure level (dB)
Impact sound level - Internal vs. total loss factor
Internal loss factor
Total loss factor
Measured
Figure 3.28: The simulated impact sound level using internal (material specific)
and total (in-frame specific) loss factor for the cross-laminated timber material in
COMSOL. Additionally, the measured values from [10] in black.
frequency spectrum, and a closer fit with the measured data was achieved.
41
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis
February 2025
3.5.1
Model verification
The primary ISI model was finalized and a satisfactory fit with measurements was
found. To verify the computational model, the mesh for the CLT domain, air domain
and PML domain were tested with different mesh types and resolution. Only the air
domain was tested with a convergence study approach, whereas the CLT and PML
domains were only investigated by differences in the ISI simulation. For this entire
section, the loss factor used for the CLT domain was the internal loss factor, though
Figure 3.28 indicated a better fit with the total loss factor. This was simply due to
the fact that the total loss factor was not tested before after the model verification
was completed. It was assessed that the verification process was still valid, as it is
investigated by means of relative differences.
The mesh for the CLT domain was tested using both a ’swept’ and a ’free tetrahedral’
mesh generation. Two versions of the swept mesh were made with one and two
elements per CLT layer (e.g. 7 and 14 elements through the thickness). Also, two
versions for the tetrahedral mesh were made, one purely tetrahedral and a hybrid,
where the mesh for the first CLT layer was made as a boundary layer, e.g. the
element size was smallest closest to the surface of excitation and gradually increased
through the layer. The resulting ISI for each case are shown in Figure 3.29. Note
that the purely tetrahedral mesh was used for all previous simulations.
102
103
Frequency (Hz)
65
70
75
80
85
Impact sound pressure level (dB)
Impact sound level - Validation of CLT mesh
Swept 1 Layer-E6 ~8h52m
Swept 2 Layers-E6 ~24h20m
Tetrahedral-E6 Boundary layer ~18h48m
Tetrahedral-E6 ~9h21m
Measured
Figure 3.29: Simulated impact sound level with four different mesh generations for
the cross-laminated timber (CLT) layer. Dashed blue being a swept mesh with one
element and dashed red with two elements per CLT layer in the thickness direction.
Solid yellow curve being tetrahedral mesh generation with a boundary layer in the
first layer of CLT and solid purple curve being purely tetrahedral. The notation of
’E6’ corresponds to a maximum element size in the air domain being 6 elements per
smallest wavelength. The timestamp followed by ’∼’ notates the computation time
for each simulation. Additionally, the measured impact sound insulation from [10]
in black.
No significant differences were observed between the two tetrahedral meshes however
significant differences were observed between the swept and the tetrahedral mesh
generation, in the frequency range between 180 to 400 Hz. For the peaks at lower
42
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis
February 2025
frequencies the 2 elements per CLT layer swept mesh differed from the three other
meshes. The largest difference observed was approximately 1.9 dB at the 125 Hz
one-third octave band. Due to the difference observed between the use of the 2
layer per CLT swept mesh and the tetrahedral mesh, it would had been advisable to
test a combination of the two. However, due to time constraints and the extensive
difference in computation time between the two, the purely tetrahedral mesh was
assessed to be satisfactory.
The mesh for the air domain was also verified using the approach of a convergence
study. The maximum allowed element size was restricted to a certain length, which
was dependent on the number of elements along the smallest wavelength (e.g. the
highest studied frequency). The expectation was, that with increasing resolution
(increasing number of elements) the radiated power would begin to converge. The
absolute difference for the radiated power was however so small, that the relative
difference (as compared to the finest resolution) was compared instead. The ex-
pectation of a convergence point was not redeemed, as it is apparent from Figure
3.30. It should be noted that this convergence study initially applied the maximum
element size of both the CLT and air domain. However, it was realised that the
maximum element size for the CLT was already, as per default, much smaller than
the smallest tested maximum element size. Hence the convergence study was limited
to the air domain.
2
4
5
6
7
8
No. of elements in air domain per smallest wavelength
-1
0
1
2
3
Relative difference (%)
Relative difference in total radiated power, 
rad,i
Figure 3.30: Relative difference in the simulated total radiated power with increasing
mesh resolution for the air domain (relative to the finest resolution).
The relative differences were surprisingly low for even an unrealistic low number
of elements per wavelength (recommendation being 5 second-order elements per
wavelength [25]), and the missing convergence were indicating that the model was
very insensitive to the element size of the air domain.
Though the relative differences were very small and did not converge, some dif-
ferences in the calculated ISI were observed in Figure 3.31. Though, the result is
supporting the idea of a low sensitivity to the air domain’s mesh, differences with
up to 1.1 dB in the octave bands 250 Hz and 315 Hz were observed for the finest
resolutions (7 and 8 elements per wavelength). Due to the increasing computation
43
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis
February 2025
time with increasing resolution, 5 elements per smallest wavelength was used in
the further investigations, as this is the minimum recommendation by COMSOL
(further details provided in [25] p. 185).
102
103
Frequency (Hz)
65
70
75
80
85
Impact sound pressure level (dB)
Impact sound level - Validation of air domain's element size
2 elements per smallest wavelength
4 elements per smallest wavelength
5 elements per smallest wavelength
6 elements per smallest wavelength
7 elements per smallest wavelength
8 elements per smallest wavelength
Figure 3.31: The simulated impact sound level with increasing mesh resolution for
the air domain.
The legend corresponds to the maximum element size being n
elements per smallest wavelength.
The mesh generation of the PML domain was also verified by increasing resolution
and thickness. In Figure 3.32 it can be seen that the differences were neglectable,
and the PML mesh with 4 elements along the thickness direction and a thickness
of one-third of the smallest wavelength was indeed satisfactory. Coarser resolution
and/or less elements were not investigated. For the further analyses the 4 elements
along the original thickness were used.
Figure 3.32: The simulated impact sound level with four different meshes for the
perfect matched layers: 4 and 8 elements along the thickness direction, and double
the thickness with 8 and 16 elements along the thickness direction.
44
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis
February 2025
Lastly, the model was tested by simulating the ISI of a 5 layer CLT floor, where
dimensions and measured data were available from [2]. Only the floor’s dimensions
and number of layers were altered. A new excitation force was simulated and the
resulting ISI can be seen in Figure 3.33.
102
103
Frequency (Hz)
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Impact sound pressure level (dB)
Impact sound level - 5 layer CLT
Simulated
Measured
Figure 3.33: Simulated impact sound level for an arbitrary five layer CLT floor
compared to measured data from [2]
A reasonable fit was obtained from 160 Hz and up, while yet another extreme peak
was apparent in the lower frequencies. As this was the first attempt to introduce
the model to a different floor than the one it was built from, the results were indeed
promising for further work.
45
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis
February 2025
4.
Discussion
4.1
Material properties of CLT
4.1.1
Elastic moduli
From the experimentally found longitudinal wave speed, Young’s modulus (EL)
was determined to be 8.5 GPa. This value appears to be just outside the range
reported in [11], which had values for six different kinds of spruce ranging from 9
to 11.3 GPa. However, it fits into the range from [26] that for general softwood
(not specifically spruce) ranged from 6 to 18 GPa. Additionally, the manual grid-
search inversion, that made ground for the properties tested in test A, found a
better fit with natural frequencies for a stiffer EL of 12 GPa, as was seen in Figure
3.10. Though other combinations of the material properties with equal stiffness did
not show this improved fit. Furthermore, some uncertainty should be tied to the
longitudinal wave speed experiment, due to the lack of repetitions and averaging.
The longitudinal wave speed was based on a single measurement, which is generally
not advisable for any experimental procedure.
On the other hand, to support the experimentally determined EL, the best com-
promise for the mode shapes (validated by the MAC) and the natural frequencies
was found to be the properties referred to as Otani 8 GPa, which had a EL close to
the experimentally determined value. The predicted ISI using these values yielded
a satisfactory fit with measurements, particularly considering the early stages of the
model development. It could have been interesting to investigate the influence of
the different material properties for the general predicted ISI, and not only their
influence on mode shapes and resonance frequencies. The predicted ISI for the 5
layer CLT floor also suggested that satisfying results could be achieved without prior
detailed examination of the floor’s material properties. However, this may have been
coincidental, as the two floors must share similar material properties. Nevertheless,
the exact material properties would be of great importance when considering the
resonance frequencies of the floor, which is very important when dealing with sound
insulation performance.
4.1.2
Poisson’s ratio
Also, the Poisson’s ratio are tied to much uncertainty, though this aspect was not
considered in this project, as the Poisson’s ratio was simplified to 0.1 for all simu-
lations, and to 0.3 for all calculations outside of COMSOL. The initial thought was
46
==PAGE:53==
Master thesis
February 2025
to simplify the Poisson’s ratio in the simulations to 0.3 as well, however when doing
so the simulations showed unrealistic and very messy mode shapes. It was assessed
to be due to a numerical error, but it was not investigated further, as the issue did
not show when using a Poisson’s ratio of 0.1. From the literature, one can expect a
Poisson’s ratio of 0.25±0.25 for soft wood [26], indicating a large variation in wood
in general, but also for the different fibre orientations. It is interesting how it was
still possible to get such a good fit with the measured ISI, despite the use of this
severely simplified Poisson’s ratio of 0.1 in all simulations; considering the, perhaps,
more accurate and complex alternative of having six different Poisson’s ratios, that
in theory vary between 0.25±0.25.
4.2
Boundary conditions
The objective of the modal analyses for the in-frame floor was to achieve a good
fit between the simulated and measured mode shapes and resonance frequencies,
in order to validate the accuracy of the modelled BCs for the steel frame. As the
previous modal analyses of the simply supported floor yielded satisfactory results,
the material properties and the junction between the CLT elements were considered
to be sufficiently represented in the model. Hence the in-frame modal analyses was
only investigating the accuracy of the modelled BCs. However, a satisfactory fit
between the simulated and measured values was not obtained, resulting in large
uncertainties regarding the modelled BCs of the laboratory steel frame. Indicating
that the modelled BCs was oversimplified. In fact, the complexity of the in-frame
BC is evident from the measured mode shapes (shown in Figures 3.15 and 3.16).
If indeed the in-frame floor had uniform BCs around the edge, then the measured
mode shapes should be similar to the theoretical mode shapes for uniform BCs,
e.g. have clear symmetry, which is not apparent from the two figures. The lack
of symmetry and pattern in the measured mode shapes argues that the steel frame
does not act as an uniform BC. This could be due to the uneven load-distribution
between the floor and frame, as a result of the small irregularities on each the
surfaces. This might be resolved by introducing a thin elastic layer between the
floor and frame, such that the load-distribution could be considered more even.
Also, if knowing the material properties of the elastic layer well, then it would be
simple to implement in COMSOL. Lastly, a good fit between the measured and
simulated ISI was found, except for some extreme peaks in the low frequency range.
Questioning the importance of achieving a good fit with the modal analyses in order
to predict the general ISI. Though, it would be crucial for predicting the resonance
frequencies, which affects these low frequency extreme peaks.
4.3
Modal analyses and MAC
As stated in R. Allemang’s article ”The modal assurance criterion - twenty years
of use and abuse”[20] one has to be careful when using MAC to compare modal
vectors. One of the mentioned pitfalls is having too few measurement positions, that
could result in a falsely MAC value approaching unity, or the reference mode shape
is not captured correctly, due to inadequate excitation or poor spatial resolution.
47
==PAGE:54==
Master thesis
February 2025
The spatial resolution is most important for capturing the mode shapes of higher
resonance frequencies, as their shape change more rapidly throughout the floor.
Considering the mode shapes captured for the simply supported case (Figure 3.4 and
3.5), clear patterns were obtained for most of the resonance frequencies, indicating
that the spatial resolution was adequate. One could question if a higher spatial
resolution would improve the found MAC for the in-frame floor, as patterns for
its measured mode shapes are less clear. As it has been mentioned, the BC for
in-frame was probably not as uniform as initially thought, and hence it is more
complicated to predict the shape of the first mode shapes, though the lowest mode
shapes should still be the one least sensitive to the spatial resolution. Therefore
the spatial resolution is not considered to be the cause for not obtaining a good fit
between the measured and simulated BC.
Another aspect to consider is also the noisy FRF obtained below 50 Hz for the in-
frame floor. With changing BC from simply supported to in-frame, it is expected
that the first resonance frequency will increase, as the stiffness of the system must be
considered to increase in-frame. In the measured FRFs the first resonance frequency
rose from 30 Hz for the simply supported floor to 50 Hz for the in-frame floor, but it
is a possibility that the actual first resonance frequency is hidden in the noisy FRF
between 30 and 50 Hz.
Another aspect for using the MAC to compare measurements and simulations is
that it is sensitive to the modal density of the floor. If two resonance frequencies are
very close to each other on the frequency spectrum, then the measured mode shape
will likely be a combination of the two. Whereas the simulated case will simulate
two independent mode shapes of each other. Hence a good comparability between
the modes cannot be obtained.
4.4
Simulated impact sound insulation
Overall, a good fit between measured and simulated ISI was obtained using the
Otani 8 GPa material properties, the periodic fixed-free BC and the total loss factor
as the internal material loss factor. However two significantly deviating peaks were
observed for the one-third octave bands 63 and 125 Hz. The reason for this could
lie in the summation of the radiated power frequency components for each one-
third octave band according to Sec.
2.4.3.
The simulated radiated power was
calculated for every tenth hertz, resulting in some one-third octave bands with more
frequency components than others.
This was analysed in Figure 4.1, where the
simulated radiated power for each tenth hertz component (not summed into one-
third octave bands) are plotted together with the one-third octave bands limits.
It is apparent that exactly the bands with centre frequencies 63 and 125 Hz have
frequency components that are significantly higher than their neighbouring octave
bands.
It is apparent that some frequency components were radiating significantly more
than others. This can be the result of the 10 Hz resolution coinciding with specific
resonance frequencies, or that some resonance frequencies radiate more than others.
However, according to Table 3.3 there was only one resonance frequency in the 63
48
==PAGE:55==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure 4.1: Simulated radiated power with a 10 Hz resolution (red stars). Vertical
black lines visualise the one-third octave band limits, as it can be seen some one-
third octave bands includes more 10 Hz components than others.
Hz one-third octave band and there was no resonance frequencies in the 125 band,
arguing against the fact that the increased radiated power at these one-third octave
bands should be due to resonance frequencies. Additionally, if the increased radiated
power in these bands were due to resonance frequencies, why are they not apparent
in the measured ISI? The floor was modelled with the same dimensions, had verified
material properties, and a good fit was found for the general ISI. Naturally, the
uncertainty linked to the resonance frequencies due to BCs and material properties
could result in a shift in resonance frequencies, but not in their disappearance.
4.5
Model verification
The model verification process showed only small differences in the initial mesh
generation and element sizes for all domains.
In the convergence study regarding the mesh resolution of the air and PML domain,
no point of convergence was seen, and the influence of the element size seemed rather
random across the different tested resolutions (see Figure 3.30). It seems apparent
from Figure 3.31 that the ISI prediction model was surprisingly insensitive to the air
and PML domain’s mesh resolution. If indeed the model is so insensitive to the mesh
generation of the air domain, perhaps the air domain is in fact redundant for ISI
prediction. Alternatively, it could also be the case that the an even finer resolution
was needed, and hence the point of convergence was yet to appear with a finer
resolution. The investigation of this was, however, limited due to the already heavy
computation time for 8 elements per smallest wavelength. A frequency dependent
convergence study could also have been of interest, as the resolutions tested were
most critical for the maximum studied frequency, but this is not supported by the
identical predicted impact sound level found for the highest one-third octave bands
in Figure 3.31. Finally, it could have been interesting to make a similar convergence
study for the CLT domain to possibly make the model more computational efficient.
49
==PAGE:56==
Master thesis
February 2025
4.6
Further work and more complex models
The predicted ISI for the arbitrary 5 layer CLT floor had a good fit with measured
values above 160 Hz. This was a very promising result in the aspect of introducing
the model to other structures. The motivation for doing this project was to develop
a finite element model that could accurately predict the ISI for more complex struc-
tures as well, e.g. built-up structures. Though the 5 layer CLT floor is still very
much like the 7 layer CLT floor, this was a promising step in that direction. If fur-
ther work was to be done based on this project, it would be advisable to investigate
the extreme peaks in the impact sound levels found at the lowest frequencies for
both the 7 and 5 layered CLT, subsequently improving the fit for the frequencies
below 160 Hz for the 5 layer floor as well.
To introduce the model to more complex built-up structures, one could begin with
simpler built-up systems like adding floor coverings to the CLT floor. However, be-
fore introducing the model to built-up structures, one has to implement the coupling
loss factor in a different way than presented in this project. The total loss factor was
implemented as the internal material damping for CLT, however this would not be
practical for built-up structures. The first reason being that the goal of this model
is not have to make laboratory measurements beforehand, in this case to determine
the total loss factor. Another reason for this is the question of where to add the total
loss factor for structures that consists of multiple materials. It would be favourable
to implement the coupling loss factor differently in COMSOL. One way this could
be done, would be to model the steel frame and parts of the laboratory’s structure,
the geometry would then need to be surrounded by a PML in order to simulate no
reflecting waves. Obviously, this approach would have to be validated with mea-
sured loss factors. Alternatively, it could be investigated if the coupling loss factor
could be implemented directly to the BCs in COMSOL, with the expression given
in ISO 10140-5 [16].
50
==PAGE:57==
Master thesis
February 2025
5.
Conclusion
The goal for this project was to predict the ISI of a 7 layered CLT floor using FEM
in COMSOL. Throughout this process, the material properties of a 7 layered CLT
was investigated by experimental measurements and compared to the literature. A
Young’s modulus of 8.5 GPa was found for the stiffest direction (EL). Nevertheless
different material properties and BCs was tested in the simulation, and compared
to the measured frequency response using the MAC, where the best fit was found
using the material properties from [26] with EL=8 GPa. A satisfactory comparison
was found for the modelled geometry of the floor and its material properties, while
the floor was investigated under controlled and simplified BCs, namely eight simply
supporting points along the edge. Unfortunately, the project was unsuccessful in
finding suitable model conditions for the in-frame BC.
Also the excitation signal from one impact with a tapping machine hammer was
successfully computed in a time dependent study in COMSOL. It was later used
to calculate the repeated excitation spectrum which was used as the excitation in a
frequency domain study in COMSOL used to predict the radiated power underneath
the floor. The radiated power was then used to calculate the impact sound level
beneath the floor and hence predict the ISI.
The ISI was successfully calculated for the one-third octave bands from 20 to 1000
Hz. The general predicted ISI had a good fit with measured values, however there
was large deviations in two peaks at 63 and 125 Hz, respectively. Further anal-
ysis revealed that the overestimated values in the two peaks were a result of the
summation of the radiated power into one-third octave bands. Due to the radiated
power had been calculated with a 10 Hz resolution some octave bands had more fre-
quency components than others. In addition, a significantly higher radiated power
was found for only some of the frequency components, despite the fact that no or
only few resonance frequencies were observed in these octave bands in the modal
analysis.
The model was verified with one convergence study for the element size of the air and
PML domain, and two comparison studies for the CLT and PML mesh generation
and resolution.
Only small differences in the calculated ISI was observed using
the different mesh generations and resolutions. For the best compromise between
computational accuracy and time, it was assessed that the already implemented
mesh was satisfactory, and more analyses could be done with the goal of optimising
the computation.
51
==PAGE:58==
Master thesis
February 2025
Bibliography
[1]
M. F. Gotfredsen and J. B. Liengaard. Sound insulation of wooden slabs in
existing buildings. BA thesis. The Technical University of Denmark. 2022.
[2]
S. Jæger et al. Acoustics and CLT - A study of airborne and impact sound in
CLT slaps. Student report, special course. The Technical University of Den-
mark. 2020.
[3]
J. Buhl, J. Christensen, and S. Maagaard. Fremtidens biobaserede etagedæk
[The furture’s bio-based floor]. 2023.
[4]
A. Homb, C. Guigou-Carter, and A. Rabold. “Impact sound insulation of cross-
laminated timber/massive wood floor constructions: Collection of laboratory
measurements and result evaluation”. In: Building Acoustics, Vol. 24(I) 35-52
(2017).
[5]
K. Hagberg, D. Bard, and E. Nillson. “Comparative study of different pro-
grams for sound insulation calculations of wooden structures”. In: Inter-Noise.
2024.
[6]
J. Brunskog and P. Hammer. “Prediction Model for the Impact Sound Level of
Lightweight Floors”. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica, Vol. 89 309-322
(2003).
[7]
C. Balmes and J. Brunskog. “Impact noise calculations of CLT constructions
using finite element”. In: Inter-Noise. 2024.
[8]
J. Lietzen et al. “Computational prediction of impact sound insulation of a
full-scale timber floor applying a FEM simulation procedure”. In: Eng Struct
2024;310:118130 (2024).
[9]
P. Wang et al. “Numerical prediction and experimental validation of im-
pact sound radiation by timber joist floors”. In: Applied Acoustics 162 (2020)
107182 (2020).
[10]
J. B. Liengaard. “Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement
methods of cross-laminated timber elements”. MA thesis. Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, 2025.
[11]
W. Mahoney. Wood Engineering Handbook (2nd Edition). BNI Building News,
2000.
[12]
N. Benson. “Quantitative Assessment of the Impact of Relative Humidity on
the Vibro-Elastic Properties of a Violin”. MA thesis. Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, 2024.
[13]
COMSOL Multiphysics. The Finite Element Method (FEM). Accessed: 2025-
02-19. 2016. url: https : / / www . comsol . com / multiphysics / finite -
element-method.
52
==PAGE:59==
Master thesis
February 2025
[14]
COMSOL AB. COMSOL Multiphysics User Guide. Version 6.2. COMSOL
AB. Stockholm, Sweden, 2024. url: https://www.comsol.com.
[15]
C. Hopkins. Sound Insulation. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007.
[16]
International Organization for Standardization. Acoustics - Laboratory mea-
surement of sound insulation of building elements - part 5: Requirements for
test facilities and equipment. 2021.
[17]
International Organization for Standardization. Building acoustics - Estima-
tion of acoustic performance of buildings from the performace of elements -
Part 1: Airborne sound insulation between rooms. ISO Standard 12354-1:2017.
2017.
[18]
International Organization for Standardization. Acoustics - Measurement of
room acoustic parameters - Part 1: Performace spaces. ISO Standard 3382-
1:2009. 2009.
[19]
International Organization for Standardization. Acoustics - Laboratory mea-
surement of sound insulation of building elements - part 3: Measurement of
impact sound insulation. 2021.
[20]
R. Allemang. “The Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC): Twenty Years of Use
and Abuse”. In: Journal of Sound and Vibration (2003).
[21]
K. A. Dickow, J. Brunskog, and M. Olrich. “Modal density and modal distri-
bution of bending wave vibration fields in ribbed plates”. In: J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 134, 2719-2729 (2013).
[22]
J. Brunskog and P. Hammer. “The Interaction Between the ISO Tapping Ma-
chine and Lightweight Floors”. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica, Vol. 89
309-322 (2003).
[23]
V. Wittstock. “On the Spectral Shape of the Sound Generated by Standard
Tapping Machines”. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica, Vol. 98 301-308
(2012).
[24]
J. Lietzen et al. “Simulation of impact force generated by an ISO tapping
machine on a wooden slab using explicit dynamics analysis”. In: Eng Struct
2022;270:114855 (2022).
[25]
COMSOL. COMSOL Multiphysics - Reference Manual. version 5.5.
[26]
L. B. Otani et al. Determination of wood and byproducts elastic moduli using
the impulse excitation technique.
[27]
COMSOL Multiphysics. How to Model Different Types of Damping in COM-
SOL Multiphysics. Accessed: 2025-02-12. 2023. url: https://www.comsol.
com/blogs/how-to-model-different-types-of-damping-in-comsol-
multiphysics.
53
==PAGE:60==
Master thesis
February 2025
A.
Frequency response and
coherence for each measurement
position for the floor being simply
supported
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.1: Coherence between force excitation and measured velocity response for excitation position 1 for the
whole floor being simply supported
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.2: Coherence between force excitation and measured velocity response for excitation position 2 for the
whole floor being simply supported
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.3: Frequency response for each measurement position, when excited in excitation position 1, while the
floor where simply supported.
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.4: Frequency response for each measurement position, when excited in excitation position 2, while the
floor where simply supported.
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.5: Averaged frequency response for each measurement position while the floor where simply supported.
==PAGE:66==
Master thesis
February 2025
B.
Frequency response and
coherence for each measurement
position for the floor in-frame
60
==PAGE:67==
Figure B.1: Coherence between force excitation and measured velocity response for excitation position 1 for the
whole floor in the laboratory frame.
==PAGE:68==
Figure B.2: Coherence between force excitation and measured velocity response for excitation position 2 for the
whole floor in the laboratory frame.
==PAGE:69==
Figure B.3: Frequency response for each measurement position, when excited in excitation position 1, while the
floor where in the laboratory frame.
==PAGE:70==
Figure B.4: Frequency response for each measurement position, when excited in excitation position 2, while the
floor where in the laboratory frame.
==PAGE:71==
Figure B.5: Averaged frequency response for each measurement position while the floor where in the laboratory
frame.
==PAGE:72==
Master thesis
February 2025
C.
COMSOL models
Figure C.1: COMSOL model used for the eigenfrequency study. Model shows a 7 layered
CLT floor.
66
==PAGE:73==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure C.2: Zoomed in on the COMSOL model used for the eigenfrequency study. Model
shows a 7 layered CLT floor.
67
==PAGE:74==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure C.3: COMSOL model used for the time dependent study. Model shows a 7 layered
CLT floor and one tapping machine hammer.
68
==PAGE:75==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure C.4: Zoomed in on the COMSOL model used for the time dependent study. Model
shows a 7 layered CLT floor and one tapping machine hammer.
69
==PAGE:76==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure C.5: COMSOL model used for the frequency domain study. Model shows a 7
layered CLT floor with five excitation points and an air domain underneath, which is
surrounded by a perfectly matched layer domain.
70
==PAGE:77==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure C.6: Zoomed in on the COMSOL model used for the frequency domain study.
Model shows a 7 layered CLT floor with five excitation points and an air domain under-
neath, which is surrounded by a perfectly matched layer domain.
71
==PAGE:78==
Master thesis
February 2025
D.
Boundary conditions for
in-frame modal analysis
Figure D.1: Boundary conditions for the computational modal analysis with a fixed line
approx. 5 cm from the edge. Blue and black are indicating fixed and free boundary
conditions, respectively.
72
==PAGE:79==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure D.2: Boundary conditions for the computational modal analysis with a periodic
fixed-free line approx. 5 cm from the edge. Blue and black are indicating fixed and free
boundary conditions, respectively.
73
==PAGE:80==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure D.3: Boundary conditions for the computational modal analysis with a mixed fixed-
free line approx. 5 cm from the edge, depending on the measured mobility given in Figure
3.18. Blue and black are indicating fixed and free boundary conditions, respectively.
74
==PAGE:81==
Master thesis
February 2025
Figure D.4: Modelled steel frame for the computational modal analysis with the modelled
steel frame. The first 7 layers are CLT, the last layer are the steel frame, which has been
fixed along the side.
75
