==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A case study-based assessment of the role of LCA and 
AESA in disclosing under the Corporate 
Sustainability Reporting Directive 
 
 
Marie Astrid Steenberg Holm (s185513) 
Tor Tinangon Pedersen (s190970) 
 
 
MASTER THESIS 
DTU Sustain 
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering 
 
 
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
February 2025 
 
Supervisors: 
Assistant Professor, Anders Bjørn 
Professor, Michael Zwicky Hauschild 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
With the implementation of the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) in 2024, reporting 
companies are mandated to disclose their material environmental impacts following the European 
Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) E1-E5, affecting approximately 50,000 companies operating 
within the European Union (EU). The specific environmental impacts to be disclosed are denominated 
by a Double Materiality Assessment (DMA) carried out by the reporting company on the ESRS E1 
Climate change, E2 Pollution, E3 Water and marine resources, E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems, and E5 
Resources and circular economy. This requires higher data granularity on specific company activities 
related to environmental impacts and a scope encompassing the entire value chain, compared to previous 
regulations. However, the official DMA guidelines do not provide reporting companies with a scientific 
approach for determining environmental problem areas for which their impacts are material. This could 
lead to companies “cherry-picking” environmental problem areas, and ultimately, to burden-shifting 
from included to excluded areas. Here we show that existing voluntary sustainability initiatives and 
environmental assessment methods can be utilised to eliminate these issues, aiding companies in reaching 
compliance. In a case study of a small consultancy company, we found that Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
and Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment (AESA) could be linked to ESRS E1-E5 and be 
utilised to identify material environmental impacts which were not indicated by a DMA. The results were 
obtained using two approaches as alternative to the DMA: Mid-to-Endpoint (MtE) modelling and 
weighting which ranked the materiality of impacts and AESA that provided materiality thresholds 
aligning with the carrying capacities of the Earth’s systems. Our results demonstrate that incorporating 
LCA and AESA in the DMA process can ensure high quality and relevance in reporting under the CSRD. 
With the end-goal of providing stakeholders and regulatory authorities with assurance of the company’s 
sustainability ambition, the two approaches provide a practical framework to assess material 
environmental impacts in a scientific manner, allowing for benchmarking between companies and their 
contribution to the sustainable progress within the EU.  
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
Preface 
This thesis was written by Marie Astrid Steenberg Holm and Tor Tinangon Pedersen in the period of 26th 
of August 2024 to 26th of February 2025 constituting 6 months and corresponding to 35 ECTS points. 
The thesis completes the Master of Science (MSc) in Environmental Engineering at the Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU).  
The thesis project was supervised by Assistant Professor Anders Bjørn, and Professor Michael Zwicky 
Hauschild from the Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering at DTU Sustain.  
We would like to express enormous gratitude for the support and supervision on the thesis project. We 
would also like to thank the companies that participated for the time, effort, and resources contributed to 
the thesis project. 
 
 
___________________________                                                        ___________________________ 
   Marie Astrid Steenberg Holm                                                                    Tor Tinangon Pedersen 
                  s185513                                                                                                    s190970 
 
  ___________________________ 
  Date (dd-mm-yyyy) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26-02-2025
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1 Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 1 
1.1 Research background ............................................................................................................ 2 
2 Initial study ................................................................................................................................. 2 
2.1 Research objective ................................................................................................................ 2 
2.2 Methodology ......................................................................................................................... 3 
2.2.1 Survey analyses .............................................................................................................. 3 
2.2.2 Interviews ....................................................................................................................... 3 
2.3 Results and discussion .......................................................................................................... 5 
2.4 Initial conclusion ................................................................................................................... 8 
3 In-depth case study of DMA ..................................................................................................... 9 
3.1 Research objective ................................................................................................................ 9 
3.2 Methodology ....................................................................................................................... 10 
3.2.1 Baseline: DMA workshop based on EFRAG guidance ................................................ 10 
3.2.2 Modelling of LCI .......................................................................................................... 11 
3.2.3 Approach 1: MtE modelling and weighting ................................................................. 11 
3.2.4 Approach 2: AESA ....................................................................................................... 14 
3.3 Results ................................................................................................................................. 16 
3.3.1 Baseline: DMA workshop based on EFRAG guidance results .................................... 16 
3.3.2 Approach 1: MtE modelling and weighting results ..................................................... 17 
3.3.3 Approach 2: AESA results ........................................................................................... 19 
3.3.4 Comparison of approaches 1 and 2 to the baseline ..................................................... 20 
4 Discussion .................................................................................................................................. 21 
4.1 Novelty and comparison to existing literature .................................................................... 22 
4.2 Recommendations to individual actors ............................................................................... 23 
4.3 Limitations and future research ........................................................................................... 24 
4.3.1 Limitations of the baseline: DMA workshop based on EFRAG guidance ................... 24 
4.3.2 Limitations of Approach 1: MtE modelling and weighting ......................................... 24 
4.3.3 Limitations of Approach 2: AESA ................................................................................ 25 
4.3.4 Future research ............................................................................................................ 25 
5 Conclusion................................................................................................................................. 26 
6 List of appendices ..................................................................................................................... 27 
7 References ................................................................................................................................. 28 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
1 
 
1 Introduction 
The Earth’s systems are experiencing unprecedented anthropogenic pressures in the forms of 
climate change, pollution, water resource depletion, the biodiversity crisis, and unsustainable 
resource use (Richardson et al., 2023). Politicians and regulatory authorities are thereby required 
to act, illustrated by the rapidly evolving regulatory landscape promoting sustainable development. 
At the corporate level, the regulatory pressure is demonstrated through the International 
Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) developing sustainability disclosures, The US Security and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) adopting standardisation of climate-related disclosures, and the 
implementation of the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) in the European 
Union (EU) (Antonini & Gomez-Conde, 2024; de Villiers et al., 2024). While the former two are 
still in development, the European Commission is leading the sustainability reporting development 
having already implemented the CSRD in 2024. The planned reporting rounds are taking place 
from 2024-2028, and include:  
• For the financial year 2024, large, public-interest companies that average 500 employees 
or more.  
• For the financial year 2025, non-public-interest companies that average 500 employees or 
more. 
• For the financial year 2026, small and medium-sized listed companies fulfilling 
requirements in Regulation (EU) 575/2013, and Directive 2009/138/EC, with possible 
extension until 2028.  
In total, the CSRD is expected to affect approximately 50,000 companies operating within the EU 
(PwC, 2024). As part of the CSRD implementation, the European Sustainability Reporting 
Standards (ESRS) have been developed by the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group 
(EFRAG) and mandate companies to identify and disclose their material impacts, risks and 
opportunities (IROs) on a range of sustainability matters. The ESRS contain 82 disclosures 
comprising 1144 datapoints, which is expected to place a considerable data management burden 
on the reporting companies (Novata, 2024; Wagenhofer, 2024). The CSRD also reshapes the 
compliance landscape by addressing a broad range of environmental problem areas, specifically, 
E1 Climate change, E2 Pollution, E3 Water and marine resources, E4 Biodiversity and 
ecosystems, and E5 Resources and circular economy. In many cases, the standards also refer to 
absolute sustainability contexts, such as the Planetary Boundaries (EFRAG, 2022a, 2022b, 2022c, 
2022d, 2022e; Richardson et al., 2023). The standards further require companies to account for 
their entire value chain, including not only the direct impacts from operations, but upstream and 
downstream impacts as well. Ultimately, this has created an unprecedented need for reporting 
companies to efficiently assess the environmental impacts of their corporate activities using 
methodologies that allow for addressing the abovementioned aspects. But this raises the question: 
Are current environmental assessment methods harmonisable with the disclosure requirements of 
the ESRS E1-E5? 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
2 
 
An initial study will investigate which parts of reporting under the ESRS E1-E5 poses challenges 
related to environmental impact quantification. Based on the conclusion pertaining to this initial 
research objective, a new set of research questions will be formulated in a following case study. 
Finally, a discussion of current literature, recommendations, and limitations will detail the paper’s 
contribution to the field followed by a conclusion of the most important findings.  
1.1 Research background 
The authors of this paper have previously carried out a short study titled “Critical Assessment of 
the CSRD” during a special course at the institute DTU Sustain, Technical University of Denmark, 
see Supplementary Information (SI) (specifically, SI6.SpecialCourse). It contained a systematic 
review of the ESRS E1-E5 and identified reporting metrics where the environmental assessment 
method Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) could potentially be adapted to provide indicators related 
to the metrics in the disclosure requirements. It also found that the ESRS E1-E5 all refer to absolute 
environmental contexts such as the Paris Agreement and Planetary Boundaries yet are absent of 
methodological guidance to evaluate the reporting company’s environmental impacts in these 
contexts. The method Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment (AESA) was found as a 
viable approach for reporting companies to address the absolute environmental contexts referenced 
in the ESRS E1-E5. 
In this master thesis, a literature review was conducted to investigate the current research 
background on implementing LCA and AESA in reporting under the ESRS E1-E5. This was done 
via the platforms ScienceDirect, Google Scholar, ResearchGate, Springer Nature Link, and DTU 
FindIT using key words such as, “Corporate Sustainability Reporting”, “Corporate Sustainability 
Reporting Directive”, “Life Cycle Assessment”, “Organisation Environmental Footprint”, 
“Hybrid LCA”, “Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment”, “Double Materiality 
Assessment”, “ESG”, “Impact Materiality”, and “Financial Materiality”. However, due to the 
timeline of the CSRD, companies subject to the first round of reporting had only recently published 
their sustainability statements resulting in a lack of research on which areas of reporting under the 
CSRD companies find difficult, as well as the implementation of these environmental assessment 
methods in reporting. Hence, there is currently a research gap concerning approaches and 
recommendations to apply existing voluntary environmental assessment methods, specifically 
LCA and AESA, in reporting under the ESRS E1-E5.  
2 Initial study 
Limited by this nascency of the field and scarce academic literature, an initial study has first been 
conducted to explore the field.  
2.1 Research objective 
The initial study was carried out to achieve a fundamental understanding of the CSRD, and how 
companies are currently approaching the new directive. Using this information, the initial study 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
3 
 
specifically aims to identify the area in ESRS E1-E5, where it would be most viable to apply LCA 
or AESA as an environmental impact quantification method answering the research questions: 
1. In which area of reporting under the ESRS E1-E5 are reporting companies most challenged 
with quantifying environmental impacts? 
2. Can these challenges potentially be solved by incorporating environmental impact metrics 
from pre-existing voluntary sustainability initiatives and/or environmental assessments, or 
is it necessary to develop additional environmental assessment methodologies? 
2.2 Methodology 
The initial study was based on the approach shown in Figure 1. To best tackle research questions 
1 and 2 survey analyses and interviews were conducted. These were utilised to explore industry 
insights of companies subject to the first reporting round. This further allowed for identifying the 
most prominent obstacles according to a large pool of survey participants, as well as reflecting 
more minute practical issues surrounding these obstacles through interviews.  
 
Figure 1: Research structure of the initial study and the pertaining research questions (RQs). 
2.2.1 Survey analyses 
Insights in how companies are managing reporting under the CSRD was compiled and analysed 
from global and European grey paper surveys of industry executives and professionals through a 
multitude of branches. Among these are: the PwC Global CSRD Survey 2024, including 547 
executives and senior professionals (PwC, 2024), the KPMG Survey of Sustainability Reporting 
2024 (KPMG, 2024), including data from 5800 companies in the N100 and G250 groups, and the 
Novata CSRD Survey 2024 reflecting insights from 59 organisations from which 83% are 
headquartered in Europe (Novata, 2024). The survey analyses were conducted using grounded 
theory to allow theory generation, rather than theory verification (Beemsterboer et al., 2020). This 
allowed for using the results from the survey analyses aligned with the exploratory ideal of this 
initial study. 
2.2.2 Interviews  
The interviews were conducted with two different companies. The two companies were chosen as 
interview subjects as both are known in the corporate sustainability reporting sphere and have 
working experience with the CSRD. The first company interviewed is a small Danish consultancy 
company, which is therefore referred to as CC. They specialise in advising businesses on their 
environmental strategy through multiple services regarding voluntary sustainability initiatives, 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
4 
 
such as greenhouse gas (GHG) accounting according to the GHG Protocol: Corporate Standard 
and the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi). The company also conducts LCAs and provides 
guidance for companies getting certified through the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) and the 
Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC). Recently, they have aided in the 
development of multiple tools for reporting under CSRD and consult both a large company subject 
to reporting under the CSRD as well as several Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) choosing 
to align with the CSRD voluntary reporting standard for SMEs (VSME). The interviewees from 
CC can be seen in Table 1. 
Table 1: Overview of the interviewees from Consultancy company (CC) and how they will be referred to in the paper. The table 
also describes their respective roles in CC. 
Interviewee role 
Abbreviation 
Partner with a background 
in communication. 
CC#1 
Partner with a background in environmental and 
chemical engineering. 
CC#2 
The second company interviewed, is a large Danish manufacturing company, which will be 
referred to as MC. The company is subject to report under the CSRD for the financial year of 2024 
and have recently published their consolidated sustainability statement as the last step of a 
reporting round. The interviewees from MC can be seen in Table 2. 
Table 2: Overview of the interviewees from Manufacturing company (MC) and how they will be referred to in the paper. The 
table also describes their respective roles in MC. 
Interviewee role 
Abbreviation 
Environmental specialist   
MC#1 
CSRD specialist 
MC#2 
Environmental economist 
MC#3 
The interviewees have been of a variety of roles within the companies to obtain a diverse and 
unbiased perspective of the CSRD workflows. All interviews have been conducted in a semi-
structured and synchronous manner with a duration of approximately one hour in either English or 
Danish. This allowed for keeping the interview aimed at the specific expertise of the interviewees, 
while letting the discussion be as open as possible without straying from subject (Adams, 2015). 
More details on how the specific interviews have been conducted can be found in 
SI1.Documentation. 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
5 
 
2.3 Results and discussion 
Findings pertaining to the survey analyses and interviews are summarised in the following. The 
interviews were transcribed and contexts such as relevant legislature and terminology have been 
referenced. All notes from the interviews are available in SI1.Documentation and are redacted to 
comply with a confidentiality agreement. 
Finding 1: Companies are more capable at reporting under climate change than other 
environmental topics. Survey respondents were more confident in environmental topics that are 
already included in various reporting standards, like Climate change. The additional topics such 
as Biodiversity and ecosystems, Pollution, and Resource use and circular economy are less familiar 
(KPMG, 2024; PwC, 2024). Interviewees also highlighted this issue:  
“Some of the standards are less intuitive, i.e. ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems. Companies 
have less knowledge on the environmental area, perhaps because it may be less mature 
compared to reporting on climate.” (CC#2, 2024) 
Finding 2: Data management is the biggest hurdle. With the ESRS containing 82 disclosures 
comprising 1144 datapoints, companies are required to collect extensive data. CSRD also 
mandates a higher level of data granularity, i.e. for Climate change, where overall energy 
consumption has previously been disclosed by MC. However, in E1 Climate change, a company’s 
energy consumption should be disaggregated by source (renewables, non-renewables, etc.) 
(MC#2, 2024). Furthermore, the majority of datapoints in CSRD are “narrative” or “semi-
narrative”, requiring companies to develop plans, policies, or statements regarding the topics, 
which have not been documented previously (MC#2, 2024). In the survey analyses Novata (2024) 
found 68% of participants claiming data collection and management as the largest obstacle. In 
PwC (2024), it was also found as a prevalent issue with 96% respondents mentioning availability 
and quality of data as an obstacle for implementation.  
Finding 3: Value chain reporting is complex. The second largest obstacle identified in PwC 
(2024) is value chain complexity. Incorporating a more extensive boundary for companies, 
additionally accounting for upstream and downstream activities, are proving challenging to 
reporting companies. Novata (2024) also concluded that costs associated with data management 
would be highest for companies with complex value chains. This was reaffirmed in the interviews 
with CC stating that from a consultancy perspective, the first obstacle lies in data collection. This 
obstacle is often due to reporting companies struggling to understand the perspective of their entire 
value chain (CC#1, 2024; CC#2, 2024). Further, the interviewees stated that companies who have 
experience with voluntary sustainability initiatives that require value chain engagement will have 
useful experience to use in the disclosure process:  
“Companies who already conduct voluntary sustainability reporting have an advantage, i.e. B 
Corp companies were more ready for the disclosure process.” (CC#2, 2024).  
==PAGE:10==
 
 
6 
 
Finding 4: DMA is the deciding factor for the comprehensiveness of reporting. The first step 
in reporting under the CSRD is identifying IROs, and categorising by “actuality” (having 
manifested in the environment or company), or “potentiality” (having a likelihood of occurring 
eventually). The company is then obligated to report on the IROs that can be assessed material 
through a DMA. The assessment aims to provide an overview of which activities performed by 
the company are “material” relative to thresholds determined by the company in ESRS 1 and 2 
(EFRAG, 2024a). EFRAG provides conceptual guidelines to conduct the DMA but refrain from a 
set structure:  
“The ESRS do not mandate how the materiality assessment process shall be designed or 
conducted by an undertaking. This is because no one process would suit all types of economic 
activity, organisational structure, location of operations or upstream and downstream value 
chains of all undertakings applying the ESRS.” (EFRAG, 2024a).  
This is done to enable flexibility for the reporting companies, but a lack of requirements to the data 
quality or materiality thresholds could impact the representativeness of the assessment. Since 80% 
of the data points included in the ESRS are subject to materiality assessment, it is a significant 
amount of information which is not mandatory to include in reporting (Novata, 2024). However, 
with 49% of respondents in Novata (2024) claiming DMA to be the most difficult area, and with 
67% of respondents in PwC (2024) not having completed the DMA, it is a vulnerable area, and 
potential bottleneck in terms of how much information will be disclosed by the reporting 
companies. Furthermore, the DMA is also accepted internationally with 50% of G250 companies, 
and 42% of N100s conducting DMAs as part of sustainability reporting (KPMG, 2024), so it is 
imperative that this tool is functioning robustly.  
In the interviews it was highlighted that the DMA is currently the most troublesome part of the 
CSRD workflow due to strenuosity and resource intensiveness. Hence, it is an area requiring 
improvement (CC#1, 2024; CC#2, 2024). One of the main challenges is that the implementation 
guidance does not specify which data should be collected before carrying out the DMA to serve as 
the foundation of evaluating IROs. With no specifications, companies will tend to conduct DMA 
in absence of quantitative data with the consequence of falsely prioritising IROs. Nonetheless, 
there is a trade-off in starting data collection before conducting the DMA, as it could prove 
resource-intensive without proper guidance. It would, however, increase the likelihood of 
identifying the correct IROs, which would decrease the workload in the long run.  
Another main challenge in performing the DMA is evaluating materiality:  
“One of the most helpful additions to the ESRS would be thresholds to evaluate materiality 
against. The DMA implementation guidance lacks specifications on how activities should be 
scored. The risk assessment is then forced on the company, which allows for the company to 
cherry-pick activities that are feasible to work with or create a ranking system that allows for 
it.” (CC#2, 2024). 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
7 
 
This contrasts with the intended flexibility of the implementation guidance (EFRAG, 2024a). As 
EFRAG does not define materiality thresholds, the evaluation is subjective and carries a risk of 
cherry-picking or burden-shifting to areas not included in the assessment. Ultimately, the company 
controls the calculations, data background, what is deemed material, and what is included in the 
assessment. Therefore, it is recommended that the European Commission propose requirements 
on who may conduct DMA. It is also necessary to communicate how the company has evaluated 
the materiality of its activities; qualitatively, semi-quantitatively, etc. (CC#1, 2024). This could 
additionally allow for accessible benchmarking among peers or inspiration for conducting an 
assessment. Companies could utilise external help in assessing materiality, however, the external 
party may be lacking valuable company insights (CC#2, 2024).  
The interviews with MC showed that reaching consensus on the ranking was difficult. For MC, 
considerable time and resources were allocated toward the DMA, specifically in aligning 
expectations, agreeing on which topics to include, and the materiality of each. A lot of the 
employees who were hired by MC in the period were specifically due to the upcoming CSRD 
reporting round. The DMA period started in October 2023 – went through multiple rounds of 
approval – and received final approval in July 2024, alluding to the strenuosity of the process. 
“It would have been beneficial with some level of screening to guide the process. Once the data 
collection began, we are maybe rethinking some of the decisions from the DMA” (MC#3, 2024).  
MC further stated that any data management system would be useful, and they would invest in 
development or acquisition of such (MC#2, 2024). They further predict that the company will have 
to update their DMA every two years. Although, if something irregular is discovered before, it will 
be adapted in their assessment. It was therefore preferred that a more specific structure was 
provided by EFRAG, as these updates could have been avoided with a set structure. Lastly, MC is 
requesting materiality thresholds derived from the Planetary Boundaries, specific for their 
activities, as these were not derivable from the implementation guidance (MC#1, 2024).  
Finding 5: Companies are unable to transfer voluntary sustainability initiatives and pre-
existing environmental assessments to CSRD. The EFRAG IG3 List of ESRS datapoints 
(EFRAG, 2024b) provides a comprehensive list of datapoints related to CSRD reporting. When 
the list was analysed, it became evident that the ESRS E1-E5 contain more environmental metrics 
than are usually communicated in voluntary sustainability initiatives and environmental 
assessments. An example is in GHG Protocol: Corporate Standard, SBTi, and B Corporation 
Certification (B Corp), all climate change focused disclosures, where biogenic emissions are not 
mandatory to report (depending on the type of sector the company operates in). However, in the 
ESRS E1: Climate change, they are part of several disclosure requirements. Consequently, 
reporting companies may have to recalculate their previous environmental assessments, to include 
these metrics, or disaggregating existing results that must be communicated separately in the ESRS 
E1-E5. Besides including several new environmental metrics, the majority of disclosure 
requirements in ESRS E1-E5 are qualitative statements, such as transition plans and policies 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
8 
 
related to the five environmental areas. These are referred to as “narratives” and “semi-narratives” 
by EFRAG and constitute 56% and 13% of “shall” datapoints. Similarly, the “narratives” and 
“semi-narratives” are 64% and 19% of the “may” datapoints (EFRAG, 2024b). Ultimately, the 
data basis for reporting under voluntary sustainability initiatives may be transferrable to the ESRS 
E1-E5 but will not in itself be sufficient to meet the disclosure requirements. The interviews 
support this finding as MC were not successful in transferring work with previous sustainability 
initiatives to the ESRS E1-E5. 
“Currently there is not much hope in transferring the results from existing tools or standards 
directly (…) The CSRD doesn’t specify everything. A lot of the E standards are inspired by other 
protocols, but they are not the exact same and are difficult to apply directly in the CSRD.” 
(MC#1, 2024).  
MC has concurrently been developing a climate and nature roadmap. However, this was not incited 
by the disclosure requirements in the CSRD. This is a vulnerability of the silo corporate structure 
in terms of the workflow of CSRD, in which strategy teams often work separately to reporting and 
compliance teams, hence, regulations become a tiny subset of the roadmaps. MC could use the 
roadmap in reporting action plans in the ESRS E1 and E4, but the roadmaps are more detailed than 
incited in the CSRD (MC#1, 2024). 
Finding 6: Extensive reporting requirements compromises action. MC expressed concerns that 
the strenuous reporting requirements could lead to less room for action. Furthermore, CSRD is 
focused on planning and communicating “narratives” rather than completing said plans (MC#1, 
2024). This was also expressed by another interviewee:  
“CSRD does not mandate behaviour, it mandates disclosure.” (MC#2, 2024).  
However, even in the worst case, a benefit is that companies are developing the same vocabulary 
within sustainability reporting (MC#2, 2024). Convergence of reporting directives also provides 
companies with a better foundation for gauging what environmental impacts are essential to 
investigate, and if found material, to report on and work with. There is also an aspect of financial 
pressure. How is a company expected to allocate the funds toward reporting? Should a 
manufacturing company be forced to choose between a production worker and an environmental 
specialist for reporting? An alternative consequence of the CSRD is that the reporting requirements 
trickle up through the value chain. Either it increases the workload of suppliers, or consequently 
suppliers are chosen based on their communicated environmental footprint (CC#2, 2024). 
2.4 Initial conclusion 
The results showed that as of now, there are several obstacles in reporting under the ESRS E1-E5. 
Since the ESRS E1-E5 comprise five environmental problem areas, out of which companies are 
most experienced in climate change, reporting under the remaining standards will require 
education, time, and resources. Furthermore, by broadening the impacts that a company should 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
9 
 
investigate, not only direct, but also upstream and downstream impacts, companies are required to 
gather data on their entire value chain, which has proven to be a challenge. There is not much hope 
in transferring work with previous sustainability work, as there is a mismatch between the metrics 
of voluntary sustainability initiatives and environmental assessments, and the ones included in the 
ESRS E1-E5. Additionally, the ESRS E1-E5 are introducing a substantial amount of qualitative 
disclosure requirements, which are different to the work companies have previously conducted. 
Potentially, the data acquired for voluntary sustainability initiatives or environmental assessments 
could be utilised in CSRD reporting, but it will require an alternative impact quantification that 
aligns with the metrics in the ESRS E1-E5. However, having done voluntary sustainability work 
was found to be an advantage for companies, because they are more prepared to report on 
environmental parameters, primarily through data acquisition practice and value chain 
engagement. In conclusion, the greatest obstacle was found to be conducting a robust DMA, 
substantiated by 50% of survey respondents in Novata (2024). Interviewees from CC and MC also 
underlined the difficulty of the process due to EFRAG not providing a set structure of the DMA 
process and leaving too much up to interpretation. Additionally, with EFRAG not providing 
materiality thresholds, the company will ultimately control the environmental problem areas they 
will report on, which could lead to cherry-picking areas that are more feasible to work with, 
potential burden-shifting to excluded areas, and the DMA not reflecting the company’s most 
significant environmental impacts.  
3 In-depth case study of DMA  
As concluded in the initial study, there is a need for a particular focus on the DMA, as it is one of 
the greatest obstacles in reporting under the CSRD. 
3.1 Research objective  
With basis in the initial conclusion, a case study was conducted, where the practicality of 
implementing LCA and AESA as alternatives to the DMA was tested, developing on the 
recommendations in SI6.SpecialCourse and answering the following research questions: 
3. To which extent can methodology from LCA be utilised to quantify environmental impact 
indicators which can be linked to the ESRS E1-E5? 
4. To which extent can AESA be utilised to quantify environmental impact indicators which 
can be linked to the ESRS E1-E5 and additionally evaluate if the impacts are exceeding 
the carrying capacities of the Earth’s systems? 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
10 
 
To evaluate the practical application of these methods, answering research questions 3 and 4, the 
case study was based on the approach shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 2: Research structure of the in-depth case study of DMA and the pertaining research questions (RQs). 
3.2 Methodology 
The case study was based on data from the consultancy company (CC) from the initial study. The 
case study was focused on identifying CC’s material environmental impacts through the official 
DMA process as part of reporting under the ESRS E1-E5 and explored two alternative approaches 
to identify material environmental impacts: Approach 1: Mid-to-Endpoint (MtE) modelling and 
weighting and Approach 2: AESA. 
3.2.1 Baseline: DMA workshop based on EFRAG guidance 
A DMA workshop was conducted with CC, according to the official DMA implementation 
guidance (EFRAG, 2024a) to provide a baseline of material environmental impacts. The duration 
of the workshop was three hours and focused on the five topics represented in ESRS E1-E5. In the 
standards the topics are further divided into subtopics and in some cases subsubtopics. A 
comprehensive list of all topics, subtopics, and subsubtopics can be found in SI2.Workshop.  
During the workshop, five employees from CC identified their company’s activities that could be 
connected to subtopics. Each participant individually rated CC’s activities according to the severity 
of the impact. The severity is defined as the average of the parameters: scale, scope, and 
irremediability. The scale signifies the graveness of an impact. Scope denominates how 
widespread the impacts is. Irremediability measures if the impact is rectifiable. If an activity and 
the pertaining impact is only potential, i.e. might occur in the future, the likelihood was also 
evaluated (EFRAG, 2024a). All parameters were rated semi-quantitatively, on a scale from 1-5 (1; 
lowest, 5; highest). A severity threshold was set to 3, inspired by the implementation guidance 
(EFRAG, 2024a). Hence, a subtopic with severity score over 3 was regarded as material. More 
details on how the workshop was conducted and severity scores were calculated can be found in 
SI2.Workshop. 
The interpretation of parameters such as scale, scope, irremediability is not set in the guidance. As 
the nature of the parameters is dependent on the impacts, (i.e. scope differs naturally for regional 
impacts such as air pollution, compared to global impacts such as climate change), it could be 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
11 
 
difficult to compare the company activities under each subtopic according to the severity. 
Additionally, for potential impacts the evaluation of likelihood is averaged with scale, scope, and 
irremediability, as recommended by the guidance (EFRAG, 2024a). This enables the severity of 
the impact to proportionally increase or decrease, depending on how likely the impact is. 
Consequently, this introduces a challenge when impacts are either very likely or very unlikely to 
occur, as the severity of the impact is skewed in either direction, in contrast to if the impact was 
actual. Finally, a considerable influence on the outcome of the DMA is how the data from the 
workshop is processed. In this case study, the responds were assessed as follows:  
• Individual: Material topics are based on the highest individual severity score per topic. 
• Consensus: Material topics are determined from the average of severity scores per topic. 
• Popularity: Material topics are determined from ubiquity of the topic.  
The subjective choice of the ranking method of the company conducting the DMA would highly 
influence the outcome of material topics. As EFRAG does not specify a method, it also eliminates 
potential comparison between DMAs of companies, imposing a need for alternative methods to 
evaluate materiality which are more reliable, transparent, and replicable. 
3.2.2 Modelling of LCI 
To provide these alternative methodologies, a company-wide LCA of CC was conducted and is 
detailed in SI1.Documentation. The LCA followed the ISO 14040 and 14044 (ISO, 2006a, 2006b), 
and adapted the Organisation Environmental Footprint framework (OEF) (European Commission, 
2012) to encompass the entirety of CC. The goal was to provide a more robust data background 
for assessing environmental impacts. The scope encompassed corporate activities with the 
reference unit of CC. A Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) was developed including company activities 
for 2023. The data was derived from the GHG Protocol aligned GHG inventory for 2023 and 
encompasses Scope 1, 2, and 3 activities. The primary data was supplied directly by CC and was 
used to model the foreground system, in this case processes that are controlled by CC. The 
background system was modelled using secondary data aggregated at a system level from the 
databases ecoinvent and EXIOBASE (Beemsterboer et al., 2020).  
3.2.3 Approach 1: MtE modelling and weighting 
The Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) step of the LCA provided characterised mid- and 
endpoint quantifications of environmental impacts in several categories. Evaluating each midpoint 
impact category’s contribution to endpoint damage on the Areas of Protection (AoPs) allows for 
assessing which environmental midpoint categories are most relevant within an AoP. However, as 
comparing results across AoPs is not possible as damage on the different AoPs is expressed in 
different units, a weighting step was also applied to quantify environmental impacts in a single 
score. Ultimately, conducting a contribution analysis allowed for evaluating which midpoint 
impact categories were most relevant within the single score. This approach is referred to as MtE 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
12 
 
modelling and weighting, and similarly to the DMA workshop, it allows for ranking the 
environmental impact on different problem areas, but in a scientifically robust way.  
The MtE modelling and weighting was conducted using the impact assessment method 
ReCiPe2016, hierarchist perspective (H), which provides a comprehensive list of midpoint and 
endpoint characterisation factors (Huijbregts et al., 2017). To model each midpoint impact 
category’s importance in the overall environmental footprint, the weights included in SimaPro 
were applied to calculate a single score. The ReCiPe2016 (H) method does not contain weighting 
recommendations. However, ReCiPe2008 included a weighting set based on the Eco-indicator 99 
method, which utilises the panel-based approach with data from an LCA expert survey (Goedkoop, 
2001; PRé Sustainability, 2024).  
For robustness, MtE modelling and weighting was also conducted using the impact assessment 
methods IMPACT World+ and Ecological Scarcity 2021. The IMPACT World+ method also 
contains a broad range of midpoint and endpoint characterisation factors (Bulle et al., 2019), but 
refrains from recommending weighting factors. Authors refer to the STEPWISE approach by 
Weidema et al. (2008), which allows for monetarisation of damage on AoPs through data gathered 
from a contingent valuation study (Alberini et al., 2004), a choice modelling study (Friedrich et 
al., 2005), and forecasted marginal energy costs (IEA, 2008) presented in Weidema (2009, 2015). 
The impact assessment method Ecological Scarcity 2021 does not include an endpoint 
characterisation step. However, it includes weighting sets which allowed for calculation of a single 
score, hence, it was also included in the robustness check. The Ecological Scarcity 2021 method 
utilises the distance-to-target principle in weighting, applying an eco-factor which quantifies the 
interrelations between current levels of emissions and their corresponding political target or 
environmental law (FOEN, 2021; PRé Sustainability, 2024). 
To apply the results from MtE modelling and weighting in assessing material impacts, the midpoint 
categories were linked to the subtopics in the ESRS E1-E5. In Table 3 the interconnectedness is 
indicated for each impact assessment methodology used for MtE modelling and weighting. Red is 
indicative of no connection between the midpoint impact category and a subtopic. Yellow signifies 
a weak link, as the impact category does not exclusively affect the subtopic in question. I.e. 
ecotoxicity impact categories contain, but are not limited to, bioaccumulative substances, which 
can affect the subtopic Pollution of living organisms and food. Therefore, a substance-specific 
investigation of what constitutes the impact must be conducted. The impact categories are, 
however, potentially indicative of implications on the subtopic. Finally, green indicates a strong 
link. Summarising Table 3, ReCiPe2016 (H) was compatible with 11 of 19 subtopics, IMPACT 
World+ with 12 of 19 subtopics, and Ecological Scarcity 2021 with 15 of 19 subtopics. An 
extensive list of how each link was assessed can be found in SI3.Mapping. 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
13 
 
 
Method 
 
Subtopic 
ReCiPe2016 (H) impact 
category 
IMPACT World+ impact 
category 
Ecological Scarcity 2021 impact 
category 
E1 
Climate change adaptation 
 
 
 
Climate change mitigation 
Global warming 
Climate change, short term 
Climate change, long term 
Global warming 
Energy 
 
Fossil and nuclear energy use 
Energy resources 
E2 
Pollution of air 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
Fine particulate matter formation 
Ozone formation, Human Health 
Ozone formation, Terrestrial 
ecosystems 
Ozone layer depletion 
Particulate matter formation 
Photochemical oxidant formation 
Ozone layer depletion 
Main air pollutants and particulates 
Carcinogenic substances into air 
Heavy metals into air 
Radioactive substances into air 
Noise 
Pollution of water 
Freshwater eutrophication 
Marine eutrophication 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
Marine ecotoxicity 
Freshwater eutrophication 
Marine eutrophication 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
Freshwater acidification 
Water pollutants 
Persistent organic pollutants into water 
Heavy metals into water 
Radioactive substances into water 
Pollution of soil 
Terrestrial acidification 
Terrestrial ecotoxicity 
Terrestrial acidification 
Pesticides into soil 
Heavy metals into soil 
Pollution of living 
organisms and food 
resources 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
Marine ecotoxicity 
Terrestrial ecotoxicity 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
Persistent organic pollutants into water 
Substances of concern 
Human carcinogenic toxicity 
Human non-carcinogenic toxicity 
Human toxicity cancer 
Human toxicity non-cancer 
Carcinogenic substances into air 
Heavy metals into air 
Heavy metals into water 
Heavy metals into soil 
Radioactive substances into air 
Radioactive substances into water 
Radioactive waste to deposit 
Substances of very high 
concern 
Human carcinogenic toxicity 
Human non-carcinogenic toxicity 
Human toxicity cancer 
Human toxicity non-cancer 
Carcinogenic substances into air 
Heavy metals into air 
Heavy metals into water 
Heavy metals into soil 
Radioactive substances into air 
Radioactive substances into water 
Radioactive waste to deposit 
Microplastics 
 
 
 
E3 
Water 
Water consumption 
Water scarcity 
Water resources, net balance 
Marine resources 
 
 
Biotic resources 
E4 
Direct impact drivers of 
biodiversity loss 
Global warming 
Land use 
Terrestrial acidification 
Freshwater ecotoxicity  
Terrestrial ecotoxicity  
Marine ecotoxicity 
Fine particulate matter formation 
Freshwater eutrophication 
Marine eutrophication 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
Ozone formation, Human Health 
Ozone formation, Terrestrial 
ecosystems 
 
Climate change, short term 
Climate change, long term 
Land transformation, biodiversity 
Land occupation, biodiversity 
Freshwater acidification 
Terrestrial acidification  
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
Particulate Matter formation 
Freshwater eutrophication 
Marine eutrophication 
Ozone layer depletion 
Photochemical oxidant formation 
 
Global warming 
Land use 
Ozone layer depletion 
Main air pollutants and particulates 
Carcinogenic substances into air 
Heavy metals into air 
Radioactive substances into air 
Noise 
Water pollutants 
Persistent organic pollutants into water 
Heavy metals into water 
Radioactive substances into water 
Pesticides into soil 
Heavy metals into soil 
Impacts on the state of 
species 
 
 
 
Impacts on the extent and 
condition of ecosystems 
 
 
 
Impacts and dependencies 
of ecosystem services 
 
 
Biotic resources 
E5 
Resource inflows, 
including resource use 
Fossil resource scarcity 
Mineral resource scarcity 
Mineral resources use 
Mineral resources 
Resource outflows related 
to products and services 
Fossil resource scarcity 
Mineral resource scarcity 
Mineral resources use 
Mineral resources 
Waste 
 
 
Waste, non radioactive 
Radioactive waste to deposit 
 
Table 3: Overview of the impact categories from ReCiPe2016 (H), IMPACT World+, and Ecological Scarcity 2021, which were 
linked to the subtopics of ESRS E1-E5 in Approach 1: MtE modelling and weighting. Red indicates no link, yellow indicates weak 
link, green indicates strong link. Details and justifications can be seen in SI3.Mapping. 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
14 
 
3.2.4 Approach 2: AESA 
Characterised midpoint results from the company-wide LCA, were also calculated with the impact 
assessment method EF 3.1 (Bassi et al., 2023). Since this method included characterisation in steps 
such as Ecotoxicity – freshwater part 1 and 2, the damage assessment of the midpoint results was 
used, accumulating the constituents into the main impact categories i.e. Ecotoxicity – freshwater. 
These were used to define the environmental pressure in an AESA for the case study. Conducting 
an AESA allows for evaluating whether the environmental pressure from a company’s activities 
can be considered sustainable within a set of carrying capacities. This is done by allocating a share 
of the safe operating space (SoSOS) within each carrying capacity to the company. The two 
allocation principles in the case study are revenue-based (RB) and full-time equivalents (FTE). 
The normalisation reference for RB (NRRB) is calculated as: 
𝑁𝑅𝑅𝐵= 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦
𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
 
Where GDPglobal is the world’s gross domestic product. For a carrying capacity, i, the related 
SoSOSi a company is allocated using RB is then:  
𝑆𝑜𝑆𝑂𝑆𝑖,𝑅𝐵= 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑦𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖⋅𝑁𝑅𝑅𝐵 
The absolute sustainability ratio (ASRi,j,RB) is then the midpoint score (MSj) for the pertaining 
impact category divided by SoSOSi,RB:  
𝐴𝑆𝑅𝑖,𝑗,𝑅𝐵=
𝑀𝑆𝑗
𝑆𝑜𝑆𝑂𝑆𝑖,𝑅𝐵
 
Similarly, the normalisation reference for FTE (NRFTE) is calculated as: 
𝑁𝑅𝐹𝑇𝐸= 𝐹𝑇𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦
𝐹𝑇𝐸𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
 
For a carrying capacity, i, the related SoSOSi a company is allocated using FTE is then:  
𝑆𝑜𝑆𝑂𝑆𝑖,𝐹𝑇𝐸= 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑦𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖⋅𝑁𝑅𝐹𝑇𝐸 
The absolute sustainability ratio (ASRi,j,FTE) is then the midpoint score (MSj) for the pertaining 
impact category divided by SoSOSi,FTE:  
𝐴𝑆𝑅𝑖,𝑗,𝐹𝑇𝐸=
𝑀𝑆𝑗
𝑆𝑜𝑆𝑂𝑆𝑖,𝐹𝑇𝐸
 
If the ASR exceeds 1, the impact transgresses the SoSOS allocated, hence, the activities 
constituting that impact are not absolute sustainable and will in this case study be defined as 
material for reporting. Using RB as allocation principle necessitates that no downstream activities 
are included in the company-wide LCA, as revenue does not stimulate value creation that occurs 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
15 
 
after the initial sale of a good or service. Coincidentally, FTEs neither relates to downstream 
activities, and therefore these are also excluded using this allocation principle.  
Using the same distinctions as in the MtE modelling and weighting approach, subtopics were 
linked to a midpoint impact category of the EF 3.1 method, which can be seen in Table 4. An 
extensive list of how each link was assessed, and which midpoint impact categories are connected 
to which subtopics, can be found in SI3.Mapping. Instead of the weighting step in the former 
approach, this approach evaluates materiality by comparing the environmental impacts to the 
Earth-system carrying capacities and therefore presents a second scientifically robust alternative 
to the DMA. This was done linking each EF 3.1 impact category to an LCIA-based carrying 
capacity indicator, adapting the work by Sala et al. (2020), see SI5.AESA.  
Method 
 
Subtopic 
EF 3.1 impact category 
LCIA-based carrying capacity indicator 
E1 
Climate change adaptation 
 
 
Climate change mitigation 
Climate Change 
Radiative forcing as Global Warming Potential 
Energy 
 
 
E2 
Pollution of air 
Ozone depletion 
Particulate matter 
Photochemical ozone formation 
Ozone Depletion Potential 
Impact on human health Tropospheric ozone concentration increase 
Pollution of water 
Eutrophication, marine 
Eutrophication, freshwater 
Ecotoxicity, freshwater 
Acidification 
Fraction of nutrients reaching marine end compartment (N) 
Fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment (P) 
Comparative Toxic Unit for ecosystems 
Accumulated Exceedance 
Pollution of soil 
Eutrophication, terrestrial 
Acidification  
Accumulated Exceedance 
Accumulated Exceedance 
Pollution of living organisms 
and food resources 
Ecotoxicity freshwater 
Comparative Toxic Unit for ecosystems 
Substances of concern 
Human toxicity, non-cancer 
Human toxicity, cancer 
Comparative Toxic Unit for humans 
Comparative Toxic Unit for humans 
Substances of very high 
concern 
Human toxicity, cancer 
Human toxicity, non-cancer 
Comparative Toxic Unit for humans 
Comparative Toxic Unit for humans 
Microplastics 
 
 
E3 
Water 
Water use 
User deprivation potential (deprivation weighted water consumption) 
Marine resources 
 
 
E4 
Direct impact drivers of 
biodiversity loss 
Climate Change 
Land use 
Acidification 
Ecotoxicity freshwater 
Particulate matter 
Eutrophication marine 
Eutrophication freshwater 
Eutrophication terrestrial 
Ozone depletion 
Photochemical ozone formation 
Radiative forcing as Global Warming Potential 
Soil erosion 
Accumulated Exceedance 
Comparative Toxic Unit for ecosystems 
Impact on human health 
Fraction of nutrients reaching marine end compartment (N) 
Fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment (P) 
Accumulated Exceedance 
Ozone Depletion Potential 
Tropospheric ozone concentration increase 
Impacts on the state of species 
 
 
Impacts on the extent and 
condition of ecosystems 
 
 
Impacts and dependencies of 
ecosystem services 
 
 
E5 
Resource inflows, including 
resource use 
Resource use fossils 
Resource use minerals and metals 
Abiotic resource depletion – fossil fuels (ADP-fossil) 
Abiotic resource depletion (ADP ultimate reserves) 
Resource outflows related to 
products and services 
Resource use fossils 
Resource use minerals and metals 
Abiotic resource depletion – fossil fuels (ADP-fossil) 
Abiotic resource depletion (ADP ultimate reserves) 
Waste 
 
 
Table 4: Overview of the impact categories from EF 3.1, which were linked to the subtopics of ESRS E1-E5, and corresponding 
LCIA-based carrying capacity indicator from Sala et al. (2020), in Approach 2: AESA. Red indicates no link, yellow indicates 
weak link, green indicates strong link. Details and justifications can be seen in SI3.Mapping and SI5.AESA. 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
16 
 
3.3 Results 
3.3.1 Baseline: DMA workshop based on EFRAG guidance results 
Results from the DMA workshop are illustrated in Figure 3 with the Individual ranking method. 
Each blue dot represents a severity score by a participant. The materiality threshold of three is 
indicated by the red line, and an ESRS E1-E5 subtopic is deemed material if it has been scored 
above three by one or more participants. Financial risks and opportunities are not presented in 
Figure 3, as they are not directly related to the environmental impact of the company’s activities. 
Furthermore, the positive environmental impacts mentioned in the workshop were examined and 
could be categorised as environmental impact reductions (i.e. switching to a vegetarian canteen) 
rather than the definitions of positive environmental impacts in the ESRS E1-E5 (i.e. GHG 
removals and storage).  
 
Figure 3: Results from the DMA workshop with the case company CC using the Individual ranking method. A blue dot represents 
a severity score of an environmental impact connected to an ESRS E1-E5 subtopic. The severity (y-axis) is the average of scale, 
scope, and irremediability of the impact. Red line indicates the materiality threshold (EFRAG, 2024a). 
Hence, the material subtopics identified in the DMA workshop are:  
• Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss 
• Climate change mitigation 
• Waste 
• Pollution of air 
• Impacts on the state of species 
• Microplastics 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
17 
 
Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss is the highest scoring subtopic due to it being scored with 
a severity of 4.7 by a participant. However, it was unmentioned by three participants. Figure 3 also 
shows the span in ratings for each subtopic was considerable. I.e. Climate change mitigation varied 
from 1.3 to 4.3, and Pollution of air varied from 1.7 to 3.3, due to a difference in ratings between 
participants. Consequently, this could also have led to Climate change mitigation and Pollution of 
air not being identified as material with a threshold of 3, depending on which participants’ results 
are included. If the materiality threshold was higher, it would also have influenced the results, 
which is allowable in the implementation guidance (EFRAG, 2024a).  
In the case study approach, a subtopic was deemed material if one or more participants rated the 
severity over the threshold (Individual ranking), however, a company could choose to average the 
ratings (Consensus ranking), in this case leading to a subceeded severity score. Finally, the 
company could choose material topics based on how many mentions the topic has achieved 
(Popularity ranking). The implementation guidance did not provide a recommendation for 
processing the results of the DMA workshop. Therefore, substantially different results could be 
obtained depending on the selected approach. The discrepancy between materiality ranking, 
stemming from the influence of this subjective choice, can be seen in SI2.Workshop. 
It should be mentioned that the three-hour duration could potentially have imposed a restriction on 
the results. As seen in SI2.Workshop, there was a variation in the number of subtopics identified 
for each participant, as some participants were more thorough in the identification and detailing of 
each company activity. Finally, the participants’ overall knowledge of company activities could 
also have influenced the outcome.  
3.3.2 Approach 1: MtE modelling and weighting results 
The single score results for the impact assessment methodologies ReCiPe2016 (H), IMPACT 
World+, and Ecological Scarcity 2021 were calculated. In cases where endpoint scores were 
subdivided in AoPs, as in Global warming, Human health and Global warming, Terrestrial 
ecosystems, the scores were accumulated representing the midpoint impact categories. The results 
of MtE modelling and weighting for the ReCiPe2016 (H) method can be seen in Figure 4. The 
scores for all impact assessment methods can be found in SI4.MtE. The MtE modelling and 
weighting results provided a ranking of which impact categories are of the highest magnitude. 
Selecting a materiality threshold of two orders of magnitude from the highest scoring impact 
category indicated the significant environmental impacts. Using the links between midpoint impact 
categories and ESRS E1-E5 subtopics in SI3.Mapping, the most material ESRS E1-E5 subtopics 
according to the MtE modelling and weighting approach were: 
• Pollution of air (indicated by Fine particulate matter formation) 
• Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss (indicated by Fine particulate matter formation, 
Global warming, Land use, and Terrestrial acidification) 
• Climate change mitigation (indicated by Global warming) 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
18 
 
• Substances of concern (indicated by Human carcinogenic toxicity and Human non-
carcinogenic toxicity) 
• Substances of very high concern (indicated by Human carcinogenic toxicity and Human 
non-carcinogenic toxicity) 
• Water (indicated by Water consumption) 
• Resource inflows, including resource use (indicated by Fossil resource scarcity) 
• Resource outflows related to products and services (indicated by Fossil resource scarcity) 
• Pollution of soil (indicated by Terrestrial acidification) 
The robustness check with IMPACT World+ and Ecological Scarcity 2021 yielded a few subtopics 
not identified by ReCiPe2016 (H). As seen in Table 5, Ecological Scarcity 2021 also identified 
Waste as a material subtopic. Furthermore, Ecological Scarcity 2021 identified Energy and 
Pollution of water, the latter was supported by IMPACT World+, which also deemed Pollution of 
living organisms and food resources material. Overall, the results with ReCiPe2016 (H) were 
coherent with the robustness checks, with few misalignments.  
1,0E+00
1,0E+01
1,0E+02
1,0E+03
1,0E+04
1,0E+05
1,0E+06
MPt
Figure 4: MtE modelling and weighting results presented as an aggregated single score per impact category in megapoints 
(MPt). The results were obtained using ReCiPe 2016 (H) and are presented on a log-scale in descending order. A materiality 
threshold of two orders is indicated by the red line. 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
19 
 
Table 5: Robustness check of MtE modelling and weighting, for the case company CC, across the three LCIA methods 
ReCiPe2016 (H), IMPACT World+, and Ecological Scarcity 2021. Red indicates the subtopic was not deemed material, yellow 
indicates the subtopic was only deemed material through a weak link, and green indicated the subtopic was deemed material. 
Method 
 
Material Subtopic 
ReCiPe2016 (H) 
IMPACT 
World+ 
Ecological 
Scarcity 2021 
Climate change mitigation 
 
 
 
Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss 
 
 
 
Pollution of air 
 
 
 
Water 
 
 
 
Resources inflows, including resource use 
 
 
 
Resource outflows related to products and services 
 
 
 
Substances of concern 
 
 
 
Substances of very high concern 
 
 
 
Pollution of water 
 
 
 
Energy 
 
 
 
Waste 
 
 
 
Pollution of living organisms and food resources* 
 
 
 
Pollution of soil 
 
 
 
3.3.3 Approach 2: AESA results 
The results of the AESA of the case study’s impacts are shown in Figure 5. ASRs for the RB 
allocation principle is shown alongside the FTE allocation principle, with the Absolute 
Sustainability Threshold indicated by the red line. Assessing absolute sustainability with RB yields 
only one exceeded impact category: Resource use, mineral and metals. As seen in SI5.AESA, the 
LCIA-based carrying capacity indicator for this impact category is Abiotic resource depletion 
(ADP ultimate reserves) (Sala et al., 2020). Hence, the material ESRS E1-E5 subtopics identified 
with RB as allocation principle according to SI3.Mapping was: 
• Resource inflows, including resource use (indicated by Resource use, minerals and metals) 
• Resource outflows connected to products and services (indicated by Resource use, minerals 
and metals) 
Using FTE as allocation principle additionally identified: 
• Pollution of air (indicated by Particulate matter) 
• Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss (indicated by Climate change and Particulate 
matter) 
• Climate change mitigation (indicated by Climate change) 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
20 
 
 
3.3.4 Comparison of approaches 1 and 2 to the baseline 
A comparison of the results obtained by the DMA workshop to Approach 1: MtE modelling and 
weighting as well as Approach 2: AESA, can be seen in Table 6. The MtE modelling and weighting 
approach identified three out of six material subtopics indicated in the DMA workshop. The MtE 
modelling and weighting approach also identified six additional subtopics. These results indicate 
the relevance of using the MtE modelling and weighting approach as an alternative in identifying 
material subtopics. MtE modelling and weighting also indicated the subtopic Water as material, 
which was not deemed material in the DMA workshop, however, it was mentioned by three of five 
participants. The subtopics identified as material in the DMA workshop, which was not identified 
using the MtE modelling and weighting were Waste, Impacts on the state of species, and 
Microplastics. This was due to ReCiPe2016 (H) lacking impact categories which were sufficient 
to function as indicators for these subtopics. However, as seen in Table 5, using Ecological Scarcity 
2021 identified Waste as a material subtopic, coinciding with the DMA workshop results. 
4,0
18,7
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
ASR [-]
ASR RB
ASR FTE
Absolute Sustainability Threshold
Figure 5: Absolute Sustainability Ratios (ASRs) for EF3.1 using the allocation principles revenue-based (RB) and full-time 
equivalents (FTE). Absolute Sustainability Threshold for exceeded ASRs (>1.00) is marked by the red line. 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
21 
 
Comparing the DMA workshop results to the AESA with RB as allocation principle, no mutual 
material subtopics were identified, but alternatively the subtopics Resource inflows, including 
resource use and Resource outflows connected to products and services were found material. 
Using FTE as allocation principle identified three additional subtopics to the RB allocation 
principle, which were all mutual with the DMA workshop. The subtopics identified as material in 
the DMA workshop, which was not identified using the AESA approach were also Waste, Impacts 
on the state of species, and Microplastics. In the same manner as for ReCiPe2016 (H) used in the 
MtE modelling and weighting approach, these are not included impact categories in the EF 3.1 
impact assessment method, hence, they were not identified in this AESA. Finally, comparing the 
results of the MtE modelling and weighting with the AESA yields five mutual subtopics, where 
MtE modelling and weighting further substantiates the assessment with four additional subtopics.  
Table 6: Material subtopics identified for CC using DMA, MtE modelling and weighting, and AESA. The number in parenthesis 
after each subtopic indicates the materiality rank within the respective approaches. An impact category which is linked to multiple 
subtopics will place these at a shared rank. I.e. the ReCiPe2016 (H) impact category “Fine particulate matter” is the most material 
in Approach 1. Hence, the subtopics “Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss” and “Pollution of air” achieves a shared 1st place. 
Looking at the rankings across the DMA workshop, MtE modelling and weighting, and AESA in 
Table 6, it is apparent that there is a clear discrepancy between the order of materiality ranking. 
Even though the results from MtE modelling and weighting and AESA stem from the same LCI 
of CC, there is an inherent difference in the methodological principles between the chosen 
DMA workshop  
based on EFRAG 
guidance 
MtE modelling and 
weighting  
ReCiPe2016 (H) 
AESA RB 
AESA FTE 
Direct impact drivers of 
biodiversity loss (1) 
Direct impact drivers of 
biodiversity loss (1) 
 
Direct impact drivers of 
biodiversity loss (2) 
Climate change mitigation 
(2) 
Climate change mitigation 
(2) 
Climate change mitigation 
(3) 
Pollution of air (4) 
Pollution of air (1) 
Pollution of air (2) 
 
Resource inflows, 
including resource use (5) 
Resource inflows, 
including resource use 
(1) 
Resource inflows, 
including resource use (1) 
Resource outflows related 
to products and services 
(5) 
Resource outflows 
connected to products 
and services (1) 
Resource outflows 
connected to products and 
services (1) 
Impacts on the state of 
species (5) 
 
 
 
Microplastics (6) 
Waste (3) 
 
Pollution of soil (6) 
Substances of concern (3) 
Substances of very high 
concern (3) 
Water (4) 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
22 
 
weighting sets for Approach 1 and quantifying impact exceedance according to carrying capacities 
in Approach 2. While weighting sets typically reflect ethical, political, or economic preferences, 
the SOS within a carrying capacity also reflects the current environmental pressure of 
anthropogenic forcing exerted on that system. Since these are in many cases independent, it will 
ultimately affect the ranking of environmental impacts. Comparing this to the DMA workshop, 
which focuses on the company’s perception of the materiality pertinent to their environmental 
impacts, the three methods can reflect virtually different perspectives.  
4 Discussion 
4.1 Novelty and comparison to existing literature 
This paper was motivated by the lack of guidance for reporting companies in conducting a 
scientifically robust DMA, aiding in reaching compliance with the ESRS E1-E5. This lack of 
guidance does not only affect the regulatory efficiency of the CSRD. We stipulate that it could 
negatively impact the sustainable transition in the EU by allowing companies to cherry-pick 
environmental impacts, risking burden-shifting to excluded environmental problem areas, and 
diverting resources towards reporting instead of reducing environmental impacts. The 
harmonisation of scientific environmental assessment methods with the ESRS E1-E5 will therefore 
be a significant factor in ensuring the successful implementation of the CSRD. While literature 
proposing approaches to harmonise these methods is scarce, the need for it is clear. In an invited 
contribution to the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), Adams et al. (2021) exhibits that existing 
approaches to DMA is inadequate to determine material environmental impacts, which affects the 
credibility of sustainability disclosure (Beske et al., 2020; Farooq & de Villiers, 2020; Zappettini 
& Unerman, 2014), haltering sustainable development (Machado et al., 2021; Puroila & Mäkelä, 
2021), and incorrectly addresses the state of the environment and society (Boiral et al., 2019; 
Eccles & Youmans, 2016; Gürtürk & Hahn, 2016). At the core of the issue, there is a need for 
developing the existing environmental assessment methodologies to aid companies in identifying 
material environmental impacts, in a reliable, transparent, and replicable manner.  
To our knowledge, this paper provides the first theoretical framework of how the environmental 
assessment methods LCA and AESA can be harmonised with the ESRS E1-E5, specifically in 
determining materiality of environmental impacts. The operationalisation of the two methods in 
the case study proves that the approaches provide valuable insights into a company’s material 
impacts, which were not identified in the DMA workshop and could aid in reaching compliance 
with the ESRS E1-E5 without risking burden-shifting or allowing cherry-picking.  
Further development of existing environmental assessment methods is also one of the main 
suggestions in Operato et al. (2025), which posit that the risk of non-compliance can be evaded by 
supplementing the DMA with “quantitative and documentable basis”. They also found that the 
importance of this is even further cemented as the majority of datapoints in CSRD are “narrative” 
or “semi-narrative”, many of which could additionally be substantiated with an environmental 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
23 
 
indicator or metric. The approaches that we applied in the case study could provide these indicators 
by further refining the mapping, to also relate to narratives, thereby improving the viability of the 
MtE modelling and weighting and AESA approaches. 
As argued by Wagenhofer (2024), companies are challenged in providing compliant sustainability 
data, due to the immense amount of datapoints in the CSRD and the lack of standardisation of 
impact quantification methods. A major issue in this regard is the large gap between terminologies 
of existing environmental assessment methods and corporate sustainability reporting metrics. This 
was a focus in Bachmann (2024), where it is explained how different frameworks have “developed 
independently” which is problematic to companies disclosing i.e. biodiversity-related metrics, 
such as in ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems. It relates to this study as we propose 
methodologies to aid in impact quantification, and it is therefore imperative that the terminology 
is harmonised with the corporate sustainability metrics in question, to provide companies with 
comprehensible guidance.  
The archetypical “silo-structure” in reporting companies (meaning one department works with 
sustainability reporting, another with compliance), is also hindering the transferability of voluntary 
sustainability initiatives, e.g. SBTi to the ESRS E1-E5. However, the need for comprehensive 
environmental impact quantification in compliance was found able to stimulate a cross-silo 
workflow, where sustainability reporting is an integrated part of the company’s foundation (PwC, 
2024). This could be a significant upside to operationalising the two approaches suggested in this 
paper. 
4.2 Recommendations to individual actors 
For companies using the approaches outlined in this paper as alternatives to DMA for identifying 
material environmental impacts, it will necessitate a greater effort to collect the relevant data for 
completing an LCI. So will conducting MtE modelling and weighting and/or AESA depending on 
the ambition of the reporting company. We recognise that this may prolong the expected timeframe 
allocated to conduct the DMA and impose more costs in the short term. Our recommendation is, 
however, that companies incorporate the approaches operationalised in this paper to achieve a 
robust DMA, since it will emphasise the long-term benefits both environmentally, socially, and 
economically (Grewal et al., 2021; Heijningen, 2019; Khan et al., 2016; Martinez, 2016; Oh et al., 
2011). 
For the European Commission and EFRAG, we recommend providing an external incentive for 
reporting companies to apply scientific rigor in their work with the ESRS E1-E5. This could be 
achieved by EFRAG incorporating recommendations or requirements to methods substantiating 
the DMA outlined in the implementation guidance. To further ensure that the sustainability 
statements resulting from the reporting companies can actively be used in benchmarking the 
sustainability progress of the EU, EFRAG should consider specifying environmental assessment 
methodologies that can be utilised to reach compliance. This would further enable the inclusion of 
the absolute sustainability contexts referred to in the ESRS E1-E5. With six out of nine Planetary 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
24 
 
Boundaries transgressed (Richardson et al., 2023), achieving relative sustainability is no longer 
sufficient. It is imperative that EFRAG outlines absolute accounting principles, like the ones 
illustrated in the case study AESA, allowing for evaluating if reporting companies are 
environmentally sustainable in an absolute sense or how much impact reduction is required to 
respect the Earth-system carrying capacities. 
From an assurance standpoint, the conventional DMA process is highly qualitative i.e. does not 
include methodologies to assess the materiality of environmental impacts and is therefore 
vulnerable to cherry-picking. If companies should be compliant with the ESRS E1-E5, per the 
assurance terms, they must incorporate environmental assessment methods that allow for ranking 
materiality, such as MtE modelling and weighting, and AESA. A recommendation to assurance 
companies is therefore aiding reporting companies in operationalising the approaches in this thesis. 
Since the end-goal of sustainability reporting is providing stakeholders and regulatory authorities 
with assurance of the company’s standpoint relative to sustainability matters, it is imperative that 
this is conducted in a reliable, transparent, and replicable manner allowing for benchmarking 
among peers and on the sustainable progress within the EU. 
4.3 Limitations and future research 
4.3.1 Limitations of the baseline: DMA workshop based on EFRAG guidance 
The DMA workshop served as a point of comparison for the MtE modelling and weighting 
approach as well as the AESA. Therefore, it is important to consider its weaknesses and limitations, 
as these can be improved in further research, to provide a more consistent baseline for comparing 
the two approaches. The duration of the workshop was set to three hours. In retrospect, the duration 
could be extended, or several iterations could be conducted. This would account for the 
discrepancy between time spent identifying material subtopics per participant. It would also 
provide space for a more in-depth discussion among participants, as well as leaving room for 
researching subtopics that were less familiar for the participants.  
The aversion from set guidelines in the EFRAG implementation guidance introduced a set of 
variables influenced by subjectivity in the DMA. The primary variable is probably the materiality 
threshold, which according to the guidance is for the company to determine (EFRAG, 2024a). It 
is arguable that this allows for selecting thresholds deductively of the DMA outcome, which allows 
for cherry-picking which subtopics are reported on in the later stage and could cause burden-
shifting to excluded subtopics.  
4.3.2 Limitations of Approach 1: MtE modelling and weighting 
The MtE modelling and weighting approach showed that the environmental impact categories 
from the selected LCIA methods could to some extent be linked to the subtopics of ESRS E1-E5. 
However, depending on the method there were a variation in how many subtopics could be 
covered. As seen in Table 3 ReCiPe2016 (H) was compatible with 11 of 19 subtopics, IMPACT 
World+ with 12 of 19 subtopics, and Ecological Scarcity 2021 with 15 of 19 subtopics. Ecological 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
25 
 
Scarcity 2021 is therefore a more suitable impact assessment method to evaluate environmental 
impacts related to the ESRS E1-E5 with MtE modelling and weighting, when it comes to covering 
as many subtopics as possible. MtE modelling and weighting provides an insight to the most 
material subtopics within the company. However, as the impact categories can only be compared 
relatively to each other, the materiality threshold is dictated by the biggest environmental impact 
of the company.  
The outcome of the approach is also highly dependent on the chosen weighting principle. There is 
currently no scientific consensus on a correct weighting principle, and the application of weighting 
factors requires an ethical value-choice which may not represent all stakeholders (ISO, 2006a, 
2006b; Rosenbaum et al., 2017). Consequently, this affected the subtopics that were identified 
according to each underlying weighting principle. The robustness check with IMPACT World+ 
(STEPWISE weighting) and Ecological Scarcity 2021 showed four misaligned ESRS E1-E5 
subtopics, which alludes to the lacking consensus between the value perspectives of weighting 
methods. However, as seen in Table 5, the three impact assessment methods indicated four mutual 
subtopics, and comparing ReCiPe2016 (H) with Ecological Scarcity 2021, yielded eight mutual 
subtopics, showing consistency in the identification. Ultimately, a company should consider 
utilising MtE modelling and weighting, as it can provide indication of subtopics not identifiable 
by the reporting company.  
4.3.3 Limitations of Approach 2: AESA  
Much like the MtE modelling and weighting approach, the AESA approach was dependent on the 
successfulness in linking the impact categories in EF 3.1 and the subtopics of the ESRS E1-E5. 
With the mapping principles used in the SI3.Mapping, the impact assessment methodology is 
compatible with 11 of 19 subtopics, see Table 4. Furthermore, AESA is a normative approach 
which requires selecting allocation principles to assign a SoSOS. In doing so, an implicit choice 
of ethical norm is unavoidable (Bjørn et al., 2020). The conclusion of the results using the RB or 
FTE allocation principles are therefore limited to the context of the case study, i.e. investigating if 
AESA can aid reporting companies in determining materiality thresholds for company activities 
and their pertaining environmental impacts. Furthermore, the allocation principles used in the case 
study are limited to representing upstream and operational environmental impacts, as they do not 
allocate a SoSOS to value generation downstream of the organisational boundaries determined in 
the case study. This must be considered when developing the LCI of the reporting company.  
4.3.4 Future research 
The MtE modelling and weighting approach could be refined to derive additional harmonised 
indicators for the subtopics of the ESRS E1-E5. This could occur at both an LCI- and endpoint-
level. An example of an LCI-level indicator is the amount of waste generated in the company, 
which is included in the Waste subtopic of ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy. This 
data was available in the LCI of the case study. Hence, if an environmental impact indicator for 
waste were available in the LCIA methods, along with a weighting factor and/or LCIA-based 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
26 
 
carrying capacity indicator, the materiality of the impact would also be indicatable. Furthermore, 
the endpoint indicator for ecosystem damage in ReCiPe2016 (H) and IMPACT World+ is 
expressed in the unit species.yr, and PDF.m2.yr, both aligned with metrics in ESRS E4 
Biodiversity and ecosystems. If an approach to ranking endpoint damage was applied, the 
materiality of this subtopic could be evaluated. However, weighting damage on AoPs would 
require further prioritisation, and was therefore not done in the case study.  
As seen in Table 3 an Table 4 there are a considerable number of subtopics which could not be 
mapped to LCIA methods investigated in the case study. The importance of developing the 
materiality assessment methods of these subtopics is unequivocal as they are of great importance 
to the Earth’s systems subject of this study. As an example, Microplastics a subtopic included in 
ESRS E2 Pollution is not quantified in the LCIA methods investigated. Though a Planetary 
Boundary has not been determined (Richardson et al., 2023; Sala et al., 2020), scientists argue that 
the SOS pertaining to the Planetary Boundary for Novel Entities (encompassing microplastics) has 
been exceeded due to the production and release far outweighing the capacity for monitoring and 
assessment (Persson et al., 2022). It is an environmental topic of high concern due to the 
amplifying nature of the plastic pollution impact pathway exacerbating the transgression of other 
Planetary Boundaries as Biosphere Integrity through cascading mechanisms i.e. habitat and 
ecosystem alterations, microbiome, and antibiotic resistance, etc. (Villarrubia-Gómez et al., 2024). 
With the development of carrying capacities for i.e. Novel entities, and the incorporation of 
important environmental impact categories, such as Marine fish resources and Plastic to soil and 
water in Ecological Scarcity 2021, this issue is remediable with the update of the impact 
assessment method in future research.  
5 Conclusion 
This paper provides the theoretical foundation on which the environmental assessment methods 
LCA and AESA are harmonisable with the metrics of the ESRS E1-E5. Furthermore, it 
operationalised two practical approaches on how companies can quantify material environmental 
impacts related to the reporting company’s activities: Approach 1: MtE modelling and weighting 
and Approach 2: AESA.  
The initial study showed that as of now, there are several obstacles in reporting under the ESRS 
E1-E5. Specifically, both survey participants and interviewees criticised DMA due to the difficulty 
of the process and the lack of structure advised by EFRAG. By not specifying materiality 
thresholds, companies are able to control which subtopics are selected in the DMA, which could 
lead to cherry-picking subtopics that do not reflect their most significant environmental impacts 
and potentially burden-shifting to excluded subtopics. 
The Baseline: DMA workshop found six material subtopics: Direct impact drivers of biodiversity 
loss, Climate change mitigation, Waste, Pollution of air, Impacts on the state of species, and 
Microplastics. These were however dependent on interpretation of the parameters of severity, the 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
27 
 
materiality threshold chosen, and if the data was processed individually, or on basis of consensus 
or popularity.  
The MtE modelling and weighting approach showed that the environmental impact categories 
from LCIA methods selected could to some extent be linked to the subtopics of ESRS E1-E5. 
ReCiPe2016 (H) was compatible with 11 of 19 subtopics, IMPACT World+ with 12 of 19 
subtopics, and Ecological Scarcity 2021 with 15 of 19 subtopics. This approach identified six 
material subtopics more, additional to the ones of the DMA workshop: Substances of concern, 
Substances of very high concern, Water, Resource inflows, including resource use, Resource 
outflows related to products and services, and Pollution of soil. The results where only slightly 
misaligned with the robustness checks, further solidifying MtE modelling and weighting as a 
robust alternative to conducting DMA.  
The AESA of the case company using RB as allocation principle indicated the material subtopics: 
Resource inflows, including resource use, Resource outflows connected to products and services, 
and using the FTE allocation principle additionally yielded: Pollution of air, Climate change 
mitigation, and Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss. This showed that AESA methodology 
further allows for conducting a DMA, which is aligned with the Earth-system carrying capacities.  
6 List of appendices 
SI1.Documentation: Contains notes from industry interviews and the detailed LCA of case 
company CC. 
SI2.Workshop: A complete tool for conducting DMA according to the implementation guidance 
from EFRAG, as well as the results of the DMA workshop.  
SI3.Mapping: Includes the mapping framework between the ESRS E1-E5 subtopics to the impact 
assessment methodologies EF 3.1, ReCiPe2016 (H), IMPACT World+, and Ecological Scarcity.  
SI4.MtE: A complete tool for conducting MtE modelling and weighting with the input of LCIA 
data. The output is material subtopics. 
SI5.AESA: A complete tool for conducting AESA with the input of LCIA data. The output is 
material subtopics.  
SI6.SpecialCourse: Short study titled “Critical Assessment of the CSRD”, written during a special 
course in Spring 2024 at the institute DTU Sustain, Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
28 
 
7 References 
Adams, C. A., Alhamood, A., He, X., Tian, J., Wang, L., & Wang, Y. (2021). The double-
materiality concept Application and issues. 
Adams, W. C. (2015). Conducting Semi-Structured Interviews. In Handbook of Practical Program 
Evaluation: 
Fourth 
Edition 
(pp. 
492–505). 
Wiley 
Blackwell. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119171386.ch19 
Alberini, A., Hunt, A., & Markandya, A. (2004). Willingness to Pay to Reduce Mortality Risks: 
Evidence from a Three-Country Contingent Valuation. 
Antonini, C., & Gomez-Conde, J. (2024). Environmental management control systems and 
environmental innovation: Unintended consequences of the EU non-financial reporting 
directive. Management Accounting Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mar.2024.100903 
Bachmann, T. M. (2024). What is the difference between “environmental aspect,” “direct driver,” 
and “impact driver”? In International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment. Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-024-02416-5 
Bassi, A., Biganzoli, S., Ferrara, F., Amadei, N., Valente, A., Sala, A., & Ardente, S. (2023). 
Updated characterisation and normalisation factors for the Environmental Footprint 3.1 
method. https://doi.org/10.2760/798894 
Beemsterboer, S., Baumann, H., & Wallbaum, H. (2020). Ways to get work done: a review and 
systematisation of simplification practices in the LCA literature. International Journal of Life 
Cycle Assessment, 25(11), 2154–2168. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-020-
01821-w 
Beske, F., Haustein, E., & Lorson, P. C. (2020). Materiality analysis in sustainability and 
integrated reports. Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, 11(1), 162–
186. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-12-2018-0343 
Bjørn, A., Chandrakumar, C., Boulay, A. M., Doka, G., Fang, K., Gondran, N., Hauschild, M. Z., 
Kerkhof, A., King, H., Margni, M., McLaren, S., Mueller, C., Owsianiak, M., Peters, G., 
Roos, S., Sala, S., Sandin, G., Sim, S., Vargas-Gonzalez, M., & Ryberg, M. (2020). Review 
of life-cycle based methods for absolute environmental sustainability assessment and their 
applications. In Environmental Research Letters (Vol. 15, Issue 8). IOP Publishing Ltd. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab89d7 
Boiral, O., Heras-Saizarbitoria, I., & Brotherton, M. C. (2019). Assessing and Improving the 
Quality of Sustainability Reports: The Auditors’ Perspective. Journal of Business Ethics, 
155(3), 703–721. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10551-017-3516-4 
Bulle, C., Margni, M., Patouillard, L., Boulay, A. M., Bourgault, G., De Bruille, V., Cao, V., 
Hauschild, M., Henderson, A., Humbert, S., Kashef-Haghighi, S., Kounina, A., Laurent, A., 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
29 
 
Levasseur, A., Liard, G., Rosenbaum, R. K., Roy, P. O., Shaked, S., Fantke, P., & Jolliet, O. 
(2019). IMPACT World+: a globally regionalized life cycle impact assessment method. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Life 
Cycle 
Assessment, 
24(9), 
1653–1674. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-019-01583-0 
CC#1. (2024). Interview 1 at the consultancy company (CC). Anonymous: Partner, 
communications background. 
CC#2. (2024). Interview 2 at consultancy company (CC). Anonymous: Partner, background in 
environmental and chemical engineering. 
de Villiers, C., Dumay, J., Farneti, F., Jia, J., & Li, Z. (2024). Does mandating corporate social 
and environmental disclosure improve social and environmental performance?: Broad-based 
evidence regarding the effectiveness of directive 2014/95/EU. British Accounting Review. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bar.2024.101437 
Eccles, R. G., & Youmans, T. (2016). Materiality in Corporate Governance: The Statement of 
Significant Audiences and Materiality. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 28(2), 39–46. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/JACF.12173 
EFRAG. (2022a). Draft European Sustainability Reporting Standard. ESRS E1 Climate change. 
EFRAG. (2022b). Draft European Sustainability Reporting Standard. ESRS E2 Pollution. 
EFRAG. (2022c). Draft European Sustainability Reporting Standard. ESRS E3 Water and marine 
resources. 
EFRAG. (2022d). Draft European Sustainability Reporting Standard. ESRS E4 Biodiversity and 
ecosystems. 
EFRAG. (2022e). Draft European Sustainability Reporting Standard. ESRS E5 Resource use and 
circular economy. 
EFRAG. (2024a). EFRAG IG 1: Materiality Assessment Implementation Guidance. 
EFRAG. (2024b). EFRAG IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points (1) [Excel File]. 
https://efrag.sharefile.com/public/share/web-s363afe552f8a4f3b99de63a12c2f8865 
European Commission. (2012). Organisation Environmental Footprint (OEF) Guide. 
CONSOLIDATED VERSION. 
Farooq, M. B., & de Villiers, C. (2020). How sustainability assurance engagement scopes are 
determined, and its impact on capture and credibility enhancement. Accounting, Auditing and 
Accountability Journal, 33(2), 417–445. https://doi.org/10.1108/AAAJ-11-2018-3727 
FOEN. (2021). Swiss Eco-Factors 2021 according to the Ecological Scarcity Method. 
www.bafu.admin.ch/uw-2121-e 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
30 
 
Friedrich, R., Droste-Franke, B., & Rabl, A. (2005). ExternE Externalities of Energy Methodology. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/232075838 
Goedkoop, 
M. 
J. 
(2001). 
Eco-indicator 
99 
Methodology 
report. 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.4271.3127 
Grewal, J., Hauptmann, C., & Serafeim, G. (2021). Material Sustainability Information and Stock 
Price 
Informativeness. 
Journal 
of 
Business 
Ethics, 
171(3), 
513–544. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/S10551-020-04451-2 
Gürtürk, A., & Hahn, R. (2016). An empirical assessment of assurance statements in sustainability 
reports: smoke screens or enlightening information? Journal of Cleaner Production, 136, 30–
41. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2015.09.089 
Heijningen, K. V. (2019). The impact of ESG factor materiality on stock performance of firms. 
Huijbregts, M. A. J., Steinmann, Z. J. N., Elshout, P. M. F., Stam, G., Verones, F., Vieira, M., Zijp, 
M., Hollander, A., & van Zelm, R. (2017). ReCiPe2016: a harmonised life cycle impact 
assessment method at midpoint and endpoint level. International Journal of Life Cycle 
Assessment, 22(2), 138–147. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-016-1246-y 
IEA. (2008). World energy outlook 2008. OECD Publishing. 
ISO. (2006a). ISO 14040:2006 Environmental management—life cycle assessment—principles 
and framework. In Geneva: International Organization for Standardization. 
ISO. (2006b). ISO 14044:2006 Environmental management—life cycle assessment—
requirements and guidelines. In Geneva: International Organization for Standardization. 
Khan, M., Serafeim, G., & Yoon, A. (2016). Corporate Sustainability: First Evidence on 
Materiality. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.2575912 
KPMG. (2024). The move to mandatory reporting Survey of Sustainability Reporting 2024 | The 
move to mandatory reporting. 
Machado, B. A. A., Dias, L. C. P., & Fonseca, A. (2021). Transparency of materiality analysis in 
GRI-based sustainability reports. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental 
Management, 28(2), 570–580. https://doi.org/10.1002/CSR.2066 
Martinez, C. R. (2016). Effects of Materiality and Assurance of Environmental and Social 
Disclosures 
on 
Analysts’ 
Forecast 
Accuracy. 
SSRN 
Electronic 
Journal. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.2872206 
MC#1. (2024). Interview 1 at the manufacturing company (MC). Anonymous: Environmental 
specialist. 
MC#2. (2024). Interview 2 at the manufacturing company (MC). Anonymous: CSRD specialist. 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
31 
 
MC#3. (2024). Interview 3 at the manufacturing company (MC). Anonymous: Environmental 
economist. 
Novata. (2024). From Strategy to Spend: How Companies Are Preparing for CSRD Compliance. 
Oh, W. Y., Chang, Y. K., & Martynov, A. (2011). The Effect of Ownership Structure on Corporate 
Social Responsibility: Empirical Evidence from Korea. Journal of Business Ethics, 104(2), 
283–297. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10551-011-0912-Z 
Operato, L., Gallo, A., Eva Marino, E. A., & Mattioli, D. (2025). Navigating CSRD reporting: 
turning compliance into sustainable development with science-based metrics. Environmental 
Development, 101138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envdev.2025.101138 
Persson, L., Carney Almroth, B. M., Collins, C. D., Cornell, S., de Wit, C. A., Diamond, M. L., 
Fantke, P., Hassellöv, M., MacLeod, M., Ryberg, M. W., Søgaard Jørgensen, P., Villarrubia-
Gómez, P., Wang, Z., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2022). Outside the Safe Operating Space of the 
Planetary Boundary for Novel Entities. Environmental Science and Technology, 56(3), 1510–
1521. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c04158 
PRé Sustainability. (2024). SimaPro database manual Methods library. 
Puroila, J., & Mäkelä, H. (2021). Matter of opinion: exploring the socio-political nature of 
materiality disclosures in sustainability reporting. Social and Environmental Accountability 
Journal, 41(1–2), 131–132. https://doi.org/10.1080/0969160X.2020.1870315 
PwC. (2024). Global CSRD Survey 2024. https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/esg/global-csrd-
survey.html 
Richardson, K., Steffen, W., Lucht, W., Bendtsen, J., Cornell, S. E., Donges, J. F., Drüke, M., 
Fetzer, I., Bala, G., von Bloh, W., Feulner, G., Fiedler, S., Gerten, D., Gleeson, T., Hofmann, 
M., Huiskamp, W., Kummu, M., Mohan, C., Nogués-Bravo, D., … Rockström, J. (2023). 
Earth 
beyond 
six 
of 
nine 
planetary 
boundaries. 
Science 
Advances, 
9(37). 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adh2458 
Rosenbaum, R. K., Hauschild, M. Z., Boulay, A. M., Fantke, P., Laurent, A., Núñez, M., & Vieira, 
M. (2017). Life cycle impact assessment. In Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and Practice (pp. 
167–270). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3_10 
Sala, S., Crenna, E., Secchi, M., & Sanyé-Mengual, E. (2020). Environmental sustainability of 
European production and consumption assessed against planetary boundaries. Journal of 
Environmental Management, 269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110686 
Villarrubia-Gómez, P., Carney Almroth, B., Eriksen, M., Ryberg, M., & Cornell, S. E. (2024). 
Plastics pollution exacerbates the impacts of all planetary boundaries. One Earth, 7(12), 
2119–2138. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ONEEAR.2024.10.017 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
32 
 
Wagenhofer, A. (2024). Sustainability Reporting: A Financial Reporting Perspective. Accounting 
in Europe, 21(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1080/17449480.2023.2218398 
Weidema, B. P. (2009). Using the budget constraint to monetarise impact assessment results. 
Ecological Economics, 68(6), 1591–1598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008.01.019 
Weidema, B. P. (2015). Comparing Three Life Cycle Impact Assessment Methods from an 
Endpoint 
Perspective. 
Journal 
of 
Industrial 
Ecology, 
19(1), 
20–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12162 
Weidema, B. P., Hauschild, M. Z., & Jolliet, O. (2008). Preparing characterisation methods for 
endpoint impact assessment (previously submitted under the title: “Stepwise 2006 - a new 
environmental impact assessment method”). 
Zappettini, F., & Unerman, J. (2014). INCORPORATING MATERIALITY CONSIDERATIONS 
INTO ANALYSES OF SUSTAINABILITY REPORTING ABSENCE. Social and 
Environmental 
Accountability 
Journal 
34 
(3) 
172-186. 
https://www.academia.edu/6801069/INCORPORATING_MATERIALITY_CONSIDERA
TIONS_INTO_ANALYSES_OF_SUSTAINABILITY_REPORTING_ABSENCE 
  
