==PAGE:1==
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple 
Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth 
Production
Master Thesis
DTU Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Pro­
duction
Master Thesis
February,2025
By
Marta Barbieri
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Brovej, Building
118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for DTU Construct, Depart­
ment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Marta Barbieri ­ s246881
Signature
Date
ii
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Nowadays we find ourselves surrounded by electronic devices and it is highly likely they
use integrated circuits and chips produced from monocrystalline silicon wafers. The pro­
cess of producing silicon wafers starts with polycrystalline silicon that is first melted and
then recrystallized in a monocrystalline structure. Usually, in an industrial setting, this
process can be achieved with either the Czochralski or the Float Zone method.
The growth process of the ingots is a time­consuming batch process and, in order to
reduce the cost per unit of the final products, it is necessary to increase crystal yield.
This can be achieved by properly regulating the parameters that affect the quality of the
monocrystalline silicon obtained, avoiding anomalies that would lead to defective and
low­quality ingots. Obtaining high­quality ingots also reduces material waste and energy
consumption.
Parameters regulation is based on the information acquired through different sensors and
data from previous runs stored in an archive. The camera vision system is particularly
important as it monitors the growth chamber throughout the whole process. The frames
captured are constantly processed to extract important geometric parameters.
This project is aimed at implementing an algorithm that ensures consistent high­quality
images across the production plant, allowing a coherent feature extraction required for
a proper process control. The high variation in the content of images captured across
multiple cameras makes being able to properly tune camera focus a challenge. The focal
length of the camera is manually adjusted with the aid of an algorithm that scores the blur
content of the image.
Properly focusing the camera ensures that the images acquired during the growth process
are of high enough quality to allow feature extraction and coherent control of different
process parameters.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
iii
==PAGE:6==
Riassunto
I dispositivi elettronici che utilizziamo quotidianamente sono con ogni probabilità realizzati
con circuiti integrati e chip prodotti a partire da wafer di silicio monocristallino. Il processo
che porta alla realizzazione dei wafer in silicio ha inizio a partire da silicio policristallino
che viene in un primo momento fuso e successivamente fatto risolidificare con una strut­
tura monocristallina. Nell’ambito industriale si può ricorrere attualmente a due possibili
tecnologie: il metodo di Czochralski e il metodo Float­Zone.
La produzione dei lingotti di silicio monocristallino è molto dispendiosa in termini di tempo
e, per ridurre il costo per unità del prodotto finale, è fondamentale aumentare la resa del
processo. Tale risultato è ottenibile regolando attentamente tutti i parametri che determi­
nano la presenza di difetti e di conseguenza influenzano la qualità del silicio monocristallino
ottenunto. Riuscire ad ottenere un lingotto di buona qualità consente di ridurre scarti di
materiale e sprechi di energia.
La regolazione dei parametri che governano il processo avviene utilizzando informazioni
acquisite tramite diversi sensori e dati archiviati da precedenti lavorazioni realizzate. Par­
ticolare importanza ha il sistema di telecamere di cui ogni macchina è dotata. Tramite
le telecamere è possibile monitorare l’intero processo ed estrarre importanti informazioni
relative alla geometria del lingotto in produzione.
Lo scopo di questo progetto è trovare un algoritmo che sia in grado di garantire una
buona qualità delle immagini acquisite su macchine diverse, consentendo l’estrazione
delle caratteristiche necessarie per un’opportuna regolazione del processo. La princi­
pale sfida è posta dall’elevata variabilità del contenuto delle immagini raccolte, in quanto
questo ostacola considerevolmente la capacità di ottenere una comparabile messa a
fuoco delle numerose telecamere. La messa a fuoco, ottenuta con una regolazione man­
uale dell’obbiettivo, si basa sul punteggio restituito dall’algoritmo che deve quindi essere
sensibile al contenuto di blur nell’immagine.
Essere in grado di regolare la messa a fuoco uniformemente sulle diverse macchine
dell’impianto è un prerequisito fondamentale affinché le informazioni estratte dalle im­
magini acquisite abbiano tutte la stessa validità e consentano una coerente regolazione
dei parametri del processo.
iv
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I wish to express my sincere gratitude to Matteo Calaon and Lars Conrad­Hansen for their
unwavering support and assistance. Their guidance and insights were instrumental in the
successful completion of this project.
Marta Barbieri, MSc Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Riassunto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Silicon Monocrystal Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Basic operations in image processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Introduction to Image Quality Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3
Blurriness detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4
No­Reference IQA in the spatial domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.5
Objective IQA in the spectral domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
2.6
Magnitude method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
2.7
Machine Learning in IQA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3
Methodology and Experiment
39
3.1
Pristine images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.2
Simulated set on gray­scale image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.3
Camera information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.4
Out­of­focus image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.5
Checkerboard testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.6
Industrial testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4
Results and Discussion
51
4.1
Perceptive blur method (RBM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.2
Quadratic index of fuzziness (QIF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
4.3
Global phase coherence (GPC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
4.4
Local phase coherence (LPC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
4.5
Image quality on multiple cameras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
4.6
Live testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
4.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
5
Conclusion
77
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Bibliography
84
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Electrical phenomena have been known, through first­hand experiences, since ancient
times. Humans attributed to them magical powers, not being able to find any explanation
for them. With the slow but consistent progress of scientific knowledge, we were finally
able to understand the mechanisms behind electric current, rooted in the atomic structure
of matter. Over the last century we have witnessed an incredible development in the world
of electronic devices.
Nowadays we find ourselves surrounded by all sorts of hardware that allows to process
information or control systems based on the information encoded in the flow of electrons.
Learning how to take advantage of the electrical properties that different materials show,
it is what made all of this possible. Materials used to build electronic devices are divided
into conductors, insulators and semiconductors [1].
Conductors are able to conduct electrical current since electrons are loosely bound to
the atom and even a small energy input is sufficient for the electrons to become free and
therefore available to carry current. Metals are typically good conductors.
On the other hand insulators are not able to conduct electrical current since electrons are
tightly bound to the atoms. Some common insulators are plastic and glass.
Semiconductors have an ability to conduct electrical current that is somewhere in between
conductors and insulators. We can find examples of compound semiconductors (gallium
nitride, gallium arsenide...) as well as single­element semiconductors (arsenic, boron,
silicon...) and, out of those, the most used is the silicon (Si).
Silicon is largely employed in manufacturing of integrated circuits, transistors, diodes,
solar cells, and power electronics [2]. For all of these different applications silicon wafers
constitute the starting point for further processing of the product. The production of silicon
wafers has grown along with the introduction and development of new technologies.
Figure 1.1: Silicon ingots and wafers [3].
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
1
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Silicon Monocrystal Production
There are mainly two possible alternatives when it comes to technologies that allow silicon
ingot production. Once the ingots are obtained a series of following steps leads up to their
slicing into the wafers.
Silicon ingots are typically manufactured through either the Czochralski (CZ) [4] or the
Float­Zone (FZ) [5] crystal growth techniques. Both approaches start from a silicon seed
(monocrystal silicon cylinder with a diameter of 4­7 mm and 5­10 cm of length) but they
differ in how the final product is obtained and its properties.
The growth of the crystal is a time­consuming process in either cases, and it takes hours
before the product is ready to move on to other production stages.
The Czochralski method
Figure 1.2: Schematic representation of the CZ crystal growth method [6].
The growth of the crystal takes place in a growth chamber where the feed material is
melted in a silica (SiO2) crucible. The seed crystal is dipped in the molten material and
then pulled upwards as it is being spun to stabilize the process. Despite working in a
controlled environment with an inert gas atmosphere, the ingots produced show high level
of incorporation of oxygen. This is to be associated with the fact that at high temperatures
the silica crucible releases oxygen into the molten silicon.
Purity is not essential for many applications, but it becomes a necessity when trying to
achieve high­efficiency or high­power.
The CZ method, despite this limitation in the quality of the ingot produced, is the most
common method used in the manufacturing of silicon ingots thanks to the reduced cost
of the product. This method allows for large diameter ingots (up to 450 mm), reducing the
cost­per­unit of the final wafer. The feed material does not have to satisfy any specific
quality requirements, as it is melted in the crucible.
2
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:13==
The Float Zone method
Figure 1.3: Schematic representation of the FZ crystal growth method [7].
The growth of the crystal takes place in a chamber with inert gas atmosphere, similarly to
how the process is carried out according to the CZ method. The main difference between
these two technologies is that, with the FZ method, the feed material is not melted in a
crucible. Removing the silica crucible eliminates the main source of oxygen, thus notice­
ably increasing the quality of the crystal grown.
Defects associated with the presence of oxygen can still be found in the final product due
to possible oxygen infiltrations in the chamber but, thanks to the much lower concentra­
tion of absorbed oxygen, the monocrystalline silicon obtained is of a considerably higher
quality compared to the one produced with the CZ method.
The main reason why this method is not the most used is its cost inefficiency. Since this
method allows for diameters of up to 200 mm, it has bigger cost­per­unit compared to the
CZ. Besides, working with only a small pool of molten silicon makes the whole process
less robust to defects that may be present in the feed silicon rod (such as irregularity on its
surface like cracks, excessive roughness or oxidation), making it necessary to work with
a high­quality, having homogeneous thermal and electrical properties is also essential to
ensure a stable melting process, and therefore expensive feedstock material.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
3
==PAGE:14==
The FZ method can be studied by dividing it in a series of phases represented in figure
1.4 [8]. The feed material is preheated until it reaches a temperature of at least 500 K in
order to enable its interaction with the electromagnetic field produced by the inductor.
1. Producing the melt drop:
In this first phase, the feed rod is moved closer to the inductor so that its lower end
is melted, forming a portion of liquid material hanging from the feed material. Due
to surface tension the liquid material does not fall under the influence of gravity.
2. Forming the feed tip:
In this second phase, the seed of monocrystalline silicon is moved upwards until it
touches the drop formed during the first phase.
3. Creating the thin neck:
This third phase eliminates the dislocations that originated in the seed due to the
drastic increase in temperature to which it has been subjected, by reducing the
diameter to 2 −3 mm. It is necessary to achieve a length of the thin neck of 30 −50
mm before moving onto the next phase.
4. Making the cone:
During this phase, the diameter of the growing monocrystalline silicon is increased
gradually, by properly regulating the process parameters, until it reaches the desired
value (maximum diameter possible is equal to 200 mm).
5. Growing the cylinder:
During this phase, the monocrystalline silicon grows keeping its diameter constant.
This cylindrical portion of the product is referred to as ingot.
6. Closing the crystal:
In this final phase, the feed rod is pulled upward in order to separate it from the
molten zone on the upper end of the monocrystalline silicon produced so far. To
avoid excessive thermal­induced residual stresses the molten zone needs to be
gradually cooled down.
Figure 1.4: Different phases of the Float­Zone process [8].
4
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:15==
1.2
Problem definition
The growth of the monocrystal silicon stemming from the seed is a very time consuming
batch process. To reduce the cost of the final product it is vital to increase the crystal yield
since the cost of the raw material makes up a significant portion of the production cost,
especially for the FZ technique.
In order to do, so we rely on the proper regulation of the many parameters that affect crys­
tal growth such as: humidity content in the chamber, rotational and translational speeds
of the holders and power input. The control unit that is responsible for regulating the pro­
cess receive inputs from different sensors and cameras while also relying on a database
that is constantly updated with the new data retrieved.
Particular attention has to be given to the geometric dimensions, as they allow to draw
important conclusions on whether the process is progressing properly and on how to in­
tervene.
Figure 1.5: Schematic representation of the characterizing geometric dimensions [8].
The only way to measure some of these parameters is to rely on a camera vision system
and to then process the acquired images and extract the desired information, which is
then used by the control system.
The same controller is used on different machines and the assumption that all machines
operate under the same working conditions is made. In order to guarantee the validity of
decision making process, it is important to make an effort in reducing differences between
separate machine that operate independently from one another.
This includes ensuring that the camera vision system also captures images that are similar
in quality since all images are then processed by the same tools to collect the information
necessary to obtain a high­quality final product.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
5
==PAGE:16==
Image quality is affected by a large number of factors, but mainly it is determined by focal
blur and lighting condition. Focal blur can be minimized by manually focusing the camera,
while we have very little control over lighting condition.
Figure 1.6: Schematic representation of the chamber growth and the vision system [9].
1.3
Research question
The footage captured throughout the crystal growth process is used to constantly monitor
the production and extract the information necessary to regulate different parameters that
determine the quality of the monocrystalline silicon ingot produced.
In order to ensure that the decision making process is effective in guaranteeing a consis­
tently high­quality final product, it is necessary to guarantee a consistent image quality
across multiple cameras.
The production plant consists of a collection of machines each with their own camera
vision system installed. The decision making process is based on the assumption that
the working conditions are the same for each machine and this also applies to the images
captured from the various cameras.
The purpose of this project is then to identify a metric that allows the scoring of an im­
age’s blurriness content to assess its overall quality. Being able to quantify this, otherwise
qualitative, characteristic allows for an objective comparison across footage taken from
distinct cameras. Using a score that is mainly affected by blur content ensures a proper
adjustment of the focal length of each camera and, therefore, image quality consistency.
The main obstacle to overcome is the significant differences in the content of the frames
captured from different cameras on distinct machines, as they compromise the chance of
using one unique reference to assess image quality and adjust the focus setting of each
camera.
6
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:17==
2
Literature Review
Ever since the invention of photography, pictures have always been used to document and
qualitatively describe occurring phenomena. The development of computers and digital
photography made extracting quantitative information from images possible. Nowadays,
image processing is largely used in almost every technical and scientific discipline [10].
The purpose of image quality assessment (IQA) is to define metrics that can objectively
evaluate the quality of any given image that will always present some kind of defects as
there are many variables that introduce noise, blur and distortion.
Doing so requires to elaborate and process the data contained in a photo or frame from
a video.
2.1
Basic operations in image processing
Before delving into some of the already developed methods to assess the quality images,
it is useful to get familiar with the basics of digital image processing.
Images are nothing more than two­dimensional signals and as such they contain many dif­
ferent kinds of information that can be accessed through various tools [11]. The concepts
introduced are going to be useful to better understand how the IQA methods elaborate
images.
2.1.1
Image in the spatial domain
Images represented in the spatial domain are usually stored in the computer memory as
arrays of different sizes. Any image can be considered as a rectangular domain in which
each pixel is identified by its indices, usually i and j.
Figure 2.1: Identification of a generic pixel of an NxM image.
To completely define an image it is necessary to specify the colour of each of its pixels.
There are multiple ways to numerically express different colour shades. One of the most
common is the Red­Green­Blue (RGB) colour model.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
7
==PAGE:18==
In the RGB model any shade of colour can be uniquely identified by a sequence of 3
values each between 0 and 255. This model can be easily used to completely define any
image as we can specify the colour of each of the pixels constituting the coloured image.
Let’s consider the following picture as an easy example of how the information is stored
with the RGB colour model.
Figure 2.2: coloured image and the intensities of Red, Green and Blue respectively.
As expected, in the pixels associated with the cherries, the colour red has really high level,
whereas green has lower intensity value. The blue content is moderate over almost all the
picture since, as we can see, the predominant colours in the picture are red and green.
In many cases instead of a coloured image a gray­scale image is available. A generic
image made up of M pixels on the vertical side and N on the horizontal can be memorized
as a matrix which entries can be any number between 0 and 255. The colour associated
with the numerical value 0 is black and white to 255. Any number in between is a different
shade of gray.
It is possible to obtain a gray­scale image given its coloured version by computing a
weighted average of the intensities of red, green and blue for each pixel.
Figure 2.3: Gray­scale image of the picture showed in 2.2.
We can clearly see the subject of the picture so, while all the information about the orig­
inal colour is lost, it appears that other kinds of information are still available even in the
gray­scale version of the image.
In this project we will be working with cameras that take gray­scale images, therefore ev­
erything that follows is based on the fair assumption that all the information necessary to
assess image quality is contained within gray­scale images. This justifies working with
gray­scale images when evaluating anything related to their quality. Moreover, working
with gray­scale images significantly reduces the amount of storage space needed com­
pared to coloured images.
8
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:19==
2.1.2
Image processing in the frequency domain
Representing an image in the spatial domain is very intuitive, but it is not the only option
and, in some cases, it can be useful to work in the spectral domain as some operations
can be computed faster in this domain.
It is possible to transform an image from the spatial to the frequency domain using the 2D
formulation of the Discrete Fourier Transform [11].
We can consider any gray­scale image as a function f(x, y) that outputs the intensity
value for x = 0, 1, 2, ..., M −1 and y = 0, 1, 2, ..., N −1 identifying every pixel of the
image. The Fourier transform of such defined function is a complex function F(u, v) for
u = 0, 1, 2, ..., M −1 and v = 0, 1, 2, ..., N −1 given by the following equation.
F(u, v) =
M−1
X
x=0
N−1
X
y=0
f(x, y) · e−2πi( ux
M + vy
N )
(2.1)
The transformed image is a complex function, with u and v as frequency variables, and
can therefore be characterized by its real R(u, v) and imaginary I(u, v) part. Usually the
magnitude and phase angle are used to represent F(u, v).
The magnitude M(u, v) of F(u, v) is defined as:
M(u, v) =
p
R(u, v)2 + I(u, v)2
(2.2)
While the phase angle Φ(u, v) of F(u, v) is defined as:
Φ(u, v) = tan−1 I(u, v)
R(u, v)

(2.3)
Using magnitude and phase angle the Fourier transform can be rewritten as:
F(u, v) = M(u, v) · eiΦ(u,v)
(2.4)
Figure 2.4: Magnitude of transformed
image.
Figure 2.5: Phase angle of transformed
image.
As we can see working in the spectral domain is much less intuitive than working in the
spatial domain. Given the visual representation of both magnitude and phase angle we,
as humans, are not able to understand what could be the subject of an image.
Despite what our perception might be, the transformed image contains exactly the same
information as the image in the spatial domain.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
9
==PAGE:20==
This allows the computation of the inverse discrete Fourier transform [11]. Given an image
in the frequency domain F(u, v) we are able to obtain that same image in the spatial
domain through the equation:
f(x, y) =
1
MN
M−1
X
u=0
N−1
X
v=0
F(u, v) · e2πi( ux
M + vy
N )
(2.5)
Any image can therefore be seen as a weighted sum of 2D orthogonal basis functions.
The weight of each term of the sum are the coefficients F(u, v) normalized on MN. We
can visualize a few of the functions constituting the basis for the spectral domain by rep­
resenting their inverse Fourier transform. Each element of the basis is identified by the
indices (u, v). The element corresponding to (0, 0) is commonly referred to as the DC
component.
Figure 2.6: Visualization of some elements of the Fourier transform basis
Applying the inverse Fourier transform to the magnitude and phase angle shown in 2.4
and 2.5 makes everything more clear.
10
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.7: Image in the spatial domain corresponding to magnitude and phase angle in 2.4 and 2.5.
2.1.3
Filtering
Filtering is an image processing technique that plays a big role in image analysis since it
can emphasize or remove features by modifying images [12].
Filtering in the spatial domain
Spatial filtering is based on the direct manipulation of pixels in an image. In order to pro­
ceed it is necessary to introduce the concept of neighbour pixels. Given any pixel of the
image, its neighbours are the pixel surrounding it. It is possible to differentiate different
types of neighbourhoods based on shape and size.
Figure 2.8: Different possible neighbours for any i, j­pixel
In linear filtering the value of each pixel is modified in linear relationships to its neigh­
bours, this operation can be computed as a convolution of two functions as defined by the
following equation.
f(x, y) = (g ∗h)(x, y) =
X
m∈Ω
X
n∈Ω
g(x −m, y −n) · h(m, n)
(2.6)
Where g(x, y) : Ω→Z2 is the original image and h(x, y) is the image that mathematically
defines how pixels of the original image are modified in order to obtain the convoluted
image f(x, y) : Ω→Z2 that is the same size as the original.
This mathematical operation can be visualized as the sliding of a mask (or filter) over the
picture that is being filtered. The geometry of the mask used determines which of the
nearby pixels are considered when calculating the new value of the i, j­pixel.
When computing the convolution it is necessary to pay attention to the pixels on the border
of the original image as the result of the operation is highly affected by the boundary effect.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.9: Different possible situation when computing the convolution with a 3x3 mask.
As shown in figure 2.9, the neighbours of all the pixels on the edges of the image are not
well defined since some of them are not part of the original image [13].
There are many ways to deal with this issue, but it is still important for the object of interest
of the image to be far from the edges since all of the following methods introduce artifacts.
Slight adjustments need to be made based on the size of the mask used in the convolution,
but the reasoning behind each solution stays the same regardless.
• zero­padding
This method simply requires adding black pixels around the original image and then
considering those as part of the neighbours when computing the convolution for the
pixels that were part of the original border.
Figure 2.10: Zero­padding used to extend original image and compute convolution with a 3x3 mask.
• wrapping
This method is based on translations of the original image in its plane. Including
portions of the surrounding images in the computation of the convolution allows the
proper definition of the neighbours even for the pixels that were originally on the
border.
Figure 2.11: How the original image is extended to compute convolution with a 3x3 mask through wrapping.
12
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:23==
• mirroring
This method is based on mirroring the original image in its plane. It reduces border
effects by preserving the features of the original image, since it does not change the
neighbouring pixels but only duplicates the m.
Figure 2.12: The original image is expanded to compute convolution with a 3x3 mask through mirroring.
Filtering in the frequency domain
An image can be filtered while working in the spectral domain and dealing with its trans­
formed version obtained through the Fourier transform.
The convolution theorem states that the convolution operation in the spatial domain is
equivalent to a multiplication in the frequency domain.
g(x, y) = f(x, y) ∗h(x, y) ⇐⇒G(u, v) = F(u, v) · H(u, v)
(2.7)
F(u, v) and H(u, v) are obtained by computing the Fourier transform of the image f(x, y)
and the mask h(x, y) defined in the spatial domain as shown previously (see 2.1.2).
The operation computed as a multiplication in the spectral domain outputs the filtered
image G(u, v) in the spectral domain. G(u, v) can be transformed back to the spatial
domain through the inverse Fourier transform, obtaining g(x, y).
It is important to notice that by computing the convolution in the frequency domain, we
are implicitly considering the wrapping method to deal with the boundary issue thanks to
the periodicity of the transform itself.
2.1.4
Filter masks
Masks differing in size and entries are commonly used in image processing [14] [15]:
• One dimensional filters
There are two kinds of 1D filters that are represented in the spatial domain as vectors
of various length. The horizontal filter is defined as hh = [1
1
1 · · · 1], while the
vertical filter is its transpose hv = [1
1
1 · · · 1]T .
The size of the vector has an impact on the result of the filtering operation.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.13: Visualization of the horizontal filter in the frequency domain.
Figure 2.14: Visualization of the vertical filter in the frequency domain.
• 2D average filter
This filter is a square matrix whose entries are all the same value. For example a
possible average filter is:
A = 1
9


1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1


Figure 2.15: Visualization of the average filter in the frequency domain.
• Sobel operator
There are two possible 2D Sobel operators, the horizontal Sh and the vertical Sv:
Sh =


1
0
−1
2
0
−2
1
0
−1


Sv =


1
2
1
0
0
0
−1
−2
−1


Sh is the horizontal filter and Sv the vertical filter.
14
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.17: Visualization of the vertical Sobel mask in the frequency domain.
Figure 2.16: Visualization of the horizontal Sobel mask in the frequency domain.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
15
==PAGE:26==
• Gaussian filter
The Gaussian filter is obtained through the discretization of the following 2D equa­
tion:
G(x, y) =
1
2πσ2 · e−x2+y2
2σ2
(2.8)
This filter can also be represented in the frequency domain.
Figure 2.18: Visualization of the Gaussian filter in the frequency domain.
• Disk filter
This filter is implemented in MATLAB where the user can select the radius of the
filter thus changing the mask size. Considering the following mask, obtained by se­
lecting a radius = 3:
D =


0
0.0003
0.0110
0.0172
0.0110
0.0003
0
0.0003
0.0245
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0245
0.0003
0.0110
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0110
0.0172
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0172
0.0110
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0110
0.0003
0.0245
0.0354
0.0354
0.0354
0.0245
0.0003
0
0.0003
0.0110
0.0172
0.0110
0.0003
0


Figure 2.19: Visualization of the disk filter in the frequency domain.
As we can deduce from the representations in the frequency domain all the previous
masks are low­pass filters as they reduce the high frequency content in the image.
16
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:27==
2.2
Introduction to Image Quality Assessment
Through the years, the use of camera­collected data has grown remarkably and with
it, the need to be able to process images to extract significant data in order to aim the
decision­making process towards the right direction.
Image processing in the industry finds many different applications such as quality control,
medical diagnostics, and surveillance. Based on the specific field of work one may face
different issues and necessities making image processing a very broad subject [16].
Image quality assessment (IQA) is a specific branch of image processing that focuses on
quantifying the perceived quality of any image, often considering a human being as the
consumer of the final processed media.
As humans we are instinctively able to tell whether an image is high­quality or not, but it is
a subjective measure and as such it can be affected by inconsistencies. There are many
factors that contribute to determining image quality (noise, motion blur, focal blur and
lighting conditions are few of the most significant). Having many ways in which an image
quality can be compromised makes it a challenge to define a score able to quantitatively
distinct a low­quality from an high­quality image.
Figure 2.20: Original image and distorted versions by noise, focal blur and motion blur.
The aim of this project is to find an algorithm that is able to effectively detect and score the
blurriness content in images. Being able to do that allows a proper tuning of the camera
focus settings so that the data collected, and then used by the control system to regulate
the process parameters, can ensure a satisfactory quality of the final product.
Many methods have been developed to score image quality and they can be classified in
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
17
==PAGE:28==
the following categories:
• Full­Reference (FR): This kind of algorithms require to have a pristine image to
use as a reference to quantify image quality based on how different an image is
compared to its pristine version. These methods are often used to assess the ef­
fectiveness of image enhancement or restoration algorithms where the undistorted
version of an image is available.
• No­Reference (NR): The algorithms that fall into this category allow scoring the
quality of an image without needing a reference to compare it to.
• Reduced­Reference (RR): In this case the methods do not require an entire pris­
tine image. These methods are used in applications similar to the one where FR
methods are normally implemented with the difference that, by using partial infor­
mation on the pristine image, the storage space required and computational power
are significantly reduced.
It appears obvious that, in most practical instances where we want to assess image blur­
riness, a pristine image is not available and working with a no­reference method is the
only possible option.
When considering the no­reference methods it is fundamental to introduce the basic dis­
tinction between:
• Spatial domain methods:
Methods in the spatial domain work directly on the image as it is captured by the
camera. When working with a gray­scale image all data is stored in a NxM array
whose entrances are the intensities and can range between [0, 255] (or [0, 1] if they
are normalized on the maximum value possible).
• Spectral domain methods:
Methods developed in the spectral domain require a preliminary step to transform
the original image from the spatial domain to the spectral domain. This can be
achieved using the 2D Fourier transform or similar transforms to the frequency do­
main. The output is a complex NxM array.
2.3
Blurriness detection
One of the main factors contributing to the perceived quality of an image is indubitably
focal blur. The human vision system is capable of automatically detecting blurriness in an
image but it is not clear how it is able to do so.
Blur has not been mathematically characterized yet and we are only able to simulate it
through Gaussian filtering. Even if the filtered version of the originally sharp image and
the actual out­of­focus picture look similar to each other, there is something intrinsically
different in the way simulated blur and actual focal blur affect the intensities of a gray­
scale image. This can be highlighted, for example, by taking a look at the histograms of
the following images.
Considering that we are working with a black and white checkerboard, we would expect
a histogram where there are only either pixels with intensity equal to 0 (corresponding to
black) or to 255 (corresponding to white). In a pristine image with perfectly sharp edges
there would not be any pixels with intermediate values of intensity in the greyscale.
18
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.21: Sharp image of a checkerboard and relative histogram of the intensities.
Figure 2.22: Simulated blur with Gaussian filter and relative histogram of the intensities.
Figure 2.23: Out­of­focus image of checkerboard and relative histogram of the intensities.
Mainly due to lighting conditions, even for a sharp image we can only get as close as
shown in figure 2.21 to a pristine image. From the distribution of the pixels’ intensity
we see that most of the pixels tend to be close to either being black or white, although
intermediate intensities are also present.
Looking at the simulated blur (fig. 2.22) we can clearly see how the histogram is trans­
formed and especially how filtering the image leads to cutting the tail ends of the distribu­
tion. Most of the pixels now have intermediate intensity.
Looking at the histogram of this actual out­of­focus (fig. 2.23)image we can immediately
notice how different it is from the histogram in figure 2.22. Focal blur obviously impacts
perceived image quality but without causing a cut of the tail ends of the distribution as
sharp as the one associated with the simulated blur.
The fact that simulated blur through filtering and actual focal blur are inevitably different
from one another, is the reason why usually methods are tested on both simulated sets of
images (with different levels of simulated focal blur) and sets of images taken with different
focus adjustments. The human eye instinctively recognizes both the simulated blur and
the focal blur but an algorithm can be affected by the different nature of the blurriness
since it is based on mathematical operations.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
19
==PAGE:30==
2.4
No­Reference IQA in the spatial domain
Being able to define a metric that quantifies the quality of an image has been a topic of
interest for the past few decades. Over the years, many methods have been presented
each with its own strengths and limitations. In this section, we will examine few of the
algorithms developed to assess image quality working in the spatial domain.
2.4.1
Maximum Local Variation
This method is one of the very first developed and is to be appreciated for its immediacy
and fast computational time. It is based on the assumption that a sharp image will show
higher variations in the intensity values amongst adjacent pixels compared to blurry im­
ages [17].
This simple algorithm consists of the following steps:
• Computing the map of the maximum local variation (MLV) of the image
• Creating the weighted MLV map
• Parametrize the distribution with Generalized Gaussian Distribution
This method is able to detect blurriness in an image and correlates well with human per­
ception of image quality. By its own definition, the score can be any positive number and
there is not a theoretical maximum value for it.
Computing the map of the normalized MLV of the image
Considering a grayscale image f(x, y) where x = 1, 2, ...N and y = 1, 2, ...M with pixels
whose intensity is defined in the range [0, 255] we can easily compute the map of the MLV.
MLV (i, j) = max|f(i, j) −f(a, b)|
a = [i −1, i + 1],
b = [j −1, j + 1]
(2.9)
We can see that, when computing the maximum local variation for the pixel identified by
the indices (i, j), only its 8 neighbours are taken into consideration.
Figure 2.24: Mapped MLV of the figure 3.9a.
20
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:31==
Creating the weighted MLV map
Working with a weighted distribution that associates larger weights to pixels that have
larger MLV values allows obtaining a quality score that better correlates to the human
perception of image sharpness. In order to do that an exponential relationship is consid­
ered for each pixel:
w(i, j) = e−rank(MLV (i,j))
100
(2.10)
Where rank(MLV (i, j)) is the position of the MLV (i, j) when the values of the map are
ordered in ascending order and not according to their indices.
Parametrize the distribution with Generalized Gaussian Distribution
Considering the weighted value computed in the previous step we can parametrize the
distribution using the generalized Gaussian distribution that is defined as follows:
g(MLV, µ, γ, σ) =
γ
2σΓ( 1
γ )
r
Γ( 1
γ )
Γ( 3
γ )
· e
−
 
MLV −µ
σ
v
u
u
t Γ( 1
γ )
Γ( 3
γ )
!γ
(2.11)
The score associated with the quality of an image is the standard deviation of the GGD
that parametrize the distribution of the weighted maximum local variation. The standard
deviation of the distribution can be estimated by calculating auxiliary parameters using
the statistical properties of the data available.
Despite the fact that this algorithm is able to detect blurriness in an image, it will not be im­
plemented since other methods that outperform this one in terms of correlation to human
perception of image quality and computational cost have been developed more recently.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
21
==PAGE:32==
2.4.2
Perceptive blur method
This method, developed in the spatial domain, is based on the assumption that adding
blur through filtering leads to an image that is more different from the original as the qual­
ity of the starting image is higher. This means that adding blur to an already low­quality
image generates an image that is not discernibly different from the original [18].
Figure 2.25: Sharp image, blurred original and blurred version of the blurred image.
Considering a simple black­and­white image we can understand what is the concept be­
hind this method by simulating a blurry through a Gaussian filter. We can see that there is
a clear difference between the original image and its blurred version. On the other hand, if
we apply the same filter to the already blurred image, what we get is an even more blurry
image that is not that different from the one we already had.
The algorithm is quite straightforward and can be divided into sequential steps:
• Obtaining horizontal and vertical blurred images
• Computing absolute difference between original and blurred images
• Evaluating the variation
• Computing sum coefficients
• Normalising the result
This method is able to detect focal blurriness and score it consistently with the human
vision perception of quality. Moreover the score is obtained with low computational cost
and, thanks to normalization, is defined within a closed range of values where 0 is the
score for the highest quality and 1 for the lowest.
On the other hand the size of the filter, arbitrarily defined by the user, is an important input
parameter for this method since it heavily affects the output quality score.
Obtaining horizontal and vertical blurred images
Starting from the image f(x, y) whose quality we want to assess, the first step consists in
filtering such image with two 1D filters. The convolution between the image and the mask
can be computed as a multiplication in the frequency domain (as stated in the convolution
theorem 2.7).
Bv(u, v) = F(u, v) · Hv(u, v)
(2.12)
Bh(u, v) = F(u, v) · Hh(u, v)
(2.13)
Where Bv is the Fourier transform of the image filtered through a vertical filter (see 2.14)
whose Fourier transform is Hv, while Bh is the Fourier transform of the image filtered
through a vertical filter (see 2.13) whose Fourier transform is Hh.
22
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:33==
By computing the inverse Fourier transform of both Bv and Bh we can then visualize the
filtered images in the spatial domain.
Figure 2.26: Original, vertically filtered and horizontally filter with length = 17.
Figure 2.27: Original, vertically filtered and horizontally filter with length = 35.
As we can see the output of the filtering operation changes significantly with the size of
the filter used and, consequently, the final score is also affected by this parameter.
Computing absolute difference between original and blurred images
Once the filtered images have been obtained in the spatial domain, we are able to compute
the absolute differences along the vertical and horizontal directions. Each of the images
is defined in the rectangular domain Ω= 1, 2, ..., Mx1, 2, ...N.
DFv(i, j) = |F(i, j) −F(i −1, j)|
(2.14)
DBv(i, j) = |Bv(i, j) −Bv(i −1, j)|
(2.15)
When computing these variations along the vertical direction we are considering
i = 2, 3, ...M and j = 1, 2, ..., N.
To compute the horizontal variations we consider i = 1, 2, ...M and j = 2, 3, ..., N as
shown in the following equations.
DFh(i, j) = |F(i, j) −F(i, j −1)|
(2.16)
DBh(i, j) = |Bh(i, j) −Bh(i, j −1)|
(2.17)
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
23
==PAGE:34==
Evaluating the variation
The variation of the intensity in the neighbouring pixels caused by the blurring is only
considered if the absolute differences have decreased since it has been proven that this
allows obtaining a score that correlates better with the human perception of image quality.
When computing these variations along both the vertical and the horizontal directions we
consider i = 2, 3, ...M and j = 2, 3, ..., N.
DV v = max{0, DFv −DBv}
(2.18)
DV h = max{0, DFh −DBh}
(2.19)
(a) Visualization of the vertical variation.
(b) Visualization of the horizontal variation.
Computing sum coefficients
So far a map of the variation along both the horizontal and vertical location has been
obtained. In order to score any image these maps need to be pooled into scalar values.
SFv =
M−1
X
i=2
N−1
X
j=2
DFv(i, j)
(2.20)
SFh =
M−1
X
i=2
N−1
X
j=2
DFh(i, j)
(2.21)
SVv =
M−1
X
i=2
N−1
X
j=2
DV v(i, j)
(2.22)
SVh =
M−1
X
i=2
N−1
X
j=2
DV h(i, j)
(2.23)
The pooling is simply obtained by summing the values of the maps obtained previously
over the entire domain.
Normalising the result
Having pooled the maps down to scalar values we can now compute the quality of the
original image.
RBMscore = max
(
SFv −SVv
SFv
, SFh −SVh
SFh
)
(2.24)
Thanks to the normalization, the score is always a number between 0 and 1. It is important
to remember that for this method a higher score is associated with lower image quality.
For this reason it is conservative to consider the maximum value between the score of
the image in the vertical and horizontal direction as the overall quality score.
24
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:35==
2.4.3
Quadratic index of fuzziness
This is another method developed in the spatial domain. It is based on the concept that
blur leads to having lower gradient magnitude of the intensity in a gray­scale image [19].
Figure 2.29: Gradient magnitude for both sharp and blurry black­and­white images.
Considering a simple black­and­white image we can easily see how blurriness affects the
gradient magnitude. As we would expect the gradient along the horizontal direction is
zero in the areas where the colour is uniform while its value spikes along the edge in the
sharp image. For the blurry image gradient is characterized by less sudden variations, its
maximum magnitude of the gradient is still on the edge but its numerical value is much
lower than the one obtained in the sharp image.
The algorithm can be divided into sequential steps:
• Obtaining horizontal and vertical blurred images
• Evaluating local gradient magnitude
• Normalizing local gradient
• Computing the sharpness index
This method is able to detect focal blurriness and score it consistently with the human
vision perception of quality. Moreover the score requires short computational time and,
thanks to the normalization, is defined within a closed range of values where 1 is the score
for the highest quality and 0 for the lowest.
Obtaining horizontal and vertical blurred images
The algorithm prescribes to use both vertical and horizontal Sobel masks (see 2.1.4) to
compute respectively the vertical and horizontal blurred images. This is obtained by con­
volving the original image and each of the masks.
∇h(x, y) = Sh(x, y) ∗X(x, y)
(2.25)
∇v(x, y) = Sv(x, y) ∗X(x, y)
(2.26)
As usual these convolutions can be also computed in the frequency domain as multipli­
cations (see convolution theorem 2.7).
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.30: Original, horizontal filtered and vertical filtered images.
Evaluating local gradient magnitude
Starting from the horizontal and vertical gradient computed through Sobel masks we can
evaluate the local gradient magnitude map of the image we want to score.
∇=
q
∇2
h + ∇2v
(2.27)
Figure 2.31: Gradient magnitude map.
As we expected the gradient map highlights the edges of the original image.
Normalizing local gradient
The gradient mapped in 2.31 has been computed through the convolution with Sobel
masks by considering one pixel and its 8 surrounding neighbours (as shown in 2.9 for a
generic 3x3 mask).
26
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:37==
Figure 2.32: Pixel configurations with maximum gradient.
In the figure 2.32 are represented 4 possible configuration of neighbouring pixels. The
gradient is being evaluated in the central pixel. The darker pixels have an intensity L = 0
while for the lighter L = 255.
Computing the convolution in the spatial domain (as defined in 2.6) we find that the max­
imum value for the gradient (evaluated through Sobel masks) is ∇max =
√
20 · 255. This
value can be considered to normalize the gradient map in order to get a sharpness index
that is a number defined between 0 and 1. The normalized gradient map is defined:
µxmn =
∇mn
2
√
20 · 255 ≈∇mn
9 · 255
(2.28)
The normalized gradient is not computed by simply considering µxmn =
∇mn
∇max . We can
see that this value is further divided by 2 and that has to do with how the sharpness index
of this method is defined. The normalization is done considering ∇max but the ultimate
purpose is to work with 0 ≤SI ≤1.
Computing sharpness index
Considering the map of the normalized gradient we can compute a sharpness index by
pooling the map into a scalar value using the formula:
QIFscore =
2
√
MN
v
u
u
t
M
X
i=1
N
X
j=1
min{µxmn, 1 −µxmn}2
(2.29)
As usual M and N define the size of the image we want to score.
The term min{µxmn, 1−µxmn} cannot be higher than 0.5 and lower than 0. The normalized
gradient has been previously defined to ensure that a perfectly sharp edge would have
µxmn = 0.5 which would lead to a QIFscore = 1.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
27
==PAGE:38==
Exponential form of QIF
The tests that were conducted highlighted some limitations of this method that have been
solved by slightly modifying the original method just presented.
The first issue was that the score did not seem to be particularly sensitive to blur as the
score did not vary across the whole range of value possible. The following equation was
used to enhance differences in the score:
QIFexp = e1−
1
QIFscore
(2.30)
The new score is still defined within the closed range of values [0, 1] but is able to better
differentiate images based on their blur content thanks to the non linear rescaling of the
numeric value obtained through the algorithm just described.
Figure 2.33: Comparison between the original score and its exponential form.
QIF and contrast enhancement algorithm
Another issue of this method is its high sensitivity to indices lighting conditions as it is
based on the gradient of the pixel’s intensities of the gray­scale image. This issue was
also addressed by slightly changing the algorithm and adding an extra step where, as
the convolutions are computed, the contrast between the pixels of the neighbourhood
considered is enhanced by rescaling the intensities so that they span the whole range
0­255.
Figure 2.34: Comparison between the original algorithm and the contrast enhanced.
In order to not compromise gradients that are associated with actual blur, a threshold
needs to be defined and its value tuned so that the score correlates well with human
perception.
Introducing this change increases significantly the computational cost of the algorithm,
compromising the possibility of live implementation.
28
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:39==
2.5
Objective IQA in the spectral domain
Concerning the image quality assessment many methods have been developed in the
spectral domain. Compared to the methods developed in the spatial domain, they have
higher computational cost thus making them less fit for real­time applications.
Since blur in an image manifests as a reduction of the high­frequency content in an im­
age, the first methods developed were based on the energy spectrum of the magnitude
component of the image in the frequency domain. Working with the magnitude can be
intuitive and relatively cost­efficient, but often results are affected by the image content
and not only by its quality.
For this reason other methods have been proposed that are based on the phase coher­
ence. These methods are based on the fact that close to sharp edges there is strong
phase coherence that is disrupted by blur. To find a measure of this disruption allows
scoring the image quality.
2.5.1
Global Phase Coherence
This method is able to score the image quality correlating well with the subjective quality
evaluation.
On the other hand the score of the images is not defined within a closed range of values
and it approaches 0 as the image to score has lower quality [20] [21].
The algorithm can be seen as sequence of steps:
• pre­processing periodic component
• pre­processing dequantization
• Computing expectation and variance of total variation
• Compute sharpness index
Pre­processing: periodic component
Any given image f(x, y) : Ω→R can be seen as the sum of a periodic and a smooth
components. The smooth component can be easily implemented and, consequently, the
periodic component is determined [22].
The Fourier transform of the smooth component S(u, v) : Ω→R, it is defined as:
S(u, v) =
(
0
if
(u, v) = (0, 0)
G(u,v)
2cos( 2πu
M )+2cos( 2πv
N )−4
otherwise
(2.31)
Where G(u, v) is the Fourier transform of g(x, y) = g1(x, y) + g2(x, y) defined as:
g1(x, y) =
(
f(M −1 −x, y) −f(x, y)
if
x = 0
or
x = M −1
0
otherwise
(2.32)
g2(x, y) =
(
f(x, N −1 −y) −f(x, y)
if
y = 0
or
y = N −1
0
otherwise
(2.33)
Once we have determined the Fourier transform of the smooth component, computing its
inverse Fourier transform outputs s(x, y) : Ω→R.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 2.35: Smooth component and its magnitude and phase.
At this point we are able to easily obtain the periodic component ˆf(x, y) : Ω→R of the
image directly in the spatial domain using the original image and its smooth component.
Figure 2.36: Original image and its magnitude and phase.
Directly form the definition of the components we derive the equation:
ˆf(x, y) = f(x, y) −s(x, y)
(2.34)
Figure 2.37: Periodic component and its magnitude and phase.
Pre­processing: Dequantization
The dequantization is used to reduce the artifacts introduced by the computation of the
discrete Fourier transform.
Figure 2.38: Dequantized image and its magnitude and phase.
30
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:41==
It is a (1
2, 1
2) translation of the transform computed considering the Shannon interpolation:
pint(x, y) =
1
MN
X
(q,r)∈Ω
P(q, r) · e2πi( qx
M + ry
N )
(2.35)
Computing expectation and variance of total variation
The score of the image is actually the score of its dequantized periodic component, to
avoid excessively heavy notation we will refer to such component as f(x, y).
We can define the periodic gradient of the image as:
∇f(x, y) =
∂xf(x, y)
∂yf(x, y)

=
f(x + 1, y) −f(x, y)
f(x, y + 1) −f(x, y)

∀(x, y) ∈Ω
(2.36)
The adjective ”periodic” refers to the fact that to compute the gradient for the pixels along
the border of the image the wrapping method (see 2.11) is used.
The gradient is then used to define another function:
∀⃗z ∈Ω,
Γ(⃗z) =
Γxx(⃗z)
Γxy(⃗z)
Γyx(⃗z)
Γyy(⃗z)

=
X
⃗y∈Ω
∇f(⃗y) · ∇f(⃗y + ⃗z)T
(2.37)
Two coefficients can be also determined from the gradient:
αx = ||∂xf||2
(2.38)
αy = ||∂yf||2
(2.39)
We can now define the total variation of any image as:
TV (f) =
X
⃗y∈Ω
|∂xf(⃗y)| + |∂yf(⃗y)|
(2.40)
Now the expectation of the total variation can be computed as:
ETV (f) = (αx + αy)
r
2MN
π
(2.41)
Introducing the function:
∀t ∈[−1, 1]
ω(t) = t · arcsin(t) +
p
1 −t2 −1
(2.42)
Allows computing the variance of the total variation as:
V arTV (f) = 2
π
X
⃗z∈Ω
"
α2
x · ω
Γxx(⃗z)
α2x

+ 2αxαy · ω
Γxy(⃗z)
αxαy

+ α2
y · ω
Γyy(⃗z)
α2y
#
(2.43)
Computing sharpness index
Now the sharpness index of the image can be computed as:
SI(f) = −log10
 
Φ
ETV ( ˆfQ) −TV ( ˆfQ)
q
V arTV ( ˆfQ)
!
(2.44)
Where Φ is defined as:
Φ(x) =
1
√
2π ·
Z +∞
x
e−t2
2 dt
(2.45)
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
31
==PAGE:42==
2.5.2
Local Phase Coherence
This algorithm is developed in the spectral domain. It is also based on the assumption that
blurriness causes a disruption in the phase coherence commonly associated with edges
in an image [23].
The method can be divided into a sequence of steps:
• pass the image through a series of N­scale and M­orientation log­Gabor filters
• compute the strength of the local phase coherence
• compute the spatial map of the local phase coherence
• compute the sharpness index of the image
Log­Gabor filter
The log­Gabor filter is conceptually similar to the filters already seen in 2.1.3. When
working with a 2D signal, i.e any gray­scale image, this kind of filter is described by the
equation:
G(f, θ) = e
−1
2 ·
h
log(f/f0)
log(σf /f0 )
2
+

θ−θ0
σθ
2i
(2.46)
The parameters of such filter are:
• f0 is the centre frequency (changes with the i −th scale)
• σf is the width parameter for the frequency (constant)
• θ0 is the centre orientation (changes with the j −th orientation)
• σθ is the width parameter for the orientation (constant)
Figure 2.39: Visualization of a log­Gabor filter in the frequency domain.
Any log­Gabor filter is designed for a specific frequency (f0) and orientation (θ0). Usually
these filters are used as a series with different scales and orientations.
The picture 2.40 shows a 3­scale, 8­orientation log­Gabor series represented in the
frequency plane. Since the filter is formulated in the frequency domain (the analytic for­
mula of such filter does not exist in the spatial domain), the filtered image is obtained
through a multiplication in the frequency domain and then converted into the spatial do­
main through the inverse Fourier transform.
32
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:43==
Figure 2.40: Visualization of a series of log­Gabor filter in the frequency domain.
Considering a simple black­and­white image in 2.42, we can visualize what is the result
of the log­Gabor filtering in the spatial domain.
Figure 2.41: Image filtered through a series of log­Gabor filter.
Figure 2.42: Original black­and­white image to be filtered.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
33
==PAGE:44==
Strength of the local phase coherence
Once the original image has been filtered through a N­scale, M­orientation series we have
NM complex images that can be used to define the strength of the local phase coherence.
For each j −th orientation we can obtain a map of the local phase coherence, where
values are defined for every k −th location (in this instance each pixel of the image is
identified by only one index) [24].
S{j,k}
LPC = cos
 
Φ
 N
Y
i=1
Cwi
ijk
!!
(2.47)
Where:
• wi are weights determined by the scales of the series of filters:







NP
i=1
ωi = 0
NP
i=1
ωi
si = 0
(2.48)
When working with more than 3 orientations the values of the weight coefficient can
be found solving for a least square energy solution under the constraints.
• Cijk are the complex coefficient of the filtered image for the i −th scale, j −th
orientation and k −th location
• Φ(x) is a function that outputs the phase of any complex number x
Spatial map of the local phase coherence
The spatial map of an image is obtained as a weighted average of the strength of the local
phase coherence defined as 2.47 for every orientation:
S{k}
LPC =
M
P
j=1
e1jk · S{j,k}
LPC
M
P
j=1
e1jk + α
(2.49)
The weights e1jk are determined computing the magnitude component of the filtered im­
age with the filter with the finest scale for each j −th orientation.
The coefficient α is a small arbitrary constant to avoid numerical instability.
Figure 2.43: Spatial map of local phase coherence of image 2.3.
34
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:45==
LPC sharpness index
Since the human vision system tends to assess the sharpness of an image based on the
sharpest areas of an image, to pool the local phase coherence map into a scalar value a
weighted sum is considered.
Each coefficient of the map is multiplied by a function its ranking (when sequence of the
strength values in descending order).
The weights are computed as:
uk = e
−k−1
K−1 · 1
βk
(2.50)
This is the exponentially decaying function used, where K is the total number of pixels in
the image scored and βk an arbitrary parameter that determines the decaying speed of
the function.
At this point it is possible to compute the quality score of the image as:
SLPC =
K
P
k=1
uk · Sk
LPC
K
P
k=1
uk
(2.51)
The LPC quality score of the image is a number between 0 and 1, the closer to 1 the
higher the image sharpness.
This method requires to arbitrarily define some input parameters, for this study the follow­
ing values have been taken into account as they guarantee better performance level:
• M = 8 number of scales
• N = 3 number of orientations
• s1 = 1,s2 = 1.5 and s3 = 2 as scales
• α = 2 constant to avoid numerical instability
• βk = 1 · 10−4
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
35
==PAGE:46==
2.6
Magnitude method
This method is the one currently being employed in the industrial setting. It is based on
the well­known fact that focal blurry reduces the high­frequency content in an image and,
despite being a very simple method in the spectral domain, it shows great correlation with
human perception of blurriness [25].
On the other hand, the score has no theoretical maximum value, while it approaches 0 for
low­quality images. Is also important to notice that the score requires to arbitrarily define
a threshold value that is picked based on the type of images whose quality needs to be
evaluated.
The algorithm can be divided into a series of intermediate steps:
• Converting image to the frequency domain
• Counting elements whose magnitude is greater than threshold
• Normalizing the score
Converting image to the frequency domain
As already mentioned in the section 2.1.2 dedicated to image processing in the frequency
domain, it is always possible to convert an image known in the spatial domain to the
frequency domain. Particularly we are interested in extracting the magnitude component
as it is the one that contains the information used in the following steps to compute the
final score.
The equations 2.1 and 2.4 can be condensed into the following relation that describes the
discrete Fourier transform:
F(u, v) =
M−1
X
x=0
N−1
X
y=0
f(x, y) · e−2πi( ux
M + vy
N ) = M(u, v) · eiΦ(u,v)
(2.52)
Counting elements whose magnitude is greater than threshold
Once we have obtained the magnitude component of the original image in the spatial
domain, we are able to simply count the number of elements whose value is greater than
the threshold defined.
It appears clear that the final score is highly affected by the value of this threshold that is
arbitrarily defined. The value is chosen through few tests on a small database of images
whose quality needs to be assessed. In those tests, the score is compared with what
is the subjective quality of the image and the threshold is adjusted until a satisfactory
correlation between the score and human perception of blur is achieved.
Normalizing the score
The final score of the image is computed as follows:
MAGscore =
c
M · N · 100
(2.53)
Where M and N are the height and width of the original image and c is the number of
elements counted in the previous step.
36
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:47==
2.7
Machine Learning in IQA
Methods to assess image quality that have been developed more recently are usually
based on machine learning. There are examples of methods that rely exclusively on deep
learning tools, as well as combined methods where learning techniques are integrated
with more traditional algorithms (either in the spatial or spectral domain).
Through the MATLAB toolbox for Image Processing, one can easily implement few ma­
chine learning methods since they have been introduced as built­in functions. Still, even
with the opportunity to implement those methods, there are some issues related to learn­
ing methods that make it so that is not convenient to resort to their use.
In particular, working with machine learning methods does not allow to know exactly how
the output score is obtained so, when assessing the quality of an image, it is not known
which characteristics of the image are more significant than other in determining the score.
Figure 2.44: Schematic representation of the process of image quality scoring with machine learning tools.
Another noteworthy peculiarity of machine learning methods is that they require a massive
amount of data for their training, which is sometimes not available.
2.7.1
Blind/Reference­less Image Spatial Quality Evaluator (BRISQUE)
This method is implemented in MATLAB as a built­in function. For its training it is neces­
sary to have access to a large database consisting of a sequence of pristine image along
with their distorted versions and associated subjective opinion score.
Using a subjective opinion score makes this method opinion­aware and is the reason why
this method correlates well with human perception of quality.
This method is limited to evaluating images with the same type of distortion present in the
training database [26].
2.7.2
Naturalness Image Quality Evaluator (NIQE)
This method is trained on a database that includes only pristine images and is able to as­
sess arbitrary distortion of any image we might want to score. Being an opinion­unaware
method, it unfortunately leads to poor correlation with human perception of image quality
[27].
2.7.3
Perception based Image Quality Evaluator (PIQE)
This method does not require any training and is able to measure the quality of images with
arbitrary distortion by estimating block­wise distortion. The performance level obtainable
by this method is quite low when considering how it correlates to human perception [28].
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
37
==PAGE:48==
38
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:49==
3
Methodology and Experiment
In order to find a valid alternative to the currently implemented method, it is necessary to
test the multiple proposed methods on various kinds of images.
Conducting different tests allows for a better understanding of which features of an image
impact the score and, therefore, finding the methods that are a better fit for our needs. As
the tests are conducted, shortcomings of each method are highlighted and the number
of viable options is narrowed down, leading to the assessment of the live performance of
only one possible alternative to the currently implemented algorithm.
Not all the methods presented in chapter 2 have been implemented since some of them
were mostly presented to introduce the reader to the world of image quality assessment.
While some of them are considered milestones in the development of IQA algorithms,
they have been outperformed by more recent methods and we would not benefit from
their implementation.
The methods developed in the spatial domain implemented and tested are:
• Perceptive blur method (RBM)
• Quadratic index of fuzziness (QIF)
The methods developed in the spectral domain implemented and tested are:
• Global phase coherence (GPC)
• Local phase coherence (LPC)
Tests were conducted on a small data set of images to assess performance levels of each
method and eventually reject those that do not meet the requirements, this was achieved
by using both digitally generated pristine images and images captured with the camera.
In the following paragraphs each test conducted is thoroughly described.
3.1
Pristine images
All the presented methods are no­reference image quality assessment algorithms and are
supposed to work directly on the distorted images captured by the camera.
Since image quality is affected by a number of different factors (such as lighting conditions,
lens distortion, signal noise and focal blur) over which we have little to no control, a few
tests were first conducted on pristine images generated digitally through MATLAB codes.
The images created are simple black and white images, that differ in shape and size or
pattern of the subject depicted. The one thing that they all have in common is that, being
created through code, there are no artifacts or defects of any kind and therefore they all
are the sharpest image possible as they all have perfect edges where the intensity varies
abruptly from 0 to 255 between adjacent pixels.
Other than having the maximum possible sharpness, we are also able to guarantee that
the final score is going to be affected only by features that are intrinsic to the image, since
any other factor that could contribute to the distortion of the image captured by a camera,
potentially affecting the quality score, has been eliminated.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
39
==PAGE:50==
Ideally, any digitally created black and white image would be scored the same by an
algorithm that is intended to assess sharpness. It is also possible to generate a simulated
set with different blur content starting from these pristine images.
(a) Examples of pristine images with square.
(b) Examples of pristine images with circles.
These images (120x160 pixels) were created in MATLAB and have perfect sharpness and
maximum contrast along the edges. Both images with squares and circles are tested to
see whether the score of any of the methods is sensible to the directionality of the edges.
Another thing that we are able to assess with these images is the impact the size and the
location of the subject of the image have on its quality score. For both the squares and
the circles three sizes (length measured in pixels) have been tested:
• small:
L = 20 for the square edge and r = 10 for the circle radius
• medium:
L = 40 for the square edge and r = 20 for the circle radius
• big:
L = 80 for the square edge and r = 40 for the circle radius
For each size the shapes were centred with the image, translated to the left and then to
the right by 25 pixels. Resulting in a set of 18 pristine images.
The most robust algorithm would have a score that is not affected by the directionality of
the edges and that does not change with size and location.
Another test is conducted to highlight how the score changes as blurriness is introduced
by filtering the pristine image through a Gaussian mask. Filtering an image lowers its
perceived quality, but only simulates the focal blur. Seeing that a method performs well
with a simulated test bodes well for its ability to also detect actual focal blur.
A set of images with can be created by filtering a pristine image with Gaussian masks of
different sizes and increasingly higher standard deviation. Obviously, when working with
digitally generated images, we can only simulate blur through filtering.
(a) Original pristine image with a centred circle.
(b) Simulated blur with Gaussian filter size 7 and σ = 5.
40
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:51==
(a) Original pristine image with a centred square.
(b) Simulated blur with Gaussian filter size 7 and σ = 5.
3.2
Simulated set on gray­scale image
Testing methods using pristine images does not allow drawing any conclusion on the
effectiveness of any algorithm. It was decided to also work with a gray­scale image that,
even as it appears sharp, it is nowhere close to being pristine. We can see how the score
changes when the image is filtered with Gaussian filters of different sizes and with different
values of standard deviation (see 2.8).
Since Gaussian filtering only simulates focal blur it is possible for a method to perform
very well with simulated blur and then show very little ability to detect actual focal blur. On
the other hand, only methods that detect simulated blur stand a chance in showing the
desired behaviour with focal blur therefore justifying conducting this preliminary test.
Figure 3.4: Original image, filtered with σ = 100 and size = 21, filtered with σ = 10 and size = 43.
3.3
Camera information
Before presenting in detail all the tests conducted with various set of images captured
by the camera, it is beneficial to describe the camera used and also give some general
information on how manual focus can be adjusted.
The camera used is the model BFLY­PGE­20E4M of the BlackFly series. It is able to
record up to 50fps with a resolution of 1600x1200 and monochrome colour. The acquired
frames are passed on to the computer through GigE Vision System that allows high­speed
data transmission through Ethernet network.
Figure 3.5: Camera model used to acquire gray­scale images [camera].
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
41
==PAGE:52==
The lens mounted on the camera is the Pentax­35mm C3516­M. With a focal length of 30
mm, it is considered a wide­angle lens. The objective has a focus knob that is used to
manually adjust focus and secure the lens position to guarantee good image quality.
Figure 3.6: Objective mounted on the camera.
It can be useful to briefly explain how focus works in cameras considering a simple
objective were there is only one lens. In the following schemes we consider a generic
arrow to be the subject of the picture. In order for the arrow to appear focused in the
picture taken it is necessary that its light rays, refracted by the lens, converge on the
sensor plane. The distance between the lens and the sensor plane is referred to as focal
length.
Figure 3.7: Camera focused on the arrow.
When the distance between the arrow and the camera varies, the arrow will appear out
of focus as the convergence point of the light rays will be in front or behind the sensor
plane. To refocus the lens basically means manually moving it relative to the sensor
plane, whose position is fixed within the camera body.
Figure 3.8: Adjusting camera focus.
Properly moving the lens leads to having the image plane overlapping the sensor plane,
meaning that the arrow would appear as focused in the picture taken from the camera.
42
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:53==
3.4
Out­of­focus image
The image we get after filtering with a Gaussian mask appears to be less sharp than the
original, but the blurriness introduced is different from the blurriness associated with
focal length even though both cause the quality of an image to be perceived as lower by
the human eye.
As already mentioned on multiple occasions, the fact that a method is able to accurately
detect the simulated blur does not imply that the same will happen when dealing with
focal blur. This is why it is important to test how the score is affected by focal blur by
comparing two images of the same object that is properly focused in only one of them.
Clearly, in the second instance, the focal point was either somewhere between the
camera and the object, or behind the rubber duck.
(a) Focused image.
(b) Out­of­focus image.
3.5
Checkerboard testing
So far the methods were tested on actual focal blur only in one instance and, in that
case, the subject of the picture was much different from the checkerboard that is
currently being used in the industrial setting. In order to work with something that is
closer to the actual problem of adjusting the camera focus, we can use a checkerboard.
By taking multiple images with increasing blurriness levels we can work with something
that is similar to a simulated set but with actual focal blur, and therefore see how each
method behaves when scoring images captured with different focal lengths.
Figure 3.10: Representation of the camera setup.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
43
==PAGE:54==
3.5.1
Hardware setup
The checkerboard used for this test presents few differences from the one used in the
industrial setting, but shares enough similarities with it to justify conducting this test
before moving on to the industrial testing.
Figure 3.11: Picture of testing checkerboard captured by BlackFly camera.
As shown in the picture above, the checkerboard consists of a black and white pattern
printed on a flat surface. Both the camera and the checkerboard were mounted on an
modular aluminium support frame fixed to a desk. To better recreate the working
condition of the industrial setting the nominal distance between the camera chip and the
checkerboard was set to 1300 mm.
Concerning lighting conditions an effort was made to keep them as constant and
homogeneous as possible using a diffused artificial light source.
Adaptive ROI selection
The score can be computed considering an user­defined fixed region of interest (ROI) of
the captured image, in order to not take into account portions of the background.
Due to the low stiffness of the aluminium, the bolted joins used can not be tightened
excessively without causing a permanent deformation in the structure. These relatively
loose joins combined with the low rigidity of the beams used are the underlying causes
to one of the main issues highlighted during testing: while manually adjusting the
camera focus setting, we can see the camera support moving.
These movements of the camera cause the subject within the ROI to change: from the
camera point of view it appears as if the checkerboard is translating across the ROI.
When working with a ROI that is almost as big as the checkerboard, any movement of
the camera would lead to including portions of the background in the region of interest,
affecting the quality score of the image.
It is possible to implement an algorithm that is able to detect the checkerboard and to
define a ROI accordingly. The ROI is evaluated at each frame and is able to follow any
translation of the checkerboard. The developed algorithm is quite simple but still able to
select pixels corresponding to portions of the checkerboard and consequently define a
ROI that is as big as the checkerboard. Given any frame a pixel is considered part of the
checkerboard only if the total number of pixels in its same row and column that have an
intensity above a certain value is greater than a threshold that is arbitrarily defined.
What we are doing is basically using the white squares of the checkerboard (that are
more clearly distinct in intensity from the background) to select the corresponding
rectangular region of the image.
44
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.12: Gray­scale images of checker­board with original size 1600 × 1200.
By using the algorithm of the adaptive ROI selection and excluding the outer pixels, we
are able to create new images that contain only the central portion of the checker­board.
Figure 3.13: Cropped versions of gray­scale images of checker­board.
By a quick examination, we can subjectively assess that image n°5 is the one with the
worst blur levels, whereas images n°1, 8 and 9 are the sharpest. When scoring these
images with the implemented algorithm, we expect the output to correlate well with the
perceived image quality.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
45
==PAGE:56==
3.6
Industrial testing
The sequence of tests conducted so far has narrowed down the list of viable alternatives.
Further testing on actual footage collected from the focus regulating process in the
industrial setting is required to properly assess performance level for each algorithm.
The industrial data set consists of 5 videos taken on 3 different cameras. Throughout
each video the focal length of the camera is manually adjusted to simulate the focus
regulating process. From each video the sequence of frames is extracted to individually
score them as they can be processed as images.
3.6.1
Hardware setup
The cameras in the industrial setting are used to monitor the monocrystal growth
process inside the chamber of a FZ machine. This is made possible thanks to a small
window in the machine.
The camera is mounted on an aluminium support frame that secures its location
throughout the process of focus regulation.
Since the low stiffness of the supports used in the industrial setting causes the camera
to move when manually adjusting the camera focal length, it could be beneficial to
implement the algorithm for the adaptive ROI selection introduced previously (see 3.5.1)
instead of working with a smaller fixed user­defined region of interest.
Having a small ROI makes the quality score more sensitive to local defects that can be
associated with non­uniform lighting conditions and defects in the glass window such as
dirt or scratches. These aspects affect the score without being related to the blur content
of the image captured. In order to reduce their impact on the quality score, working with
a big enough ROI would be necessary.
Figure 3.14: Workflow of the algorithm to achieve adaptive ROI selection.
Despite the effectiveness of the algorithm, it significantly increased computational time
while the benefits introduced in assessing the score were minimal, as normally a fixed
ROI is already big enough to properly score image quality.
For these reasons it was decided not to invest any resources in further developing and
optimizing an algorithm to achieve adaptive ROI selection.
Industrial checkerboard
Once the camera focal length has been adjusted, it is not changed throughout the entire
crystal growth process, during which the size of the monocrystal silicon changes
significantly as its diameter grows from 2 mm (equal to the diameter of the monocrystal
seed) to up to 200 mm (maximum diameter of silicon ingots produced through the FZ
process).
To ensure good image quality, the checkerboard used to regulate the camera focus has
a peculiar shape, different from that of the checkerboard used in the preliminary testing.
As shown in the picture above, the checkerboard is made up of two planes with an offset
46
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:57==
Figure 3.15: Schematic representation of the checkerboard used in the industrial setting.
of 100 mm, which corresponds to the distance between the closest and farthest points
from the camera of the cylindrical ingot. Including both planes in the ROI used to assess
the quality score, ensures that the focus of the camera is adjusted to guarantee good
overall quality during the whole process, allowing a proper evaluation of the geometric
dimension required to regulate process parameters.
3.6.2
Industrial data set
Before simulating the actual working conditions, it is useful to process pre­existing videos
captured through the camera. This allows testing of the algorithms without worrying of
computational time, as each frame from the video is processed individually as an image.
The industrial database consists of videos taken either on the same machine (and
therefore from the same camera) but during different runs, or on different machines and
cameras.
What appears clear is that the lighting conditions change significantly across multiple
machines, affecting the quality score.
(a) Frame extracted from industrial videos.
(b) Frame from a different machine.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
47
==PAGE:58==
It is important to notice that lighting conditions during the growth process are mainly
determined by the incandescent molten silicon and are much different from the ones we
have when regulating focus settings. Therefore, we want the quality score to be affected
as little as possible by lighting conditions since we are only interested in assessing
image blur.
Figure 3.17: Lighting condition and surface roughness on perceived image quality.
Different lighting condition reduce comparability of the score itself across different
machines, but maximizing the quality score on each machine leads to work with similar
image quality during the growth process (since during that process lighting conditions
tend to be more consistent across different machines). It is important to notice that, due
to the surface roughness of the printed checkerboard, lighting conditions can affect the
perceived image quality while not having any impact on the blur content.
If the light is not diffused enough, the roughness of the surface on which the
checkerboard is printed can cause bright reflections that negatively affect the image
quality. This specific issue has not been addressed before as it was not present in any
other image considered so far.
3.6.3
Live testing
This is the last test conducted and is meant to compare the currently implemented
method with the only algorithm of the proposed ones that has not been ruled out during
the previous testing phases. The live testing is also carried out in the industrial setting
and its purpose is to perform the focus regulation procedure and see how the new
algorithm performs on a live stream rather than on a pre­recorded video.
The previous tests conducted on industrial videos have highlighted limitations of the
LPC and GPC methods concerning the high computational cost and, consequently, the
low number of frames­per­second that can be scored.
While this was not an issue when working with pre­recorded videos, it becomes a major
hindrance for real­time scoring, where frames are processed as they are captured by the
camera.
Scoring a number of frames­per­second that is much lower than the fps collected by the
camera leads to a significant delay between the image shown on the display (that is a
continuous stream of the frames collected by the camera at a rate of 30 fps) and the
frame that is actually being scored, compromising the possibility to properly adjust the
camera focus. For this reason, taking into account the computational cost of a method
becomes inevitable.
Considering that the script developed so far would be used by the operator in charge of
regulating camera focus, it was decided to create a more user­friendly interface, that
allowed easily running the script and visualizing the quality scores in real time. Showing
both the live feed of the camera and the real time quality score is fundamental as it
allows the user to properly tune the focal length since the manual regulation of the
objective can be associated with the image seen on the screen and the quality score
output.
48
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:59==
Designing user interface
The graphical user interface (GUI) developed in MATLAB can be used to both define
input parameters and display the outputs of different calculations. In this case, the GUI
was developed specifically to make collecting live data and comparing two methods
easier, but it could be customized based on the specific needs of any application.
Figure 3.18: GUI designed for live industrial setting.
As shown in the picture above, the GUI allows the user to:
• see live frames from the camera as a continuous stream
• manually define the ROI
• start and stop video recording of scored frames and save associated scores
• input the filename for the video to be saved
• display live scores of both methods being compared to allow focus regulation
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:61==
4
Results and Discussion
As stated previously (see chapter 3), various tests have been conducted to assess the
accuracy and effectiveness of each method. Since, during the testing process, methods
were gradually being ruled out, it is easier to present the results organized by method
and not by test.
4.1
Perceptive blur method (RBM)
This method, as already mentioned in 2.4.2, is heavily affected by the length of the
vertical and horizontal filter used to compute the filtered images Bv and Bh. Therefore,
each test has been conducted by implementing different filter sizes: 5, 9, 17 and 35. The
following paragraphs present the results obtained using the RBM on the set of images
described previously (see 3.1).
• Square pristine images
Figure 4.1: RBM scores for different square sizes, locations and filter lengths (see 3.1a).
We can see that the score, for a given filter length, is not affected by either the size
or the location of the square except for the score obtained with the largest filter on
the smaller square. It is important to note that in this case, the length of the filter is
bigger than the square edge so the method is not able to correctly evaluate the
image quality.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
51
==PAGE:62==
• Circle pristine images
Figure 4.2: RBM scores for different circle sizes, locations and filter lengths (see 3.1b).
We see that working with circles does not change the fact that the score is not
affected by either size or location. We also notice that the scores are the same as
those obtained with the squares, except for the one obtained with the biggest filter
and both small and medium circles.
• Square and circle simulated sets
Considering the centred and medium­sized square, we can simulate a set of blurry
images through Gaussian filtering. The Gaussian mask used is a 3x3 and the
standard deviation is increased until σ = 5.
Figure 4.3: RBM scores for simulated sets from pristine square.
Figure 4.4: RBM scores for simulated sets from pristine circle.
We can see that the method is able to correctly score the simulated blur.
52
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:63==
Grayscale simulated set
Starting from a sharp grayscale image, a simulated set is generated by convolving the
image with Gaussian masks of different sizes (3x3, 5x5, 7x7) and with increasingly higher
standard deviation.
Figure 4.5: Simulated set of blurry grayscale images.
We can see that by increasing the standard deviation the score gets closer to 1 (for this
method, a RBMscore = 1 is associated with the lowest quality). The same trend is
observed when increasing the size of the Gaussian mask. These trends correlate well
with the human perception of image quality.
Considering a 5x5 Gaussian mask we can see how the score changes as the standard
deviation ranges from 0 to 5.
Figure 4.6: RBMscore for different σ values of 5x5 Gaussian mask.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
53
==PAGE:64==
Out­of­focus grayscale image
We can now use the implemented algorithm to score an actual out­of­focus picture
whose sharp version we have considered so far (see pictures 3.9a and 3.9b). Based on
how the score is defined, we would expect to obtain a score of the sharp image that is
lower than that of the out­of­focus one.
(a) Score for the on­focus image.
(b) Score for the out­of­focus image.
Unfortunately, the score that we get for the out­of­focus image is slightly lower than the
score for the sharp image, suggesting it would have higher quality, which is clearly not
the case.
If we simulate a set of images using a 5x5 Gaussian filter on the already out­of­focus
image, we observe the same behaviour seen for the sharp image.
Figure 4.8: RBMscore for different σ values of 5x5 Gaussian mask for out­of­focus image.
This would lead to the conclusion that the method is only able to properly assess the
simulated blur introduced by filtering through Gaussian masks. It is important to notice
that perhaps the excessive focal blur may have caused such poor performance of the
algorithm and that it is appropriate to carry out further testing on actual focal blur before
making any over­generalization on the effectiveness of this method.
54
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:65==
Checkerboard test
We can see that this method struggles to score very sharp images as the highest scores
are registered for images n°2 and 7, suggesting they have the lowest quality. The scores
for images n°1,8, and 9 are similar to the scores for images n°3 and 6 that are clearly of
lower quality. This confirms what had already been highlighted in the preliminary testing
with the out­of­focus grayscale image: this method performs well on simulated set but is
not able to score focal blur.
Figure 4.9: Score trend on given set of images.
The reason why this method is not able to detect and properly score actual focal blur is
probably related to the fact that this algorithm is heavily directional, as it uses
one­dimensional horizontal and vertical filters. While this is enough to describe
simulated Gaussian blur, it clearly is not when dealing with actual focal blur since it has
some nuances (as pointed out in 2.3) to it that this algorithm is not able to evaluate.
Based on the poor level of performance achieved by this method when scoring actual
focal blur, it was decided to not further implement this method, so no industrial tests
were conducted.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
55
==PAGE:66==
4.2
Quadratic index of fuzziness (QIF)
This method, presented in 2.4.3, is the second and last implemented of the algorithms
developed in the spatial domain.
Pristine images
In the following paragraph are presented the results obtained using the QIF on the set of
images described previously (see 3.1).
• Pristine square
Figure 4.10: QIF scores for different square sizes and locations (see 3.1a).
We can see that the score is affected by the size of the square but does not
change with its location.
• Circle pristine images
Figure 4.11: QIF scores for different circle sizes and locations (see 3.1b).
We can see that the score is affected by the size of the circle but does not change
with its location and that the scores of squares and circles are slightly different
from each other suggesting that the score this method outputs might be affected
both by shape and size of the subject.
The gradient is computed using a specific kind of two­dimensional filters known as
Sobel masks (visualized in the frequency domain in figures 2.16 and 2.17). As it
can be seen from their expression in the spatial domain, not all of the 8
neighbouring pixels are multiplied by the same factor (as it would happen with an
average filter) therefore the geometry of the edge leads to having different gradient
values and quality scores. The fact that the gradient map is pooled to a scalar
56
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:67==
value by computing a sum which is then normalized based on the image size is the
reason why the size of the subject matters. Having a longer perimeter increases
the sum of the gradient map and the final score as well.
• Square and circle simulated set
Despite the fact that the scores for the centred and medium­sized square and
circle are different from one another, simulating blur using a Gaussian mask
highlights similar trend. The masks used have sizes of 3x3, 5x5 and 7x7, while for
each size, the standard deviation is increased from σ = 0 to σ = 5.
Figure 4.12: QIFscore for simulated sets from pristine square.
Figure 4.13: QIFscore for simulated sets from pristine circle.
We can see that, in both cases, the score for small values of σ does not change
with the mask’s size. Coherently with human perception of blur, as the standard
deviation increases, the score decreases and for a given σ the set simulated with
the largest mask has the lowest score.
We also notice that for values of standard deviation close to zero the score does
not change. This also correlates well with human perception of blur as simulated
blur with σ →0 is not actually noticeable.
Another thing that we notice looking at the graph 4.12 and 4.13 is the fact that the
curves for each size appear as if they have an horizontal asymptote, so variations
in the score get significantly lower as σ approaches higher values.
Overall, this method appears to be able to detect simulated blur only within a
limited range of standard deviation values.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
57
==PAGE:68==
Grayscale simulated set
Starting from a sharp grayscale image, a simulated set is generated by convolving the
image with Gaussian masks of different sizes (3x3, 5x5 and 7x7) and with increasingly
higher standard deviation. We can see that by increasing the standard deviation the
Figure 4.14: Simulated set of blurry grayscale images.
score gets closer to 0 (for this method, a QIFscore = 1 is associated with the highest
quality and QIFscore = 0 to the lowest).
The same trend is observed when increasing the size of the Gaussian mask. These
trends correlate well with the human perception of image quality.
The main issue with this method appears obvious, as the score does not change
significantly introducing blurriness and even for the highest quality image of the set the
score is pretty close to 0 even if we are dealing with an image perceived as sharp by the
human eye.
Figure 4.15: QIFscore for different σ values of 3x3, 5x5 and 7x7 Gaussian masks.
We can see that the scores of the simulated sets present the same issue mentioned for
the simulated sets of square and circle pristine images.
58
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:69==
Out­of­focus grayscale image
We can now use the implemented algorithm to score an actual out­of­focus picture
whose sharp version we have considered so far (see pictures 3.9a and 3.9b). Based on
how the score is defined, we would expect to obtain a score of the sharp image that is
higher than that of the out­of­focus one.
Figure 4.16: QIFscore for simulated sets of out­of­focus and sharp images with 5x5 Gaus­
sian mask.
We see that both the simulated sets of the sharp and the out­of­focus image have the
same behaviour. The score of the out­of­focus image is lower than that of the sharp one,
but both are close to 0.
Despite the fact that this method is able to detect focal blur the score does not seem to
be as sensible to it as it is needed to make this method a viable option.
This algorithm will be further tested regardless, to either confirm or deny its
inadequateness for our application.
Checkerboard test
This method is coherent with the human perception as image n°5 has the lowest score
and images n°1,8, and 9 the highest. We can also see that the sharp images have
normalized scores that are very similar to one another and close to 1.
Figure 4.17: Score trend on given set of images.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
59
==PAGE:70==
4.2.1
Industrial data set
Since the results obtained with this method on the tests conducted were satisfactory
enough, it was decided to test this method by scoring the set of videos available.
Each frame of the video was scored evaluating only the portion selected by the fixed
ROI. Analysing the 5 different videos available the scored proved to be consistent with
the subjectively perceived image quality, while also being able to process the video at a
rate of about 37 fps.
Interestingly enough, when taking into account the sharpest frame from each of the video
the numerical values seem to be consistent with the perceived quality (coherently with
what we would expect when working with an objective measure of image sharpness). By
conducting some tests on pristine images with different patterns and sizes (see figures
4.28 and 4.29) it was shown that the QIF score is not affected by neither, consistently
with what we would expect from an algorithm designed to assess image sharpness.
Sensitivity to lighting conditions
As previously mentioned, a method based on gradient is prone to be sensitive to lighting
conditions as they determine contrast within the image, therefore affecting gradient in
the intensity of the grayscale.
To assess how the score was affected by lighting conditions, different portions of the
checkerboard were selected from the sharpest frame of each video.
Figure 4.18: Images extracted from sharpest frames of different videos.
Figure 4.19: Scores for each of the images with different lighting conditions.
60
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:71==
Images 1,3,5,7 and 9 are from the top left portion of the checkerboard, while 2,4,6,8 and
10 are from the top right corner. For each of the frames considered, both images (left
and right) belong to the top part of the checkerboard, meaning that they have exactly the
same blur content since they are equally far from the camera. Ideally a method that is
meant to assess image sharpness would score the same value for the left and right
images taken from each of the frames.
As we can see from figure 4.19 the QIF is sensitive to lighting conditions especially
when scoring images 5 and 6 that show the most differences in contrast. The low
contrast between white and black squares of the checkerboard, associated with non
uniform lighting conditions, affects the gradient reducing the quality score (even if the
fifth image is just as sharp as the sixth).
In the same graph were also represented the scores obtained using the currently
implemented method where we can see that there are still variation in the score of the
left and right sides of the checkerboard, but the method seems to be less affected by
lighting conditions (coherently from what we would expect from a method developed in
the frequency domain and not based on gradient).
Finally the scores output by the modified version of the QIF are also shown. As we can
see this method is the one that better correlates with blur content as left and right
portions of the checkerboard for each of the frames are scored similarly.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
61
==PAGE:72==
4.3
Global phase coherence (GPC)
This method, presented in 2.5.1, is the first implemented of the ones developed in the
frequency domain.
Pristine images
In the following paragraph are presented the results obtained using the RBM on the set
of images described previously (see 3.1).
• Pristine square
Figure 4.20: GPCscore for different square sizes and locations (see 3.1a).
We can see that the score is affected by the size of the square but does not
change with its location.
• Pristine circle
Figure 4.21: GPCscore for different circle sizes and locations (see 3.1b.
We can see that the score is affected by the size of the circle but does not change
with its location.
The score of squares and circles are very different from each other suggesting that
the score this method outputs is affected by edges directionality.
We also notice that the score is not defined within a limited range of values (as the
methods previously analysed). In this case the closer the score is to 0 the lower
the quality.
62
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:73==
• Square and circle simulated set
The scores for the centred and medium­sized square and circle are very different
from one another but simulating blur using a Gaussian mask highlights similar
trends. The masks used have sizes of 3x3, 5x5 and 7x7. For each size, the
standard deviation ranges from σ = 0 to σ = 5.
Figure 4.22: GPCscore for simulated sets from pristine square.
Figure 4.23: GPCscore for simulated sets from pristine circle.
The score spans a high range of values, to make the graph easier to read on the
Y­axis is represented the logarithm of the GPCscore. We can see that in both cases
the score for small values of σ does not change with the mask’s size. Coherently
with human perception of blur, as the standard deviation increases the score
decreases and for a given σ the set simulated with the biggest mask has the
lowest score.
We also notice that for values of standard deviation close to zero the score does
not change. This also correlates well with human perception of blur, as simulated
blur with σ →0 is not actually noticeable.
This method appears to be able to detect simulated blur as long as the standard
deviation has high enough values.
Grayscale simulated set
Starting from a sharp grayscale image, a simulated set is generated by using Gaussian
masks of different sizes (3x3, 5x5 and 7x7) with increasingly higher standard deviation to
convolve the image.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure 4.24: Simulated set of blurry grayscale images.
We can see that by increasing the standard deviation the score gets closer to 0. For this
method, a GPCscore = 0 is associated with the lowest quality.
The same trend is observed when increasing the size of the Gaussian mask. These
trends correlate well with the human perception of image quality.
The main issue with this method appears obvious, as the score is not defined within a
closed range of values. The score appears to be changing significantly as blurriness is
introduced but not having an upper limit to relate the score to makes it difficult to assess
whether an image can be further focused.
Figure 4.25: GPCscore for different σ values of 3x3, 5x5 and 7x7 Gaussian masks.
We can see that the scores of the simulated sets exhibit the same behaviour highlighted
with the simulated sets of square and circle pristine images.
64
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:75==
Out­of­focus grayscale image
We can now use the implemented algorithm to score an actual out­of­focus picture
whose sharp version has been considered in the tests conducted so far(see pictures
3.9a and 3.9b). Based on how the score is defined, we would expect to obtain a score of
the sharp image that is higher than that of the out­of­focus one.
Figure 4.26: GPCscore for simulated sets of out­of­focus and sharp images with 5x5 Gaus­
sian mask.
We see that the simulated sets of the sharp and the out­of­focus images have very
distinct behaviour. The score of the out­of­focus image is lower than that of the sharp
one.
This method seems to be able to detect focal blur and will be further tested to see how
well it fits our application.
Checkerboard test
Figure 4.27: Score trend on given set of images.
The huge difference in score between sharp images and the out­of focus ones is clear.
All the images that are even only slightly out­of­focus as are n°2 and 7 have a
normalized score below 0.1 while the lowest score for the sharp images is well above
0.8. This clear difference makes this method a good option for our application, as it is
very sensitive to blur content.
We also notice that the method assigns similar scores to all the out­of­focus images,
even if they clearly have different blur levels. This is not really a limitation, since we are
interested in working with sharp images. Being able to detect when an image is
out­of­focus is all that matters, and quantifying how out­of­focus it is would not be of any
use.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
65
==PAGE:76==
4.3.1
Industrial data set
Since the results obtained with this method on the previous tests carried out were
satisfactory enough, it was decided to test this method scoring the set of videos
available.
Each frame of the video was scored by evaluating only the portion selected by the fixed
ROI. Analysing the 5 different videos available the scored proved to be consistent with
the subjectively perceived image quality. Unfortunately, due to the high computational
cost of the algorithm, this method was able to process the video at a rate of only about 3
fps (10 times lower than the rate achieved by the QIF method).
Besides, when taking into account the sharpest frame from each of the available videos,
the score output showed high variation that did not correlate well with the subjectively
assessed quality across the different videos.
Further testing on pristine images proved that the output score of this method is highly
affected by ROI size and pattern of the image, which are features of the acquired image
that cannot be controlled. Having a score that is not mainly determined by blur content
makes this algorithm less suitable for our application.
Figure 4.28: Score sensitivity to pattern.
Figure 4.29: Score sensitivity to ROI size.
For these reasons it was chosen not to implement live this method.
66
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:77==
4.4
Local phase coherence (LPC)
This last method is developed in the frequency domain and it requires arbitrarily defining
a few parameters. In the following tests the default values for all the parameters are
used since they have been proven to work in most useful applications (see 2.5.2).
Pristine images
• Pristine square
Figure 4.30: LPCscore for different square sizes and locations (see 3.1a).
We can see that the score is slightly affected by the size of the square but does not
change with its location within the image.
• Pristine circle
Figure 4.31: LPCscore for different circle sizes and locations (see 3.1b).
We see that the scores of the circles are only slightly different from those of the
squares whose edge length is equal to the diameter. It is reasonable to attribute
this discrepancy to the fact that a square with edges parallel to the border of the
image can be transformed in the frequency domain only using elements of the
Fourier transform basis where either u = 0 or v = 0 (see 2.6). This does not occur
with the circle which necessarily requires elements of the basis that are generically
oriented. Having this many differences in the representation in the frequency
domain surely affects phase coherence and therefore, the score of any method
based on phase coherence (either global or local).
Similar observation can be made when considering the impact of the size of the
subject depicted in the image.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
67
==PAGE:78==
• Square and circle simulated set
The scores of the centred and medium­sized square and circle are very close to
one another, and simulating blur using a Gaussian mask highlights similar trends.
The masks used have sizes of 3x3, 5x5 and 7x7. For each size, the standard
deviation ranges from σ = 0 to σ = 5.
Figure 4.32: LPCscore for simulated sets from pristine square.
Figure 4.33: LPCscore for simulated sets from pristine circle.
We notice that for values of standard deviation close to zero the score varies less
than it does for higher values of σ, correlating well with human perception of blur,
as simulated blur with σ →0 is not particularly noticeable.
This method appears to be able to detect simulated blur for any value of the
standard deviation.
68
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:79==
Grayscale simulated set
Starting from a sharp grayscale image, a simulated set is generated by using Gaussian
masks of different sizes (3x3, 5x5 and 7x7) with increasingly higher standard deviation to
convolve the image.
Figure 4.34: Simulated set of blurry grayscale images.
We can see that by increasing the standard deviation the score gets closer to 0. For this
method, a LPCscore = 0 is associated with the lowest quality.
The same trend is observed when increasing the size of the Gaussian mask. These
trends correlate well with the human perception of image quality.
Figure 4.35: LPCscore for different σ values of 3x3, 5x5 and 7x7 Gaussian masks.
We can see that the scores of the simulated sets present the same behaviour
highlighted with the simulated sets of square and circle pristine images.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
69
==PAGE:80==
Out­of­focus grayscale image
We can now use the implemented algorithm to score an actual out­of­focus picture
whose sharp version has been considered in the tests conducted so far(see pictures
3.9a and 3.9b). Based on how the score is defined, we would expect to obtain a score of
the sharp image that is higher than that of the out­of­focus one.
Figure 4.36: LPCscore for simulated sets of out­of­focus and sharp images with 5x5 Gaus­
sian mask.
We see that the simulated sets of the sharp and the out­of­focus images have very
distinct behaviour. The score of the out­of­focus image is lower than that of the sharp
one, but both are close to 1, suggesting a low sensitivity to blur content.
This method seems to be able to detect focal blur and will be further tested to see how
well it fits our application.
Checkerboard test
Figure 4.37: Score trend on given set of images.
Coherently with what we expected we see that images n°1,8, and 9 have the highest
scores, while image n°5 has the lowest similar to image n°4.
70
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:81==
Overall, this method seems to be able to score the image consistently with the human
perception of blur. We also notice that even for image n°2, which appears to be clearly
out­of­focus, the score is still high (above 0.9).
This method seems to be correlating well with blur content of the image but the score
does not show high variation in the value as the quality changes, suggesting that it is not
very sensitive to blur content and thus making it not a good fit for our application, where
being able to clearly discern image quality through the score value is fundamental.
This method was developed to output a score that is determined by the sharpest areas
of an image, since this would lead to better correlation with the human perception. This
becomes an issue when working with a checkerboard like the one used in the industrial
setting (see 3.15). Having two different planes means that the camera can not be
focused on both of them at the same time, maximizing the quality score could mean
optimizing the focal length to that the camera is focused on either one of the planes
since the overall score is based on the sharpest region.
The reason why the checkerboard has that shape is to ensure that the focus plane is
somewhere in between the two planes, so that we have a consistently good quality
image as the monocrystalline silicon diameter increases during the cone­phase.
Focusing the camera on the upper plane would mean having optimum image quality
during the early stages, when working with small diameters, but poor quality during the
cylindrical phase, when the diameter reaches its maximum value. Something similar, but
reversed, would happen if we focused only on the bottom part of the checkerboard.
Moreover live implementation of this method would not be possible as its high
computational cost would cause significant delay between the frame scored and the one
acquired live by the camera, making it very hard for the operator to regulate the camera
focus setting as the score displayed and the image seen on the screen would not match.
For these reasons it was decided not to test this method any further.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
71
==PAGE:82==
4.5
Image quality on multiple cameras
Since the decision­making process that controls the parameters throughout the growth
of the silicon ingots is the same on each machine, guaranteeing similar image quality
between different machines and cameras is necessary to ensure that the final product is
consistently high­quality across the whole production plant.
Working with a score that is able to detect and properly assess blur content allows for
the optimization of the camera focal setting on each machine regardless of the
differences that might be present concerning lighting condition. Therefore, even though
the score value itself can vary across different cameras, the quality of the image is
consistent when the camera’s focus is properly regulated by maximizing the score.
When taking into account the five sharpest frames from the videos available in the
industrial data set, the GPC score showed low correlation with perceived image quality
whereas the QIF score behaved more consistently.
It is interesting to understand why the numeric value of the score is not the same across
different machines analysing the industrial data available, to see whether the differences
in score are associated with actual different blur content across the machines, or the
inconsistencies are determined by the nature of the algorithm itself.
Figure 4.38: Sharpest frame from each of the videos in the industrial data set.
We can see how different the ROIs are in the various videos: in the first three videos the
bottom part of the checkerboard was hidden by some machine parts that were in
between the camera and the checkerboard and therefore, it was not included in the
region of interest score to assess image quality.
The fact that the GPC is highly affected by ROI size explains why scores across different
videos are not comparable when considering this algorithm. The QIF is not significantly
affected by ROI size but, different lighting conditions contribute to the final score.
72
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:83==
4.6
Live testing
Based on the results of the previously conducted tests, it appeared that the best
possible alternative to the method currently implemented is the QIF algorithm.
Using the user interface previously described (see 3.6.3) the focal length was adjusted
trying to maximize the QIF score.
The main issue highlighted is that the two methods identify as the sharpest two different
frames.
Figure 4.39: Trend of the QIF and MAG algorithm during live scoring.
Although when comparing side by side the two frames there are not visible differences in
the blur content.
Figure 4.40: Sharpest frames according to QIF and MAG respectively.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
73
==PAGE:84==
To better visualize how these two images are different, we can show the image resulting
from their subtraction.
Figure 4.41: Subtraction of the two frames with colormap.
The colormap used highlights that the main difference between the two frames is
associated with a translation of the checkerboard (produced by camera movements as
the focal length was being manually adjusted). We can come to this conclusion by
observing the high directionality of the differences as they are concentrated on the top
and right edges of each square.
When we consider two frames with actual differences in blur content, we can see that
the result of their subtraction is less directional, as blur affects all directions.
Figure 4.42: Subtraction of two frames with different focal blur content.
Since there is no evident difference in the image quality of both frames shown in 4.40
why are the scores different?
74
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:85==
If we take into account the last frames of the video, we can see that both the scores
show variations across different frames, despite the fact that no changes are being
made concerning the focal length. Since the camera is not being touched, we would
expect the score to be a flat line. This does not occur due to noise in the signal.
Figure 4.43: Effect of signal noise on the scores.
We can see that the MAG score is more susceptible to noise, showing variation of up to
1.4% of its mean value. The QIF method is much less susceptible to noise, with the
maximum variation in its value being about 0.3% of its mean value. Using the
exponential form of the QIF increases the sensitivity to noise of this method (variations
are around 3.2% of the mean value of the score).
When comparing the scores for both methods on each of the sharpest frames, we can
see that the discrepancy in their values is small enough to be associated with noise
rather than a difference in the focal length of the camera.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
75
==PAGE:86==
4.7
Summary
The main focus of this section was to collect all the results from the different tests
conducted to highlight how each method behaves when it is fed as input images very
different in nature and subject represented.
Two methods out of the four that were implemented were discarded after the first phase
of preliminary testing:
• the RBM was ruled out because of its poor correlation with image quality
associated with actual focal blur content
• the LPC was excluded from further analysis since it showed low sensitivity to focal
blur (while still being able to properly assess it) and required long computational
time, undermining the possibility of live implementation
Of the two methods that were actually tested on the industrial data set only the QIF
method showed a satisfactory enough sensitivity to blur content without also being
overly susceptible to signal noise.
The GPC proved to be able to assess blur content but showed high sensitivity to ROI
size and pattern, making it non­comparable across different cameras. It is also important
to note that, despite the fact that this method would have allowed real­time applications,
the low frame rate would have caused the same issues seen with LPC in live
implementation, although to a smaller extent.
For these reasons the only method that was then tested and compared to the algorithm
currently employed was the quadratic index of fuzziness, as throughout all testing was
the one that proved to be the best fit for this specific application.
76
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:87==
5
Conclusion
The purpose of this work was to find an algorithm that would ensure consistent image
quality across different cameras monitoring the crystal growth process carried out using
FZ technology.
The method currently employed (MAG) is already able to score blur content in the
frames acquired live by the camera used, but its relatively low sensitivity to blur content
and high sensitivity to signal noise hinder the consistency of image quality achieved.
Moreover, the method’s output is heavily affected by a threshold that is arbitrarily defined
and shows variation with the ROI size.
Throughout the years many different IQA algorithms have been developed, and various
examples can be found in literature. A quick overview was given on few of the existing
methods, aimed at introducing the reader to the world of image quality assessment by
describing not only methods that seemed to be more promising for our specific
application, but also algorithms that are considered fundamental milestones in the
evolution of IQA methods.
In order to find the best alternative to the currently implemented method in the industrial
setting many tests have been conducted, gradually ruling out algorithms as their
weaknesses were highlighted.
First, the various methods implemented were tested on some digitally created pristine
images (3.1a and 3.1b) and their simulated set through Gaussian filtering. Then, other
preliminary tests were conducted, analysing a generic grayscale sharp image acquired
through the camera, studying score trend on a simulated set, and eventually comparing
the scores with those of a picture of the same subject where the focal length was
purposefully misadjusted (3.9b).
Only the methods that showed the desired behaviour were then tested on the industrial
data set and finally the live testing was conducted to compare the performances levels
of the currently employed method (MAG 2.6) and the new proposed one (QIF 2.4.3).
When scoring images taken with different lighting conditions the exponential form of the
QIF method combined with the contrast enhancement algorithm (see 2.4.3) showed the
best behaviour (see 4.19), but its high computational cost compromised the chances of
a live implementation.
Throughout the testing process some changes were made to the original QIF method.
The exponential form of the QIF (see 2.4.3) shows larger variation in the value of the
score so it is able to better differentiate sharp images from out­of­focus ones.
On the other hand, since the variation of the QIF score are amplified thanks to the
exponential law in 2.30, this method is more sensitive to noise and therefore less fit for a
finer tuning of the focal length. Normalizing each score on their mean value across
different frames of the video analyzed we can see how the original QIF is the most
robust to noise showing variation of about 0.3% that are significantly smaller than the
one showed by the MAG (1.4%) and the exponential version of the same method (3.2%).
The proposed method (QIF) is able to score an image based on focal blur content while
being only slightly more sensitive to blur is significantly less susceptible to noise when
compared to the currently implemented method. Its characteristics allow a finer tuning of
the focal length, guaranteeing a more consistent image quality across different cameras.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
77
==PAGE:88==
Figure 5.1: QIF,MAG and QIFexp scores normalized on their maximum value.
Figure 5.2: QIF,MAG and QIFexp scores normalized on their mean value.
Since the regulation is carried out manually, it is important that the variation in the score
is mainly associated with blur and not random noise in the signal, so that the operator is
able to properly adjust the focal length.
5.1
Future work
Despite having found a valid alternative to the MAG algorithm, currently implemented,
there is still room for further improvements concerning the optimization of codes to
reduce computational time. This would allow for live implementation adaptive ROI
selection and the QIF version combined with the contrast enhancement algorithm.
It could also be possible to study the noise that affects the signal in order to be able to
filter it after characterizing it. Since there are many different types of noise that affect
image capturing (quantization noise, analogue to digital converter error, statistical
quantum fluctuation, electronic noise...) this approach is possible, but time consuming
and its effectiveness for live implementation doubtable.
Implementation of more recent methods based on machine learning could also be
considered to deal with the high variability in image content across different machines.
Unfortunately, trying to reduce these differences would require excessive time and
resources into modifying the hardware to standardize the subject captured through each
of the multiple cameras.
78
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:89==
Further experiments could also be conducted to address the same issue through
camera calibration. Rather than relying the focusing process on algorithms to assess
image blur, it is possible to correlate the angular position of the objective mounted on the
camera body with the distance between the camera and the focused plane. Knowing the
correlation between lens positioning and focus depth would enable proper regulation
based on the distance between the camera and the object we want to focus on,
regardless of the nature of such subject that does not necessarily have to be a
checkerboard. Of course, this approach would solve some issues peculiar to working
with algorithms, while inevitably introducing other complications that would need to be
addressed.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
79
==PAGE:90==
80
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:91==
List of Figures
1.1
Silicon ingots and wafers [3].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Schematic representation of the CZ crystal growth method [6].
. . . . . . .
2
1.3
Schematic representation of the FZ crystal growth method [7].
. . . . . . .
3
1.4
Different phases of the Float­Zone process [8]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Schematic representation of the characterizing geometric dimensions [8]. .
5
1.6
Schematic representation of the chamber growth and the vision system [9].
6
2.1
Identification of a generic pixel of an NxM image.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
coloured image and the intensities of Red, Green and Blue respectively. . .
8
2.3
Gray­scale image of the picture showed in 2.2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Magnitude of transformed image. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Phase angle of transformed image. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Visualization of some elements of the Fourier transform basis
. . . . . . . 10
2.7
Image in the spatial domain corresponding to magnitude and phase angle in 2.4 and 2.5. .
11
2.8
Different possible neighbours for any i, j­pixel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.9
Different possible situation when computing the convolution with a 3x3 mask. 12
2.10 Zero­padding used to extend original image and compute convolution with a 3x3 mask. . . 12
2.11 How the original image is extended to compute convolution with a 3x3 mask through wrapping. 12
2.12 The original image is expanded to compute convolution with a 3x3 mask through mirroring.
13
2.13 Visualization of the horizontal filter in the frequency domain. . . . . . . . . . 14
2.14 Visualization of the vertical filter in the frequency domain. . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.15 Visualization of the average filter in the frequency domain. . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.17 Visualization of the vertical Sobel mask in the frequency domain. . . . . . . 15
2.16 Visualization of the horizontal Sobel mask in the frequency domain.
. . . . 15
2.18 Visualization of the Gaussian filter in the frequency domain. . . . . . . . . . 16
2.19 Visualization of the disk filter in the frequency domain. . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.20 Original image and distorted versions by noise, focal blur and motion blur. . 17
2.21 Sharp image of a checkerboard and relative histogram of the intensities. . . 19
2.22 Simulated blur with Gaussian filter and relative histogram of the intensities.
19
2.23 Out­of­focus image of checkerboard and relative histogram of the intensities. 19
2.24 Mapped MLV of the figure 3.9a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.25 Sharp image, blurred original and blurred version of the blurred image. . . . 22
2.26 Original, vertically filtered and horizontally filter with length = 17.
. . . . . . 23
2.27 Original, vertically filtered and horizontally filter with length = 35.
. . . . . . 23
2.29 Gradient magnitude for both sharp and blurry black­and­white images. . . . 25
2.30 Original, horizontal filtered and vertical filtered images. . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.31 Gradient magnitude map. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.32 Pixel configurations with maximum gradient. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.33 Comparison between the original score and its exponential form. . . . . . . 28
2.34 Comparison between the original algorithm and the contrast enhanced.
. . 28
2.35 Smooth component and its magnitude and phase.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
2.36 Original image and its magnitude and phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
2.37 Periodic component and its magnitude and phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
2.38 Dequantized image and its magnitude and phase.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
2.39 Visualization of a log­Gabor filter in the frequency domain. . . . . . . . . . . 32
2.40 Visualization of a series of log­Gabor filter in the frequency domain.
. . . . 33
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
81
==PAGE:92==
2.41 Image filtered through a series of log­Gabor filter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.42 Original black­and­white image to be filtered. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.43 Spatial map of local phase coherence of image 2.3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
2.44 Schematic representation of the process of image quality scoring with machine learning tools. 37
3.4
Original image, filtered with σ = 100 and size = 21, filtered with σ = 10 and size = 43.
. . . . . . 41
3.5
Camera model used to acquire gray­scale images [camera].
. . . . . . . . 41
3.6
Objective mounted on the camera. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.7
Camera focused on the arrow.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.8
Adjusting camera focus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.10 Representation of the camera setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.11 Picture of testing checkerboard captured by BlackFly camera. . . . . . . . . 44
3.12 Gray­scale images of checker­board with original size 1600 × 1200. . . . . . 45
3.13 Cropped versions of gray­scale images of checker­board. . . . . . . . . . . 45
3.14 Workflow of the algorithm to achieve adaptive ROI selection.
. . . . . . . . 46
3.15 Schematic representation of the checkerboard used in the industrial setting. 47
3.17 Lighting condition and surface roughness on perceived image quality.
. . . 48
3.18 GUI designed for live industrial setting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.1
RBM scores for different square sizes, locations and filter lengths (see 3.1a). 51
4.2
RBM scores for different circle sizes, locations and filter lengths (see 3.1b).
52
4.3
RBM scores for simulated sets from pristine square. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.4
RBM scores for simulated sets from pristine circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.5
Simulated set of blurry grayscale images. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.6
RBMscore for different σ values of 5x5 Gaussian mask. . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.8
RBMscore for different σ values of 5x5 Gaussian mask for out­of­focus image. 54
4.9
Score trend on given set of images.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.10 QIF scores for different square sizes and locations (see 3.1a).
. . . . . . . 56
4.11 QIF scores for different circle sizes and locations (see 3.1b).
. . . . . . . . 56
4.12 QIFscore for simulated sets from pristine square.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.13 QIFscore for simulated sets from pristine circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.14 Simulated set of blurry grayscale images. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4.15 QIFscore for different σ values of 3x3, 5x5 and 7x7 Gaussian masks.
. . . . 58
4.16 QIFscore for simulated sets of out­of­focus and sharp images with 5x5 Gaus­
sian mask.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.17 Score trend on given set of images.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.18 Images extracted from sharpest frames of different videos.
. . . . . . . . . 60
4.19 Scores for each of the images with different lighting conditions. . . . . . . . 60
4.20 GPCscore for different square sizes and locations (see 3.1a).
. . . . . . . . 62
4.21 GPCscore for different circle sizes and locations (see 3.1b. . . . . . . . . . . 62
4.22 GPCscore for simulated sets from pristine square. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.23 GPCscore for simulated sets from pristine circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.24 Simulated set of blurry grayscale images. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
4.25 GPCscore for different σ values of 3x3, 5x5 and 7x7 Gaussian masks. . . . . 64
4.26 GPCscore for simulated sets of out­of­focus and sharp images with 5x5
Gaussian mask.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.27 Score trend on given set of images.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.28 Score sensitivity to pattern. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.29 Score sensitivity to ROI size.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.30 LPCscore for different square sizes and locations (see 3.1a). . . . . . . . . . 67
4.31 LPCscore for different circle sizes and locations (see 3.1b). . . . . . . . . . . 67
82
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:93==
4.32 LPCscore for simulated sets from pristine square. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
4.33 LPCscore for simulated sets from pristine circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
4.34 Simulated set of blurry grayscale images. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
4.35 LPCscore for different σ values of 3x3, 5x5 and 7x7 Gaussian masks. . . . . 69
4.36 LPCscore for simulated sets of out­of­focus and sharp images with 5x5 Gaus­
sian mask.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
4.37 Score trend on given set of images.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
4.38 Sharpest frame from each of the videos in the industrial data set. . . . . . . 72
4.39 Trend of the QIF and MAG algorithm during live scoring. . . . . . . . . . . 73
4.40 Sharpest frames according to QIF and MAG respectively. . . . . . . . . . 73
4.41 Subtraction of the two frames with colormap.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
4.42 Subtraction of two frames with different focal blur content. . . . . . . . . . . 74
4.43 Effect of signal noise on the scores.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
5.1
QIF,MAG and QIFexp scores normalized on their maximum value. . . . . 78
5.2
QIF,MAG and QIFexp scores normalized on their mean value.
. . . . . . 78
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
83
==PAGE:94==
Bibliography
[1]
Jim Turley. Essential Guide to Semiconductors, 1st Edition ­ Introduction to
semiconductors. Pages 1­23, Pearson. 2003. URL:
https://www.pearsonhighered.com/assets/samplechapter/0/1/3/4/0134414446.pdf.
[2]
Tingting Chen. Data­driven oxide problem characterization and optimization in
float­zone silicon crystal growth production. PhD Thesis Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet. 2023.
[3]
Quaser. Semiconductor. Accessed September 23, 2024. URL:
https://www.quaser.com/semiconductor.
[4]
Jochen Friedrich et al. Handbook of Crystal Growth, 2nd Edition ­ Czochralski
Growth of Silicon Crystals. Pages 45­104, Elsevier. 2015.
[5]
Stefano Meroli. Czochralski process vs float zone: two growth techniques for
monocrystalline silicon. URL: https://www.scienceshot.com/post/czochralski-
process-vs-float-zone-two-growth-techniques-for-mono-crystalline-silicon.
[6]
Halbleiter.org. Semiconductor Technology from A to Z. Accessed October 14,
2024. URL: https://www.halbleiter.org/en/waferfabrication/singlecrystal/.
[7]
R. Fornari. Bulk Crystal Growth of Semiconductors: An Overview. 2011.
[8]
Nico Werner. Analysis and automation of the crucible­free floating zone (FZ)
growth of silicon crystals. PhD Thesis Technische Universität Berlin. 2014.
[9]
Tingting Chen et al. Multi­label Oxide Classification in Floatzone Silicon Crystal
Growth Using Transfer Learning and Asymmetric Loss. 2023.
[10]
Bernd Jähne. Digital image processing, 6th Edition. Springer. 2015.
[11]
Richard E. Woods Rafael C. Gonzalez and Steven L. Eddins. Digital Image
Processing using MATLAB. Pages 1­23, Pearson. 2004.
[12]
Davide Scaramuzza. Image filtering. University of Zurich. 2018. URL:
https://rpg.ifi.uzh.ch/docs/teaching/2018/04_filtering.pdf.
[13]
Vincent Mazet. Basics of image processing ­ Transforms and Filtering. University
of Strasbourg. 2020. URL: https://vincmazet.github.io/bip/index.html.
[14]
Stefano Mattoccia. Embedded and reconfigurable systems ­ Convolution filters.
University of Bologna. 2017. URL:
http://vision.deis.unibo.it/~smatt/DIDATTICA/Sistemi_Embedded_M/PDF/07%20-
%20Convolution_filters_HLS.pdf.
[15]
Bernd Girod. Digital Image Processing ­ Linear Image Processing and Filtering 1.
University of Stanford. 2013. URL:
https://web.stanford.edu/class/ee368/Handouts/Lectures/2019_Winter/8-
LinearProcessingFiltering.pdf.
[16]
Zhu Mengqiu et al. “Review: A Survey on Objective Evaluation of Image
Sharpness”. In: Applied Sciences 13 (2023), pp. 26–52.
[17]
Khosro Bahrami and Alex C. Kot. “A fast approach for no­reference image
sharpness assessment”. In: Signal processing letters 21 (2014), pp. 751–755.
[18]
Patricia Ladret et al. “The blur effect: perception and estimation with a new
no­reference perceptual blur metric”. In: Proceedings of SPIE ­ The International
Society for Optical Engineering (2007).
[19]
Simi V.R. et al. “A fuzzy sharpness metric for magnetic resonance images”. In:
Journal of Computational Science 29 (2018), pp. 1–8.
84
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
==PAGE:95==
[20]
Gwendoline Blanchet and Lionel Moisan. “An explicit sharpness index related to
global phase coherence”. In: International conference on acoustics, speech and
signal processing (2012), pp. 1065–1068.
[21]
Gwendoline Blanchet and Lionel Moisan. “Measuring the global phase coherence
of an image”. In: International conference on image processing (2008),
pp. 1176–1179.
[22]
Gwendoline Blanchet and Lionel Moisan. “Periodic plus smooth image
decomposition”. In: Journal of mathematical imaging and vision 39 (2011),
pp. 161–179.
[23]
Zhou Wang and Eero P. Simoncelli. “Local phase coherence and the perception of
blur”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 16 (2004).
[24]
Rania Hassen et al. “Image sharpness assessment based on local phase
coherence”. In: Transactions on image processing 22 (2013).
[25]
Kanjar De and V. Masilamani. “Image sharpness measure for blurred images in
frequency domain”. In: International conference on design and manufactoring 64
(2013), pp. 149–158.
[26]
MathWorks. BRISQUE: Blind/Referenceless Image Spatial Quality Evaluator.
2025. URL: https://se.mathworks.com/help/images/ref/brisque.html.
[27]
MathWorks. NIQE: Naturalness Image Quality Evaluator. 2025. URL:
https://se.mathworks.com/help/images/ref/niqe.html.
[28]
MathWorks. PIQE: Perception based Image Quality Evaluator. 2025. URL:
https://se.mathworks.com/help/images/ref/piqe.html.
Image Quality Assessment on Multiple Cameras for Float­Zone Crystal Growth Production
85
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
