==PAGE:1==
Simulation Extractable NIZK in
the Multistring Model:
Considerations and Improvements
Oskar Hovmøller Dinesen, s184004
Supervisor: Luisa Siniscalchi
Co-supervisor: Tyge Tiessen
February 17th, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
A zero-knowledge proof is an interactive proof system where a prover proves
the veracity of some statement to a verifier without revealing anything but the
veracity of the statement. This thesis studies how to construct non-interactive
zero-knowledge proofs (NIZKs) in a multistring setting. We have managed to
build a simulation extractable NIZK in the multistring setting from Learning
with Errors (LWE). Thereby, we have obtained a NIZK which is secure from
post-quantum hardness assumptions and maintains simulation extractability,
even when parts of the common reference string is corrupted. Our construction
relies on an OR-composition of trapdoor sigma protocols to achieve a witness
indistinguishable proof. Non-interactiveness is achieved using the Fiat-Shamir
transformation instantiated from correlation intractable hash-functions. Uti-
lizing two special relations for our OR-composition, zero-knowledge is achieved
via witness-indistinguishability.
Our construct is not the first simulation extractable NIZK from LWE, but
our approach differs from known constructions. This approach is less reliant on
expensive NP-reductions, which may lead to more efficient implementations.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Contributions of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Technical Overview
6
2.1
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Preliminaries
9
3.1
Public Key Encryption Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Signature Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Secret-sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Sigma protocol definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Correlation Intractable Hash Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.6
Non-interactive Witness Indistinguishable Proofs
. . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.7
NIWI from CI Hash functions in the CRS model . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8
Proofs in the Multistring Setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Simulation Extractable NIZK in the multistring model
20
4.1
Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Proof of Completeness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Proof of Zero-Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Proof of Simulation Extractability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.6
On Post-Quantum Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Conclusion
26
2
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
”We stand on the brink of a revolution,” are the famous opening words in Diffie
and Hellman’s seminal paper New directions in Cryptography of 1976 [DH76]. In the
paper they introduced the first way of establishing a secure channel of communica-
tion without the use of a physical courier to exchange the initial keys. They were
right in their prognosis and, ever since, secure communication has become an integral
part of everyday life. Today, we are on the brink of a new revolution, namely the
quantum computer. Experts anticipate the first working machines to arrive within
the next decade. As promising as these machines are, in terms of offering unprece-
dented computational power, at the same time, or in fact as a result of that, they
pose a substantial threat to the current cryptographic landscape. For instance, the
Diffie Hellman key-exchange relies on the computational hardness of computing the
discrete logarithm. This hardness dissolves when faced with a quantum computer, ne-
cessitating new methods that can withstand the computational power of the quantum
machine. Likewise, the quantum computer poses a threat to the way we authenticate
ourselves online. It is within this realm that this thesis operates. We examine the
state of the art when it comes to interactive cryptographic protocols used for per-
forming joint computation, authentication, digital signatures and much more. One
of the foundational cryptographic primitives when it comes to these types of things
is the sigma protocol.
Sigma protocols are three-round proof systems between two parties, a prover P and
a verifier V. The goal is for P to prove to V that a statement x ∈L. The prover
has access to a secret witness w for which it holds that (x, w) ∈R, where R is a
binary relation. The prover starts by sending an initial message a to the verifier
who responds with a challenge c. From this challenge, the prover computes a final
message z and sends it back to the verifier. The verifier then has to decide whether
the transcript (a, c, z) is a convincing proof that x ∈L. Some sigma protocols have
the zero-knowledge (ZK) property and are then aptly called zero-knowledge proofs.
Informally, this means that a proof reveals nothing but the veracity of the statement
x ∈L, specifically the witness w remains secret to the verifier. The way a protocol
is shown to be zero-knowledge is by creating a so called simulator. A simulator is an
algorithm which can produce a proof transcript without the use of the secret witness.
If no one but the prover can distinguish between the simulated transcript and one
generated with a secret witness, then it follows that zero knowledge (of the witness)
was revealed by the transcript.
The three-round nature of a sigma protocol has a few disadvantages, mainly that the
prover and verifier has to make themselves available to each other while performing
this proof together. It is possible to turn a three-round protocol into a single-round
or rather non-interactive protocol using the widely acknowledged Fiat-Shamir trans-
form. This utilizes a hash-function to act on behalf of the verifier in the challenge
step. A hash-function should be a one-way function. If this is the case, evaluating a
hash-function Hk with the initial message a yields a seemingly random value which
3
==PAGE:5==
should be hard for the prover to anticipate. This randomness can then be used as
a stand-in source of randomness on behalf of the verifier. Usually this randomness
has been modeled using random oracles, but as the name suggests, this model has a
sort of ”magic” to it. Recent work [CGH98, HL18, CCH+19, PS19, BKM20, HLR21]
has shown, however, that for some relations, it is possible to instantiate correlation-
intractable (CI) hash-functions. Informally, this means that for a particular relation
it is possible to sample a hash-function Hk in a way that makes it computationally
hard to find an input a, such that (a, Hk(a)) ∈R, thus ensuring exactly the kind of
hardness we need in a concrete and realizable way. As mentioned this is not always
possible. Indeed it requires that the proof relation satisfies two properties: the rela-
tion should be efficiently searchable and for every x /∈L there should exist a unique
bad challenge for which a valid transcript can be produced. This is exactly the prop-
erties that define a trapdoor sigma-protocol. A ZK-proof made non-interactive (NI) is
called a non-interactive zero-knowledge proof or NIZK for short.
Canetti et al. construct a NIZK from CI hash-functions in [CSW20] which is not only
complete, sound, and zero-knowledge, but also posses certain more refined proper-
ties. Most notably, the proposed protocol is universally composable (UC secure) also
when facing adaptive corruptions. Many cryptographic systems consist of many dif-
ferent protocols composed in many different ways. Composing protocols is not easy
and often have unintended ramifications when it comes to security. A universally
composable protocol is one that, no matter how it is composed with other protocols,
does not compromise its security guarantees. An adaptive corruption on the other
hand captures the idea that one or more of the participants in a protocol may be
corrupted after the onset of the protocol execution. The question of adaptive secu-
rity is concerned with what happens to the security properties if bad actors corrupt
parties during execution, as well as before or after. As such, the work of Canetti et
al. obtain some impressive results attaining adaptive UC security. Their paper is one
of the main inspirations for this thesis.
All cryptography relies heavily on randomness. It has been shown time and time
again that it is no trivial task to generate such randomness or even to model it when
designing cryptographic protocols. One of the classic ways of modeling randomness is
by using the common reference string (CRS). In this model, it is assumed that a sin-
gle trusted party generates a uniformly random bit-string that can be made available
to the participants of cryptographic protocols. It is in this setting that the NIZK of
Canetti et al. is defined. Finding a trusted third party, however, is nontrivial, even
impossible in some cases. One could imagine that parties with conflicting interests
would not trust an opposing party to create a trustworthy CRS for their protocols.
This could be conflicting states or competing companies. From here on, an honestly
generated CRS will refer to a CRS generated in honesty and with no malicious intent.
As a solution to the problem of obtaining an honestly generated CRS, Groth and Os-
trovsky proposed a multistring model in [GO06]. In this model, the CRS is created by
assembling numerous segments of reference strings from different authorities. These
4
==PAGE:6==
authorities need not all be honest or trustworthy since the protocols constructed
in this multistring setting may offer similar security guarantees as those offered by
NIZKs in the CRS model, as long as a majority of the CRS shares are honestly gener-
ated. This is desireable compared to the single CRS model since the reference string
providers now play a minimal role as the provider is just one of many. Another benefit
is that it will be much easier for the parties who want to use the CRS to agree on
a set of authorities to trust. From a malicious actor’s perspective it becomes much
harder to control enough authorities to cheat, thus complicating an otherwise obvious
attack vector.
1.1
Contributions of this thesis
Following the path of Groth and Ostrovsky, this thesis will construct a new protocol in
their multistring model. In short, their method depends on combining two circuits.1
One for the satisfiability of (x, w) ∈R, and the other for showing that a prover con-
trols a certain amount of trapdoors in the multistring CRS. The latter is used to
ensure zero-knowledge. Groth and Ostrovsky prove the satisfiability of the combined
circuit using ZAPs2 [GO06]. The construction of this thesis differs as we perform a
composition of two sigma protocols for the same two languages as Groth and Ostro-
vsky. The composition is a form of OR-composition introduced in [CX23]. This has
two distinct advantages: first off, their construction relies on witness-preserving NP-
reductions3 to achieve a combined circuit for the two languages, which we avoid using
OR-composition; secondly, we manage to instantiate our protocol from Learning with
Errors (LWE). This is a computational problem which is assumed to be hard also
for quantum computers. ZAPs are not known from polynomially hard LWE, but for
sigma-protocols, which is why we can instantiate our protocol from LWE. As such, we
obtain a simpler and possibly more efficient protocol in terms of computation that can
also be instantiated from problems assumed to be secure in the post-quantum setting.
In terms of security, our protocol achieves simulation-extractability in the multistring
model. This property informally tells us that an adversary is not able to form accept-
ing proof transcripts for our protocol even after seeing many simulated proofs. This
corresponds closely to the notion of UC security in the CRS model. Comparing the
results to Canetti et al., we manage to go a long way but fail to attain security when
facing adaptive corruptions.
In [BJMS18], Badrinarayanan, Jain, Manohar and Sahai achieve a similar result in the
sense that they manage to create a simulation-extractable NIZK from LWE. Their pro-
tocol is instantiated from Blum’s sigma-protocol for hamiltonicity. Therefore, in order
to use their construction for other languages, they rely on expensive NP-reductions.
Our protocol, on the contrary, can be instantiated using OR-Composition of trapdoor
1A circuit is a way to refer to the computation necessary to solve a particular problem.
2ZAPs are a form of two-round witness-indistinguishable proof systems.
3An NP-reduction is the reduction of one decision problem in the NP-class of decision problems,
to another decision problem with a known decision algorithm.
5
==PAGE:7==
sigma-protocols. This potentially offers a way of obtaining a simulation-extractable
NIZK from LWE without relying on NP-reductions. In this sense, our construction
is a step towards a computationally more efficient solution.
2
Technical Overview
Our construction follows a similar approach as the construction laid out in [GO06].
We wish to assemble a CRS for our protocol from multiple CRS strings provided by
multiple parties. As previously mentioned, the idea is to enhance the trustworthiness
of the proof system by anchoring the trust with multiple parties rather than one. We
will assume that the CRS in the multistring setting is created by n different parties.
This is all well and good, but in order to really take advantage of the multistring
CRS, we would like to attain our desired security properties even when some parts
of the CRS are not generated honestly. For this we employ a classic tool, namely
secret-sharing. To show that some x ∈L, we could employ some proof system to
show (x, w) ∈R with R being a relation corresponding to the language L. Using
a t-out-of-n secret-sharing, we can instead generate a proof that the prover knows t
shares by reconstructing a valid witness for R from the shares. Note that this suggests
that an extraction of a witness is possible and, as such, we have a way of maintaining
soundness as long as t of the n parties are behaving honestly.
Zero-knowledge (ZK) is quite different in this setting and employing secret-sharing
makes it somewhat hard to construct a simulator for a protocol as outlined above. In
order to circumvent this problem, we use the same strategy as Groth and Ostrovsky
and separate the soundness and zero-knowledge. To simulate a proof, we realize that
the CRS will contain simulated pieces of randomness created from a pseudorandom
function. Thus, we can achieve ZK by relying on trapdoors in the CRS. A proof
system can be used to prove that a prover knows tz pseudorandom function evalua-
tions of our strong one-time verification key using the seeds of our PRF. To realize
how this can be used to obtain zero-knowledge, we see that a prover in the simulated
setting has access to simulated parts of the CRS. This means that a prover knows
the seeds (trapdoors) of the CRS and can thereby construct a proof for the afore-
mentioned proof system in the simulated setting. This is how we create our simulator.
If we combine the two proof-systems for (x, w) ∈R and knowing tz PRF seeds, re-
spectively, a prover can prove (x, w) ∈R when the CRS is honestly generated and
when the CRS is simulated, the prover can simulate a proof using the trapdoors. In
[GO06], the proof-systems used are ZAPs and they combine the two languages by
using witness-preserving NP-reductions. In our approach, we use trapdoor sigma-
protocols instead and OR-compose them with a method from [CX23]. In order to
make this change, we have to ensure two things:
6
==PAGE:8==
Firstly, we need to ensure that the OR-composed protocol is witness-indistinguishable.
We do this in order to make sure that an adversary will not be able to distinguish
whether a witness is produced by proving (x, w) ∈R or by using trapdoors in the
CRS. To ensure that this is not possible in our construction, we return a tuple of
encryptions for each type of proof. The encryptions are made using a CCA2 secure
encryption scheme. In the proof of (x, w) ∈R, the tuple consists of an encryption
of a witness share and a dummy encryption. In the case where knowledge of trap-
doors is proved, the tuple consists of an encryption of a share of a dummy witness
and an encryption of a pseudorandom function evaluation of the verification key.
The CCA2 security ensures that an adversary cannot distinguish between these two
types of tuples. The first is the honest proof case and the other tuple corresponds
to the simulation. This is important because the witness-indistinguishability ensures
that the proof transcripts do not reveal whether the proof is honest or simulated. It
should be mentioned that the security of the PRF ensures that no one can distin-
guish a simulated piece of CRS from any other piece of CRS, be it honest or simulated.
Secondly, we need to ensure that the OR-composition preserves the bad-challenge
property of our trapdoor sigma-protocols. More specifically, if our composed protocol
has a bad-challenge for which it is possible to create an accepting proof for an invalid
statement x /∈L, the challenge should be unique. We want to make it difficult for an
adversary to exploit this bad-challenge as this would let them break the soundness of
our protocol. To achieve non-interactiveness, we can use the Fiat-Shamir transforma-
tion. Since our bad-challenge is unique, we are able to instantiate the transform from
correlation-intractable hash functions instead of relying on a random oracle. In this
way, we ensure that an adversary cannot exploit the bad-challenge from a concretely
realizable construct.
In this way we arrive at a NIZK in the multistring model which we show to be
complete and simulation-extractable. As in the Groth and Ostrovsky paper, these
properties are conditioned on how many parts of the CRS is honestly generated.
Note that we can instantiate our protocol for any relation for which an instance-
dependant trapdoor protocol exists. Following a result from [CPV20], we can create
an instance-dependant trapdoor sigma protocol from any sigma protocol in which
there is only one challenge for every invalid statement that can yield an accepting
proof. In their paper, they show how this transformation can be applied to Blum’s
protocol for hamiltonicity and as such our protocol works for all of NP. We have the
advantage of being able to choose from a broader array of proof systems which in
theory can lead to more efficient implementations. On the other hand, the relations
we prove are somewhat complex and might add some computational overhead in im-
plementations.
The benefit of this approach is that by relying on sigma-protocols, instead of ZAPs,
we are able to instantiate our protocol from LWE. The rest of the cryptographic
primitives, IND-CCA2 PKE and strong one-time secure signature schemes can also
7
==PAGE:9==
be instantiated from LWE. Thus, we end up with a simulation-extractable NIZK in
the multistring model which is secure in the post-quantum setting given that LWE is
a computationally hard problem for a quantum computer.
2.1
Applications
Zero-knowledge proofs are an essential cryptographic construct when it comes to
authentication. As such, it is often used for secure authentication, digital signature
schemes, on blockchains and for cryptocurrencies. NIZKs are particularly useful since
they let us create a certificate rather than an interactive proof. This makes the use
of ZK a lot more feasible as it does not require participants to be online at the same
time to carry out the protocol.
It is of great interest to improve the efficiency of such protocols since many NIZKs
are expensive to compute or use large amounts of memory. One of the steps taken to
make NIZKs more applicable in real life situations is the invention of multi-verifier
zero-knowledge proofs (MVZK). This is a proof system which allows multiple verifiers
to verify a statement from a single proof. We can have a prover convince n verifiers
at the same time. The soundness of MVZK even ensures that honest verifiers are not
convinced by a corrupted prover as long as it does not collude with a majority of the
verifiers. These proofs have the obvious advantage of letting a prover produce one
proof, when the need arises, to convince multiple parties instead of having to produce
multiple in parallel. Our protocol can easily be used as a MVZK in that we can
simply let the different verifiers be the providers of the CRS shares in our multistring
protocol. As long as t of the n verifiers have generated an honest piece of CRS for
our protocol, we can produce a simulation-extractable NIZK and thus we satisfy the
requirements of being a MVZK.
MVZK is often employed in Multi-Party Computation (MPC) protocols [Yao82].
Shortly, MPCs are a way of letting multiple parties perform a joint computation
where the different users all provide their own input. It is often of interest for the
parties involved to keep their input secret, the classic example being Yao’s Million-
aire’s problem where a group of millionaires want to find out who is the richest without
revealing their respective net worths [Yao82]. Here, zero-knowledge is of the essence.
MPC instantiated using MVZK is often used when security against an adversary that
corrupts less than the majority of the players is needed. In this case, MVZK can be
used (instead of classic NIZKs) to ensure the correct behavior of players. This is for
instance done in [ACGJ18] where the construction of [GO06] is used as a MVZK to
ensure an honest behavior of players in the underlying semi-malicious MPC protocol.
It follows that plugging our tool (instead of the one described in [GO06]) into the
result of [ACGJ18], we can achieve round-optimal MPC with honest majority and
Guaranteed Output Delivery (GOD) security from LWE instead of relying on ZAPs.4
4In the literature this result on MPC is already obtained in a different manner by [BJMS18].
8
==PAGE:10==
3
Preliminaries
In this section, we will go over the necessary building blocks for our protocol.
3.1
Public Key Encryption Schemes
For our construction, we will need a public key encryption scheme which is defined
in the following section along with an important security property.
Definition 3.1 (Public Key Encryption Scheme (PKE)).
A public key encryption scheme PKE = (KeyGen, Enc, Dec) consists of three PPT
algorithms for which the following holds:
– KeyGen is a probabilistic key generation algorithm that takes as input a security
parameter 1λ, and outputs a signing key sk, and a verification key vk.
– Enc is a (possibly probabilistic) encryption algorithm that receives as input a
public key pk and plaintext message m from the message space M and returns
a ciphertext c.
– Dec is a deterministic decryption algorithm that takes as input a decryption key
dk and a ciphertext c and returns a plaintext m or returns fail.
Definition 3.2 (IND-CCA2).
The attack game for IND-CCA2 proceeds as follows:
1. Query a key generation oracle to obtain a public key pk.
2. Make a sequence of calls to a decryption oracle, submitting any ciphertext c
of the proper length (not necessarily in the ciphertext space). The oracle will
respond with Decsk(c).
3. Choose two plaintext messages m0, m1 and submit them to an encryption oracle.
The oracle will choose a random bit b ∈{0, 1} and reply with the challenge
ciphertext cb = Encpk(mb).
4. Keep performing decryption queries. If the submitted ciphertext is cb the oracle
halts.
5. The adversary outputs a bit b′ ∈{0, 1}.
We say that a PKE has Indistinguishability against adaptive chosen cipher-
text attacks (IND-CCA2) if there exists a negligible function such that:
Pr

b′ = b

−1
2
 ≤neg(λ)
9
==PAGE:11==
3.2
Signature Scheme
In a way very similar to public key encryption schemes, we give the definition of a
signature scheme and the definition of strong one-time security of one such scheme.
Definition 3.3 (Signature Scheme).
A signature scheme Sig = (KeyGen, Sign, Verify) consists of three PPT algorithms
for which the following holds:
– KeyGen is a probabilistic key generation algorithm that takes as input a security
parameter 1λ, and outputs a secret signing key sk, and a public verification key
vk.
– Sign is a signing algorithm that receives as input a signing key sk and message
m from the message space M and returns a signature sig.
– Verify is a deterministic decryption algorithm that takes as input a verification
key vk, a message m ∈M and a signature sig and returns 1 if the signature
is valid, and 0 otherwise.
Definition 3.4 (Strong One-time security game).
For a signature scheme Sig = (KeyGen, Sign, Verify) the one-time signature game
Sig-gamesots
A,C,Sig(λ) is defined using a challenger C and an adversary A. In this game:
1. C uses KeyGen(1λ; r) to generate a pair of keys (vk, sk).
2. C sends the key vk to A.
3. A sends one message m1 ∈M to C.
4. C generates the signature sig1 = Signsk(m1)
5. A outputs a message-signature pair (m, sig).
It is possible that A chooses
m = m1.
6. The output of the game is 1 if Verifyvk(m, sig) = 1 and 0 otherwise.
Definition 3.5 (Strong One-time Secure Signature Scheme).
A signature scheme Sigsots = (Setup, KeyGen, Sign, Verify) is said to be strong
one-time secure if for any PPT adversary A, there exists a negligible function
such that:
Pr

Sig-gamesots
A,C,Sig(λ) = 1

≤neg(λ)
Intuitively, being a strong one-time secure signature scheme means that an adversary
cannot come up with a new valid signature on the same message for a generated set
of keys, even after seeing one valid signature.
10
==PAGE:12==
3.3
Secret-sharing
As described in the technical overview, secret-sharing plays a central role in achieving
soundness in the multistring setting.
Definition 3.6 (t-out-of-n threshold secret-sharing [DRSY23]).
A t-out-of-n secret sharing scheme is a tuple of efficient algorithms (share, reconstruct)
defined as follows.
share(t,n)(x) →(s1, . . . , sn): The randomized algorithm share(t,n) takes as input a
secret x and outputs a set of n shares, in such a way that t shares can be used to
reconstruct the secret x.
reconstruct({si}i∈S⊆[n],|S|>t) →x: The reconstruction algorithm reconstruct takes
as input a vector of at least t + 1 shares and outputs the secret x.
This can be instantiated using Shamir secret-sharing based on polynomical inter-
polation as posed in [Sha79].
We will refer to this scheme and its algorithms by
Shamir.share and Shamir.reconstruct
3.4
Sigma protocol definitions
Another core part of our construct is the sigma-protocol. We define it here along with
some more specific types of sigma-protocols that are important for instantiating the
Fiat-Shamir transformation from correlation-intractable hash-functions.
Definition 3.7 (Sigma Protocol [HL10]).
A 3-move protocol Σ = (Setup, P, V ) with challenge length l ∈N is a Sigma proto-
col for a relation R if it satisfies the following three properties.
• Completeness. If P and V follow the protocol on input x and private input w,
where (x, w) ∈R, then V always accepts.
• Special Soundness.
There exists a PT algorithm, s.t for any x, and two
accepting transcripts (a, c, z) and (a, c′, z′), where c ̸= c′, the algorithm outputs
w, s.t. (x, w) ∈R.
• Special Honest Verifier Zero Knowledge (SHVZK). There exists a PPT
simulator Sim, which on input x and c outputs a transcript (a, c, z) with the
same probability distribution as transcripts between P and V on common input
x. That is for every (x, w) ∈R and every c ∈{0, 1}λ it holds that
n
Sim(x, c)
o
≃
n
⟨P(x, w), V (x, c)⟩
o
where Sim(x, c) denotes the output of simulator Sim upon input x and c, and
⟨P(x, w), V (x, c)⟩denotes the output transcript of an execution between P and
V, where P has input (x, w), V has input x, and V’s random tape (determining
its query) equals e.
11
==PAGE:13==
Definition 3.8 (CRSigma protocol [CPV20]).
A Sigma protocol, Σ = (Setup, P, V ), in the CRS model is a CRSigma protocol if for
every valid CRS, every statement x /∈L, and every first round a, there is at most one
challenge c := f(ω, x, a) such that (ω, x, a, c, z) is an accepting transcript for some z.
We informally call f the bad-challenge function associated to Σ, and note that f may
not be efficiently computable.
Definition 3.9 (Instance-dependant Trapdoor Sigma Protocol [CPV20]).
A CRSigma protocol Σ = (Setup, P, V ) with bad-challenge function f is a instance-
dependant trapdoor Sigma protocol if there are PPT algorithms TrapGen,BadChallenge
with the following syntax:
• TrapGen takes as input the unary representation of the security parameter, a
statement (instance) x, and an auxiliary input aux. It outputs a common ref-
erence string CRS with a trapdoor τ
• BadChallenge takes as input a trapdoor τ, common reference string CRS, a
statement x and the first message a, and outputs a challenge c.
Additionally the following properties are required:
• CRS Indistinguishability. An honestly generated common reference string
CRS is identically distributed to a common reference string output by TrapGen(1λ).
• Correctness. For every statement x /∈L there exists an auxiliary input aux
such that for all (CRS, τ) ←TrapGen(1λ) we have that BadChallenge(τ, CRS, x, a) =
f(CRS, x, a)
The importance of the instance-dependant trapdoor sigma-protocols for our construct
comes from the fact that we are able to extract a bad-challenge for any statement
x /∈L. This is in fact the sole bad-challenge for that particular statement since a
CRSigma protocol ensures the uniqueness of such a challenge. As we will see later
on, this is a very helpful property in ensuring soundness of our protocol when paired
with correlation intractable hash functions.
3.5
Correlation Intractable Hash Functions
To arrive at a non-interactive protocol, we will use the Fiat-Shamir transformation.
Instead of relying on a random oracle, we will instead use correlation-intractable
hash-functions that are realizable and give us security guarantees based on a hardness
assumption rather than a heuristic. In the following section, we give the necessary
definitions for achieving correlation-intractable hash functions, as well as the tools we
need to use them in a meaningful way.
Definition 3.10 (Hash family [CPV20]).
For a pair of efficiently computable function (n(·), m(·)), a hash family with input
length n and output length m is a collection H = {hk : {0, 1}n(λ) →{0, 1}m(λ)}λ∈N,k∈{0,1}s(λ)
of keyed hash functions, along with a pair of PPT algorithms specified as follows:
12
==PAGE:14==
– H.KeyGen(1λ) outputs a hash key k ∈{0, 1}s(λ)
– H.Hk(x) computes the function hk(x).
Definition 3.11 (Correlation intractability [CPV20]).
A family of hash-functions H = {Hk{0, 1}n(λ) 7→{0, 1}m(λ)} is said to be R-correlation
intractable with security (σ, δ) for a given relation ensemble R =
n
Rλ ⊆{0, 1}n(λ)×
{0, 1}m(λ)o
if it holds for any given σ-size adversary A = {Aλ} that
Pr

(x, H.Hk(x)) ∈Rλ
 k ←H.KeyGen(1λ), x ←A(k)

= O(δ(λ))
We say that H is R-correlation intractable if it is R-correlation intractable with se-
curity (λc, λ−c) for all constants c > 1.
Definition 3.12 (Sparsity [CPV20]).
For a relation ensemble R =
n
Rλ ⊆{0, 1}n(λ) × {0, 1}m(λ)o
, we say that R is p(·)-
sparse if for all λ ∈N and for any x ∈{0, 1}n(λ) it holds that (x, y) ∈Rλ with
probability at most p(λ) over the choice of y ←{0, 1}m(λ). If p is a negligible function
we say that R is sparse.
Definition 3.13 (Efficiently Searchable Relation [CPV20]).
A relation ensemble R is searchable in (non-uniform) time t if there exists a function
f = fR : {0, 1}∗7→{0, 1}∗computable in (non-uniform) time t s.t.
Pr

y = f(x)|x ∈{(x, y) ∈R}] = 1
R is said to be efficiently searchable if t is of polynomial size.
Definition 3.14 (Programmability [CPV20]).
A hash family H is said to be programmable if it is 1-universal and there exists and
efficient sampling algorithm, Sample, which lets us sample hash functions conditioned
on a specific input-output pair.
Pr[Hk(x) = y | k ←H.KeyGen(1λ)] = 2−λ
(1-universality)
Sample(1λ, (x, y)) := k ←H.KeyGen(1λ) | Hk(x) = y
(Sample algorithm)
The preceding section should highlight that a programmable and correlation-intractable
family of hash-functions can be programmed in a way that allows us to sample
correlation-intractable hash-functions for sparse and efficiently searchable relations.
This is very valuable as it guarantees that it will be as hard as possible for an ad-
versary to predict the nature of the hash-function for this particular relation. Note,
however, that CI hash-functions are not guaranteed to exist for any relation.
13
==PAGE:15==
3.6
Non-interactive Witness Indistinguishable Proofs
In this section, we give the formal definition of a non-interactive witness-indistinguishable
proof (NIWI). Witness-indistinguishability is a weaker notion than zero-knowledge,
but ensures that, given two accepting transcripts for a proof, an adversary cannot
distinguish the two. This is an essential property for our final construction.
Definition 3.15 (Non-interactive witness-indistinguishable proof).
We call Π = (Setup, P, V ) a Non-interactive witness-indistinguishable proof if (Setup, P, V )
are PPT algorithms such that the following three properties hold:
1. Completeness: For every (x, w) ∈R it should hold that:
Pr
h
V (x, CRS, π) = 0
 (x, w) ∈R, π ←P(x, CRS, w)
i
≤neg(λ)
2. Soundness: For any non-uniform polynomial-time adversary A with access to
Setup and any (x, w) /∈R it should hold that:
Pr
h
V (x, CRS, π) = 1
 (x, w) /∈R, (x, CRS, π) ←ASetupi
≤neg(λ)
3. Witness Indistinguishability: If (x, w0), (x, w1) ∈R s.t. w0 ̸= w1 it should
hold that the following two distributions are indistinguishable.
n
π0
 π0 ←P(x, CRS, w0)
o
∼=
n
π1
 π1 ←P(x, CRS, w1)
o
3.7
NIWI from CI Hash functions in the CRS model
Our final construct crucially relies on witness-indistinugishability to achieve zero-
knowledge. We therefore present an important result by Ciampi and Xia [CPV20]
that lets us compose Σ-protocols in a way that yields a NIWI. This is essential to our
construction.
If we have two instance-dependant trapdoor sigma-protocols, then we can perform
an OR-composition of the two.
If we suppose we have sigma-protocols for two
relations in two different NP languages, given as ΣR0 = (SetupR0, PR0, VR0) and
ΣR1 = (SetupR1, PR1, VR1), we can then OR-compose them as described in figure
1. Note that SimRb denotes the SHVZK simulator for ΣRb where b ∈{0, 1} and let
b′ = 1 −b. This yields a sigma-protocol for the following relation:
RR0∨R1 =
n (x0, w0), (x1, w1)

: (x0, w0) ∈R0 ∨(x1, w1) ∈R1
o
Turning to the CRS it is simply created by performing the following:
CRSR0 ←SetupR0
CRSR1 ←SetupR1
CRSR0∨R1 ←(CRSR0, CRSR1)
This OR-composition has some useful properties provided in the following lemmas.
14
==PAGE:16==
Prover(CRSR0∨R1, x0, x1, w)
Verifier(CRSR0∨R1, x0, x1)
P(CRSR0∨R1, x0, x1, w)
ab ←P(CRSRb, xb, w)
(ab′, cb′, zb′) ←SimRb′(xb′)
a0, a1
c ←{0, 1}λ
c
cb ←c ⊕cb′
zb ←P(CRSRb, xb, w, ab, cb)
(c0, c1)(z0, z1)
Verifier accepts if the following
conditions hold:
c = c0 ⊕c1
VR0(CRSR0, x0, a0, c0, z0) = 1
VR1(CRSR1, x1, a1, c1, z1) = 1
Figure 1: OR-composition of Σ-protocols
Lemma 3.1. ΣR0∨R1 has an efficient bad-challenge extractor BadChallengeR0∨R1,
and the correctness property holds.
Lemma 3.2. ΣR0∨R1 is an instance-dependant trapdoor sigma-protocol and it is wit-
ness indistinguishable for the language R = {(x0, x1) : x0 ∈R0 ∨x1 ∈R1}.
The Σ-protocol derived from the above described OR-composition can be made non-
interactive using the classic Fiat-Shamir method. For completeness, we give here a
definition of the Fiat-Shamir transformation from [CPV20].
Definition 3.16 (Fiat-Shamir transformation [CPV20]).
Let H be a hash family and Σ = (Setup, P, V ) be a CRSigma protocol for some relation
R. Consider the following non-interactive argument system Π = (Setup, P, V ) for R:
– The common reference string CRS := (CRSΣ, k) consists of the CRS of the
sigma protocol, CRSΣ ←Σ.Setup(1λ), along with a hash key k ←H.KeyGen(1λ)
– Upon input (x, w) ∈R the prover P computes (a, state) ←P(1λ, CRSΣ, c, w),
c := hk(a||x) and z ←P(state, x, w, c), and outputs (a, c, z).
15
==PAGE:17==
– The verifier V accepts the transcript (a, c, z) with respect to CRS = (CRSΣ, k)
and statement x if V (CRS, x, a, c, z) = 1 and hk(a||x) = c.
In the following section, we see how we can realize Fiat-Shamir using a family of
correlation-intractable hash functions. Given lemma 3.1, we have an efficient bad-
challenge extractor for our OR-composed relation, RR0∨R1. This implies that our new
relation is efficiently searchable. Since there is a unique bad-challenge for our relation,
we can make a trapdoor Σ-protocol for it. We denote the bad-challenge cbad and stress
that it is the unique challenge for which V (x, w, a, cbad, z) = 1 for (x, w) /∈R. Taking
a programmable hash-function, we can choose to sample our hash-key k in such a way
that our hash-function is correlation-intractable for exactly Hk(x) = cbad. In this way,
an adversary would need to break the correlation-intractability of the hash-function
to break soundness. This is the reasoning behind the following result from [CCH+19].
Theorem 3.3. Take a hash-family H, which is a correlation intractable for all
sub-exponenitally sparse relations, that are searchable in time T, and an instance-
dependant sigma-protocol Σ = (Setup, P, V, TrapGen, BadChallenge) with 2−λ sound-
ness, such that BadChallenge(τ, CRS, x, a) is computable in time T. Applying the
Fiat-Shamir transform to the the sigma-protocol using H, results in a sound NIZK.
Again, we are going to use a result by Ciampi and Xia about the OR-composition of
two Σ-protocols. The following lemma follows directly from lemma 3.2 and theorem
3.3 and states that the resulting NIZK instantiated from our correlation-intractable
hash-family is both sound and witness-indistinguishable, which is exactly lemma 5 of
[CX23].
Lemma 3.4. ΠR0∨R1 is sound and witness-indistinguishable.
We recall from lemma 3.1 that the correctness property holds for our OR-composition
as well. To conclude, we now have a non-interactive, complete, sound and witness-
indistinguishable protocol obtained from OR-composing two Sigma-protocols. We
will use this way of creating a NIWI to create a NIZK in the multistring setting.
3.8
Proofs in the Multistring Setting
Lastly, we are going to look at proofs in a multistring setting as posed by Groth
and Ostrovsky [GO06]. Their research is motivated by a concern as to how a good
and trustworthy source of randomness for multiparty computation can be achieved. A
common way of modeling randomness in security proofs is with the common reference
string generated by a single trusted authority. It is, however, a rather complicated
task to ensure that this randomness comes from an honest source with no malicious
intent. Groth and Ostrovsky tries to provide a solution by introducing the multistring
model. The basic idea is to have multiple parties provide this source of randomness,
thus heightening the likelihood that at least a certain ratio of the participating par-
ties are behaving honestly. Creating protocols in this multistring model, however,
requires some extra work.
16
==PAGE:18==
We are going to redefine the notion of a NIZK-proof system in this model; more
specifically, the definitions of completeness, simulation-soundness, zero-knowledge
and knowledge extraction in the multistring setting. The main idea is to partition
the reference string into n parts. We can then parametrize our security guarantees
by the number of parts available to a potential adversary. In the following section,
CRS will denote the entirety of the common reference string consisting of n parts,
more formally CRS = {CRSi}i∈[n].
Definition 3.17 ((tc, ts, tz, n)-Completeness [GO06]).
For all non-uniform polynomial time adversaries A we have
Pr
h
V (tc, ts, tz, CRS, x, π) = 0 and (x, w) ∈R and |CRS \ S| ≥tc

S := ∅; (CRS, x, w) ←ASetup; π ←P(tc, ts, tz, CRS, x, w)
i
≤neg(λ)
where Setup on query i outputs CRSi ←Setup(1λ) and sets S = S ∪{CRSi}.
Definition 3.18 ((tc, ts, tz, n)-Soundness[GO06]).
We say that Σ = (Setup, P, V ) is (tc, ts, tz, n)-sound if for all non-uniform polynomial
time adversaries A we have
Pr
h
V (tc, ts, tz, CRS, x, π) = 1 and x /∈L and |CRS \ S| ≥ts

S := ∅; (CRS, x, π) ←ASetupi
≤neg(λ)
where Setup on query i outputs CRSi ←Setup(1λ) and sets S = S ∪{CRSi}.
Next, we turn to the definition of zero-knowledge. Here, we have to give special care
to the way the reference string is generated. We want to be able to simulate a proof
like we usually do for zero-knowledge, but we also have to make sure that poten-
tial manipulations of the reference string does not give an adversary any advantage.
Groth and Ostrovsky go about this by splitting the question of ZK into the following
two definitions. The first one is concerned exactly with the problem of reference string
manipulation.
Let S1 be an algorithm that outputs (CRSi, τi), where CRSi is a piece of reference
string and τi is a trapdoor key for CRSi. S2 is an algorithm that takes as input
(tc, ts, tz, CRS,⃗τ, x, w) and simulates a proof π if ⃗τ contains tz simulation trapdoors
in {CRS}i∈[n].
Definition 3.19 (Reference String Indistinguishability [GO06]).
We say that we have reference string indistinguishability if for all non-uniform poly-
nomial time adversaries A we have:
Pr
h
A(CRS) = 1
CRS ←Setup(1λ)
i
∼= Pr
h
A(CRS) = 1
(CRS, τ) ←S1(1λ)
i
17
==PAGE:19==
Definition 3.20 ((tc, ts, tz, n)-Simulation Indistinguishability[GO06]).
For all non-uniform interactive polynomial time adversaries A we have
Pr
h
A(π) = 1 and (x, w) ∈R and |CRS \ S| ≥tz

S := ∅; (CRS, x, π) ←AS1, π ←P(tc, ts, tz, CRS, x, w)
i
∼= Pr
h
A(π) = 1 and (x, w) ∈R and |CRS \ S| ≥tz

S := ∅; (CRS, x, π) ←AS1, π ←P(tc, ts, tz, CRS, x, w)
i
where ⃗τ contains the simulation trapdoors corresponding to CRSi’s generated by S1.
Definition 3.21 ((tc, ts, tz, n)-Composable Zero-Knowledge).
We say that a Σ-protocol is (tc, ts, tz, n)-composable zero-knowledge if there exist
algorithms S1 and S2, such that we have reference string indistinguishability
and (tc, ts, tz, n)-simulation indistinguishability.
We give the definition of knowledge extraction in the multistring setting.
Definition 3.22 ((tc, ts, tz, n)-Knowledge[GO06]).
We call Σ = (Setup, P, V ) a (tc, ts, tz, n)-proof of knowledge for R if there exists a
knowledge extractor E = (E1, E2), s.t. for the following two properties hold for all
non-uniform polynomial-time adversaries, A:
Pr
h
A(CRS) = 1
CRS ←Setup(1λ)
i
∼= Pr
h
A(CRS) = 1
(CRS, ξ) ←E1(1λ)
i
And that:
Pr
h
V (tc, ts, tz, CRS, x, π) = 1 and (x, w) /∈R and |CRS \ S| ≥ts

S := ∅; (CRS, x, π) ←AE1, w ←E2(tc, ts, tz, CRS, ⃗ξ, x, π)
i
≤neg(λ)
where E1 is an oracle that returns (CRS, ξ) ←E1 and sets S := S ∪{CRSi}, and ⃗ξ is
the n element vector that contains at least tsξ’s corresponding to the CRS’s in CRS
generated by E1.
Seeing a simulated proof might give an adversary the possibility to learn how to
create a proof. We want to make sure that seeing simulated proofs does not enable
adversaries to produce accepting proofs for x /∈L. This property is exactly what
simulation-soundness encapsulates. The definition is as follows:
Definition 3.23 ((tc, ts, tz, n)-simulation soundness).
A (tc, ts, tz, n)-NIZK proof system, Σ = (Setup, P, V, S1, S2) is said to be (tc, ts, tz, n)-
simulation sound if for all non-uniform polynomial-time adversaries, A it holds that
Pr
h
V (tc, ts, tz, CRS, x, π) = 1 and (x, π) /∈Q and x /∈L and |CRS \ S| ≥ts

S := ∅; Q := ∅; (CRS, x, π) ←AS1,S2(1λ)
i
≤neg(λ)
18
==PAGE:20==
where S1 returns (CRS, τ) ←S1(1λ) and sets S := S ∪{CRSi}. S2 returns π ←
S2(tc, ts, tz, CRS,⃗τ, x) with ⃗τ containing the simulation trapdoors for the CRS’s gen-
erated by S1 and sets Q := Q ∪{x, π}.
In the multistring setting, the CRS can be produced by multiple parties. Knowledge
extraction is a desirable property that we want to keep even when we need to simulate
proofs as well. Thus combining the notion of simulation-soundness and knowledge-
extraction, we get the simulation-extractability property. Informally, it ensures that
if an adversary produces an accepting proof, then it is possible to extract a witness.
Note that this naturally implies simulation-soundness as the statement must be in
the language for (x, w) ∈R.
Definition 3.24 ((tc, ts, tz, n)-simulation extractability).
A (tc, ts, tz, n)-NIZK proof system, Σ = (Setup, P, V, S1, S2) is said to be (tc, ts, tz, n)-
simulation extractable if for all non-uniform polynomial-time adversaries, A it holds
that
Pr
h
V (tc, ts, tz, CRS, x, π) = 1 and (x, π) /∈Q and (x, w) /∈R and |CRS \ S| ≥ts

S := ∅; Q := ∅; (CRS, x, π) ←ASE′
1,S2(1λ); w ←E2(tc, ts, tz, CRS, ⃗ξ, x, π)
i
≤neg(λ)
where SE′
1 returns (CRS, ξ) from (CRS, τ, ξ) ←SE1(1λ) and sets S := S ∪{CRSi}.
S2 returns π ←S2(tc, ts, tz, CRS,⃗τ, x) with ⃗τ containing the simulation trapdoors for
the CRS’s generated by SE1 and sets Q := Q ∪{x, π}. ⃗ξ is a vector containing at
least ts ξ’s generated by SE1 corresponding to CRSi in the CRS.
On the parameters tc, ts and tz
We have achieved a way of parametrizing completeness, soundness and zero-knowledge.
In our protocol, any 0 ≤tc ≤n yields perfect completeness. In other words, even
if an adversary creates all of the CRS, our protocol will still be complete. Turning
to the other parameters, we have to realize that soundness and zero-knowledge are
complementary. In the following section, assume that ts + tz > n. If we have a NIZK
proof system in the multistring setting, we want to decide whether x ∈L. If a prover
has access to a witness w for x, then by completeness the verifier accepts if all parts
of the CRS is correctly generated. By reference string indistinguishability, we will
still accept if some parts of the CRS are simulated as the verifier cannot distinguish
the honest and simulated CRS parts. Therefore, the verifier will accept with over-
whelming probability.
If on the other hand x /∈L, then by soundness the verifier will not accept as long
as ts parts of the CRS is correctly generated. Since n −tz ≥ts, we can infer that
this is exactly the case. It follows that an adversary controlling tz parts can always
simulate a proof for anything thus breaking soundness. We therefore want to keep
both ts and tz at a minimum since this implies that, even when facing a large amount
of corruptions, we are able to maintain the soundness and zero-knowledge. A good
compromise is to let n be odd and let ts = tz = n+1
2 .
As a last remark, it should be noted that a (1, 1, 1, 1)-NIZK proof system in the
multistring setting is closely related to NIZK-proofs in the standard CRS model.
19
==PAGE:21==
4
Simulation Extractable NIZK in the multistring
model
In this section, we create a new protocol largely inspired by the one proposed by Groth
and Ostrovsky [GO06]. Instead of using ZAPs to prove satistifiability of a circuit, we
use our OR-composition on two sigma protocols as introduced in the preliminaries.
This has the benefit that we can instantiate our protocol from post-quantum secure
assumptions, which we will describe in more depth in section 4.6.
4.1
Protocol
We present here our protocol. We start by considering the following two NP relations,
where n is the number of partitions of the CRS, ts is the threshold for the secret
sharing and tz is the amount of CRS trapdoors needed to simulate a proof. Our
construction holds when ts, tz and n are chosen s.t. ts + tz > n.
R0 =











 ({(pki1, ci1)}i∈[n], x), ({ri}i∈[n], r, w)

(x, w) ∈R,
(s1, . . . , sn) ←Shamir.Share(w, r),
(vk, sk) ←Sigsots.KeyGen(1λ),
{(pki1, dki1) ←PKE.KeyGen(1λ)}i∈[n],
{ci1 ←PKE.Encpki1(si, vk; ri)}i∈[n]











R1 =







Tz ⊆{1, . . . , n} ∧|Tz| ≥tz,
(vk, sk) ←Sigsots.KeyGen(1λ),
 {(pki1, ci2)}i∈[n], {ri}i∈Tz

{(pki2, dki2) ←PKE.KeyGen(1λ)}i∈[n],
{ri ←PRFτi(0)}i∈Tz,
{ci2 ←PKE.Encpki2(PRFτi(vk); ri)}i∈Tz







Informally, R0 is a binary relation for the statement that all encryptions {ci1}i∈[n]
encrypt a verification key, and are encryptions of a (ts, n)-secret sharing of a valid
witness w, i.e. (x, w) ∈R. This R0 is the actual relation that we want to create our
protocol for. R1 on the other hand is a relation for the statement that at least tz of
the ri’s on the reference string are on the form ri = PRFτi(0) where the corresponding
encryptions {ci2}i∈[n] are encryptions of PRFτi(vk).
It is the composition of these two relations in the multistring setting that yields our
protocol.
RR0∨R1 =
n (x0, w0), (x1, w1)

: (x0, w0) ∈R0 ∨(x1, w1) ∈R1
o
We know from section 3.7 that the OR-composition of two instance-dependant Σ-
protocols for each relation has a new unique bad challenge. We also know that it is
efficiently searchable, and as such we can instantiate the Fiat-Shamir transform on
our composition to arrive at a non-interactive and witness indistinguishable protocol
for the relation as described in section 3.7.
20
==PAGE:22==
4.2
Construction
We present here our construction.
Setup:
Generate two different sets of keys for our PKE, reference strings and randomness
for our Sigma-protocol as follows:
(pki1, dki1), (pki2, dki2) ←PKE.KeyGen(1λ)
r ←{0, 1}2k
CRSΣ ←{0, 1}lΣ(k)
Proof:
– Generate a keypair for a strong one-time secure signature scheme, (vk, sk) ←
Sigsots.KeyGen(1λ).
– Create a (ts, n)-threshold secret-sharing of the witness: (sw,1, . . . , sw,n) ←
Shamir.share(ts,n)(w)
– Encrypt shares ci1 = PKE.Encpki1(sw,i, vk; ri1)
– Encrypt dummy shares ci2 = PKE.Encpki2(0)
– Create NIZKs for the statement ((ci1, ci2), w) ∈RR0∨R1 for all i:
πi ←P((ci1, ci2), CRSΣ
i , w)
– Sign the proof transcript with a strong one-time secure signature scheme:
sig = Sig.Signsk(vk, CRSΣ
1 , c11, c12, π1, . . . , CRSΣ
n, cn1, cn2, πn)
– The final proof is: Π = (vk, CRS1, c11, c12, π1, . . . , CRSn, cn1, cn2, πn, sig).
Verification:
Check that Sigsots.Verifyvk(sig)
=
1,
if so check that
V ((ci1, ci2), CRSi, πi) = 1 for all i ∈[n]. If any of the check fails abort.
Figure 2: Prover and verifier of Simulation Extractable NIZK
21
==PAGE:23==
Extraction : We recall that we need extractors: (E1, E2).
– E1(1λ) simply outputs the honest CRS.
– E2(tc, ts, tz, {CRSΣ
i }i∈[n], ⃗ξ, x, π) should produce an accepting witness. This
can be produced by extracting the shares (sw,i, vk; ri) = PKE.Decdki1(ci1)
from every NIZK πi. Note that ⃗ξ = {dki1}i∈[n]. The witness can now be
recreated using w = Shamir.reconstruct({sw,i}i∈[n]) as long as ts of these
witness-bits are honestly generated.
Figure 3: Extractor of Simulation Extractable NIZK
The simulator creates the randomness r differently namely by using the trapdoors
τ, s.t. r = PRFτ(0). The extractor uses the extraction keys dki1.
Simulated Proof:
– Generate a keypair for a strong one-time secure signature scheme, (vk, sk) ←
Sigsots.KeyGen(1λ).
– Take
the
first
tz
simulation
trapdoors
τi
and
create
ci2
=
PKE.Encpki2(PRFτi(vk)).
For the remaining n −tz encryptions sim-
ply encrypt 0: ci2 = PKE.Encpki2(0).
– Perform a (ts, n)-secret-sharing of 0: {s0,i}i∈[n] = Shamir.share(ts,n)(0).
– For all i ∈[n] encrypt the shares as ci1 = PKE.Encpki1(s0,i, vk).
– Create NIZKs for all n pairs ((ci1, ci2), 0) ∈RR0∨R1.
πi ←P((ci1, ci2), CRSi, 0)
– Create a signature for the entire transcript:
sig = Sigsots.Signsk(vk, CRS1, c11, c12, π1, . . . , CRSn, cn1, cn2, πn)
– The simulated proof is then: Π = (vk, c11, c12, π1, . . . , cn1, cn2, πn, sig)
Figure 4: Simulator of Simulation Extractable NIZK
22
==PAGE:24==
4.3
Proof of Completeness
Completeness follows straightforward from the correctness of the NIZK (lemma 3.1),
and the uniqueness of the secret-sharing. Lastly, it should be noted that the common
reference string and the simulated reference strings are indistinguishable due to the
pseudorandomness of the PRF.
4.4
Proof of Zero-Knowledge
The proof of zero-knowledge is very much in the style of [GO06]. It uses a set of
hybrid arguments.
Recall from lemma 3.21 that we need to show both reference
string indistuinguishability and (tc, ts, tz, n)-simulation indistinguishability.
Hybrid 1
This is the real world execution with an honest prover knowing the witness, w. The
CRS is simulated.
Hybrid 2
In this section we modify the creation of the shares ci2. Having access to tz random
seeds τi s.t. ri = PRFτi(0), we create the shares ci2 as:
ci2 = PKE.Encpki2(PRFτi(vk))
as opposed to PKE.Encpki2(0) in the real world scenario.
By the CCA2 security of the encryption scheme it follows that
{PKE.Encpki2(0)} ∼= {PKE.Encpki2(PRFτi(vk))}
and as such the hybrid 2 is computationally indistinguishable from hybrid 1.
Hybrid 3
In this hybrid, we want to form a witness-pair for R1 instead of R0. Instead of using
the real ri pieces of the random string we use the ri = PRFτi(0). By the security of
the PRF, an adversary cannot distinguish this from the real reference string. Since
we made encryptions ci2 = PKE.Encpki2(PRFτi(vk)) in hybrid 2, we are now able to
produce a witness for R1. By lemma 3.4, we know that the witnesses for R0 and R1 are
witness-indistinguishable under the OR-composition of protocols in those languages.
This means that an adversary cannot distinguish whether a proof verifies due to a
witness-pair in R0 or R1. As such hybrid 2 and hybrid 3 are indistinguishable.
23
==PAGE:25==
Hybrid 4
In this hybrid, we make sure that it is not possible to recycle a share ci1, as this would
make it possible to produce an accepting proof even with less than ts shares. We use
the notion of a bad event. The bad event in this case is that an adversary manages
to recycle a share. We want to show that this bad event only occurs with negligible
probability.
Note that the encryption of every share is ci1 = PKE.Encpki1(sw,i, vk; ri), and that vk
is a verification key for a strong one-time secure signature scheme. To make a valid
proof using a recycled share, an adversary would have to produce a new verification
key, vk′, and produce an accepting proof for ci1 = PKE.Encpki1(sw,i, vk′; ri). By the
strong one-time security of the signature scheme it is not possible to forge a verifi-
cation key. The only possibility left is that the NIZK is still accepting for an invalid
ciphertext ci1, this however is not possible by the soundness of the NIZK (lemma 3.4).
This proves that the bad event will only happen with negligible probability and as
such hybrid 4 and hybrid 3 are indistinguishable.
Hybrid 5
Instead of using the real witness shares, sw,i, we perform a new (ts, n)-secret-sharing
of 0, and get shares {s0,i}i∈[n]. We use these dummy shares for our proof instead of
the real witness secret-shares by creating the first half of encryptions in the following
way: ci1 = PKE.Encpki1(s0,i, vk). Due to the CCA2 security of the encryption scheme
an adversary cannot distinguish between the encryptions of dummy shares and the
real shares. We also know that it is impossible to reuse a share ci1 in our proofs. This
implies that an adversary will need to control at least ts shares of the reference string
to reconstruct our witness. Since we have that tz + ts > n it follows that n −tz < ts
and as such the remaining n −tz shares do not reveal anything about the witness
by the security of the secret-sharing. As a consequence, an adversary is not able to
distinguish a (ts, n)-secret-sharing of a real witness w, from a (ts, n)-secret-sharing of
0.
This hybrid is equal to the proof simulation of the protocol and with that we have
shown that it is possible to create a simulator, i.e., produce an accepting proof without
knowing a proper witness.
4.5
Proof of Simulation Extractability
We prove here the simulation-extractability property. We note that an adversary
can see the extraction keys, {dki1}i∈[n], but does not have access to the simulation
trapdoors τ of the CRS. The adversary has access to a simulation oracle (S1, S2) that
lets it output a statement and a proof. By the unforgeability of the strong one-time
signature, it is not possible to reuse a verification key vk used in a simulated proof.
In the case where the CRS is honestly simulated, an adversary does not know the
24
==PAGE:26==
seed for the pseudorandom function and, thereby, cannot encrypt a pseudorandom
function evaluation of the verification key, i.e. produce ci2 = PKE.Enc(PRFτi(vk)).
To break soundness, an adversary must then be able to produce an accepting proof
for (x, w) /∈R0. By the soundness of our NIZK (3.4), we know that {ci1}i∈[n] must
contain a (ts, n)-threshold secret sharing of w. This means we can decrypt the cipher-
texts and reconstruct a valid witness, w, using Shamir.reconstruct. This implies
that (x, w) ∈R0 and, thereby, the protocol is simulation sound.
Turning to knowledge extraction, we realize that it is extremely improbable that an
honestly generated random string contains a pseudorandom value ri = PRFτi(0).
This follows from the security of the PRF.
This implies that an accepting proof
generated by an adversary must be generated such that {ci1}i∈[n] encrypt a (ts, n)-
threshold secret sharing of w. Thus, any accepting proof generated by an adversary
is extractable which concludes the proof.
This concludes the proof of simulation-extractability.
4.6
On Post-Quantum Assumptions
The different cryptographic primitives that we use for our protocol can all be instan-
tiated from post-quantum secure assumptions. In most cases, we use the Learning
with Errors [Reg05] problem as our hardness assumption.
First off, Shamir (ts, n)-secret-sharing is perfectly secure as long as an adversary has
less than ts shares and, thus, it is secure in a post-quantum setting as well.
Following the important result by Ciampi et al. [CPV20], we can turn any CRSigma-
protocol into a trapdoor sigma-protocol using a perfectly correct PKE scheme. It is
possible to instantiate such a PKE with perfect correctness from LWE. As mentioned
before, we can use Blum’s Σ-protocol for hamiltonicity and apply the transformation
of Ciampi et al. to get a trapdoor Sigma protocol. A second requirement is that
the relation is efficiently searchable for us to instantiate the Fiat-Shamir transfor-
mation from correlation-intractable hash functions. Ciampi and Xia show that the
OR-composition preserves the efficient bad-challenge extractor and thereby we can
instantiate Fiat-Shamir [CX23]. Both the sigma-protocols and correlation-intractable
hash-functions can be instantiated from LWE, which they show in [CSW20].
It is known that one-time secure signature schemes can be instantiated from one-way
functions and that these can be securely instantiated from post-quantum secure as-
sumptions. See for example [KSN16]. Similarly, it is known that quantum secure
PRFs exist - in fact many well-known PRFs in the classic setting are quantum secure
[Zha12].
25
==PAGE:27==
5
Conclusion
We have constructed a simulation-extractable (SE) NIZK in the multistring model.
Furthermore, we have done this from cryptographic primitives which can be instan-
tiated under the Learning with Errors hardness assumption. It is not the first SE
NIZK from LWE as Badrinarayanan et al. [BJMS18] already succeeded in this. To
the knowledge of the author, the construction presented in this work is the second
SE NIZK from LWE. We differ from the approach of Badrinarayanan et al. as we
use OR-composition of trapdoor sigma-protocols to achieve our NIZK. The construc-
tion of Badrinarayanan relies on Blum’s protocol for hamiltonicity which means their
construction is for all NP but, crucially, relies on NP-reductions. In [CCH+19], it is
shown that a modified version of Blum’s protocol is a trapdoor protocol and, there-
fore, our construction has the same capabilities. In [CPV20] however, they go on to
show that we can get trapdoor sigma protocols from any CRSigma-protocol without
any NP-reductions. Thus, our construction can be instantiated from a much wider
array of sigma-protocols without NP-reductions. This opens the possibility of achiev-
ing a computationally more efficient protocol.
The freedom that we allow for the choice of sigma-protocols also opens the possibility
of obtaining better security properties. We speculate that it is possible to obtain
adaptive witness indistinguishability by using trapdoor sigma protocols that have
adaptive special honest verifier zero-knowledge in our OR-composition. This may
pave the way for an adaptively secure SE NIZK from LWE, but is left as an open
question.
In an increasingly interconnected digital world, it is important that we can keep using
the services and methods we have come to rely on. Being able to protect ones privacy
while participating in our online society is essential. In a time where tech oligarchs
and state agencies are challenging our human rights and even our democracy, the need
for secure and private ways of communicating, trading and authenticating ourselves
is more important than ever. Blockchains, cryptocurrencies and MPC are ways to
enable us to do these things. Firmware signing and message encryption are other
digital constructs that protect us. All these things are made possible by cryptography
and in many cases zero-knowledge proofs play a crucial role. This thesis is a part
of a bigger effort in making zero-knowledge proofs secure and efficient, even when
looking into a future where quantum computers are present. The effort is paying off
and the first efforts to create post-quantum secure cryptographic protocols are seeing
the light.
26
==PAGE:28==
References
[ACGJ18] Prabhanjan Ananth, Arka Rai Choudhuri, Aarushi Goel, and Abhishek
Jain. Round-optimal secure multiparty computation with honest major-
ity. In Hovav Shacham and Alexandra Boldyreva, editors, Advances in
Cryptology – CRYPTO 2018, pages 395–424, Cham, 2018. Springer Inter-
national Publishing.
[BJMS18] Saikrishna Badrinarayanan, Aayush Jain, Nathan Manohar, and Amit
Sahai. Secure MPC: Laziness leads to GOD. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Paper 2018/580, 2018.
[BKM20]
Zvika Brakerski, Venkata Koppula, and Tamer Mour. Nizk from lpn and
trapdoor hash via correlation intractability for approximable relations.
In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2020: 40th Annual International
Cryptology Conference, CRYPTO 2020, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, Au-
gust 17–21, 2020, Proceedings, Part III, page 738–767, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2020. Springer-Verlag.
[CCH+19] Ran Canetti, Yilei Chen, Justin Holmgren, Alex Lombardi, Guy N. Roth-
blum, Ron D. Rothblum, and Daniel Wichs. Fiat-shamir: From practice
to theory. In Moses Charikar and Edith Cohen, editors, STOC 2019 -
Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
Computing, Proceedings of the Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing, pages 1082–1090. Association for Computing Machinery, June
2019. Publisher Copyright: © 2019 Association for Computing Machin-
ery.; 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
STOC 2019 ; Conference date: 23-06-2019 Through 26-06-2019.
[CGH98]
Ran Canetti, Oded Goldreich, and Shai Halevi.
The random oracle
methodology, revisited. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 1998/011, 1998.
[CPV20]
Michele Ciampi, Roberto Parisella, and Daniele Venturi. On adaptive se-
curity of delayed-input sigma protocols and fiat-shamir NIZKs. Cryptology
ePrint Archive, Paper 2020/831, 2020.
[CSW20]
Ran Canetti, Pratik Sarkar, and Xiao Wang. Triply adaptive UC NIZK.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2020/1212, 2020.
[CX23]
Michele Ciampi and Yu Xia. Multi-theorem fiat-shamir transform from
correlation-intractable hash functions. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
2023/1677, 2023.
[DH76]
W. Diffie and M. Hellman. New directions in cryptography. IEEE Trans-
actions on Information Theory, 22(6):644–654, 1976.
[DRSY23] Ivan Damg˚ard, Divya Ravi, Luisa Siniscalchi, and Sophia Yakoubov.
Broadcast-optimal two round MPC with asynchronous peer-to-peer chan-
nels. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/1187, 2023.
27
==PAGE:29==
[GO06]
Jens Groth and Rafail Ostrovsky. Cryptography in the multi-string model.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2006/407, 2006.
[HL10]
C. Hazay and Y. Lindell. Efficient Secure Two-Party Protocols: Tech-
niques and Constructions.
Information Security and Cryptography.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010.
[HL18]
Justin Holmgren and Alex Lombardi. Cryptographic hashing from strong
one-way functions. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2018/385, 2018.
[HLR21]
Justin Holmgren, Alex Lombardi, and Ron D. Rothblum.
Fiat-shamir
via list-recoverable codes (or: Parallel repetition of GMW is not zero-
knowledge). Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2021/286, 2021.
[KSN16]
Kassem Kalach and Reihaneh Safavi-Naini.
An efficient post-quantum
one-time signature scheme. In Orr Dunkelman and Liam Keliher, editors,
Selected Areas in Cryptography – SAC 2015, pages 331–351, Cham, 2016.
Springer International Publishing.
[PS19]
Chris Peikert and Sina Shiehian. Noninteractive zero knowledge for NP
from (plain) learning with errors.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
2019/158, 2019.
[Reg05]
Oded Regev. On lattices, learning with errors, random linear codes, and
cryptography. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh Annual ACM Sympo-
sium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’05, page 84–93, New York, NY,
USA, 2005. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Sha79]
Adi Shamir.
How to share a secret.
Commun. ACM, 22(11):612–613,
November 1979.
[Yao82]
Andrew C. Yao. Protocols for secure computations. In 23rd Annual Sym-
posium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1982), pages 160–164,
1982.
[Zha12]
Mark Zhandry. How to construct quantum random functions. In 2012
IEEE 53rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
pages 679–687, 2012.
28
