==PAGE:1==
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in
Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Al­
gorithms
Master’s Thesis
20th of February, 2025
By
Gustav Nilsson Pedersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in collaboration with
the biometrics and security research group da/sec, affiliated with Hochschule Darmstadt,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
The reader is assumed to have a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science,
machine learning, and biometrics.
Gustav Nilsson Pedersen ­ s174562
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
20-02-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) algorithms provide a Unified Quality Score (UQS)
or a Component Quality Measure (CQM). UQSs aim to describe the overall utility of a sam­
ple face image in a face recognition system, while CQMs aim to describe the quality with
respect to a specific quality component. The best performing UQS FIQA algorithms are
deep learning­based models. Existing explainability methods attempt to explain how UQS
FIQA algorithms make decisions. Some provide heatmaps visualising quality estimates of
small parts of the image, down to pixel­level. We present a new Fine­Grained Face Pars­
ing (FGFP) algorithm, parsing the face image into medical literature­based regions that
are larger than the small parts used in other methods. Through a region removal experi­
ment, we analyse how important for quality a UQS FIQA algorithm considers each region.
We further present a Face Region Quality Estimation (FRQE) algorithm for explainability
of UQS FIQA algorithm quality decisions, which estimates the quality of each region in a
sample face image and visualises them in a heatmap. FRQE heatmaps are shown to have
higher interpretability than heatmaps from an existing method. CQMs inherently provide
explanation of why images are low quality, but a deep learning­based UQS FIQA may
not find quality components equally important for quality. We use random forest models
to explain how important quality components are for UQS FIQA algorithm decisions. We
further analyse the performance of UQS FIQA algorithms based on CQMs and random
forests, and find they are outperformed by state­of­the­art UQS FIQA algorithms.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Carsten Baum, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, DTU
Supervisor
Wassim Kabbani, PhD Candidate, Department of Information Security and Communica­
tion Technology at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology
External Supervisor
Christoph Busch, Professor, Computer Science faculty at Hochschule Darmstadt, and
Department of Information Security and Communication Technology at the Norwegian
University of Science and Technology
External Supervisor
Christian Nicolai Nielsen, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
iv
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Related Work
4
2.1
Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Open Source Face Image Quality (OFIQ) project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Definitions of Explainability and Interpretability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Visual Explainability Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Facial Landmark Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Random Forest Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.7
Error vs. Discard Characteristic (EDC) Curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.8
Facial Esthetic Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.9
Face Parsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
10
3.1
Choice of Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Fine­Grained Face Parsing (FGFP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Region Removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
Face Region Quality Estimation (FRQE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.6
Usability Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.7
Random Forests for Predicting UQS using CQMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Results and Evaluation
22
4.1
Region Removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Face Region Quality Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.3
Usability study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4
Random Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Perspectives
43
6
Conclusion
44
Bibliography
45
A GitHub Repositories
47
B Usability Study Structure
48
C Usability Study Responses
50
D Random Forest Classifier Data
52
D.1 Thresholds for Low­ and High­Quality Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
D.2 Random Forest Classifier Hyperparameter Settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
D.3 pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on All CQMs
. . . . . 54
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
v
==PAGE:8==
D.4 pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on Top 24 CQMs . . . 55
D.5 pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on Top 20 CQMs . . . 56
D.6 pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on Top 15 CQMs . . . 57
D.7 pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on Top 10 CQMs . . . 58
E
Random Forest Regressor Data
59
E.1 Random Forest Regressor Hyperparameter Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
E.2 pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on All 27 CQMs . . . 59
E.3 pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on Top 24 CQMs
. . 59
E.4 pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on Top 20 CQMs
. . 60
E.5 pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on Top 15 CQMs
. . 60
E.6 pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on Top 10 CQMs
. . 60
vi
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Face recognition systems are increasingly used for identification and verification purposes
of individuals. There is a demand for high quality face images, because performance of
face recognition systems has been shown to scale with the quality of the face images used
[1], [2]. Ensuring high quality of face images can be done by assessing the quality of the
images either manually or automatically and only accepting face images of high quality
for use [2]. Manual quality assessment is labour intensive and unreliable, because it is
subjective and prone to human errors, all of which are motivations for automatic assess­
ment. Automatic assessment of the quality of face images can be done with Face Image
Quality Assessment (FIQA) algorithms [3]. A FIQA algorithm usually provides a Quality
Score (QS) for the input image, which is supposed to explain the utility of the face image
in a face recognition system [3], [1]. Thus, a better QS means higher utility of that image
in a face recognition system. FIQA algorithms can either provide a Unified Quality Score
(UQS) or a Component Quality Measure (CQM) [3]. A UQS is a holistic assessment of the
expected utility of the face image in a face recognition system, whereas a CQM attempts
to describe the quality of a face image with respect to only one specific component [3],
such as under­exposure, sharpness, occlusion and more [4].
The best performing FIQA algorithms are deep learning­based machine learning models
[2], [5], [6], [7]. Since they are deep learning­based, the models are considered black­box,
as we do not know the inner workings of the models. This means we cannot understand
the reasoning behind the decisions made by these models without analysing them with
explainability methods [8]. Explainability and interpretability in artificial intelligence are the
topics of helping humans understand the decisions of machine learning models [8]. Mak­
ing the decisions of FIQA algorithms understandable for humans is important, because
we tend to only trust that which we understand [8].
The new Entry/Exit System [9] of the European Union, which will be used to monitor all
border crossings to and from the Schengen area by non­EU nationals, is an example of
a system where both face image quality and usability is of great importance. Face image
quality is important for the performance of the face recognition system and the system
will have millions of users, which means there will also be high requirements for usability
for the users. The combination of high requirements for face image quality and usability
results in a need for good actionable feedback on rejected low quality face images that
users attempt to enrol into the database of the face recognition system and likewise for
probe face images.
FIQA is important, but in order to ensure interoperability between different vendors of
face recognition systems and different databases, it is necessary to define what consti­
tutes high quality in a face image. A common approach to this is being standardised in
ISO/IEC 29794­5 [3]. The Open Source Face Image Quality (OFIQ) project [4] serves
as a reference implementation of this standard and is used in for example the Entry/Exit
System [10], [11]. It contains 27 FIQA algorithms providing CQM and 1 FIQA algorithm
providing a UQS [4]. Development of OFIQ version 2.0 is planned [11], and a part of
the development is investigating demographic biases and improving explainability of the
algorithms.
There exist explainability methods for FIQA algorithms that attempt to enhance explain­
ability of the quality decisions by estimating the quality of different parts of an image on a
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
1
==PAGE:10==
very granular level. This is down to pixel­level quality estimation, where each individual
pixel is assessed on its utility in a face recognition system. The XFIQ project, presented
in [12], provides such a pixel­level quality estimation. Another granular method for en­
hancing explainability of FIQA algorithms is presented in [13], where they use activation
mapping variation analysis to find which parts of a face image differ from the expected
activation mappings of high and low quality images.
To our knowledge, no existing explainability methods use clearly defined and human­
understandable parts of the face for their explanations. The parts used for quality estima­
tion in the mentioned explainability methods are also very granular, and to our knowledge
no existing methods use less granular parts of the image for improving interpretability of
the quality decisions of FIQA algorithms. We hypothesise that assigning quality estima­
tions to clearly defined regions of the face, on a less granular level than existing methods
and more granular level than a single quality score, will be easier to understand for hu­
man operators of a face recognition system. This informs our first and second research
question:
1. How can computer vision and image analysis methods be used to create an inter­
pretable method for explaining decisions of Face Image Quality Assessment algo­
rithms that provide a Unified Quality Score?
2. How well does the proposed explainability method perform as a feedback tool for
the operator of a Face Recognition System, guiding them to capture face images of
higher quality?
While CQMs inherently provide actionable feedback for an individual on how to improve
the quality of an image, they only provide limited explainability of FIQAs providing UQS.
FIQA algorithms providing CQMs are designed specifically to assess the quality of a face
image with respect to a specific component, while FIQA algorithms providing UQS are
designed to asses the overall quality and utility of the face image. If a UQS FIQA algorithm
is a deep learning­based model, we do not know how important for utility it has learned
to view a component measured by a CQM FIQA algorithm. This gives rise to the third
research question:
3. How can Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms that provide Component Qual­
ity Measures be used to explain the decisions of Face Image Quality Assessment
algorithms that provide a Unified Quality Score?
• Can Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms that provide Component Qual­
ity Measures be used to create a new Face Image Quality Assessment algo­
rithm that provides a Unified Quality Score?
• How good is the performance of a Face Image Quality Assessment algorithm
that provides a Unified Quality Score based on Component Quality Measures?
The first and second research questions are answered in multiple steps. We present a
new Fine­Grained Face Parsing algorithm, which parses the face into more fine­grained
regions than existing methods. The regions are clearly defined and based on medical
literature. We explore the importance of the face regions for quality decisions made by
a state­of­the­art FIQA algorithm providing UQS. We use the results to create a Face
Region Quality Estimation algorithm that outputs highly interpretable heatmaps that help
explain the UQS decisions made by the FIQA algorithm. The interpretability of the Face
Region Quality Estimation algorithm is explored in a usability study, where it is compared
to an existing explainability method outputting heatmaps.
2
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:11==
The third research question is answered using two types of random forest models, clas­
sifiers and regressors.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA)
A Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) algorithm attempts to predict the utility of a face
image in a face recognition system [1]. FIQA algorithms are generally divided into two cat­
egories, those providing a Unified Quality Score (UQS) and those providing a Component
Quality Measure (CQM) [3].
2.1.1
Unified Quality Score (UQS)
A Unified Quality Score (UQS) is a Quality Score given to a face image, which is a holistic
assessment of the expected utility of the image in a face recognition system [4], [3].
MagFace
MagFace [5] losses are used for training face recognition systems. The feature embed­
dings of input images computed by MagFace­based face recognition systems have a
special property. The magnitude of the feature embedding correlate with the quality of
the face image. Thus, a MagFace­based face recognition system functions as a FIQA
algorithm providing a UQS. A FIQA algorithm based on MagFace was found to be the
best performing FIQA algorithm for UQS among 16 algorithms [2].
2.1.2
Component Quality Measure (CQM)
A Component Quality Measure (CQM) is a quality measure given to a face image, which
describes the quality of the image with respect to an individual quality component [4],
[3]. This quality component can be either capture­ or subject­related [3]. CQM FIQA
algorithms enhance explainability of UQS FIQA algorithms when both are used together,
by giving insight into which individual quality components are considered low quality and
thus likely causing a lower UQS [4].
2.2
Open Source Face Image Quality (OFIQ) project
The Open Source Face Image Quality (OFIQ) project [4] serves as a reference imple­
mentation of ISO/IEC 29794­5 [4]. It is a vendor­agnostic open source framework for per­
forming face image quality assessments and the purpose of OFIQ and ISO/IEC 29794­5
is to improve interoperability of systems using face images by defining a common stan­
dard for face image quality [3], [10], [11]. It contains 1 UQS FIQA algorithm, which is a
MagFace FIQA, and 27 individual quality component FIQA algorithms [4]. Among the 27
quality components are over­ and under­exposure prevention, illumination uniformity, dy­
namic range, face occlusion prevention, and expression neutrality [4], to name a few. It
computes native CQMs and UQS and scalar CQMs and UQS. The native measures and
score are the values directly output by the algorithms. The scalar CQMs and UQS are
values in the range [0, 100] obtained by functions mapping the native CQMs and UQS to
the scalar range. Only the scalar CQMs and UQS are used in this thesis, so any mention
of a CQM or UQS will refer to the scalar values.
Preprocessing
The images input to OFIQ are preprocessed by being cropped and aligned. The cropped
and aligned images are used as input for some of the FIQA algorithms and other algo­
rithms in OFIQ, such as the UQS FIQA algorithm, face parsing algorithm, and landmark
estimation algorithm.
4
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:13==
(a) Original image.
(b) Image after OFIQ preprocessing.
Figure 2.1: Example of image before and after OFIQ preprocessing.
2.3
Definitions of Explainability and Interpretability
Many different definitions of explainability and interpretability are found in literature [14],
[8]. In this thesis, we use interpretability to mean how easy it is for a human to understand
an explanation. We use explainability to mean the act of explaining AI models and the
level to which the decisions of an AI model is explained. These definitions are similar to
those found in [8].
2.4
Visual Explainability Methods
Limited research has looked into enhancing explainability of FIQA algorithms, but some
approaches have been proposed. The following three approaches are described in liter­
ature. They all work on a very granular level, estimating the quality of small parts of the
image, down to the pixel level.
2.4.1
Class Activation Models
In recent years, one collection of methods, known as Class Activation Mappings (CAMs),
using visual means to increase explainability has gained popularity. The overall aim of
these methods is to provide insight into which parts of the image was used to make a
classification decision. CAMs output a heatmap overlain on the input image, which at­
tempts to show how much each area contributed to the classification decision. While
CAMs can be useful for increasing explainability of classification models, they are not
suited for directly explaining the decisions of FIQA algorithms, because FIQA algorithms
do not perform classifications, which is the same reason why they are not suitable for
explaining verification decisions made by face recognition systems [15], [16].
2.4.2
Pixel­Wise Quality Estimation
In [12] an inherently explainable Face Image Quality Assessment method is proposed.
It provides a pixel­wise quality estimation, thus estimating the quality of each individual
pixel in the face image. The pixel­wise approach enables them to output a heat­map
visualising the quality of each pixel. They demonstrate that this provides understandable
feedback for why a face image is considered low quality by the given face recognition
system. The pixel­wise FIQA approach works for any face recognition system, but a
model­specific quality estimation is computed for the given face recognition model, and
an image­specific quality regression model is build for the input image in order to compute
the pixel­wise quality estimation.
2.4.3
Activation Map Variation Analysis
In [13] they present an approach to explaining FIQA decisions by analysing the face recog­
nition activation mappings of high and low quality images. Their method can help enhance
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: The 98 ADNet landmarks. The image is borrowed from [4].
explainability of both the decisions of FIQA algorithms and the behaviour of face recogni­
tion models on low and high quality face images. It is difficult to discern any differences
between the activation mappings of the high and low quality images by simply looking at
them. To overcome this, they perform various activation map variation analyses, which
produce outputs showing clearer differences between high and low quality images.
2.5
Facial Landmark Estimation
Facial landmark estimation is the process of detecting certain landmarks in a face image,
i.e. very specific locations in the face.
The ADNet [17] algorithm is a state­of­the­art method for estimating the location of facial
landmarks in a face image. The largest model available in the official ADNet repository
detects 98 facial landmarks. The landmarks can be seen in figure 2.2. This largest ADNet
model is the model used for facial landmark estimation in OFIQ [4].
Each of the 98 landmarks has a unique number in the range 0­97. For example, landmark
54 is located at the tip of the nose, as shown in figure 2.2.
2.6
Random Forest Models
A random forest model is an ensemble method, first presented in [18]. Ensemble methods
for prediction use multiple weaker models that each reach a prediction, and the ensem­
ble model then makes a single prediction based on the predictions made by the weaker
models. For random forests, the weaker models are decision trees.
A decision tree is a supervised model used for prediction tasks. Two types of decision
trees exist, classification trees and regression trees. Classification trees are, as the name
suggests, used for classification tasks, and they predict the class label of an input. Re­
gression trees are used for regression tasks and predict a continuous numerical value
instead of a class label.
6
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:15==
The random forest is a more robust model for prediction than a single decision tree, due
to the variation in all the decision trees used in the forest. The variation is achieved by
introducing randomness in the construction of the trees [18]. This is done by bootstrap
aggregation and by considering only a randomly selected subset of the features in the
data set when splitting a node in a tree.
2.6.1
Hyperparameters
Random forests have a number of hyperparameters that determine how the trees grow,
and adjusting these hyperparameters can have great impact on the performance of the
model. Searching for better model performance through adjusting these hyperparameters
is called hyperparameter optimisation.
The hyperparameters include:
• Number of estimators: The number of decision trees in the random forest.
• Max features: The maximum number of features considered at each split in the
trees.
• Max depth: The maximum depth a tree is allowed to grow to.
• Minimum samples in leaf: The minimum number of samples required for a leaf
node. If splitting a node would result in one of the child nodes having fewer than
this number of samples, the split cannot be performed.
• Minimum samples to split: The minimum number of samples required in a node in
order to consider splitting it further.
• Bootstrapping: Whether or not to use bootstrap aggregation for the datasets used
to train each decision tree. Usually, random forests use this, and it is a part of why
they are called random. Even if bootstrapping is not used though, the random forest
model is still random, since the features considered at each split are also random.
The importance of a feature can be estimated by the mean decrease in the splitting cri­
terion provided by the feature across all trees. For classifiers, Gini impurity is often used.
For regressors, mean squared error is commonly used.
2.7
Error vs. Discard Characteristic (EDC) Curves
Error vs. Discard Characteristic (EDC) curves are a method used for visualising and
comparing the performance of quality assessment algorithms [19], such as Face Image
Quality Assessment Algorithms. An example EDC curve is shown in figure 2.3.
EDC curves measure an error [19]. Commonly, False Non­Match Rate (FNMR) is the
error measured. FNMR is a measure of how frequently a mated sample pair is decided to
be a non­match. This means that for a FNMR to be computed, a data set of mated sample
pairs is needed, and a biometric recognition system is needed, which for face images is a
face recognition system. The face recognition system is used to compute a comparison
score for each mated sample pair. A threshold for the comparison scores is then selected,
so if a comparison score is above the threshold, the mated sample pair is accepted as a
mach. The threshold is selected such that a certain FNMR is achieved when none of the
mated sample pairs are discarded, e.g. 10%.
An EDC curve shows the performance of a quality assessment algorithm. Each sample
(face image) is given a quality score by the FIQAA. Each mated sample pair needs a
quality score as well, and it is this quality score that will be used for discarding mated
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: EDC curve example.
sample pairs. Usually, the minimum of the quality score of each the two samples in the
mated sample pair is used as the quality score for the pair [19].
For a FIQAA to be useful, the FNMR should fall when the mated sample pairs with the low­
est quality scores are discarded. The faster the FNMR drops for an EDC curve compared
to other EDC curves created using other FIQA algorithms, the better the FIQA algorithm
is considered to be, compared to the other FIQA algorithms. This is what the error vs.
discard characteristic means. In an ideal scenario, the more poor quality mated sample
pairs that are discarded, the more the FNMR should decrease, since the mated sample
pairs with the lowest quality scores are discarded first, and the mated sample pairs with
the lowest quality scores should ideally also be the ones with the lowest comparison score
[19].
The partial Area Under Curve (pAUC) value is used to compare the EDC curves. The
pAUC value is computed in a specified discard fraction range, e.g. 0% to 40%. The lower
the pAUC value, the better the FIQAA is [19]. For a FNMR of 10%, the theoretical best
EDC curve is a straight line going through the points (0, 0.1) and (0.1, 0). This would mean
that removing 10% of the mated sample pairs removes exactly the mated sample pairs
that are false non­matches. When computing pAUC values, the theoretical best value
is usually subtracted. This results in a pAUC of 0 being the value for a perfect FIQA
algorithm.
2.8
Facial Esthetic Units
In [20] they define a number of Facial Esthetic Units. They define a Facial Esthetic Unit as
”an anatomical site classified as an area of similar facial contour characteristics that can
be distinguished from other areas”. The purpose of the Facial Esthetic Units is to have
clearly defined parts of the face that can be referenced and compared between faces.
Figure 2.4 shows the Facial Esthetic Units defined in [20].
8
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Facial Esthetic Units. The image is borrowed from [20].
2.9
Face Parsing
Face parsing is the process of performing segmentation on face images, segmenting the
face into different regions. These regions could for instance include nose, eyes, mouth,
etc.
A well­performing face parsing algorithm, face­parsing.PyTorch [21], is implemented in
OFIQ. This algorithm is a modified version of the BiSeNet [22] segmentation model archi­
tecture. Figure 2.5 shows an example of a face parsing map from face­parsing.PyTorch.
The example is taken directly from the GitHub repository of face­parsing.PyTorch.
The large blue region in figure 2.5 is called the Face Skin region.
Figure 2.5: Segmentation map example from face­parsing.PyTorch [21].
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Methodology
In this chapter, we describe the algorithms developed and experiments performed during
the work of this thesis. See appendix A for links to GitHub repositories containing the
source code for the algorithms and experiments.
3.1
Choice of Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
To limit scope, one UQS FIQA algorithm was chosen as the one in focus in the work
described in this thesis. The OFIQ project is currently highly relevant, its source code is
publicly available, and it is well documented, which made its UQS FIQA algorithm a great
candidate. Furthermore, the OFIQ project contains FIQA algorithms providing CQMs, and
CQM FIQA algorithms are needed to answer research question 3. Also, each of the FIQA
algorithms in OFIQ was selected as the best among a number of candidates [4], which
means they have all been demonstrated to be among the best algorithms for their specific
purpose. Thus, the MagFace­based UQS FIQA algorithm used in OFIQ was chosen as
the UQS FIQA algorithm in focus, and the CQM FIQA algorithms were chosen as the
CQM FIQA algorithms in focus.
3.2
Data Set
The datasets used for the experiments are subsets of the VGGFace2 dataset. The VG­
GFace2 dataset was chosen due to its high variation in poses, illumination, occlusion,
and more. It has also been used for similar experiments such as the evaluation of the
candidate algorithms for the Unified Quality Score in OFIQ [4].
The primary subset consists of a total of 197,684 images of 540 identities. There are not
equal numbers of images for each identity. See appendix A for where to find the exact
images used.
The exact data sets used for each experiment is described in the methodology section for
the experiment.
3.3
Fine­Grained Face Parsing (FGFP)
As mentioned in the introduction, existing explainability methods for FIQA algorithms work
on very granular parts of the face image. As a step in answering the research question
”How can computer vision and image analysis methods be used to create an interpretable
method for explaining decisions of Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms that pro­
vide a Unified Quality Score?”, and to address the issues with existing methods using
quality estimation of parts of the face image that are not tied to anything specific in the
face itself, it was necessary to define specific parts of the face to focus on estimating the
quality of. We will refer to these parts as regions in the rest of this thesis.
The OFIQ project contains an algorithm for face parsing, the face­parsing.PyTorch [21]
model based on BiSeNet [22], which was selected as the best of the candidate algorithms
considered [4]. Face parsing algorithms parse a face image into specific regions, exactly
as we needed. Since we are using the UQS FIQA algorithm and CQM FIQA algorithms
from OFIQ, using this face parsing algorithm was an obvious choice.
The Face Skin region (see section 2.9) computed by the face parsing algorithm in OFIQ
is very large and spread out across the whole face. Stating ”Face Skin” is of low quality
10
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:19==
in a given sample is not very precise because the region is so large. It could be of low
quality in some areas and fairly high in another, and overall the quality could likely still
be considered low. To solve this issue, we developed a new Fine­Grained Face Parsing
(FGFP) algorithm, parsing the face into smaller regions.
3.3.1
Potential Approaches to Fine­Grained Face Parsing Algorithm
One potential approach to an algorithm that calculates more fine­grained face regions was
to use the same approach as was used to create the BiSeNet­based face­parsing.PyTorch
algorithm [21] used in OFIQ. Thus, the FGFP algorithm could also be a machine learning
model based on BiSeNet [22], [23], trained to parse the face into more and smaller regions
than the existing model used in OFIQ. This would require a large dataset of face images
with all the regions defined and labelled.
Another approach was to base the FGFP algorithm on the face parsing mask output by
the OFIQ face parsing algorithm. The face parsing algorithm in OFIQ parses the face into
many good regions. It is only the Face Skin region that is too large and spread out across
the face for our purpose. Thus, we can divide the Face Skin region further into smaller
subregions to obtain a more fine­grained face parsing.
Due to unavailable data for training a new face parsing model based on BiSeNet [22], [23],
it was decided to use the existing face parsing algorithm in OFIQ and divide the Face Skin
region into smaller subregions.
3.3.2
Defining the FGFP Regions
The new Fine­Grained Face Parsing regions should be defined and based on something
tangible. We decided to base the approach on regions of the face defined in medical
literature. It is difficult to find sources for a proper definition of medical regions of the face,
but in [20] they define 12 Facial Esthetic Units which serve our purpose well.
In order to divide the Face Skin region further, it was necessary to define the new FGFP
regions based on specific locations in the face. The ADNet landmark detection algorithm
in OFIQ was great for this, with the 98 facial landmarks for which it estimates the locations.
We have limited the FGFP algorithm to only consider what is called the landmarked region
of the face, as used in OFIQ and defined in [4]. This excludes the forehead and includes
the rest of the face. The FGFP algorithm divides the landmarked region into eight new
regions, in addition to the regions output by the face parsing algorithm in OFIQ. The FGFP
algorithm does this by dividing the ”Face Skin” region output by the OFIQ face parsing
algorithm into smaller subregions.
The names of the eight new FGFP regions are based on the Facial Esthetic Units. The
names can be found in table 3.1. Most of them are fairly obviously named according to
a specific Facial Esthetic Unit that the region overlaps, with the exception of the left and
right ZygoInfroParo regions. ZygoInfroParo was decided as the name, because the FGFP
regions overlap the Facial Esthetic Units Zygomatic, Infraorbital, and Parotidmasseteric.
The FGFP regions are not in the exact same locations as the Facial Esthetic Units. A
compromise had to be made between the Facial Esthetic Units and the 98 available facial
landmarks.
The eight new regions computed by the FGFP algorithm are defined by the convex hull
given by a set of ADNet landmarks. The FGFP regions and their defining ADNet land­
marks are listed in table 3.1 together with their class number. All class numbers from 0­19
are existing regions computed by the OFIQ face parsing algorithm. Face Skin has class
number 1. The example image with ADNet landmarks from [17] and the FGFP regions
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
11
==PAGE:20==
(a) Example image with ADNet facial land­
marks. Image borrowed from [4].
(b) FGFP regions visualised for the image
in figure 3.1a. Light blue is non­FGFP re­
gions.
Figure 3.1: Image with ADNet landmarks and FGFP regions highlighted in face parsing mask.
visualised for that image are shown in figure 3.1. See also figure 3.2 later in section 3.4
for further illustration.
FGFP Region
ADNet Landmarks
Region
Class Number
Nasal
51, 64, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 68
20
RightOrbital
33, 41, 40, 39, 38, 51, 64, 63, 62, 61, 60
21
LeftOrbital
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72
22
Mental
82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 76, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
23
17, 18, 19, 20, 21
RightBuccal
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 76, 55
24
LeftBuccal
27, 26, 25, 24, 23, 22, 21, 82, 59
25
RightZygoInfraParo
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 55, 64, 65, 66, 67, 60
26
LeftZygoInfraParo
27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 72, 73, 74, 75, 68, 59, 82
27
Table 3.1: FGFP Regions, their ADNet landmarks defining the perimeter of the region, and their
class number.
3.3.3
Description of Fine­Grained Face Parsing Algorithm
The FGFP algorithm is implemented directly in the OFIQ source code in a repository1 on
GitHub, forked from the original OFIQ repository. See also appendix A.
Algorithm
In the face parsing algorithm in OFIQ [4], the input image I is cropped by 60 pixels from
the bottom, 30 pixels from the right, and 30 pixels from the left, giving image I′. Before
cropping, I has size 616x616. After cropping, I′ has size 556x556. I′ is then resized to
400x400, which results in I′′. After running I′′ through the face parsing model, the face
parsing image F is obtained. F has a size of 400x400 and is greyscale and thus has only
1 colour channel.
The FGFP algorithm takes two inputs. The first input is the face parsing mask F. The
second input is a vector L with the ADNet landmarks for the aligned image computed by
OFIQ [4].
1https://github.com/GustavNP/OFIQ­Project­FGFP
12
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:21==
To save space and reduce computation time, F is resized to size 200x200 pixels using
nearest­neighbour interpolation, resulting in image F’. Nearest­neighbour interpolation is
used because the pixel values in the face parsing image correspond to a specific face
parsing region. Other interpolation strategies, such as linear, would cause artifacts in F’.
The landmarks in L were computed on I and need to be scaled to fit F ′. For each landmark
l in L with coordinates (lx, ly) this is done by the following operations:
• l′
x = (lx −30) ∗200/(616 −60)
• l′
y = ly ∗200/(616 −60)
After performing these operations for each l in L, we obtain L′.
We create a dictionary RM with the FGFP region names as keys and empty values.
For each FGFP region key­value pair RMi, we create Mi, a 2­dimensional array of size
200x200 with zeros as elements. On each Mi, we draw the polygon defined by the land­
marks for the region corresponding to RMi. The polygon is drawn with all 1’s. Mi is now
a mask that defines the region corresponding to RMi. We set the value of RMi to Mi.
RM now maps the FGFP region name to the mask defining the region.
We define a dictionary RC with region names as keys and region class numbers as values.
We make a copy F ′′ of F ′. We then iterate through all pixels in F ′′. A pixel value of 1 in F ′′
corresponds to Face Skin. If a pixel F ′′[k, j] has value 1, we iterate through the key­value
pairs in RM and check if RMi[k, j] is equal to 1. When a region is encountered where
RMi[k, j] has value 1, we assign F ′′[k, j] = RC[key(RMi)], stop iterating further through
RM, and continue for the next pixel in F ′′.
Output F ′′.
3.3.4
Implementation Issues
There were some issues and important considerations in the implementation of the FGFP
algorithm. They will be described here.
Saving the FGFP Mask
The FGFP mask is saved in a lossless format, png. This is to ensure no pixels change
value due to compression artifacts. This is of great importance, because the pixel value
corresponds to the class number of the region to which a pixel belongs.
Asymmetric FGFP Regions Caused by Non­Order­Preserving Data Structure
The Nasal region is not symmetric in the generated face parsing masks. This error was
caused by subdividing the Face Skin region into the new FGFP regions in the wrong order,
due to using a data structure that is not order­preserving. This is explained further here
below.
Some of the FGFP regions overlap. This was a conscious design choice. We wanted to
have an FGFP Nasal region around the Nose region, to limit the size of the other FGFP
regions. The 98 ADNet landmarks had to be used to define and generate the FGFP
regions, but they are not defined for the purpose they are used for in this algorithm. To
define a Nasal region, it was necessary to let Nasal and other FGFP regions overlap
in their definitions. In the implementation of the algorithm, the regions were stored in a
data structure in order of importance, so the region deemed most important was stored
first, and the least important region was stored last. The intention with this ordering is
that each pixel in the Face Skin region will be assigned to the first (most important) of
the FGFP regions it is contained in. However, a wrong data structure was used in the
implementation. A dictionary was used, which is not order­preserving. This caused the
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
13
==PAGE:22==
pixels in the RightZygoInfraParo and RightBuccal regions overlapping with Nasal region to
be defined as RightZygoInfraParo or RightBuccal, instead of Nasal, which was supposed
to have higher priority. LeftZygoInfraParo and LeftBuccal did not have this issue. This is
why the Nasal region is less symmetric than expected in the FGFP masks.
By the time this error was noticed, there was unfortunately not enough time left before the
deadline to fix the error and re­do the experiments. The error has been kept in the code
for reproducibility purposes.
The regions are consistent in all the algorithms and experiments. The regions are not
vertically symmetric, as they were intended to be and which would be preferable. The
RightZygoInfraParo and RightBuccal regions are generally larger than the LeftZygoInfra­
Paro and LeftBuccal regions, which can cause some problems in comparing Right and
Left versions of the regions in the later experiments.
3.4
Region Removal
With the new Fine­Grained Face Parsing algorithm, the regions can be used for improving
explainability and interpretability of FIQA algorithm predictions. This is a step further in
the process of answering Research Question 1.
Adding black squares randomly to a face image is a method used in literature [12] for
assessing the importance of the area for the face image in various aspects, among these
quality and thus utility. Blacking out pixels in the image removes the signal and utility
of those pixels in the face recognition system. In order to estimate the quality of each
FGFP region, and thereby the importance of it for the UQS, we carried out an experiment
using the same approach of removing areas by blacking out pixels. In this Region Re­
moval experiment though, the entire FGFP regions and eight regions from the existing
face parsing mask in OFIQ are removed by blacking them out, instead of using random
squares. Figure 3.2 shows the 16 regions.
The Region Removal experiment removes a region by blacking it out, and then computes
the UQS of this modified version of the image. Since the UQS describes the utility of a
face image in a face recognition system, a drop in UQS when removing a region indicates
the pixels in that region have utility in a face recognition system. A large drop indicates
high utility, while a low drop or an increase indicates low utility. Based on this assumption,
the Region Removal method can be used to find the mean importance of each region for
the UQS.
3.4.1
Data
For the experiment, a smaller subset of the subset with 197,684 images from VGGFace2
dataset was used. The subset consists of 50 images of each of the 540 identities, giving
a total of 27,000 samples. Information about the exact images used is available through
the Region Removal GitHub repository2.
All of the 27,000 samples were preprocessed by cropping and aligning them using the
algorithm for this in OFIQ, described in section 2.2 and in more detail in [4]. The Fine­
Grained Face Parsing masks were then computed for each of the cropped and aligned
images.
They were then resized to size 222x222 using bilinear interpolation. This size corresponds
to the 200x200 pixel FGFP mask, due to the cropping of the input image performed in the
FGFP algorithm.
2https://github.com/GustavNP/RegionRemoval­and­HelperScripts
14
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:23==
For each of the 27,000 samples, a copy of the image was created for each of the 8 new
FGFP regions and these 8 existing regions: Left Eye Brow, Right Eye Brow, Left Eye,
Right Eye, Nose, Mouth, Upper Lip, Lower Lip. Thus, a total of 16 images with a specific
region removed were created for each image, giving a total of 459,000 images, including
the original aligned images with no region removed.
The MagFace UQS of all 459,000 images was computed using the implementation in
OFIQ. Thus, all the images were preprocessed by OFIQ by cropping and aligning them
once again before running them through the UQS FIQA algorithm.
Figure 3.2 shows an example face image and its 16 corresponding Region Removal im­
ages, each with a specific region removed by blacking it out.
(a) Original
(b)
Left
Eye
Brow
(c) Right Eye
Brow
(d) Left Eye
(e) Right Eye
(f) Nose
(g) Mouth
(h) Upper Lip
(i) Lower Lip
(j) Nasal
(k) Right Or­
bital
(l) Left Orbital
(m) Mental
(n) Right Buc­
cal
(o) Left Buccal
(p) Right Zy­
goInfraParo
(q)
Left
Zy­
goInfraParo
Figure 3.2: Example image with its corresponding Region Removal images.
3.4.2
Considerations for Evaluation
For the analysis of the Region Removal images, only images where a region actually
exists are considered. That is, if a region r has a size of 0 pixels in the FGFP mask for
an image Ioriginal, the image Ir with r removed, which is then identical to Ioriginal, is not
considered in the statistical analysis.
In order to make a fair comparison between the regions, we define the measure Difference
per Pixel (DP). We define it as:
DP(Iremoved) = UQS(Ioriginal) −UQS(Iremoved)
RPC(Iremoved)
(3.1)
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
15
==PAGE:24==
where Ioriginal is the original image, Iremoved is a copy of Ioriginal with a region removed,
UQS is the Unified Quality Score, RPC is the pixel count of the region that has been
removed in Iremoved.
3.5
Face Region Quality Estimation (FRQE)
While the Fine­Grained Face Parsing algorithm and the Region Removal experiment
should help explain the decisions of a FIQA algorithm on their own, the Region Removal
experiment focuses mainly on distributions over the entire data set.
To explain individual decisions of FIQA algorithms in a more interpretable way, and thus
giving a better answer to ”How can computer vision and image analysis methods be used
to create an interpretable method for explaining decisions of Face Image Quality Assess­
ment algorithms that provide a Unified Quality Score?”, a Face Region Quality Estimation
(FRQE) algorithm was developed. The purpose of the FRQE algorithm is, as the name
suggests, to estimate the quality of regions in a captured face image. The FRQE algorithm
is available on GitHub3.
3.5.1
FRQE Based on Existing Explainability Methods
Since the pixel­level quality estimation and activation map variation approaches described
in section 2.4 are more granular than the regions in the face parsing mask (single pixel
or CNN node vs. a region made up of many pixels), these approaches could be used
to assign a single quality score to each region by manipulating the more granular quality
scores/explanations of the individual pixels or CNN nodes inside each region.
Our first approach to designing the FRQE algorithm was to base it on the pixel­level quality
estimations from XFIQ [12]. The quality estimation of a region was computed by taking
the average of the pixel­level quality estimation of the pixels in the region. However, it
was found that this approach tends to smooth out the high quality pixel estimations too
much, making it difficult to discern differences in quality between the regions. Essentially,
averaging the pixel­level quality estimations removes most of the explainability signals
obtained by the approach.
3.5.2
FRQE Based on Region Removal
Due to the disappointing results of the approach based on an existing more granular
method, described in the previous section, it was decided to try a different approach.
Instead of basing the FRQE algorithm on existing methods, the outputs of the Region
Removal experiment are used.
Either the total difference in UQS between the original face image and region­removed
face image can be used for the region quality estimation, or the difference in UQS per
pixel (DP, as defined in equation 3.1).
The region quality estimations should be useful for comparing regions with each other.
Due to the difference in size of the face regions, we find the region quality estimations
should indicate the average utility of the pixels in the region, rather than the total utility of
the region. Otherwise, the FRQE would possibly view larger regions as being of higher
quality. Thus, the FRQE algorithm will use the DP values of regions for estimating quality.
An increase or no change in UQS when removing a region indicates either no or very little
utility of the pixels in the region. Thus, we can set the quality estimation to 0 for these
regions. By looking at the distributions of DP values from the Region Removal experiment,
presented later in chapter 4, we found a DP higher than 0.1 to be in the higher end, and
3https://github.com/GustavNP/FaceRegionQualityEstimation
16
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:25==
thus any value above 0.1 can be considered high and without much need for improvement.
Thus, we can set the quality estimation to 0.1 for regions with a DP ≥0.
The FRQE will thus be computed using the following definition:
FRQE(I, r) =





0,
if DP(Ir) < 0
0.1,
if DP(Ir) > 0.1
DP(Ir),
otherwise
(3.2)
where I is the face image, r is the region, Ir is the face image with r removed, and DP
is as defined in equation 3.1.
The Face Region Quality Estimations can be visually displayed using a heatmap, in the
same manner as they do in [12]. They use a colour gradient going from red for low quality,
to yellow for medium quality, and green for high quality. Since the quality estimations in
FRQE are between 0 and 0.1, those values are set as the minimum and maximum values
for the heatmap image. Thus, region quality estimations are consistent between images,
instead of being image­specific.
Figure 3.3: Example face image and corresponding FRQE heatmap.
Figure 3.3 shows an example of a heatmap output by the FRQE algorithm.
3.6
Usability Study
To answer Research Question 2, ”How well does the proposed explainability method per­
form as a feedback tool for the operator of a Face Recognition System, guiding them
to capture face images of higher quality?”, a usability study was designed and carried
out. The usability study was designed to assess how the FRQE heatmaps compare to
very granular state­of­the­art explainability heatmaps in terms of interpretability and ex­
plainability. The FRQE heatmaps were compared with heatmaps using pixel­level quality
estimations computed by XFIQ [12].
The study was carried out by asking users a series of standardised questions. The exact
structure of the study, questions asked, and examples shown are described in appendix
B and the responses can be found in appendix C, but the high­level structure is also
described here below.
We assumed most people do not understand what the terms interpretability and explain­
ability exactly mean, and there are even many different definitions of the terms in literature.
To address this issue and still measure the interpretability and explainability, we swapped
the terms with intuitive and useful, which we hoped would be easier to understand, while
still carrying a similar meaning.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
17
==PAGE:26==
Three images and their corresponding FRQE and XFIQ heatmaps were shown to the
users. Figure 3.4 shows one of the images and its corresponding heatmaps as they were
shown in the study. One image and its heatmaps was shown at a time. For each image,
the users were asked which explaining heatmap they found more intuitive. After seeing
all three images, they were asked which heatmap they found more intuitive overall. They
were also asked which heatmap they would find more intuitive, and which they would find
more useful, if they were to receive training in better understanding and using them.
(a) FRQE heatmap
(b) XFIQ heatmap
Figure 3.4: One of three images used in usability study and its corresponding FRQE and XFIQ
heatmaps.
Eight users participated in the usability study. None of them were experts in the field or
related fields.
3.7
Random Forests for Predicting UQS using CQMs
Random forest models were decided on as appropriate methods for attempting to answer
Research Question 3 and its sub­questions. For clarity, Research Question 3 is listed
again here below.
How can Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms that provide Component Quality
Measures be used to explain the decisions of Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms
that provide a Unified Quality Score?
• Can Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms that provide Component Quality
Measures be used to create a new Face Image Quality Assessment algorithm that
provides a Unified Quality Score?
• How good is the performance of a Face Image Quality Assessment algorithm that
provides a Unified Quality Score based on Component Quality Measures?
18
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:27==
Since CQMs explain which components of a face image are low­ and high­quality, they
provide some explanation of the quality of a face image. If all of the CQMs are of low
quality, then the UQS would likely also be of low quality. However, this does not mean that
each CQM provides the same level of explanation of the UQS. Since the MagFace FIQA
algorithm is black­box, we do not know how the model makes decisions about quality, and,
by extension, utility. The MagFace FIQA algorithm could have found certain components
more important to quality than others.
We hypothesise that the CQMs in OFIQ can be used to predict the UQS computed in
OFIQ, since they measure quality of a broad set of quality components. If the CQMs
can be used to predict the UQS using a white­box method, it can provide insight into the
importance of each CQM for prediction, which in turn gives us a better understanding of
how the UQS FIQA algorithm makes its decisions.
It is also possible that the UQS predictions of a machine learning model trained to predict
MagFace UQS based on CQMs could in fact outperform the MagFace UQS itself. This
could happen if some of the CQMs contain quality information that is not captured by
the MagFace model. The inaccuracy in prediction, which is likely to occur, could then
be beneficial if the inaccuracy is due to more quality information found and used for the
prediction. If the hypothetical quality information not captured in the MagFace model
is considered high quality by the CQMs, the predicted UQS could be higher than the
MagFace FIQA algorithm, and opposite, if it is considered low quality by the CQMs, the
predicted UQS could be lower than the MagFace algorithm. Thereby, the predictions by
the model trained to predict the UQS computed by the MagFace FIQA algorithm could
actually outperform the MagFace FIQA algorithm as a UQS FIQA algorithm. In fact, a
similar approach was found to perform the best for fingerprint image quality assessment
in NFIQ 2 [24].
In NFIQ 2 they define two classes of fingerprint images, very high utility and very low utility.
A random forest classifier is then trained to predict whether an image is of high or low
utility, using a feature vector of individual quality features, similar to OFIQ’s Component
Quality Measures. NFIQ 2 then takes the probability that a fingerprint image belongs
to the high­utility class, multiplies the probability by 100, rounds to the nearest integer,
and that integer value is the NFIQ 2 score for the fingerprint image. However, they use
comparison scores instead of UQS to train on.
There are significant similarities between the available data in OFIQ and the data used
in NFIQ 2. Due to these similarities and the performance of the NFIQ 2 algorithm based
on a random forest classifier, we wish to investigate if a similar approach for face images
can outperform the MagFace model used in OFIQ as a UQS.
In addition, we investigate the potential of using a random forest regressor instead of a
random forest classifier.
3.7.1
Data
Images from the VGGFace2 data set were used. The 27 CQMs and single UQS were
calculated using OFIQ for the subset of 197,684 images from VGGFace2. The data set
was divided into a training set with 158,180 samples (80%) and a test set with 39,504
samples (20%).
The scalar EyesVisible CQM had null values, which were resolved by setting their value
to 0.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
19
==PAGE:28==
3.7.2
Ablation
We want to investigate the effect of considering only a subset of the CQMs in the training
of random forest models.
The feature selection was based on the performance of each CQM as a quality score.
This was measured using EDC curves. 25% of the samples from the training set with
158,180 samples was used to create the EDC curves.
For the ablation study, it would be interesting to see how the random forest models per­
form, if the worst performing CQMs are excluded as features. To test this, we trained
models considering only the top 24, 20, 15 and 10 CQMs, to see how the performance of
the random forest models change when only considering these CQMs.
3.7.3
EDC Curves
EDC curves for evaluation were created with a starting FNMR of 10%. The pAUC values
were computed in the discard fraction range [0.0, 0.4]. It is the same discard fraction
range and FNMR that was used for the evaluation of candidate UQS FIQA algorithms for
OFIQ in [4]. The pAUC values used in this thesis are the values without subtracting the
theoretical best pAUC. It would have been better to subtract the theoretical best, since it
is the commonly used standard, and results in a pAUC of 0 being the value for a perfect
FIQA algorithm, making it easier to understand how well a FIQA algorithms performs.
The test set with 39,504 samples and 1,556,844 mated sample pairs was used to create
the EDC curves.
The comparison scores for the mated sample pairs were computed using Facenet512
[25] and cosine distance measure as the comparison score. YuNet [26] was used for face
detection. The code for creating the mated sample pairs and computing their comparison
score is based on code previously developed by the authors in a course at the Technical
University of Denmark. Much of it is changed, but elements are reused.
The minimum quality score of the two samples in a mated sample pair was used as the
quality score for the mated sample pair.
The EDC curves were computed using a modified version of ERCWare (developed by
Martin Olsen and Elham Tabassi, provided by Hochschule Darmstadt, i.e., Christoph
Busch [27]). The modified version of ERCWare was developed previously by the authors
in a course at the Technical University of Denmark.
3.7.4
Random Forest Classifier (RFC)
Data
The random forest classifier should classify samples as low or high quality. We define
samples of low quality as 10 ≤UQS ≤50 and high quality as 51 ≤UQS ≤100. Dif­
ferent thresholds for low and high quality samples were tested before deciding on these.
Different models were trained using the different thresholds, and the results are found in
appendix D.1.
15,000 samples were randomly selected from each class. They were all taken from the
training set with 158,180 samples. These 30,000 samples were divided into a training and
test set, with 24,000 samples in the training set and 6,000 samples in the test set. The
test set has 3,027 samples in the high­quality class and 2,973 samples in the low­quality
class.
Training
The random forest classifier was trained using 5­fold cross validation. The training set
with 24,000 samples was used to train. Gini impurity was used as criterion for feature
20
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:29==
selection.
Hyperparameter optimisation was used to find the best hyperparameters for an RFC
model. 22 hyperparameter settings were manually defined using insights from a previ­
ous random search approach, all with 100 or 200 estimators. Due to limited space and
computation resources, 200 was chosen as the maximum number of estimators for can­
didate hyperparameter settings. The settings can be found in appendix D.2. Each setting
was given a name like Specific XX because it made some things easier in the evalua­
tion process. Specific refers to the hyperparameter settings being exact, as opposed to
Broad, which was used to refer to broad randomized searches. A model was trained with
each hyperparameter setting for each ablation.
Evaluation
Training the random forest classifier had two purposes, testing its performance as a UQS
FIQA algorithm and analysing how important each CQM is for predicting the MagFace
UQS. Thus, it is not very relevant to compare the accuracy of the 22 models. Computing
the EDC curves for the 22 models and comparing their pAUC values is the appropriate
method to assess the performance of each model as a FIQA algorithm. Feature impor­
tances were computed to analyse the importance of each CQM for predicting MagFace
UQS.
3.7.5
Random Forest Regressor (RFR)
Data
The training and test sets with 158,180 and 39,504 samples, respectively, were used.
Training
Similarly to the methodology for training random forest classifiers, optimisation was used
to find the best performing hyperparameter settings for the RFR model. As a compro­
mise between the results of an initial random search approach and limited computing
and storage resources, the number of estimators for the random forest regressors was
again limited to 200. Min. samples in leaf and min. samples to split were found as the
most interesting hyperparameters to experiment with further. Again, due to the limited
resources, five candidate hyperparameter settings were defined using the results of the
random search. For each of the hyperparameter settings, a random forest regressor was
trained. The five candidate settings can be found in appendix E.1. They use the same
names as was used in the RFC experiment, which is the reason for the names Specific
4, 6, 9, 10, 11. They all have 200 estimators and a max depth of 30. Specific 6 has max.
features=6, the other four use sqrt. Min. samples in leaf and Min. samples to split range
from 1 and 2 to 16 and 32.
The random forest regressors were trained using 5­fold cross validation. Mean squared
error was used as the criterion for feature selection.
Evaluation
As with the random forest classifier, training the random forest regressor had two pur­
poses, testing its performance as a UQS FIQA algorithm and analysing how important
each CQM is for predicting the MagFace UQS. Computing the EDC curves for the five
models of each ablation and comparing their pAUC values is the appropriate method to
assess the performance of each model as a FIQA algorithm. Feature importances were
again calculated to analyse the importance of each CQM in predicting MagFace UQS.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
21
==PAGE:30==
4
Results and Evaluation
4.1
Region Removal
With the Region Removal experiment we aim to contribute to answering Research Ques­
tion 1.
4.1.1
Results
Figure 4.1 shows the distributions of UQS for images with a specific region removed,
together with the distribution of UQS for the images without any region removed. Figure
4.1.a shows distributions for the eight existing regions we consider, computed by the face
parsing algorithm in OFIQ. Figure 4.1.b shows the distributions for the eight new FGFP
regions. We see that removing the Nose and Nasal regions tends to give a much lower
UQS, and images with the FGFP regions removed also have a significantly lower UQS.
Images with the existing face parsing regions removed, not including Nose, also skew
further towards lower UQS than UQS of the original images, but not nearly as much as
the Nose, Nasal, and FGFP regions.
(a) Existing Regions
(b) FGFP Regions
Figure 4.1: Distributions of UQS for images with specific regions removed.
In 4.2, the distributions of the differences in UQS between original images and images
with a region removed. The difference was computed by taking the UQS of each image
Ir with a region removed and subtracting it from the UQS of the corresponding image
Ioriginal without any regions removed. Here we see that, for most images, the removal of
a region lowers the UQS, resulting in a positive difference in UQS. However, for all regions,
22
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:31==
there are some images where the removal of the region actually causes an increase in
UQS, resulting in a negative difference. Table 4.1 shows that the Nose and Nasal regions
also have the highest mean difference in UQS with µ = 29.74 and µ = 26.54, respectively.
Seeing as UQS are in the range [0, 100], these mean differences in UQS are very high.
In comparison, the mean difference for the smaller regions around the eyes are all below
12. These regions include the left and right Orbital, Eye and EyeBrow regions.
(a) Existing Regions
(b) FGFP Regions
Figure 4.2: Distributions of difference in UQS for images with specific regions removed.
The distributions of difference in UQS per pixel, DP, as defined in 3.1, are shown in figure
4.3. Here we can see that removing the regions around the eyes cause the largest differ­
ence in UQS per pixel. These regions include the left and right Orbital, Eye and EyeBrow.
Looking at table 4.1, we also see that Nose and Nasal do not have the highest mean DP,
as they did in total difference. The highest mean DP values are instead found for Left Eye
and Right Eye, with mean values of µ = 0.105 and µ = 0.107.
Figure 4.4 shows heatmaps highlighting relative importance of removing each region with
respect to different measures. For instance, 4.4.a shows the mean difference in UQS
obtained by removing each region, relatively to all the other regions. These heatmaps
make it easy to see that the larger regions have a higher mean total difference, whereas
the regions around the eyes have a higher mean DP.
4.1.2
Evaluation
The Region Removal experiment and the Fine­Grained Face Parsing algorithm were cre­
ated as steps in answering Research Question 1, which is presented again here.
How can computer vision and image analysis methods be used to create an interpretable
method for explaining decisions of Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms that pro­
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
23
==PAGE:32==
(a) Existing Regions
(b) FGFP Regions
Figure 4.3: Distributions of DP for images with specific regions removed.
24
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:33==
Region Removed
Mean ­∆UQS
σ
Mean DP
σ
Left Eye Brow
5.42
6.41
0.074
0.104
Right Eye Brow
5.54
5.96
0.074
0.138
Left Eye
2.28
6.14
0.105
0.160
Right Eye
3.56
6.16
0.107
0.139
Nose
29.74
13.37
0.050
0.031
Mouth
1.56
5.53
0.021
0.095
Upper Lip
1.55
5.71
0.019
0.060
Lower Lip
6.63
6.95
0.035
0.044
Nasal
26.54
14.50
0.058
0.035
Left Orbital
11.91
7.34
0.067
0.120
Right Orbital
11.86
7.52
0.070
0.096
Mental
12.30
7.38
0.012
0.009
Left Buccal
8.55
5.43
0.017
0.020
Right Buccal
11.77
6.68
0.020
0.017
Left ZygoInfraParo
16.73
8.64
0.021
0.027
Right ZygoInfraParo
18.88
9.72
0.023
0.026
Table 4.1: Mean difference and mean difference per pixel in UQS caused by removing each
region.
vide a Unified Quality Score?
From the results, we find removing Nose and Nasal regions to cause the greatest reduc­
tion in UQS. This is proven by the distributions and mean values of the differences in UQS
between original images and their region­removed images. This suggests these regions
are the most important of all 16 considered regions for quality. One could argue that this
is the case, but that does not mean that all the pixels in those two regions are more im­
portant than the pixels in the other regions. The Nose and Nasal regions are also large
compared to some of the other regions, such as the eyes and orbital regions, meaning
they contain more pixels. If all pixels in the image have equal utility, then the removal of
larger regions should have a greater impact on the UQS.
DP values are a more fair comparison between the regions. Some regions are large, and
some are smaller, which might be a factor in how much removing the region impacts the
UQS. The DP value is a measure of the average impact that removal of a pixel from a
given region has on the UQS, and that information has greater value than knowing the
total impact on UQS caused by removing a region. From the DP distributions and mean
values for removal of each region, illustrated by figures 4.3 and 4.1, we can see that the
impact on UQS, that removing each region has, is more balanced. It also makes the
regions around the eyes more important than the other larger regions, which is consistent
with literature [12], [13].
The results of the Region Removal experiment shows that the Fine­Grained Face Parsing
regions can be used to explain the importance of pixels in each region for quality. Some
regions are more important than others. The Mental region has the lowest mean DP of the
FGFP regions, and in fact of all 16 regions, with µ = 0.012. The Right Orbital region has
the highest mean DP of the FGFP regions with µ = 0.070. This is a very large difference.
This is further illustrated by the distributions in figure 4.3.b. If the Face Skin region of the
OFIQ face parsing algorithm had not been split into the new FGFP regions, the pixels in
the Right Orbital and Mental regions would have had the same mean DP, even though
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
25
==PAGE:34==
(a) Mean difference (−∆UQS)
(b) Mean DP
Figure 4.4: Heatmaps showing relative impact of removing each region. The relative importances
are image­specific. Purple is less impact, yellow is higher.
our results show they do not have equal importance for quality in the MagFace FIQA
algorithm.
The results of the Region Removal experiment show that it is possible to base explain­
ability methods for FIQA algorithms on semi­granular parts of the face, namely the clearly
defined Fine­Grained Face Parsing regions. Thus, the FGFP algorithm and the results of
the Region Removal experiment give a partial answer to Research Question 1.
Potential Errors in Region Removal experiment and FGFP algorithm
There were some errors in the implementation of the FGFP algorithm and some poten­
tial problems highlighted by the Region Removal experiment. They are explored in the
following sections.
Error in FGFP implementation
In section 3.3.4, an error in the implementation of the FGFP algorithm was described.
This error causes the Right ZygoInfraParo and Right Buccal regions to be larger than
intended, and larger than their Left counterparts, because they include some pixels that
were meant to be contained in the Nasal region. We see that Right ZygoInfraParo and
Right Buccal have higher mean difference and DP than their left counterparts. This may
be caused by larger regions having a larger impact on the UQS, but we would then not
expect the DP between the left and right regions to be different. That is assuming region
impact on UQS scales linearly with size. However, for the Right Orbital, Right Eye and
Right Eye Brow, they all also have higher or equal mean difference and DP than their
Left counterparts. This suggests that the MagFace FIQA algorithm values the right side
of the face higher, or the data set used is not completly balanced in terms of where in the
sample face images there are low and high quality areas.
Missing FGFP Regions
The FGFP algorithm does not always successfully find every defined region. This can
happen because a region is occluded, such as eyes or eyebrows being occluded by hair
or glasses. Another reason can be that the OFIQ face parsing algorithm fails to parse the
regions correctly. This would mean the existing regions are not parsed correctly. It can
also affect the FGFP regions if the Face Skin region is not parsed correctly by the OFIQ
face parsing algorithm, since the FGFP regions depend on the Face Skin region. Even
if the OFIQ face parsing algorithm successfully parses all the existing regions, parsing of
the FGFP regions by the FGFP algorithm can still fail. This can happen if the landmark
detection algorithm fails to correctly estimate the location of the 98 landmarks. Wrong
26
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:35==
placement of a landmark on the face image can cause FGFP regions to be parsed incor­
rectly for those regions that have the incorrectly placed landmark as part of their defining
landmarks.
Region
Images With No Pixels
Left Eye Brow
2909
Right Eye Brow
2905
Left Eye
6592
Right Eye
6415
Nose
506
Mouth
12605
Upper Lip
919
Lower Lip
693
Nasal
103
Right Orbital
1254
Left Orbital
1150
Mental
89
Right Buccal
165
Left Buccal
129
Right ZygoInfraParo
155
Left ZygoInfraParo
121
Table 4.2: Images with zero pixels in the specified region.
Figure 4.2 shows how many of the 27,000 face images do not have any pixels in each
region. Some of them have a significantly higher count than others. Mouth is the region
that could not be parsed for the most images, with the region not being parsed in 12,605
images. This is primarily because Mouth is the area between the upper and lower lip, so
if the subject has a closed mouth, Mouth will not exist.
Left/Right Eye regions are not present in a large number of images, approximately 6,500
images each. Upon investigation, it turns out that this is primarily due to the subject wear­
ing glasses. Glasses are parsed as a region, Glasses, by itself in the face­parsing.PyTorch
[21] model, so eyes will not be parsed, even if they are visible through the lenses.
A large number of the images do not have any pixels in the Left/Right Eye Brow regions,
approximately 2,900 for each. Only after running the Region Removal experiment did
we learn that scaling and aligning a face image can have a greater impact on the perfor­
mance of face detection algorithms than we had assumed. Due to time constraints, it was
not possible to fix this issue. The next paragraph explores the potential impact of using
cropped and aligned images.
Cropped and Aligned versus Unaltered Images
The cropped and aligned images were used instead of the unaltered images due to how
preprocessing, FIQA, and face parsing algorithms are implemented in OFIQ. The FGFP
algorithm was implemented as an extension of OFIQ. Thus, it was necessary to use the
cropped and aligned images for the FGFP algorithm as well, in order to avoid having to
transform the OFIQ face parsing mask back to undo the cropping and aligning performed
on the image before it was used as input to the OFIQ face parsing algorithm. The cropped
and aligned image is also used as input for the UQS FIQA algorithm in OFIQ.
When designing the Region Removal experiment, we made the assumption that using
the cropped and aligned images as input to OFIQ would have no or very little impact on
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
27
==PAGE:36==
the UQS. This assumption was made based on the fact that any face image input to OFIQ
is cropped and aligned before being run through the MagFace UQS FIQA algorithm and
the face parsing algorithm. This assumption held when testing on a few images. Using
the cropped and aligned face images for the Region Removal experiment was deemed
simpler than transforming the FGFP masks to fit the unaltered face images. Transforming
the FGFP mask also carried a risk of creating artifacts. Artifacts in the FGFP mask are
more problematic than artifacts in the face image, because the pixel values in the FGFP
mask determine the exact region that any given pixel belongs to.
As mentioned, using the cropped and aligned images for the Region Removal experiment
could potentially have been the cause of the missing regions. To investigate this, a subset
of 100 face images was selected, where Left Eye Brow was not identified. The OFIQ
algorithm was run on the unaltered, so not cropped and aligned, versions of the face
images in the subset. The pixel count of the Left Eye Brow region in each unaltered
image was then compared to the pixel count of the Left Eye Brow in the corresponding
cropped and aligned image. The region pixel count was 0 for all unaltered images and all
cropped and aligned images. It is still possible that the cropping and aligning contributes
to the failed parsings, since the input image to OFIQ is cropped and aligned before being
run through the UQS FIQA algorithm and the face parsing algorithm.
After learning that cropping and aligning could potentially have a greater effect than first
anticipated, we decided to compare the UQS of all 27,000 unaltered images with their
corresponding cropped and aligned image. Note that unaltered and cropped and aligned
refers to the image used as input for OFIQ. The input images are still cropped and aligned
as a preprocessing step in OFIQ before running the image through the UQS FIQA algo­
rithm, OFIQ face parsing algorithm, and then the FGFP algorithm.
The cropped and aligned images were found to have 0.26 points lower UQS on average
than their unaltered versions, with a standard deviation of 3.17. Figure 4.5 shows a his­
togram of the frequency of differences in UQS between original image and the cropped
and aligned image. The scale is logarithmic. The histogram shows there is a low dif­
ference in UQS for the vast majority of the 27,000 images. There are some significant
outliers. Upon investigation, it turns out those images contain multiple faces, and using
the cropped and aligned image instead of the original image causes another face to be
identified as the primary face in the image.
From these experiments, we conclude that using the already cropped and aligned images
as input to OFIQ is unlikely to be the cause of unsuccessful parsing of regions. In most
cases, it also has a low effect on the UQS.
4.2
Face Region Quality Estimation
Figure 4.6 shows two face images and their FRQE heatmaps. The face images both have
regions that are of low quality, and thus low utility. The cause of the low quality is different
for the two images. The low quality in figure 4.6.a is caused by an occlusion of the face,
namely a finger and hand. The low quality in figure 4.6.b is due to low illumination on one
side of the face. These two examples show that the FRQE algorithm can successfully
estimate the quality of regions of the face.
The Face Region Quality Estimation algorithm further answers Research Question 1. It
provides an interpretable heatmap, that is able to highlight regions of low quality. It works
for multiple causes of low quality. With the examples used in this thesis, we have shown
it works for low quality regions caused by low illumination and occlusions of the face.
28
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.5: Histogram of difference in UQS between original and cropped and aligned images.
Note that the y­axis is logarithmic.
(a) Occlusion
(b) Low illumination
Figure 4.6: FRQE heatmaps showing low quality regions with different causes.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
29
==PAGE:38==
4.3
Usability study
The study found our FRQE heatmaps to be more interpretable for users in general than
XFIQ heatmaps using more granular pixel­level quality estimations. Seven out of eight
users found the FRQE heatmaps more intuitive than the XFIQ heatmaps. The last user
preferred XFIQ overall in terms of intuitiveness, and for each individual image, but found
FRQE heatmaps intuitive too.
Four users found the FRQE and XFIQ heatmaps to be almost equally intuitive for one
face image, but it was not the same image for all four users. One user thought the two
heatmaps were equally intuitive for image 3 and did not provide a reason, while two users
found the two heatmaps equally intuitive for image 2 due to more high quality (green)
pixels in the XFIQ heatmap. The last user found the XFIQ heatmap more intuitive than
the FRQE heatmap for image 2.
When asked which heatmap they thought would be more intuitive and which one would
be more useful, if they were to receive training to further understand the FRQE and XFIQ
heatmaps, the results were closer and more nuanced. All users except two felt that the
FRQE heatmaps would still be more intuitive, but they were less sure in their response. In
terms of usefulness, the users found that it depends on the use case. Five users thought
they would find XFIQ heatmaps more useful than FRQE, if it is relevant to look at small
details in the image, with one user giving the example of zooming in on a scar. Another
user, who said they preferred XFIQ heatmaps, if it is relevant to look at small details,
mentioned they would still find FRQE more useful, if it is to understand more broadly, for
example if there is a hand in front of the face. The last three users thought they would
find FRQE more useful also after receiving training. They felt that the XFIQ heatmaps
seemed random and could be describing anything, giving examples including forest fires
and energy grids.
It is worth noting that the users finding XFIQ heatmaps difficult to understand, and thus
believing they would find FRQE most useful even after receiving training, may in fact find
XFIQ heatmaps more useful, if they learn to understand them better through training. This
can only be determined by a more extensive study, where users a questioned before and
after receiving training.
One user mentioned they would prefer having both heatmaps shown, instead of choosing
one of them. They would like to use the FRQE heatmap to get a quick understanding
of the quality in the face image, and then use the XFIQ heatmap to investigate details.
It would be interesting to ask users how they feel about this option in a more extensive
study.
Two users said they believe they would find the FRQE heatmaps useful on their own, even
without the face image shown alongside them. This was not the case for XFIQ heatmaps.
None of the users are experts in the field. Professional operators of a face recognition
system, for example at border controls, may feel different about each of the heatmaps.
The usability study answers Research Question 2, ”How well does the proposed explain­
ability method perform as a feedback tool for the operator of a Face Recognition System,
guiding them to capture face images of higher quality?”. The results of the study suggest
that FRQE heatmaps have higher interpretability than heatmaps created by a state­of­the­
art explainability method for FIQA algorithms. However, the explainability of the FRQE
heatmaps may be lower.
30
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:39==
4.4
Random Forests
The random forest classifiers and regressors were trained to predict the Unified Qual­
ity Score based on Component Quality Scores. With this, we aim to answer Research
Question 3, listed again here below for increased readability.
How can Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms that provide Component Quality
Measures be used to explain the decisions of Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms
that provide a Unified Quality Score?
• Can Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms that provide Component Quality
Measures be used to create a new Face Image Quality Assessment algorithm that
provides a Unified Quality Score?
• How good is the performance of a Face Image Quality Assessment algorithm that
provides a Unified Quality Score based on Component Quality Measures?
4.4.1
Component Quality Measures as Quality Scores
The individual performance of the CQM FIQA algorithms as quality scores was assessed
using EDC curves. The pAUC values for the EDC curves of all 27 CQM algorithms are
shown in table 4.3 in sorted order. The three best and worst CQMs, with respect to their
performance as a quality score, measured by pAUC values, are shown in figure 4.7. From
figure 4.7 and table 4.3 we can see that the three worst performing CQMs actually increase
the FNMR. To set the pAUC values in perspective, a quality score that does not change
the FNMR at all, no matter the fraction of mated sample pairs discarded in the range 0.0 to
0.4, would have a pAUC value of 0.1 ∗0.4 = 0.04. Note that we do not subtract the pAUC
of the theoretical best EDC curve, which is usually done and would have been better. The
theoretical best pAUC for a starting FNMR of 0.1 is 0.005.
Since the three worst performing CQM FIQA algorithms increase the FNMR, we wanted
to investigate how the random forest models perform if ExpressionNeutrality.scalar, Back­
groundUniformity.scalar and MarginAboveOfTheFaceImage.scalar are excluded, so only
the CQMs of the top 24 CQM FIQA algorithms are left to train on. We further trained mod­
els considering only the top 20, top 15 and top 10 CQM FIQA algorithms, to see how the
performance of the random forest models change when only considering these CQMs.
Figure 4.7: EDC curves of the top and bottom 3 CQM FIQA algorithms, measured by pAUC in
the discard fraction range [0.0, 0.4].
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
31
==PAGE:40==
CQM
pAUC
FaceOcclusionPrevention.scalar
0.03083
EyesVisible.scalar
0.03130
HeadPoseYaw.scalar
0.03203
MouthOcclusionPrevention.scalar
0.03233
HeadPosePitch.scalar
0.03483
EyesOpen.scalar
0.03484
HeadPoseRoll.scalar
0.03561
InterEyeDistance.scalar
0.03563
DynamicRange.scalar
0.03573
LuminanceMean.scalar
0.03635
IlluminationUniformity.scalar
0.03662
UnderExposurePrevention.scalar
0.03667
NoHeadCoverings.scalar
0.03700
LuminanceVariance.scalar
0.03705
SingleFacePresent.scalar
0.03733
MouthClosed.scalar
0.03843
OverExposurePrevention.scalar
0.03843
NaturalColour.scalar
0.03853
MarginBelowOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.03863
Sharpness.scalar
0.03879
HeadSize.scalar
0.03891
CompressionArtifacts.scalar
0.03921
RightwardCropOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.03986
LeftwardCropOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.03986
MarginAboveOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.04019
BackgroundUniformity.scalar
0.04029
ExpressionNeutrality.scalar
0.04219
Table 4.3: pAUC values for EDC curves created using each of the 27 CQMs.
32
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:41==
4.4.2
Random Forest Classifier (RFC)
The five best RFC models trained using all 27 CQMs from OFIQ as features, out of 22
models, are shown in table 4.4. The settings corresponding to each setting name can be
found in appendix D.2.
Name
Max depth
Max feat.
Min. s. leaf
Min. s. split
Mean acc.
pAUC
Specific 22
30
4
16
32
0.7798
0.02877
Specific 21
30
4
8
16
0.7840
0.02884
Specific 11
30
sqrt
16
32
0.7828
0.02887
Specific 14
40
sqrt
16
32
0.7838
0.02887
Specific 16
50
sqrt
16
32
0.7838
0.02887
Table 4.4: Top 5 best performing hyperparameter settings (out of 22), trained using all 27 CQMs
as features. All settings used 200 estimators and no bootstrapping. Lower pAUC is better, higher
mean accuracy is better. The remaining settings can be found in appendix D.2.
From the results, we see that the best performing models have a fairly high min. samples
to split and min. samples in leaf. 32 and 16, respectively, were the highest values used
in any of the 22 settings, with 2 and 1 being the lowest.
Using all 27 CQMs, sqrt=5. Considering only 4 features at each split when building the
decision trees seems to perform better than using 5 or 6, which was also used in some of
the 22 settings.
The results also show that models with higher prediction accuracy do not necessarily
have better pAUC values. This proves that it is necessary to use the pAUC values when
comparing the performance of the models as quality scores.
Interestingly, a max depth of 30 performs better than using a max depth of 40 or 50,
suggesting that the models overfit when the trees are allowed to grow too deep.
The pAUC of the best performing model trained on all 27 CQMs was 0.02877. The pAUC
of the MagFace UQS used in OFIQ was 0.02628. Thus, the RFC model performed worse
than the MagFace UQS.
Figure 4.8: EDC curve for the best performing model trained using all CQMs, measured by pAUC
in the discard fraction range [0.0, 0.4].
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
33
==PAGE:42==
Ablation Study
The top five RFCs for each ablation setting can be seen in tables 4.5 to 4.9. The settings
corresponding to each name can be found in appendix D.2.
The models that perform best overall are the models trained using settings Specific 18,
Specific 11 and Specific 22 and using only the CQMs of the top 20 CQM FIQA algorithms.
They achieve a pAUC of 0.02865. The MagFace UQS FIQA algorithm used in OFIQ
achieved a score of 0.02628, so even the best random forest classifiers perform worse
than the MagFace UQS FIQA algorithm.
The fewer CQMs that are used in training, the better Specific 12 performs. Specific 12 is
the only setting out of the 22 that uses the setting min. samples in leaf=32, min. samples
to split=64. Generally, most of the top performing models in each ablation were trained
using min. samples in leaf=16, min. samples to split=32. However, when using all 27
CQMs or the top 24, we find some models with min. samples in leaf=8, min. samples
to split=16. This includes settings Specific 10, 13, 15, 17 and 21. None of the settings
with min. samples in leaf<8, min. samples to split<16 are found in the top 5 models of
any ablation. This suggests more specific trees perform better when more of the CQMs
are considered, and they perform worse when fewer CQMs are considered. None of the
settings with min. samples in leaf<8, min. samples to split<16 are found in the top 5
models of any ablation.
It is important to note that some of the models with the same score in the top 5 of each
ablation are the same models. They were trained with very similar settings, only varying
in max depth, min. samples in leaf and min. samples to split. This suggests some of
the models with the same score, but slightly different settings, either have the same max
depth, which they reach before models with lower min. samples in leaf and min. samples
to split are able to split further, or vice versa. For the three best performing models overall,
Specific 11, 18, and 22 trained on the top 20 CQMs, all with a pAUC of 0.02865, looking
at the feature importances, they are identical for Specific 11 and 22, suggesting they are
the same model. Specific 18 has different feature importances, so it is a different model
that performs equally well.
Feature Importances
From tables 4.3 and 4.10 we can see that a good individual performance of a CQM as a
quality score does not translate to high feature importance in the random forest classifier.
For example, MouthOcclusionPrevention.scalar has the fourth best pAUC value of the
CQMs, but it is only the 21st most important feature in the RFC with a Normalised Mean
Gini Decrease value of 0.0130. An example of the reverse is ExpressionNeutrality.scalar,
which is the worst CQM in terms of pAUC, but the 9th most important feature in the RFC.
There is some correlation between high pAUC and high Normalised Mean Gini Decrease
though, for example with FaceOcclusionPrevention.scalar and HeadPoseYaw.scalar, which
were the best and 3rd best CQMs as individual quality scores, and are the 2nd and 3rd
most important features in the RFC. One very interesting observation is InterEyeDis­
tance.scalar which was the 8th best CQM in terms of pAUC, but is by far the most impor­
tant feature in the RFC, with a Normalised Mean Gini Decrease value of 0.2903.
The order of importance of the features does not change significantly between ablations.
34
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.9: EDC curves of the best model in each ablation, measured by pAUC in the discard
fraction range [0.0, 0.4].
Setting
pAUC
Specific 22
0.02877
Specific 21
0.02884
Specific 11
0.02887
Specific 14
0.02887
Specific 16
0.02887
Table 4.5: 5 best models trained using all
27 CQMs.
Setting
pAUC
Specific 10
0.02868
Specific 21
0.02868
Specific 15
0.02870
Specific 13
0.02870
Specific 17
0.02871
Table 4.6: 5 best models trained using top
24 CQMs.
Setting
pAUC
Specific 18
0.02865
Specific 11
0.02865
Specific 22
0.02865
Specific 14
0.02866
Specific 16
0.02866
Table 4.7: 5 best models trained using top
20 CQMs.
Setting
pAUC
Specific 11
0.02876
Specific 12
0.02876
Specific 14
0.02876
Specific 16
0.02876
Specific 18
0.02878
Table 4.8: 5 best models trained using top
15 CQMs.
Setting
pAUC
Specific 12
0.02910
Specific 18
0.02911
Specific 11
0.02912
Specific 14
0.02912
Specific 16
0.02912
Table 4.9: 5 best models trained using top
10 CQMs.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
35
==PAGE:44==
Feature name
Normalised Mean Gini Decrease
InterEyeDistance.scalar
0.2903
FaceOcclusionPrevention.scalar
0.1205
HeadPoseYaw.scalar
0.1202
EyesOpen.scalar
0.0468
HeadPosePitch.scalar
0.0412
MouthClosed.scalar
0.0389
LuminanceVariance.scalar
0.0366
EyesVisible.scalar
0.0350
ExpressionNeutrality.scalar
0.0295
IlluminationUniformity.scalar
0.0292
MarginAboveOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.0273
NoHeadCoverings.scalar
0.0263
LuminanceMean.scalar
0.0203
DynamicRange.scalar
0.0194
HeadPoseRoll.scalar
0.0183
MarginBelowOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.0175
Sharpness.scalar
0.0171
BackgroundUniformity.scalar
0.0154
HeadSize.scalar
0.0140
NaturalColour.scalar
0.0136
MouthOcclusionPrevention.scalar
0.0130
OverExposurePrevention.scalar
0.0040
CompressionArtifacts.scalar
0.0025
UnderExposurePrevention.scalar
0.0022
SingleFacePresent.scalar
0.0010
LeftwardCropOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.0000
RightwardCropOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.0000
Table 4.10: Feature importances measured in Normalised Mean Gini Decrease values for random
forest classifier trained using Specific 22 setting and all 27 CQMs as features.
36
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:45==
4.4.3
Random Forest Regressor (RFR)
Setting name
Max feat.
Min. s. leaf
Min. s. split
R2
pAUC
Specific 4
sqrt
2
4
0.6483
0.02822
Specific 9
sqrt
4
8
0.6463
0.02825
Specific 10
sqrt
8
16
0.6415
0.02825
Specific 6
6
1
2
0.6492
0.02828
Specific 11
sqrt
16
32
0.6348
0.02832
Table 4.11: Performance of the five models. All settings used 200 estimators, a max depth of 30,
and no bootstrapping. Lower pAUC is better, higher R2 is better. Ordered by pAUC.
The results for all the five models trained using all 27 CQMs can be seen in table 4.11.
The best setting for max features seems to be sqrt, which evaluates to 5 when there are
27 features. Specific 6 uses max features=6 and performs worse than most of the other
models. Looking at the models trained with max features=sqrt, performance seems to
increase when min. samples in leaf and min. samples to split decrease. This further
suggests that max features=6 is worse than max features=sqrt (so 5), since the model
with max features=6 has the lowest min. samples in leaf and min. samples to split of all
the models.
As with the RFCs, a higher R2 score does not equal higher pAUC value. This shows that
it also here is necessary to use the pAUC values when comparing the performance of the
models as quality score algorithms.
The pAUC of the best performing model is 0.02822. The pAUC of the UQS FIQA algorithm
used in OFIQ is 0.02628, so the RFR model performs worse than the UQS FIQA algorithm.
The EDC curve of the best performing RFR and the EDC curve of the UQS FIQA algorithm
are displayed together in figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: EDC curve for the best performing random forest regressor trained using all CQMs,
measured by pAUC in the discard fraction range [0.0, 0.4].
Ablation Study
Tables 4.12 to 4.16 show the performance of the five models in each ablation. The settings
corresponding to each name can be found in appendix E.1.
The best pAUC values are 0.02821, achieved by two models. One model is the one
trained using the Specific 4 settings and trained using the top 24 CQMs. The other model
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
37
==PAGE:46==
is the model trained with Specific 9 settings and using only the top 20 CQMs. The pAUC
value of the UQS FIQA algorithm in OFIQ is 0.2628, which means the random forest
regressors are worse than the UQS FIQA algorithm as FIQA algorithms.
The pAUC values of all models trained using 27, 24 and 20 CQMs are very close between
ablations. The models trained with Specific 6 setting vary most, and there is only a differ­
ence of 0.00006 for the best and worst ablation. The best models of the ablations using
top 20 and top 24 CQMs have the exact same score, and it is only 0.00001 better than
the best model trained using all 27 CQMs.
The models trained using only the CQMs of the top 15 and top 10 CQM FIQA algorithms
generally perform worse than the models trained using 20, 24 or 27 CQMs. The best
model of each ablation also follow this pattern. Figure 4.11 shows the EDC curves of the
best model of each ablation and the UQS FIQA algorithm. This shows that after removing
the 7 worst performing CQMs, removing more features starts to impact the performance
of the random forest regressors as FIQA algorithms.
Figure 4.11: EDC curves of the best model in each ablation, measured by pAUC in the discard
fraction range [0.0, 0.4].
Models with settings Specific 10 and Specific 11 are outperformed by Specific 4 and Spe­
cific 9 when using 20­27 CQMs, but are the best performing models when using 15 or 10
CQMs. The hyperparameters of the four settings are the same, except for min. samples
in leaf and min. samples to split. Specific 10 and 11 have larger values in these settings
than Specific 4 and 9. This suggests models allowing smaller leaves and splits start to
overfit when using only 15 or 10 features.
Feature Importances
Table 4.17 shows the feature importances of the best performing random forest regressor
using all 27 CQMs, measured in Normalised Mean MSE Decrease. As with the RFC,
good performance of a CQM as a quality score does not translate to high importance of
the CQM as a feature in the RFR. This can be seen by comparing the ranking of the CQMs
38
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:47==
Setting
pAUC
Specific 4
0.02822
Specific 9
0.02825
Specific 10
0.02825
Specific 6
0.02828
Specific 11
0.02832
Table 4.12: pAUC values for EDC curves for
the five models trained using all 27 CQMs.
Setting
pAUC
Specific 4
0.02821
Specific 9
0.02822
Specific 10
0.02826
Specific 11
0.02830
Specific 6
0.02834
Table 4.13: pAUC values for EDC curves for
the five models trained using top 24 CQMs.
Setting
pAUC
Specific 9
0.02821
Specific 4
0.02823
Specific 10
0.02825
Specific 11
0.02833
Specific 6
0.02834
Table 4.14: pAUC values for EDC curves for
the five models trained using top 20 CQMs.
Setting
pAUC
Specific 10
0.02831
Specific 11
0.02833
Specific 9
0.02835
Specific 4
0.02837
Specific 6
0.02857
Table 4.15: pAUC values for EDC curves for
the five models trained using top 15 CQMs.
Setting
pAUC
Specific 11
0.02852
Specific 10
0.02855
Specific 9
0.02858
Specific 4
0.02866
Specific 6
0.02891
Table 4.16: pAUC values for EDC curves for
the five models trained using top 10 CQMs.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
39
==PAGE:48==
Feature name
Normalised Mean MSE Decrease
InterEyeDistance.scalar
0.2240
FaceOcclusionPrevention.scalar
0.1318
HeadPoseYaw.scalar
0.0969
EyesOpen.scalar
0.0449
HeadPosePitch.scalar
0.0422
EyesVisible.scalar
0.0413
MouthClosed.scalar
0.0382
MouthOcclusionPrevention.scalar
0.0378
ExpressionNeutrality.scalar
0.0349
LuminanceVariance.scalar
0.0337
IlluminationUniformity.scalar
0.0327
MarginAboveOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.0267
LuminanceMean.scalar
0.0258
MarginBelowOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.0254
BackgroundUniformity.scalar
0.0252
DynamicRange.scalar
0.0241
Sharpness.scalar
0.0228
NoHeadCoverings.scalar
0.0224
HeadPoseRoll.scalar
0.0215
HeadSize.scalar
0.0188
NaturalColour.scalar
0.0155
OverExposurePrevention.scalar
0.0045
SingleFacePresent.scalar
0.0033
UnderExposurePrevention.scalar
0.0031
CompressionArtifacts.scalar
0.0024
RightwardCropOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.0000
LeftwardCropOfTheFaceImage.scalar
0.0000
Table 4.17: Feature importances measured in Normalised Mean MSE Decrease values for ran­
dom forest regressor trained using the Specific 4 setting and all 27 CQMs as features.
in table 4.17 against the rankings in table 4.3. InterEyeDistance.scalar is by far the most
important feature in the RFR, while only being the 8th best CQM FIQA algorithm when
used as a quality score algorithm. ExpressionNeutrality.scalar is the 9th most important
feature, while it is the worst CQM as a quality score. FaceOcclusionPrevention.scalar and
HeadPoseYaw.scalar show that there is some correlation between a CQM as a feature in
the RFR and as an individual quality score. They were the best and 3rd best CQM FIQA
algorithms as quality score algorithms, and are the 2nd and 3rd most important features
in the RFR.
The five most important features are the same as the five most important features of
the random forest classifier. However, the most important features are less dominant in
the RFR than in the RFC. InterEyeDistance.scalar is the most important feature for both
random forest models, but the Normalised Mean Criterion Decrease value of the feature is
0.2903 in the RFC and only 0.2240 in the RFR. The third most important feature in both is
HeadPoseYaw.scalar with a value of 0.1203 in the RFC and 0.0969 in the RFR. Looking at
some less important features, the 10th most important feature in the RFC and the RFR, in
the RFC it is IlluminationUniformity.scalar with a Normalised Mean MSE Decrease value
of 0.0292, compared to a value of 0.0337 for LuminanceVariation.scalar in the RFR.
40
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:49==
MouthOcclusionPrevention.scalar was the fourth best CQM as a quality score, and was
only the 21st most important feature in the RFC, but it is significantly more important in
the RFR. In the RFR, it is the 8th most important feature.
The order of importance of the features remains mostly unchanged between ablations.
4.4.4
Evaluation
For the random forest regressors, there were only slight differences in pAUC values for
models trained using 27, 24 and 20 CQMs. These minor differences are not significant
enough to confidently label one ablation as better than the others. However, this means
we can conclude the 7 CQMs that perform worst as quality scores do not contribute sig­
nificantly to the performance of the random forest regressors as FIQA algorithms.
The accuracy and R2 of the random forest classifier and regressor are not very high, but
they are not bad either. This further suggests that the random forests are not great at
predicting the Unified Quality Scores computed by the UQS FIQA algorithm.
The feature importances for both the random forest classifier and regressor suggest the
UQS FIQA algorithm considers the information contained in the Inter Eye Distance, Face
Occlusion Prevention and Head Pose Yaw CQMs as especially important for quality. How­
ever, this could be due to the data set used. If the samples with low UQS in the data set
tend to be of low quality due to the same reasons, for example occlusions of the face, the
CQM FIQA algorithms measuring quality with respect to these components, for example
Face Occlusion Prevention, would likely be more important features in the random forest
models. More research of the data set is needed before we can conclude that the UQS
FIQA algorithm truly considers the information contained in Inter Eye Distance, Face Oc­
clusion Prevention and Head Pose Yaw that much more important than the information
contained in the other CQMs.
The EDC curves of the best RFC model, RFR model and the UQS FIQA algorithm from
OFIQ are displayed in figure 4.12. Both random forest methods do succeed in lowering the
FNMR in the EDC curves when used as UQS FIQA algorithms. Thus, we can answer yes
to the first sub­question of Research Question 3, ”Can Face Image Quality Assessment
algorithms that provide Component Quality Measures be used to create a new Face Image
Quality Assessment algorithm that provides a Unified Quality Score?”.
The best random forest classifier had a pAUC value of 0.02865, while the best random
forest regressor had a pAUC value of 0.2821. Thus, the random forest regressor per­
forms better as a UQS FIQA algorithm than the random forest classifier. However, the
MagFace UQS FIQA algorithm in OFIQ had a pAUC of 0.02628, which means it performs
significantly better than either random forest method.
This gives an answer to the second sub­question of Research Question 3, ”How good
is the performance of a Face Image Quality Assessment algorithm that provides a Uni­
fied Quality Score based on Component Quality Measures?”. The random forest models
trained in the work of this thesis perform worse as UQS FIQA algorithms than state­of­
the­art algorithms.
However, we cannot conclude that the state­of­the­art UQS FIQA
algorithm considered in this thesis would outperform other UQS FIQA algorithms based
on Component Quality Measures, if they are created using other methods or even other
approaches to random forest models.
We have shown that random forest models that use CQMs as features can predict the
UQS computed by a UQS FIQA algorithm, albeit with limited accuracy. Because they are
white­box models, we understand how they make their predictions and which features
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.12: EDC curves of the best random forest classifier, random forest regressor, and the
MagFace UQS, measured by pAUC in the discard fraction range [0.0, 0.4].
they use to do so. The random forest models help bridge the gap between the CQMs and
the UQS, giving us a better understanding of why a face image is considered high or low
quality by FIQA algorithms providing a UQS. Thus, we have answered Research Question
3, ”How can Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms that provide Component Quality
Measures be used to explain the decisions of Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms
that provide a Unified Quality Score?”.
We trained random forest models to predict the UQS computed by a FIQA algorithm by
using the CQMs computed by other FIQA algorithms. This was done to explain how
important each quality component is for the UQS decisions made by the existing UQS
FIQA algorithm. At the same time, we tried to optimise the random forest models to work
as new UQS FIQA algorithms, like the algorithm in NFIQ 2 [24]. Our approach made the
new random forest UQS FIQA algorithms dependent on an existing UQS FIQA algorithm.
That is unlike the approach used in NFIQ 2, from where we got the inspiration to also
use the random forest models to create a new UQS FIQA algorithm, instead of only using
them to explain an existing UQS FIQA algorithm. In NFIQ 2, the random forest classifier
is trained using comparison scores [24], not a UQS. Our approach likely also impacted
how much explanation the random forest models give of the UQS decisions made by the
existing UQS FIQA algorithm. We would likely have obtained better results by not trying to
do two things at once and instead training different random forest models for each specific
purpose, namely explanation of the existing UQS FIQA algorithm and creation of a new
UQS FIQA algorithm.
42
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:51==
5
Perspectives
Our work gives rise to new potential areas of research. Suggestions of future work are
presented here.
Using the Same Training Approach as NFIQ 2
As stated in the evaluation of the experiments with random forest models, the random
forest­based UQS algorithm in NFIQ 2 [24] was trained using comparison scores instead
of an existing UQS. A random forest classifier trained using comparison scores may per­
form better as a FIQA algorithm than the random forest models we have trained in this
project.
Larger Usability Study
Eight users participated in our usability study. Though the results of the study are enough
to indicate that FRQE heatmaps have higher interpretability than XFIQ [12] heatmaps,
eight participants is not a very large sample size. It would be good to make a new usability
study with more participants. Also, none of the participants of our study were experts in the
field. It would be good to include some expert users, for example professionals working
at border controls. The FRQE heatmaps could also be compared to more than just the
XFIQ heatmaps.
Demographic Variability in the OFIQ Face Parsing algorithm
Some of the FGFP masks in which the Left Eye Brow region could not be identified do
have the left eye brow visible in the sample face image. It appears the face parsing al­
gorithm used in OFIQ can have trouble parsing light coloured eye brows on light­skinned
subjects and dark coloured eye brows on dark­skinned people. This suggests demo­
graphic variability in the face parsing algorithm currently used in OFIQ, which may be
worth researching further.
FGFP and FRQE without OFIQ
The FGFP and FRQE algorithms could work without OFIQ, by implementing them us­
ing the same algorithms that they use in OFIQ, but outside OFIQ. This would give more
freedom in future development.
FGFP Using only ADNet Landmarks
The current design of the FGFP algorithm relies on the output of the existing face parsing
algorithm used in OFIQ and the ADNet landmarks. A new version of the FGFP algorithm
could be developed using only ADNet landmarks to parse the face into regions. This
removes one dependency and would give more control over all the regions, not just the
FGFP regions defined in this project. The Face Esthetic Units could potentially be used
as regions and implemented by defining them as a mesh relative to the ADNet landmarks.
Deep Learning­Based FGFP
A CNN model could be trained to parse the face into more fine­grained regions than the
existing face parsing algorithm in OFIQ. The FGFP masks created by our FGFP algorithm
could potentially be used as a data set for a CNN.
Importance of Size versus Location of Regions in FRQE
From the results of this project, we do not know exactly how much of the change in UQS
when removing a region is caused by the size of the region and how much is caused by
the location of the region. This should be researched further, potentially by varying sizes
of regions in the same locations.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
43
==PAGE:52==
6
Conclusion
We have created a new Fine­Grained Face Parsing algorithm that parses the face into
more fine­grained regions. The regions are clearly defined and based on medical litera­
ture. We explored how removing the newly defined Fine­Grained Face Parsing regions
affect the quality decisions made by a state­of­the­art Face Image Quality Assessment
algorithm providing Unified Quality Scores. We used the Fine­Grained Face Parsing re­
gions and the removal of those same regions to develop a Face Region Quality Estima­
tion algorithm. The Face Region Quality Estimation algorithm outputs heatmaps that help
explain decisions made by Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms providing Unified
Quality Scores. The heatmaps are less granular than those of existing explainability meth­
ods. We showed that the Face Region Quality Estimation algorithm is able to estimate
low quality of regions from different causes. With the Fine­Grained Face Parsing algo­
rithm, the region removals, and the Face Region Quality Estimation algorithm, we have
successfully answered Research Question 1.
We conducted a usability study, comparing the interpretability of the Face Region Quality
Estimation heatmaps with heatmaps from a state­of­the­art explainability method. The
results of the study gave us a successful answer to Research Question 2. Most users felt
that the interpretability of Face Region Quality Estimation heatmaps is higher than for the
heatmaps of the state­of­the­art method. However, a small majority of users felt that the
heatmaps of the state­of­the­art method provide greater explainability.
We trained random forest models to use Component Quality Measures to predict Unified
Quality Scores computed by a Face Image Quality Assessment algorithm. This was done
with two purposes. The first purpose was to explain the importance of various quality com­
ponents for the Unified Quality Scores computed by a Face Image Quality Assessment
algorithm. The second purpose was to use the random forest models as new Face Im­
age Quality Assessment algorithms providing Unified Quality Scores. Both random forest
regressors and classifiers were trained. We performed ablation studies, removing some
of the Component Quality Measures as features. The results of the ablation studies, to­
gether with the feature importances of the models, give some explanation of the Unified
Quality Score decisions made by the Face Image Quality Assessment algorithm, although
there are uncertainties in the results. The random forest models were shown to work as
Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms computing Unified Quality Scores. Random
forest regressors were found to perform better than classifiers as Face Image Quality
Assessment algorithms. However, both performed worse than state­of­the­art Face Im­
age Quality Assessment algorithms. With the results, we were able to answer Research
Question 3, including its two sub­questions. We reflected on the training approach used
for the random forest models and conclude that we likely would have obtained better re­
sults by training specific random forest models targeting each of our two goals, instead of
training models to explain decisions of a Face Image Quality Assessment algorithm and
at the same time work as new Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms.
In conclusion, we have found answers to all of the research questions we set out to an­
swer. Our contributions inform suggestions for future work, and it is our hope that others
will continue to build on these contributions to further explore explainability and inter­
pretability of Face Image Quality Assessment algorithms.
44
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
L. Best­Rowden and A. Jain. “Learning Face Image Quality From Human Assess­
ments”. In: IEEE Trans. on Information Forensics and Security 13.12 (Dec. 2018),
pp. 3064–3077. ISSN: 1556­6013, 1556­6021.
[2]
Joyce Yang et al. Face Analysis Technology Evaluation (FATE) Part 11: Face Image
Quality Vector Assessment: Specific Image Defect Detection. Jan. 2025.
[3]
ISO/IEC JTC1 SC37 Biometrics. ISO/IEC 29794­5 Information Technology ­ Bio­
metric Sample Quality ­ Part 5: Face Image Data. International Organization for
Standardization. 2025.
[4]
Johannes Merkle et al. Open Source Face Image Quality (OFIQ) ­ Implementation
and Evaluation of Algorithms. Version 1.2. Federal Office for Information Security
(BSI). 2024.
[5]
Q. Meng et al. “MagFace: A Universal Representation for Face Recognition and
Quality Assessment”. In: 2021 IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). Mar. 2021.
[6]
Fadi Boutros et al. “CR­FIQA: Face Image Quality Assessment by Learning Sample
Relative Classifiability”. In: 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2023, pp. 5836–5845.
[7]
Žiga Babnik, Peter Peer, and Vitomir Štruc. “DifFIQA: Face Image Quality Assess­
ment Using Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models”. In: 2023 IEEE International
Joint Conference on Biometrics (IJCB). 2023, pp. 1–10.
[8]
K. Santosh and C. Wall. “Trustworthy and EXplainable AI for biometrics”. In: AI
Ethical Issues and Explainability—Applied Biometrics, Singapore:Springer. 2022,
pp. 29–46.
[9]
European Comission ­ Home Affairs ­ Entry/Exit System (EES). https://home­affairs.
ec.europa.eu/policies/schengen­borders­and­visa/smart­borders/entry­exit­system,
Last accessed: 2024­10­18. 2024.
[10]
eu­LISA. Roadmap for standardisation for data quality purposes ­ Fourth progress
report. LIMITE, IXIM 153, JAI 980, COMIX 333. July 2023.
[11]
Anna Stratmann, Federal Office for Information Security (BSI). Open Source Face
Image Quality (OFIQ): An Overview. https://eab.org/files/events/2023­11­07­09
_Face_Image_Quality/2023­11­07_07­Anna_Stratmann­BSI.pdf,
Last Accessed: 2024­10­18. Nov. 2023.
[12]
Philipp Terhörst et al. “Pixel­Level Face Image Quality Assessment for Explainable
Face Recognition”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Sci­
ence 5.2 (2023), pp. 288–297.
[13]
Biying Fu and Naser Damer. “Explainability of the Implications of Supervised and
Unsupervised Face Image Quality Estimations Through Activation Map Variation
Analyses in Face Recognition Models”. In: 2022 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision Workshops (WACVW). Jan. 2022, pp. 349–358.
[14]
Pedro C. Neto et al. Causality­Inspired Taxonomy for Explainable Artificial Intelli­
gence. 2024. arXiv: 2208.09500 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.09500.
[15]
Marco Huber et al. “Efficient Explainable Face Verification based on Similarity Score
Argument Backpropagation”. In: 2024 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applica­
tions of Computer Vision (WACV). 2024, pp. 4724–4733.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
45
==PAGE:54==
[16]
Naser Damer Marco Huber Anh Thi Luu. “Recognition Performance Variation Across
Demographic Groups through the Eyes of Explainable Face Recognition”. In: Inter­
national Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition 2024. 2024.
[17]
Yangyu Huang et al. “Adnet: Leveraging error­bias towards normal direction in face
alignment”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision. 2021, pp. 3080–3090.
[18]
L. Breimann. “Random Forests”. In: Machine Learning 45.1 (2001), pp. 5–32.
[19]
T. Schlett et al. “Considerations on the Evaluation of Biometric Quality Assessment
Algorithms”. In: Trans. on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science (TBIOM) (Dec.
2023).
[20]
Jung Choi et al. “Distribution of Basal Cell Carcinoma and Squamous Cell Car­
cinoma by Facial Esthetic Unit”. In: Archives of plastic surgery 40 (July 2013),
pp. 387–91. DOI: 10.5999/aps.2013.40.4.387.
[21]
Repository of face­parsing.PyTorch. https://github.com/zllrunning/face­parsing.PyTorch,
Last accessed: 17.02.2025. 2019.
[22]
Changqian Yu et al. “BiSeNet: Bilateral Segmentation Network for Real­time Se­
mantic Segmentation”. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV). Sept. 2018.
[23]
Changqian Yu et al. BiSeNet V2: Bilateral Network with Guided Aggregation for
Real­time Semantic Segmentation. 2020. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.02147.
[24]
E. Tabassi et al. NIST Interagency Report 8382. NIST Interagency Report 8382.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, July 2021.
[25]
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. “FaceNet: A unified em­
bedding for face recognition and clustering”. In: 2015 IEEE Conference on Com­
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2015, pp. 815–823. DOI: 10.1109/
CVPR.2015.7298682.
[26]
Wei Wu, Hanyang Peng, and Shiqi Yu. “YuNet: A Tiny Millisecond­level Face De­
tector”. In: Machine Intelligence Research 20.5 (2023), pp. 656–665. ISSN: 2731­
538X.
[27]
Christop Busch Website. https://www.christoph­busch.de/index.html, Last accessed:
17.02.2025.
46
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:55==
A
GitHub Repositories
The code developed as part of the work for this thesis can be found in six repositories
on GitHub. The repository for random forest training contains information about exactly
which images are in the VGGFace2 subset with 197,684 images used in this thesis.
Main repositories:
• OFIQ with Fine­Grained Face Parsing: https://github.com/GustavNP/OFIQ­Project­
FGFP
• Face Region Quality Estimation: https://github.com/GustavNP/FaceRegionQualityEstimation
• Random Forest training: https://github.com/GustavNP/RandomForestUQS
Other repositories:
• Region Removal code and random scripts: https://github.com/GustavNP/RegionRemoval­
and­HelperScripts
• For computing embeddings, comparison scores, and input files for ERCWare:
https://github.com/GustavNP/FaceSimilarity
• Modified ERCWare for computing EDC curves: https://github.com/GustavNP/ERCware­
GNP­custom
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
47
==PAGE:56==
B
Usability Study Structure
Tell the user: ”Three face images of three different people will be displayed. For each
face image, two explaining heatmaps will be displayed, which aim to explain the quality of
different areas in the face image. One face image with the two explaining heatmaps will
be shown at a time.”
Ask for each of the three face images:
• Which of the explaining heatmaps do you find more intuitive?
After showing all three face images and their heatmaps:
• Which of the explaining heatmaps do you find most intuitive overall?
• If you were to receive training in further understanding these explaining heatmaps,
which of them do you think would be more intuitive, and which one would be more
useful?
The three face images and their corresponding heatmaps:
(a) FRQE heatmap
(b) XFIQ heatmap
Figure B.1: First image used in usability study and its corresponding FRQE and XFIQ heatmaps.
48
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:57==
(a) FRQE heatmap
(b) XFIQ heatmap
Figure B.2:
Second image used in usability study and its corresponding FRQE and XFIQ
heatmaps.
(a) FRQE heatmap
(b) XFIQ heatmap
Figure B.3: Third image used in usability study and its corresponding FRQE and XFIQ heatmaps.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
49
==PAGE:58==
C
Usability Study Responses
Person 1, Male, 60 years old, non­expert:
• FRQE more intuitive for all three. But almost 50/50 for the last one.
• FRQE most intuitive overall.
• Depends on the use case. Intuitive still FRQE probably. If it is relevant to look
at small details, then XFIQ for usefulness. If it is to understand more broadly, like
“there’s a hand in the way”, then FRQE more easily useful.
Person 2, Female, 61 years old, non­expert:
• FRQE more intuitive for all three. But 50/50 for second image, where there are more
green pixels.
• FRQE most intuitive overall.
• Prefers FRQE for intuitiveness then too. Would prefer XFIQ it is relevant to for some
reason for example “zoom in on a scar or something”.
Person 3, Male, 24 years old, non­expert:
• Finds both intuitive for all. Prefers XFIQ though, when you have the face image next
to the heatmap and can just look back and forth.
• XFIQ most intuitive overall.
• XFIQ more intuitive and useful.
Person 4, Female, 25 years old, non­expert:
• Finds FRQE much more intuitive for all three face images.
• Finds FRQE most intuitive and useful overall.
• She thinks the XFIQ “looks like an energy grid or a forest fire or something” and
finds it difficult to understand what it means.
Person 5, Female, 29 years old, non­expert:
• Finds FRQE most intuitive for all three images.
• Finds FRQE most intuitive overall.
• She thinks XFIQ might be more useful if she was to receive training, but FRQE still
more intuitive.
• She would find XFIQ more useful for investigating details, as long as the face image
is shown next to it. FRQE would be fine without the face image shown.
• She would be interested in having both heatmaps shown, so FRQE can be used
to see “the nose is low or medium quality” and then use the XFIQ heatmap to see
exactly which parts are considered low and high quality.
Person 6, Male, 28 years old, non­expert:
• Finds FRQE most intuitive for all.
50
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:59==
• Believes he would find FRQE most intuitive and useful even after receiving more
training. Does not like XFIQ, it looks “random and all over the place”.
Person 7, Female, 26 years old, non­expert:
• Finds FRQE most intuitive for all.
• FRQE still more intuitive after training. FRQE more useful also after training.
Person 8, Male, 27 years old, non­expert:
• Finds FRQE most intuitive for images 1 and 3. XFIQ for image 2.
• Finds FRQE most intuitive overall.
• Would find XFIQ most intuitive and useful after receiving training.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
51
==PAGE:60==
D
Random Forest Classifier Data
D.1
Thresholds for Low­ and High­Quality Images
Low Quality UQS
High Quality UQS
pAUC
0­10
80­100
0.03331
0­20
80­100
0.03208
0­30
80­100
0.03120
0­40
60­100
0.02980
10­40
60­100
0.02953
5­40
60­100
0.03002
10­50
51­100
0.02958
Table D.1: pAUC values for EDC curves with 10% FNMR and in the discard fraction range
0.0­0.4. The random forest classifier was trained using hyper­parameters no. of estimators =
200, max. depth = 40, max. features = sqrt, min. samples leaf = 16, min. samples split =
32, bootstrap = false.
D.2
Random Forest Classifier Hyperparameter Settings
52
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:61==
Name
No. of est.
Max depth
Max feat.
Min. s. leaf
Min. s. split
Specific 1
100
30
sqrt
1
2
Specific 2
200
30
sqrt
1
2
Specific 3
100
30
sqrt
2
4
Specific 4
200
30
sqrt
2
4
Specific 5
100
30
6
1
2
Specific 6
200
30
6
1
2
Specific 7
100
30
6
2
4
Specific 8
200
30
6
2
4
Specific 9
200
30
sqrt
4
8
Specific 10
200
30
sqrt
8
16
Specific 11
200
30
sqrt
16
32
Specific 12
200
30
sqrt
32
64
Specific 13
200
40
sqrt
8
16
Specific 14
200
40
sqrt
16
32
Specific 15
200
50
sqrt
8
16
Specific 16
200
50
sqrt
16
32
Specific 17
200
20
sqrt
8
16
Specific 18
200
20
sqrt
16
32
Specific 19
200
30
6
8
16
Specific 20
200
30
6
16
32
Specific 21
200
30
4
8
16
Specific 22
200
30
4
16
32
Table D.2: Random forest classifier hyperparameter settings.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
53
==PAGE:62==
D.3
pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on
All CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 22
0.02877
Specific 21
0.02884
Specific 11
0.02887
Specific 14
0.02887
Specific 16
0.02887
Specific 17
0.02888
Specific 18
0.02888
Specific 15
0.02888
Specific 10
0.02888
Specific 13
0.02888
Specific 20
0.02889
Specific 19
0.02889
Specific 12
0.02893
Specific 9
0.02900
Specific 4
0.02907
Specific 8
0.02912
Specific 3
0.02912
Specific 7
0.02921
Specific 2
0.02934
Specific 1
0.02936
Specific 5
0.02936
Specific 6
0.02937
Table D.3: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest classifiers trained using all CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
54
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:63==
D.4
pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on
Top 24 CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 10
0.02868
Specific 21
0.02868
Specific 15
0.02870
Specific 13
0.02870
Specific 17
0.02871
Specific 18
0.02871
Specific 14
0.02874
Specific 16
0.02874
Specific 11
0.02875
Specific 22
0.02875
Specific 12
0.02876
Specific 9
0.02881
Specific 19
0.02882
Specific 20
0.02883
Specific 4
0.02892
Specific 3
0.02901
Specific 8
0.02903
Specific 2
0.02914
Specific 7
0.02915
Specific 1
0.02918
Specific 6
0.02927
Specific 5
0.02934
Table D.4: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest classifiers trained using top 24 CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
55
==PAGE:64==
D.5
pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on
Top 20 CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 18
0.02865
Specific 11
0.02865
Specific 22
0.02865
Specific 14
0.02866
Specific 16
0.02866
Specific 17
0.02871
Specific 12
0.02873
Specific 13
0.02873
Specific 15
0.02873
Specific 10
0.02874
Specific 21
0.02874
Specific 9
0.02877
Specific 20
0.02888
Specific 19
0.02892
Specific 3
0.02896
Specific 4
0.02896
Specific 2
0.02915
Specific 8
0.02915
Specific 1
0.02919
Specific 7
0.02922
Specific 5
0.02938
Specific 6
0.02939
Table D.5: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest classifiers trained using top 20 CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
56
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:65==
D.6
pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on
Top 15 CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 11
0.02876
Specific 12
0.02876
Specific 14
0.02876
Specific 16
0.02876
Specific 18
0.02878
Specific 10
0.02882
Specific 17
0.02882
Specific 13
0.02882
Specific 15
0.02882
Specific 22
0.02885
Specific 9
0.02888
Specific 21
0.02897
Specific 4
0.02901
Specific 3
0.02907
Specific 20
0.02907
Specific 19
0.02918
Specific 2
0.02928
Specific 1
0.02931
Specific 8
0.02955
Specific 7
0.02963
Specific 5
0.02982
Specific 6
0.02985
Table D.6: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest classifiers trained using top 15 CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
57
==PAGE:66==
D.7
pAUC Values for Random Forest Classifiers Trained on
Top 10 CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 12
0.02910
Specific 18
0.02911
Specific 11
0.02912
Specific 14
0.02912
Specific 16
0.02912
Specific 13
0.02919
Specific 15
0.02919
Specific 10
0.02919
Specific 17
0.02920
Specific 9
0.02928
Specific 22
0.02928
Specific 21
0.02934
Specific 4
0.02947
Specific 20
0.02952
Specific 3
0.02956
Specific 19
0.02967
Specific 1
0.02978
Specific 2
0.02985
Specific 8
0.03028
Specific 7
0.03039
Specific 5
0.03065
Specific 6
0.03068
Table D.7: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest classifiers trained using top 10 CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
58
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:67==
E
Random Forest Regressor Data
E.1
Random Forest Regressor Hyperparameter Settings
Name
No. of est.
Max depth
Max feat.
Min. s. leaf
Min. s. split
Specific 4
200
30
sqrt
2
4
Specific 6
200
30
6
1
2
Specific 9
200
30
sqrt
4
8
Specific 10
200
30
sqrt
8
16
Specific 11
200
30
sqrt
16
32
Table E.1: Random forest regressor hyperparameter settings. Names are the same settings as
for random forest classifiers.
E.2
pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on
All 27 CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 4
0.02822
Specific 9
0.02825
Specific 10
0.02825
Specific 6
0.02828
Specific 11
0.02832
Table E.2: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest regressors trained using all 27 CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
E.3
pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on
Top 24 CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 4
0.02821
Specific 9
0.02822
Specific 10
0.02826
Specific 11
0.02830
Specific 6
0.02834
Table E.3: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest regressor trained using top 24 CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
59
==PAGE:68==
E.4
pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on
Top 20 CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 9
0.02821
Specific 4
0.02823
Specific 10
0.02825
Specific 11
0.02833
Specific 6
0.02834
Table E.4: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest regressor trained using top 20 CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
E.5
pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on
Top 15 CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 10
0.02831
Specific 11
0.02833
Specific 9
0.02835
Specific 4
0.02837
Specific 6
0.02857
Table E.5: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest regressor trained using top 15 CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
E.6
pAUC Values for Random Forest Regressors Trained on
Top 10 CQMs
Name
pAUC
Specific 11
0.02852
Specific 10
0.02855
Specific 9
0.02858
Specific 4
0.02866
Specific 6
0.02891
Table E.6: pAUC values for EDC curves for random forest regressor trained using top 10 CQMs.
Sorted by pAUC value.
60
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
==PAGE:69==
Exploring Explainability and Interpretability in Face Image Quality Assessment Algorithms
61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
