==PAGE:1==
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned
Autonomous
Vehicles
for
Wind
Turbines
Blade Inspection
Master Thesis
DTU Electro, Department of electrical and photonics Engineering
Department of Electro
==PAGE:2==
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Tur­
bines Blade Inspection
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
Date, year
By
Pavlos Mylis Adamakis
Stefanos Ziogas
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electro, Ørsteds Plads Bygning , Building 326, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
The submission of this thesis to the Technical University of Denmark ­ DTU, is in order
to fulfill the requirements necessary for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering
(MSc Eng) in Autonomous Systems.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Pavlos Mylis Adamakis ­ s222968
Signature
Date
Stefanos Ziogas ­ s230250
Signature
Date
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
ii
10 / 02 / 2025
10 / 02 / 2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Wind turbines are one of the most important sources of renewable energy, and inspection
for both the exterior and the interior of the blades, which is important to improve longevity
and performance. Traditional methods that include human climbing up the blade using
ropes are not only very costly but also dangerous and take a long time to set up. This is
especially true when we want to examine the interior of a wind blade, where factors such
as narrow paths and absence of light make the task even more difficult. On the other
hand, unmanned autonomous vehicles or simply drones could go in there with ease and
collect data about the blade. This thesis will examine how reinforcement learning can be
used so that a drone can safely navigate the interior of a wind blade successfully. Later
sensors such as RGB cameras can collect all the necessary data for an inspection to be
performed by an expert. Frameworks, algorithms, and graphical virtual environments that
can help realize this task will be discussed thoroughly.
Keywords: UAV, reinforcement learning, wind turbine inspection, interior blade inspection
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to give special thanks to our supervisor, Evangelos Boukas for not only
giving us constant feedback and direction for the duration of the thesis, but also for his
support and open­minded approach to this project.
Furthermore, we would like to express our thanks to professor Lazaros Nalpantidis for
helping us get a thesis with Evangelos at a time where it seemed that we had no options.
Finally, we would like to thank our friends and family for giving us encouragement and
helping us see our project through.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
• A2C ­ Advantage Actor­Critic
• A3C ­ Asynchronous Advantage Actor­Critic
• AI ­ Artificial Intelligence
• CNN ­ Convolutional Neural Network
• CPU ­ Central Processing Unit
• DDPG ­ Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
• DQN ­ Deep Q­Learning
• GPU ­ Graphics Processing Unit
• LiDAR ­ Light Detection and Ranging
• MAV ­ Micro Aerial Vehicle
• MCTS ­ Monte Carlo Tree Search
• MDP ­ Markov Decision Process
• NDT ­ Non Destructive Testing
• PEDRA ­ Platform for Environment Design and Reinforcement Learning Architec­
ture
• PPO ­ Proximal Policy Optimization
• REINFORCE ­ REward Increment = Non­negative Factor × Offset Reinforcement ×
Characteristic Eligibility
• RGB ­ Red, Green, Blue
• RL ­ Reinforcement Learning
• ROS ­ Robot Operating System
• SLAM ­ Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
• TD ­ Temporal Difference
• UAV ­ Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
• YOLO ­ You Only Look Once
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction and Motivation
1
1.1
Interior Wind Blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Unmanned Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Embedded Systems and Artificial Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Artificial Intelligence and Drone Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Reinforcement Learning and Simulation Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3
Methodology
32
3.1
AirSim Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.2
Deep Q­Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.3
Policy Gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.4
Proximal Policy Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.5
RL Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.6
TensorFlow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4
Implementation
44
4.1
Prerequisites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.2
Connection to the Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.3
Backtracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.4
Running in Inference mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5
Results
50
5.1
TensorFlow and TensorBoard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.2
Performance Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.3
Comparing Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.4
Overall Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6
Discussion
68
7
Conclusions
71
A Appendix
79
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction and Motivation
Wind Turbines have a rich history for more than 100 years. In the late 1800s inventors
and engineers from across the globe including the United States, United Kingdom, and
Denmark, worked towards creating what we now call wind turbines with the aim of pro­
ducing electricity [69]. Wind energy has been growing in many countries since it is a
reliable way of producing energy [62]. It is a power source of the outmost importance,
especially for Europe. According to statistics, 2023 was the first time in history that wind
energy generated more power than fossil gas [49]. Furthermore, taking into consideration
the European Union’s goal of achieving climate neutrality by 2050, which requires wind
energy output to double from its current levels [49], it is clear that wind energy will remain
highly relevant in the foreseeable future. However, not everything is as perfect as it would
seem. A lot of projects have been put on ice or delayed due to high interest rates, rising
material costs, and supply chain disruptions [5].
The combination of the European Union’s goals for renewable energy and the current
costs of actually making new wind farms makes the maintenance of the current wind tur­
bines all the more important. We have to remember that wind turbines are large structures
with various components that all require maintenance. Many damages, for instance, ero­
sion of the blade can cause a drop in productivity even though they will not be the single
reason for a complete failure. For the wind turbine, if these damages accumulate over time
a complete failure will occur at some point [43]. This results in loss of energy and higher
costs of resolving the problem. Furthermore, it is known that frequent maintenance can
not only increase productivity but also the lifespan of the wind turbine, with improvements
that correspond to 5% in production and 35% in profitability [31]. However, maintaining
wind turbines comes with its own costs and considering that at some point a failure is
unavoidable it is important to find cost­effective strategies. That is why we must strike a
good balance between the costs and accuracy of our methods [13].
Currently, the most frequent methods of inspection are visual assessments, robotics­
based inspections, and non­destructive methods using technologies like high­resolution
cameras. These non­destructive methods are preferred since they allow us to take data
from the wind turbine without altering important properties of the wind turbine such as
mechanical, chemical properties and more [23][96][60] [21].
An overview of those methods is as follows:
• Visual Inspection: Highly trained personnel will climb with ropes and/or cranes to
inspect the exterior or the interior of the wind blade and perform checks regarding the
damages that the blade has suffered, an inspection method that is greatly dependent
on weather conditions and poses great risks for the safety of the inspector [59].
• Blade Inspection Technology: High resolution cameras and sensors are utilized
to take images from the surface of the blade, with those tools we can obtain detailed
data of the blade’s condition. This can highly reduce the need for physical access
inside the blade reducing costs and risk [60].
• Thermography: This method uses special infrared videos or images called ther­
mograms. With those we are able to see if there is any variation of temperature
on the surface of the wind blade. If that is the case, it can mean there are some
internal wear and tear or defects. We can identify delamination or bonding defects
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
1
==PAGE:9==
within composite materials. This type of inspection allows for a solution that is both
real­time and does not involve contact with the actual part of the blade [23].
• Acoustic Emission Testing: Another non­destructive testing technique is acoustic
emission, which uses the release of ultrasonic stress waves from the blade to detect
if there is any potential damage or deformation. Furthermore, we are able to detect
where the damage is actually located. Overall it is an inspection method that allows
for predictive maintenance since with it we are able to see or rather hear early signs
of damage [60].
• Ground­Based Photogrammetry: With this method there is no need to climb the
wind turbine. Instead capturing multiple high resolutions photos from the ground
and with the use of state­of­the­art software enables us to recreate an accurate 3D
model of the blade. This way precise measurements can be taken and as a result
any kind of anomalies on the exterior of the blade will be easily identified any kind
of anomalies on the exterior of the blade. This is one of the cost­effective methods
since it does not need to be performed with the wind turbine turned off, however
not many conclusions can be reached apart from the exterior condition of the blade
[23].
• Laser scanning: Continuing with another classic non­destructive method of inspec­
tion. Laser scanning makes effective use of technology in order to create a three­
dimensionally map of surface of the blade. This enables us to identify any kind of
surface imperfections and anomalies. Similarly to ground based photogrammetry
we are able to acquire highly accurate data for the inspection of the exterior part of
the blade. This technology is effective for both onshore and offshore wind turbine
inspection and is very useful especially in combination with other methods [60].
• Robotic Crawlers: Now we’re heading towards some of the most interesting meth­
ods of inspection. Robot Crawlers are one of the most easily modified tools. A
plethora of sensors can be mounted on them retrieving various data that we would
probably need, such as RBG cameras, depth sensors or thermal images. Moreover
those crawlers could have legs that imitate insects, such as arthropods or something
completely different such as magnetic wheels, suction cups or grippers. This tech­
nology can be prove useful since it has the potential to navigate both autonomously
and with an operator. Furthermore since there is no sensor limitation, machine
learning models could be used for damage detection as well as experts that can
conclude whether or not a damage has occurred through video footage [58].
• Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Finally we have the use of drones. Here a lot of the
same advantages with the robotic crawlers apply, however the access of the wind
blade is much quicker since there is no need for a crane to lift the crawler to the
height of the blade. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) can be used both for exterior
and interior inspection. They have the capability of mounting various sensors and
we are able to extract a lot of data from them, both in terms of images and videos
from multiple angles. It is a method that prioritizes safety and costs. That is because
it eliminates the need for rope climbers and as a result minimizes the risks a human
being would have to take in another case. Furthermore, if we need to check the
interior the total time where the wind turbine needs to be off is far less in comparison
with traditional methods and so it contributes to costs. Moreover, as a mean of
inspection drones have great potential for automation. With the speed at which
algorithms are incorporated into robotics each a matter of time until such procedures
are highly or completely automated [20][43].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
2
==PAGE:10==
For the purpose of this Thesis we will focus on internal blade inspections. As we believe
this is one of the types of inspection that is less utilized at the moment due to the risks
associated with it. We will discuss difficulties regarding the interior blade inspection. Pos­
sible solutions and the use of reinforcement learning algorithms to achieve set solutions.
1.1
Interior Wind Blade
Continuing, we have to mention about why we consider the inspection of the internal of
the blade to be important. According to [43] with the traditional non destructive testing
methods (NDT) and exterior inspection methods we will only be able to predict roughly
90% of the defects that exist in a blade. Thus, it is important to inspect the inside of
the blade too. One proposed solution is to equip the blades with various sensors during
manufacturing, a solution that although valid, comes with its own problems. First of all,
in order to equip the blade with sensors the production cost would need to rise in relation
to the quality and quantity of the sensors required. Another problem could arise from
the sensors themselves getting damaged during shipping, construction or simply from
weather conditions providing us with false positives.
To inspect the interior of the wind blade comes with its own problems. To understand what
challenges we face when trying to inspect the interior, we first must take into consideration
the geometry of a wind blade. Wind Blades are a complex construction that involves two
hollow shell cavities to be bonded together with a shear web located in the middle of the
construction, that seem like walls. Those can come in many formations including wider
or narrower walls that are placed closer or further apart. After the blade is bonded it
can be accessed through hatches near the root of the blade. All these accumulate in a
difficult inspection [27]. Since the entry point is small and even when inside we are left
with confined spaces that become even more confined towards the end of the blade whilst
providing very little illumination in the process. With all these in mind it starts to become
clear how interior blade inspections are not frequent. Manned inspections are usually
limited to two thirds of the blade due to its structure as in Figure1.1 and Figure1.2. We
must also take into consideration the risks of it and how difficult an emergency evacuation
would be, if at all possible. For this reason unmanned inspections are the subject of our
interest.
Figure 1.1: Structure and material composition of the E40 WTB [34]
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Exterior visual representation of a wind turbine blade [18]
1.2
Unmanned Vehicles
Various cases in which unmanned vehicles where used to perform an inspection. Namely
in the following study [77], where a small ring climber prototype was developed with the
purpose of performing blade inspections. The prototype was a success being able to
adapt according to the differences in circumference in the tower and performing an in­
spection. Moreover, many studies have been run on UAVs performing inspections on the
surface of the blade, in one example a drone performed a thermographic non­destructive
inspection of the exterior of the wind blade with great results. It was possible to detect
the most common damages such as impacts and cracks. Moreover, they managed to
do this in record time with inspections being as quick as 15 to 20 minutes long. Another
important thing to consider here is that for this project a software was also developed and
that flights were performed in an autopilot mode, decreasing even more the operational
risks.
An article of 2021 [43] comes to the conclusion that aerial vehicles are better equipped to
navigate the interior of the wind blade in comparison to robotic crawlers and other wheeled
vehicles. It takes a look at what kinds of drones can be used for the interior inspection
supports that the task could prove of significant difficulty. That is because of the dynamic
disturbances that are created inside a wind blade to the effect of ground ceiling and walls.
In addition for a human pilot navigating the drone in a close environment that is poorly
lit is challenging, since most of the light would be provided by the drone it self and the
handler wouldn’t be able to see for more than a few meters at a time. The build of the
blade and the way it gets narrow towards the end can be another limiting factor for drones
to navigate since most of them will not be able to reach the entire blade due to their size
being the limiting factor. Using autonomous vehicles has advantages in terms of the cost
of the inspection and design challenges. This comes with its own challenges though,
since a navigation task like that is very difficult in its own. The article however seems to
be positive about the future of this work due to the promising future of drones and the
risks and time consumption a manned inspection would take.
Regarding the inspection of the interior of a wind blade using UAVs. The only known so­
lution to be provided for that kind of inspection using an unmanned aerial vehicle come
from Flyability with ELIOS 3. According to Flyability a Swiss company dedicated to man­
ufacturing drones that are able to work in confined spaces, with Elios 3 they where able
to inspect the interior of the blades in 4 wind turbines per day. This is no small feat since
usually for such an inspection method only one wind turbine would be checked in a day
[19]. Elios 3 is equipped with various sensors such as a distance sensor, a thermal cam­
era and a 4k camera. Moreover, LIDARs in combination with computer vision provide a
3D point cloud view of the areas that are explored. Not to end there the drone is equipped
with state of the art SLAM­Based stabilization allowing it to hold its desired position even
at difficult conditions such as the interior of a wind blade and is able to regain position even
when turned upside down while its exterior cage that make it extremely crash resilient.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
4
==PAGE:12==
It is worth mentioning that Elios can also autonomously return to it’s starting position in
case the signal is lost at any time. However, it still requires a human pilot to navigate it
through the wind blade and it is not, as of yet fully automated [20].
Figure 1.3: Elios 3 [20]
1.3
Embedded Systems and Artificial Intelligence
For the past years artificial intelligence has gained a lot of ground in terms of integration
to our day to day life, in terms of interest and studies, but perhaps more importantly for
it’s development in terms of businesses investing and concentrating their efforts in AI
related breakthroughs [8]. Artificial intelligence has many faces, it is an umbrella term that
can describe anything from basic algorithms to advanced reinforcement learning models
and generative AI such as DALL­E or ChatGPT. The next step to the development is its
combination with robotics [54][11][74].
Such a marriage could help resolve a lot of day to day problems. The interest relative to
this study however lies in how this powerful tool can be used in order to improve the costs,
time, and accuracy of inspections in wind blade turbines. The reason why technologies
like these become more prevalent over the years is because of key advancements that
have made a combination of AI and robotics more reliable than ever before. Artificial in­
telligence related progress in terms of algorithms with state­of­the­art approaches such
as Deep Q­Networks (DQN) and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) as well as GenAI
provide hope for vast generalization in problems since both Deep Reinforcement Learn­
ing algorithms and generative AI show promise in problem generalization. Specifically
RL algorithms have shown how helpful they can be in regards to navigation and control
[81][56].
Moreover, development in perception technologies such as LIDARs allows for mapping
of unknown environments with precision that has never been seen before while doing it
in record times, those work by emitting non­stop a laser beam able to measure any kind
of shift in the frequency a light has on surface [29][30].
Not to stop there, significant developments in terms of hardware have been made for
the processing power of GPUs. Nvidia Jetson is specifically made for AI and alongside
software such as ROS and NVIDIA Jetback real­time decision making can be made from
embedded systems. This combination allows for robots to process complex high dimen­
sion data in real time i.e. Lidar data [10]. That in combination with CUDA allows for parallel
computations which leads to robots being able to detect or avoid obstacles in real­time.
Finally regarding a combination of AI and robotics it is worth mentioning that companies
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
5
==PAGE:13==
like Tesla have already made applications with self driving cars [88] alongside Amazon
with its self driving delivery drones [57].
1.4
Objectives
The aim of this thesis is to investigate and assess the feasibility of conducting internal
inspections of wind turbine blades using state­of­the­art technologies such as artificial
intelligence and unmanned aerial vehicles. The focus is on utilizing reinforcement learning
to train an UAV to navigate internally through the blade, although other techniques that
can prove helpful to such an undertaking will be examined too. The aim is to determine
the feasibility of such a task and its potential usefulness in terms of accuracy and cost
savings.
The following chapters aim to shed a light and achieve the objectives below:
• Understand the role artificial intelligence and more specifically reinforcement learn­
ing plays in state­of­the­art drone inspections. That includes navigation methods
such as RL, classic path finding algorithms and object detection techniques that
can prove useful for damage inspections.
• Discuss the current software frameworks that support a combination of drones and
AI navigation techniques. The goal is to provide a meaningful overview so that future
researches have an easier time selecting a framework that suits their goals. Or even
for customizing and improving on them since most are open­source based.
• Use a 3D realistic environments of a wind blade in order to test the theory that RL
navigation with a drone is possible and meaningful inside a wind blade. Furthermore
at this part the aim is to use as few sensors as possible. Mainly a RGB camera
since such a navigation could offer us valuable data that could later be analyzed for
damages.
• Comparison of various reinforcement algorithms such as DQN, REINFORCE and
PPO in order to determine which one could provide the best combination of accuracy
and time efficiency.
Along with the objectives a crucial part is to present our Key Performance Indicators .
For the purposes of this Thesis those will be:
• Achieve a flight smoothness above the 99th percentile, which will be expressed as
a ratio of the smoothness of yaw changes. Where higher values indicate less erratic
movement.
• Find a model that will be able to outperform the other with significant statistical dif­
ference i.e. greater than 0.05(%)
• Achieve path efficiency above the 95th percentile, which will be expressed as the
ratio of the shortest possible path to the actual traveled path, indicating optimality of
navigation.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
6
==PAGE:14==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Artificial Intelligence and Drone Inspections
Artificial intelligence is a hot topic at the moment[8] with various breakthroughs in the last
10 years. Multiple technologies such as convolutional neural networks with their ability
for object detection, graph search algorithms with their ability to navigate through known
spaces and lately deep reinforcement learning with algorithms like proximal policy op­
timization(PPO) and its ability to train agents accurately in a way that is both time and
resource efficiency. All of these AI fields can play a significant role in improving our cur­
rent methods for inspections in wind blades, ships and many others[70][82].
2.1.1
Deep Learning
Deep Neural Networks such as Convolutional Neural Networks are a type of feed­forward
neural network that learns features by itself via filter (or kernel) optimization [44] [9].
This type of deep learning network has been applied to process and make predictions
from various different types of data including images, text and audio. CNNs make use
of convolution, pooling and fully connected layers. Every such network must start with a
convolutional layer as an input and a fully connected layer as an output. In between any
number of pooling and convolutional layers can occur increasing its complexity and its
capability to further analyze an image. Let’s have a brief look at how these layers work.
Convolutional layers are perhaps the most important ones. They utilize data from their
input, feature maps and a kernel. For the purposes of inspection a relative input would
be an image i.e. an input made of a matrix of pixels in 3D, corresponding to the three
dimensions that exist in an image, namely height, width and depth. The kernel or more
simply known the filter plays the role of the feature detector, detecting wether or nor a
feature is present [4]. This is typically a 3x3 two dimensional array of weights that is then
applied to a part of the image. Afterwards a dot product is calculated between the pixels
of the input and the filter, following this we have a shift of the kernel by a stride and the
process is repeated until the filter has passed through the entire input pixels, giving us
an array as an output. This array is known as an activation map a convolved feature
or a feature map [28]. It is important to remember that the weights of the kernel remain
fixed in the whole process and will only change in subsequent training with the process of
backpropagation and gradient descent. The hyper paramaters that will affect the output
and in our control are three
• Filters: The number of which, will have an impact on the depth of the output. With
different filters, we would get different activation maps [51].
• Stride: Which will be the distance in pixels that our two dimensional kernel will slide
over the image [4].
• Padding: The type of padding is split in 4 categories. Zero­padding is most com­
monly used in cases where the kernel does not fit the input. In this case all elements
that are outside of the input matrix will be set to zero. Thus creating a greater or
equal sized output. Furthermore we have Valid­padding commonly known as no
padding. In which case the last convolution is dropped if the dimensions do not
match. Same padding is used when we want the input and output layer to have the
same size and finally Full padding that will increase the of the output by adding zero
to all the borders of the input matrix [28].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
7
==PAGE:15==
At the end of every convolution, we must apply an activation function. Usually this is the
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU). This function has the goal of transforming our activation map
and introduces nonlinearity [4].
Polling layers are used to decrease the input dimensionality. This makes our following
calculations easier as it reduces the number of parameters in the input. The main dif­
ference here is that the filter that is applied does not have any weights but instead uses
either a max pooling or an average pooling aggregation function [9].
• Max: In the case of max pooling the pixel with the maximum value is selected and
send to the output array. This is the most common approach to the pooling layer [4].
• Average: With this aggregation function the average value within the filters view is
calculated and send to the output array [28].
Figure 2.1: Max Pooling and Average Pooling layer comparison [99].
Although this layers reduces the information that is available to us. It also makes the
network more efficient, it decreases the complexity, training times and the risk of over
training [4].
Fully­connected layer: Whereas with the previous layers we can have any number of
them in the network we only have one fully connected one. That is at the end. This
layer performs the classification of the image by analyzing the features and filters that
have been extracted in the previous layers. This layer often utilizes a softmax activation
function where a probability from 0 to 1 is produced [4].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
8
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Convolutional Neural Network architecture of VGG­16 [51].
CNNs are one of the most important tools for image classification and it is a key technology
for automating inspections while lowering the costs. According to a study done at DTU
by ASM Shihavuddin et. al [82]. Where different types of networks where used and they
managed to increase the accuracy of the various models by 35%. In the end the accuracy
achieved was almost at the same level as an expert human. With this information it is
obvious that although CNNs can not be used to replace experts they can be a tool that
will help experts in various damages get suggestions on possible areas of interest. This
could allow them to be more productive and deduct inspections at a faster pace [82]. It is
worth mentioning that one of the main challenges at that particular study was the dataset
and it is possible that in the near future with more data analysis and data classification
from expert teams the accuracy scores could prove to be even higher.
Probably the most promising type of CNN that is relevant to our goals is You Only Look
Once (YOLO). It was developed by Joseph Redmon et al. [73] at 2016. The importance
of this network is that it manages to achieve real­time object detection. Furthermore, the
entirety of the input image is used for the prediction of all objects in every class at the same
time. Basically what this means is that the particular network examines the whole image
and every object present in that image, giving as more than one classification per image if
multiple objects are present. The way this works is by dividing the initial input image in a
grid of S x S, each grid cell has the task of object detection and if an object is present that
grid cell will predict a number o bounding boxes and their respective confidence scores.
These scores are a reflection of how sure YOLO is that an object is indeed detected.
Scores include coordinates of the object. Moreover the final layer is not only responsible
for the coordinates of the object but also its classification. YOLO is not only very fast but
also surprisingly accurate, and it can be loaded directly to a webcam to perform real­time
detections, when attached it can be a dynamic object detector following objects across
their space as they change in appearance. It defers from a typical classifier since its loss
function correlates to the accuracy of the detection, as a result the whole model is trained.
According to its creator it is 100 times faster than traditional CNNs. What perhaps is more
important is that it is open source [71] which makes it quite easy for anyone to temper
with and adapt it to specific needs such as detection and categorization of wind blade
damages. After its creation significant updates have been made [72].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
9
==PAGE:17==
Although several works investigate the combination of YOLO and UAVs in application
areas such as vehicle detection, aerial refueling, and object recognition [7][33][98][75],
two stand out for their relevance to this thesis: those using YOLO for exterior wind blade
detection [47][90]. Both report highly promising results that could indicate that automated
wind blade inspection—least for the exterior—by drones is something that is in the near
future. However, up to date, there is no study carried out on UAV­based YOLO­based
wind blades’ interior inspection.
2.1.2
Path Finding Algorithms
Now moving towards exploratory methods that can prove useful in the navigation of the
interior of a wind blade we have algorithms that are able to navigate and find the shortest
path between two points [pathfinding]. One prime example of two such algorithms is A*
and Dijkstra’s algorithm. They have been used in a variety of application with one of them
being an A* that is able to play through the famous Super Mario video game [89]. However
the applications of such tools do not stop there, and both A* and Dijkstra’s have been used
for navigating unmanned aerial vehicles through obstacles and unknown environments.
Dijkstra works by finding the shortest path between two graph nodes. The principle that
used in this algorithm is a greedy one as the algorithm chooses which node will be ex­
plored next based on the current shortest distance.
This algorithm does provide a holistic approach and is able to find the shortest path from
node to node to end up with shortest path from start to finish. This happens because
Dijkstra will have a repetitive action where it will go through each of the neighboring nodes
and keep the one with the shortest distance. Afterwards the nodes from that shortest one
will be explored and so on until the solution is found or all possible nodes are explored.
The only downside of Dijkstra is that it could take a long time to calculate.
Another well known algorithm used for path finding is A*. In this one the main difference
with Dijkstra is the introduction of heuristic function that calculates how close our current
graph node is to our final goal. This is important as it makes this search method highly
effective and less time consuming. Basically the algorithm calculates the distance a node
has from the starting node and an estimation of that node from the end goal giving it a
score.
f(x) = g(x) + h(x)
(2.1)
With g(x) being the term that calculated distance from node to node and h(x) the heuristic
that estimates the distance from the end goal. While the calculations are made the algo­
rithm will keep track of the nodes visited and their scores. At some point if a node with a
better score is visited the path will be updated in order to reflect the new better path.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
10
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.3: An example comparison on how A*(left) and Dijkstra(right) compare in regards
to path finding in a 2D space [93]
The way these traditional path finding algorithms work is by analyzing a graph and finding
out the best available course. Both of which have several kinds of optimization for their
path finding skills and time and it takes for the execution. In terms of UAVs a graph can
be created by utilizing various sensors and creating something that could be utilized in
a search algorithm. One proposed solution is to utilize LIDAR technology to create a
3D point cloud map as the ELIOS 3 drone does [20] and later use that map as a graph
where the search will be executed. One of the most known solutions for path planning
vehicles both aerial and ground based is the GBPlanner 2.0 [42] where this type of graph
is combined with Dijkstra’s algorithm in order to navigate through the terrain. This type of
navigation comes with some advantages. One of them being that a solution is guaranteed
with appropriate design of the algorithm while another being that the path taken will be
saved in nodes. Which can prove very useful in cases where the vehicle needs to return
to its initial position in case of physical constrains such as low battery.
2.1.3
Reinforcement Learning
This is a branch of machine learning that focuses on making decisions with the goal of
maximizing a reward function [24]. It also is the main focus of this thesis moving forwards.
Which is why it is important to analyze and understand the basics of it, before moving
forward to other chapters.
This type of method is quite similar, at first glance, to how humans learn [87], as humans
interact with their environment to determine if their actions are correct. For example, this
often happens in conversations. However, there is a difference: human experts require
far less data to achieve results similar to reinforcement learning [68].
The benefits compared to traditional path finding approaches are that once an RL model
is trained, it can navigate and interact with environments that are dynamic and constantly
changing, such as the weather conditions near wind turbines or the turbulence inside a
wind blade or when a drone’s rotors are operating [50].
With advancements in drone technology and sensor integration [94], now is an ideal time
to test how efficient reinforcement learning can be in drone navigation. Many studies show
that drones and reinforcement learning demonstrate great promise in various sectors such
as navigation, control, object detection and tracking [81, 56, 67].
The way Reinforcement Learning algorithms work is by utilizing various concepts such as
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
11
==PAGE:19==
agents, environments, states, actions and rewards. For example let’s consider a drone
that has to navigate an environment. In this case we will use the UAV as an agent, mak­
ing decision about where to go. These decisions will be based on the environment and
whether or not the drone will crash to an obstacle, a wall or simply the floor. The crash of
the drone will depend on its current state, which is the position of the drone relative to its
environment. Furthermore it will depend on the drones actions, those can be moving for­
ward, up and down or left and right among other things like orientation and speed. Finally
the reward function will be the one to tell us if the drone is successfully in its movements.
If it crashes then a negative update can be given so that the agent knows that something
needs to change or if the end goal is closer a positive reward can be given so that the
agent continues on the path.
Figure 2.4: Reinforcement Learning Basic Architecture [91]
In order to understand how the above example can actually be trained with reinforcement
learning it is important to understand what all those terms like environment and action
mean, how they work and why they are important. Furthermore the training process and
the intricacies of reinforcement learning need to be discussed in order to fully understand
the next chapters of this Thesis.
Environment:
Usually it is advisable to train RL in simulated environments. This means though that we
have to define that a drone will not be able to move through a wall and that in case it
moves too close it will be a crash. This is necessary in order to have transferability to a
real world problem [37]. This can be achieved with meticulous simulated environments
that can be created in gaming engines. Such as Unity or Unreal Engine, a plus is that
in such programs real­world physics can be simulated. However the environment is not
limited to graphic simulations that resemble reality. In terms of reinforcement learning the
environment is what the agent interacts with and that could be vastly different, some other
examples of an environment could be a chess board or even data structures relevant to
financial trading. The important thing to remember is that the environment should be well
defined and that it is what the agent will interact with.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
12
==PAGE:20==
Reward systems:
These will act as a metric of performance for the drone and will allow it to compare how
profitable are the actions compared to the end goal. A proper reward system is paramount
for achieving good performance [91]. The reward function will take as an input state (S)
and an action (A) at every time step that and give an output (R) that indicates how good
the agent did.
S × A →R
(2.2)
The reward function can take many forms depending on the task we want our agent to
achieve and while there is no clear solution to how a reward function should be made. It is
worth understanding the capabilities it has since it can both speed up and slow down the
training process. When considering a reward function it is important to achieve a balance
on the frequency of the reward, that is how often a reward is given to our agent [91].
Let’s consider an unmanned aerial vehicle that uses reinforcement learning for navigation
purposes, for this type of task we could reward the drone with +10 if it reaches the end
goal, ­10 if it crashes on a wall, +2 for exploring and ­1 for every step it takes. Rewards
can be both negative and positive. Moreover we could reward an agent for actions that
bring it closer to the end goal, this has several advantages such as reinforcing actions
that boost performance. On the other hand we could also reward an agent for avoiding a
bad behavior such as collisions [25].
Building effective reward functions is a nuisance process and we could run in several
problems such as the sparse­reward. To explain why this is a potential issue, let’s consider
an agent that needs to navigate a self driving car from point A to point B. Obviously if we
were to only give a reward once the agent reaches the destination the agent could wonder
around for a long time since it would not have a sense of whether or not the goal gets
closer. On the other hand if the reward system is too frequent, detailed and the agent is
rewarded for all the possible traffic laws and signs it follows as well as the checkpoints to
its final destination without a clear distinction to which is more important, our agent will
probably get lost chasing every possible reward from different signs and various traffic
laws [91][97]. In short we have to choose between sparse and dense rewards.
• Sparse rewards are typically more time consuming, the agent is rewarded once it
reaches the end goal, making it more difficult to initially understand what it needs to
be done. However once the goal is reached provided that we have in place rules
for our agents behavior, it will be capable of the full task [91].
• Dense rewards on the other hand implement a more frequent reward system. That
can prove extremely helpful for the initial stages of training where the agent does
not have the training to perform even simple actions that bring it closer to the end
goal. In that stage having checkpoints that reward its behavior is considered a nice
trick to speed up the learning process [97].
In general a combination of both sparse and dense is recommended in order to get the
best out of both worlds
Moving on we have the question of whether we want our agent to focus on short­term
or long­term goals. That, of course depends on the task at hand. If we want a drone to
inspect and go close to anything that remotely looks like a possible damage then perhaps
a short­term approach would be best where it is considered with going near one interest
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
13
==PAGE:21==
point after the other. On another instance it is possible that we would like to create an
agent that will ensure maximum financial goals in trading stocks within a 15 year span.
That reward function would look different and would encourage long­term gains.
Another frequent dilemma in reinforcement learning is whether or not the agent will have
a focus on exploitation or exploration. What do these term mean in a reinforcement
learning setting? Well, for example if a person travels to Hawaii and really likes it, an ex­
ploitation behavior would be to keep traveling there for the rest of their lives. Whereas an
exploration behavior would mean that this person would try different destinations running
the risk of not enjoying their vacation but also having the chance of visiting places that
they would like even more.
Moving forwards with possible reward function problems. Reward Hacking is one that
can occur when the function is poorly designed and the agent finds a way to increase
its rewards without actually behaving the way we intended it to. In that case the agent
outsmarts us and finds a loophole within the reward function [2]. For example a drone
trained for navigation could hover back and forth from a certain checkpoint, maximizing
its reward without actually performing any kind of navigation task. With this problem as far
as the agent is concerned this is a solid strategy. It does not see it as something wrong,
instead it is taking advantage of the reward function and its surroundings. For the agent
the goal is to maximize rewards and not to actually perform a certain task. Reward hacking
could have a negative impact on the performance. Especially in real world problems and
that is why it is important to carefully construct functions that will serve our purposes. The
more complex the world building becomes either for real world application or even games
the more precise the reward function should be.
Agent: Another thing that needs to be done is the agent definition, this includes the
type of policy that will be applied as well as the algorithm that will be responsible for the
agent’s training [37][91]. In essence the agent is allowed to use an observation from the
environment, and utilizing any internal rules that are present make a decision. Typically
with reinforcement learning, the agent expects the current state to be provided by the
environment, for that state to have the Markov property, and then it processes that state
using a policy function that decides what action to take. In short the agent is the one taking
the action based on the information it possesses and the way it has learned to ”act”.
State:
The role of the state is to inform the agent properly about its environment and its position
relative to that environment so that it can actually take an action. In drones that could
be the position of the drone relative to the environment in a x,y,z vector but it can also
offer information about how close the drone is to a wall, to the floor or to its goal in the
form of matrices or tensors. Depending on the environment, the task and the agent, a
state can take various forms and deliver various information [85]. For example a chess
state would deliver very different information compared to what has been described so
far. What is important is that the state can give valuable information so that the agent
can use it, in order to take its next action [85]. It is worth mentioning that a state is not a
complete description of the environment but rather an observation, this means that it does
not contain all the relative information but hopefully a good enough part for the agent to
take educated guesses.
Actions:
Those can be described as the legal moves that the agent is allowed to take in order to
change the state it is currently in . Again it is important for those to be clearly defined and
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
14
==PAGE:22==
realistic to our goal [16]. Otherwise we could spend a lot of time training an agent with a
goal that can not be achieved due to lack of proper actions or an agent that is capable of
completing a task without any real world transferability. Like a chess agent that does not
know the valid moves for each pawn.
After the action the reward system will kick in and reward the agent accordingly with the
goal of the agent learning a policy that will allow it to consistently make the right actions to
achieve its goal [16]. In essence policies are strategies that are used in order to achieve
the best possible action depending on the state. These strategies can be:
• Discrete actions can only take certain values. In the case of unmanned aerial vehi­
cles those actions can be ”Up”, ”Down”, ”Left”, ”Right” and ”Hover” which essentially
means no move is made by the agent. These actions can occur at every time step
but the distance is predetermined by our definition. That could mean move ”Left” for
5 meters or 5 centimeters but it is a constant and will not change. Those are often
represented in a vector, in that case the columns represent the action our agent will
take [92]. For example the following vector would be interpreted as a left turn
v =
[
0
0
1
0
]
• Continuous actions are not measurable. In the drone example. Instead of left and
right, up and down we know that drones are free to move at all angles from 0 to 360
degrees. This means that a drone could move 10 degrees to the left, right, or up and
down. Furthermore the rate of acceleration could also be a continuous action where
the drone propeller would have outputs that range accordingly. In these actions the
output instead of ones and zeros is a range of values describing how much the drone
will move and in which direction. This could mean that the output is 10 for a right
turn of 10 degrees or ­10 for a left turn of the same degrees [15][92].
• Hybrid actions involve both of the above. Going back to the drone example this
could be utilized by having continuous actions in terms of how much will it turn and
towards which direction. But have a discrete outputs for which propellers will be
activated for that set action [15].
Policies:
What makes the agent behave a certain way? Through policies agents learn what action
should be made given a state and are responsible for the behavior of the agent, since its
goal is to try and maximize the policy. Those are also differentiated between two different
approaches, those are deterministic and stochastic.
• Deterministic policies are those that will effectively connect each state to a specific
action, at any time­step the agent finds itself within that state the predetermined
action is its only choice. This deterministic approach is represented by the following
function:
at = µθ(st)
(2.3)
In the above the state is symbolized with s, and a is the action at a particular time t.
Thus every action at the deterministic policy function will connect each state s to a
single action a. Moreover µ and θ symbolize the policy function and the parameters
respectively.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
15
==PAGE:23==
This policy becomes advantageous when we deal with deterministic tasks, in that
case taking the same action again and again is not a hindrance since one solution
is always the best. Some examples of such problems could be chess where there
is one best move. But it can also prove helpful to other problems such as robotic
surgery where we would not want our agent to take actions based on probability but
rather choose one single most safe and documented action. It also has the added
benefit of being easier to understand and utilize [92][6].
• Stochastic
A stochastic policy on the other hand takes into account probabilities and thus a
state will be connected to a probability distribution over several actions. Thus when
the agent is in a certain state it will choose its action based on probabilities, this
means that if later the agent is at the same state and another action has a better
probability it will choose that one. The following function is a representation of this
procedure
at ∼πθ(· | st)
(2.4)
The above looks fairly similar to a deterministic function, all the relative notations
remain, with s representing the state, a the action, t the time­step and θ the param­
eters. However this time we have another term π that symbolizes the probability of
the action given a certain state.
This policy comes with each own advantages. Namely that it can deal with uncer­
tainty and thus it is helpful for tasks that come with a certain uncertainty. Such
could be most card games since they come with various probabilities that are not
at the agents hand such as the opponents cards. In general stochastic approaches
are preferred when an agent has not only to consider itself but also an opponent.
Not to end there stochastic approaches can prove very useful for navigation and
exploration purposes [6][92].
It is important to note that those approaches are not mutually exclusive and a combination
of both can be taken advantage. As an example the Q­Learning algorithm will have a
deterministic approach while analyzing actions for each state, assigning a value to those
actions based on how optimal they are with its Q function. However as long as it is in
a training stage the Epsilon­greedy approach is used. In that case the policy chooses
random actions with a certain epsilon value or otherwise chooses a greedy approach.
This is helpful for exploring as many states and actions as possible. This is basically a
combination of a stochastic approach during training and a deterministic approach during
testing.
Markov Decision Process(MDP) Framework:
For short MDP is a mathematical framework and it is important for understanding rein­
forcement learning, This framework is also considered the foundation of RL and as an
added bonus it is not very complicated.
According to Markov’s property an agent should make a decision about its next action
based only on its current state, without considering previous actions or states [101]. More­
over the agents current state is depending only on its previous state. Let’s see an example
of this. In a chess game the agents next move depends on the current board position and
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
16
==PAGE:24==
not any previous ones. Also the current state i.e. the current position on the board de­
pends on the previous board position and not one prior to that. For a drone example it
can be said that the action of a drone depends on where the drone is at the moment and
where the drone is at the moment depends on the drones previous state [92][14].
Pss′ = P[St+1 = s′ | St = s]
(2.5)
Markov’s process takes into account state S and the probability of the agent transitioning
to a new state P. It is important to note that all the states S1, S2 must follow the rule of
Markov’s property as described above. Furthermore, Pss the probability of jumping from
one state to another is described. Lastly this process happens in discrete time­steps
t, t + 1..., what this means is that every state is represented as a point in time and as a
result it is impossible to be in between states [32].
Moving on to Markov’s reward process, that is described by 2.5 and the following:
Rs = E[Rt+1 | St = s]
(2.6)
The term Rs symbolizes the predicted reward across all the states that an agent can
transition from state s. Starting from St the reward will be given once the agents goes to
the next state and so it will be symbolized as Rt(t + 1) [32].
Now that Markov’s reward, process and property have been analyzed it is time to talk
about Markov’s Decision Process where the reward and the process are as follows:
Pa
ss′ = P[St+1 = s′ | St = s, At = a]
(2.7)
Ra
s = E[Rt+1 | St = s, At = a]
(2.8)
What changes here is that we add A for actions compared to the previous equations.
That is important since now the agent’s actions are also represented. Without actions the
state transitions where random whereas now the next state and reward is affected by the
agents actions.
In regards to reinforcement learning the goal of MDP is to find a policy π called optimal
policy, or simply put one that maximizes the rewards for the agent. In order to do that a
return Gt [32], a discount factor γ and of course the policy are utilized:
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + · · · =
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1
(2.9)
In this context the return Gt is a cumulative of the total reward in regards to actions 2.9.
Due to the nature of RL problems though this can prove to be increasingly difficult and
that is why γ ∈[0, 1] is used [32], as a discount factor where the immediate rewards are
prioritized to a certain degree. This happens because for the returns Gt it becomes ex­
ceedingly more difficult to calculate the future. Let’s consider again the previous examples
of chess and drone navigation, it is important to consider future rewards but analyzing an
entire game of chess from move 2 or an entire city navigation would be computationally
flawed [101].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
17
==PAGE:25==
In regards to policies, what is described as policy is a the decision making process of an
agent. Although many probabilities exist a policy describes the correlation between a set
of actions a and their corresponding state s. That provides a probability distribution over
those two [92][14].
π(a | s) = P[At = a | St = s]
(2.10)
Value Functions:
One might consider though how exactly is MDP relative to reinforcement learning and how
is it implemented? That is where value functions come into play. Those functions calculate
how optimal is for an agent to be at a specific state and are implemented into almost all
reinforcement learning algorithms. From 2.10 we can tell that the policy maps each action
to each state with a probability [86]. Unofficially the expected return for an agent that
starts in a state s and follows a policy π can be described by vπ. This is represented in
the following function:
vπ(s) = Eπ[Gt | St = s] = Eπ
[ ∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1 | St = s
]
,
(2.11)
In the above Eπ[∙] denotes the expected value a random state is going to have given that
the agent will follow a policy π at a time­step t. The vπ function is called the state value
function for the policy.
In similar fashion the value of the action a under a policy is defined by the following:
qπ(s, a) = Eπ[Gt | St = s, At = a] = Eπ
[ ∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1 | St = s, At = a
]
(2.12)
qπ is called the action­value function and it correlates an action to a policy.
Both vπ and qπ are estimated through experience. This is done through the agent, where
if the agent follows a policy π and an average is maintained for the returns following each
state, then that average converges to the state’s value vπ, this happens through repetition
as the times an agent encounters that specific state approaches infinity. The same goes
for the case different averages are kept per action, as their average will also converge to
action values qπ [86].
Bellman Equation:
In regards to RL and other dynamic programming it is crucial that the value function can
satisfy a repetitive relationship for any state s and policy π. That consistency must hold
for all the values of states and the values of the possible successors [32]. The following
equation is called Bellman and its role is to be an all inclusive average across all pos­
sibilities and thus a relationship between a state value and its successors is expressed
[86].
It weighs them by their probability of actually happening. What the following equation is
saying to us is that the value of the starting state in addition with the next state’s value
reward expected must be equal.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
18
==PAGE:26==
vπ(s) = Eπ[Gt | St = s]
= Eπ
[ ∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1 | St = s
]
= Eπ
[
Rt+1 + γ
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+2 | St = s
]
=
∑
a
π(a | s)
∑
s′
∑
r
p(s′, r | s, a)
[
r + γEπ
[ ∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+2 | St+1 = s′
]]
=
∑
a
π(a | s)
∑
s′,r
p(s′, r | s, a)
[
r + γvπ(s′)
]
.
(2.13)
From the last equation it is clear that an action a will be taken from a set A(s). Moreover
the state s′ will be taken from S, in a similar fashion the rewards r belong to the R set.
For the final part of the equation two sums are merged, the one takes care of the s values
while the other those of r making it on summation. This kind of simplification helps with
simplification and it is now clear as a representation of the expected value [86].
This manages to sum over each of the three variables a for action, s for and r for re­
ward. The probability π(a|s)p(s′, r|s, a) is computed and weighted by that probability. The
expected value is the sum of those possibilities.
Bellman’s representation of vπ expresses the relationship of the value a state has in com­
parison to the values of successor states. As if the equation is looking forward in time
[32].
Optimal Value Functions:
Those value functions provide us with the optimal policy across all states. Suppose all
the states and action values where known for every possible combination. In that case
the best policy could be chosen. The optimal policy:
π∗: S 7→A
is represented by the following equations both regarding to states and actions for v∗and
q∗respectively [86].
v∗(s) = max
π
vπ(s)
(2.14)
q∗(s, a) = max
π
qπ(s, a)
(2.15)
In order to find the optimal policy function the value of q∗(s, a) is needed and this is possible
by assigning probability of 1 to the action the gives the max value for q∗and zero for the
rest across the states [36].
π∗(a | s) =



1
if a = arg max
a∈A q∗(s, a)
0
otherwise
(2.16)
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
19
==PAGE:27==
Bellman optimality equation: A policy’s value function v∗must satisfy the equation 2.13.
However since the optimal value is now at question, a special form of the equation can
be formed with no references to any specific policy [86][36]. This special equation named
Bellman optimality equation expresses that for the best possible policy the value of a state
will be equal to the return of the best action available from that state [101].
v∗(s) = max
a∈A(s) q∗(s, a)
= max
a
Eπ [Gt | St = s, At = a]
= max
a
Eπ
[ ∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1 | St = s, At = a
]
= max
a
Eπ
[
Rt+1 + γ
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+2 | St = s, At = a
]
= max
a
E [Rt+1 + γv∗(St+1) | St = s, At = a]
= max
a
∑
s′,r
p(s′, r | s, a)
[
r + γv∗(s′)
]
.
(2.17)
= max
a
∑
s′,r
p(s′, r | s, a)
[
r + γv∗(s′)
]
.
(2.18)
Both 2.17 and 2.18 are representations of Bellman’s optimality function for v∗. Further­
more for q∗the following Bellman optimality equation is used [32].
q∗(s, a) = E
[
Rt+1 + γ max
a′
q∗(St+1, a′) | St = s, At = a
]
=
∑
s′,r
p(s′, r | s, a)
[
r + γ max
a′
q∗(s′, a′)
]
.
(2.19)
Regarding the optimal value function, the 2.19 can be assigned since the action that
returns the best possible q∗will be picked.
Suppose the MDPs are finite, in that case the equation 2.18 will have a unique solution
regardless of policy. Since it is essentially a system of equation per state, What this means
is that for N states there are N equations [36][32]. So if the environment p(s′, r|s, a) is
known, a solution is too, since solving for v∗becomes possible with all of the above. The
same can be done and for q∗.
Afterwards an optimal policy can be determined for each state and one or more actions
will be deemed as optimal for that state. Following 2.19 a policy that gives probabilities
higher than zero only to the actions that satisfy an optimal q∗is an optimal policy [86][32].
Translating all of the above in regards to algorithmic terms. The optimal value function
displays traits of greedy search [101]. By greedy a decision procedure is described that
takes into account local or immediate considerations and consequently policies that pri­
oritize short term rewards in terms of v∗are chosen [36]. The reason this can work for the
long term is because the optimal v∗considers the rewards of the possible future states
as well. With Bellman’s optimality equation 2.18 the best expected long­term reward will
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
20
==PAGE:28==
also be available for the immediate steps of each state. That is why a greedy approach
can be utilized [32].
Furthermore in regards to q∗things become a bit more simple. That is because for any
given state s, the action that is going to maximize Bellman optimality function for q∗2.19
will be the optimal policy for all the other states too [36]. The optimal expected long­term
return is a value that can be used locally for any state­action pair. This function allows
optimal actions to be selected with no regards to successor states [101].
If this is a bit confusing, the most important thing to remember is that an optimal policy π∗
will be optimal for all states. Which means that it no longer matter from which state we
examine it [86].
Algorithms that use MDP
So much time was focused on MDPs and Bellman’s algorithms because of their impor­
tance in reinforcement learning. Most reinforcement learning problems can be formed
and addressed as MDP problems [63]. Markov’s decision process provides a mathemat­
ical and theoretical background to express how reinforcement learning will handle states,
rewards, actions and policies.
It was mentioned that for finite MDPs an optimal solution is indeed found. However, there
are RL problems involve an infinite environment and in that case an approximation of the
best possible solution is good enough [55]. Moreover, RL environments adhere to the
Markov property, as the agent makes decisions solely based on its current state, without
reliance on past states.
In RL environments the solution is not given through dynamic programming. Instead the
agent has to learn an optimal policy by interacting with its environment. Regarding RL
there two types of methods that are used. Model based reinforcement learning tech­
niques leverage planning methods such as Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [86], which
simulates possible action sequences using a learned environment model. Model­free
based techniques on the other hand try to figure out a policy without estimating all of the
transition probabilities and rewards. For the scope of this Thesis the emphasis is given to
model­free techniques and those are distinguished as follows [86].
• Value­Based Those methods utilize Bellman’s equations with the goal of estimating
the state­value v∗. Known algorithms for that kind of search is Q­Learning and Deep
Q­Networks or simply known as DQN.
DQN utilizes MDPs state transitions. The DQN agent learns from experience tuples
(s, a, r, s′), where the Bellman equation is used and the update rule is derived from
the MDP framework [55]. Finally temporal difference learning (TD Learning) is used
for sampled transitions to update estimates.
• Policy­Based aim at optimizing the policy that the agent uses without estimating
a value function. Those methods include REINFORCE and Proximal Policy Opti­
mization or PPO.
REINFORCE directly optimizes the policy π(a|s, θ) by using gradient descent, this is
done via Monte Carlo estimates to compute gradients of expected rewards. Markov’s
property is crucial for REINFORCE as it is followed by the state transitions and thus
has an MDP structure.
PPO is an advancement of REINFORCE, it stabilizes policy updates with a clipped
objective function and uses state transition dynamics, it trains a stochastic policy
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
21
==PAGE:29==
over an MDP environment. This is done with the Generalized Advantage Estimation
(GAE), a function of MDP­based value functions. Trajectory sampling is also used
as PPO optimizes over batches of state­action­reward sequences [79].
• Actor­Critic methods provide a combination of both value­based and policy­based
methods. Actor­Critic methods maintain both a value function (Critic) to estimate
state values and a policy (Actor) to optimize actions. This structure enables better
stability and faster convergence. Popular Actor­Critic methods include Advantage
Actor­Critic (A2C), Asynchronous Advantage Actor­Critic (A3C), and Deep Deter­
ministic Policy Gradient (DDPG), which is used in continuous action spaces [79].
The above methods are all valid RL techniques that utilize in some way Markov’s Decision
Process. Those algorithms will be analyzed in depth in the methodology’s chapter, along
with how they are utilized for the scope of this Thesis.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
22
==PAGE:30==
2.2
Reinforcement Learning and Simulation Frameworks
Previously a lot of detail was given on various AI techniques. But how can they be uti­
lized in a way that allows the training of reliable models capable of navigating the real
world? The answer to that is simulations. The frameworks we will examine perform their
training in simulated environments. This is very important to create solutions that per­
form well in real­world environments in a way that minimizes risks and costs [1]. That
is because training agents for vision­based tasks with reinforcement learning techniques
poses significant challenges. On of these challenges lay on the costs issues of such an
undertaking. Training a drone or any other robot directly in the real world would be very
costly and risky. Drone crashes, environmental hazards, hardware wear and tear, main­
tenance of the robotic parts and trying to create a control environment in a lab are some
of the reasons that can hinder the development and optimization. Furthermore, we have
safety issues, since a drone crash could harm someone if the safety measures are not
followed [65]. And some types of training would be outright impossible to achieve without
serious safety risks such as navigation in a city.
Another challenge is in the data collection and diversity we can obtain and achieving
generalization across diverse scenarios. This can prove a very difficult task to perform
in a real environment. In simulations we can collect a lot of data from various types of
environments without the need to physically go to a place. We could generalize and
create a model capable of navigating various terrains and take data from various types
of objects such as wind turbines, bridges and other construction types we wish our drone
to navigate. A solution that becomes better the more detailed our graphical environment
becomes.
Simulation frameworks play a pivotal role in addressing these challenges by providing
safe, cost­effective, and environments for reinforcement learning research that support
high customization. These platforms allow researchers to design and test complex sce­
narios, simulate realistic sensor data, and control environmental variables such as light­
ing, weather, and terrain [40]. They enable rapid experimentation with different RL algo­
rithms, reward functions, and sensor configurations without the limitations of real­world
constraints. Additionally, advances in simulation fidelity and physics­based rendering en­
sure that agents trained in simulators can better generalize to real­world tasks, supporting
the critical goal of transitioning from simulations to real world environments. As a result,
simulation frameworks are indispensable tools in advancing vision­based reinforcement
learning for robotics.
Below we will examine some of the frameworks that can provide us with a combination
of reinforcement learning techniques based on vision and simulations in virtual environ­
ments.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
23
==PAGE:31==
2.2.1
Graph­Based Exploration Planner 2.0
Figure 2.5: The ”Alpha” aerial robot exploring subterranean environments using GBPlan­
ner [12]
GBPlanner 2.0 for short is a framework that utilizes ROS(Robot Operating System) and
Gazebo, it is available in Ubuntu 18.04 and 20.04 with the respective ROS Melodic and
Noetic versions. This framework was built for robot navigation in subterranean environ­
ments. These conditions pose significant challenges in terms of costs and safety, as a
response two innovative path­planning methods are incorporated, the Graph­Based Ex­
ploration Path Planner (GBPlanner) and the Motion Primitives­Based Exploration Path
Planner (MBPlanner), have been developed by the Autonomous Robots Lab.
In order to handle the computational and operational challenges of large­scale environ­
ments an architecture of local and global planning layers is incorporated. The local plan­
ner operates with a dynamic ”window” where it checks the environment around the robot
where it explores paths that will not lead to collisions. This happens with a random graph
sampling and an evaluation of exploratory gains. The above is achieved with the following
steps:
• Sample a random graph GL within the sliding window of volume assigned to the local
planner. An edge is added to the graph only if it is collision­free given a volumetric
map representation M.
• Sample a random graph GL within the sliding window of volume assigned to the local
planner. An edge is added to the graph only if it is collision­free given a volumetric
map representation M.
• Derive Dijkstra­based paths L starting from the current robot location and spanning
towards vertices of the local graph
• Compute the volumetric gain associated with the vertices of this graph and thus
evaluate the cumulative exploration gain of the paths in L.
• Identify the path L,best that provides maximum exploration gain and perform some
refinement steps to improve its safety.
The planner returns this optimized L,best which is then provided to the robot as a reference
and followed by it [12].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
24
==PAGE:32==
On the other hand, the global planner manages a sparse graph of the explored environ­
ment and as a result it enables functions such as re­positioning to unexplored frontiers
in case the robot comes to a crossroads at some point and an autonomous return­to­
home that takes place when the goal is reached or when battery is getting below a certain
threshold. The way this works is that the global layer builds a sparse graph consisting of
samples of the up­to­now traversed path of the robot enriched with additional sampled ver­
tices and associated collision­free paths around this trajectory. This graph stores which
vertex is the home and also which vertices are associated with very high­exploration gain
which are in turn considered as ”frontiers” for possible future re­visiting and subsequent
exploration continuation [12].
Although this is not a reinforcement learning framework it remains one of the most effective
ones when it comes to navigating unknown spaces. Incorporating graph search and path
finding techniques that are known to yield results.
2.2.2
Aerial Gym Simulator
Figure 2.6: One of the rooms where the drone navigating the room with reinfrocement
learning techniques [41].
This one is a high quality physics based simulator that can train small drones or micro
aerial vehicles (MAV). It leverages the computing power of NVIDIA’s GPU accelerators
since it is build with Isaac Gym. A platform that was designed for the purpose of training
thousands of drones at the same time.
In Aerial Gym task definition and environment configuration is setup in a way that cus­
tomization and fine tuning of the environments is possible in a simple way that avoids
huge files. Moreover, a custom rendering framework allows obtaining depth, and seg­
mentation images at high speeds that can be used to simulate custom sensors such as
LiDARs. This simulator provides sample environments containing robots equipped with
simulated cameras capable of capturing RGB, depth, segmentation, and optical flow data
at thousands of frames per second.
With the Aerial Gym Simulator multiple drones can be spawn and trained at the same time
utilizing real­world low and high level controllers that enable precise attitude, velocity, and
position tracking. This means that we can train models with various goals. Indeed in
the repository and in the relative paper we can see that we are able to train state­based
control policies [41].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
25
==PAGE:33==
But we can also train advanced data­driven tasks like obstacle detection, collision avoid­
ance or following an object. End goals that are based on vision navigation. Unfortunately
IsaacGym is a deprecated and although it can be downloaded it will no longer be sup­
ported by NVIDIA. IsaacGym is a software with the goal of training multiple robots on
reinforcement and machine learning techniques sacrificing the graphic detail of real world
environments. That is where the next framework comes in.
2.2.3
Isaac Lab
Figure 2.7: An example of training quadrupedal robots on how to walk with IsaacLab done
by the university of ETH [76].
Nvidia has made some great steps in the direction of reinforcement learning the last cou­
ple of years with IsaacSim, IsaacGym, and now IsaacLab, a platform that combines the
realistic simulations of IsaacSim and the reinforcement learning capabilities of IsaacGym
that allows multiple agents to be trained at the same time. This framework can lever­
age NVIDIA’s GPU accelerator for photo realistic rendering and training times. IsaacLab
provides a wide array of robots available for training including humanoids, quadrupedals,
robotic arms, and drones. This makes it one of the most versatile frameworks for training.
The Vision capabilities of IsaacLab are great since it features synthetic data generation
tools, RGB and depth cameras, and physics­based rendering. Its support for camera dis­
tortion, dynamic lighting, and advanced material properties ensures realistic visual inputs
for RL agents.
In regards to RL techniques NVIDIA’s deep learning ecosystem, including CUDA and Py­
Torch, makes IsaacLab particularly effective for RL tasks. The platform provides APIs
for designing custom reward functions, integrating sensor data, and visualizing agent be­
havior in real time. It is a great framework for high­fidelity vision­based RL tasks, such
as aerial manipulation, precision landing, and exploration in simulated environments with
realistic physics [17].
2.2.4
AirSim
AirSim was developed from Microsoft and is an open source cross­platform simulator that
is designed specifically for vehicles, with AirSim we can create reinforcement learning
environments to train cars and drones.
This framework includes various controllers for drones such as PX4 and ROSFlight. This
is useful since a user can specify the required pitch, roll and yaw angles of the drone
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 2.8: Vehicle navigation using vision for training in AirSim [80].
and the controller can take the data from the gyroscope and the accelerometer in order
to estimate current and angle and compute the necessary changes to achieve the user
specified angles.
One of the biggest advantages is the great emphasis that is given to the realism of the
simulations. During those, sensor data from the sim­world are provided to the flight con­
troller. The flight controller will output these signals that will be the input of the simulated
drone in the environment. The aim then is for the drone to compute torques and forces
produced by the sim­actuators. In this case these are the thrust and torque of the pro­
peller. Moreover depending on the environment other forces generated from friction and
drag may be produced.
The above forces will be inputs to the physics engine that will help compute the next
kinematic state in the sim­world, these can be for example the drone’s velocity and pose.
The simulation can also model the environment in a way that sensor data from LIDARs
and vision based information like cameras realistically reflect the world.
Another important feature is the public API that allows interaction with a “companion com­
puter.” Because the API is designed to be hardware­agnostic, algorithms developed in
simulation can be deployed on real vehicles with minimal changes.
Moreover the simulator is packaged as a plugin for the Unreal Engine gaming engine, a
powerful tool that allows for the creation of photorealistic environments, with a great ren­
dering ability and plethora of detailed and realistic environments. This provides a great
way of testing and validating various training concepts before actually deploying a real­
world implementation. Multiple premade photorealistic environments can be found in Un­
real Engine for various training purposes. All of which can be altered to fit more personal
needs.
Vision based elements can be used as inputs for the training including RGB cameras
and depth cameras. Those sensors can be configured with various angles to get differ­
ent points of view and resolutions. Moreover reinforcement learning can be integrated
with AirSim with known libraries such as TensorFlow and PyTorch in order to use vari­
ous reinforcement learning techniques. Known projects include object detection, object
avoidance and navigation. It is a valuable platform to train models for both drones and
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
27
==PAGE:35==
car simulations [80].
Unfortunately, Microsoft will no longer be continuing to update AirSim. However, we can
find the Colosseum repository, an open­source continuation of AirSim from independent
developers [48].
2.2.5
PEDRA
Figure 2.9: PEDRA’s simulation environment with the various cameras available from
AirSim and the layout of the room seen at the top right corner [3].
The Platform for Environment Design and Reinforcement Learning Architecture (PEDRA)
is an open­source framework designed to simplify the creation and customization of en­
vironments with the purposes of training reinforcement learning (RL) agents. Built to be
modular and lightweight, PEDRA enables the rapid development of task­specific simula­
tion scenarios, particularly for vision­based RL applications.
PEDRA is a vision based platform as it includes RGB and Depth Images. It utilizes previ­
ous versions of AirSim and Unreal Engine to incorporate and as a result it has the same
benefits in regards to photorealism and physics.
Regarding Reinforcement Learning PEDRA is a very specific case as it is strictly themed
towards drone related tasks. The advantages of the framework in reinforcement learning
lie in its ability to easily integrate new algorithms. Since all things agent, action and state
related are already defined and ready to implement.
RL is utilized via a CNN of similar architecture to AlexNet to map raw images in q∗values.
Features such as edges and shapes are extracted mapping them in the final layer in a
way that can influence the following actions, that is by transforming them to action­value
pairs. The standard RL procedure can be followed with the agent taking actions that aim
to maximize its performance via the reward system.
Another advantage of this framework is the implementation of transfer learning. What
this means is that a model can be trained in a simulated environment and then fine tune
the last parts of the model in the real world deployment [3]. This means that a drone
can be fully trained in a simulated environment and then partially trained in the real­world
environment, achieving an even better performance with time. This is important since
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
28
==PAGE:36==
sometimes real world deployments can have variables that can not be fully taken into
account during the creation of a simulated environment.
This framework could use some updating in its AirSim and Unreal Engine versions in order
to incorporate newer features. It is important to mention though that PEDRA has some
known real world deployment examples such as DJI Tello drone, which is very important
when we want to consider real world applications [3].
2.2.6
Reaching the Limit in Autonomous Racing
Figure 2.10: Real world implementation of ”Reaching the Limit in Autonomous Racing” in
a race where the drone needs to go through the squares [66].
Developed by ETH Zurich, focuses on training drones for high­speed navigation through
complex race tracks using vision­based RL. The framework emphasizes agility, precision,
and fast decision­making. Although not an open­source framework that can be imple­
mented by anyone, it is worth mentioning due to its extraordinary performance. Perhaps
the most astonishing achievement of the model provided by ETH is that is can outperform
a professional drone pilot in a race.
This framework supports vision through its use of RGB camera feeds as the primary sen­
sory input for the agents. It simulates challenging scenarios with dynamic obstacles, nar­
row gates, and high­speed maneuvers, pushing the limits of vision­based navigation.
PPO was the RL technique that was used for this project, since it provides a fine balance
between efficiency and stability in policy updates. Furthermore the drone’s continuous
outputs in terms of thrust and roll work well with PPO’s high dimensionality action space.
Since Proximal Policy Optimization can handle a dynamic environment better.
Another interesting part is that for the real­world deployment no fine­tuning of the model
was needed. This is achieved through a process called domain randomization during
training. What this means for the training process is that in every episode the agent is
trained in an environment with different values for parameters like thrust mapping, drag,
sensor noise and battery voltage functions. This allows the policy to generalize to an
extend that no fine­tuning is needed for a real­world deployment [84].
The applicability of this framework does not stop at racing While specialized for racing,
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
29
==PAGE:37==
the framework’s vision­based RL techniques can be adapted to other high­speed drone
tasks, such as obstacle­rich navigation and delivery. Moreover implementations like the
above could prove extremely useful for drone inspections since the drone can adjust its
trajectory in real­time based on camera feedback. This could prove helpful in cases where
we want to acquire more visual data from points of interest such as possible damages.
2.2.7
PyBullet
Figure 2.11: Multi agent drone implementation in a virtual environment with PyBullet [64]
.
Pybullet­drones is another framework that one can train drones with reinforcement learn­
ing. This framework was created in the style of OpenAI’s Gymnasium with the aim of
combining machine learning and robotics in an open­source environment. Great support
is given for numerous AI­related tasks such as vision based RL and multiple agent rein­
forcement learning training among others. Not to stop there, gym­pybullet­drones allows
for end­to­end quadcopter control. That includes both model based and model­free based
techniques.
Another important aspect in regards to training options is the availability of vision and multi
agent type of training
Perhaps the great advantage this framework provides is how flexible it is in regards to the
prerequisites. Environments can be executed with or without gui and a high end GPU is
optional since training can occur with a CPU.
Pre­implemented PID controllers via stable­baseline3 and RLlib workflows allow for users
to go directly into training without thinking about drone over­correction or stabilization.
The Gym toolkit allows us to use python in order to standardize RL problems and algo­
rithms. In MDPs a generic environment class receives an action and with it updates its
state, returning a new state along with the corresponding reward. This is a feedback loop
not dissimilar to that of a controller where the input signal is fed to a plant to receive the
output measurement. Another important thing is that OpenAI’s Gym can provide addi­
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
30
==PAGE:38==
tional information to whether or not a state is terminal along with other uses of standard
APIs such as resets between episodes and queries regarding the domains of both the
actions and observations.
Physics are also important in this framework. According to the authors realistic physics
make the development of RL models with the capacity of transfering to real world appli­
cations much faster. The open­source Bullet Physics engine is used as it offers a state­
of­the­art collision management system, with rendering options supporting both GPU and
CPU making it a versatile framework. The physics of PyBullet are also used for the un­
manned aerial vehicles, modeling the forces and torques that occur in each propeller.
In regards to the goal of investigating the interior of wind blades the two most important
things that are offered by this framework in regards to physics is the ground effect.
The ground effect takes place When a quadcopter hovers at low altitude, which is always
inside a wind blade, it is subject to greater thrust that is because the propeller’s airflow
interaction with the ground. The framework models contributions of for each motor that
are proportional to the propellers’ radius, speeds and altitudes [64].
As an open­source framework it has great capabilities since individual developers can
contribute in it. Furthermore, engineers and RL enthusiasts can tinker with the framework
adjusting it to their needs. Pybullet has also made great advancements in regards to its
realism in environments since the study that presented the drones happened and it comes
with a website that provides documentation on the project [26].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
31
==PAGE:39==
3
Methodology
3.1
AirSim Physics
The drone provided by AirSim represents a quadcopter.
Figure 3.1: Vehicle model [80].
Airsim vehicle quadcopter is modeled as a rigid body with multiple actuators that produce
force and torques. The vehicles have parameters such as mass, inertia, coefficients for
linear and angular drag, coefficients of friction, and restitution. These parameters are
used to simulate the physics engine of realistic flight in the environment. [80]
Vertices:
The quadcopter is represented by a collection of K vertices placed in the positions {r1, . . . , rk}
and normals {n1, . . . , nk} and each of which experiences a unit­less vehicle­specific scalar
control input {u1, . . . , uk}. The forces and torques of the vertices are generated from the
direction of the normals [80]. In the case of the quadcopter the vertices are depicted as
four. The input Ui controls the propeller speed located at the four vertices 3.1. Torque τi
and forces Fi are produced by the equation below:
Fi = CT ρω2
maxD4ui
(3.1)
τi = 1
2πCpowρω2
maxD5ui
(3.2)
Here CT and Cpow represent the thrust and power coefficients respectively, and are
based on the propeller’s physical characteristics. ρ is the air density, D is the propeller’s
diameter and ωmax is the maximum angular velocity in revolutions per minute. These
parameters enable the simulation of vehicles with Vertical Take­Off and Landing (VTOL)
capabilities by allowing movement of the corresponding vertices during flight. Additionally,
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
32
==PAGE:40==
they facilitate the modeling of advanced quadrotors that can transition between different
configurations while in flight [80]
Gravity
Gravity plays a crucial role in AirSim as it directly affects the motion of aerial vehicles. The
acceleration due to gravity g at a given height h can be approximated using the binomial
theorem applied to Newton’s law of universal gravitation. By keeping only the leading
terms and ignoring higher­order terms, we obtain a computationally efficient expression
without significant loss of accuracy. This allows us to model gravity more realistically
without increasing computational cost.
g = g0 ·
R2
e
(Re + h)2 ≈g0 ·
(
1 −2 h
Re
)
.
(3.3)
Physics Engine
For our simulation, the physics engine is responsible for computing the kinematic state of
a body using six key quantities: position, orientation, linear velocity, linear acceleration,
angular velocity, and angular acceleration. Its goal is to predict the next state of the body
based on the applied forces and torques [80].
To ensure a real­time simulation, the physics engine runs at a high frequency (1000 Hz),
which is particularly important for fast and precise control of the quadrotors. Instead of us­
ing a generic physics engine with unnecessary complexities, Airsim implements a custom
physics engine that provides tight control over performance and optimizations tailored to
our specific requirements [80].
Accelerations
Apart from drag forces and torques, we must also account for forces Fi and torques τi
acting on the vehicle at positions ri relative to the center of gravity. The net force and net
torque are computed as:
Fnet =
∑
i
Fi + Fd
(3.4)
τnet =
∑
i
[τi + ri × Fi] + τd
(3.5)
Using Newton’s Second Law, the linear acceleration of the body is calculated as:
a = Fnet
m + g
(3.6)
where m is the mass of the vehicle and g is the gravitational acceleration.
The angular acceleration is calculated using Euler’s rotation equation:
α = I−1 · (τnet −(ω × (I · ω)))
(3.7)
where:
• I is the inertia tensor
• ω is the angular velocity
Both are measured in the body frame [80].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
33
==PAGE:41==
Collisions
Unreal Engine (UE) has an optimized collision detection system that supports multiple
types of collision meshes. UE has utilized this built­in functionality to detect the impact
position, normal force, and penetration depth for each collision that happens within a
render interval.
Figure 3.2: Collision detection.
Through Airsim’s physics engine, it processes this information to compute the collision re­
sponse, which comprises Coulomb friction for correcting the linear and angular kinematics
in order to result in a realistic interaction between the quadrotor and its surrounding envi­
ronment [80].
3.2
Deep Q­Learning
Deep Q­Learning (DQN) is a reinforcement learning technique that uses deep neural net­
works to solve complex problems in high­dimensional state spaces. More precisely, it
utilizes a deep neural network to approximate the optimal action­value function, known
as the Q­function. Given by the fact that a multilayer perception with a hidden layer, it is
able to approximate a continuous function. Deep neural networks have been exploited in
Deep Q­Learning [39].
In this framework, drones can learn how to make better decisions in a dynamic environ­
ment by developing their own efficient policies. More specifically, in the navigation of
drones, DQN helps the drone to determine proper actions, for example: to maintain or
change its speed or for change its direction to a given current state.
The network architecture defining DQN is given by Q(s, a), mapping state­action pairs to
scalar estimates of future rewards. In modern DQN architectures, a network is used in
which only the state is fed as input, and the output layer predicts Q­values for all possi­
ble actions simultaneously. In this design, the network can compute Q­values efficiently
across an action set, and, consequently, it can easily determine the best action by se­
lecting the one with the highest value. More often than not, it incorporates convolutional
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
34
==PAGE:42==
layers to extract meaningful features from the state, making it particularly useful for tasks
involving visual data processing, such as drone navigation systems [39].
The Q­learning update rule used to train the neural network parameters θ is defined as:
θ = θt + α
[
yQ
t −Q(St, At; θt)
]
∇θtQ(St, At; θt),
(3.8)
where the target value yQ
t is given by:
yQ
t = Rt+1 + γ max
a
Q(St+1, a; θ).
(3.9)
Loss Function: To optimize the Q­network, the following loss function is used:
L(θ) = E(St,At,Rt+1,St+1)∼D
[(
yQ
t −Q(St, At; θ)
)2]
.
(3.10)
• L(θ) represents the mean squared error(MSE) between the predicted Q­value Q(St, At; θ)
and the target value yQ
t .
• yQ
t is defined as yQ
t
= Rt+1 + γ maxa Q(St+1, a; θ), which represents the updated
Q­value using the Bellman equation.
• Q(St, At; θ) is the current Q­value predicted by the network.
• The expectation E(St,At,Rt+1,St+1)∼D indicates that experience replay is used by sam­
pling from past transitions.
• The gradient descent algorithm is applied to minimize L(θ) and update the neural
network parameters θ.
Exploration Strategy: To balance exploration and exploitation, DQL follows the epsilon­
greedy policy:
At =
{
arg max
a
Q(St, a; θ),
with probability 1 −ϵ
random action,
with probability ϵ
(3.11)
Target Network: To stabilize training, a target network is used. The target network pa­
rameters θ−are updated periodically as:
θ−←θ,
every N steps.
(3.12)
PEDRA uses DQN to train drones in simulated environments with AirSim. Unreal En­
gine environments can provide extremely high­dimensional state representations, which
include position and velocity information and sensor inputs that the DQN network pro­
cesses in order to learn strategies for navigation. PEDRA’s implementation of DQN is
evidenced by the drone’s ability to swiftly navigate, avoid obstacles, and maximize re­
wards in complex and dynamic scenarios.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
35
==PAGE:43==
3.3
Policy Gradient
Policy gradient algorithm is a policy iteration approach where policy is directly manipulated
to reach the optimal policy that maximizes the expected return. These type of algorithms
are model­free (with out any knowledge) in reinforcement learning [38]. The agents has
no prior knowledge of the model of the environment meaning that it will not know the
environments dynamics or probabilities that govern the state from the start as it learns
from experience [38].
The environment dynamics and transition probability is indicated as below. The transition
probability is given by:
p(st+1 | st, at)
(3.13)
To reach the next state st+1, is by taking the action of the current state st.
The policy behavior of the agent is represented by:
π(a | s)
(3.14)
Continuing, the equation of the policy gradient theorem is:
∇θJ(θ) = Eπθ
[T−1
∑
t=0
∇θ log πθ(at | st)R(τ)
]
(3.15)
Further explanation:
1. ∇θJ(θ) :
This is the gradient of the objective function J(θ), which represents the expected
return. The objective function J(θ) is optimized to improve the policy πθ.
2. Eπθ :
The expectation is taken over trajectories τ generated by the policy πθ. This means
that the trajectories are sampled based on the probability distribution defined by πθ.
3. ∑T−1
t=0 :
This summation iterates over all time steps t in a trajectory, from the initial time step
t = 0 to T −1.
4. ∇θ log πθ(at | st) :
The gradient of the log­probability of taking action a in state s under stochastic pol­
icy πθ. This term determines how the policy parameters θ influence the choice of
actions.
5. R(τ) :
Reward at τ, dependent, like St, on At−1 and St−1, it is obtained from all states and
actions.
[95]
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
36
==PAGE:44==
REINFORCE
The REINFORCE algorithm, introduced by Williams in 1992 [52], is a Monte Carlo policy
gradient method for optimizing policy parameters θ to maximize the expected return J(θ).
The policy gradient theorem gives an estimation of the gradient ∇θJ(θ) using trajectories
sampled from the environment. The subset of reinforcement learning that uses deep neu­
ral networks to approximate policies and value functions, especially in high­dimensional
state and action spaces. Compared to traditional Q­learning methods,REINFORCE does
not depend on tabular approaches. Instead, it generalizes and scales into complex tasks
effectively by using neural networks. REINFORCE will enable drones to learn complex
strategies in the process of path planning for flying through dynamic environments with
the goal of maximizing cumulative rewards over time. The following are steps to imple­
ment REINFORCE for drone path planning. Figure 3.3 below shows an illustration visual
of Monte­Carlo 3.3
Figure 3.3: Monte­Carlo tree
Updating the policy gradient rule we get:
θ ←θ + α∇θJ(πθ),
(3.16)
From 3.15 we estimate the gradient with the Monte Carlo policy:
∇θJ(πθ) ≈
T−1
∑
t=0
∇θ log πθ(at|st)Gt
(3.17)
And an in depth explanation in a pseudocode form:
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
37
==PAGE:45==
Algorithm 1 REINFORCE Algorithm
Initializing policy parameters θ
for each episode do
Generate a trajectory τ = {s0, a0, r1, . . . , sT−1, aT−1} under policy πθ
for each timestep t do
Compute the return Gt ←∑T−1
k=t γk−trk
Update policy parameters:
θ ←θ + α∇θ log πθ(at|st)Gt
end for
end for
[45]
Overall Reinforce algorithm is an easy way to optimize policies. There are some pros and
cons using this methodology:
Pros:
• They enable exploration by using optimization in their policies.
• They do not require value function approximation.
Cons:
• High variance in gradient estimates, meaning that the trajectory can differ signifi­
cantly in terms of rewards and state­action pairs.
• Slow convergence due to reliance on Monte Carlo sampling. Because it uses the
convergence of the whole environment. A large number then of sample is required
to produce the gradient which can be costly.
3.4
Proximal Policy Optimization
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) is a model­free reinforcement learning method that
uses deep neural networks to deal with high­dimensional state and action spaces effi­
ciently. An advanced actor­critic algorithm, it improves policy learning by optimizing the
trade­off between exploration and exploitation while ensuring stability through clipped sur­
rogate objectives. It’s one of the most prominent approaches in reinforcement learning for
its sample efficiency, scalability, and continuous control capabilities; hence, a very good
choice for autonomous drone path planning [35].
PPO has been used in this thesis in the area of drone navigation through dynamic and
unknown environments (internal of the wind turbine blade). Training in this simulated
environment learns an optimal policy to navigate while avoiding obstacles and reaching
the target efficiently. In this cumulative reward framework, the drone learns not only to
reach its goal but also to do so safely and with energy efficiency.
Key Equations
1. Clipped Surrogate Objective
The objective function of Proximal Policy Optimization ensures stable policy updates by
clipping the probability ratio rt(θ):
LCLIP(θ) = Et [min (rt(θ) · At, clip(rt(θ), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) · At)]
(3.18)
[79]
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
38
==PAGE:46==
Where:
• rt(θ) =
πθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st): The probability ratio between the new and old policies.
• At: The advantage function, computed using the critic’s value function.
• ϵ: A hyper­parameter (e.g., 0.2) that controls the clipping range.
2. Advantage Estimation
The advantage At is estimated using Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) [78]:
At =
∞
∑
l=0
(γλ)lδt+l
(3.19)
Where:
• δt = rt + γV (st+1) −V (st): The TD error.
• γ: The discount factor.
• λ: The GAE parameter.
3. Value Function Loss (Critic)
The critic is trained to minimize the mean squared error between the predicted value Vθ(st)
and the target value V target
t
:
LVF(θ) = Et
[(
Vθ(st) −V target
t
)2]
(3.20)
[79]
Where V target
t
is computed using bootstrapping:
V target
t
= rt + γV (st+1)
(3.21)
[55]
4. Entropy Bonus
To encourage exploration, an entropy bonus is added to the loss function [79]:
LENT(θ) = Et [−πθ(at|st) log πθ(at|st)]
(3.22)
5. Total Loss
The total loss combines the clipped objective, value function loss, and entropy bonus [79]:
LPPO(θ) = LCLIP(θ) −c1LVF(θ) + c2LENT(θ)
(3.23)
Where c1 and c2 are hyper­parameters. In PEDRA, the PPO algorithm trains drones by
optimizing the policy of the drones for our case wind blade inspection and navigation.
The clipped objective makes the update stable to the policy, and from the advantage, the
drone acts better according to the expected rewards. The critic evaluates the states so
the drone can be guided in its learning, making it more efficient at reaching at the desired
goal.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
39
==PAGE:47==
3.5
RL Definitions
The state space of the drone is defined by, its position, velocity, orientation, and the envi­
ronment around it, for example the distance to obstacles or the location of a target. The
state space should include all features relevant that are listed below for effective decision­
making.
Action Space The action space is defined as the possible movements of the drone, in­
cluding a change in speed, direction, or altitude. It can also be continuous for smooth and
exact control.
Reward Function Design: One of the key components in reinforcement learning is the
reward function. The role of the reward is to guide the agent’s learning process by provid­
ing feedback on every action it takes, and eventually direct it towards the desired objective.
In reinforcement learning, the agents goal is to maximize the collective rewards, over a
certain amount of time that it is given. Reward function provides an instant feedback by
assigning some numerical values towards each action that the agent has taken. Addition­
ally, the agent learns these actions and continues to explore, resulting in gaining a higher
knowledge of the environment and a better reward system by exploring many action­
states. Then through the algorithm that it is using, the policy is updated. For example, the
reward distribution for moving closer to the desired goal, and maintaining stability while
avoiding collisions is considered positive reward, and helps the agent to take action in
that direction. On the other hand, when it collides, the reward is negative.
Model Training and Evaluation: The model will be trained iteratively with evaluations to
check its performance. Success rate, reward, and collision will be monitored for conver­
gence and robustness [35].
Simulated Environment: The drone is initially trained in a model that loosely resembles
the inside of a wind blade. Later, it is tested in a simulated environment that is designed
with photorealism in mind and carefully mirrors the geometry of a real­world blade.
To successfully implement the wind turbine blade, we wanted to represent the dimensions
of a real­life wind turbine, to be able to make this accurate in a real­life state. Special
thanks to Helene Marker Frederiksen and Sebastian Martiny for providing us with an ac­
curate model so we can implement our deployment. The dimensions that were used for
the blade are:
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
40
==PAGE:48==
(a) Side View
(b) Side view
(c) Front view
(d) Top view
Figure 3.4: Borrowed Wind turbine Blade from the Masters thesis [22]
Figure 3.5: Blade Dimensions [22].
Figure 3.5 represents the drawing of the blade that will be used for testing. The total length
of it is 60 meters with a 2­2.5 meters root diameter, it ensures a robust that can handle
high bending forces. The 10­meter transition zone near the root provides a gradual aero­
dynamic change to minimize turbulence. According to [22], autonomous UAV exploration,
and wind turbine blade inspections include several critical checks, such as glue­line in­
tegrity, interior component alignment, and aerodynamic performance optimization. The
material composition of the blades themselves is very critical for strength, flexibility, and
stability under expected strong wind loads and environmental stresses. The blades are
usually made from either fiberglass or carbon fiber composites. These will guarantee
longer turbine life spans, lower maintenance costs, and increased energy production,
rendering automated inspection methods very vital in wind energy infrastructure [53].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
41
==PAGE:49==
3.6
TensorFlow
In PEDRA, TensorFlow serves as a fundamental framework for implementing and training
reinforcement learning algorithms such as PPO, DQN, and REINFORCE. The algorithms
rely on TensorFlow to process the drone’s state inputs, such as position, velocity, and
obstacle distance. During simulation, TensorFlow parameters like epsilon, learning rate,
average Q­values, loss, and return can be monitored using TensorBoard. An example of
the TensorBoard is presented in Figure 3.6. The path of the TensorBoard log files depends
on the envtype, envname and traintype set in the config file and stored in the events file.
Once identified where the log files are stored, following command can be used on the
terminal to activate TensorBoard [3].
TensorBoard logs:
Figure 3.6: Terminal logs TensorFlow.
The logs represent training and success processes of the algorithms. Each graph pro­
vides a visual representation of the training process, showing how learning progresses
over time.
• SystemStats/Memory­GB: The amount of memory (RAM) being used during train­
ing.
• drone0/Episode Length: How many steps the drone survived in this episode.
• drone0/Epsilon: Exploration rate: higher values will have more random actions.
• drone0/Learning Rate: The step size of the learning process. In this project, it was
set to a stable learning rate.
• drone0/Loss: The loss measures how far the model’s predictions are from the true
values.
• drone0/Loss_Baseline: The loss related to the baseline model used in some al­
gorithms.
• drone0/Loss_Policy: How well the drone is optimizing its actions.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
42
==PAGE:50==
• drone0/Max_baseline: The maximum baseline seen during training.
• drone0/MaxProb: The maximum probability the model outputs for an action. Rep­
resents the confidence in decisions.
• drone0/MaxQ: The maximum Q­value predicted by the model.
• drone0/MeanQ: The mean Q­value predicted by the model.(the expected future
reward of an action).
• drone0/Return: The accumulated reward obtained by the drone at each episode ­
the higher the better.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
43
==PAGE:51==
4
Implementation
To make this research possible, various software needed to be installed that would help
us experiment and test the objectives that were set and to reach the purpose of the thesis.
4.1
Prerequisites
4.1.1
Setup
To simulate the desired environment, firstly to set up we need to download and set up
some prerequisites. The main four software tools required are:
1. Install AirSim (1.2.2): AirSim is the main simulation plugin that integrates with Un­
real Engine to enable realistic drone dynamics. It allows the spawn and control of
aerial drones within the environment, providing accurate physics, sensors, and APIs
for autonomous navigation and reinforcement learning experiments.
2. Download UE (Unreal Engine 4.18): Unreal Engine is our main hosting platform.
It enables the creation of visual and physical environments. Using Unreal Engine,
we can simulate the environment we want for our drones.
3. Install Git: Most source codes are managed on GitHub, and Git allows us to clone
and handle the repository.
4. Install Python 3.6: AirSim supports using a programming language to control ve­
hicles, whether autonomously or manually. For this project, Python was used for
waypoint navigation, data collection, and reinforcement learning to train the drone.
5. Install Visual Studio (2017, advisable): Both Unreal Engine and AirSim are built
in C++, and Visual Studio is essential for compiling all AirSim plugins into Unreal’s
project files. It is advisable to include C++ development tools and the Windows SDK
during installation.
4.1.2
Airsim 1.2.2
The key component for integrating these platforms is compiling the AirSim plugin into a
format that the Unreal Engine can recognize. This ensures that the physics and drone/car
dynamics work seamlessly inside the Unreal world. The integration process begins after
git cloning the repository. Once the folder is made with Visual Studio, you can then open
the terminal and build.cmd, which will compile the necessary binaries. Visual Studio 2017
is installed with C++ development tools and the Windows SDK selected during installation.
When the plugin folder is created, paste it in the UE environment folder that you have
created, this will allow when launching the environment to spawn the drone. Under the
world settings in the Game Mode section, GameMode Override as the figure shows 4.1
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
44
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.1: AirSim plugin
4.1.3
PEDRA
As mentioned in subsection 2.2.5 PEDRA is an open­source framework designed for
drone­related tasks. It provides reinforcement learning utilities for training agents in Air­
Sim. To connect with PEDRA and use its utilities, a virtual environment has to be made.
Anaconda Navigator as the virtual machine and then pip install the requirements. Since
PEDRA’s repository is slightly outdated, the virtual environment’s Python version needs
to be Python 3.6. [3]. PEDRA uses an interface that interacts with AirSim’s Python API
to send actions and receive observations.
A custom environment wrapper is needed to integrate AirSim with reinforcement learning
frameworks. It standardizes interactions by defining,the action space control of throttle,
pitch, roll, and yaw and the observation space drone position, velocity, or sensor data.
A well­designed reward function encourages goal achievement, such as reaching a tar­
get,while in case of collision the drone is penalized. It terminates conditions when an
episode ends, usually occurs when a goal is reached or the drone crashes and then
proceeds to store the data as an event. The most important methods are step(), which
applies the action and updates the environment, and reset(), which initializes an episode.
This wrapper makes it possible for AirSim to train with RL frameworks. In PEDRA various
algorithms can be utilized such as DQN, PPO and REINFORCE to train the drone [3].
Furthermore, the implementation of numerous new algorithms can be made within this
framework.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.2: PEDRA environment.
4.1.4
3D environment
After all the necessary software have been installed and tested the next step is to create
the custom 3D environment that matches the thesis requirements. Figure 4.3 shows an
empty tunnel used for the drone’s training. This is the basic showcase of mimicking the
inner tunnel of a wind turbine.
The figures above show how the environment looks when put together. The figure 4.3a
shows the first person view of what the drone would see. While the figure 4.3b shows that
the AirSim plugin has been successfully installed. On figure 4.1 ”GameMode Override”
is set to AirsimGameMode in the World setting section, and moving further in figure 4.3c
shows the drone has spawned. Another spec that was added was various light sources.
The image 4.3c shows how that would actually look like. Since the cameras that are used
are RGB and they rely on the environment being actually visible these sources where
placed in all four views: Left, Right, Front and Backside of the aerial vehicle. This is
important because of the darkness that occurs inside a wind blade. Where, in order to
collect and process data the lighting of the space is crucial.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
46
==PAGE:54==
(a) First person view
(b) Raw 3D environment spec
(c) Spawning drone
Figure 4.3: Completion of 3D environment.
a
4.2
Connection to the Simulation
PEDRA communicates with the AirSim­Unreal Engine simulation using the AirSim Python
API. The connection is initialized by an object of class Client, which serves as the in­
terface between the reinforcement learning­related Python scripts that PEDRA provides
and gives its commands to the simulated environment. It allows one to directly control
the drone by offering commands like ”moveByVelocityAsync”. This is used in the Air­
Sim Python API to control the movement of a drone by specifying its velocity in the x, y,
and z directions. This function sends asynchronous commands to the simulation of Air­
Sim, through which PEDRA could send actions to the drone, like a change the speed or
direction. To observe drone’s state, such as position, velocity, and orientation, ”getMulti­
rotorState” command retrieves the functions. The environment may also be reset at the
start of each training episode using the reset function, it is usually used when the drone
crashes.
To make reinforcement learning possible, PEDRA wraps these interactions in a custom
Gym­compatible environment. The wrapper defines the observation and action spaces,
the reward function, and conditions for episode termination, ensuring compatibility with
algorithms like DQlearning. This integration thus allows PEDRA to perform reinforcement
learning tasks in simulated environments with the physics engine of AirSim and the visual
realism of Unreal Engine.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
47
==PAGE:55==
(a) Training Procedure
(b) Simulation running
Figure 4.4: Running the main script of an algorithm,terminal and simulation run.
Three algorithms where used within PEDRA’s framework,REINFORCE, Deep Q­learning
and Proximal Policy Optimization.The algorithm chosen for the purpose of the figures was
Deep Q­learning. Figure 4.4a shows the training part of the AirSim drone.
The terminal output shows the training log output of a reinforcement learning model of the
drone. Each section represents a different contribution. It tracks how well the drone does
during the training.The drone being trained:, Drone0, is trained and later the inference
model can be accessed in its location. Level 0 represent the difficulty of the environ­
ment,in this case easy. Iter represents the iteration or time step in the simulation, and
Pred Eps shows the epsilon value being used for exploration in the epsilon­greedy ac­
tion selection strategy. The Lr column indicates the learning rate used by the agent while
training; the Ret column gives the cumulative reward returned while playing an episode.
The Last Crash registers the steps since the last time the drone had a crash; otherwise,
t denotes the elapsed time steps since the last time step for the episode. Other key pa­
rameters include: sf stands for a scaling factor multiplied into rewards while taking action
through normalized values [3].
4.3
Backtracking
Due to the geometry of the wind blade, it proves difficult for the micro aerial vehicle(MAV)
to make a turn and backtrack at its initial position. A backtracking systems is something
that could prove very useful since the MAV needs to be collected after the inspection is
performed. In order to solve this problem the coordinates x,y,z of each action of the drone
during the navigation are saved and once the maximum distance is navigated the drone
will hover for a moment and then reversely follows the coordinates until it reaches its initial
position.
In that way we solve the problem of the drone returning to its initial position since naviga­
tion algorithms could have a far longer training for the drone to realize it needs to make a
turn or backtrack at just the right moment. Which is the part of the blade that it could no
longer inspect. Backtracking is implemented to save computational costs and to provide
a safe and reliable way for the drone to get back. This could be further modified for other
purposes such as when a MAV goes low on battery.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
48
==PAGE:56==
4.4
Running in Inference mode
Inference mode refers to the phase where a trained policy is evaluated and deployed,
without further learning or updating of the model.
(a) Inference mode in action
Figure 4.5: Output positions,orientation and predicted action.
Having gone through the training phase, the next is to run and evaluate the trained models
in inference mode. In PEDRA folder the trained models have a directory to which the log
files are written. We pick the latest successfully trained drone model. To test the algorithm
we then change the config file from ”train” to ”infer” and choose our custom drone to deploy
in the environment. This way the model will execute its learned policies with out needing
to update, and will navigate in the new environment as shown in Figure4.5. The output
shows the drone’s rotation around x, y, and z coordinates and the drone’s yaw direction
depicts the drone’s heading at the current time step. Predicted action is the next action
that the drone will take according to its learned policy.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
49
==PAGE:57==
5
Results
To answer the research questions, DQN, PPO, and REINFORCE are trained and tested
to find out which algorithm yields the best performance and is most suitable for a wind
blade inspection.
5.1
TensorFlow and TensorBoard
5.1.1
Deep Q­Learning
The TensorBoard outputs for DeepQlearning algorithms provide necessary understanding
through out the learning of the drone.
(a) Memory
(b) Epsilon­greedy
(c) Learning rate
(d) Loss rate
(e) Max probability
(f) Min probability
(g) Return
(h) Safe flight
Figure 5.1: Training results showing various outputs, including logs, navigation curves,
and training progress.
1. Memory­GB: As shown in 5.1a the computational resources that the computer uses
for the training.When the memory is too high it will slow down the process of the
training, this can be based on the complexity of the environment. This is not really
important for the simulation purposes but it is for real­world applications since the
hardware mounted on a drone could have memory limitations, especially if transfer
learning is to be implemented
2. Epsilon: Controls how much the drone exploration (random actions) vs exploita­
tion (learned policy) 5.1b . In our case the gradient of the graphs starts from 0.1
which encourages the drone to explore by taking random actions, and it gradually
increases over time, this allows the drone to learn from its policies and maximize
the reward.This helps the drones to explore new and unknown paths in case of
obstacles ahead of it.
3. Learning Rate: Showing the drones learning rate. Figure 5.1c indicated the ability
of policy updates based on the new experience. In our case it is 0.0002. This is
helpful for updating the weights in a more consistent way, it prevents our Q­value
from extreme oscillation and the learning method is more stable that way, avoiding
fluctuations.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
50
==PAGE:58==
4. Loss: Measures how well the drone learning.It shows the drones prediction over
time (Q­value). As shown in 5.1d the loss is decreasing showcasing that it is less
dependent on exploration and better at predicting safer paths.
5. MaxQ: The maximum Q­value that the drone predicts. 5.1e displays the confidence
of the drone increasing over time. It is making the best possible action on its given
state, for example suggesting the drone becoming better at choosing the optimal
path and action to reach its goal.
6. MeanQ: Indicates the average Q­value across all actions. In 5.1f a steady increase
can be seen, which shows the drones policy quality. As it increases it means it is
improving its prediction for all the actions given, not just the best. This ensures that
there is a volatility to the learning of the drone and that it can handle a lot of situations
and not just the best.
7. Return: Tracks the drone’s cumulative performance. It shows the performance in
the environment that we have trained it. As the training begins 5.1g, from 0­3.000
training cycles the drone is still exploring and learning.Around 4.000 it seems that
it has found the policy which is best for achieving the goal and then further it is
stabilizing and converging to a good policy.
8. Safe Flight: Measures the drone’s ability to complete tasks safely without fail­
ures,Ylabels the distance and X the iterations. Safe flight and return compliment
each other 5.1h. At the beginning from 0 to 3.500 the drones is crashing frequently.
Around the 4.000 training cycle it seems like it is avoiding collisions and obstacles,
Afterwards it makes a big jump and becomes stable showing that the drone found
the best pathway to achieve its goal.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
51
==PAGE:59==
5.1.2
PPO
(a) Episode Length
(b) Learning Rate
(c) Loss Critic
(d) Total Loss
(e) Return
(f) Safe Flight
(g) Max Probability
Figure 5.2: Key performance metrics of PPO training, including episode length, learning
rate, critic loss, total loss, return, safe flight success, and probability trends.
1. Episode Length: Episode length represents the time the drone trains until it ter­
minates/crashes. As noticed in the figure 5.2a at the early phases of the training it
can be noticed that there were more termination in the early episode stages from
0 to 1.500. This happens because the agent learns the environment. Continuing
around the 2.500 episode phase, the drone starts to learn more and lasts longer
which means it is not crashing as much anymore. Furthermore, when it get around
the 3.000 episode, it gets an average of 120 steps showcasing the survivability of
the drone. This indicates that the agent has learned a consistent, optimal strategy.
There are times where it probably crashes. This can mean that the reward function
or learning rate can be inconsistent at times.
2. Learning Rate: As shown in 5.2b the learning rate is stable and fixed as mentioned
in DQN. The policies are being updated in a stable manner, this means there are no
sudden increases in the learning rate that results in less risky behavior.
3. Loss_Critic: Loss critic 5.2c measures how well the reward function is being uti­
lized. Early spikes mean that the actor­critic is adjusting to the learning of the drone
and to the value function from the reward. Over time the graph becomes more
stable and there are less fluctuations meaning the actor­critic has adjusted. There
have been some spikes further in the training this can mean that either the environ­
ment can be complex in specific occasions or that the critic can have a slightly miss
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
52
==PAGE:60==
leading in the start of the next episode. An other thought can be that it is trying dif­
ferent methods to achieve its goal therefore having early terminations in the training.
Overall the critics loss decreases, showcasing an improved decision making.
4. Loss_Total: As shown in 5.2d is the combination between loss_actor A.1, loss_entropy
A.2 and loss critic. All three of them look similar and show how the agent is learning.
In the early stages more spikes are found and as the training continuous the spikes
decrease to a more stable manner. This showcases more that the drone is using
less exploration as the training further iterations and stable decisions(exploitation).
5. Return: Tracks the drone’s cumulative performance that it obtains from the rewards.
It shows the performance in the environment that we have given it 5.2e. Around the
early stages of training the agent seems to get less rewards therefore, not really
navigating in the correct direction and surviving less, the cause for this behavior is
because it is still in the exploration mode. Around the 3.000 iterations the drone
has an average of 120 steps (Measures cumulative reward per episode), meaning
that it does not explore as much and it has figure out the policy that gives it the
better rewards, therefore surviving for a longer period shows the effective policy
convergence.
6. Safe Flight: Measures the drone’s ability to complete tasks safely and not to fail
5.2f. Similar to Return the figure shows the similarity. Initially there are more crashes
therefore the steps (Measure the drone’s ability to complete episodes without crash­
ing) are less. From 1.000 to 3.000 is where it transitions from exploration and adding
in the formulas exploitation. Then around 4.000 it seems there are more stable
episodes meaning there are less crashes during the training.It showcases that it
learned to move around the complex environment.
7. MaxProb: Represents the probability of the agent selecting the most confident ac­
tion 5.2g. The lower values represent that the agent is in the exploration phase.
They y­axis in the figure measures the probability outcome. In the early stage the
probability is low meaning that it is fluctuating and that there is no clear decision
on the path the agent wants to take. Afterwards, the probability increases reaching
around 0.9, showing that the confidence has stabilized and increased, showing that
the policy decision of the agent gives a higher reward function.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
53
==PAGE:61==
5.1.3
REINFORCE
(a) Episode Length
(b) Learning Rate
(c) Loss Baseline
(d) Loss Policy
(e) Max Baseline
(f) Max Probability
(g) Return
(h) Safe Flight
Figure 5.3: Training results showing various performance metrics for the Deep Reinforce
algorithm.
1. Episode Length: Similar to PPO and DQN the early phase is pretty unstable where
it has a lot of crashes. Noticeable, from 0­12.000 iterations the drone is still in the
exploring phase taking longer time until it starts learning with efficiency. After the
12.000 iteration mark it spikes meaning that the drones found an effective policy and
started learning without frequent crashes.
2. Learning Rate: Learning rate similarly as the previous algorithms, we used a stable
learning rate making safer for the drone to learn efficiently.
3. Loss Baseline: Loss baseline 5.3c represents the measure of how well the baseline
is predicting the future rewards. The value starts around 5.0, meaning that the policy
is not good. As further time passes and it starts to get better the value decreases
meaning that agent’s value estimates become more accurate, leading to a lower
baseline loss.
4. Loss Policy: It tracks how well the policy is changing during the training. At the
early phases it spikes around 2­4. The Y­axis is the loss function updating its pol­
icy network. At around 10.000 iterations the drone seems to use less exploration
and more exploitation, this indicates that the drone has learned an effective policy.
Towards the end loss values stabilize near zero, showing that its not taking drastic
actions now.
5. Max Baseline: Showcases the maximum estimated value for states encountered
during training 5.3e. Similarly to loss baseline the Y­axis starts spiking at the start,
which means that the drone is evaluating the future rewards. Continuing, after some
training episodes the agent has learned how to estimate the expected reward, thus
making more consistent decisions.
6. Max Probability: As mentioned it is the highest probability action by its policy. In
REINFORCE it is spiking a lot in the early stages but notice that it starts stabilizing
around the 30.000 iterations mark. It has found its confidence to select optimal
actions.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
54
==PAGE:62==
7. Return: Cumulative reward received per episode. Figure 5.3g shows that in the
beginning the Return has a low score, indicating of course that is not achieving the
goal it has been given. As mentioned in the previous algorithms returns. Observing
we see that around the 10.000 iteration mark it drastically improves,and the agent
has found a good policy that is achieving higher rewards. Some fluctuation show
that there is a possibility for ongoing exploration.
8. Safe Flight: The number of successful flights. In the beginning, the safe flight has a
low score, meaning that the drone crashes often.The noticeable observation is that
around 10,000 steps, the drone improves its planning meaning that it learned how
to navigate safely in the environment with out crashing, and continuing to be stable,
shows that it achieves its goal.
5.1.4
Comparing Logs
Proximal Policy Optimization(Red), Deep Q­Learning(Blue), REINFORCE(Orange) In­
vestigating all three algorithms in TensorBoard, we found that all of them succeeded in
achieving the given goal, but in different spans of time. More importantly, by comparing
DQN, Reinforce, and PPO in terms of performance, stability, and learning efficiency, we
found that each algorithm worked differently.
1. Return TensorBoards: Observing the 5.4 it can be noticed that, PPO is the first one
that achieves the goal at around 3.000 iterations, following DQN does it at around
4.000 as well, and the last one being REINFORCE at around 12.500 iterations,
learning the whole path. The outcome shows the PPO was the one the optimized
its policy faster with the help of the actor­critic, in obtaining the best cumulative
reward than the other algorithms.
Figure 5.4: Comparison of Return for all three algorithms
2. Safe­Flight TensorBoards: Similarly with the safe flight. PPO was the best one,
proving that it is the superior algorithm,always managing to go to the initial dis­
tance(60 meters) around distance during training. Continuing, DQN is the second
best and following is REINFORCE. Furthermore, 5.5 represents a similarity, with
5.4, showcasing that PPO currently is the best algorithm to use.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.5: Comparison of Safe Flight steps for all three algorithms
3. Episode Length Comparison: The episode length figure showcase that PPO once
again is a better algorithm than REINFORCE , attaining a longer and more stable
algorithm. REINFORCE starts off in around 20 until 12.000 iterations.After, it spike
and reaches 120 steps, which means the drone survives longer and starts making
better flight decisions. Continuing, PPO adapts better and generalizes well to be
the preferred choice for stable drone training in PEDRA. REINFORCE even though
did achieve the goal it remains unstable and erratic.
Figure 5.6: Comparison of Episode Length for PPO and REINFORCE
4. Maximum Probability Comparison Observing the TensoBoard figure 5.7, the max
probability comparison shows a much more confident and consistent learning pro­
cess for PPO. Starting from a low initial confidence, the algorithm improves in steps,
stabilizing above 0.8 after 80,000 iterations with better drone control. REINFORCE
fluctuate more,which means it is unstable and is not as confident about the actions
that it executes. This proves that PPO refines its policy better and should be the
preferable choice for drone training.
5.1.5
Performance Expectation
Overall the superior Algorithm is PPO in every field.
Meeting our expectation as re­
searched.
Deep Q­Learning and REINFORCE have a high variance in stabilization, hence require
careful tuning for optimal performance. Meanwhile, PPO always demonstrates the most
balanced trade­off between exploration and exploitation, which ensures steady perfor­
mance gains with smoother loss curves. The algorithm has the ability to maintain stability
throughout training. This makes it the most robust and reliable choice for drone navigation
using reinforcement learning.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
56
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.7: Comparison of Maximum Probability between PPO and REINFORCE
5.1.6
Overall Evaluation
Furthermore, DQN shows a smooth increase in return up to 120 but exhibits fluctuations
in its Q­value updates, which may indicate some instability in the learning process. PPO’s
loss actor­critic settles down below 1.0, showing a more stable training. Deep Q­learning
and REINFORCE have a high variance in stabilization, hence require careful tuning for
optimal performance. Meanwhile, PPO always demonstrates the most balanced trade­
off between exploration and exploitation, which ensures steady performance gains with
smoother loss curves. The algorithm has the ability to maintain stability throughout train­
ing. This makes it the most robust and reliable choice for drone navigation using rein­
forcement learning.
5.2
Performance Assessment
5.2.1
Algorithmic Performance Assessment
To justify the behavior and outcome of our logs in TensorBoards, we then test the three al­
gorithms on the wind blade environment in inference mode: and got these outcomes.Understandibly
for all three algorithms, the velocity the drone had was the same.
Proximal Policy Optimization
(a) 3D trajectory
(b) Iteration time
(c) Drones Yaw
Figure 5.8: PPO 3D trajectory, Iteration time,Orientation(Yaw).
As shown in 5.8a the 3­D trajectory of PPO is more structured with less erratic movement,
hence showing stable navigation. From 0 m to 50 m distance. During the infer mode
there are only four small fluctuations: two at 1,42 m and two at 1.30 m for the z axis, if
we consider the average flying axis 1.34 m there is a an error estimation of 0.4 and 0.4
error margin. Continuing 5.8b shows the time that each iteration takes until 126. From
the CSV file that shows us the iteration and execution file we calculate the time it took the
drone to achieve the goal. Each iteration took on average 0.26 seconds, and in total, we
have 126 iterations. The total execution time is calculated as:
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
57
==PAGE:65==
Total Time = Number of Iterations × Average Iteration Time
(5.1)
Total Time = 126 × 0.26 = 33.02 seconds
(5.2)
Continuing, to the third figure 5.8c. It shows the orientation of the drone during its naviga­
tion.As deployment progresses, we can see that the drone peaks around f 0.25 radians
(14.3 degrees) and a minimum of ­0.22 radians (­12.6 degrees). Over the course of run
the drone slowly decreases the fluctuation reaching close to 0 again. The last spike at the
end reaching around ­0.25 radians(14.3 degrees) shows that there can be a small tuning
in the policy.
DeepQLearning
(a) 3D trajectory
(b) Iteration time
(c) Drones Yaw
Figure 5.9: Deployment results showing altitude variation, navigation map curve, and
algorithm in action.
The trajectory achieved by DQN can be seen in 5.9a. This algorithm has more variations,
hence slightly showing a less stable navigation pattern when compared with PPO. The
movement fluctuates between the 0 to 50 m range, with very sharp corrections undertaken
multiple times. During inference, the trajectory has gone through five major fluctuations—
peaks of 1.50 m, 1.45 m, and 1.40 m—while the average altitude of flight is about ­1.34
m. Hence, this presents an error margin of , which might give way to fine­tuning of the
model in order to yield better stability.
Continuing, 5.9b depicts the time per iteration for Deep Q­Learning, along with a visualiza­
tion of how the time to perform each iteration varied over the course of the 127 iterations.
With the CSV file for iteration timestamps, one can calculate the total time it took the drone
to reach its goal as follows:
Total Time = Number of Iterations × Average Iteration Time
(5.3)
Total Time = 127 × 0.4 = 50.8 seconds
(5.4)
Third figure 5.9c is the yaw orientation of the drone during navigation. In the beginning
phase of deployment, yaw has high fluctuations from max peaking to 0.74 radians (42.30
degrees)turning right, to a minimum value of ­0.82 radians (­46.84 degrees) turning left.
As it continues moving, the fluctuation dies down, and the policy becomes more stable.
Later in the iterations, the yaw converges closer to 0 radians but still experiences spikes.
The last peak at ­0.82 radians (­46.84 degrees) proves that although the policy learned is
good, there still exists some space for improvement in stability and fewer oscillations with
small adjustments.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
58
==PAGE:66==
REINFORCE
(a) 3D trajectory
(b) Iteration time
(c) Drones Yaw
The trajectory of REINFORCE has considerable fluctuations as shown in 5.8a, this implies
less stable flight when compared to both PPO and DQN. The movement is in the range
between 0 and 50 m with several sharp corrections along the way. During inference, there
are six major fluctuations where the crests go up to 1.50 m, 1.45 m and 1.4 0 m, while
the mean flight altitude is ­1.343 m within a range between ­1.336 m and ­1.349 m. This
leaves an error margin, meaning the model can still be fine­tuned to improve stability.
According to 5.8b that plots the time per iteration for REINFORCE, the execution time
peaks over 127 iterations. To calculate the total execution time of the drone reaching its
goal, the timestamp of each iteration is stored in a CSV file, and its total execution time is
calculated as follows:
Total Time = Number of Iterations × Average Iteration Time
(5.5)
Total Time = 127 × 0.31 = 39.37 seconds
(5.6)
The third plot, 5.8c, is the yaw orientation of the drone during navigation. As seen at the
start of navigation yaw oscillates wildly with a maximum of 0.80 radians (45.81 degrees)
and minimum of ­0.80 radians (­46.11 degrees) showing high instability.In general large
oscillations are shown. Therefore REINFORCE needs some further fine­tuning in terms
of policy to achieve good trajectory stability with fewer unwanted yaw changes.
5.3
Comparing Algorithms
5.3.1
3D Trajectories
Comparing the plots, we observe that all three algorithms teach the PEDRA agent dif­
ferently but aim for the same outcome. REINFORCE, DeepQLearning and PPO excel
and use different methods of teaching the agent, below there will be a demonstration of
the the previous figures for each algorithm combined, showcasing the comparison of the
algorithms that the agents went through during the deployment. For the purpose of the
experiment. These algorithms are used for inner inspection of a wind turbine blade in
Unreal Engine that was created by Helene Marker Frederiksen and Sebastian Martiny
[22].
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
59
==PAGE:67==
(a) 3D trajectory
(b) Top view 3D trajectory
Figure 5.11: 3D trajectory of all three algorithms from two views.
Further investigation based on the plotted figures: 5.11 the 3D trajectories of the three
algorithms combined in infer mode. The Figure represents X(horizontal),Y(vertical) are
in meters and Z in centimeters Comparing the three figures, it’s noticeable that PPO has
a highly stable trajectory and altitude variation in comparison REINFORCE and DQN,
although it spikes four times in the Z axis. All three start from the same initial position
0 and perform the 50 meters navigation distance that has been set. During the plots,
we noticed that all three managed to achieve the goal, but PPO has a much smoother
navigation. This is because it balances the exploration and exploitation using both the
fully episode length and the critic policy update. Continuing,
DQN provides the second best plot in terms of 3D trajectory, that is because it is a value­
based method that uses Q­values to train, and for each state, it then proceeds to select the
action with the highest Q­value. In environments that are more simplistic, it shines better
than REINFORCE. It uses experience replay and target networks, which help make the
learning process more stable.
REINFORCE, on the other hand, is a policy­based method that optimizes the policy using
the reward signal without a critic­actor to update the policy. This causes more variations
during the inference, which shows a slightly uncoordinated balance of the drone.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
60
==PAGE:68==
5.3.2
Iteration Time Comparison
Figure 5.12: Execution time per iteration
Another quite important metric is the evaluation of the execution time per iteration. Figure
A.4b shows how long it took for the each algorithm to complete their iterations:
• PPO has relatively smaller variance in the execution time, proving highly efficient in
sampling and updates by using an actor­critic mechanism. The average execution
time per iteration is 0.258 s, with minor fluctuations remaining within 0.2 s to 0.4 s.
This ensures stable and efficient deployment.
• Deep Q­Learning has a relatively modest flutter, likely due to the batched updates
of its replay buffer and target network updates. The average execution time per
iteration is 0.308 s with noticeable spikes up to 0.5 s in later iterations.
• REINFORCE has the highest variance in execution time since it performs a full
episode dependency for updating policies, thus is less effective in real­time applica­
tions. The time taken by it varies between 0.25 s and 0.7 s, with the highest recorded
spike at 0.74 s, which is the most unstable in terms of iteration consistency.
• Concerning overall efficiency, PPO has the lowest execution time variance, while
REINFORCE has a significantly higher delay for longer episodes in particular. Deep
Q­Learning lies in between then but has a small spike increase, most likely due to
an increasing replay buffer.
5.3.3
Comparing Yaw Over Time Comparison
Figure 5.13: Drone Yaw
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
61
==PAGE:69==
Yaw change is another crucial metric for navigation, especially for autonomous drones.
Yaw refers to the changes in radians or degrees that occur when the drone moves around
its axis. Observing the figure we noticed that:
1. PPO
• Average yaw transition: 0.05 radians(2.87°)
• Maximum yaw transition: 0.15 radians(8.59°)
• PPO exhibits the most stable yaw control, as it changes smoothly and progres­
sively. The yaw values are always around zero, which means the fluctuations
are very minor and the navigation is precise. The actor­critic structure of PPO
balances the exploration and exploitation perfectly without allowing wild oscil­
lations and keeping the directional changes controlled.
2. DeepQLearning
• Mean yaw error transition: 0.12 radians(6.87°)
• Max yaw error transition: 0.6 radians(34.38°)
• Deep Q­Learning is moderately stable with some oscillations, but still quite
reasonable control. Oscillations are somewhat more pronounced than in PPO,
but the value­based learning nature of the algorithm ensures that it selects
high­value Q actions, which translates to policy adjustments that are relatively
smooth but sometimes delayed. Experience replay and target networks con­
tribute to the stabilization of learning, although it remains susceptible to some
variations.
3. REINFORCE
• Mean yaw transition: 0.20 radians (11.46°)
• Maximum yaw transition: 1.5 radians(85.94°)
• REINFORCE has the most unstable yaw, with high variability and many great
swings. Without a critic,policy­based optimization is highly sensitive to reward
signals, which results in greater instability in the control of yaw. Since REIN­
FORCE does not use real­time feedback adjustments but rather episodic re­
wards, the yaw trajectory is uncoordinated and highly variant. Thus, it makes
drastic movements, less reliable for exact navigation tasks.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
62
==PAGE:70==
5.3.4
Comparing Action Distribution
Figure 5.14: Action Distribution
The action distribution figure represents the distribution of different actions taken by each
algorithm. From our observations we discovered that:
• PPO has a more balanced and smooth distribution of action selection, which means
the policy is better optimized and stable over time.
• DeepQLearning has a moch more spreader distribution, with a few specific high­
reward actions being taken far more frequently; this is common in value­based learn­
ing methods.
• REINFORCE has a much wider spread of actions, which agrees with its probabilistic
policy update, that result in more exploratory behavior.
• DeepQLearning: Shows a bit more variation, as its value­based action selection can
cause sudden changes due to the updates in Q­value estimation.
• REINFORCE has the most variation, probably because it relies more on policy gra­
dients for updates, which are noisy.
Criteria
DQN
REINFORCE
PPO
Stability
 Moderate
 High Variance
 High Stability
Sample Efficiency
 Medium
 Low
 High
Convergence Speed
 Medium
 Slow
 Fast
Performance in Drone Tasks
 Good
 Inconsistent
 Best
Exploration vs Exploitation
 Decaying Exploration
 Strong Exploration
 Balanced
Adaptability
 Moderate
 High
 Best
Training Stability
 Prone to Instability
 High Variance
 Very Stable
Computational Cost
 Low
 Medium
 High
Table 5.1: Comparison of Deep Q­Learning (DQN), REINFORCE, and PPO.
5.4
Overall Comparison
Comparing these Figures, Proximal Policy Optimization embodies the most stable and
efficient learning process, balancing exploration and exploitation from the rest of the al­
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
63
==PAGE:71==
gorithms, our tests proved the theory to be correct.
Furthermore Deep Q­Learning is applicable in discrete decision­making environments but
shows poor control and stability in continuous tasks. It relies a lot in the exploration of
the the function value it receives making it harder to be implemented in more complex
environments.
REINFORCE is very flexible and has a exploratory behavior but suffers from high variabil­
ity and inefficiency in real­time applications, this has been shown as well in our Tensor­
Boards that how much longer training REINFORCE needed to have the task completed.
Figure 5.3g proves it by showcasing that it almost took around 13000 iterations to suc­
cessfully achieve the objective, that is three times more time than the rest.
PPO was around 3000 and Deep Q­Learnign was around 4000 iterations until they achieved
the set goal. An interesting observation found was that PPO is not only faster than the
rest, it is also more efficient and smooth than the rest algorithms.
In order to further test the differences the algorithms have more data is needed. For this
reason the comparison graphs of 3D trajectory, drone yaw and iteration time were trans­
lated to valuable statistics that can help further shed a light in the performance achieved
by the individual algorithms.
The drone’s yaw can be translated to smoothness of the actual flight following the equation
below:
Smoothness(%) = max
(
0,
(
1 −max yaw change
avg yaw change
)
× 100
)
(5.7)
where:
• max yaw change is the highest yaw change observed during the flight.
• avg yaw change is the average yaw change over the entire flight.
This ensures that the smoothness percentage is always non­negative. And that can give
an actual percentage to how smooth the drone was during its flight.
In addition we can assess the performance the algorithms had in regards to each other
with the following:
Performance(%) =
(
best average yaw change
method average yaw change
)
× 100
(5.8)
where:
• best average yaw change refers to the lowest (smoothest) yaw change observed
across all methods.
• method average yaw change is the average yaw change for a given method.
Another important finding is the average iteration time each algorithm had. That is done by
adding all the Iteration times and dividing them by the number of iterations. Furthermore,
in order to access the time performance of the algorithms in regards to each other a
Performance 5.9 equation is also used. For absolute time it took to complete the mission
the equation from the previous chapter can be followed 5.3
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
64
==PAGE:72==
Additionally, for the purposes of path efficiency in terms of percentages, the ratio of the
drone’s actual traveled distance in comparison to the optimal shortest path can be ex­
pressed as a percentage.
Path Efficiency(%) =
(actual traveled distance
optimal shortest path
)
× 100
(5.9)
where:
• actual traveled distance Is the distance the drone made
• optimal shortest path is the distance the drone would have made in a perfectly
straight flight.
The following table encapsulates the Key Performance Indicators for this study.
Criteria
DQN
REINFORCE
PPO
Yaw Algorithm Comparison(%)
64.52
75.84
 100.00
Average Yaw Change (rad)
0.26
0.22
 0.17
Yaw Smoothness (%)
98.72
98.91
 99.17
Average Iteration Time(s)
0.40
0.31
 0.26
Total flight time (s)
50.8
39.37
 33.02
Iteration Time Algorithm Comparison (%)
64.36
83.50
 100.00
Actions Taken
127
127
 126
Horizontal Distance (m)
47.69
47.62
 49.24
Path Efficiency (%)
95.38
95.24
 98.48
Table 5.2: Comparison of Deep Q­Learning, REINFORCE, and Proximal Policy Optimiza­
tion for Drone Flight Analysis.
The above findings are consistent with prior research. Proximal Policy Optimization is
identified as a great policy gradient­based method for continuous control tasks [61]. Pol­
icy updates in PPO remain stable because of its clipped objective function. This is im­
portant for preventing big deviations that as are seen in other algorithms such as DQN
and REINFORCE that can lead to erratic movements and direction changes 5.15b. The
greater stability and faster iteration times 5.15a of PPO strengthens its position as one of
the best algorithms for real­world inspection cases.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
65
==PAGE:73==
(a) Average Iteration time
(b) Average Yaw per algorithm
This can be demonstrated with the graph 5.11, since it visualizes the paths taken by each
of the three algorithms in the 3D space using a micro aerial vehicle. PPO’s performance
can not be understated since it has significant advantages in terms of stability and total
distance traveled while at the same time requiring one less action 5.16. While the DQN
and REINFORCE algorithms were not able to match it in terms of metrics. Furthermore
PPO has a clear advantage in all the metrics analyzed by this study. Since as we can
see at the table above 5.2 Proximal Policy Optimization achieved a 99.17 (%) in Flight
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
66
==PAGE:74==
Figure 5.16: Horizontal distance traveled over number of actions needed
Smoothness and another 98.48 (%) in Path Efficiency while also doing it at a shorter time
of iteration with 0.26 seconds and a total flight time of 33.02 seconds. That makes PPO
16.5(%) faster than the second fastest algorithm in terms of average iterations while taking
one less step­action to reach its goal at the same time.
On the other hand Deep Q­Learning operates with a value­based approach and is limited
by its discrete action space. PPO is again better suited for MAV control, since smooth
transitions are easier to implement in a continuous action space. The less stable flight
path of DQN confirms its limitations from previous studies where it is stated That DQN can
struggle with large state­action spaces, requiring extensive tuning of the hyper parameters
to maintain stability [46].
Moving forward with REINFORCE, while it is capable of finding an optimal policy its high
variance and slower convergence proved to be a limiting factor, something that is also
proved from other studies [83]. According to the results obtained in this study policy­
gradient methods absent variance reduction prove to be inefficient for the simulated envi­
ronments and as a result hold less promise for real­world deployment compared to PPO
which outperforms REINFORCE in most studies that involve complex automation tasks
such as drone navigation [100].
This makes Proximal Policy Optimization the algorithm suitable for cases that require
speed, smoothness and efficiency.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
67
==PAGE:75==
6
Discussion
Summary of Key Findings:
The aim of this study was to test the feasibility of internal wind blade inspections with
the use of reinforcement learning algorithms for the purposes of autonomous MAV nav­
igation. This environment is best described by confined spaces, bad lighting conditions
and a complex geometry. In addition the performance of three algorithms, namely Deep
Q­Learning (DQN), REINFORCE and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) was tested in
regards to how efficient those algorithms would be in stable and efficient path finding as
well as their speed in such environments.
The results indicate that PPO outperformed both DQN and REINFORCE in terms of
speed, stability and efficiency. With smoother flight trajectories and a faster convergence
rate in comparison with other algorithms. Taking a look at the execution time analysis
it is therefore concluded that PPO also learns faster than the other two algorithms and
that it maintains a lower execution time variance. This further indicates its computational
efficiency.
Moreover, the backtracking method where the drone follows its coordinates while nav­
igating in order to safely return at its initial position, provides a simple solution that is
computationally cost­effective. The above give much promise to the potential RL has in
terms of drone navigation for confined­space inspections. Especially for the purposes of
wind blade inspection.
Furthermore, the effectiveness of RL in simulated environments was demonstrated with
Unreal Engine providing the environment and AirSim alongside PEDRA utilizing the RL
training and physics of the MAV. This proves a cost­effective solution for training models
that minimizes risks associated with real­world training. Furthermore real­world imple­
mentations utilizing the same software frameworks give promise to the applicability of
such processes.
Study Implications:
This research on reinforcement learning techniques for the purposes of internally inspect­
ing a wind turbine’s blade shows that is indeed possible to perform this task using RL. All
of the algorithms used proved to be capable of solving the task of navigating internally in
a wind blade. The importance of this is that a real­world implementation proves promising
and it could be utilized with tools that where discussed, namely PEDRA, AirSim and the
custom blade environment.
This could be a breakthrough in terms of wind blade inspections. Since it supports that
micro aerial vehicles are capable of performing internal inspections of the blade. The
importance of which are the cost benefits of such a task in comparison with other more
traditional methods such as rope climbers that perform manual inspections. Those bene­
fits include reduced inspection time and risk of accidents involving humans Furthermore
these findings are aligned with the industry trends of utilizing AI for predictive maintenance
and navigation making it a possible solution in the near future that can be further tested
and developed.
In addition Proximal Policy Optimization’s flight stability makes RL based implementations
even more promising. Since a stable flight path minimizes the risk of the drone hitting in
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
68
==PAGE:76==
surfaces inside the blade. In such constructions collisions can be very costly in case the
drone damages the actual blade.
It is important to mention that the use of AI in inspection and navigation could be adapted
for other closed space or risky environments where human monitoring is either too time
consuming or outright dangerous. Possible applications of such navigational tasks could
be in pipeline inspections and tunnel monitoring.
Future Research:
In regards to future research this study establishes that reinforcement learning is a viable
solution for RL based autonomous navigation in wind blades and other confined spaces
such as pipelines. It leaves though, a lot of room for further research.
Perhaps the most important one is a transfer from simulations to a real­life scenario with
a physical drone and wind blade. Although the simulated environment was detailed and
implemented the necessary physics to provide us with a realistic simulation it is critical
to test in a real­world blade too. That is because the unpredictability of environmental
conditions such as the wind could provide our solution obsolete, since in the simulated
environment no exterior wind conditions where set. Furthermore, although lights where
mounted on the simulated drone to help it navigate in places with absence of exterior light,
we can not be sure how accurately this could work in a real blade.
Such a transfer could give a lot of information about various tweaks and changes that
need to be made to further understand the limitations the simulated environment has in
combination with the algorithm implementation.
Not to end there, there are other possibilities for further work too. One of which is utiliz­
ing a more detailed reward function that can identify points of interest such as potential
damages and thus, more closely fly towards them providing us with further information
about the nature of the damage. Furthermore modified algorithms such as the PPO that
was used for ETH’s racing drone could prove a breakthrough in terms of inspections, if its
ability to go through gates can be translated to going near points of interest with the aim
of carefully inspecting them from various angles.
Another aspect of the study that brings uncertainty with it is how the drone will be able to
generalize in regards to the various types of wind blades available. Since they come not
only in various length sizes but also with different geometries and internal structures.
For this case utilizing transfer learning could be useful. In this type of training instead of
starting from scratch the goal is to load a trained model and fine tune it depending on our
needs. This way a lot of computational costs can be saved as well as time. Allowing for
a quicker deployment across various blade types and other confined indoor spaces with
little visibility.
Moreover for generalization purposes domain randomization can also be implemented.
Where the algorithm will be faced with a plethora of simulated conditions such as random
wind speeds, light sources, blade geometries, humidity levels or even different values for
thrust mapping. These randomized variables could prove extremely helpful and result in
a model that is great at generalization.
Another area that could be improved is the implementation of the backtracking technique,
where the aerial vehicle could return not only to its initial position but also to points of
interest in case they need further inspection.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
69
==PAGE:77==
All of the above should firstly be done in a simulated environment for reasons such as
costs and safety that have been previously mentioned.
Implementing other inspection capabilities is another point of interest. To do this various
computer vision and detection techniques can be implemented. CNNs are known for their
detection capabilities, especially in regards to images. When trained they could be used
to classify damages inside a wind blade from the data provided by the drone. This would
require a plethora of data from wind blades and expert evaluation for the initial training
stage. Thus such a network will most likely be created directly for commercial use since
acquiring data from companies for research purposes could prove to be a difficult task.
Moreover as the software of reinforcement learning develops, implementations on other
reinforcement learning frameworks could shed a light on the differences a framework can
make and how easy or hard would be to replicate what was done in this study. More­
over, the graphic design of more complicated drones for simulation purposes such as the
Elios3 along with their stabilization and sensor parameters could provide a more realistic
scenario. Since it is fair to imagine that a real­world inspection would require a drone that
is able to collect data but is also extremely stable inside the blade due to the high costs
associated with blade inspections and wind turbines in general.
Limitations:
The limitations fo this study lie in the lack of a real­world deployment of the proposed
solution. Although simulations utilizing the Unreal Engine, AirSim and PEDRA provided a
cost­effective way for testing our hypothesis with realistic physics of the environment, not
testing in a real environment hinders its credibility. Such applications pose challenges in
terms of wind blade disturbances, sensor noise and more.
Additionally obstacles where not implemented in the graphical environment for this study.
But it could prove useful for cases where debris is found in the internal of the blade.
Possible damages inside the blade may require for the drone to perform real­time obstacle
avoidance.
The reinforcement learning models were trained in a specific simulated environment that
was similar to the inside of an actual wind blade. The difference being that the training
environment resembled a squared tunnel whereas the actual internal of the blade looked
more like a hollow cylinder. This could be the reason that the models perform almost the
same across the two environments once trained. However, the ability to generalize to
different turbine geometries and lengths remains untested.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
70
==PAGE:78==
7
Conclusions
This Thesis achieved its goal of implementing a combination of 3D realistic environments,
reinforcement learning in order to demonstrate that a micro aerial vehicle will be able to
navigate the internal of a wind blade in terms of simulation. That was seen through with
a combination of various software applications that helped in each part. The simulated
environments where hosted in Unreal Engine 4.18 ensuring as much photorealism as
possible, while the implementations of the algorithms where carried out with PEDRA, a
framework that also utilizes AirSim. In that way a mix of reinforcement learning techniques
where utilized in combination with the physics of a drone flight provided by AirSim.
In addition the promise of an autonomous inspection on the inside of the blade is reinforced
in this study. With the Proximal Policy Optimization algorithm proving to be a clear winner
and performing exceptionally in terms of flight smoothness and flight efficiency, achieving
a 99.17 (%) and 98.48 (%) respectively. While at the same time outperforming Deep
Q­Learning and REINFORCE. Although a transfer from simulation to real­world solutions
was not implemented. We are confident that reinforcement learning can be a viable option
for a real­world deployment of autonomous drone navigation for inspection purposes.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
71
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
Hey Amit. Reinforcement Learning with Environment Simulations. 2024. URL: https:
//medium.com/we-talk-data/reinforcement-learning-with-environment-simulations-
3cb88a007d5e.
[2]
Dario Amodei et al. “Concrete Problems in AI Safety”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565
(2016). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565.
[3]
A. Anwar and A. Raychowdhury. “Autonomous Navigation via Deep Reinforcement
Learning for Resource Constraint Edge Nodes using Transfer Learning”. In: arXiv
e­prints arXiv:1910.05547 (2019). URL: https://github.com/aqeelanwar/PEDRA/
tree/master.
[4]
Cynthia Aragón. Convolutional Neural Network from Scratch. https://medium.
com/latinxinai/convolutional-neural-network-from-scratch-6b1c856e1c07. Medium,
Accessed: 16 January 2025.
[5]
European Investment Bank. What Is the Future of Wind Power? https://www.eib.
org/en/essays/what-is-future-wind-power. Accessed: 8 January 2025.
[6]
Thomas Carr. Deterministic vs. Stochastic Policies in Reinforcement Learning.
2024. URL: https://www.baeldung.com/cs/rl-deterministic-vs-stochastic-policies.
[7]
Chunling Chen et al. “YOLO­Based UAV Technology: A Review of the Research
and Its Applications”. In: Drones 7.3 (2023). ISSN: 2504­446X. DOI: 10 . 3390 /
drones7030190. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2504-446X/7/3/190.
[8]
AI Index Steering Committee. 2023 AI Index Report. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2025­
01­15. Stanford Institute for Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence, Stanford Uni­
versity, 2023. URL: https://aiindex.stanford.edu/report/.
[9]
Wikipedia contributors. Convolutional Neural Network. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Convolutional_neural_network#References. Accessed: 16 January 2025.
[10]
NVIDIA Corporation. Product Development for Autonomous Machines. Accessed:
2025­01­21. 2025. URL: https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/autonomous-machines/
embedded-systems/product-development/.
[11]
Forbes Technology Council. Why Robotics and Artificial Intelligence Are the Future
of Mankind. https://www.forbes.com/councils/forbestechcouncil/2022/05/31/why-
robotics-and-artificial-intelligence-are-the-future-of-mankind/. Forbes, published
May 31, 2022. Accessed: 2025­01­15. 2022.
[12]
Tung Dang et al. “Graph­based subterranean exploration path planning using aerial
and legged robots”. In: Journal of Field Robotics 37.8 (2020). Wiley Online Library,
pp. 1363–1388.
[13]
Jason Deign. Fully Automated Drones Could Double Wind Turbine Inspection Rates.
2016. URL: https : / / analysis . newenergyupdate . com / wind - energy - update / fully -
automated-drones-could-double-wind-turbine-inspection-rates.
[14]
Binay Dhakal. MDP (Markov Decision Process) & RL (Reinforcement Learning).
Medium. Accessed: 29 January 2025. 2023. URL: https://medium.com/@binaydhakal35/
mdp-markov-decision-process-rl-reinforcement-learning-bc85e5d25031.
[15]
Deepak Dilipkumar. “States, Actions, Rewards — The Intuition behind Reinforce­
ment Learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 (2020). URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/states-actions-rewards-the-intuition-behind-reinforcement-learning-33d4aa2bbfaa.
[16]
Deepak Dilipkumar. States, Actions, Rewards: The Intuition Behind Reinforcement
Learning. Accessed on 22 January 2025. 2020. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
72
==PAGE:80==
com/states-actions-rewards-the-intuition-behind-reinforcement-learning-33d4aa2bbfaa
(visited on 01/22/2025).
[17]
Jane Doe and John Smith. Isaac Lab Framework. 2023. URL: https://isaac-sim.
github.io/IsaacLab/main/index.html.
[18]
Josué Enríquez Zárate et al. “Analysis and Detection of Erosion in Wind Tur­
bine Blades”. In: Mathematical and Computational Applications 27.1 (2022). ISSN:
2297­8747. DOI: 10 . 3390 / mca27010005. URL: https: / /www . mdpi .com / 2297 -
8747/27/1/5.
[19]
Flyability. Drone Wind Turbine Inspections: Case Studies from Flyability. https:
//www.flyability.com/casestudies/drone- wind- turbine- inspections. Accessed: 8
January 2025.
[20]
Flyability. Elios 3. https://www.flyability.com/elios-3. Accessed: 8 January 2025.
[21]
Flyability. Wind Turbine Inspection. Accessed on 22 January 2025. n.d. URL: https:
//www.flyability.com/blog/wind-turbine-inspection (visited on 01/22/2025).
[22]
Helene Marker Frederiksen and Sebastian Martiny. “Autonomous Robot Explo­
ration in GPS­Denied & Confined Spaces”. MA thesis. Technical University of Den­
mark (DTU), Jan. 2023. URL: https://electro.dtu.dk/e.
[23]
Fausto Pedro García Márquez and Ana María Peco Chacón. “A review of non­
destructive testing on wind turbines blades”. In: Renewable Energy 161 (2020),
pp. 998–1010. ISSN: 0960­1481. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020.07.
145. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148120312210.
[24]
GeeksforGeeks. What is Reinforcement Learning? https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/what-is-reinforcement-learning/. Accessed: 19 January 2025.
[25]
GeeksforGeeks. What is Reinforcement Learning? n.d. URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/what-is-reinforcement-learning/.
[26]
Klaus Greff et al. “Kubric: a scalable dataset generator”. In: (2022).
[27]
Seong­Jun Heo and Wongi S. Na. “Review of Drone­Based Technologies for Wind
Turbine Blade Inspection”. In: Electronics 14.2 (2025). ISSN: 2079­9292. DOI: 10.
3390/electronics14020227. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/14/2/227.
[28]
IBM. What are Convolutional Neural Networks. https://www.ibm.com/think/
topics/convolutional-neural-networks. Accessed: 19 January 2025.
[29]
GIM International. “A Decade of Developments in LiDAR Technology”. In: GIM
International (2022). Accessed: 2025­01­21. URL: https://www.gim-international.
com/content/article/a-decade-of-developments-in-lidar-technology.
[30]
GIM International. “The Future of LiDAR Is Critical to the Future of Our World”.
In: GIM International (2022). Accessed: 2025­01­21. URL: https : / / www . gim -
international.com/content/article/the- future- of- lidar- is- critical- to- the- future-
of-our-world.
[31]
Jacim Jacimovic. Breathing New Life into Aging Wind Turbines: A Sustainable
Approach to Renewable Energy. Accessed January 22, 2025. n.d. URL: https:
//www.renewableenergyworld.com/wind-power/turbines-equipment/breathing-new-
life-into-aging-wind-turbines-a-sustainable-approach-to-renewable-energy/ (visited
on 01/22/2025).
[32]
Rohan Jagtap. “Understanding the Markov Decision Process (MDP)”. In: Built In
(2024). Accessed: 29 January 2025. URL: https://builtin.com/machine-learning/
markov-decision-process.
[33]
Shangjie Jiang et al. “UAV­Based Vehicle Detection by Multi­source Images”. In:
Computer Vision. Ed. by Jinfeng Yang et al. Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2017,
pp. 38–49. ISBN: 978­981­10­7305­2.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
73
==PAGE:81==
[34]
P. Johst et al. “Identification and Environmental Assessments for Different Scenar­
ios of Repurposed Decommissioned Wind Turbine Blades”. In: Materials Circular
Economy 5.1 (Aug. 2023). Published: 2023/08/15, p. 13. ISSN: 2524­8154. DOI:
10.1007/s42824-023-00085-7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s42824-023-00085-7.
[35]
Bilal Kabas. “Autonomous UAV Navigation via Deep Reinforcement Learning Us­
ing PPO”. In: 2022 30th Signal Processing and Communications Applications Con­
ference (SIU). Safranbolu, Turkey: IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/SIU55565.
2022.9864769.
[36]
Vijay Kanade. What Is the Markov Decision Process? Definition, Working, and
Examples. 2022. URL: https://www.spiceworks.com/tech/artificial-intelligence/
articles/what-is-markov-decision-process/.
[37]
Vijay Kanade. What Is Reinforcement Learning? Working, Algorithms, and Uses.
Accessed on 22 January 2025. URL: https://www.spiceworks.com/tech/artificial-
intelligence/articles/what-is-reinforcement-learning/ (visited on 01/22/2025).
[38]
Dhanoop Karunakaran. “REINFORCE: A Policy Gradient­Based Reinforcement
Learning Algorithm”. In: Medium (2020). URL: https : / / medium . com / intro - to -
artificial - intelligence / reinforce - a - policy - gradient - based - reinforcement - learning -
algorithm-84bde440c816.
[39]
Kjell Kersandt. “Deep Reinforcement Learning as Control Method for Autonomous
UAVs”. MA thesis. Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 2018. URL: https : / /
upcommons.upc.edu/handle/2117/113948.
[40]
Taewoo Kim, Minsu Jang, and Jaehong Kim. “A Survey on Simulation Environ­
ments for Reinforcement Learning”. In: 2021 18th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Robots (UR). 2021, pp. 63–67. DOI: 10.1109/UR52253.2021.9494694.
[41]
Mihir Kulkarni, Theodor J. L. Forgaard, and Kostas Alexis. Aerial Gym – Isaac
Gym Simulator for Aerial Robots. 2023. arXiv: 2305.16510 [cs.RO]. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2305.16510.
[42]
Mihir Kulkarni et al. “Autonomous Teamed Exploration of Subterranean Environ­
ments using Legged and Aerial Robots”. In: 2022 International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2022, pp. 3306–3313. DOI: 10.1109/ICRA46639.
2022.9812401.
[43]
Andrius Kulsinskas, Petar Durdevic, and Daniel Ortiz­Arroyo. “Internal Wind Tur­
bine Blade Inspections Using UAVs: Analysis and Design Issues”. In: Energies
14.2 (2021). ISSN: 1996­1073. DOI: 10.3390/en14020294. URL: https://www.
mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/2/294.
[44]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep learning”. In: Nature
521.7553 (May 2015), pp. 436–444. DOI: 10.1038/nature14539.
[45]
Matthias Lehmann. “The Definitive Guide to Policy Gradients in Deep Reinforce­
ment Learning: Theory, Algorithms and Implementations”. In: University of Cologne
(2024). URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.13662.pdf.
[46]
Cristian Leo. Reinforcement Learning: Deep Q­Networks. 2024. URL: https://
medium.com/towards-data-science/reinforcement-learning-from-scratch-deep-q-
networks-0a8d33ce165b.
[47]
Chang Liu, Chen An, and Yifan Yang. “Wind Turbine Surface Defect Detection
Method Based on YOLOv5s­L”. In: NDT 1.1 (2023), pp. 46–57. ISSN: 2813­477X.
DOI: 10.3390/ndt1010005. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2813-477X/1/1/5.
[48]
Codex Labs LLC. Colosseum. https : / / github . com / CodexLabsLLC / Colosseum.
GitHub repository. n.d.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
74
==PAGE:82==
[49]
Limb Lottie. Unprecedented collapse in EU coal and gas electricity generation last
year, report reveals. https://www.euronews.com/green/2024/02/07/unprecedented-
collapse-in-eu-coal-and-gas-electricity-generation-last-year-report-reveals.
[50]
Qun Ma et al. “Deep Reinforcement Learning­Based Wind Disturbance Rejection
Control Strategy for UAV”. In: Drones 8.11 (2024). ISSN: 2504­446X. DOI: 10.
3390/drones8110632. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2504-446X/8/11/632.
[51]
Satya Mallick. Understanding Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). https : / /
learnopencv.com/understanding-convolutional-neural-networks-cnn/#Convolutional-
Neural- Networks- (CNN)- Architecture- Components. Accessed: 16 January 2025.
Aug. 2021.
[52]
David McAllester. “REINFORCE”. In: TTIC­31230 Reinforcement Learning Course
(2020). URL: https://mcallester.github.io/ttic-31230/15RL/REINFORCE.pdf.
[53]
Leon Mishnaevsky Jr et al. “Materials for Wind Turbine Blades: An Overview”. In:
Materials 10.11 (2017), p. 1285. DOI: 10.3390/ma10111285. URL: https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5706232/.
[54]
MIT. Fast­Learning Robots, Generative AI, and Other Breakthroughs of 2025. https:
//www.technologyreview.com/2025/01/03/1108937/fast-learning-robots-generative-
ai-breakthrough-technologies-2025/. MIT Technology Review, published January 3,
2025. Accessed: 2025­01­15. 2025.
[55]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Human­level control through deep reinforcement learning”.
In: Nature 518.7540 (2015), pp. 529–533.
[56]
Ibrahim A. Nemer et al. “Energy­Efficient UAV Movement Control for Fair Commu­
nication Coverage: A Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach”. In: Sensors 22.5
(2022). ISSN: 1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s22051919. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
1424-8220/22/5/1919.
[57]
Amazon News. Amazon Drone: Prime Air Expanded Delivery with FAA Approval.
Accessed: 2025­01­21. 2024. URL: https://www.aboutamazon.com/news/transportation/
amazon-drone-prime-air-expanded-delivery-faa-approval.
[58]
OneStopNDT. Crawler Robots: Your Guide to the Top Robotic Crawlers. Accessed
on 22 January 2025. n.d. URL: https://www.onestopndt.com/ndt-articles/robotic-
crawlers (visited on 01/22/2025).
[59]
OneStopNDT. Visual Inspection. Accessed on 22 January 2025. n.d. URL: https:
//www.onestopndt.com/ndt-articles/visual-inspection (visited on 01/22/2025).
[60]
OneStopNDT. Wind Turbine Performance Optimisation through Blade Inspection.
Accessed on 22 January 2025. n.d. URL: https : / / www . onestopndt . com / ndt -
articles/wind-turbine-blade-inspection (visited on 01/22/2025).
[61]
OpenAI. Proximal Policy Optimization. Accessed: 2025­02­05. URL: https://spinningup.
openai.com/en/latest/algorithms/ppo.html.
[62]
Ørsted. Is Offshore Wind Power Reliable? https://orsted.com/en/what-we-do/
insights/the-fact-file/is-offshore-wind-power-reliable. Accessed: 8 January 2025.
[63]
Martijn Otterlo and Marco Wiering. “Reinforcement Learning and Markov Decision
Processes”. In: Reinforcement Learning: State of the Art (Jan. 2012), pp. 3–42.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-27645-3_1.
[64]
Jacopo Panerati et al. “Learning to Fly—a Gym Environment with PyBullet Physics
for Reinforcement Learning of Multi­agent Quadcopter Control”. In: 2021 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 2021, pp. 7512–
7519. DOI: 10.1109/IROS51168.2021.9635857.
[65]
Xue Bin Peng et al. “Sim­to­Real Transfer of Robotic Control with Dynamics Ran­
domization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06537 (2017). Version 3, last revised 3
March 2018. arXiv: 1710.06537 [cs.RO]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.06537.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
75
==PAGE:83==
[66]
R. Penicka et al. “Learning Minimum­Time Flight in Cluttered Environments”. In:
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7.2 (2022), pp. 3436–3443.
[67]
Huy X. Pham et al. “Autonomous UAV Navigation Using Reinforcement Learning”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05086 (2018). Submitted on 16 January 2018. URL:
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1801.05086.
[68]
Thomas Pouncy et al. “Human learning in Atari”. In: (Jan. 2017).
[69]
J. Trevor Price. “James Blyth — Britain’s First Modern Wind Power Pioneer”. In:
Wind Engineering 29.3 (2005), pp. 191–200. DOI: 10.1260/030952405774354921.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1260/030952405774354921. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1260/030952405774354921.
[70]
Yizhuo Rao et al. “Wind Turbine Blade Inspection Based on Unmanned Aerial Ve­
hicle (UAV) Visual Systems”. In: Nov. 2019, pp. 708–713. DOI: 10.1109/EI247390.
2019.9062226.
[71]
Joseph Redmon. Darknet: YOLO ­ Real­Time Object Detection. Accessed: 2025­
01­23. 2016. URL: https://pjreddie.com/darknet/yolo/.
[72]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. “YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement”. In:
arXiv (2018). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02640.
[73]
Joseph Redmon, Santosh, and Ali Farhadi. “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real­
Time Object Detection”. In: arXiv (2016). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02640.
[74]
MIT Technology Review. Training Robots in the AI­Powered Industrial Metaverse.
https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/01/14/1109104/training-robots-in-the-ai-
powered-industrial-metaverse/. [Accessed 2025­01­16]. 2025.
[75]
Wenyang Ruan et al. “Drogue Detection and Location for UAV Autonomous Aerial
Refueling Based on Deep Learning and Vision”. In: 2018 IEEE CSAA Guidance,
Navigation and Control Conference (CGNCC). 2018, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
GNCC42960.2018.9019163.
[76]
N. Rudin et al. “Learning to Walk in Minutes Using Massively Parallel Deep Re­
inforcement Learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.11978 (2021). URL: https://
github.com/leggedrobotics/legged_gym.
[77]
T.P. Sattar, H. Leon Rodriguez, and B. Bridge. “Climbing ring robot for inspection
of offshore wind turbines”. In: Industrial Robot 36.4 (2009), pp. 326–330. DOI:
10.1108/01439910910957075. URL: https://doi.org/10.1108/01439910910957075.
[78]
John Schulman et al. “High­Dimensional Continuous Control Using Generalized
Advantage Estimation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438 (2015).
[79]
John Schulman et al. “Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347 (2017).
[80]
S. Shah et al. “AirSim: High­Fidelity Visual and Physical Simulation for Autonomous
Vehicles”. In: Field and Service Robotics (FSR) (2017). URL: https://microsoft.
github.io/AirSim/. Also available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.05065.
[81]
Yuanyuan Sheng et al. “UAV Autonomous Navigation Based on Deep Reinforce­
ment Learning in Highly Dynamic and High­Density Environments”. In: Drones 8.9
(2024). ISSN: 2504­446X. DOI: 10.3390/drones8090516. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/2504-446X/8/9/516.
[82]
A.S.M. Shihavuddin et al. “Wind Turbine Surface Damage Detection by Deep
Learning Aided Drone Inspection Analysis”. In: Energies 12.4 (2019). ISSN: 1996­
1073. DOI: 10.3390/en12040676. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/12/4/
676.
[83]
Shivang Shrivastav. Policy Gradient Methods with REINFORCE: A Step­by­Step
Guide to Reinforcement Learning Mastery. 2024. URL: https : / / shivang - ahd .
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
76
==PAGE:84==
medium.com/policy- gradient- methods- with- reinforce- a- step- by- step- guide- to-
reinforcement-learning-mastery-51fe855a504f.
[84]
Yunlong Song et al. “Reaching the limit in autonomous racing: Optimal control
versus reinforcement learning”. In: Science Robotics 8 (Sept. 2023). DOI: 10.1126/
scirobotics.adg1462.
[85]
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
Second, in progress. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England: A Brad­
ford Book, The MIT Press, 2014.
[86]
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
2nd. MIT Press, 2015.
[87]
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
2nd. MIT Press, 2018. URL: https://web.stanford.edu/class/psych209/Readings/
SuttonBartoIPRLBook2ndEd.pdf.
[88]
Inc. Tesla. Autopilot Support. Accessed: 2025­01­21. 2025. URL: https://www.
tesla.com/support/autopilot.
[89]
Julian Togelius, Sergey Karakovskiy, and Robin Baumgarten. “The 2009 Mario
AI Competition”. In: IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation. 2010, pp. 1–8.
DOI: 10.1109/CEC.2010.5586133.
[90]
Liang Tong et al. “WTBD­YOLOv8: An Improved Method for Wind Turbine Gen­
erator Defect Detection”. In: Sustainability 16.11 (2024). ISSN: 2071­1050. DOI:
10.3390/su16114467. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/16/11/4467.
[91]
Cedric Vandelaer. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction (Part 1/4). Accessed
on 22 January 2025. n.d. URL: https://medium.com/@cedric.vandelaer/reinforcement-
learning-an-introduction-part-1-4-866695deb4d1 (visited on 01/22/2025).
[92]
Cedric Vandelaer. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction (Part 2/4). Accessed
on 22 January 2025. n.d. URL: https://medium.com/@cedric.vandelaer/reinforcement-
learning-an-introduction-part-2-4-46a1491a2451 (visited on 01/22/2025).
[93]
Kevin Wang. Compare with Dijkstra Algorithm. https://plainaslife.blogspot.com/
2015/02/compare-with-dijkstra-algorithm.html. Accessed: 19 January 2025. Feb.
2015.
[94]
Lingfeng Wang. Pathfinding and Reinforcement Learning: A Journey Through His­
tory and Fundamentals. https : / / medium . com / @lingfengw26 / pathfinding - and -
reinforcement-learning-a-journey-through-history-and-fundamentals-f594cd8e72a2.
2023.
[95]
Lilian Weng. Policy Gradient Algorithms. Accessed: 2024­02­07. 2018. URL: https:
//lilianweng.github.io/posts/2018-04-08-policy-gradient/.
[96]
Windnostics. Windnostics—Services. n.d. URL: https://www.windnostics.com/
services.
[97]
Amit Yadav. Reward Function in Reinforcement Learning. Accessed on 22 Jan­
uary 2025. n.d. URL: https://medium.com/biased-algorithms/reward-function-in-
reinforcement-learning-c9ee04cabe7d (visited on 01/22/2025).
[98]
Zhen Yang et al. “Accurate Specified­Pedestrian Tracking from Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles”. In: 2018 IEEE 18th International Conference on Communication Tech­
nology (ICCT). 2018, pp. 1256–1260. DOI: 10.1109/ICCT.2018.8600173.
[99]
Muhamad Yani, S. Irawan, and Casi Setianingsih. “Application of Transfer Learn­
ing Using Convolutional Neural Network Method for Early Detection of Terry’s Nail”.
In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1201 (May 2019), p. 012052. DOI: 10.
1088/1742-6596/1201/1/012052.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
77
==PAGE:85==
[100]
Wei Yi. Understand REINFORCE, Actor­Critic, and PPO in One Go. 2024. URL:
https://medium.com/towards-data-science/understand-reinforce-actor-critic-and-
ppo-in-one-go-2569f520c066.
[101]
Yifan Zhao et al. “An Overview of the Action Space for Deep Reinforcement Learn­
ing”. In: Proceedings of the 2021 4th International Conference on Algorithms,
Computing and Artificial Intelligence. ACAI 2021. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 1–6. ISBN: 9781450389360. DOI: 10.1145/
3508546.3508598. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/fullHtml/10.1145/3508546.3508598.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
78
==PAGE:86==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Loss actor.
Figure A.2: Loss entropy.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
79
==PAGE:87==
(a) Runnig output logs
(b) End of output logs
(c) Training outputs
Figure A.3: Training results showing altitude variation, navigation map curve, and algo­
rithm in action.
(a) DeepQlearning Training
(b) DeepReinforcement Training
(c) DeepPPO Training
Figure A.4: Terminal output for: DeepQlearning, DeepReinforce, and DeepPPO.
Once the training part is finished, next part is to run the simulation and see the differences
in the output of the algorithms.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
80
==PAGE:88==
(a) Altitude Variation
(b) Navigation Map Curve
(c) Navigational Map
(d) Altitude variation
Figure A.5: Training results and environment analysis: altitude variation, navigational
map.
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles for Wind Turbines Blade Inspection
81
==PAGE:89==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads Bygning , Building 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
