==PAGE:1==
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
Preparation of Environmental Product
Declarations and calculation of load-bearing
capacity for two types of unfired clay walls.
Emilie Henriksen s183583
January 2025
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
Preparation of Environmental Product Declarations and calculation of load-bearing ca-
pacity for two types of unfired clay walls.
Master’s Thesis
January, 2025
By
Emilie Henriksen
Supervisors
Per Goltermann & Ana Teresa Lima
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication, whether in full or in part, must include
the standard bibliographic citation, encompassing author attribution, re-
port title, and other relevant details.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was completed over a period of five months within the Department of Civil
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), as a partial requirement for
the Master of Science in Engineering (MSc Eng) degree. The research was conducted in
collaboration with the clay wall projects by the Clay Alliance and the Capital Region of
Denmark [in Danish: Region Hovedstaden].
Commercial AI tools, such as Grammarly, were utilized for spell-checking.
Emilie Henriksen - s183583
Signature Emilie Henriksen - s183583
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
ii
31/01/25
==PAGE:4==
Nomenclature
CO2e CO2-equivalent
BR18 Building Regulation 2018
CEB
Compressed Earth Block
CEBW Compressed Earth Block Wall
CEN
European Committee for Standardization
cPCR Complementary Product Category Rules
DIN
Deutsches Institut für Normung
EN
European Norm
EoL
End of Life
EPD
Environmentation Product Declaration
GWP Global Warming Potential
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LCI
Life Cycle Inventory
LCIA Life Cycle Impact Assessment
PCR
Product Category Rules
REBW Rammed Earth Block Wall
RSL
Reference service life
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Symbols
d
Thickness of the cross-section
w
Width of the cross-section
h
Height of the cross-section
qp(z)
Peak wind speed
ρ
Correlation factor in relation to the wind load
µi
Form factor for snow load
Ce
Exposure factor in relation to snow load
Ct
Thermal factor
sk
Characteristic terrain value
g
The bulk density of the clay soil
Mwind
Wind moment
NEd
Design value of the applied normal force
fck
Characteristic compressive strength
fcd
Design compressive strength
MOT
Overturning moment from wind load
e0
Initial eccentricity due to construction errors
eM
Eccentricity caused by the overturning moment
eN
Eccentricity from the normal force not applied at the center
deff
Effective thickness
Aeff
Effective area
I
Moment of inertia
Es
Elastic modulus for describing unfired clay
Ls
Effective length of the cross-section
σcr
Critical stress
kt
Adjustment factor for load-bearing capacity based on wall thickness
Ncrd
Design load-bearing capacity
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
iv
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
This project investigates the feasibility, sustainability, and challenges of using unfired clay
as a building material, focusing on its potential to contribute to sustainable construction
practices. Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs) were developed for two types of
unfired clay walls, and their structural performance was analyzed based on the require-
ments of Eurocode 6.
The findings confirm that the unfired clay walls meet the structural requirements for inner
walls in an average single-family house in Denmark. The study argues that Eurocode
6 can be used to calculate the load-bearing capacity of unfired clay walls, providing a
reliable framework for assessing their structural performance. However, challenges were
identified in the development of EPDs, particularly due to problems with data availability
and quality for Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), the use of generic versus specific data, and a
lack of transparency in LCA databases and tools. Additionally, integrating the material’s
recycling potential into the EPD framework proved to be a challenge.
A barrier to the widespread adoption of unfired clay as a building material is the lack of es-
tablished standards. Developing comprehensive standards is essential to ensure consistent
assessment and certification of unfired clay’s viability as a future building material.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
v
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
From Emilie Henriksen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Per Goltermann, Professor at DTU,
and Ana Teresa Lima, Senior Researcher at DTU, for their invaluable guidance, support,
and constructive feedback throughout this project. Their expertise and encouragement
have been instrumental in shaping this thesis.
I am also grateful to Niels Brix, Co-supervisor and Architect, for his support and for
serving as the contact person for data access related to the clay wall project by the Capital
Region of Denmark. Special thanks go to Trine Sofie Dusine Schmidt Nielsen, Architect,
for her assistance and for serving as the contact person for data access related to the clay
wall project by the Clay Alliance.
I would like to acknowledge Morten Wold, Mahan Maleki, and Ida Bertelsen for providing
essential data for the Compressed Earth Block Wall project, as well as Johan Klejs, Hans
Pauli Joensen, Mads Udsen Grevit, and Jesper Frank Axelsen for their contributions to
the Rammed Earth Block Wall project.
This work would not have been possible without the collaboration and contributions of
these individuals, and I am grateful for their time and expertise.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Framework
4
2.1
Clay soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Structural analysis for load-bearing capacity calculations . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Life Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Environmental Product Declarations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Summary of theoretical framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Case description
22
3.1
The Compressed Earth Block Wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
The Rammed Earth Block Wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Methodology
28
4.1
Static method and calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Development of EPDs for the cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Case Studies: Wall-specific methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results
47
5.1
Load-bearing verification of the walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
EPD for the Compressed Earth Block Wall
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
EPD for the Rammed Earth Block Wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.4
Comparing the results of the EPDs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Discussion
74
6.1
Assessment of load-bearing capacity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.2
Uncertainties in the development of EPDs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.3
Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Conclusion
80
8
Future
82
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
vii
==PAGE:9==
Bibliography
83
A Appendix
91
A.1 Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.2 Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
A.3 Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
A.4 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
B Appendix - attachments
B.1
Calculation of the load-bearing capacities.mw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.2
Data.xlsx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.3
Simapro results and sensitivity analysis.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
viii
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Reducing CO2 emissions is one of the most pressing challenges the world faces today. The
2015 Paris Agreement commits countries to limit global temperature rise to well below
2°C above pre-industrial levels, with efforts to cap the increase at 1,5°C [1]. This goal is
essential for mitigating severe climate change impacts, including extreme weather events,
rising sea levels, and biodiversity loss. The European Union supports this goal through
a long-term strategy to achieve climate neutrality by 2050 [2]. Central to this strategy
is the Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP), which aims to radically shift the economy
from a traditional linear model—where materials are extracted, used, and disposed of—to
a circular model [3]. In this system, materials and products are reused, repaired, recycled,
and kept in circulation for as long as possible, minimizing waste and reducing resource
consumption. The plan emphasizes sustainable product design, reduced resource consump-
tion, waste prevention, and innovation. Key sectors, such as the construction industry,
play a pivotal role in this transition, as the building sector alone accounts for approxi-
mately 40% of global CO2 emissions [4]. This places pressure on the construction sector
to adopt sustainable practices and materials that align with circular economy principles.
Unfired clay emerges as a promising alternative building material that could meet several
of CEAP’s key objectives. It is recyclable, circular, non-toxic, and locally available, making
it an ideal candidate for reducing the environmental impact of construction. Unfired clay
is also biodegradable, meaning that, at the end of its life cycle, it can return to the earth
without contributing to waste [5]. Furthermore, clay has a long history in construction,
with its use dating back over 3,000 years to the Iron Age [6]. This demonstrates that it is
a building material that has stood the test of time, showcasing durability.
In Denmark, fired clay bricks have long been a cornerstone of architectural tradition [7],
but unfired clay techniques have not been as widely adopted. Rammed earth, a technique
commonly used in Southern Europe and North Africa [8], has recently gained attention in
Denmark as part of the growing movement toward sustainable and ecological construction
[9]. This technique offers several advantages: it is fire-resistant, cost-effective, and energy-
eﬀicient [10]. In Germany, a house has been constructed with up to six stories using the
rammed earth technique [11]. Alongside rammed earth, other unfired clay techniques are
also being explored, reflecting a broader interest in the potential of this material within
sustainable construction.
In a Danish context, where the construction industry generates approximately 6–9 million
tons of excess soil annually [12] [13], there is significant potential to utilize surplus clay
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
1
==PAGE:11==
soil in new building projects. This approach could help reduce the waste burden while
also potentially lowering the carbon footprint of the construction sector.
Clay soil possesses certain thermal properties that can enhance the energy eﬀiciency of
buildings by naturally regulating indoor temperature and humidity [14]. However, the
practical benefits of these properties depend on appropriate design and context, meaning
they are not always a universal solution. Unfired clay products, despite their potential,
face significant challenges—particularly in terms of strength, durability, and resistance to
water erosion. These issues are especially critical in climates where high levels of moisture
and rainfall can compromise the material’s long-term performance [5].
Modern building practices rely on established standards for materials to ensure consis-
tency and performance [15]. It is therefore necessary to create standards for alternative
materials that define, for example, their structural capabilities. As the construction indus-
try strives to meet ambitious climate goals, it is also necessary to develop Environmental
Product Declarations (EPDs) to evaluate and document the environmental impacts of
alternative materials. Overcoming these limitations is crucial for integrating the material
into contemporary building solutions.
1.2
Goal
The goal of this project is to investigate the potential of unfired clay walls as an alternative
indoor building material, focusing on their load-bearing capacity and sustainability. There
is a lack of standards for evaluating the structural properties of unfired clay walls, as well
as a shortage of Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs) for these materials. This
study seeks to address these gaps by advocating for the use of Eurocode 6 for masonry as
the basis for calculating the load-bearing capacity of unfired clay walls. Additionally, the
project aims to develop EPDs to assess their environmental impact, thereby strengthening
the case for their use as a sustainable building material.
Two specific types of clay walls will be analyzed in this project:
1. One wall type consists of 98% moraine clay and 2% quicklime, and it is currently
being constructed in Landerslev as part of a project under Region Hovedstaden. The
clay soil is locally sourced from Landerslev, while the quicklime is supplied by Faxe
Kalk. Faxe Kalk obtains the raw material from various locations across Europe and
processes it at their facilities. This wall is built using the compressed earth block
technique.
2. The other clay wall is being constructed by the Clay Alliance and consists entirely
of moraine clay.
This clay soil is extracted by Nymølle Stenindustri in Roskilde
and then transported to its production sites in Gadstrup and Odense, where the
production takes place.
The rammed earth technique is being used to build the
wall.
These cases will be used to develop EPDs to evaluate the environmental footprint of
the unfired clay walls. Furthermore, the load-bearing capacity of these clay walls will
be analyzed to assess their structural viability. To demonstrate this, an average single-
family house in Denmark will be used as a model to calculate applied loads on the walls,
enabling the calculation of their load-bearing capacity. This analysis will help determine
the feasibility of using these walls as inner walls in single-family house designs.
Additionally, the two cases will be compared to evaluate their different production ap-
proaches, providing insight into how variations in the production of unfired clay impact
environmental performance.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
2
==PAGE:12==
Ultimately, the project aims to contribute to the development of more sustainable building
practices, supporting the transition to a climate-friendly construction industry in line with
international and European objectives for climate neutrality and the circular economy.
1.3
Research Questions
The purpose of the study is to explore the potential of unfired clay as an
alternative building material, focusing on its load-bearing capacity and Envi-
ronmental Product Declarations (EPDs).
The purpose motivates the following research questions:
1. What are the advantages and disadvantages of unfired clay as a building material?
2. How can the load-bearing capacities of the two wall cases be calculated?
3. How can an EPD be developed for each wall case?
4. What are the uncertainties in calculating the load-bearing capacity of the two wall
cases?
5. What uncertainties and diﬀiculties are associated with developing an EPD?
Scope and Limitations
The economic aspects of using clay soil are not the focus of this study, but there are as-
sumptions that unfired clay should be both a sustainable, static, and inexpensive material.
Furthermore, this study will not address the impacts of clay material on indoor climate
quality; however, this aspect would be relevant for future research.
Due to time constraints, this study does not include a comparison of unfired clay walls with
other building materials to evaluate potential environmental savings. Such a comparison
would require the materials to be assessed based on multiple comparable parameters,
including their load-bearing capacities, significantly increasing the complexity and scope
of the research.
Project Overview
To address the research questions, this project first conducts a literature review of the
advantages and disadvantages of unfired clay. The literature review also presents theories
for calculating the load-bearing capacity of clay walls and methods for developing EPDs.
Next, the study introduces the two case studies: the Compressed Earth Block Wall and
the Rammed Earth Block Wall, which differ, among other things, in material composition
and construction techniques.
Subsequently, the project calculates the load-bearing capacity of the walls and develops
EPDs for each case. These EPDs are then analyzed to determine the factors driving the
differences in their environmental impacts.
Finally, the project discusses the broader implications of the findings.
The discussion
evaluates the process of creating an EPD and calculating the load-bearing capacities of
the walls, addressing limitations and uncertainties. Recommendations for future research
are also provided.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
3
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Framework
This chapter introduces the theory forming the foundation of the study. It begins with
an overview of clay theory, including the associated risks of the material, techniques for
building with unfired clay, and potential binders. This is followed by a review of standards
for unfired clay, with particular emphasis on the lack of standards regarding its structural
capability and sustainability. Additionally, structural theory on the load-bearing capacity
of unfired clay is explored. Next, the section presents the theory of Life Cycle Assessment
(LCA) of a product, followed by an explanation of how a product’s environmental impacts
are documented through EPDs.
2.1
Clay soil
Clay is a natural material composed primarily of fine-grained minerals that result from the
weathering of rocks over millions of years. According to geologists, clay is distinguished by
particles less than 2 micrometers in diameter [16]. The main components of clay include
silica (SiO2), alumina (Al2O3), and water, with smaller amounts of various metal oxides
such as iron, magnesium, calcium, and potassium [17]. The exact composition of clay
can vary widely depending on geographical and environmental factors, leading to diverse
characteristics that influence its suitability for different applications [18].
According to the organizations AIPEA (International Association for the Study of Clays)
and CMS (Clay Minerals Society), plasticity is the defining characteristic of clay. They
emphasize that plasticity, along with the ability to harden upon drying or firing, are the
most essential properties of clay. It has been demonstrated that a fine-grained material
can be classified as clay when the Plasticity Index (PI) is greater than or equal to half the
Liquid Limit (LL), expressed as PI ≥LL/2 [16].
In clay mineral systems, plasticity is defined as the property of a material that allows
it to be repeatedly deformed without rupture when acted upon by a force suﬀicient to
cause deformation and that enables it to retain its shape after the applied force has been
removed [19]. This property is particularly advantageous in construction, as clay can be
molded into bricks, tiles, or even applied directly to surfaces to create walls. Upon drying,
clay hardens, forming a durable surface that can resist moderate mechanical stress. This
transition from plasticity to rigidity makes clay a versatile material in building techniques
[20].
In Denmark, moraine clay is the most common type of clay, covering approximately 40%
of the country’s land area [21]. Figure 2.1 shows a map of soil types in Denmark, where it
can be seen that moraine clay (represented by the brown color on the map) is the dominant
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
4
==PAGE:14==
soil type. Deposited by glaciers during the Ice Age, moraine clay typically consists of a
mixture of clay, silt, sand, and gravel, which contributes to its unique properties. Despite
containing only about 10-20% clay particles, it is still classified as a clay soil due to its
structural and compositional characteristics [22]. The soil can also contain non-crystalline
clay components such as allophanes, which have no definite composition, as well as oxides
and hydrous oxides of aluminum, silicon, and iron [11].
København
Århus
Odense
Aalborg
Horsens
Esbjerg
Kolding
Næstved
Skive
Roskilde
Hjørring
Viborg
Ikast
Holstebro
Hillerød
Slagelse
Randers
Herning
Holbæk
Silkeborg
Helsingør
Vejle
Birkerød
Køge
Svendborg
Varde
Sæby
Fredericia
Vejen
Haderslev
Grenaa
Struer
Thisted
Nakskov
Farum
Nyborg
Sønderborg
Aabenraa
Haslev
Frederikshavn
Vojens
Skagen
Hobro
Nørresundby
Nykøbing F
Ringsted
Skjern
Kalundborg
Tønder
Grindsted
Middelfart
Dragør
Brønderslev
Padborg
Hundested
Faaborg
Brande
Sorø
Høng
Lemvig
Ringe
Frederikssund
Hadsten
Fakse
Maribo
Nykøbing M
Ribe
Korsør
Frederiksværk
Jyderup
Hirtshals
Assens
Bramming
Vordingborg
Gråsten
Hals
Præstø
Løgstør
Ebeltoft
Ringkøbing
Asnæs
Hadsund
Sakskøbing
Rødby
Gilleleje
Skanderborg
Nordborg
Nykøbing S
Skærbæk
Rødding
Rudkøbing
Fjerritslev
Bogense
Løkken
Marstal
St Heddinge
Løgumkloster
Dronninglund
Stege
Thyborøn
Hanstholm
Stubbekøbing
Tranebjerg
Vesterø Havn
Østerby Havn
Humlebæk
Rønne
Neksø
Aakirkeby
Allinge-Sandvig
Gudhjem
Geologisk kort over de overfladenære jordarter
Jordartskort    1:200.000
De Nationale Geologiske Undersøgelser for
Danmark og Grønland                
                                                         Marts 2008
Legend
Flyvesand
Ferskvandsdannelser
Marsk
Marint sand og ler
Strandvolde
Morænesand og grus
Moræneler
Smeltevandssand og -grus
Smeltevandsler
Extramarginale aflejringer
Ældre havaflejringer
Prækvartær
Søer
Fyld, havne, diger m.m.
0
10
20
30
40
5
Km.
/,(' 
/ 
~ 
i jl 
( ,, 
G E U s 
,, 
lJ 
\\, 
\ 
\"\ 
\ 
--", 
/J 
,J 
' ' 
'"'-"'-\ 
I 
\ 
/ 
''" 
', 
' ' 
-~---_,' 
/ 
., 
I 
j 
,~ 
' \ 
' ' 
u 
/'\ 
I 
\ 
( 
/ 
/ 
' 
"1 
( 
\ 
----~/ 
/ 
-\ 
' 
" 
~--,,/ 
r, 
I i(; 
-
,I 
'1 
,,J 
\ 
I I 
• 
'1 
I 
) 
I 
I 
\ ' \ 
, 
\ 
I 
' I \ 
• 
J 
- -----
• 
D ---------
-
\ ' 
I 
I 
I 
\ ' ' 
-~ 
\ 
', 
\ 
'i 
I 
I 
,--,,\ 
/,,,' 
I 
-----( 
I 
' ' I 
/'/, 
', ' I \ 
\ 
\ 
I 
I 
'\ 
/ 
/ , _ __/ 
/ 
_____ .,.~----
l,' 
' -, 
I 
I 
I ' 
I 
Figure 2.1: Map of soil types in Denmark [23].
In the book Earth Construction, H. Houben and H. Guillaud [24] provide guidelines for
optimal clay soil properties for compressed (compacted) earth constructions. These guide-
lines focus on parameters such as particle size distribution (PSD) and Atterberg limits.
The Atterberg limits define specific thresholds of water content in the soil-water system,
categorized as the liquid limit, plastic limit, and shrinkage limit.
The shrinkage limit
marks the transition from the solid state to the semi-solid state. H. Houben and H. Guil-
laud emphasize the plastic state, which represents the transition from the semi-solid to
the plastic state, as well as the liquid limit, where the soil transitions from the plastic to
the liquid state, in their guidelines [11].
Figure 2.2 illustrates the recommended PSD range. Deviations from this range are accept-
able, although staying close to these parameters is generally preferred to ensure suitability
for compressed (compacted) earth constructions. Similarly, Figure 2.3 presents the opti-
mal Atterberg limits.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
5
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Optimum particle size distribu-
tion [24].
Figure 2.3: Optimum Atterberg limits [24].
Soil stabilization is essential for achieving the optimal ranges outlined in the guidelines.
According to the principles of soil stabilization described in H. Houben and H. Guillaud’s
book [24], this process involves three main approaches: adapting the existing soil on-site,
sourcing more suitable soil from external locations, or modifying the local soil to align
with project requirements [24]. These methods ensure that the soil attains the necessary
properties.
In the book Compressed Earth Block and Rammed Earth Structures [11], stabilization
techniques for excavated soil are categorized into three broad approaches:
1. Mechanical stabilization, where two or more soils or soil grains are blended to achieve
a modified soil composition;
2. Stabilization by additives, which includes blending soils with inorganic materials,
mixing soils with organic materials, or incorporating fibers;
3. Stabilization by compaction, where soil is compacted using either static or dynamic
methods.
These approaches demonstrate different strategies for achieving stable and functional soil
compositions. However, they share a common goal: enhancing the soil’s properties for
optimal performance in construction. The choice of stabilization method often depends on
factors such as the soil’s initial condition, the project’s requirements, and the availability of
resources. This highlights the importance of flexibility and adaptability in soil stabilization
techniques, ensuring the most suitable approach is chosen for each unique construction
scenario [11].
2.1.1
Risk factors for unfired clay
While clay offers many benefits as a natural, sustainable building material, it also presents
several limitations. Understanding these challenges is crucial for designing and maintain-
ing structures that can withstand natural elements and meet structural requirements. Key
factors such as moisture sensitivity, load-bearing capacity, and vulnerability to environ-
mental stresses highlight the importance of appropriate design and protective measures
when building with clay soil.
One of the primary risk factors for unfired clay is moisture sensitivity, making the material
particularly well-suited for internal, protected applications.
Due to its porous nature,
unfired clay readily absorbs water, which can lead to swelling, softening, and degradation
over time. In regions with high humidity and frequent rainfall, unfired clay structures
are vulnerable to erosion, cracking, and loss of structural integrity.
To mitigate these
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
6
==PAGE:16==
effects, clay walls often require protective measures such as plasters or roof overhangs to
limit direct exposure to moisture [25] [26]. In colder climates, freeze-thaw cycles pose
an additional risk. As absorbed water freezes, it expands, causing stress within the clay
structure, which can lead to cracks or spalling when temperatures rise again [27].
Another limitation of unfired clay is its load-bearing capacity. While clay provides ade-
quate compressive strength for one- to two-story buildings, it is generally weaker in tension
compared to conventional construction materials like concrete and steel. This characteris-
tic restricts the use of unfired clay for multi-story buildings or load-intensive applications
unless reinforced with additional materials [28]. This limitation underscores the impor-
tance of selecting appropriate construction techniques and designs that align with clay’s
physical properties to maintain safety and stability.
Moreover, thermal sensitivity and biological growth are notable factors that can affect the
performance of unfired clay. Clay’s high thermal mass allows it to absorb and release heat,
which aids in passive temperature regulation within buildings. However, in regions with
extreme temperature fluctuations, thermal expansion and contraction can lead to cracking,
allowing moisture to infiltrate the structure [29]. Prolonged exposure to damp conditions
also increases the risk of mold and mildew growth, which can affect indoor air quality and
compromise the health of occupants [30].
2.1.2
Construction techniques for unfired clay
Unfired clay is utilized in various construction techniques, each offering unique proper-
ties and applications. Ensuring optimal moisture content is essential for the stability of
earth construction. Excess moisture can cause swelling and structural instability, while
insuﬀicient moisture leads to inadequate compaction and weaker structures. The major
earthen wall construction techniques include Rammed Earth, Adobe, Compressed Earth
Blocks (CEBs), and Cob [11]. These methods predominantly use soil or earth as the main
material and are described in the following sections.
Rammed Earth
Rammed earth, also referred to as ”Pisé,” is a traditional construction technique involving
the compaction of clay-rich soil within temporary formwork to create dense, load-bearing
walls. This is achieved through dynamic compaction. These walls often display a distinc-
tive layered appearance due to the stratification of the soil during the compaction process.
The soil typically has an optimal moisture content of 8–12%, which minimizes shrink-
age during drying and allows the formwork to be removed immediately after compaction.
Compaction can be carried out either manually or mechanically, using tools such as pneu-
matically powered rammers. The result is thick, durable walls, often left unplastered to
showcase their natural stratified aesthetic [31], [32]. Appendix A.1 includes Figures (A.1,
A.2, A.3, and A.4) illustrating the technique, with historical references to its application
in 1829 by the Danish architect Sven Risom.
Figure 2.4: The rammed earth technique [33].
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
7
==PAGE:17==
Adobe
Adobe construction uses sun-dried clay bricks, often mixed with sand, straw, or other
organic materials to enhance strength and insulation. The moisture content for adobe
typically ranges between 5–20% [34]. The bricks are molded and left to dry in the sun
rather than being kiln-fired, making adobe an energy-eﬀicient choice. Adobe structures
are common in arid climates where high humidity is less of an issue. Adobe walls have
high thermal mass, contributing to natural indoor temperature regulation; however, they
can be prone to erosion without protective coatings in wetter climates [35].
Figure 2.5: The adobe technique [36].
Compressed Earth Blocks (CEBs)
Compressed earth blocks (CEBs) are made by statically compacting clay soil, often with
the addition of stabilizers such as lime or cement, into high-density blocks. Proper moisture
regulation is essential during the compaction process, as insuﬀicient moisture reduces the
blocks’ density and load-bearing capacity, while excessive moisture can lead to cracking
during drying. These blocks are then stacked to form walls. The blocks can be pressed
manually, using motorized systems, mechanical transmissions, hydraulics, or pneumatics
[37]. CEBs are more uniform in size and shape than adobe bricks and are denser due to
the mechanical compression process, which increases their load-bearing capacity [35].
Figure 2.6: The CEB technique [38].
Cob
Cob is a traditional building technique in which a mixture of clay soil, fibers, and water
is shaped by hand or with simple tools to form walls.
Unlike modern methods, cob
construction typically does not rely on formwork. Instead, walls are built layer by layer,
and excess material is shaped using tools like a pointed spade or shovel, which cut the
moist earthen material to achieve perpendicular or flush surfaces.
The water content
and initial moisture level in a cob mixture significantly influence the material’s strength,
underscoring the importance of proper moisture regulation. Cob walls are usually thick,
providing excellent thermal mass and sound insulation. The technique is labor-intensive
and therefore often used for smaller structures. Cob is flexible, allowing for the creation
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
8
==PAGE:18==
of organic shapes, but it requires a long drying period and is best suited for dry climates
[39].
Figure 2.7: The cob technique [39].
The various techniques offer distinct advantages and limitations, making them well-suited
for specific climates, structural requirements, and aesthetic preferences.
2.1.3
Binders
In Section 2.1, different stabilization techniques were described. This Section focuses on
stabilization by additives, with an emphasis on inorganic materials. By adding specific
binders, the properties of unfired clay as a material can be improved to make it suitable for
diverse construction environments. Common inorganic binders used in unfired clay con-
struction include quicklime, cement, and various combinations with industrial by-products
like fly ash and slag.
According to Vejregler: Jordstabilisering – Vejl [40], which provides a Danish context for
guidelines on soil stabilization, the choice of binder can be evaluated based on the clay’s
plasticity index (Ip) or particle size distribution. Figure 2.1 illustrates different types of
binders and their suitability based on the plasticity index.
Clay/Moraine Clay,
Fat/Very Fat
Clay/Moraine Clay,
Medium Fat
Clay/Moraine Clay,
Slightly Silted/
Highly Silted/
Sandy Clay
Silt, Clayey/Sandy
Sand
Gravel
Plasticity Index, Ip [%]
> 25
10 −25
4 −10
0 −4
-
-
Quicklime
Quicklime/ Cement
Quicklime/ Blast Furnace Slag
Quicklime/ Fly Ash
Cement/ Blast Furnace Slag
Cement/ Fly Ash
Cement
Green = Suitable, Yellow = Conditionally Suitable
Table 2.1: Applications of Binders [40].
The figure shows that quicklime is well-suited for clay soils with high plasticity (Ip >
25), which are often rich in moraine clay. Its strong chemical reactivity reduces the soil’s
plasticity while enhancing its strength and load-bearing capacity. When quicklime (cal-
cium oxide, CaO) is added, the pH value rises to approximately 12,4, dissolving the clay
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
9
==PAGE:19==
minerals and releasing silicon (Si) and aluminum (Al) ions. These ions react with cal-
cium ions (Ca) to form cement-like compounds such as calcium silicate hydrate (C-S-H)
and calcium aluminate hydrate (C-A-H) through pozzolanic reactions. These reactions
create strong, cementitious bonds by gradually crystallizing and coating the soil particles,
thereby increasing the soil’s strength and stability over time [41] [11]. Pozzolanic reactions
are central to lime stabilization as they bind the clay components and form long-lasting
structures. However, carbonation can weaken this effect over time when carbon dioxide
(CO2) reacts with calcium hydroxide to form limestone [42].
Quicklime and fly ash work well with clay that tends to expand when exposed to water,
such as sulfate-bearing clay. A study showed that fly ash counteracted the adverse effects
of lime, leading to a reduction in swelling percentage, internal pressure, and the plasticity
index of the lime-stabilized sulfate-bearing clay [43].
Blast furnace slag is suitable for clay with a plasticity index between 0 and 25. When slag
is added to lime-stabilized clay, it introduces additional minerals such as aluminum oxide,
calcium oxide, silica, and magnesium oxide, enhancing the reactivity of the mix. This
promotes the formation of strength-giving compounds, such as silicates and aluminates,
which improve the clay’s stability and load-bearing capacity. The alkaline environment
created by lime further activates the slag, leading to better hydration and structural
modification of the clay. However, in soils containing sulfates, expansive reactions can
occur due to the formation of ettringite crystals, which may cause unwanted expansion.
Research has shown that incorporating slag in lime-gypsum systems can reduce these
detrimental expansions, making slag a valuable component for stabilizing sulfate-bearing
clay soils [44].
Cement, or cement blended with high slag content, is well-suited for stabilizing sandy or
less cohesive soils, as it provides high compressive strength and effectively binds coarse
particles. This effect occurs within a couple of days. A high cement content is required to
achieve a significant effect during stabilization, making it more suitable for coarse-grained
soil, as it is easier to mix compared to clay-rich soil, which is more diﬀicult to blend [11].
Portland cement, in particular, is recommended for soil stabilization due to its ability to
bind aggregates and soil particles by hardening after being mixed with water. This harden-
ing process occurs through hydration, where chemical reactions with water develop rigidity
and gradually increase the compressive strength of the stabilized material [41]. When blast
furnace slag is included in the blend, it enhances durability by improving resistance to chlo-
ride penetration, sulfate attack, and alkali-silica reaction (ASR) [44]. However, when using
cement in combination with fly ash or blast furnace slag, the stabilizing effects may require
a significantly longer period to fully develop [40].
Soils with both frictional and cohesive characteristics, or significant variation between
these properties, can be effectively stabilized using a blend of lime and cement, which
combines the benefits of each binder [40]. This is recommended for clay with a plasticity
index between 0 and 25.
Figure 2.8 provides insights into the effectiveness of different binders based on the grain
size distribution of the soil.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
10
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.8: Binders for Various Materials’ Particle Size Distribution [40].
The figure,
although in Danish, illustrates particle size on the x-axis and percentage passing on the
y-axis. Quicklime is recommended within the blue lines, mixed binders within the dotted
red lines, and cement within the black lines.
The figure shows that quicklime works effectively in soils with finer grains, as it binds with
clay particles to form a stable structure. Cement is more suitable for coarser grains, such
as sandy soils. Mixed binders are versatile, as they can work across a range of grain sizes.
These mixtures can stabilize both finer and coarser materials, making them suitable for
soils with mixed particle sizes.
2.2
Standards
Modern construction relies on standards and regulations to ensure consistent quality and
safety [15]. Unlike today’s highly regulated processes, historical earthen construction was
shaped by local expertise. Builders assessed soil suitability through practical experience,
with knowledge passed down through generations, creating traditional methods tailored
to regional conditions and materials [45].
Today, construction is a complex commercial endeavor involving formal agreements among
stakeholders such as clients, contractors, architects, and material manufacturers. In com-
mercial projects, all materials and structures must meet stringent building standards, and
material properties are tested through standardized procedures to ensure reliability and
safety. This requirement for reproducibility extends to the production of earthen building
materials, necessitating quality control measures to meet modern standards [45].
To guarantee the durability and safety of structures and to support sustainability goals,
a focused effort to standardize earthen building materials is crucial. Dr. Horst Schroeder
from Bauhaus University Weimar, a specialist in earthen construction, emphasizes that
standardized testing and quality control for earthen materials are key to integrating these
traditional materials into contemporary construction practices [45].
The general requirements for built structures, according to EU Regulation 305/2011 are
as follows [46]:
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
11
==PAGE:21==
1. Mechanical strength and stability
2. Fire protection
3. Protection of hygiene, health, and the environment
4. Safety and barrier-free access in use
5. Sound insulation
6. Energy-saving and thermal insulation
7. Sustainable use of natural resources
The regulation mandates that all construction materials marketed within the EU must
document their performance in relation to the essential requirements relevant to their
intended use.
Currently, there are very few earth building standards compared to those for other building
materials and systems. Germany has been one of the pioneers in modern times, develop-
ing comprehensive and technically advanced standards focused on industrially produced
earthen building materials and their applications. These standards are referred to as DIN
standards (Deutsches Institut für Normung), which are the German national standards.
In 2013, new standards were published for industrially manufactured, non-chemically sta-
bilized earthen building materials, including earth blocks, earthen mortar, and earthen
plaster. These standards ensure quality and specify testing methods for clay-based build-
ing materials. Based on the DIN standards, construction using unfired clay has commenced
in Germany [45]. Sweden has followed in Germany’s footsteps and has begun developing
national standards for unfired clay within the country [47].
Internationally, various standards for earthen construction exist, but a common termi-
nology and consistent testing methods across countries are still lacking.
The German
standards incorporate sustainability considerations, such as life cycle assessments (LCA),
by focusing on the development of Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs) [45].
The German DIN standards provide a solid foundation that EN standards (European
Norm) could build upon, potentially leading to EN standards that could eventually replace
the existing DIN standards for clay. This would result in standards applicable to multiple
countries and establish a shared terminology across borders. Another option would be
for the DIN standards to be adopted as EN standards. If a German DIN standard is
harmonized at the European level, it is then designated as DIN EN.
From a Danish perspective, it is essential either to develop EN standards through CEN (the
European Committee for Standardization) or to establish Danish national standards. This
would provide Denmark with a legal framework to support the use of earthen construction
in commercial projects. Furthermore, advancing the development of EPDs for earthen
materials—an effort currently underway in Germany—is crucial.
2.2.1
Standards for clay structural
There is a lack of standards and building codes for calculating the load-bearing capacity of
unfired clay. Eurocode 6 [48] covers fired clay, but no Eurocode or CEN product standards
applicable to Denmark currently include unfired clay.
Until 2020, certification was not required in Denmark except for specific structures in
high consequence classes. In January 2020, the technical building case handling, previously
managed by municipalities, was replaced by a new certification scheme. Under this scheme,
it is now the responsibility of the certified structural engineer to document and ensure
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
12
==PAGE:22==
that the load-bearing structures meet the requirements, ensuring that the chosen solution
complies with the standards set in the Building Regulations 2018 [49].
In Denmark, there are several examples of deviations from standards and norms in con-
struction.
According to BR18, § 365 Exceptions, applicable standards can be deviated from: ”§ 359 to
§ 364 may be deviated from if it is otherwise ensured and documented that there is suﬀicient
protection against personal injury as described in § 358” [50] (my own translation).
The Danish Engineering Association’s standard for Concrete Structures, DS411, Scope of
Application (DS411 1., 1949), states in their technical guidelines that deviations from the
standards are permitted: “These standards are particularly aimed at commonly occurring
concrete and reinforced concrete structures within building, bridge, and hydraulic construc-
tion, as well as chimneys. Reinforced concrete structures are assumed to be constructed
monolithically and normally reinforced in at least two directions with steel that is fully
embedded in concrete. However, the standards should also be applied in other areas and
structures with the necessary modifications dictated by the nature of the case. Deviations
from the rules and calculation methods specified in these standards may be permitted if the
justification for such deviations is adequately documented” [51] (my own translation).
In BR18, § 356 Exceptions, another example is provided where deviations from the stan-
dards are permitted: ”§ 344, subsection 2, to § 351 as well as §§ 353-355 may be deviated
from if it is otherwise ensured and documented that the deviation is justifiable and achieves
a level of safety as described in § 344, subsection 2, no. 1” [52] (my own translation).
These examples demonstrate that it is possible to deviate from standards in Denmark if it
can be documented, for instance, through calculations, testing, or a combination thereof,
that safety and quality are still ensured. It must be demonstrated that the applied calcu-
lation, test, or combination guarantees the same level of safety, usability, and durability
as specified in the relevant standards [53]. Certified engineers or other specialists are often
involved to certify that the deviations are justifiable and comply with the requirements of
the building regulations [49].
As there are no standards for calculating the load-bearing capacity of unfired clay, the
following will argue that it is both reasonable and safe to use the masonry standard
(Eurocode 6) as the basis for the calculations in this study.
Unfired clay exhibits similar properties to other construction materials such as concrete,
lightweight concrete, and masonry, particularly regarding the compressive stress-strain
curve, which has a curved shape. Figure 2.9 shows an example of the stress-strain curve
for unfired clay, where the curvature is clearly visible.
In Appendix A.1, Figures A.5
and A.8 present similar curved compressive stress-strain curves for concrete, lightweight
concrete, and masonry.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
13
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.9: Example of stress-strain curves for unfired clay from the thesis Unstabilized
Rammed Earth: Optimization of Water Content and Particle Size Distribution [54]. The
figure shows strain along the x-axis and stress along the y-axis. The stress-strain curves
are based on Instron machine measurements for modified soil derived from Vinge soil, with
a water content of 7%. To account for uncertainties caused by imperfections and potential
human error in specimen preparation, five specimens were tested to ensure reliable data.
Based on tests conducted by DTU on the strengths and stiffnesses of clay soils from Vinge
and Landerslev, there are different methods for determining the elastic modulus. The
expression that yielded the lowest value for the elastic modulus is: E0 = kE · fc. This
expression is assumed to describe the slope of the elastic phase in the compressive stress-
strain curve for unfired clay until more precise data becomes available. This elastic phase
is assumed to correspond to the linear portion of the curve, where kE = 100, providing a
safety margin based on measurements conducted in Vinge, Hedehusene, and Landerslev
[55].
In the masonry standard, a similar expression is used to describe the elastic modulus, but
with different material parameters: Eck = kE · fck. Here, the value of kE is chosen based
on the specific materials used in the masonry [55].
The tangential elastic modulus, Et, which accounts for variations in the material’s stiffness
throughout the loading process, including the plastic portion of the stress-strain curve, is
used to describe the material’s response when the wall experiences stability failure due
to buckling.
This behavior can be reasonably described using Ritter’s method, which
combines the elastic modulus and the measured compressive strength of unfired clay [55]:
Et = E0 ∗(1 −σ
fc
)
(2.1)
The classical Ritter method is used to calculate vertical load-bearing capacity, assuming
that forces act along a straight line.
This expression for the tangential elastic modulus adjusts the elastic modulus according to
the current load level, allowing for consideration of the material’s non-linear behavior. This
is particularly relevant for materials like unfired clay, which does not follow a completely
linear elastic stress-strain curve. Concrete, lightweight concrete, and masonry also use the
extended version of the Ritter formula, as they exhibit curved compressive stress-strain
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
14
==PAGE:24==
curves. This approach ensures a more accurate assessment of load-bearing capacity for
materials with non-linear behavior, as applying the classical Ritter method to such stress-
strain curves would yield a conservative estimate of the load-bearing capacity [55].
The tensile strength of unfired clay has not yet been fully documented, but experimen-
tal tests conducted at DTU have observed that the material generally exhibits low ten-
sile strength.
The strength can vary significantly depending on both the construction
technique used and the masonry itself, making it challenging to accurately predict the
material’s behavior under tension [55].
In other materials, such as structurally unreinforced lightweight concrete, aerated concrete,
and masonry, tensile strength is included as part of the structural design. However, in
concrete, reinforcement is more commonly used to resist tensile forces. To account for the
tensile strength of unfired clay, an accurate determination of its tensile strength would be
required. Until further research provides precise documentation, the tensile strength is
disregarded to ensure stability and safety [55].
By disregarding the tensile strength, the construction is designed to withstand compressive
loads, where the material is stronger and more reliable. Including the tensile strength could
potentially reduce the amount of material required.
Based on these arguments, it is considered justifiable to apply the calculation methods
from Eurocode 6 for determining the load-bearing capacity of the unfired clay walls in this
study, while disregarding their tensile strength. Additionally, some national standards
already permit the use of unfired bricks as load-bearing masonry, which is covered under
the scope of Eurocode 6 [56]. To ensure the structural reliability of such constructions,
it would be beneficial to establish an accepted calculation framework tailored to Danish
conditions.
2.3
Structural analysis for load-bearing capacity calculations
The verification of the load-bearing capacity is carried out in accordance with Eurocode
6 (DS/EN1996-1-1, 2022) [48] and fundamental column theory. The methods are also
described in the handbook Teknisk Ståbi [57].
The load-bearing capacity of a wall can be assessed using column theory, where the wall
is idealized as a wide column. Depending on the structural design, the wall’s boundary
conditions can vary, such as being simply supported, fixed, or partially fixed.
Euler’s classical column theory calculates the critical load-bearing capacity for a vertical
column under centrally applied vertical loading, assuming the material behaves in a linearly
elastic manner.
However, walls are rarely subjected to perfectly centered loading; the
normal force, N, often exhibits some degree of eccentricity, and additional lateral forces,
such as wind pressure, can also arise. For eccentricity, e, a total eccentricity in the wall is
calculated as a combination of several factors that influence how far the load is displaced
from the centerline of the wall’s cross-section.
The total eccentricity, e:
e = e0 + eM + eN
(2.2)
• e0: Represents the initial eccentricity, which can arise due to small errors during
construction, such as misalignments or irregularities in the wall’s installation.
• eM = MOT
NEd : Describes the eccentricity caused by the overturning moment (MOT ),
which is the largest bending moment from transverse wind loads. This term expresses
how far the moment shifts the load away from the center.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
15
==PAGE:25==
• eN: Represents the eccentricity resulting from the normal force if it is not applied
exactly at the center of the wall.
The load-bearing capacity is calculated as for a centrally loaded column, but with a portion
of the column’s cross-section disregarded to ensure that the pressure is evenly distributed
over the remaining cross-section. This approach represents a conservative assumption. As
a result, effective thicknesses and areas are used in the calculation.
The effective thickness:
deff = d −2 ∗e
(2.3)
The effective area:
Aeff = b ∗deff
(2.4)
The critical stress for a centrally loaded column, assuming linear elastic behavior, is de-
termined using Euler’s formula:
σeu = E · I ·
(
π
Ls
)2
Aeff
(2.5)
where E represents the initial elastic modulus, E0, assuming linear elastic behavior.
For materials with non-linear behavior, the elastic modulus can be adjusted by using the
tangential elastic modulus, ET , which describes the stiffness as a function of the current
stress. This can be defined based on Ritter’s method, as mentioned in Section 2.2.1:
Et = E0 ∗(1 −σ
fc
)
(2.6)
Based on formulas 2.3, 2.4, and 2.6, formula 2.5 can be expressed as follows, where the
critical stress is determined for non-linear materials:
σcr =
fc
1 + 12 ∗fc
E0 ∗(
Ls
π∗deff )2
(2.7)
If E0 is unknown or diﬀicult to measure, the secant elastic modulus, Es, can be used
instead.
This is typically determined with a slope between
σ
fc = 0, 05 and 0,40.
The
secant elastic modulus is slightly lower than the initial elastic modulus, with a difference
of approximately 5% [58]. Using Es instead of E0 introduces a conservative assumption,
as the slightly lower value of Es ensures that the calculated stiffness remains within safe
limits.
In this study, the elasticity modulus is assumed to be E0 = fck ∗kE, where kE=100 (see
Section 2.2.1). Based on this assumption, the expression for the critical stress can be
reformulated as:
σcr =
fcd
1 + 12 ∗fck
E0 ∗(
Ls
π∗deff )2 =
fcd
1 + 12∗1
kE ∗(
Ls
π∗deff )2
(2.8)
The load-bearing capacity of unfired clay walls is determined using the principles outlined
in Eurocode 6. This method combines column theory with adjustments tailored to the
specific characteristics of masonry materials and wall construction.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
16
==PAGE:26==
The load-bearing capacity is given by:
Ncrd = Aeff ∗σcrd ∗kt
(2.9)
For solid walls with d > 90 mm kt=0,9 applies and for d < 90 mm kt=0,7 applies.
If the calculated design load-bearing capacity exceeds the applied vertical load NEd, the
wall is deemed suﬀicient, as the ultimate load-bearing strength surpasses the applied load.
2.4
Life Cycle Assessment
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a standardized method for evaluating the environmental
impact of a building design throughout its entire lifespan, focusing on factors such as
emissions and resource consumption.
This comprehensive approach also serves as the
foundation for developing Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs). The ISO 14040
standard outlines the foundational principles and structure for conducting an LCA, while
ISO 14044 provides specific requirements and guidance for the process [59] [60]. Together,
these standards establish the core concepts and procedures, including the four main stages
of an LCA:
1. Goal and Scope
2. Inventory Analysis
3. Impact Assessment
4. Interpretation
Along with these stages, the LCA details the environmental impact categories to be eval-
uated.
The construction industry in Europe uses two main adaptations of ISO standards to
address sustainability. The first, EN 15978, titled ”Sustainability of construction works
- Assessment of environmental performance of buildings - Calculation method,” provides
guidelines for assessing environmental impacts at each specific life cycle stage of a building
[61]. This standard is used when assessing an LCA of a building based on EPDs of products
or generic data. The second, EN 15804+A1/+A2, titled ”Sustainability of construction
works – Environmental product declarations – Core rules for the product category of
construction products,” provides guidelines for reporting environmental data for products
through EPDs [62].
According to the Building Regulations, a building over 1000 m2 must meet a requirement
of a maximum of 12 kg CO2-equivalents per m2 per year [63].
This requirement was
introduced in 2023 as the first regulation mandating the calculation of climate impacts for
new buildings, aiming to promote more climate-friendly constructions [64]. See Appendix
A.1, Table A.1 for future threshold limit values.
The five main stages of an LCA are the product stage, construction process stage, use
stage, end-of-life stage, and finally, benefits and loads beyond system boundaries (see
Figure 2.10). Stages that project far into the future carry higher levels of uncertainty.
Each stage is divided into modules identified by a letter and number, such as A1 (raw
material supply). Depending on the calculation basis of an EPD, there are different rules
for which LCA modules must be included in the declaration [65].
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
17
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.10: LCA stages based on EN 15978 with modules defined by EN 15643 specifically
for greenhouse gas emissions [66].
A life cycle assessment examines the climate impacts over a 50-year period [65].
The C3 and C4 modules represent various End-of-Life (EoL) options, such as landfill,
incineration, or reuse, which impact the data included in the D stage (e.g., reuse, recovery,
recycling or potential utility from exported energy). For example, if the EoL scenario is
incineration, the D stage will include the value derived from the energy generated through
the incineration process. However, EoL data is often derived from complex calculations,
where assumptions are made about the proportion of material that will be incinerated
versus recycled. This makes the D stage challenging to implement, as it involves high
levels of uncertainty and a lack of transparency around the assumptions used to calculate
avoided production of new materials, energy, or intermediary outputs [63].
In 2024, new principles were introduced for calculating the environmental impact of reused
materials, specifying that the impact of reused materials is set to 0 kg CO2-equivalents
across all modules in an LCA. This means that reused materials do not contribute any
additional carbon emissions to the building’s overall CO2 calculations [67]. Reuse is defined
according to the Waste Order [in Danish: Affaldsbekendtgørelsen] [68], which does not
require that the material’s previous use was for the same purpose [69].
For new materials used alongside reused materials, standard datasets apply, and their
emissions are included in the LCA. Any necessary surface treatments or adjustments to the
reused materials—comparable to maintenance or repair—are not included in the emissions
calculation.
This approach incentivizes the use of reused materials by acknowledging
their environmental benefits without attributing additional emissions to them [69]. The
approach is set to be reevaluated in 2025 to assess its consistency [67].
Therefore, if you produce something that can be reused, you receive no benefits—meaning
the CO2-emissions still counts. However, if you reuse an already existing product, you
gain 100% benefits, allowing you to disregard all associated CO2-emissions.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
18
==PAGE:28==
In addition, updates to the current European LCA methodology are underway, introducing
potential changes. The framework for GHG (Greenhouse Gas) emissions reporting is being
re-evaluated in an upcoming version of EN 15978. The draft, prEN 15978:2023, released
in 2023, proposes several key revisions, including the following adjustments [66]:
1. Merging B2 (Maintenance) and B3 (Repair) into a single module to simplify and
streamline the assessment process.
2. Incorporating packaging materials into waste management calculations, allowing for
a more comprehensive evaluation of waste impacts.
3. Differentiating between regulated and unregulated energy consumption in building
systems, as well as other energy usage related to occupant activities.
4. Expanding the scope of B1 (Use) to cover not only emissions from interior and
exterior surfaces but also emissions from leaked refrigerants and greenhouse gas
reduction through carbonation of cement and lime-based materials, as well as carbon
sequestration by vegetation.
2.5
Environmental Product Declarations
An Environmental Product Declaration documents the environmental characteristics of
a construction product.
EPDs are prepared in accordance with recognized European
and international standards, including EN 15804 [62] and ISO 14025, providing detailed
insights into the product’s environmental impact throughout its entire life cycle [70] [71].
It is based on a life cycle assessment (LCA). The calculations follow guidelines known as
Product Category Rules (PCRs), which establish the standards that the EPD must adhere
to, and these must always be referenced in the declaration. In Denmark, people often refer
to the ‘EPD standard,’ which encompasses the foundational PCR, EN 15804, required for
construction products. For certain product categories, it may also be necessary to use
a supplementary cPCR (complementary Product Category Rules) that defines specific
technical requirements and calculation methods for the EPD [72].
In 2022, a revised version of the EPD standard, EN 15804+A2 (“new”), was introduced,
bringing significant changes to EPDs, while the previous version, EN 15804+A1, is now
referred to as the “old” standard. The new version was implemented to provide more
detailed reporting of CO2-equivalent emissions and to standardize and modernize the
calculation frameworks [71].
A significant change in EN 15804+A2 concerns the calculation of environmental impact
from global warming. Unlike EN 15804+A1, which uses only a single category for global
warming, EN 15804+A2 separates the reporting because greenhouse gas emissions origi-
nate from different resource-based sources. The new version thus calculates GWP (Global
Warming Potential) across four distinct categories, providing a more precise and detailed
assessment of greenhouse gas emissions [73].
GWP is calculated in EN 15804+A2 based on these four potentials[73]:
• Global Warming Potential – Biogenic
• Global Warming Potential – Fossil
• Global Warming Potential – LULUC (Land Use and Land Use Change)
• Global Warming Potential – Total (the total of the above)
Under EN 15804+A2, EPDs are now required to document, at a minimum, the envi-
ronmental impacts during the production phase (A1-A3), the end-of-life phase (C1-C4),
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
19
==PAGE:29==
and benefits and loads beyond the system boundary (D). The inclusion of other life cycle
stages, such as the construction phase (A4-A5), and the use phase (B1-B7), remains op-
tional unless additional requirements are specified by a complementary Product Category
Rule (cPCR) [74].
Previously, under EN 15804+A1, the documentation of environmental impacts was manda-
tory only for the production phase (A1-A3), with all other phases being optional [71]. The
update in EN 15804+A2 expands the mandatory scope, ensuring a more comprehensive
lifecycle perspective and greater transparency in EPDs.
EPDs prepared according to EN 15804+A1 and EN 15804+A2 cannot be directly com-
pared, as the new requirements have altered both the included life cycle stages and envi-
ronmental impact categories [71].
In Figure 2.11, the process for preparing an EPD is illustrated.
Figure 2.11: Process for developing an EPD [75].
Developing an EPD is a complex process requiring expertise in generating data that spans
the entire life cycle of a product. The process begins with the selection of appropriate
PCRs, followed by data collection on procurement, transport, usage, and waste manage-
ment. This data is then analyzed using LCA tools to evaluate environmental impacts,
including greenhouse gas emissions, energy use, water consumption, and waste production.
The results are organized into a standardized format for verification and publication [76].
There are two types of EPDs [70]:
• Product-specific EPDs, calculated by individual manufacturers, showing the environ-
mental impact of the product based on the manufacturer’s own production processes.
• Industry EPDs, where data is collected from multiple manufacturers to produce an
average calculation of the environmental impact.
In the context of construction, EPDs are integral to calculating the total climate impact
of a building through Life Cycle Assessments (LCAs) at the building level. During the
design phase, EPDs for products with similar functions enable the identification of material
combinations that achieve the lowest possible climate impact [76].
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
20
==PAGE:30==
2.6
Summary of theoretical framework
This Section addressed research question 1: ”What are the advantages and disadvantages
of unfired clay as a building material?”. It summarizes the advantages and disadvantages
of the key perspectives identified in the literature.
Advantages of unfired clay as a building material:
• Unfired clay is recyclable, locally available, and aligns well with circular economy
principles. It is a promising material for reducing carbon emissions and is non-toxic,
making it a sustainable alternative for construction.
• The material has high thermal mass, which aids in maintaining stable indoor tem-
peratures and reduces the need for additional heating or cooling.
• Clay has been used for thousands of years in construction, showcasing its durability
and effectiveness when properly applied.
• Various construction techniques, such as rammed earth and compressed earth blocks,
provide flexibility in design and application.
• The D-stage is declared in EPDs in accordance with the newest standard, making it
possible to evaluate the reuse/recycling potential of the material.
• There are promising methods for developing viable standards for the calculation of
the load-bearing capacity of the material.
• Various techniques are available for stabilizing clay soil.
• The plasticity of the material makes it advantageous in construction, as it can be
molded into various shapes and purposes.
Disadvantages of unfired clay as a building material:
• The unique composition of clay soil, combined with various stabilization methods,
requires tailored scenarios and thorough testing for each specific use case, adding
complexity to its application.
• Unfired clay is sensitive to moisture, making it vulnerable to water damage that can
cause swelling, softening, and loss of structural integrity. This significantly impacts
its long-term durability and poses challenges in humid climates, where protective
measures are essential.
• The material has been observed to have low tensile strength.
• Inconsistent Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) data, particularly regarding End-of-Life
(EoL) scenarios, introduce uncertainties about the material’s overall sustainability.
Current methodologies often rely on numerous assumptions and tend to oversimplify
complex waste management pathways, resulting in evaluations that may not account
for future changes or dynamic conditions.
• Not all LCA modules are reported in an EPD, which introduces the risk of hidden
emissions when assessing the sustainability of unfired clay.
• There is a lack of established standards for unfired clay as a building material in
Denmark.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
21
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Case description
The two cases will be presented in this chapter. They will be referred to as the Compressed
Earth Block Wall (CEBW) and the Rammed Earth Block Wall (REBW).
3.1
The Compressed Earth Block Wall
The CEBW project, developed by the Capital Region of Denmark in collaboration with
the Danish Road Directorate, DTU, construction companies Remco and Holbøll, and the
architectural firm Thi and Dencker, is designed to reduce the consumption of primary
raw materials such as stone, sand, and gravel, addressing the significant surplus of soil
generated by the construction industry in Denmark. In addition to promoting resource
eﬀiciency, the wall aims to lower CO2 emissions. It also functions as an effective noise bar-
rier, capable of reducing noise levels by up to 60 dB, making it suitable as a soundproofing
solution [77].
The wall is composed of 98% moraine clay and 2% quicklime. The compressive strength of
the compressed earth wall blocks has been measured to nearly 4 MPa, see Appendix A.2,
Figure A.7. However, to account for uncertainties and variations in the material, a value
of 3 MPa has been conservatively applied in the calculations for this study. As described
in Section 2.1.3, pozzolanic reactions occur when quicklime reacts with the clay, leading
to the formation of cementitious compounds that increase the compressive strength over
time. This process explains the expected strength development for the unfired clay wall
stabilized with 2% quicklime.
Appendix A.2, Figure A.8 illustrates that the compressive strength increases as the mois-
ture content decreases, reaching up to 8 MPa over time for pressed moraine clay bricks.
This confirms the potential for significant strength improvement as the material dries and
the chemical reactions progress. Therefore, the compressive strength of the clay wall is
expected to exceed 3 MPa, but further testing is needed to confirm this for the actual clay
blocks used in the wall. The bulk density of the clay in the wall has been estimated based
on tests to be 21 kN/m3 [55].
The moraine clay used in the wall is excavated at the Landerslev gravel pit in Frederikssund,
which also serves as the production site. The moraine clay consists of 14,3% clay, 25,4%
silt, 57,9% sand, and 2,4% gravel [78]. The quicklime is extracted and produced at various
locations across Europe before being transported to Faxe Kalk in Denmark for distribution.
The thesis Effect of moisture content on the strength and stiffness of lime stabilised com-
pressed earth [79] investigated the particle size distribution of moraine clay from Lander-
slev, as well as its liquid limit and plasticity index, to determine the optimal binder for
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
22
==PAGE:32==
use. The results demonstrated that quicklime is an ideal binder for stabilizing the moraine
clay soil from Landerslev, forming the basis of the mixture used in the unfired clay wall.
The results are presented in the following figures.
Figure 3.1: The optimal particle size distribution for compressed (compacted) earth, ac-
cording to H. Houben and H. Guillaud, is shown in the grey area [24], while the particle
size distribution of Landerslev clay soil is represented by the blue line [79].
In Figure 3.1, it can be observed that the particle size distribution curve of Landerslev
soil falls within the optimal range for compressed earth, as defined by H. Houben and H.
Guillaud.
Figure 3.2: Comparison curve for Landerslev soil [79] with recommended binder fields [40].
Figure 3.2 shows that Landerslev soil is just at the edge of the recommended range for
using quicklime as a binder and within the range where mixed binders can be applied.
With regard to the liquid limit and plasticity, the study in the thesis presented that the
Landerslev soil has a liquid limit of 22,5% and a plasticity index of 11%, as shown in
Figure 3.3.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
23
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.3: Houben and Guillaud provide recommended values for compressed (compacted)
earth constructions, which are shown as the grey area [24]. The Landerslev soil is depicted
as the red dot [79].
It can be observed that Landerslev soil is close to the optimal range for compressed earth
constructions, though its liquid limit deviates by <2% from the recommended range. This
underscores that Landerslev soil can be effectively stabilized with an appropriate binder.
When comparing Landerslev soil’s plasticity index of 11% with the guidelines from Vejre-
gler: Jordstabilisering – Vejl in Table 2.1, the soil is classified within the ”Clay/Moraine
Clay, Medium Fat” category, for which quicklime is one of the recommended binders.
The wall is constructed using the compressed earth blocks (CEBs) technique, as described
in Section 2.1.2. To industrialize the production of the wall, DTU have develop a mobile
production apparatus for ”on-site” manufacturing. This apparatus enables the production
of large elements, streamlining the construction process. DTU SUSTAIN has contributed
to the project by developing methods to enhance the properties of the clay soil, focusing
on improving strength and moisture resistance. DTU CONSTRUCT has been involved
in designing the production equipment capable of compressing large blocks [77].
The
compression process utilizes static compaction, where a consistent and continuous force is
applied to reduce air voids and achieve high density. This method ensures a uniform and
stable structure within the blocks.
Figure 3.4 shows an image of the wall at Landerslev. The compressed clay soil elements
measure 360x360x200 mm, have a volume of 0,259 m3, and weigh 700 kg each [77]. The
clay in the wall is manually moisture-regulated during the production phase to ensure it
has the proper consistency and properties. It is recommended that the blocks cure for
six weeks after compression to ensure the material achieves the necessary strength and
stability [77].
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
24
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.4: The CEBW by the Capital Region of Denmark at Landerslev [80].
The complete wall is designed to be 1,9 m wide, 20 m long, and 3,96 m high. In total,
165 clay soil elements are required for every 20 meters of wall (15 sections, each consisting
of 11 elements) [77]. A thin layer of the clay mixture is applied between the elements
to ensure proper adhesion and structural integrity. This layer also accommodates minor
tolerances, allowing the blocks to fit together seamlessly, even if their surfaces are not
perfectly aligned.
The wall is constructed in a zigzag pattern during its test at Landerslev, as shown in
Figure 3.5, to enhance its stability. This design ensures the wall can withstand outdoor
conditions without being supported by vertical loads. The wall is primarily subjected to
lateral loads, such as wind pressure. The structural design of the wall has been developed
in collaboration with GBD Engineers in Austria [77].
Figure 3.5: The zigzag pattern of the wall [77].
3.2
The Rammed Earth Block Wall
The REBW project, developed by The Clay Alliance in collaboration with PensionDan-
mark, KIRKBI, CPH Village, and the architectural firms Juul Frost Arkitekter, Reværk,
and MEE Studio, aims to create an innovative solution for interior walls in residential
buildings. The project combines traditional craftsmanship with modern automation tech-
niques to deliver a sustainable, circular, and functional construction solution that can
compete with conventional materials like concrete in terms of environmental impact and
technical performance [81].
It is an off-site project where the raw material, moraine clay soil from the Nymølle Hede-
husene gravel pit, is transported to Gadstrup and then to Odense for processing and
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
25
==PAGE:35==
production. The moraine clay consists of 8% clay, 22% silt, 50% sand and 20% gravel [82].
The wall is assembled in Århus. Notably, the REBW are produced without any binders,
relying solely on the compacted clay soil’s natural strength [82].
The grain size curve for the soil used in the wall was provided; however, it was not possible
to obtain data on the plasticity index or liquid limit.
In Figure 3.6, the grain size recommendations by H. Houben and H. Guillaud are compared
to the grain size distribution from the Nymølle Hedehusene gravel pit.
Figure 3.6: The optimal particle size distribution for compressed (compacted) earth, ac-
cording to H. Houben and H. Guillaud, is shown in the grey area [24], while the particle
size distribution of Nymølle clay soil is represented by the blue line [83].
It can be observed that the particle size distribution deviates slightly from the optimal
range for compression.
In Figure 3.7, the curve is compared to the guidelines from Vejregler: Jordstabilisering –
Vejl, as shown in Section 2.1.3, Figure 2.8.
Figure 3.7: Comparison curve for clay soil from Nymølle Hedehusene [83] with recom-
mended binder fields [40].
According to the figure, mixed binders could potentially optimize the soil’s properties.
Nevertheless, the Clay Alliance chooses not to include binding agents in their clay mixture.
The clay soil is transported off-site, as they have established a reliable partnership with
the Nymølle Hedehusene gravel pit. Despite the soil not fully meeting the recommended
composition, the Clay Alliance relies on this clay soil.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
26
==PAGE:36==
For the moraine clay used in the wall blocks, a compressive strength of 3 MPa is the
target value [82], though this has not yet been tested. This benchmark is based on recom-
mendations from DIN standards, which consider it reliable for calculations and a trusted
reference point. The 3 MPa value has been applied in the calculations for this study. Fur-
ther testing will be required to validate and support this assumption. The bulk density of
the clay wall has been estimated based on tests to be 21,6 kN/m3 [82].
The first prototype of the clay soil element was produced by RAW with a drying time of
approximately four months. The elements are designed with modular dimensions of 1200
mm width x 600 mm height x 300 mm depth (M1200). These dimensions are significantly
larger than compressed earth blocks but smaller than typical concrete elements [81] [84].
The production of the wall currently involves two production sites. At the first site, the
clay soil is homogenized and moisture-regulated before being transported in big bags to
the second site. Here, a motorized tamper compacts the clay soil into standardized M1200
elements using dynamic compaction. This process involves the application of repeated,
short-duration forces to reduce air voids in the soil, achieving high density and strength.
The moisture content of the soil is carefully regulated during this process. The elements
are left to dry indoors at room temperature [85].
The size allows for eﬀicient wall construction, where five elements can be stacked to reach
a wall height of 3000 mm. The dimensions are aligned with the Danish masonry module
system, including a 12 mm joint width, making the system familiar and easily adoptable
by masons, contractors, and design professionals [81] [84].
The development of the REBW is supported by a comprehensive testing process in collab-
oration with The Danish Technological Institute, including:
• Point load tests (sprøjspids-test),
• Indicative full-scale testing, and
• Compressive strength testing.
The project is progressing to the next phase, which includes: Mechanical tests according
to DIN standards and further documentation of the elements’ technical and environmental
performance [81] [84].
Figure 3.8: Test interior clay wall by
the Clay Alliance [82].
Figure 3.9: Clay soil at the gravel pit at Nymølle
Hedehusene [82].
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
27
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Methodology
This chapter describes the methodology for calculating the load-bearing capacity of the
two wall cases and the process of developing EPDs for each case.
4.1
Static method and calculations
This Section outlines the methodology for calculating the load-bearing capacity of the
walls. Determining the load-bearing capacity requires a defined load. The calculation
focuses on the inner leaf of a double-leaf wall, as this component is often the most load-
bearing part of the construction in a house. If the calculation proves the design to be
stable, these walls could also be used as interior walls within the house.
The thesis ”Comparative Environmental Analysis of Building Typologies” [86] describes a
single-family house model based on the average residential area per person in Denmark. It
includes material consumption and the proportional areas of various components, such as
walls, expressed as percentages of the total house area. This single-family house will serve
as the basis for calculating the load-bearing capacities of the walls, providing a foundation
for their potential future use. As no additional details about the house’s elements are
provided, assumptions regarding the height, width, and thickness of the walls are made.
The walls are assumed to have a thickness of 30 cm to meet two essential requirements: they
must be structurally load-bearing and feasible to construct using the respective techniques.
This thickness aligns with the Clay Alliance standard for residential clay blocks and ensures
comparability between the wall systems. Although the CEBW is built of blocks that are
36 cm thick, they can easily be produced in smaller sizes; the 36 cm thickness was simply
based on the form available during production. To align with the Clay Alliance residential
construction standards, the thickness of the blocks in the CEBW is adjusted to 30 cm.
This adjustment ensures comparability.
The walls are further limited to a width of 1 meter in the calculations as a representative
simplification of the entire wall. Additionally, the height is set to 3 m, which corresponds
to the standard height for residential walls.
The wall’s thickness, width, and height are denoted as d, w, and h in the calculations.
In the calculation of the walls´ load-bearing capacity, it is assumed that the walls are
supported by a roof structure. The load-bearing capacity of the walls is verified as a wide
column, assumed to be fixed at the bottom and simply supported at the top. The tensile
strength is disregarded in the calculation (see Section 2.2.1). Additionally, the stiffening
effect of transverse walls is disregarded, as it is assessed that the walls have suﬀicient shear
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
28
==PAGE:38==
resistance to handle the load independently. If any issues were to arise, bracing would be
installed in the relevant walls.
4.1.1
Load design
The single-family house, where the two types of clay walls are used as the inner leaf of
double-leaf walls, is subjected to three types of loads: wind load, snow load, and dead
load.
NEd = Windload + Snowload + Deadload
(4.1)
The single-family house has a width of l1=15 m on the longest side, a width of l2=10,2
m on the shortest side [86]. A height of the house is calculated to z=5,98 m based on a
slope=25 degree, given by the thesis [86]. The calculated height can be seen in Appendix
B.1.
.
Wind load
The design wind load is calculated in accordance with Teknisk Ståbi [57].
As the walls are assumed to be used in a typical single-family house, terrain category
III is assumed: An area with regular vegetation or buildings, or with individual obstacles
spaced no more than 20 times the height of the obstacles (such as villages, suburban areas,
permanent forests) [57].
The building is assumed to be located in the eastern part of Denmark, where the basic
wind speed is considered to be 24 m/s. Based on Figure 4.2 in Teknisk Ståbi [57], the peak
wind speed is determined to be:
qp(z) = 0, 49kN
m2
(4.2)
The wind load is determined by the peak wind speed, a correlation factor, ρ, the wind
pressure on facades E and D, and a wind load partial coeﬀicient of 1,5.
pwind = qp(z) ∗(D −E) ∗ρ ∗1, 5
(4.3)
The load is applied to the facade of the house, as this configuration relies on the shorter
gable walls for stabilization. This is considered to create a more critical scenario compared
to wind load applied directly to the gable.
Since z/l2 ≤1, a correlation factor of 0,85 is applied, along with shape factors for wind
pressure and suction of +0,8 and -0,5, respectively [57]. This results in the following design
wind load:
pwind = 0, 49kN
m2 ∗(0, 8 −(−0, 5)) ∗0, 85 ∗1, 5 = 0.81kN
m2
(4.4)
Snow load
The design snow load is calculated in accordance with Teknisk Ståbi [57], where the fol-
lowing applies:
psnow = µi ∗Ce ∗Ct ∗sk
(4.5)
Form factor for snow load, µi:
It is assumed that normal conditions apply to the roof. The roof of the single-family house
has a slope of 25 degrees.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
29
==PAGE:39==
Roof pitch, α
0°≤α≤30°
µi
0,8
The exposure factor, Ce:
This factor is calculated in accordance with Eurocode 1 [87].
The coeﬀicient depends on the surrounding topography and the size of the structures. The
following applies:
Ce = Ctop ∗Cs
(4.6)
where Ctop is the factor for topography and Cs is the factor for size.
It is assumed that the building is located in a normal topographical area, where Ctop = 1.
There is wind exposure, normal topography and the following expression is satisfied 2*z
≤l1.
Thereby the value 1 can be used to describe Cs if l2 ≤10 ∗z.
The building meets this requirement by 10,2 m ≤10 ∗5, 98=59,8 m.
Thus, the following is obtained:
Cs = 1 ∗1 = 1
(4.7)
The thermal factor, Ct:
The thermal factor, which is set to the standard value: Ct = 1.
The characteristic terrain value, sk:
Characteristic terrain value: sk = 1 kN
m2 .
The design snow load:
psnow = 0, 8 ∗1 ∗1 ∗1kN
m2 = 0, 8kN
m2
(4.8)
Dead load
The walls must be able to support their own weight and the load from the roof. The roof
structure is based on the description of the single-family house [86]. See Appendix A.3,
Figures A.9 and A.10 for structure of the roof and the thickness of the materials. Since
thicknesses for all materials were not provided, assumptions about these values have been
made based on various sources. Furthermore, assumptions about their densities have also
been made. The assumptions and the calculations can be seen in Appendix B.1.
The table below shows the loads for the roof.
Material
Density ( kg
m3 )
Thickness (mm)
Dead load ( kN
m2 )
Roof tile [88]
6500
12
0,765
2 X Structural timber [89]
530
45
0,468
Insulation [90]
28
450
0,124
Vapour barrier [91]
900
0,2
0,0018
Wood formwork [92][93]
450
21
0,0927
Gypsum plasterboard[94]
1000
24
0,235
Overall, this results in a dead load of groof = 1, 69 kN
m2 from the roof.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
30
==PAGE:40==
The dead load of the wall, where g describes the specific weight of the wall in kN/m3, and
the other parameters are the height, width and thickness of the wall:
G = g ∗d ∗h ∗b
(4.9)
The dead load differs between the two cases. Their respective results can be found in
Section 5.1.
The dead load from the roof and the snow load are assumed to be evenly distributed on
each side of the wall. It is assumed that the roof beams span transversely, and therefore
the stability of the shorter wall in the building is analyzed. The resulting load is:
P = psnow + groof ∗(b ∗l2
2 ) = 12, 68kN
(4.10)
Several scenarios for the normal force are analyzed, as the force varies along different
sections of the wall. The wind-induced bending moment is included in the normal force
calculation as a positive contribution, representing the most critical case.
Figure 4.1
illustrates the bending moment distribution caused by a uniformly distributed wind load
acting on the structure.
The moment from the wind load is highest at the fixed end, where it is given by [57]:
Mwind = 1
8 ∗pwind ∗h2
(4.11)
At approximately the center of the wall, the moment from the wind load is [57]:
Mwind =
9
128 ∗pwind ∗h2
(4.12)
The moment from the wind is zero at the top, where the self-weight of the wall also does not
contribute. Therefore, this section of the wall is not included in the analysis. The bottom
and the center of the wall are analyzed both with and without snow loads to determine
the worst-case scenario with snow as well as the more typical conditions without snow,
which prevail for most of the year.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the wind load distribution and the resulting bending moments
on a beam, which is the same for the wall [57].
The different cases of the normal force:
NEd,bottom,w/snow = P + G + 1
8 ∗pwind ∗h2
(4.13)
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
31
==PAGE:41==
NEd,center,w/snow = P + G
2 +
9
128 ∗pwind ∗h2
(4.14)
NEd,bottom,w/o−snow = groof ∗b ∗l2
2 + G + 1
8 ∗pwind ∗h2
(4.15)
NEd,center,w/o−snow = groof ∗b ∗l2
2 + G
2 +
9
128 ∗pwind ∗h2
(4.16)
4.1.2
Load-bearing capacity verification of the wall
In the following Section, the load-bearing capacity of an unfired clay wall is verified in
accordance with Eurocode 6 [48].
The load-bearing capacity of the walls is calculated without considering limitations such
as acoustic performance, fire resistance, or aesthetics. These parameters can be evaluated
at a later stage.
The load-bearing capacity of an unfired clay inner leaf of a double-leaf wall is presented
below.
The wall’s design compressive strength:
fcd = fck
γ
(4.17)
For rammed earth γ = 1, 7 is recommended.
Overturning moment from wind load, MOT :
MOT = 1
8 ∗b ∗pwind ∗h2
(4.18)
The eccentricity, e:
e = e0 + eM + eN = e0 + MOT
NEd
+ eN
(4.19)
e0 is assumed to be 5 mm, as this is common in residential construction: e0 = 5mm.
It is assumed that the wall will be supported so that the roof either makes full contact
along the edge of the wall. In this case, the eccentric load would be: eN = d
6.
Alternatively, the roof structure does not make full contact, but a beam is placed under-
neath to center the load. In this case, the eccentric load would be: eN = Beamthickness
6
.
Since eN = d
6 will result in the largest eccentric load, this value will be used to ensure
safety. See an illustration of the two cases in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The two eccentric load cases
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
32
==PAGE:42==
The wall’s effective thickness:
deff = d −2 ∗e
(4.20)
The wall’s effective area:
Aeff = b ∗deff
(4.21)
Since the wall is fixed at the bottom and simply supported at the top, the effective column
length is given by:
Ls = 0, 7 ∗h
(4.22)
The critical stress is determined based on Ritter’s method for non-linear materials and
using the assumed initial elastic modulus for unfired clay, E0 = fck ∗kE, where kE=100:
σcr =
fcd
1 + 12∗1
kE ∗(
Ls
π∗deff )2
(4.23)
The design load-bearing capacity of the wall:
Ncrd = Aeff ∗σcrd ∗kt
(4.24)
For solid walls with d > 90 mm kt=0,9 applies and for d < 90 mm kt=0,7 applies.
At the ultimate limit state, the design value of the vertical load applied to the clay wall,
NEd shall be less than or equal to the design load-bearing capacity of the of the wall, Ncrd,
such that:
NEd ≤Ncrd
(4.25)
Since four cases of the normal force are considered, there will be four scenarios to check.
Safety margins were calculated using the following formula to assess the structural capacity
of the walls under various load conditions:
SafetyMargin(%) = (Ncrd −NEd
Ncrd
) ∗100
(4.26)
This provides an idea of how much of the bearing capacity is still available, expressed as
a percentage.
4.2
Development of EPDs for the cases
The development of EPDs for the two unfired clay wall systems was conducted using an
LCA framework in accordance with the latest standards outlined in EN 15804+A2 [95],
which is aligned with ISO 14040 [59] and ISO 14044 [60]. The EPDs are product-specific.
4.2.1
Goal
The goal of the LCA is to evaluate and compare the environmental impacts of the two
unfired clay wall systems:
1. Compressed Earth Block Wall: Constructed on-site using a quicklime binder
and the compressed earth block technique.
2. Rammed Earth Block Wall: Constructed off-site without a binder, using the
rammed earth technique.
The analysis is designed for micro-level decision-making, targeting stakeholders and pro-
fessionals interested in sustainable construction. The study assumes that readers have
prior knowledge of LCA and is not intended for publication.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
33
==PAGE:43==
4.2.2
Scope
Functional Unit The functional unit is defined as 1 ton of unfired clay wall, meeting the
following criteria:
• Structural stability as an inner wall in a standard single-family house.
• A lifespan of 100 years [96] with standard maintenance practices.
The thermal and acoustic performance of both wall systems is assumed to be equivalent
due to their similar material composition and intended application as inner walls.
The choice of 1 ton as the functional unit instead of square meters (m2) is based on
flexibility and consistency.
Using weight as the basis makes the analysis independent
of wall thickness, which can vary between projects, and aligns better with data already
provided in kilograms.
This approach ensures relevant and comparable results across
different wall dimensions and construction scenarios.
System Boundaries A cradle-to-grave analysis is conducted, covering the following life
cycle phases:
• A1-A3: Raw material extraction, transport, and manufacturing.
• A4: Transport from the production site to the construction site.
• A5: Construction and installation of the walls.
• B: Use phase, including standard maintenance practices.
• C1-C4: End-of-life phase, encompassing deconstruction, transport, treatment, and
disposal.
• D: Potential reuse, recycling, or recovery, to evaluate the circular potential of the
systems.
4.2.3
Assumptions and Methodology
Software and Standards
The modeling approach follows an attributional LCA methodology. This approach assigns
environmental impacts using average data and reflects the current production system,
without considering market-driven changes or potential future consequences [97].
The LCA was conducted using SimaPro software [98], selected for its advanced capabilities
in performing comprehensive LCAs and generating EPDs that comply with EN 15804+A2
standards. While OpenLCA was initially considered, licensing restrictions for the required
databases made SimaPro the more practical and eﬀicient choice. Furthermore, SimaPro is
recognized as a professional and reliable LCA tool, extensively documented for its ability to
evaluate the environmental impact of products and technologies across various industries
[99].
Environmental impact calculations were performed using the EN 15804+A2 method, which
is identical to the EF 3,0 method except for a few characterization factors. This method
evaluates midpoint indicators across multiple environmental impact categories, including
global warming potential, acidification, and eutrophication [100].
The EPDs were modeled using the Ecoinvent 3 database. This database is up-to-date and
reliable, offering comprehensive documentation that ensures transparency.
It supports
various system models, allowing for flexible data application. Additionally, Ecoinvent 3
is widely utilized by diverse stakeholders [101]. The ”allocation, cut-off by classification”
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
34
==PAGE:44==
system in Ecoinvent 3 was utilized to focus on the environmental impacts of producing a
product for its first use.
Data Collection
Data sources include:
• A Phases (A1-A5): Based on actual production data collected through site visits,
interviews, and operator observations.
• B, C, and D Phases: Modeled using assumptions to account for standard mainte-
nance practices, possible end-of-life scenarios, and potential reuse, since the walls
are not yet fully constructed.
General Assumptions
Key assumptions for both wall cases are summarized below:
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
35
==PAGE:45==
Assumption
Description
Transport Distances
Estimated using Google Maps for route lengths.
Truck transport
The transport method (16–32 metric tons, EURO 6) was
chosen to reflect common and environmentally optimized
logistics practices, as EURO 6 vehicles comply with
stringent emissions standards.
Sea transport
The bulk carrier for dry goods was chosen for sea transport
to represent a typical and eﬀicient method for transporting
large volumes of materials.
Material Waste
A 10% material waste rate is assumed during A1-A3
phases, reflected in A5.
Repairs (B Phase)
2% is assumed to be repaired every 50 years using the
original clay mixture, applied manually [85] .
End-of-Life (C Phases)
Dummy waste is assumed as a proxy for EoL, meaning
that the waste does not require additional energy or
resources for disposal. This is applied in C3 making C4
and D phases irrelevant.
Diesel Properties
1 liter of diesel weighs 0,85 kg [102].
Processes
Market processes in SimaPro are applied.
Exclusions
Transport of construction equipment to the site is
excluded.
Material
”Sand and clay” is used as a substitute for the silt in the
clay soil, since silt is not available in the database.
Maintenance
Quicklime addition improves water resistance, eliminating
routine maintenance in the EPD for 1 ton of the CEBW
[103].
Maintenance
Skirting boards are commonly used at the junction
between walls and floors to protect and maintain the wall.
These are not included in the EPDs, as they have their own
EPD or generic data, which can be used when the walls are
applied in a building to conduct an LCA for the building.
Building process
A thin layer of the clay mixture is applied between the
elements during assembly in both cases. However, this is
excluded from the EPDs as it constitutes only a minor
component of the wall.
Table 4.1: General assumptions for the LCAs in the two EPDs.
Limitations
The EPDs follow the methodologies outlined in the standards; however, they remain pre-
liminary and have not been third-party verified. As a result, they are unsuitable for oﬀicial
certification and do not fully comply with the requirements of ISO 14025 [104]. Therefore,
the EPDs cover only the first four steps shown in Figure 2.11 in Section 2.5.
During the development process, it was only possible to obtain results for the ”core environ-
mental impact indicators” and ”additional environmental impact indicators.” As a result,
the EPDs developed in this study do not fully meet the requirements of EN 15804+A2,
which mandates the inclusion of additional metrics such as resource use, waste categories,
and biogenic carbon content.
Unfortunately, these results could not be extracted due
to limitations in the SimaPro software. The software operates as a ”black box”, lacking
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
36
==PAGE:46==
transparency regarding how calculations are performed and how additional data could be
accessed. It was not possible to manually calculate these indicators due to the software’s
restrictions and lack of visibility into its inner workings. However, this limitation is ac-
ceptable within the scope of this study.
4.2.4
Sensitivity Analyses
Sensitivity analyses were conducted to account for uncertainties and variations in the
assumptions, particularly in the EoL phases.
The producers of the walls envision that the wall elements will be returned to the original
excavation site, where the compacted blocks would naturally break down into loose soil.
This soil could potentially be recycled for new soil-based construction projects, resulting
in material recycling. However, this scenario cannot be accurately modeled in SimaPro, as
the software only allows for ”reuse”, which assumes that materials are reused as they are,
without alteration—something that does not apply here. Additionally, future regulations
may limit how much soil can be returned to excavation sites due to existing surpluses in
many areas. This creates uncertainty about whether the proposed scenario will remain
viable in the future. As a result, ”dummy waste” is assumed for the EoL in the baseline,
representing a neutral scenario with zero environmental impacts.
Sensitivity analyses evaluate the environmental impacts of alternative EoL scenarios. Var-
ious proportions of recycling and disposal were modeled to reflect potential regulatory
limitations on returning soil to excavation sites.
In this context, the ”reuse” option will be interpreted as a form of ”recycling”. Disposal
scenarios were modeled using “Inert waste” processes to account for soil that cannot be
recycled. Inert waste includes stable, non-reactive materials like concrete, bricks, and un-
fired clay, which do not decompose or emit pollutants. It is typically disposed of in inert
landfills.
To calculate the sensitivity of the environmental impacts to variations in the EoL assump-
tions, a sensitivity coeﬀicient XIS,k is used. This coeﬀicient quantifies how changes in a
specific parameter (in this case, the proportion of material recycled or disposed) affect
the impact score for each environmental category. The sensitivity coeﬀicient is defined as
[105]:
XIS,k =
∆IS
IS
∆ak
ak
(4.27)
where:
• XIS,k: Normalized sensitivity coeﬀicient for an impact category k.
• IS: Baseline impact score for the environmental category.
• ∆IS: Change in impact score between the baseline and alternative scenario.
• ak: Proportion of material recycled in the baseline scenario.
• ∆ak: Change in the proportion of material recycled, normalized to 1 (full scale from
0% to 100% recycling).
Baseline assumptions assume 100% of materials are treated as waste (dummy waste), cor-
responding to ak=0 for recycling. To avoid division by 0, all recycling rates are normalized
to a scale where 100% recycling corresponds to ak=1. This normalization allows for consis-
tent comparison across scenarios. Alternative scenarios were tested with varying recycling
and disposal rates, such as:
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
37
==PAGE:47==
Scenario
Proportion Recycled
Proportion Disposed
Scenario 1
50%
50%
Scenario 2
80%
20%
Scenario 3
90%
10%
Scenario 4
100%
0%
Table 4.2: Recycling and disposal proportions in different scenarios
Sensitivity coeﬀicients indicate which environmental categories are most affected by recy-
cling and disposal assumptions. A coeﬀicient greater than 0,5 indicates high sensitivity,
coeﬀicient between 0,3 and 0,5 shows medium sensitivity, while coeﬀicients below 0,3 in-
dicate low sensitivity. Negative coeﬀicients suggest that increasing recycling leads to a
reduction in environmental impacts [105].
4.3
Case Studies: Wall-specific methodology
4.3.1
The Compressed Earth Block Wall
Flowchart
The production and life cycle of the CEBW is illustrated in the flowchart in Figure 4.3.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
38
==PAGE:48==
Clay soil is extracted on-
site with an excavator
Clay soil is 
extracted on-
site with an 
excavator
Clay soil is extracted on-
site with an excavator
Quicklime is 
extracted and 
produced in 
France
Clay soil is extracted 
on-site with an 
excavator
Transport
Clay soil is extracted on-site 
with an excavator
Stabilization machine 
with a star mixer that 
blends the clay soil 
with quicklime and 
filters out large stones 
of 100 mm
The excavator 
lifts the clay soil 
into a drum 
sorter
Clay soil is extracted 
on-site with an 
excavator
Drum sorting plant 
(Powerscreen), 
which separates 
stones down to 20 
mm
Wheel loader 
moves the clay 
soil to a soil 
compactor
A soil compactor 
extrudes clay soil 
elements onto a pallet, 
and a guillotine trims the 
elements to the desired 
size during the process.
Wheel loader 
lifts the pallets 
and places 
them where 
the wall will be 
built
The excavator 
lifts the 
extruded blocks 
and places 
them on the 
wall
Clay soil is extracted 
on-site with an 
excavator
Wall repair
Clay soil is 
extracted on-site 
with an 
excavator
The excavator 
lifts the 
extruded blocks 
off the wall
Clay soil is 
extracted on-
site with an 
excavator
Transport to 
waste 
treatment
Clay soil is 
extracted on-
site with an 
excavator
Waste 
treatment as 
"dummy 
waste"
Figure 4.3: Flowchart for the CEBW.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
39
==PAGE:49==
Several of the machines utilized in the construction of the wall are illustrated in Figure
4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8 og 4.9.
Figure 4.4: Clay soil extraction at Lan-
derslev [80].
Figure
4.5:
Drum
sorting plant (power-
screen) [80].
Figure 4.6:
Soil com-
pactor [80].
Figure 4.7: Com-
pressed clay soil
exiting
the
ma-
chine and being
trimmed [80].
Figure 4.8:
Excava-
tor placing the blocks
onto the wall [80].
Figure 4.9: Building the wall [80].
Material Data and Assumptions
Assumptions for A1 phase:
• Moraine soil clay:
– Material Consumption: The wall material consists of 98% moraine clay, with
the following composition: 14,3% clay, 2,4% silt, 57,9% sand, and 2,4% gravel.
– Extraction: An excavator is used to extract the clay at Landerslev gravel pit.
It consumes diesel at a rate of 0,5 liters per ton during average production [106].
This corresponds to an amount of 0,42 kg of diesel per 0,98 ton.
• Quicklime:
– Material consumption: The quicklime constitutes 2% of the wall material and
is sourced from Faxe Kalk. At Faxe Kalk, the lime is milled using a grinder
and distributed to customers. The extraction and production of quicklime are
assumed to occur at Graymont Industries, one of Europe’s largest suppliers of
quicklime, with operations in France [107]. While Graymont has lime produc-
tion facilities in France, specific facility locations are not detailed on their main
website. For the purposes of this study, it is assumed that production takes
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
40
==PAGE:50==
place in northern France, due to its proximity to Denmark and its status as a
major producer of quicklime.
– Extraction and Production: Data for the production of quicklime was obtained
from the Ecoinvent 3 database, specifically under the activity ”lime, packed.”
This activity represents a market process that accounts for the consumption
mix of quicklime within the European region (excluding Switzerland).
The
milling process is excluded from this LCA due to the lack of available data and
its minimal environmental impact.
Assumptions for A2 phase:
• Transport:
– Transport for the quicklime from Northern France to Landerslev is included,
as this distance and specific transport type were not previously accounted for.
The transport involves 1100 sea freight from Northern France to Faxe Kalk in
Denmark. From Faxe Kalk to Landerslev, the quicklime is transported 95,1 km
by a truck.
– The soil clay is extracted directly at Landerslev, which eliminates significant
transport emissions for this material.
Assumptions for A3 phase:
• Energy Use:
– Stabilization Machine: Diesel consumption is 0,15 liters per ton during average
production [106], equivalent to 0,1275 kg of diesel per ton.
– Extractor: Diesel consumption is 0,5 liters per ton during average production
[106], equivalent to 0,425 kg of diesel per ton.
– Drum sorting plant: Diesel consumption is 25 liters per hour [106], with a
production capacity of 200 tons per hour. Equivalent to 0,10625 kg diesel per
ton.
– Wheel Loader: Diesel consumption is 0,2 liters per ton during average produc-
tion [108], equivalent to 0,17 kg diesel per ton.
– Soil Compaction Machine: Operates continuously at 12,5 kW and processes
2500 kg of soil per hour [108]. This corresponds to an energy consumption of 5
kWh per ton.
– Manual guillotine: Used to trim the blocks, consuming 0 energy in the LCA
[108].
Assumptions for A5 phase:
• Energy Use:
– The same energy use is assumed for the wheel loader and extractor as in the
A3 phase.
Assumptions for B3 phase:
• Energy Use:
– The repair is assumed as described in Figure 4.1 Section 4.2.3. Only the input
from the machines up to and including the drum screening process is included,
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
41
==PAGE:51==
as the tamping is performed manually and tamped into place, without passing
through any compactor.
Assumptions for C1 phase:
• Demolition:
– The same energy use is assumed for the extractor as in the A3 phase.
Assumptions for C2 phase:
• Transport:
– The wall elements are transported to Frederikssund Recycling Center 10,8 km
by truck.
Assumptions for C3, C4 and D phases: The EoL is assumed as described in Figure
4.1 Section 4.2.3.
The calculations for the input in Simapro are provided in Appendix B.2, and the output
from Simapro can be found in Appendix B.3.
4.3.2
The Rammed Earth Block Wall
Flowchart
The production and life cycle of the REBW is illustrated in the flowchart in Figure 4.10.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
42
==PAGE:52==
Clay soil is extracted on-
site with an excavator
Clay soil is 
extracted  with 
an excavator
Clay soil is extracted 
on-site with an 
excavator
Transport to 
production site 
1
Clay soil is extracted 
on-site with an 
excavator
Wheel loader 
used to 
homogenize the 
clay and fill it 
into big pack
Clay soil is 
extracted on-site 
with an excavator
Motorized 
tamper for 
compacting the 
wall elements in 
the element 
mold
Manuel pallet 
jack for 
transporting the 
wall elements 
onto the truck
Excavator lifts 
the wallblocks 
and places 
them on the 
wall
Clay soil is extracted 
on-site with an 
excavator
Wall repair
Clay soil is 
extracted on-site 
with an 
excavator
The excavator 
lifts the blocks 
off the wall
Clay soil is 
extracted on-
site with an 
excavator
Transport to 
waste 
treatment
Clay soil is 
extracted on-
site with an 
excavator
Waste 
treatment as 
"dummy 
waste"
Clay soil is extracted on-
site with an excavator
Dumper for 
transporting the 
clay internally 
to the 
powerscreen
Clay soil is extracted on-
site with an excavator
Wheel loader 
used to load the 
clay into the 
powerscreen 
(sieve)
Clay soil is extracted on-
site with an excavator
Powerscreen, 
which seperates 
stones down to 
40 mm 
Clay soil is extracted on-
site with an excavator
 Wheel loader 
for transferring 
the processed 
clay to 
transport
Clay soil is extracted 
on-site with an 
excavator
Transport to 
production site 
2
Manual pallet jack 
transports the clay 
in big packs from the 
truck to the element 
mold for compacting 
the wall elements
Clay soil is extracted 
on-site with an 
excavator
Transport 
Clay soil is extracted 
on-site with an 
excavator
Silicate paint
Figure 4.10: Flowchart for the REBW.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
43
==PAGE:53==
Material Data and Assumptions
Assumptions for A1 phase:
• Moraine soil clay:
– Material Consumption: The wall material consists of 100% moraine clay, with
the following composition: 8% clay, 22% silt, 50% sand, and 20% gravel.
– Extraction: An excavator, dumper, powerscreen and two wheel loaders are used
to extract and process the clay soil at Nymølle Stenindustri. This corresponds
to an amount of 0,8 kg diesel per ton for these machines in total [109].
Assumptions for A2 phase:
• Transport:
– The clay soil is transported 12,6 km to the production site 1 in Gadstrup and
138 km to production site 2 in Odense. The transport is by a truck.
Assumptions for A3 phase:
• Energy Use:
– Wheel loader: Diesel consumption is 25 liters per hour and produces 34 ton
every 8 hour [85]. Equivalent to 5 kg diesel per ton.
– Big bags: 24 bigbags covers 34 ton [85] and it is assumed that every big bag
weighs 1,5 kg [110]. This corresponds to 1,06 kg bigpack per ton. The process
”Polypropylene, granulate, market, cut-off, S” is used in SimaPro to represent
this element, as it is the closest available scenario for big bags.
– Motorized tamper: Uses 1,8 Kwh electricity per 200x200x200 mm element [111].
This corresponds to 102,3 kWh per ton of a 1200x600x300 mm element.
– Manual pallet jack: Used to move the big bags and wall elements, consuming
0 energy in the LCA [85].
Assumptions for A4 phase:
• Transport:
– The wall elements are transported 145 km from Odense to the building site in
Århus by a truck.
Assumptions for A5 phase:
• Energy Use:
– Extractor: Diesel consumption is 0,41 liters per ton during average production
[109], equivalent to 0,35 kg of diesel per ton. The same extractor used in A1 is
applied here.
Assumptions for B2 phase:
• Maintenance
– Several maintenance options have been considered, including water glass, sili-
cate paint, and other protective treatments. Water glass was not utilized as a
maintenance strategy, since no direct process for potassium silicate (the main
component of water glass) is available in SimaPro. Instead, silicate paint was
chosen as the maintenance strategy for the wall.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
44
==PAGE:54==
– Silicate paint is assumed to be applied three times over a 50-year period. This
assumption is based on information from the Center for Building Preservation,
which states that silicate paint typically has a lifespan of 15-20 years before
requiring reapplication [112]. Since no specific process for silicate paint exists
in SimaPro, its components are modeled as separate processes with assumed
proportions: 60% sodium silicate corresponding to 1,78 kg (used as a substitute
for the unavailable process for potassium silicate), 15% calcium carbonate cor-
responding to 0,45 kg, 5% titanium dioxide corresponding to 0,15 kg, and 20%
water corresponding to 0,59 kg [113] [114]. This is based on the assumption of
0,2 liters of paint per m2, applied in two layers for each wall element [115]. The
transportation of the paint is disregarded.
Assumptions for B3 phase:
• Energy Use
– The repair is assumed as described in Figure 4.1 Section 4.2.3. Only the input
from the machines up to and including the wheel loader in Gadstrup is included,
as the tamping is performed manually and tamped into place, without passing
through any compactor.
Assumptions for C1 phase:
• Demolition:
– The same extractor used in A1 and A5 is applied here.
Assumptions for C2 phase:
• Transport:
– The wall elements are transported to the local recycling station 3,3 km by a
truck.
Assumptions for C3, C4 and D phases: The EoL is assumed as described in Figure
4.1 Section 4.2.3
The calculations for the input in Simapro are provided in Appendix B.2, and the output
from Simapro can be found in Appendix B.3.
4.3.3
Comparison between the walls
The following table summarizes the differences between the two wall systems:
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
45
==PAGE:55==
Life Cycle
Phase
CEBW
REBW
A1: Raw
Material
Extraction
Moraine clay extracted on-site with
an excavator. Quicklime produced
in France and delivered to the site.
Moraine clay extracted and
transported off-site. No binder
used.
A2: Transport
Minimal transport as materials are
sourced on-site, except for
quicklime (transported 1100 km by
sea + 95 km by truck).
Transport of clay to the off-site
facility: 12,6 km + 138 km
transport distance by truck.
A3:
Manufacturing
Stabilization of clay with quicklime.
Static compression into blocks
on-site.
Dynamic compaction at an off-site
production facility to form rammed
earth elements.
A4: Transport
to Site
Not relevant, as the wall is
constructed directly at the building
site.
Transported 145 km from the
off-site production facility to the
building site.
A5:
Construction
Construction involves lifting blocks
into place using a wheel loader and
excavator.
Blocks are lifted into place using an
excavator.
B: Use Phase
Minimal maintenance due to the
quicklime binder. Repairs assume
2% of the wall repaired manually
every 50 years.
Maintenance involves silicate paint
application 3 times every 50 years.
Repairs also assume 2% of the wall
repaired manually every 50 years.
C: End-of-Life
Excavator for demolition. 10,8 km
truck transport to recycling center.
Dummy waste modeled for EoL.
Excavator for demolition. 3,3 km
truck transport to recycling center.
Dummy waste modeled for EoL.
D: Potential
Reuse
Not relevant due to the use of
dummy waste in C3.
Not relevant due to the use of
dummy waste in C3.
Table 4.3: Comparison of life cycle phases for CEBW and REBW.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
46
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5
Results
This chapter presents the results from the load-bearing verification and the EPD of the
CEBW and REBW, formatted according to the EPD standard. The EPDs include the
standard required text for an EPD as well as specific information relevant to each respective
case. Finally, a comparison of the EPD results is provided.
5.1
Load-bearing verification of the walls
Table 5.1 presents the results of the calculations for the load-bearing capacities of the
walls. The calculations follow the methodology outlined in Section 4.1.2, where the wall is
treated as a wide column, with tensile strength excluded from consideration. Additionally,
the calculations are based on the load specifications detailed in Section 4.1.1. The purpose
of the calculations is to evaluate whether the wall cases can function as load-bearing inner
walls in an average Danish single-family house.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
47
==PAGE:57==
Initialization
CEBW
REBW
fck [MPa]
3
3
fcd [MPa]
1,76
1,76
g [kN/m3]
21
21,6
G [kN]
18,9
19,4
NEd,bottom,w/snow [kN]
32,49
33,03
NEd,center,w/snow [kN]
22,64
22,91
NEd,bottom,w/o−snow [kN]
28,41
28,95
NEd,center,w/o−snow [kN]
18,56
18,83
MOT [kNm]
0,913
0,913
e0 [mm]
5
5
eN [mm]
50
50
ebottom,w/snow [mm]
83,12
82,66
ecenter,w/snow [mm]
95,35
94,87
ebottom,w/o−snow [mm]
87,16
86,56
ecenter,w/o−snow [mm]
104,22
103,51
deff,bottom,w/snow [mm]
133,76
134,68
deff,center,w/snow [mm]
109,30
110,25
deff,bottom,w/o−snow [mm]
125,69
126,89
deff,center,w/o−snow [mm]
91,56
92,97
Aeff,bottom,w/snow [m2]
0,13
0,13
Aeff,center,w/snow [m2]
0,11
0,11
Aeff,bottom,w/o−snow [m2]
0,13
0,13
Aeff,center,w/o−snow [m2]
0,09
0,09
Ls [m]
2,1
2,1
σcr,bottom,w/snow [MPa]
0,4415
0,4460
σcr,center,w/snow [MPa]
0,3215
0,3261
σcr,bottom,w/o−snow [MPa]
0,4016
0,4075
σcr,center,w/o−snow [MPa]
0,2386
0,2450
kt [none]
0,9
0,9
Ncrd,bottom,w/snow [kN]
53,15
54,07
Ncrd,center,w/snow [kN]
31,62
32,36
Ncrd,bottom,w/o−snow [kN]
45,43
46,54
Ncrd,center,w/o−snow [kN]
19,66
20,50
NEd,bottom,w/snow ≤Ncrd,bottom,w/snow
Check
Check
NEd,center,w/snow ≤Ncrd,center,w/snow
Check
Check
NEd,bottom,w/o−snow ≤Ncrd,bottom,w/o−snow
Check
Check
NEd,center,w/o−snow ≤Ncrd,center,w/o−snow
Check
Check
Table 5.1: Calculation results for the load-bearing capacities of the wall cases.
The calculations are included in Appendix B.1.
The load-bearing capacities in all scenarios have been verified to be suﬀicient.
Based on the calculations, the normal forces and load-bearing capacities for the two cases
are presented in the following diagrams.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
48
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.1: Comparison of normal forces acting on different sections of the walls under
various load conditions.
Diagram 5.1 illustrates the applied normal forces (NEd) in different sections of the wall for
both wall types—CEBW and REBW—under conditions with snow (w/ snow) and without
snow (w/o snow). The normal forces are generally higher in the bottom sections of the wall
compared to the center. This is because, in the center, only half of the wall’s self-weight
is considered, whereas the full self-weight is accounted for in the bottom sections.
The self-weight of the wall significantly contributes to the total dead load. Furthermore,
the normal force at the bottom sections is influenced by a higher wind moment load than
in the center. The presence of snow increases the normal force in both the center and
bottom sections for both wall types. Additionally, the normal forces are slightly higher
in all cases for REBW, which can be attributed to its slightly greater bulk density of the
unfired clay, resulting in a higher self-weight of the wall.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
49
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.2: Comparison of load-bearing capacities across different sections of the walls.
This diagram shows the design load-bearing capacity (Ncrd) for the same wall sections and
load conditions.
The load-bearing capacity is slightly lower for the CEBW compared to the REBW due to
lower normal forces, which result from its lower bulk density. This leads to slightly higher
eccentricity values, reducing the effective thickness, critical stresses, and the effective area.
These factors collectively contribute to a reduced load-bearing capacity. However, the
difference in load-bearing capacity between the two walls is minimal, as the bulk density
differs by only 0.6 kN/m3.
The center sections have a lower load-bearing capacity because their lower normal forces
likewise contribute to a higher eccentricity.
The bearing capacities for both walls are preliminary and based on early material strength
tests or expected compressive strengths.
Further testing is required to validate these
findings. For the CEBW, the binder’s contribution to the compressive strength is expected
to enhance performance over time, as mentioned in Section 3.1, so a higher compressive
strength is anticipated.
The table below summarizes the safety margins for both the CEBW and the REBW. The
calculations can be found in Appendix B.1. The safety margin is expressed as a percentage
and indicates how much additional load the walls can withstand before reaching their
maximum capacity.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
50
==PAGE:60==
Wall Case
Section
Safety Margin (%)
CEBW
Botton w/ snow
38,87
Center w/ snow
28,41
Bottom w/o snow
37,45
Center w/o snow
5,59
REBW
Botton w/ snow
38,91
Center w/ snow
29,19
Bottom w/o snow
37,78
Center w/o snow
8,13
Table 5.2: Safety margins for the walls
The REBW consistently demonstrates slightly higher safety margins across all sections
compared to the CEBW. This difference arises because the normal force NEd acting on the
REBW is slightly lower relative to its bearing capacity Ncrd. As a result, the percentage
difference between the load-bearing capacity and the applied load is marginally larger.
While these differences are small, they suggest that the REBW performs slightly better
under the applied loads.
For both walls, the presence of snow reduces the safety margin across all sections. For
example, the safety margin for the CEBW in the ”Bottom w/ snow” section is 38,87%,
compared to 37,45% without snow.
The center sections of the walls generally exhibit lower safety margins compared to the
bottom sections. This is primarily due to the lower normal force in the center, as only
half of the wall’s self-weight contributes to the axial load. Consequently, the center sec-
tions experience a higher eccentricity, due to a larger eM, since the overturning moment
remains significant while the normal force is reduced. This results in a more critical stress
distribution, leading to a lower safety margin.
As indicated, further testing is required to confirm these results. However, the calculations
validate the walls as potential inner leaves of double-leaf walls in a typical Danish single-
family house, where they are fixed at the bottom and simply supported at the top. This
further supports their use as interior walls within the house.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
51
==PAGE:61==
5.2
EPD for the Compressed Earth Block Wall
Owner:
Emilie Henriksen
Applied tool:
Simapro
Issued:
31-01-2025
Geographical area:
Denmark
NOT THIRD - PARTY VERIFIED
EPD
In accordance with EN 15804
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
52
==PAGE:62==
K Industry EPD
 Product EPD
Declared Product
Moraine clay and quciklime
Production Site
Landerslev gravel pit in Frederikssund
Product Application
Compressed Earth Block element for con-
struction as interior wall/ sound barrier wall
Declared/Functional Unit
The declared unit is 1 ton wall element
Reference Year for Data
2024
Calculation Basis
This environmental product declaration is
developed in accordance with the require-
ments of EN 15804+A2.
Comparability
Environmental product declarations for con-
struction products may not be comparable
unless they comply with the requirements
of EN 15804. EPD data may not be com-
parable unless all datasets used are devel-
oped in accordance with EN 15804 and the
background systems are based on the same
database.
Application
The intended application of the environmen-
tal product declaration is to communicate
scientifically based environmental informa-
tion about the product to/from professional
stakeholders to assess the environmental im-
pacts of buildings.
EPD Type
Type
Selection
Cradle-to-gate
Cradle-to-gate with options
Cradle-to-grave

System Boundaries (1 = included; 0 = module not declared (MND); 2 = module not relevant (MNR))
Product
Construction Process
Use
End-of-Life
Outside System Boundaries
A1 A2 A3 A4
A5
B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 C1 C2 C3 C4
D
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
53
==PAGE:63==
Product Information
Product description
The main materials of the product are listed
in the table below. These account for 100%
by weight of the declared product.
Material
Weight % of the
Declared Product
Moraine clay
98
Quicklime
2
The declared unit is 1 ton wall element.
Service Life (RSL)
The service life is considered to be 100 years
[96].
LCA background
Declared Unit
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD re-
late to the declared unit of 1 ton of a Com-
pressed Earth Block, as specified in the table
below. The table also provides the average
mass per declared unit and a conversion fac-
tor to m2, assuming a wall thickness of 300
mm.
Name
Value
Unit
Declared Unit
1
ton
Density
2100
kg/m3
Conversion Factor to
1 m2
1,59
-
Functionel unit
Not defined.
PCR
This EPD is developed according to the core
rules for the product category of construc-
tion products in EN 15804 version A2:2019.
Flowdiagram
See Figure 4.3 in Section 4.3.1.
System boundaries
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-grave LCA,
in which 100 weight-% has been accounted
for.
All relevant and significant processes
are included.
Key assumptions for the system boundary
are described for each life cycle stage below.
The Product Stage (A1-A3):
A1 covers the extraction and production of
raw materials. For the production of an un-
fired clay wall, this primarily involves moraine
clay, which is extracted and processed on-
site by producers or subcontractors. Addi-
tionally, quicklime is supplied by external
producers or subcontractors.
A2 includes the transport of raw materials
to the production site at Landerslev Gravel
Pit in Denmark.
This includes the trans-
port of quicklime from its extraction and
production at Graymont Industries in north-
ern France to Landerslev.
A3 covers the manufacturing of the declared
product at the production site. The primary
processes in the production of compressed
earth block elements, used as wall elements,
include stabilizing moraine clay with quick-
lime, sorting out large stones from the clay
mixture, compacting the wall elements us-
ing a soil compactor, utilizing an excavator
to lift the clay soil into machines, and us-
ing a wheel loader to move the clay soil. A
10% material waste rate is assumed during
the production of the wall (A1–A3), which
is accounted for in the A5 phase.
LCA results are declared in aggregated form
for the product stage, meaning that the sub-
modules A1, A2, and A3 are presented as a
single module, A1-A3.
Construction Process Stage (A4-A5):
The construction process stage includes the
use of an excavator and a wheel loader to
move and lift the clay wall blocks into place
on the wall.
Use Stage (B1-B7):
In practice, and in accordance with the ap-
plied PCR for unfired clay, under normal
usage conditions, there will be no need for
maintenance, replacements, or renovations
after the product is installed. Similarly, there
is no energy or water consumption associ-
ated with the product during the use phase.
However, it is conservatively assumed that
2% of the wall will require repair every 50
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
54
==PAGE:64==
years. The wall will be repaired using the
same clay mixture as in the A1-A3 mod-
ule, which will be manually compacted into
place. The handling of this waste is accounted
for in module C3.
As a result, there are no environmental im-
pacts associated with modules B1, B2, B4,
B5, B6, and B7.
End of Life (C1-C4):
In this LCA, the end-of-life stage is modeled
to include demolition, transport to waste
treatment, and waste treatment.
Since specific data for the scenario is not yet
available, ”dummy waste” has been assumed
as the waste treatment to create the most
realistic representation, where there are no
positive or negative contributions to envi-
ronmental impacts.
C1 includes the demolition of the wall. At
the end of its life, the wall will be demolished
using an excavator.
C2 includes the transport of the wall ele-
ments to waste treatment. In this LCA, a
transport distance of 10,8 km is assumed be-
tween C1 and C3. This distance represents
the nearest waste treatment facility to the
Landerslev Gravel Pit.
C3 includes waste treatment modeled as ”dummy
waste”.
Phases C4 and D are excluded.
A sensitivity analysis for phases C3, C4, and
D is provided as a supplement to the EPD,
exploring other potential scenarios.
LCA results
The results from the SimaPro analysis are limited, as certain fields marked with x indicate
that it was not possible to obtain values for these parameters.
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter
Unit
A1-A3
A5
B3
C1
C2
C3
GWP-total
[kg CO2
eq.]
3,86397
0,25487
0,29343
0,20737
1,76097
0,00E+00
GWP-fossil
[kg CO2
eq.]
3,47484
0,25415
0,28714
0,20678
1,75867
0,00E+00
GWP-
biogenic
[kg CO2
eq.]
0,38412
0,00064
0,00618
0,00052
0,0016
0,00E+00
GWP-luluc
[kg CO2
eq.]
0,00501
8,3E-05
0,00011
6,8E-05
0,0007
0,00E+00
ODP
[kg
CFC11
eq.]
1,4E-06
4,4E-07
4,6E-07
3,5E-07
4,1E-07
0,00E+00
AP
[mol H+
eq.]
0,02585
0,00311
0,00345
0,00253
0,005
0,00E+00
EP-
freshwater
[kg PO4
eq.]
0,00177
2E-05
3E-05
1,6E-05
0,00012
0,00E+00
EP-marine
[kg
N
eq.]
0,00526
0,00039
0,00045
0,00031
0,00101
0,00E+00
EP-
terrestrial
[mol
N
eq.]
0,05646
0,00423
0,00495
0,00344
0,01106
0,00E+00
POCP
[kg
NMVOC
eq.]
0,01628
0,00174
0,00196
0,00142
0,00425
0,00E+00
ADP-mm*
[kg
Sb
eq.]
2,7E-05
3,4E-07
4,4E-07
2,8E-07
6,2E-06
0,00E+00
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
55
==PAGE:65==
ADP-fos*
[MJ]
110,314
26,301
27,719
21,3987
26,6647
0,00E+00
WDP*
[m3]
1,29609
0,00411
0,02279
0,00334
0,08117
0,00E+00
Caption
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warm-
ing Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic;
GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change;
ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; EP-freshwater = Eutrophi-
cation – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine;
EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone
formation; ADPm = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf
= Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use.
Disclaimer
* The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the
uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with
the indicator.
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter
Unit
A1-A3
A5
B3
C1
C2
C3
PM
[Disease
inci-
dence]
2,3E-07
1,7E-08
1,9E-08
1,3E-08
1,4E-07
0,00E+00
IRP**
[kBq
U235
eq.]
0,92631
0,1179
0,12682
0,09593
0,13739
0,00E+00
ETP-fw*
[CTUe]
211,67
13,9117
16,9629
11,3187
20,929
0,00E+00
HTP-c*
[CTUh]
2,3E-09
1,1E-10
1,4E-10
9,2E-11
6,7E-10
0,00E+00
HTP-nc*
[CTUh]
5,1E-08
3,1E-09
3,6E-09
2,5E-09
2,1E-08
0,00E+00
SQP*
[CTUh]
x
x
x
x
x
x
Caption
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health;
ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer ef-
fects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality
(dimensionless).
Disclaimer
*The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the
uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experience with
the indicator.
**This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose
ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle.
It does not
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor
due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing
radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is
also not measured by this indicator.
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter
Unit
A1-A3
A5
B3
C1
C2
C3
PERE
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
PERM
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
PERT
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
PENRE
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
PENRM
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
56
==PAGE:66==
PENRT
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
SM
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
RSF
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
NRSF
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
FW
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
Caption
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy
resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy
resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary
energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding
non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use
of non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT =
Total use of non-renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary
material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of nonrenew-
able secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water.
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter
Unit
A1-A3
A5
B3
C1
C2
C3
HWD
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
NHVD
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
RWD
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
CRU
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
MFR
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
MER
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
EEE
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
EET
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
Caption
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed;
RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR
= Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE =
Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy.
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter
Unit
At
the
factory
gate
Biogenic carbon content in product
kg C
x
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging
kg C
x
Additional information
Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity analysis was conducted to evaluate how variations in recycling and disposal
rates during the product’s end-of-life (EoL) stage affect environmental impacts.
The
analysis is based on a baseline scenario where 100% of the materials are treated as dummy
waste and compared with four alternative scenarios:
• 50% recycling and 50% disposal,
• 80% recycling and 20% disposal,
• 90% recycling and 10% disposal,
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
57
==PAGE:67==
• 100% recycling.
The sensitivity values are based on formula 4.27. The calculations can be found in Ap-
pendix B.3.
Table 5.8: Sensitivity Analysis Results - Normalized Sensitivity Coeﬀicient. Red values
shows high sensitivity and yellow indicates medium sensitivity.
Impact Category
50%
recy-
cling
and
50% disposal
80%
recy-
cling
and
20% disposal
90%
recy-
cling
and
10% disposal
100% recycle
GWP-total
3,27
0,049
-0,55
-1,02
GWP-fossil
3,26
0,046
-0,55
-1,02
GWP-bio
5,65
0,62
-0,31
-1,05
GWP-luluc
32,23
7,29
2,68
-1,02
ODP
2,49
-0,21
-0,71
-1,1
AP
8,1
1,21
-0,06
-1,1
EP-fw
5,11
0,51
-0,35
-1,03
EP-mar
17,25
3,52
0,98
-1,05
EP-ter
17,23
3,52
0,98
-1,05
POCP
12,46
2,32
0,44
-1,06
ADP-mm
2,56
-0,11
-0,61
-1
ADP-fos
2,91
-0,1
-0,7
-1,1
WDP
79,81
19,19
7,97
-1
Table 5.8 presents the results of the sensitivity analysis for the different recycling and dis-
posal scenarios. The results show that 50% recycling and 50% disposal lead to the highest
sensitivity values across multiple categories, particularly in GWP-luluc (32,23) and WDP
(79,81). This highlights that lower recycling rates and higher disposal rates significantly
amplify environmental impacts in these categories, driven by increased demand for raw
material extraction, land use changes, and water resource depletion associated with waste
disposal and the absence of material recycling.
Furthermore, this highlights the significant environmental burden imposed by higher dis-
posal rates compared to increased recycling. Scenarios with 80% recycling and 20% dis-
posal, as well as 90% recycling and 10% disposal, exhibit moderate reductions in sensi-
tivity, showing a clear trend of decreasing environmental impacts as the recycling rate
increases.
Notably, 100% recycling consistently results in the lowest sensitivity across
all categories, reflecting the environmental benefits of maximizing material recovery and
minimizing waste disposal.
To provide a simplified overview, the average normalized sensitivity coeﬀicients across all
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
58
==PAGE:68==
impact categories are plotted in a bar chart, which can be found in Appendix A.4 Figure
A.11. The chart visually illustrates the increase in sensitivity for scenarios with higher
disposal rates, particularly for the 50% recycling and 50% disposal scenario, compared to
the minimal impacts observed in the 100% recycling scenario.
This analysis underscores the importance of maximizing recycling to minimize environ-
mental burdens associated with end-of-life waste management for unfired clay walls.
Technical information on scenarios
Transport to the building site (A4)
The production takes place at the same location as the building site.
Installation of the product (A5)
Scenario information
Value
Unit
Waste material
100
kg
Reference service life
RSL information
Unit
Reference service Life
100
Declared product properties
Technical specifications and
guidance can be obtained from
direct contact to the Capital
Region of Denmark.
Design application parameters
Assumed quality of work
Outdoor environment
Indoor environment
Usage conditions
Maintenance
Use (B1-B7)
Scenario information
Value
Unit
B1 - Use
Carbonation
0
kg CO2 eq.
*No significant CO2 absorption is assumed for the use phase (B1) of the unfired clay.
Although the material contains 2% quicklime (CaO), any potential CO2 absorption during
the use phase (B1) is considered negligible. The carbonation process is slow, and the small
proportion of quicklime results in an insignificant impact on the overall CO2 balance.
End of life (C1-C4)
Scenario information
Value
Unit
B1 - Use
Collected for dummy waste
1000
kg
Assumptions for scenario development
Assumed dismantled using an
excavator.
Re-use, recovery, and recycling potential (D)
N.A.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
59
==PAGE:69==
Indoor air
The EPD does not give information on re-
lease of dangerous substances to indoor air
because the horizontal standards on the rel-
evant measurements are not available. Read
more in EN15804+A2 chapter 7.4.1.
Soil and water
The EPD does not give information on re-
lease of dangerous substances to soil and
water because the horizontal standards on
the relevant measurements are not available.
Read more in EN15804+A2 chapter 7.4.2.
References
EN 15804
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product
declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products”
ISO 14025
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmen-
tal declarations – Principles and procedures”
ISO 14040
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Princi-
ples and framework”
ISO 14044
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Require-
ments and guidelines
5.3
EPD for the Rammed Earth Block Wall
Owner:
Emilie Henriksen
Applied tool:
Simapro
Issued:
31-01-2025
Geographical area:
Denmark
NOT THIRD - PARTY VERIFIED
EPD
In accordance with EN 15804
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
60
==PAGE:70==
K Industry EPD
 Product EPD
Declared Product
Moraine clay
Production Site
The production has two production sites:
1 in Gadstrup and 2 in Odense.
Product Application
Rammed Earth Block element for construc-
tion as interior wall.
Declared/Functional Unit
The declared unit is 1 ton wall element.
Reference Year for Data
2024
Calculation Basis
This environmental product declaration is
developed in accordance with the require-
ments of EN 15804+A2.
Comparability
Environmental product declarations for con-
struction products may not be comparable
unless they comply with the requirements
of EN 15804. EPD data may not be com-
parable unless all datasets used are devel-
oped in accordance with EN 15804 and the
background systems are based on the same
database.
Application
The intended application of the environmen-
tal product declaration is to communicate
scientifically based environmental informa-
tion about the product to/from professional
stakeholders to assess the environmental im-
pacts of buildings.
EPD Type
Type
Selection
Cradle-to-gate
Cradle-to-gate with options
Cradle-to-grave

System Boundaries (1 = included; 0 = module not declared (MND); 2 = module not relevant (MNR))
Product
Construction Process
Use
End-of-Life
Outside System Boundaries
A1 A2 A3 A4
A5
B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 C1 C2 C3 C4
D
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
61
==PAGE:71==
Product Information
Product description
The main materials of the product are listed
in the table below. These account for 100%
by weight of the declared product.
Material
Weight % of the
Declared Product
Moraine clay
100
The declared unit is 1 ton wall element.
Service Life (RSL)
The service life is considered to be 100 years
[96].
LCA background
Declared Unit
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD re-
late to the declared unit of 1 ton of a Rammed
Earth Block, as specified in the table below.
The table also provides the average mass per
declared unit and a conversion factor to m2,
assuming a wall thickness of 300 mm.
Name
Value
Unit
Declared Unit
1
ton
Density
2200
kg/m3
Conversion Factor to
1 m2
1,52
-
Functionel unit
Not defined.
PCR
This EPD is developed according to the core
rules for the product category of construc-
tion products in EN 15804 version A2:2019.
Flowdiagram
See Figure 4.10 in Section 4.3.2.
System boundaries
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-grave LCA,
in which 100 weight-% has been accounted
for.
All relevant and significant processes
are included.
Key assumptions for the system boundary
are described for each life cycle stage below.
The Product Stage (A1-A3):
A1 covers the extraction and production of
raw materials.
For the production of an
unfired clay wall, this involves the use of
moraine clay, which is extracted at Nymølle
Stenindustri. The clay is processed on-site
using an extractor, dumper, wheel loaders,
and a powerscreen.
A2 includes the transport of raw materials
to the production sites. Since there are two
production sites, this involves two transport
distances:
• From Nymølle Stenindustri to Produc-
tion Site 1 (Gadstrup).
• From Production Site 1 (Gadstrup) to
Production Site 2 (Odense).
A3 covers the manufacturing of the declared
product at the production sites. The main
processes involved in producing rammed earth
block elements, which are used as wall ele-
ments, include: A wheel loader for mixing
and moisture testing of the soil, a motor-
ized tamper for ramming the soil into block
elements and a manual pallet jack to move
the soil during the production process.
A
10% material waste rate is assumed during
the production of the wall (A1–A3), which
is accounted for in the A5 phase.
LCA results are declared in aggregated form
for the product stage, meaning that the sub-
modules A1, A2, and A3 are presented as a
single module, A1-A3.
Construction Process Stage (A4-A5):
A4 covers the transport of the clay wall blocks
from the production site in Odense to the
building site at Raw Production in Århus.
A5 includes the use of an excavator to lift
the clay wall blocks into place at the wall.
Use Stage (B1-B7):
In practice, and in accordance with the ap-
plied PCR for unfired clay, no replacements
or renovations are expected under normal
usage conditions once the product is installed.
Additionally, there is no energy or water
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
62
==PAGE:72==
consumption associated with the product dur-
ing its use phase.
For maintenance, silicate paint will be ap-
plied 3 times within 50 years. Furthermore,
it is conservatively assumed that 2% of the
wall will require repair every 50 years. The
repairs will use the same clay mixture as
in the A1–A3 module, manually compacted
into place. The handling of any waste gen-
erated during this process is accounted for
in module C3.
As a result, there are no environmental im-
pacts associated with modules B1, B4, B5,
B6, and B7.
End of Life (C1-C4):
In this LCA, the end-of-life stage is modeled
to include demolition, transport to waste
treatment, and waste treatment.
Since specific data for the scenario is not yet
available, ”dummy waste” has been assumed
as the waste treatment to create the most
realistic representation, where there are no
positive or negative contributions to envi-
ronmental impacts.
C1 includes the demolition of the wall. At
the end of its life, the wall will be demolished
using an excavator.
C2 includes the transport of the wall ele-
ments to waste treatment. In this LCA, a
transport distance of 3.3 km is assumed be-
tween C1 and C3. This distance represents
the nearest waste treatment facility to the
Raw Production in Århus.
C3 includes waste treatment modeled as ”dummy
waste.
Phases C4 and D are not relevant.
A sensitivity analysis of the end-of-life phase
is provided, considering different scenarios
for phase C3, C4 and D.
LCA results
The results from the SimaPro analysis are limited, as certain fields marked with x indicate
that it was not possible to obtain values for these parameters.
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter Unit
A1-
A3
A4
A5
B2
B3
C1
C2
C3
GWP-total
[kg
CO2
eq.]
66,5808
23,6427
0,17077
8,1312
1,2418
0,17077
0,53808
0,00E+00
GWP-
fossil
[kg
CO2
eq.]
64,8364
23,6117
0,17029
8,0794
1,23971
0,17029
0,53737
0,00E+00
GWP-
biogenic
[kg
CO2
eq.]
1,66531
0,02152
0,00043
0,04483
0,00161
0,00043
0,00049
0,00E+00
GWP-
luluc
[kg
CO2
eq.]
0,07906
0,00944
5,6E-
05
0,00693
0,00048
5,6E-
05
0,00021
0,00E+00
ODP
[kg
CFC11
eq.]
1,3E-
05
5,5E-
06
2,9E-
07
1E-06
6,1E-
07
2,9E-
07
1,2E-
07
0,00E+00
AP
[mol
H+
eq.]
0,25485
0,06709
0,00209
0,08963
0,00571
0,00209
0,00153
0,00E+00
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
63
==PAGE:73==
EP-
freshwater
[kg
PO4
eq.]
0,02709
0,00155
1,4E-
05
0,00254
8,9E-
05
1,4E-
05
3,5E-
05
0,00E+00
EP-marine
[kg N
eq.]
0,0508
0,01363
0,00026
0,00803
0,00094
0,00026
0,00031
0,00E+00
EP-
terrestrial
[mol
N eq.]
0,55729
0,14854
0,00284
0,10126
0,01024
0,00284
0,00338
0,00E+00
POCP
[kg
NM
VOC
eq.]
0,16724
0,0571
0,00117
0,02671
0,00405
0,00117
0,0013
0,00E+00
ADP-mm*
[kg
Sb
eq.]
0,00055
8,4E-
05
2,3E-
07
0,00021
4,01E-
06
2,3E-
07
1,9E-
06
0,00E+00
ADP-fos*
[MJ]
1277,2
357,998
17,6225
108,439
39,6577
17,6225
8,14754
0,00E+00
WDP*
[m3]
7,8678
1,08977
0,00275
5,38075
0,06823
0,00275
0,0248
0,00E+00
Caption
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warm-
ing Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic;
GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change;
ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; EP-freshwater = Eutrophi-
cation – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine;
EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone
formation; ADPm = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf
= Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use.
Disclaimer
* The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the
uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with
the indicator.
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter Unit
A1-
A3
A4
A5
B2
B3
C1
C2
C3
PM
[Di-
sease
inci-
dence]
3,3E-
06
1,9E-
06
1,1E-
08
5,63E-
07
9,44E-
08
1,1E-
08
4,3E-
08
0,00E+00
IRP**
[kBq
U235
eq.]
11,6288
1,84459
0,079
0,65386
0,18167
0,079
0,04198
0,00E+00
ETP-fw*
[CTUe] 1308,96
280,991
9,32126
312,87
24,7801
9,32126
6,39498
0,00E+00
HTP-c*
[CTUh] 3,1E-
08
9E-09
7,6E-
11
1,4E-
08
4,8E-
10
7,6E-
11
2,1E-
10
0,00E+00
HTP-nc*
[CTUh] 9,1E-
07
2,8E-
07
2,1E-
09
2,1E-
07
1,5E-
08
2,1E-
09
6,5E-
09
0,00E+00
SQP*
[CTUh] x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Caption
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health;
ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer ef-
fects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality
(dimensionless).
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
64
==PAGE:74==
Disclaimer
*The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the
uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with
the indicator.
**This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose
ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle.
It does not
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor
due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing
radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is
also not measured by this indicator.
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter Unit
A1-
A3
A4
A5
B2
B3
C1
C2
C3
PERE
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
PERM
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
PERT
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
PENRE
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
PENRM
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
PENRT
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
SM
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
RSF
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
NRSF
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
FW
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Caption
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy
resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy
resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary
energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding
non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use
of non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT =
Total use of non-renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary
material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of nonrenew-
able secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water.
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter Unit
A1-
A3
A4
A5
B2
B3
C1
C2
C3
HWD
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
NHVD
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
RWD
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
CRU
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
MFR
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
MER
[kg]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
EEE
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
EET
[MJ]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
65
==PAGE:75==
Caption
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed;
RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR
= Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE =
Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy.
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PRODUKT PER 1 ton
Parameter
Unit
At
the
factory
gate
Biogenic carbon content in product
kg C
x
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging
kg C
x
Additional information
Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity analysis was conducted to evaluate how variations in recycling and disposal
rates during the product’s end-of-life (EoL) stage affect environmental impacts.
The
analysis is based on a baseline scenario where 100% of the materials are treated as dummy
waste and compared with four alternative scenarios:
• 50% recycling and 50% disposal,
• 80% recycling and 20% disposal,
• 90% recycling and 10% disposal,
• 100% recycling.
The sensitivity values are based on formula 4.27. The calculations can be found in Ap-
pendix B.3.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
66
==PAGE:76==
Table 5.18: Sensitivity Analysis Results - Normalized Sensitivity Coeﬀicient. Red values
shows high sensitivity and yellow indicates medium sensitivity.
Impact Category
50%
recy-
cling
and
50% disposal
80%
recy-
cling
and
20% disposal
90%
recy-
cling
and
10% disposal
100% recycle
GWP-total
10,92
2
0,32
-0,75
GWP-fossil
10,88
1,97
0,32
-0,76
GWP-bio
14,5
2,88
0,72
-0,53
GWP-luluc
93,75
22,69
9,53
-0,79
ODP
5,57
0,64
-0,27
-0,299
AP
18,12
3,78
1,12
-0,42
EP-fw
15,58
3,14
0,84
-0,72
EP-mar
41,75
9,69
3,75
-0,54
EP-ter
41,67
9,67
3,74
-0,54
POCP
30,1
6,77
2,45
-0,53
ADP-mm
9,89
1,72
0,21
-0,89
ADP-fos
6,49
0,87
-0,17
-0,32
WDP
246,9
60,97
26,54
-0,9
Table 5.18 presents the sensitivity analysis results for various recycling and disposal scenar-
ios for the EPD. The findings reveal generally very high sensitivity values across multiple
environmental impact categories, which is noteworthy.
The baseline environmental impacts for this product are very low due to minimal diesel
consumption during wall demolition in C1, the short distance to waste treatment, and a
C3 value of 0 based on dummy waste data. Small changes in EoL scenarios result in pro-
portionally large sensitivity coeﬀicients, making the results more extreme and potentially
leading to a skewed or exaggerated perception of sensitivity. Consequently, these results
should be interpreted with caution.
The scenario involving 50% recycling and 50% disposal exhibits the highest environmen-
tal burdens across all impact categories, with particularly significant values in GWP-luluc
(93,75), WDP (246,9), EP-mar (41,75) and EP-ter (41,67). These results underscore the
substantial environmental costs associated with a high disposal rate, especially for cate-
gories like GWP-luluc and WDP, which are heavily influenced by resource demands and
potential land-use changes during the disposal process. This aligns with known environ-
mental impacts of inert waste treatment.
As recycling rates increase, the environmental impacts decrease. In the 80% recycling
and 20% disposal scenario, impacts are substantially reduced, with GWP-luluc dropping
to 22,69 and WDP to 60,97. Further improvements are evident in the 90% recycling and
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
67
==PAGE:77==
10% disposal scenario, where GWP-luluc decreases to 9,53 and WDP to 26,54, highlighting
the significant benefits of minimizing disposal.
The 100% recycling scenario demonstrates the lowest sensitivity across all categories, with
negative values, indicating environmental benefits compared to baseline scenarios.
A simplified overview is provided in Appendix A.4, Figure A.12, where the average nor-
malized sensitivity coeﬀicients are plotted in a bar chart. The chart visually illustrates
the increase in sensitivity for scenarios with higher disposal rate.
The generally high sensitivity values across all scenarios emphasize the pivotal role of
EoL waste management for the unfired clay wall. The substantial differences between
disposal-heavy and recycling-heavy scenarios reflect the environmental significance of these
decisions. This underscores the importance of maximizing recycling rates to reduce global
warming potential, water depletion, and other environmental burdens, as evidenced by the
100% recycling scenario’s clear advantages.
Technical information on scenarios
Transport to the building site (A4)
Name
Value
Unit
Fuel
Diesel
-
Mode of transport
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32
metric ton, euro6 RER|market
-
Transport distance
145
km
Gross mass transported per
declared unit
1
ton
Installation of the product (A5)
Scenario information
Value
Unit
Waste material
100
kg
Reference service life
RSL information
Unit
Reference service Life
100
Declared product properties
Technical specifications and
guidance can be obtained from
direct contact to the Clay
Alliance.
Design application parameters
Assumed quality of work
Outdoor environment
Indoor environment
Usage conditions
Maintenance
Use (B1-B7)
Scenario information
Value
Unit
B1 - Use
Carbonation
0
kg CO2 eq.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
68
==PAGE:78==
*No significant CO2 absorption is assumed for the use phase (B1) of the unfired clay.
End of life (C1-C4)
Scenario information
Value
Unit
B1 - Use
Collected for dummy waste
1000
kg
Assumptions for scenario development
Assumed dismantled using an
excavator.
Re-use, recovery, and recycling potential (D)
N.A.
Indoor air
The EPD does not give information on re-
lease of dangerous substances to indoor air
because the horizontal standards on the rel-
evant measurements are not available. Read
more in EN15804+A2 chapter 7.4.1.
Soil and water
The EPD does not give information on re-
lease of dangerous substances to soil and
water because the horizontal standards on
the relevant measurements are not available.
Read more in EN15804+A2 chapter 7.4.2.
References
EN 15804
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product
declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products”
ISO 14025
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmen-
tal declarations – Principles and procedures”
ISO 14040
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Princi-
ples and framework”
ISO 14044
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Require-
ments and guidelines
5.4
Comparing the results of the EPDs
The results of the two EPDs are compared in this Section using visual graphs. The focus
is on the results for ”environmental effects” for each EPD.
In this comparison, results are presented using 1 ton as the functional unit. Although
comparing results based on m2 is often standard practice, both wall types share the same
thickness, ensuring that the comparison remains unaffected by dimensional variations.
Furthermore, the density difference between the materials is only 0.6 kN/m3—a minor
variation within the expected range of production inconsistencies, which has negligible im-
pact on the comparison. Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that in other contexts,
density differences can have a significant effect and should be carefully evaluated.
The results of the two EPDs will first be analyzed.
In Figure 5.3, the contribution of each life cycle phase to the various environmental impacts
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
69
==PAGE:79==
is shown as a percentage for 1 ton of the CEBW.
Figure 5.3: Results for the percentage share of the life cycle phases in the various environ-
mental impacts.
The stacked bar chart for 1 ton of CEBW (Figure 5.3) demonstrates the dominance of
A1-A3 on the impact categories, with significantly smaller contributions from subsequent
phases like A5 and C1. This finding underscores the importance of focusing on material
sourcing, production, and transportation to reduce the environmental impact.
A closer examination of the single scores for the A1-A3 phase (see Appendix A.4, Figure
A.13) reveals that electricity for compressing the elements, diesel consumption, and lime
production are the primary contributors to the environmental footprint.
The A1-A3 phases play a significant role in overall consumption across several environmen-
tal indicators, particularly within the Climate Change - Biogenic and Water Use impact
categories. The Climate Change - Biogenic impact is largely influenced by biomass energy
use in lime production [116], while Water Use is primarily driven by electricity generation
and lime production [117].
As lime production stands out as a significant contributor, it raises the question of whether
the inclusion of lime is strictly necessary.
Previous analyses showed that the moraine
clay used in the wall construction fell within the optimal particle size distribution for
compressed earth but outside the Atterberg limits defined by H. Houben and H. Guillaud.
As a result, quicklime was recommended as a binder to stabilize the soil.
However, an alternative approach could involve sourcing clay from a different location
(off-site) that falls within the recommended properties, potentially eliminating the need
for lime altogether.
Currently, lime is transported all the way from France, significantly adding to the en-
vironmental burden due to long-distance transport. Using clay soil that does not need
quicklime could dramatically reduce the environmental impact of the A1-A3 phase. How-
ever, this solution would require truck transport for the off-site clay soil, which would also
contribute to the overall impact. Despite this trade-off, such a change could still represent
a better long-term strategy to mitigate environmental burdens.
It should also be noted that machinery used in clay soil processing remains a significant
factor in the environmental impact.
Reducing these impacts is inherently challenging
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
70
==PAGE:80==
due to the energy-intensive nature of the operations. While improving energy eﬀiciency
or transitioning to renewable energy sources could mitigate some of the impacts, these
measures might not fully address the issue.
Additionally, the transport phase in C2, which involves a truck transport distance of 10,8
km to the waste treatment facility, also shows a notable impact.
This highlights the
substantial contribution of transport to the environmental impact categories, emphasizing
the importance of logistical strategies.
The results for 1 ton of REBW is shown in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Results for the percentage share of the life cycle phases in the various environ-
mental impacts.
The results for the REBW clearly show that the A1-A3 phases has a significant impact
on the environmental categories. However, as illustrated in Figure 5.4, the B2 phase also
stands out, particularly in categories such as Water use and Resource use (minerals and
metals). This high impact is primarily attributed to the frequent use of silicate paint in
the B2 phase, which is applied three times within the 50-year reference period. Silicate
paint production is resource-intensive, especially in terms of water consumption and min-
eral extraction, which explains its prominent contribution in these categories [118]. This
emphasizes the importance of maintenance requirements as a key driver of environmental
impact for the REBW.
When comparing single scores for silicate paint (A.4, Figure A.14) and quicklime (A.4,
Figure A.13), the results reveal that silicate paint’s production and extraction contribution
in the B2 phase for the REBW is significantly larger than lime’s contribution in the A1-
A3 phase for the CEBW. Specifically, the single score for silicate paint in the B2 phase
is approximately 1,08 mPt, while lime production in the A1-A3 phase contributes only
0,164 mPt. This indicates that silicate paint’s environmental impact is approximately 6,6
times greater than lime’s. Lime’s ability to eliminate maintenance requirements makes
the CEBW a much more environmentally friendly choice over the long term.
The A1-A3 phase encompasses processes such as material extraction, transportation, and
production. A closer analysis of the single scores for the A1-A3 phase (Appendix A.4,
Figure A.14) reveals that electricity consumption for the motorized tamper and transport
contribute significantly to the overall environmental footprint. Furthermore the dieselco-
sumption and the use of big bags (polypropylene granulate) also contributes to the A1-A3
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
71
==PAGE:81==
phase.
Currently, the clay undergoes multiple transportation steps, moving from the extraction
site to the first production facility and then to a second production site. This repeated
transportation significantly increases the environmental impact of the A1-A3 phases. Ad-
ditionally, constructing the wall at a separate location from the production sites further
amplifies the environmental burden in A4, as shown in Figure 5.4, where the A4 phase
is notably impacted due to 145 km of truck transport. To mitigate these impacts, future
strategies could focus on consolidating production processes at a single location, thereby
reducing transportation distances and the associated emissions.
This approach would
streamline the supply chain, minimize the environmental footprint, and eliminate the
need for using big bags for material handling.
The electricity for the motorized tamper was also a notable contributor. This process is
energy-intensive and accounts for a significant proportion of the total environmental im-
pact in the A1-A3 phase. Reducing electricity consumption or transitioning to renewable
energy sources could help mitigate this impact.
After observing that the A1-A3 phases are the most significant contributors to environ-
mental impacts in both EPDs, which also is the phase relying on real data from the
production, these phases are compared. As the construction industry imposes require-
ments on the amount of CO2 a building over 1000 m2 is allowed to emit [63], the climate
change environmental impact is compared for the two EPDs.
Figure 5.5: Comparing climate change for the A1-A3 phases of the two EPDs.
The graph compares the climate change impact (measured in kg CO2e) for the A1-A3
phases of the two walls: REBW and CEBW. The results reveal that the REBW has a
significantly higher climate change impact across all subcategories, primarily due to its
more resource-intensive construction techniques and machinery.
The REBW uses a motorized tamper, which consumes significantly more electricity than
the soil compactor used for the CEBW. The motorized tamper requires 102,3 kWh elec-
tricity per ton, while the soil compacter uses 5 kWh electricity per ton. This substantial
difference heavily impacts the Climate Change - Fossil category, contributing significantly
to the overall climate change footprint. Additionally, the REBW uses big plastic bags for
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
72
==PAGE:82==
transporting the clay, which adds to the overall environmental burden. The clay is trans-
ported from an off-site location to two separate production facilities, further increasing
emissions due to logistics.
In contrast, the CEBW relies on a simpler soil compactor and uses machinery during pro-
duction that has a smaller environmental footprint. Diesel consumption from machinery
in the CEBW amounts to 0,155 mPt, whereas for the REBW, it reaches 0,7 mPt. This
means that diesel-powered machinery for the REBW has approximately 4,5 times higher
emissions than those for the CEBW.
However, the CEBW incorporates quicklime as a stabilizing agent, which is transported
from France, contributing to its overall emissions. Despite this, its total climate change
impact remains significantly lower than that of the REBW.
The significant differences in emissions are further illustrated in the single score results
for the A1-A3 phases (see Appendix A.4 Figures A.13 and A.14). The REBW shows a
higher contribution from electricity and transport, while the CEBW benefits from lower
diesel consumption and simpler production techniques, offsetting its emissions from lime
transportation.
While the REBW offers excellent structural properties through its advanced techniques,
its reliance on energy-intensive processes and complex logistics results in a higher environ-
mental footprint. The CEBW, on the other hand, achieves a more sustainable balance
with reduced energy consumption and emissions.
In the future, optimizations for the REBW could focus on reducing its reliance on machin-
ery, consolidating production sites to minimize transport distances, and exploring alterna-
tive transport methods to further lower its impact. Meanwhile, the CEBW’s reliance on
quicklime could also be revisited to improve its environmental performance. While quick-
lime significantly enhances the wall’s durability and maintenance, alternative solutions
could be explored to replace the maintenance methods investigated in this study. Addi-
tionally, it may be found that maintenance is not necessary at all for indoor applications,
which could further reduce the environmental impact.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
73
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This chapter will discuss the results in relation to load-bearing capacity and the uncertain-
ties associated with the development of the EPDs. Finally, standards will be discussed.
6.1
Assessment of load-bearing capacity
The load-bearing capacity of Compressed Earth Block Wall (CEBW) and Rammed Earth
Block Wall (REBW) presents several interesting points, particularly when considering
their differing approaches to construction.
6.1.1
Differences in assumptions and measurements
Both wall systems assume a compressive strength of 3 MPa. For CEBW, the compressive
strength of 3 MPa is based on actual measurements, providing a degree of confidence in
its structural capacity. However, the use of quicklime as a stabilizer is expected to further
increase the compressive strength over time. This additional strength has not yet been
quantified, raising the question of whether the current calculations underestimate CEBW’s
true potential. Further testing is needed to determine how much the lime contributes to
strength improvements, potentially positioning CEBW as the stronger solution.
In contrast, REBW assumes a compressive strength of 3 MPa based on theoretical recom-
mendations for unfired clay. These standards provide a useful baseline but remain untested
for this specific wall, introducing some uncertainty. Variation in the material’s mechanical
properties and moisture content can lead to deviations from the assumed strength. While
this assumption is reasonable for initial screening, it underscores the need for validation
through direct measurements.
For safety purposes, tensile strength is not included in the load-bearing capacity calcu-
lations for either wall. The tensile strength of unfired clay is poorly documented, and
tests have shown relatively low values that can vary depending on construction methods
and soil type. By excluding tensile strength, the analysis focuses solely on the material’s
strongest property: its compressive strength. This approach is reasonable in the context
of initial evaluations.
6.1.2
Compression methods
A significant factor influencing the strength of unfired clay is the compaction technique and
the force applied during compaction. Various techniques can be employed, as described
in Section 2.1.2. The compressive strength of rammed earth has been reported to range
between 0.5 and 4 MPa in various studies [119]. In a study on the compressive strength
of compressed earth blocks (CEBs), all blocks were produced using a manual press and
demonstrated compressive strengths in the range of 2–3 MPa [120].
Achieving higher
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
74
==PAGE:84==
compressive strengths for CEBs typically requires the use of a hydraulic press, which
is often prohibitively expensive [121].
This highlights how compaction techniques and
equipment significantly influence the resulting mechanical properties of unfired clay.
Bulk density is a key parameter directly affected by the compaction method and signifi-
cantly influences the compressive strength of unfired clay. Increased compaction reduces
the porosity of the material, leading to higher bulk density, which is associated with
greater load-bearing capacity.
Studies have shown a strong correlation between bulk
density and compressive strength, with denser materials typically exhibiting superior me-
chanical performance. For example, compressed earth blocks compacted using a hydraulic
press achieve not only higher bulk density but also compressive strengths exceeding those
of manually pressed blocks [121]. Conversely, insuﬀicient compaction can result in lower
bulk density, reducing the structural integrity of both CEB and rammed earth construc-
tions.
Traditionally, rammed earth techniques involve compacting the entire wall on-site to create
a monolithic structure. However, in this study, rammed earth block walls (REBW) were
constructed using a block-based approach, aligning them more closely with compressed
earth block walls (CEBW).
The differences in techniques yield varying compressive strength values for unfired clay.
However, the level of compressive strength achieved depends on how aggressively the tech-
nique is applied, allowing for variations even within the same technique. These variations
also depend on specific details of the production process, such as the moisture content
during compaction and the thoroughness of material mixing [39].
It is also important to note that the strength of both rammed earth and CEB decreases
significantly when the material is exposed to moisture. To mitigate this, additives such
as quicklime can be used to improve water resistance and enhance mechanical properties
[122]. In this study, where clay walls are analyzed as potential inner walls for a typical
Danish single-family house, moisture exposure is not expected to be a significant issue,
except in areas like bathrooms.
A challenge when evaluating compaction techniques is the lack of standardized methods
for measuring the compressive strength of compressed earth blocks, which is also an issue
for rammed earth. Strength testing for quality control of compressed earth blocks has
frequently adopted procedures originally designed for fired clay and concrete block units
[123]. However, the appropriateness of these methods has not been thoroughly validated
through scientific research. As CEB has different material properties, these standardized
procedures may not necessarily be appropriate.
Earlier studies have found that com-
pressive strength increases with greater compaction effort (density) and cement content,
but decreases with higher moisture content and clay content (in cement-stabilized blocks)
[121]. For the CEB wall analysed in this study the inclusion of quicklime will increase
the strength. Highlighting the different material properties in compacted and compressed
earth soil.
According to the article ”Compressive strength testing of compressed earth blocks” [121],
it is diﬀicult to establish a uniform method for strength testing, as various factors such as
moisture content, and the test procedure used can significantly affect the results. Unlike
other masonry units, there is limited consensus on the appropriate test procedures for
compressed earth blocks. For instance, should the blocks be tested in wet or dry conditions?
This highlights the need for further research and the development of standards to ensure
comparable and reliable measurements across different methods and clay soil compositions
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
75
==PAGE:85==
[121].
Historically, rammed earth has been used to construct buildings up to six stories high,
showcasing its remarkable load-bearing capacity and durability [11]. In contrast, CEB
walls have yet to be applied to multi-story construction on the same scale. It has been
used for up to 2 stories [124]. However, based on the analysis in this study, both wall
types demonstrated suﬀicient load-bearing capacity for use as inner walls in a typical
Danish single-family house. Further testing would be required to assess their performance
in multi-story applications.
Both techniques face a significant challenge in the lack of standards for unfired clay. As
noted in the theoretical chapter, there are currently no standards for calculating the load-
bearing capacity of unfired clay in a Danish context, forcing this study to adapt to masonry
norms (Eurocode 6).
6.2
Uncertainties in the development of EPDs
EPDs are developed following the process outlined in Figure 2.11 in Section 2.5.
As
mentioned in Section 4.2, the EPDs developed in this study have not undergone third-
party verification. Consequently, the development of these EPDs only progresses to step
4 in Figure 2.11. Step 4 involving transfer LCA to EPD format will not be discussed here.
In step 1, the product for which the EPD is to be created is selected. Here, two wall cases
were chosen as the products for the EPDs.
In step 2, the Product Category Rules (PCR) were selected as the foundation for ensuring
consistency and comparability in the assessment.
Updates to the EPD standard, EN
15804+A2, which outlines the core PCR framework, have introduced stricter requirements.
These updates mandate the inclusion of additional life cycle phases, extending beyond
the production phase (A1–A3) required under the earlier EN 15804+A1 standard (see
Section 2.5). Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) remains a complex process that requires precise
data collection, modeling of environmental impacts, and ongoing updates to standards
to reflect new knowledge and technological advancements. The continuous revisions to
standards like EN 15804 highlight the effort to make assessments more comprehensive
and reliable, but they also increase the demands on manufacturers and researchers. As
a result, developing EPDs requires advanced expertise and the adoption of sophisticated
tools and methodologies.
A report by BUILD from 2021 highlighted that only 9% of
Danish EPDs currently cover all life cycle stages (A–D), while 20% are limited to the
production phase (A1–A3) [125]. With the implementation of the updated standard, future
analyses are expected to present revised figures, reflecting an increase in the number of
EPDs covering more life cycle stages.
This progress would help reduce uncertainty in
sustainability assessments and support more informed decision-making.
The EPDs in
this study adhered to the EN 15804+A2 standard as the PCR, which required a broader
dataset to account for additional life cycle stages compared to the earlier standard. This
ensured alignment with the latest requirements and provided a more detailed and accurate
representation of environmental impacts.
In step 3, the LCA is conducted in accordance with the chosen PCR. Here, the data is
gathered, and the environmental impacts are calculated using LCA software. The article
”Challenges in life cycle assessment implementation for construction environmental product
declaration development: A mixed approach and global perspective” [76] notes that the most
significant challenge in creating an EPD arises during this step. The article presents a
literature review identifying thirty-two challenges associated with LCA implementation
for EPD development. This Section will discuss some of these challenges as they relate to
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
76
==PAGE:86==
the development of the two EPDs in this study.
6.2.1
Problems with data availability and quality for LCA
Collecting data for Life Cycle Assessments is inherently complex, as it requires detailed
information across all stages of a product’s lifecycle, including raw material extraction, pro-
duction, transportation, use, and EoL phases [126]. A survey identified significant gaps in
data availability and assessment guidelines, particularly in the use and EoL phases, which
were highlighted as critical areas lacking suﬀicient information [126]. The lack of robust
data in these phases has often led to reliance on diverse sources and assumptions, thereby
increasing the uncertainty of LCA outcomes. Additionally, the data-intensive nature of
LCA emphasizes the need for high-quality data, as it directly impacts the reliability of
EPDs, which are widely used for sustainable decision-making [76]. These gaps directly im-
pacted the development of the two EPDs for unfired clay walls in this project, introducing
several challenges and uncertainties.
One significant challenge was the lack of precise data regarding machine usage during the
production phase. For some machines, manufacturers were unable to provide accurate
energy consumption figures, relying instead on estimates. This variability introduced con-
siderable uncertainty, which significantly influenced the reliability of the environmental
results. Furthermore, data collection for the Use, Demolition, and EoL phases proved dif-
ficult, as data from implemented unfired clay walls used as inner walls were not accessible.
The lack of real-world data necessitated generalized assumptions, further contributing to
uncertainty in the assessments. These challenges underscore the critical need for more
precise and verifiable data to enhance the accuracy and reliability of the LCA results.
A proposed solution to reduce maintenance requirements was the incorporation of 2%
quicklime into the clay walls. If effective, this could eliminate the need for silicate paint,
which has an environmental impact 6,6 times greater than the extraction and production
of quicklime. However, uncertainties remain regarding the use phase of the walls. Ad-
ditionally, silicate paint was not available as a predefined process in SimaPro and was
instead modeled through a combination of its individual components, further increasing
the uncertainty of the results. Further testing and practical application are needed to
assess the walls’ real-world performance, emphasizing the influence of data limitations on
use-phase assessments and the assumptions made.
Electricity consumption was another area of concern, particularly with the motorized tam-
per, which consumed significantly more energy than the compactor machine. As the Clay
Alliance continues to refine its production processes, it is unclear whether the motorized
tamper’s energy consumption will remain at the level used in this EPD. Additionally,
there are plans to shut down production site 1, which could lead to further environmental
improvements by reducing transportation distances and eliminating the need for big bags.
However, as these processes are still under development, the final data remains uncertain.
A sensitivity analysis in both EPDs revealed key insights into the influence of data gaps
on the EoL scenarios. It showed that increasing recycling rates (the term recycle was used
for the actual reuse modelling) substantially decreases environmental impacts, highlight-
ing significant differences between disposal-heavy and recycling-heavy scenarios. These
findings emphasize the environmental importance of decisions related to recycling and
disposal, further illustrating the critical role of data availability in shaping reliable and
meaningful LCA outcomes.
Transparency remains a significant challenge for EPDs.
Differences in production pro-
cesses, energy sources, and assumptions about product life cycles contribute to variability,
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
77
==PAGE:87==
making it diﬀicult for decision-makers to fully trust or compare EPD data.
Errors in
EPDs further undermine their credibility; for example, a study [127] found discrepancies
in EPD data as large as a factor of 1000, which were not always corrected after report-
ing. To address these issues, stronger quality assurance measures are essential. However,
these measures may increase costs, particularly for smaller producers, creating additional
barriers to participation.
6.2.2
Generic vs. Specific data
The choice between generic and specific data plays a critical role in LCAs, as it has a
substantial impact on results, including key indicators such as global warming potential
(GWP) [125]. Specific data, obtained directly from real-world measurements or manu-
facturer input, provides greater precision and reliability in environmental assessments.
Generic data, derived from standardized databases, is commonly used when specific data
is unavailable. While this approach ensures feasibility, reliance on generic data, raises
questions about the credibility of such assessments, as generic datasets often represent
industry averages that may not reflect specific processes or regional variations [125].
In EPDs, a hybrid approach is frequently used, combining specific data with generic pro-
cesses to balance precision and practical feasibility.
This approach still qualifies as a
specific EPD. Specific data is often used for critical lifecycle phases, such as production,
while generic data often represents the background processes in the modeling and values
for downstream processes.
In this study, the EPDs for unfired clay walls were developed using precise data values for
A1-A3, A4 and A5 while relying on generic background processes. For example, specific
data on the amount of diesel used for the machinery has been collected. However, when
the specific data is used in calculations in SimaPro, they rely on generic processes for
diesel production. Generalized assumptions and generic processes for the Use phase and
EoL phase was used.
All processes in the EPDs were modeled using Ecoinvent 3 – Allocation, Cut-off by Clas-
sification, with market datasets selected for every process.
Although Ecoinvent 3 is a
robust and widely recognized database, the use of market-based generic processes intro-
duces some uncertainty, as these datasets may not fully align with the specific conditions
of the production and supply chain of the walls. Market processes represent typical dis-
tribution pathways but do not account for specific routes. For example, in this study,
additional specific transport data was added for quicklime to model the environmental
impacts of transporting the product from France to Denmark, ensuring a more precise
and context-specific assessment. In contrast, for silicate paint, additional transport was
deemed unnecessary, as it was considered adequately represented in the typical distribu-
tion pathways within the market process.
The EPDs for the unfired clay walls in this study combined precise data with generic
processes for the production phase and assumptions and generic processes for the use and
EoL phases. This reflects a pragmatic approach to balancing the precision of real data
with the feasibility offered by generic processes.
6.2.3
Lack of transparency in LCA databases and tools
The transparency of LCA databases and tools remains a significant challenge, as regional
variations and differences in modeling assumptions can lead to substantial variability in
results. Many databases, such as Ecoinvent and GaBi, are developed with a specific region
or context in mind, reflecting local manufacturing practices and energy mixes. When these
databases are used outside their intended regions, discrepancies can arise. For example,
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
78
==PAGE:88==
a study by Takano et al. demonstrated variability in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of
up to 33% for whole buildings and 183% for individual materials when comparing results
across five different databases. This highlights the uncertainty inherent in relying on a
single database that may not fully align with the specific context of a study [128].
In this project, only one database—Ecoinvent 3—was used, which made it impossible to
assess the influence of using multiple databases on the results. While Ecoinvent is widely
regarded as a comprehensive and reliable resource, the lack of comparison introduces
potential limitations in understanding how database selection might affect the lifecycle
assessment outcomes.
Another limitation in this study was the need to use the ”reuse” option in SimaPro instead
of ”recycle” due to the tool’s constraints. Reuse and recycling are distinct processes: reuse
involves repurposing materials with minimal processing, while recycling breaks materials
down and reprocesses them, introducing additional environmental impacts. The lack of
transparency in the SimaPro tool made it challenging to accurately model recycling for
the unfired clay walls.
Reuse was used in the sensitivity analysis to explore the potential environmental benefits
of repurposing the walls. This approach highlighted the significant reuse potential of the
unfired clay walls, which could lead to reductions in environmental impacts. However, it
would have been preferable to model the EoL phase as it is expected to occur based on
input from manufacturers, where recycling is likely the more realistic scenario. In the
absence of this capability, a baseline EoL scenario was developed using dummy waste,
which was deemed the most suitable approximation given the constraints.
6.3
Standards
The development of standards and EPDs for unfired clay as a building material is es-
sential to promote this material as a viable and sustainable alternative to conventional
building materials. As highlighted in Section 6.2, there are, however, significant challenges
associated with current EPD systems.
As mentioned in Section 2.2, the EU Construction Products Regulation (Regulation
305/2011) establishes seven essential requirements for construction works, including me-
chanical strength and stability, fire protection, and sustainability. For unfired clay prod-
ucts, the lack of a standardized approach to calculating load-bearing capacity remains a
significant barrier to wider adoption where structural applications are concerned. While
this project has focused on load-bearing capacity and EPDs, there is also a need to de-
velop documentations that address the specific requirements of the EU regulation that are
relevant to unfired clay’s intended applications.
An additional challenge lies in balancing the need for comprehensive and accurate environ-
mental data while simultaneously developing accessible and usable standards for producers
and users. Although unfired clay offers significant sustainability benefits, Environmental
Product Declarations must provide suﬀicient insight into the material’s lifecycle, includ-
ing raw material extraction, production, use, and end-of-life processes. Without this, the
market risks encountering resistance from skeptical stakeholders.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
79
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
This study has explored the potential of unfired clay as an alternative building material,
with focus on two cases of unfired clay walls to investigate the following research questions:
1. What are the advantages and disadvantages of unfired clay as a building material?
2. How can the load-bearing capacities of the two wall cases be calculated?
3. How can an EPD be developed for each wall case?
4. What are the uncertainties in calculating the load-bearing capacity of the two wall
cases?
5. What uncertainties and diﬀiculties are associated with developing an EPD?
Question 1 was addressed through a literature study. The key advantages and disadvan-
tages are summarized in Section 2.6. The advantages highlighted include the material’s
historical use over thousands of years, the variety of techniques and stabilization methods
available, and its versatility. The main disadvantages identified were the lack of standard-
ized guidelines, low tensile strength, and the unique composition of clay, which, combined
with various stabilization methods, necessitates specific testing for each case.
In relation to Question 2, the methodology for evaluating the load-bearing capacity of un-
fired clay walls is grounded in the principles of Eurocode 6, which provides a standardized
framework for masonry structures. The applicability of Eurocode 6 to unfired clay walls
is supported by the similarities in compressive behavior between clay soil and traditional
masonry materials. This approach not only adheres to Eurocode 6 but also incorporates
adaptations to account for the specific characteristics of unfired clay, ensuring a robust
and reliable framework for assessing its load-bearing capacity. The findings demonstrate
that the two cases of unfired clay walls can meet the structural requirements for the inner
leaves of double-leaf walls in a typical single-family house in Denmark, in accordance with
Eurocode 6.
An EPD for each wall case was developed using a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) approach
following EN 15804+A2 to answer question 3. The process included functional unit, sys-
tem boundaries, data collection, impact assessment and assumptions. The EPDs were
developed as a preliminary assessment to estimate the environmental impact of unfired
clay walls and were intended for comparative analysis rather than formal certification.
Question 4 highlights uncertainties in calculating the load-bearing capacity for the two
wall cases, particularly due to assumptions made about the compressive strength of the
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
80
==PAGE:90==
REBW. These assumptions were based on theoretical recommendations for unfired clay, as
opposed to the CEBW, where the strength was determined through actual measurements.
It is worth noting that the measured strength of CEBW potentially will increase over time
due to the application of 2% quicklime. Unfired clay can exhibit a wide range of material
properties—such as variations in moisture content, binder application, technique, and the
intensity with which the technique is applied—thereby the strength of earth constructions
can vary significantly. Furthermore, uncertainties were discussed in relation to the strength
testing method, particularly for the CEB, which is also applicable to rammed earth.
Question 5 was discussed in Section 6.2. Developing EPDs involves significant uncertain-
ties, particularly in data availability and quality, with gaps in Use and EoL phases leading
to reliance on assumptions.
Transparency issues in LCA databases and tools, as well
as the evolving complexity of standards like EN 15804+A2, further complicate the pro-
cess. Addressing these challenges is critical to improving EPD reliability and supporting
sustainable decision-making.
Unfired clay is a promising building material, but further research and standardization
are necessary.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
81
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 8
Future
To advance the adoption and reliability of unfired clay as a building material, several areas
require further exploration and development:
1. Standardization and Verification:
• Develop comprehensive standards for evaluating the structural performance of
unfired clay, ensuring that the requirements outlined in the EU Construction
Products Regulation relevant to unfired clay´s intended applications are sup-
ported by documented evidence.
• Ensure third-party verification of the EPDs and ensure that all impact cate-
gories required by EN 15804+A2 are included.
2. Data Collection and Refinement:
• Conduct extensive testing to generate accurate and specific data for unfired
clay production processes.
• Expand datasets to include more studies of Use and EoL phases of unfired clay
walls.
3. Comparative Studies:
• Compare the environmental and structural performance of unfired clay with
alternative sustainable materials to strengthen the case for its adoption.
4. Innovation in Construction Techniques:
• Explore innovative construction methods, such as automated production and
advanced compaction techniques, to improve eﬀiciency and scalability.
By addressing these areas, future research can solidify the role of unfired clay as a viable
and sustainable alternative in the construction industry, fostering a transition toward more
climate-friendly and circular building practices.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
82
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
[1]
The Paris Agreement | United Nations. https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/pa
ris-agreement. (Accessed on 09/12/2024).
[2]
2050 long-term strategy - European Commission. https://climate.ec.europa.eu/e
u-action/climate-strategies-targets/2050-long-term-strategy_en. (Accessed on
09/12/2024).
[3]
Circular economy action plan - European Commission. https://environment.ec.eu
ropa.eu/strategy/circular-economy-action-plan_en. (Accessed on 10/23/2024).
[4]
UNEP IEA. “Global status report for buildings and construction 2019”. In: UN
Enviroment programme 224 (2019).
[5]
Eco-friendly unfired clay materials modified by natural polysaccharides - ScienceDi-
rect. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0950061823024996.
(Accessed on 10/24/2024).
[6]
lerhuse i Danmark | lex.dk – Den Store Danske. https://denstoredanske.lex.dk/ler
huse_i_Danmark. (Accessed on 09/17/2024).
[7]
De brændte sten af ler – Danmarks Teknologihistorie. https://www.danmarkstekn
ologihistorie.dk/de-braendte-sten-af-ler/. (Accessed on 10/24/2024).
[8]
Pisé – stampet lerjord | lex.dk – Den Store Danske. https://denstoredanske.lex.dk
/Pis%C3%A9_-_stampet_lerjord. (Accessed on 09/19/2024).
[9]
Earth to Earth: Patterns of Environmental Decay Affecting Modern Pis&eacute;
Walls. https://www.mdpi.com/2075-5309/12/6/748. (Accessed on 10/24/2024).
[10]
Rammed Earth: A Timeless Construction Material Shaping Modern Architecture -
RTF | Rethinking The Future. https://www.re-thinkingthefuture.com/articles/ra
mmed-earth/. (Accessed on 10/24/2024).
[11]
B. V. Venkatarama Reddy. Compressed Earth Block & Rammed Earth Structures.
Ed. by T. G. Sitharam. Springer Transactions in Civil and Environmental Engi-
neering. Singapore: Springer, 2022. isbn: 978-981-16-8879-6. doi: 10.1007/978-981
-16-8880-2.
[12]
Rapport. https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/2023/10/978-87-7038-566-4
.pdf. (Accessed on 10/28/2024).
[13]
Står foran gennembruddet: Kalk skal gøre lerbyggeri til en god forretning - Dagens
Byggeri. https://dagensbyggeri.dk/materialer/star-foran-gennembruddet-kalk-ska
l-gore-lerbyggeri-til-en-god-forretning/. (Accessed on 09/19/2024).
[14]
Fugtbufferkapaciteten af  ubrændt lermurværk - ScienceDirect. https://www.scienc
edirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132314003199. (Accessed on 10/24/2024).
[15]
Dansk Standard: Har du styr på standarderne i BR18? https://bygge-anlaegsav
isen.dk/dansk-standard--har-du-styr-paa-standarderne-i-br18-. (Accessed on
11/04/2024).
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
83
==PAGE:93==
[16]
What is clay? A new definition of “clay” based on plasticity and its impact on the
most widespread soil classification systems - ScienceDirect. https://www.sciencedi
rect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0169131718301698. (Accessed on 10/30/2024).
[17]
Lermineral - Kaolin, Serpentine, Gruppe | Britannica. https://www.britannica.co
m/science/clay-mineral/Kaolin-serpentine-group. (Accessed on 10/30/2024).
[18]
XRD-based quantitative analysis of clay minerals using reference intensity ratios,
mineral intensity factors, Rietveld, and full pattern summation methods: A critical
review - ScienceDirect. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S24519
12X17300703. (Accessed on 10/30/2024).
[19]
W. W. Perkins. Ceramic Glossary. Westerville, OH: The American Ceramic Society,
1995.
[20]
Clays and Clay Minerals in the Construction Industry. https://www.mdpi.com/2
075-163X/12/3/301. (Accessed on 10/30/2024).
[21]
Moræneler - Geocenter Danmark. https://www.geocenter.dk/projekter/2017-2/m
oraeneler/. (Accessed on 10/31/2024).
[22]
AN6-2017.indd. https://aktuelnaturvidenskab.dk/fileadmin/Aktuel_Naturvidens
kab/nr-6/AN6-2017plastler.pdf. (Accessed on 10/31/2024).
[23]
Untitled. [Online; accessed 2024-12-09]. url: https://data.geus.dk/pure-pdf/28464
_GEUS-R_2011_19_opt.pdf.
[24]
H. Houben and H. Guillaud. Earth Construction: A Comprehensive Guide. Practical
Action Publishing, 1994.
[25]
Engineering properties of unfired clay masonry bricks - ScienceDirect. [Online; ac-
cessed 2025-01-23]. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013
795209001197?via%3Dihub.
[26]
Untitled. [Online; accessed 2025-01-23]. url: https://files.bregroup.com/bre-co-uk
-file-library-copy/filelibrary/pdf/projects/low_impact_materials/IP16_11.pdf?.
[27]
Properties of Sustainable Earth Construction Materials: A State-of-the-Art Review.
https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/16/2/670. (Accessed on 10/31/2024).
[28]
Lodewijk Nell. “Unfired Clay Bricks: Structure, Applications, and Developments”.
eng. In: Sustainability Factsheet #06 (). https://www.claybrick.org/factsheets.
[29]
Probabilistic estimation of thermal crack propagation in clays with Gaussian pro-
cesses and random fields - ScienceDirect. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science
/article/pii/S2352380823000230. (Accessed on 11/04/2024).
[30]
Untitled. [Online; accessed 2025-01-23]. url: https://iris.who.int/bitstream/handl
e/10665/164348/9789289041683-eng.pdf?sequence=1.
[31]
A Guide to Rammed Earth Construction - First In Architecture. https://www.firs
tinarchitecture.co.uk/rammed-earth-construction/. (Accessed on 10/30/2024).
[32]
Peter Walker et al. Rammed Earth: Design and Construction Guidelines. Published
by BRE Bookshop in association with the University of Bath. Bracknell, RG12
8DW, UK: BRE Bookshop, 2005.
[33]
glsrammedearth. Exploration Of Rammed Earth Construction Techniques. [Online;
accessed 2025-01-25]. Sept. 2023. url: https://glsrammedearth.com/blog/rammed
-earth-construction-techniques/.
[34]
Effects of Moisture Content on Thermal Properties of Adobe Bricks as a Sustainable
Building Material | American Journal of Applied Sciences | Science Publications.
[Online; accessed 2025-01-20]. url: https://thescipub.com/abstract/ajassp.2020.5
0.55.
[35]
A Comprehensive Review of the Improvement of the Thermal and Mechanical Prop-
erties of Unfired Clay Bricks by Incorporating Waste Materials. https://www.mdp
i.com/2075-5309/13/9/2314. (Accessed on 10/28/2024).
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
84
==PAGE:94==
[36]
Adobe: The Tradition and Techniques of Mud Bricks – Regenerative Skills. [Online;
accessed 2025-01-12]. url: https://regenerativeskills.com/articles-1-2016-5-29-ad
obe-the-tradition-and-techniques-of-mud-bricks/.
[37]
Compressed earth blocks - MecoConcept. [Online; accessed 2024-12-18]. url: https:
//www.mecoconcept.com/en/green-building/compressed-earth-blocks/.
[38]
naturalbuild. Low cost building methods: Compressed Earth Block Technology |
ECO-HOMES + COMMUNITIES. [Online; accessed 2025-01-12]. Oct. 2010. url:
https://ecohomes.blog/2010/10/19/low-cost-building-methods-compressed-earth-
block-technology/.
[39]
Horst Schroeder. Sustainable Building with Earth. Cham, Switzerland: Springer
International Publishing, 2016. isbn: 978-3-319-19490-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-1
9491-2.
[40]
Jord og grus. Jordstabilisering - Vejl. Status: Gældende. Udskriftsdato: 9.4.2022
05:15:28. Dato: 28.1.2022. Responsible group: Jord og grus. Mar. 19, 2018.
[41]
Engineering and mineralogical characteristics of stabilized unfired montmorillonitic
clay bricks. https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S1687404813
00076X ? ref = pdf _ download & fr = RR - 2 & rr = 8edf9b3bb861eccb. (Accessed on
11/04/2024).
[42]
B. Thiagesen. Jordforbedring med kalk. Laboratorierapport 4. Copenhagen, Den-
mark: Statens Vejlaboratorium, Oct. 1971.
[43]
Effect of lime and fly ash on swelling percentage and Atterberg limits of sulfate-
bearing clay - ScienceDirect. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0
16913171630388X. (Accessed on 11/04/2024).
[44]
Effects of partial substitution of lime with ground granulated blast furnace slag
(GGBS) on the strength properties of lime-stabilised sulphate-bearing clay soils -
ScienceDirect. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013795298000
398. (Accessed on 11/04/2024).
[45]
Horst Schroeder. “The New DIN Standards in Earth Building—The Current Situ-
ation in Germany”. eng. In: (2018). doi: 10.17265/1934-7359/2018.02.005.
[46]
Regulation (EU) No 305/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9
March 2011 laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction
products and repealing Council Directive 89/106/EECText with EEA relevance.
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:088:0005:00
43:EN:PDF. (Accessed on 11/04/2024).
[47]
Swedish Institute for Standards, SIS - Swedish Institute for Standards, SIS. https:
//www.sis.se/en/. (Accessed on 11/04/2024).
[48]
Eurocode 6: Design of Masonry Structures - Part 1-1: General Rules for Reinforced
and Unreinforced Masonry Structures. Eurocode standard for design of masonry
structures. Dansk Standard, 2022.
[49]
Bygningsreglementet. Vejledning om certificering af statikere og brandrådgivere.
Tilgængelig fra Bygningsreglementet. July 2022.
[50]
BR18. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske- bestemmelser/16/Krav. (Ac-
cessed on 11/08/2024).
[51]
746 - normer for bygningskonstruktioner. 2. beton- og jernbetonkonstruktioner.pdf.
https://danskbyggeskik.dk/publikationer/746%20-%20normer%20for%20bygnings
konstruktioner.%202.%20beton-%20og%20jernbetonkonstruktioner.pdf. (Accessed
on 11/08/2024).
[52]
BR18. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske- bestemmelser/15/Krav. (Ac-
cessed on 11/08/2024).
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
85
==PAGE:95==
[53]
Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. Dokumentation af bygningsreglementets tekniske
bestemmelser i forbindelse med færdigmelding af byggeriet. Første version, udgivet
18. august 2020. Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. København, Aug. 2020.
[54]
Rasmus B. Obel and Magnus V. Kristensen. Unstabilized rammed earth: Optimiza-
tion of water content and particle size distribution. Bachelor Project. June 2022.
[55]
Per Goltermann. Beregning af Lervægge: Lodrette Bæreevner. Tech. rep. Version
311024. Fokus på beregningsmetoder og sikkerhedsvurdering for lervægge af ubrændt
ler. Inkluderer testmetoder og anvendelse af Rittermetoden. Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet (DTU), 2024.
[56]
Compressed Earth Blocks for Walls and Partitions – Definitions, Specifications,
and Test Methods. Standard for compressed earth blocks used in load-bearing and
non-load-bearing walls. Asociación Española de Normalización (UNE), 2008.
[57]
Bjarne Chr. Jensen. Teknisk Ståbi. Danish. Praxis, Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 2019, 25
udgave, p. 131. isbn: 978-87-571-2990-8.
[58]
Bjarne Chr. Jensen. Betonkonstruktioner efter DS/EN 1992-1-1. 3. udgave. Cited
pages: 24-25. Latvia: Praxis, 2019. isbn: 978-87-571-2944-1.
[59]
Environmental management– Life cycle assessment– Principles and framework. En-
glish. ISO 14040. 2008.
[60]
Environmental management– Life cycle assessment– Requirements and guidelines–
Amendment 2. English. ISO 14044:2006/Amd 2:2020. 2020.
[61]
Sustainability of construction works– Assessment of environmental performance of
buildings– Calculation method. English. EN 15978. 2012.
[62]
Sustainability of construction works– Environmental product declarations– Core
rules for the product category of construction products. English. EN 15804. 2019.
[63]
BR18. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/11/Krav/297_29
8. (Accessed on 10/10/2024).
[64]
Vejledninger til 2023-krav om bygningers klimapåvirkning | Social- og Boligstyrelsen.
https://www.sbst.dk/nyheder/2022/vejledninger-til-2023-krav-om-bygningers-kli
mapaavirkning. (Accessed on 10/10/2024).
[65]
BR18. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/11/BRV/Version-
2-Bygningers-klimap%C3%A5virkning/Kap-1_2. (Accessed on 09/15/2024).
[66]
Maria Balouktsi and Harpa Birgisdottir. Analysis of new modules in connection
with calculation of the climate impact of buildings. English. 2023.
[67]
Nu regnes genbrugte byggematerialer for 0 kg CO2 i bygningers klimaregnskab |
Social- og Boligstyrelsen. https://www.sbst.dk/nyheder/2024/-genbrugte-byggem
aterialer-for-0-kg-co2-i-bygningers-klimaregnskab. (Accessed on 11/07/2024).
[68]
Miljø- og Ligestillingsministeriet. Affaldsbekendtgørelsen. [Online; accessed 2025-01-
23]. url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2021/2512.
[69]
BR18. (Accessed on 11/07/2024). url: https://www.bygningsreglementet.dk/tek
niske-bestemmelser/11/brv/version-2-bygningers-klimapaavirkning/kap-1_1/.
[70]
Hvad er en EPD? https://www.epddanmark.dk/om-epd-er/hvad-er-en-epd/.
(Accessed on 11/04/2024).
[71]
epddanmark_guide4.pdf. https://www.epddanmark.dk/media/nxvppn4v/epddan
mark_guide4.pdf. (Accessed on 11/07/2024).
[72]
Tre vigtige begreber i EPD-udarbejdelsen | Social- og Boligstyrelsen. https://www
.sbst.dk/byggeri/alt-om-epder/artikler/tre-vigtige-begreber-i-epd-udarbejdelsen.
(Accessed on 11/07/2024).
[73]
EN 15804+A2: What the changes mean for EPDs | One Click LCA. https://oneclic
klca.com/en/resources/articles/en-15804-changes-epds. (Accessed on 11/07/2024).
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
86
==PAGE:96==
[74]
Videnspakke: Hvad er en EPD - og hvorfor er det en god idé at have en? | Social-
og Boligstyrelsen. https://www.sbst.dk/byggeri/alt-om-epder/videnspakker-om
-epder/hvad-er-en-epd-og-hvorfor-er-det-en-god-ide-at-have-en. (Accessed on
11/06/2024).
[75]
En enkel guide til EPD’er | One Click LCA. https://oneclicklca.com/da/resources
/articles/guide-to-epds. (Accessed on 11/07/2024).
[76]
Challenges in life cycle assessment implementation for construction environmental
product declaration development: A mixed approach and global perspective - Sci-
enceDirect. [Online; accessed 2025-01-17]. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/sci
ence/article/pii/S2352550924001817.
[77]
Niels Brix. Byggepladsbesøg - Fuldskala test af støjskærme i lerjord. https://w
ww.regionh.dk. Projektleder, Arkitekt | Program for cirkulært byggeri. Region
Hovedstaden, Center for Regional Udvikling, 2023.
[78]
Ida Bertelsen et al. Udvikling og test af støjskærme ved anvendelse af stampet
lerjord – Etape 2. Tech. rep. Report on development and testing of noise barriers
using rammed earth. Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2023.
[79]
Marie Felmer Olsen and Dagmar Tørrild Thorbek. “Effect of moisture content on
the strength and stiffness of lime-stabilised compressed earth”. Project start date:
January 30, 2023. Submission date: June 4, 2023. Bachelor’s Thesis. Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, June 2023.
[80]
Site Visit. Observation during site visit. Site visit conducted on 12th September
2024. Direct observation. Sept. 2024.
[81]
Leralliancen. “Presentation from Clay Symposium”. Presented on November 21,
2024. Nov. 2024.
[82]
Trine Sofie Dusine Schmidt Nielsen. Data received via email. Personal communica-
tion via email. Sept. 2024.
[83]
Jesper Frank Axelsen. Data received via email. Personal communication via email.
Covers data of the clay soil from Nymølle Hedehusene gravel pit. Dec. 2024.
[84]
Partnerskab: ’Leralliancen’ | Juul Frost Arkitekter. [Online; accessed 2024-12-17].
url: https://juulfrost.dk/da/project/partnerskab-leralliancen.
[85]
Johan Klejs. Data received via email. Personal communication via phone. Personal
communication. Covers data for machinery usage in the production process of the
Rammed Earth Block Wall and process information. Nov. 2024.
[86]
Mads F. Bornæs Bjørn M. Rothmann. “Comparative environmental analysis of
building typologies”. In: (2023).
[87]
DS EN 1991-1-3 DK NA:2015 V2. https://www.ds.dk/media/ezfhvyv5/ds-en-199
1-1-3-dk-na-2024-rev-2023-12-19-final-version.pdf?srsltid=AfmBOopwVlvF_fJe
TQ6Wqil_5gS-HNpRUo3Ron54Fj1YKIuyrSHobVch. (Accessed on 09/26/2024).
[88]
Traditional Plain Tile - Russell Roof Tiles. https://www.russellrooftiles.com/prod
uct/regency-range/traditional-plain-tile/. (Accessed on 09/26/2024).
[89]
Forza Doors | Timber Density Chart. https://www.forza-doors.com/performance-
guides/general-guidance/timber-density-chart.aspx. (Accessed on 09/26/2024).
[90]
Knauf Insulation. Environmental Product Declaration: Glass Mineral Wool Insu-
lation. https : / / www . environdec . com. In accordance with ISO 14025 and EN
15804:2012+A1:2013. EPD Registration Number: S-P-01752. Sweden: EPD Inter-
national AB, 2019. url: https://www.environdec.com (visited on 12/22/2024).
[91]
danosa.com/global/product/danopol-250-barrera-de-vapor/?pdf&download. https://
www.danosa.com/global/product/danopol-250-barrera-de-vapor/?pdf&download.
(Accessed on 09/26/2024).
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
87
==PAGE:97==
[92]
4 types of Wooden Formwork Panel widely used in the construction - Tadex Ply %.
https://tadexply.com/blog/4-types-of-wooden-formwork-panel-widely-used-in-th
e-construction/. (Accessed on 09/26/2024).
[93]
Sammenligningsskema-2020.pdf. https://globaltimber.dk/wp-content/uploads/20
20/08/Sammenligningsskema-2020.pdf. (Accessed on 09/26/2024).
[94]
What is the density of Gyproc plasterboards? | British Gypsum. https://www.briti
sh-gypsum.com/technical-support/self-help-tools/faqs/what-density-gyproc-plast
erboards. (Accessed on 09/26/2024).
[95]
European Committee for Standardization (CEN). EN 15804+A2: Sustainability of
construction works — Environmental product declarations — Core rules for the
product category of construction products. Available at: https:/ / www. cen. eu/.
Brussels, Belgium, 2019.
[96]
Microsoft PowerPoint - CASS_webinar_earthenConstruction_2021_09_20.pptx.
https : / / climateadaptation . ucdavis . edu / sites / g / files / dgvnsk8401 / files / inlin
e- files/CASS_webinar_earthenConstruction_2021_09_20.pdf. (Accessed on
11/20/2024).
[97]
Attributional Life Cycle Assessment - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics. [Online;
accessed 2025-01-26]. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/agricultural-an
d-biological-sciences/attributional-life-cycle-assessment.
[98]
SimaPro | LCA software for informed changemakers. https://simapro.com/. (Ac-
cessed on 11/14/2024).
[99]
admin. LCA Software review of SimaPro. [Online; accessed 2025-01-26]. Feb. 2024.
url: https://lca-software.org/simapro/.
[100]
PRé Sustainability. SimaPro – Life Cycle Assessment Software. Accessed: 30 Jan.
2024. 2024. url: https://pre-sustainability.com/solutions/simapro/.
[101]
ecoinvent - Data with purpose. [Online; accessed 2025-01-26]. url: https://ecoinve
nt.org/.
[102]
Diesel Fuel - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics. https://www.sciencedirect.com
/topics/engineering/diesel-fuel. (Accessed on 12/08/2024).
[103]
Ida Bertelsen and Per Goltermann. “Holdbarhed og levetid af ekstruderede blokke
i Støjmursprojektet”. In: DTU Sustain Report (2024).
[104]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 14025: Environmental labels
and declarations — Type III environmental declarations — Principles and proce-
dures. Available at: https://www.iso.org/standard/38131.html. Geneva, Switzer-
land, 2006.
[105]
Olivier Jolliet. Life Cycle Assessment: Interpretation Principles. Lecture slides from
the course 12772: Life Cycle Assessment of Products and Systems. Accessed: Jan-
uary 2025. 2022.
[106]
Morten Wold. Data received via email. Personal communication via email. Covers
data for machinery usage in the production process of the Compressed Earth Block
Wall. Oct. 2024.
[107]
Top Quicklime suppliers (+Website of companies). https://arijco.com/quicklime-s
uppliers/. (Accessed on 10/10/2024).
[108]
Mahan Maleki. Data received via email. Personal communication via email. Covers
data for machinery usage in the production process of the Compressed Earth Block
Wall. Oct. 2024.
[109]
Hans Pauli Joensen. Data received via email. Personal communication via email.
Covers data for machinery usage in the production process of the Rammed Earth
Block Wall. Nov. 2024.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
88
==PAGE:98==
[110]
050media BigBagStore.com. Big Bag 1500 kg - BigBagStore.com. [Online; accessed
2024-12-19]. url: https://www.bigbagstore.com/big-bag-1500-kg-prod/.
[111]
Mads Udsen Grevit. Data received via email. Personal communication via email.
Covers data for machinery usage in the production process of the Rammed Earth
Block Wall. Nov. 2024.
[112]
Untitled. [Online; accessed 2025-01-07]. url: https://www.bygningsbevaring.dk/u
ploads/files/anvisninger/7-ANVISN_Silikatmaling.pdf?.
[113]
Knowledge: What is silicate paint? | MissPompadour. [Online; accessed 2025-01-28].
url: https://www.misspompadour.com/r/silicate-paint/.
[114]
Untitled. [Online; accessed 2025-01-28]. url: https://shop.mega.de/medias/52453
95-original.pdf?context=bWFzdGVyfHBkZi1kYXRhc2hlZXRzfDQ5MzgzNXxhcH
BsaWNhdGlvbi9wZGZ8cGRmLWRhdGFzaGVldHMvaGRlL2hiMS85MzU5NDI3N
DY5MzQyLnBkZnw4YmE4NTk3MmQ5NDI5OTgxZjYwM2I3YTMzYTNkN2Q1N
jBhYWM5MWVkZTg5M2ZjMWJkMjE0MmY1NDZhNWQ4ZDgw.
[115]
Bleo Collective. Paint Calculator I Blēo. [Online; accessed 2025-01-28]. Dec. 2023.
url: https://bleocollective.com/blogs/guidance/paint-calculator?srsltid=Afm
BOorctQvAlhUBnCT8QQST9f1zSWOH2itSqt1oTww_0LZbL-K1o51w.
[116]
Biomass-based carbon capture and utilization in kraft pulp mills | Mitigation and
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change. [Online; accessed 2025-01-30]. Jan. 2019.
url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11027-018-9833-9.
[117]
Water use of electricity technologies: A global meta-analysis - ScienceDirect. [Online;
accessed 2025-01-30]. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S13
64032119305994.
[118]
Silicate Paint - Endeavour Centre. [Online; accessed 2025-01-30]. url: https://en
deavourcentre.org/resources-for-building-green/free-encyclopedia-of-sustainable-b
uilding-materials/finishes/silicate-paint/.
[119]
Structural Capacity of Rammed Earth in Compression | Request PDF. [Online;
accessed 2025-01-21]. July 2011. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication
/245308516_Structural_Capacity_of_Rammed_Earth_in_Compression.
[120]
Compressive strength testing of compressed earth blocks - ScienceDirect. [Online;
accessed 2025-01-21]. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S09
50061805002631.
[121]
Jean-Claude Morel and Pete Walker. “Compressive strength testing of compressed
earth blocks”. In: Construction and Building Materials 21.2 (Feb. 2007), pp. 303–
309. doi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2005.08.021. url: https://www.researchgate.net
/publication/222914532.
[122]
Enhancing water resistance of earthen buildings with quicklime and oil - ScienceDi-
rect. [Online; accessed 2025-01-21]. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/a
rticle/pii/S0959652616317723.
[123]
Pete Walker. “Specifications for stabilised pressed earth blocks”. In: Masonry In-
ternational 10.1 (1996), pp. 1–6.
[124]
FAQ – Earth Block International. [Online; accessed 2025-01-21]. url: https://eart
hblockinternational.com/faq/.
[125]
Nye referenceværdier til LCA på bygninger. Opdaterede værdier fra rapporten
Klimapåvirkning fra 60 bygninger. https://vbn.aau.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/4
56659034/BUILD_Rapport_2021_25.pdf. (Accessed on 02/01/2025).
[126]
Experiences with LCA in the Nordic Building Industry – Challenges, Needs and
Solutions. Accessed on 19/01/2025. 2016. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/sci
ence/article/pii/S1876610216307457.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
89
==PAGE:99==
[127]
Embodied carbon of concrete in buildings, Part 1: analysis of published EPD. http
s://journal-buildingscities.org/articles/10.5334/bc.59/. (Accessed on 02/01/2025).
[128]
LCA databases focused on construction materials: A review - ScienceDirect. [Online;
accessed 2025-01-19]. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S13
64032115016263.
[129]
Henry Purwanti and Titik Penta Arintingsih. “Palm Kernel Shell as an Alternative
Aggregate on High Performance Concrete”. In: Journal of Science Innovare 01.02
(Sept. 2018), pp. 68–75. doi: 10.22159/jasi.2018.v1i2.1. url: https://journaloaij.o
rg/index.php/jasi.
[130]
Claudio D’Ambra, Gian Piero Lignola, and Andrea Prota. “Multi-Scale Analysis
of In-plane Behaviour of Tuff Masonry”. In: The Open Construction and Building
Technology Journal 10 (May 2016), pp. 141–153. doi: 10.2174/18748368016100101
41. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/303477170.
[131]
Nye BR18 klimakrav - se hvad de betyder for dig. https://nyheder.velfac.dk/erhve
rv/br18-klimakrav. (Accessed on 11/06/2024).
[132]
Ida Maria Gieysztor Bertelsen. “Presentation from Clay Symposium”. Presented on
November 21, 2024. Nov. 2024.
[133]
Ernst Jan de Place Hansen and Kurt Kielsgard Hansen. Lerstensprodukters fugt-
tekniske og styrkemæssige egenskaber. Tech. rep. 71. Institut for Bærende Konstruk-
tioner og Materialer, Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Oct. 2000.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
90
==PAGE:100==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Theory
A.1.1
Rammed earth
Description of Rammed Earth Technique by Sven Risom (1829).
Figure A.1: Description from Sven Risom of rammed earth page 1 of 4.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
91
==PAGE:101==
Figure A.2: Description from Sven Risom of rammed earth page 2 of 4.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
92
==PAGE:102==
Figure A.3: Description from Sven Risom of rammed earth page 3 of 4.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
93
==PAGE:103==
Figure A.4: Description from Sven Risom of rammed earth page 4 of 4.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
94
==PAGE:104==
A.1.2
Stress-strain curve for concrete, lightweight concrete, and ma-
sonry
Figure A.5: Stress-strain curve for concrete and lightweight concrete [129].
Figure A.6: Stress-strain curve for masonry [130].
A.1.3
Target values for GWP in Denmark
Life Cycle Assessment requirements, BR18
2023
12 kg CO2e/m2/year (only for new constructions above 1000 m2)
2025
10.5 kg CO2e/m2/year
2027
9 kg CO2e/m2/year
2029
7.5 kg CO2e/m2/year
Table A.1: The Danish Building Regulation sets limit values that must be met, though
only the 2025 threshold is currently mandatory, with other future thresholds still under
proposal [131].
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
95
==PAGE:105==
A.2
Case
A.2.1
Curves for compressive strength for compressed earth
Figure A.7: Compressive strength of samples from Landerslev that are lime-stabilized
[132].
Figure A.8: Strength vs. moisture content for bricks made of pressed moraine clay [133].
A.3
Method
A.3.1
Construction of the roof in the single-family house
The roof of the single-family house is constructed as shown in Figure A.9 by SF. The
thickness can be seen in Figure A.10. The figures are from the bachelor thesis ”Comparative
Environmental Analysis of Building Typologies” [86].
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
96
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.9: Construction and volumes of the roof.
Figure A.10: Thickness of some of the roof constructions.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
97
==PAGE:107==
A.4
Results
A.4.1
Average Sensitivy coeﬀicents for scenarios at EoL for CEBW
Figure A.11: Average Sensitivity coeﬀicents, where dark red line indicates large sensitivity
and mashed dark red line indicates medium sensitivity.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
98
==PAGE:108==
A.4.2
Average Sensitivy coeﬀicents for scenarios at EoL for REBW
Figure A.12: Average Sensitivity coeﬀicents, where dark red line indicates large sensitivity
and mashed dark red line indicates medium sensitivity.
A.4.3
Single scores of A1-A3 phase for CEBW
Single scores represent the total environmental impact for each process or product phase,
allowing a comparison of which parts of the system contribute the most to the overall
impact.
Note: The Y-axis is measured in µPt (mikro-point).
Figure A.13: Results from Simapro of A1-A3.
A.4.4
Single scores of A1-A3 phase for REBW
Note: The Y-axis is measured in mPt (milli-point).
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
99
==PAGE:109==
Figure A.14: Results from Simapro of A1-A3.
A.4.5
Single scores of B2 phase for REBW
Note: The Y-axis is measured in mPt (milli-point).
Figure A.15: Results from Simapro of B2.
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
100
==PAGE:110==
Appendix B
Appendix - attachments
B.1
Calculation of the load-bearing capacities.mw
B.2
Data.xlsx
B.3
Simapro results and sensitivity analysis.xlsx
LCA Analyses of Clay Structures
==PAGE:111==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
