==PAGE:1==
Mapping value chain collaboration opportuni-
ties for circular economy transition
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The transition to a circular economy requires companies to adopt new collaborative ap-
proaches across the value chain, involving multiple partners in order to implement circular
strategies. By partnering with actors who possess complementary skills, companies can
overcome barriers that would be difficult to solve individually. However, such collabo-
rations require time and resources, especially in the initial stages, directly affecting the
net-value creation of the collaboration itself. This thesis investigates how collaboration
can be supported to enable more circular economy transitions. This is done by identifying
224 barriers, influencing such collaborations, and developing an initial support to map op-
portunities and guide companies in establishing and managing collaborative processes.
Through a systematic literature review and empirical data collection, this thesis found that
data transparency, trust, commitment, and alignment of goals are main areas of focus.
The thesis proposes an initial support concept, offering companies a structured approach
to mapping collaboration goals, identifying opportunities, and enhancing transparency
between partners. The work concludes by identifying areas for further research, includ-
ing broader empirical studies across industries, cross-sector workshops, and longitudinal
studies to track the evolution of circular collaborations over time.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
iii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Josephine Friis Jensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Josephine Friis Jensen
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:6==
Preface
English title
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
Danish title
Kortlægning af muligheder for værdikædesamarbejde i den cirkulære omstilling
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for DTU Construct, Depart-
ment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, under
supervision of Professor Tim C. McAloone and researcher Giovana M. Gomes.
Master thesis in M.Sc. Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
30 ECTS Points
Wordcount:
Pages:
Appendices:
Josephine Friis Jensen
s173868
Stud. M.Sc. Eng
Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Signature
Date
ii
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
28/02/2025
==PAGE:7==
Learning Objectives
Analysis
• Investigate, describe, and present different barriers, risk and failures that may occur
when implementing value chain collaborations for circular economy transition.
• Investigate, describe, and present different collaboration dynamics for CE.
• Define relevant knowledge within the field of CE in relation to linear economy and
sustainability.
Design & Evaluation
• Develop an overview of Opportunities for value chain collaboration for CE transition.
• Develop an initial support that guides the establishment of collaboration in CE tran-
sition.
• Identify future research areas enabling collaboration for CE transition.
Overall Project
• Plan, structure, and execute a long-term project in collaboration with multiple stake-
holders and make requested deliveries.
• Collect and structure information and data from a problem context, using contex-
tual interviews and other appropriate methods, and extract and utilize the relevant
components for an analysis.
• Communicating the analyzed literature in a critical and objective manner.
• Communicate the results of the review to an audience of peers.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
iii
==PAGE:8==
Acknowledgement
Josephine Friis Jensen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
I would like to express my gratitude to the people who contributed in the development of
this thesis.
Warm and heartfelt thanks to my supervisor, Tim McAloone, Professor, Ph.D., and Gio-
vana Monteiro Gomes, Ph.D., for their time and valuable input throughout this project. I
especially appreciate your positive attitude and motivating guidance.
Additionally, I would like to thank all the people and companies who dedicated their time to
participate in interviews and workshops, sharing their valuable insights and contributions.
Finally, a huge thank you to family and friends for being supportive and understanding
throughout the process.
iv
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:9==
Project structure
This project is classified as the Design Research Methodology, design study type 1 [1],
which includes a review-based Research Clarification and a comprehensive Descriptive
Study I involving literature reviews and empirical studies with a qualitative approach. This
process has involved iterations with each cycle giving increasing understanding and rise
to further investigation.
The project has been structured into 6 phases divided by milestones and outcomes.
Figure 1: Project structure. Illustration of the different phases with description for each
phase, and their outcome.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
v
==PAGE:10==
vi
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:11==
Chapters
1
Chapter: Introduction
2
1.1 Introduction and Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2 Research gaps and questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Chapter: Research Methodology
5
2.1 Design Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2 Methodological framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Research methods and approach for Research Clarification . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Research methods and approach for RQ1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Research methods and approach for RQ2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.4
AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Research Clarification
9
3.1 Introductory Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2 Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2.1
Introductory Question 1:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2.2
Introductory Question 2:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3 IQ 1: Overview of circular economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3.1
Circular economy concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3.2
Circular economy and sustainable development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3.3
Circular economy frameworks and approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3.4
IQ 1: Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4 IQ 2: Collaboration for circular economy transition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4.1
Circular economy transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4.2
IQ 2: Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.5 Research gaps and questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Results of DS-1
25
4.1 Phase 2: Identification of support and mechanisms for collaboration for CE
transition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.1.1
Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.1.2
Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2 Supporting element characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2.1
Analysis and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.2.2
Scoping SLR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.3 Phase 3: Support elements for collaboration for CE transition . . . . . . . . . 43
4.3.1
Workshop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.3.2
Elements highlighted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.4 Phase 4: Identification of barriers for collaboration for CE transition . . . . . . 51
4.4.1
Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.4.2
Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
vii
==PAGE:12==
4.4.3
Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.4.4
Scoping SLR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.5 Phase 5: Systematization of barriers for collaboration for CE transition . . . . 60
4.5.1
Determine shared characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4.5.2
Clustering of barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.5.3
Interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.5.4
Barrier theme cards
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
4.5.5
Barrier connection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
5
Discussion
85
5.1 Phase 6: Mapping opportunities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
5.1.1
From barrier to opportunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
5.1.2
Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
5.2 The role of the orchestrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
5.3 Types and dynamics of collaboration for circular economy transition
. . . . . 90
5.4 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
5.5 Reflection and further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
5.5.1
Further work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
5.5.2
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
6
Met Learning Objectives
93
A
Digital appendix NEEDS to be updated!
101
B
Initial Study
103
C Phase 2: Paper selection
110
D Phase 2: Support Comparison
112
E
Phase 4: Paper selection
116
F
Phase 4: Sheet A
120
G Phase 4: Sheet B
123
H Phase 4: Excluded barriers
143
I
Phase 5: Barrier Matrix
145
J
Phase 5: Barriers Interview
150
K
Phase 5: Interview Guide
153
L
Interview Company A
155
M Interview Company B
160
N Interview Company C1
164
O Interview Company C2
169
P
Phase 5: Interview quotes
174
viii
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:13==
Q Phase 5: Barrier theme cards
175
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
ix
==PAGE:14==
x
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:15==
Thesis structure
This thesis consists of five chapters. An overview of the project’s six phases is described
below and additionally illustrated in Figure 1.
Chapter 1
Describes the results from Phase 1 by setting the scene for the project, and introducing
the motivation and context of the research. The chapter ends with identifying the research
gaps and corresponding research questions
Chapter 2
Describes the research methodology and structure used, within this thesis, to answer the
research questions. Finally, it presents the specific methods applied to each research
question.
Chapter 3
Research Clarification: Describes the full work of Phase 1, where research gaps are
identified and research questions are developed. This has been developed through an
exploratory literature review of the area and an earlier investigation.
Chapter 4
Presents the development of the material made for Descriptive Study 1. Describing the
planning, execution, and analysis in Phases 2 & 3:Identification and comparison of support
and mechanisms and Phase 4 & 5: Identification and systematization of opportunities.
.
Chapter 5
Discusses the main findings from the descriptive study as a part of Phase 6, with a focus
on suggesting an initial concept for support to collaboration for circular economy tran-
sition and ending with a focus on the research questions. Discusses the contributions,
implications, and limitations of the process. Followed by the conclusion on the findings,
reflections, and recommendations for future research.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
xi
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2: Thesis structure: Illustration of what each chapter consists of.
xii
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:17==
Reading Guide
Nomenclature
Actor
An actor is a term covering any stakeholder, partner, company, NGO in this thesis.
Barrier
A barrier can be a challenge, constraint, obstacle, issue, problem, or other similar requiring
resources to overcome. In this thesis a barrier doesn’t have to be the stopping factor, it
can also be overcome; however, it is a resource-expensive obstacle or a bottleneck.
Capabilities
With capabilities, there is a focus on the specific resources of abilities in an organization,
e.g. knowledge, skills, power, or experience. Capabilities can, in collaboration between
two actors, be developed together, such as risk management, communication, data col-
lection, etc.
Collaboration
Collaboration is an overarching term that encompasses partnership, cooperation, coordi-
nation, or co-creation. In this thesis, collaboration is defined as a situation in which two or
more actors use resources for development, innovation, or operations, without expecting
direct payment for the resource, with the goal of achieving a higher net value creation
than if they were working independently.
Ecosystem
An ecosystem refers to a multi-actor system with a shared goal, such as a specific sector
or circular economy business. The participants can include industry players, municipali-
ties, universities, NGOs, and consumers.
Opportunity
When you know how to overcome a barrier, it becomes an opportunity. Understanding a
barrier includes recognizing challenges, obstacles, issues, or a resource-intensive task.
Resource
In this thesis, the term ”resource” encompasses all the value that a company can con-
tribute in a collaboration, and is an expense for the company itself. This value can include
knowledge, time, skills, experience, power, money, energy, or materials.
Support
A ”support” is an overall term in this thesis that describes what could be a guide, frame-
work, or tool.
Transition
In this thesis, transition refers to the process of shifting from a linear economy to a circular
economy, requiring changes in business models, value creation, and collaboration across
the value chain.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
1
==PAGE:18==
1
Chapter: Introduction
1.1
Introduction and Motivation
There is an increased focus on including social and environmental benefits to companies’
bottom line, leading to interest in circular economy implementation. The transition from
linear to circular economy requires new capabilities, resources, and collaboration between
companies for the implementation of circular strategies.
By partnering with actors who possess complementary skills, companies can overcome
barriers that would be difficult to solve individually. However, such collaborations require
time and resources, especially in the initial stages, directly affecting the net-value creation
of the collaboration itself.
Despite the recognized importance of collaboration for circular transitions, there is a lack
of generic frameworks to guide the implementation of CE principles in a way that is useful
for all partners in the value chain. The current approaches often leave the responsibility
for driving collaboration with the OEM or product manufacturer in the value chain.
This thesis is motivated by the need for a shared support that all partners can use to
compare their positions, identify gaps, and clarify needs when collaborating for circular
economy transition. By following the same process, partners can quickly identify deal
breakers and critical issues that must be resolved upfront — saving time, minimizing re-
sources, and increase the net-value of circular collaborations.
The goal is to develop an overview of opportunities which can support structured and
transparent collaborations but also establishes a more shared process across the value
chain, enabling smoother transitions and faster alignment.
1.2
Research gaps and questions
From the Research Clarification described in chapter 3. There are found three research
gaps:
• Lack of common language about collaboration in CE transition.
• Lack of general approach which is not developed or focused on a specific industry
or case.
• Lack of focus on other than OEM or Brand owners as enabler of collaboration in CE
transition.
Based on the three identified research gaps this thesis will work with the following research
gap.
Research Gap: Lack of generic understanding for the implementation of collabora-
tion for CE transition
Based on the findings during the Research Clarifications research gaps, the first research
question (RQ1) was formulated. For a further understanding of the generic challenges
2
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:19==
leading to opportunities, the second research question (RQ2) was developed.
Research Question 1 aims to investigate the existing structure, and dynamics supported
in the literature for collaboration for CE transition in the technical cycle.
Research Question 2 aims to investigate the existing challenges in the literature for col-
laboration for CE transition in the technical cycle.
RQ 1: How is the literature supporting collaboration for CE transition?
• RQ 1.1: Which focus areas are found in the literature for supporting collabo-
ration for CE transition?
• RQ 1.2: Which dynamics are described in the literature supporting collabora-
tion for CE transition?
RQ 2: What are the existing challenges for collaboration for CE transition docu-
mented in the literature?
• RQ 2.1: In which focus areas are the challenges for collaboration for CE
transition?
• RQ 2.2: In which stages of the collaboration are the challenges for collabora-
tion for CE transition?
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
3
==PAGE:20==
4
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:21==
2
Chapter: Research Methodology
2.1
Design Research Methodology
This thesis uses the Design Research Methodology, type 1, design research, [1], illus-
trated in Figure 2.1. It aims to explore the state of the industry and literature, identify
gaps, and develop a further understanding for future development. The chosen research
design has a review-based Research Clarification followed by a comprehensive Descrip-
tive Study I. This thesis aims to better understand the existing situation and to identify the
factors most relevant to addressing the improvement of collaboration in the CE transition.
This thesis uses a qualitative approach to investigate the situation. Methods used are
interviews, observations, and written documents.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of DRM framework with the type 1 design research highlighted [1]
Research clarification
In this stage, an exploratory literature review is done to investigate the research area and
determine the aim, focus, and scope of the thesis.
A previous investigation of the field supports the exploratory literature review. The previ-
ous investigation was a preparation for this thesis and includes an ecosystem map of a
company whose current practices are an example of one of the gaps in the literature. By
identifying the extent of what remains to be solved and existing solutions of collaboration
for CE transition in both academia and current practice.
Descriptive study I
This thesis has a comprehensive DS-1 involving a literature review as well as an empirical
study to fill the lack of understanding on opportunities for collaboration in CE transition.
A comprehensive DS-I is used with the aim of gaining a more general understanding
of opportunities for collaboration in CE transition, which was identified as lacking in the
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
5
==PAGE:22==
Research Clarification. As a comprehensive study, this study includes: Systematic Liter-
ature Reviews, Semi-structured Interviews, and a Workshop, to understand the criteria of
success and opportunities for enabling collaboration for CE transition.
This process involves iterations where the understanding increases and gives rise to fur-
ther empirical studies. In each cycle of these steps, different methods are used, however,
this thesis is written as a linear process to minimize complexity for the reader.
The basis for this stage is the research questions developed from Section 3.5, because of
the relatively unexplored area of design. The research questions and the methodologies
used are illustrated on Figure 2.2 in Section 2.2 and further explained in ??.
2.2
Methodological framework
Figure 2.2: Methodological framework: Illustration of research questions, stages, and
results.
6
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:23==
2.2.1
Research methods and approach for Research Clarification
The research clarifications are developed through a preliminary study investigating col-
laboration in the literature and industry, exemplified by mapping the ecosystem of a value
chain company. Together with an exploratory literature review, the research questions,
gaps, and plan for the empirical study have been derived.
2.2.2
Research methods and approach for RQ1
Research Question 1 is addressed through a systematic literature review, ensuring that
the relevant academic literature is collected and analyzed in a structured and transparent
manner. The review process follows the methodology outlined by Biolchini et al. (2005)[2],
which includes the development of a review protocol, systematic search and selection,
data extraction, and synthesis of findings. The aim is to identify support and mechanisms
for collaboration for circular economy transition.
Followed by empirical data collected through an industry workshop, where participants
shared their needs and experience in solving them to understand expectations for support
that could facilitate their circular economy transition. The workshop gives a more detailed
understanding of the support needs for circular economy transition.
2.2.3
Research methods and approach for RQ2
Research Question 2 is addressed through a systematic literature review, ensuring that
the relevant academic literature is collected and analyzed in a structured and transparent
manner. The review process follows the methodology outlined by Biolchini et al. (2005)[2],
which includes the development of a review protocol, systematic search and selection,
data extraction, and synthesis of findings. The purpose of the review is to identify barriers
that hinder collaboration for the circular economy transition.
To complement and expand the findings from the literature, empirical data were collected
through three individual semi-structured interviews with industry representatives. These
interviews provided additional insights into practical barriers experienced by companies
and allowed for a more nuanced understanding of the challenges encountered in real-
world collaborative settings.
2.2.4
AI
AI has been used through the writing phase to ensure clear communication in the form of
grammar and sentence structure.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
7
==PAGE:24==
8
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:25==
3
Research Clarification
3.1
Introductory Questions
To guide the Research Clarification phase, two areas of introductory questions are pro-
posed to understand the context and define the frame of the research and the main needs
in terms of collaboration in the Circular Economy transition.
The goal is to create a foundation of terminology, and strategies to understand where this
thesis can help narrow the gaps.
The first area is to develop an understanding and knowledge within the field of Circular
Economy in relation to linear economy and sustainability. This helps scope the landscape
that this thesis will be looking into collaboration for the Circular Economy transition.
The second area is an initial understanding of what role collaboration has in Circular Econ-
omy transition, and what terminology, and dynamics are described.
This chapter ends with the identification of research gaps and the development of research
questions.
Introductory Question 1:
How is CE conceptually described and how does it relate to sustainable develop-
ment?
Introductory Question 2:
How is collaboration described in relation to the Circular
Economy transitiont?
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
9
==PAGE:26==
3.2
Method
3.2.1
Introductory Question 1:
To develop an understanding within the field of Circular Economy, an exploratory literature
review is done, with some additional gray literature.
To investigate and answer this question, the circular economy is searched as Title-ABS-
Key in the database Scopus, giving a result of 38.732 articles. Here the articles are
sorted after the amount of citations, assuming the higher citation, the higher validation,
relevance, and acceptance in the field. The following top 7 articles were chosen:
Exported 14 October 2024.
• [3] The Circular Economy – A new sustainability paradigm?, 4212 citations
• [4]Conceptualizing the circular economy: An analysis of 114 definitions, 4074 cita-
tions
• [5]A review on circular economy: The expected transition to a balanced interplay of
environmental and economic systems, 3605 citations
• [6]Circular Economy: The Concept and its Limitations, 2167 citations
• [7] Product design and business model strategies for a circular economy, 2102 ci-
tations
• [8] Towards circular economy implementation: A comprehensive review in context
of manufacturing industry, 1707 citations
• [9] Product services for a resource-efficient and circular economy - A review, 1324
citations
3.2.2
Introductory Question 2:
To answer this question, results from a preliminary study consisting of two systematic lit-
erature reviews, together with empirical data, were collected through a workshop with a
case company working with CE as its main business model.
The literature was collected through two search strings in Scopus, one with a focus on
sustainability and one on circular economy. All abstracts were scanned to filter out irrel-
evant publications.
The workshop aims to map the ecosystem of a value recovery company founded on the
principle of circular economy.
A more detailed description of the workshop and the ecosystem map can be found in
the appendix appendix B. While only the results will be described in this research clari-
fication. For this research clarification, a follow-up interview was conducted with one of
the participants from the workshop to collect additional thoughts, reflection, or experience.
As additional literature, ”The SDG Partnership Guidebook” [10] is used.
The book was written in collaboration with The Partnering Initiative (TPI) and The United
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA). TPI is an international
10
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:27==
NGO with a focus on the development of theory and practice of multi-stakeholder col-
laboration, guided by the 2030 Agenda and the 17 Sustainable Development Goals [11].
With its limited scope on multi-stakeholder collaboration, it is mainly used for collection of
terminology, and to understand and navigate in the landscape of terms and structure.
3.3
IQ 1: Overview of circular economy
3.3.1
Circular economy concept
3.3.2
Circular economy and sustainable development
Sustainability gained focus back in 1960, when evidence on global-scale environmental
risk was increasing, e.g., thin ozone, climate change, and biodiversity loss [3]. In 1987 The
Brundtland Commision provided the most commonly accepted definition of sustainability
as “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their own needs” ([3], p. 4.)
In this thesis the therm sustainable development is framed as; A concept describing the
aim of maintaining a balance of environmental, economic and social factors to meet the
needs of the present generation without compromising the future generations [3] [5] [6].
The linear economy is one of the main concerns to global sustainable development with
the flow of material and energy through the system. [6].
Circular economy (CE) is seen as an sustainable development strategy utilizing the ma-
terial and energy disposed in the linear economy in balance with economic and social
development. CE aims to close the open-ended extract-produce-use-dispose structure
from linear economy, by focusing on keeping the product use-value in circulation as long
as possible with the highest possible value and quality [6],[3]. The value of the resource
is highest, where the product keeps its intended function and thereby fully utilize the em-
bedded value [3].
Similar to sustainability is circular economy not solely focusing on economics in develop-
ment [3], but the three objective; the environmental, economic and social objective [6],
[3]. ”Successful circular economy contributes to all the three dimensions of sustainable
development” ([6], p. 3.). If a CE implementation only takes one or two of the three di-
mension of the sustainable development into account it may result in an implementation
that is not sustainable [4].
Booth CE and sustainable development share the global perspective and the relevance
of coordination and value co-creation between multiple actors [3]. According to [3] coop-
eration of different stakeholders is seen a necessity.
Time is also one of the main components of CE supporting the definition: ”To future gen-
eration” in sustainable development. The cycle process inherent in CE does also reflect
its focus on long-term sustainability, with resources and value managed through multiple
life cycles. Thereby making CE as a long-term solution [4].
Investigation done by [3] found that CE can be seen as ”a necessary”, ”one of multiple
necessary” and ”one option among others” for sustainable development depending on the
reference. Figure ?? shows a more detailed description of the different relationship types
mapped by [3], but the argument for the three main categories are:
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
11
==PAGE:28==
• The argument for CE as a necessary for sustainable development are by it being a
precondition for sustainable manufacturing. Considering a circular business mod-
els and supply chains as necessary condition for maintaining an economic growth
sustainable [3].
• The argument for CE as one of multiple necessary are adding that change of lifestyle
is also needed to sustain a long-term sustainable solution.
CE is therefore not
enough on its own [3].
• The argument for CE as the one option among others are that CE is a part of broader
sustainable strategies and an archetype of sustainable business models. Assuming
other business models and strategies also needs to be taken into account. Finding
the best possible to the context [3].
In this thesis Circular economy is seen as a solution for transformation of a system to a
sustainable one, if all commitment are made and the system implements a full transfor-
mation. This is under the assumption that a good design of a CE solution also gives in-
centive and facilitate lifestyle change. Because of its three objective, the long-term focus,
and global perspective, giving it a strong conditional relation to sustainable development.
The the transition an implementation of a CE system may require other solution to back-up
the system or may result in a trade in relation to sustainability, however the design should
be dynamic and circular economy should aim through iterations to be a main solution.
3.3.3
Circular economy frameworks and approaches
The approach to use circular economy as a concept have been illustrated through different
strategies and frameworks from multiple different angels. For further description, compar-
ison and discussion of circular economy for collaboration four frameworks are highlighted.
Each framework has a main focus how to address the value generated through circular
economy.
• The two material loop (biological or technical)
• The shape of the loop (slowing, narrowing, closing)
• The hierarchy of the loop
• The business strategy model CE scanner.
The biological and technical loop
The butterfly diagram focus on the purpose of the resource separating the cycles into bi-
ological and technical cycles, see figure 3.1 [12]. It contains a hierarchy of activities like
the 9R, where the most value is captured in the inner activity. The characterization of the
loops in material circles require a products or parts can be separated. A product consisting
of material from both the technical and biological cycle, needs to be separated to ensure
the materials can enter the right cycle. [7]. The biological and technical loop are also
focusing more on the activities which can be done to enable the cycle depending on the
context and function of the product e.g. ”Product for service” or ”Product of consumption”.
12
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.1: The butterfly diagram with biological and technical cycle [12]
The shape of the loop: Slowing, closing, narrowing
Slowing, closing and narrowing is terminology introduced to describe the resource loops
and categorize design and business model strategies. Authors describe the flow of the
resources through the system[7]:
• Slowing, focus on slowing down the material flow by extending the utilization period.
This could be through design for longevity, introduction of service loops, repair, abil-
ity for upgrade, intensify the use.
• Closing, focus on closing the loop by recirculating material back into the loop. This
could e.g. be reuse, refurbish, remanufacturing, re-purpose, recycling or cascade if
looking into the technical cycle.
• Narrowing, focus on resource efficiency by using less resources for each product.
E.g. reducing resources in the production-process is also narrowing the loop.
Together, these strategies emphasize that a circular economy is not only about closing
the loop but also about slowing and narrowing resource flows, ensuring that materials and
products are used more efficiently and for longer periods [7].
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
13
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.2: Narrowing, slowing and closing the loop illustrated graphically [7]
The hierarchy
Describe how the different circular strategies has an hierarchical order, reflecting the pre-
ferred sequence of actions to maximize value and resource efficiency.
At the top of the hierarchy are strategies such as refuse, rethink, and reduce, which aim to
minimize resource use altogether by designing smarter products, reducing material inputs,
or reconsidering consumption patterns. These strategies are the most resource-efficient,
as they prevent waste from occurring in the first place [6]..
When products already exist, the next preferred strategies involve extending their lifes-
pan through reuse, repair, refurbishment, remanufacturing, or repurposing [6]. These
approaches preserve much of the embedded value — including labor, energy, and ma-
terials — already invested in creating the product. By keeping products and components
in productive use, companies avoid the need for new raw materials and delay the point at
which materials enter waste streams [6]..
At the bottom of the hierarchy are strategies such as recycling and energy recovery. While
recycling allows for material recovery, it destroys the added production value that was built
into the product during manufacturing — such as the design, processing, and assembly
steps [6].
The 9R framework can bee seen on figure 3.3[4]. Showing the increasing preservation or
added value by applying the different development strategies from the bottom to top.
14
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.3: 9R Hierarchy [4]
The CE scanner
Last and not least, there are the circular economy scanner designed to support manu-
facturing companies identify the multiple strategies which can enable circular economy
principle [13]. The tool includes 32 circular strategies all categorized according to specific
business processes, providing insights into how these strategies can be integrated into an
existing company. The possible business model strategies support the circular economy
principle on the the technical circle. [13]. With the 32 circular strategies the tool has the
ability to be a configuration of all possible circular strategies helping navigation for man-
ufacturing companies. It includes the hierarchical structure to of the different strategies
helping business understand the trade-offs and synergies among the different strategies.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
15
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.4: CE scanner from [13]
The business models developed for According to Bocken [7], is a Circular Business mod-
els seen as main driver for innovation in CE by the argument that the Business model
defines the architecture of the business and scalability [7]. It is important to ensure a
good business model because when implemented it can be difficult to change [7].
Because of the size of the change in introducing a CE product, the ”go to market” or ”cap-
turing value” strategies requires development of a business model along side a design
strategies, see figure ?? .
System thinking describes the overlook which is important when developing an new busi-
ness model and design strategies. It should help avoid rebound effects, and wider con-
sequences of adopting the business model on the environmental, economic and social
perspective. [7]. A rebound effect is when the implemented CE strategy does not give
the expected environmental effect, because the consumption practices does not follow
the expected pattern [6]. This could be the saved resources and money generated from
the strategy being used on other consumption practices. Customers could as an exam-
ple spend their cost savings on other ”polluting activities” [7]. An example could be the
car-sharing service, where the consumer were expected to change culture of owning a
car, thereby having fewer cars on the street. A rebound effect for this could be a service
creating a second car for the consumer or for consumers not owning a car it is the easier
way of transport instead of public transportation or bike. Thereby not resulting in the ex-
pected environmental gain.
The dynamic interaction between business models, product design, supply chain and cus-
tomer is essential [8].Production and distribution is no longer enough, the consumption
phase has to be integrated, what may also be one of the main challenges [4].
16
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:33==
Value chain layers With a value chain perspective the circular economy strategies and
the implementation of a closed loop have created new players to the value chain. These
player are supporting the new life cycle of products. It could be companies whose value
proposition is to help slowing the material loop by offering repair, maintenance, upgrade
of the products as ”Maintenance and Repair services”.Or it could be companies closing
the loop by offering remanufacturing, refurbishment, repurpose of the product or recycling
of the material like ”Value recovery”. These are examples of additional layers to the value
chain in the technical cycle, which has been identified by Ready2Loop [14] as illustrated
in fig. 3.5. The areas is under development why other layers could arise however this
thesis are using the defined value chain layers from Ready2Loop [14] when analyzing the
industry.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of value chain based on Ready2Loop.org
3.3.4
IQ 1: Conclusion
Circular economy(CE) is a concept aiming to decouple economic value from material re-
sources, unlike the linear economy, with its the extract-produce-use-dispose depending
on the extraction of new materials [4].
Circular economy is a concept described with various different approaches and focus.
Some papers describes circular economy in relation to sustainable development [3], or
the planetary boundaries [6] with a high focus on the environmental gains. Others focus
more on the economy, possible circular business models(CBM) and their implementation
in the industry [8].[9], [7],[5]. Lastly ones focus on unifying the conceptualizing of circular
economy in the academia and industry, [4].
In this thesis Circular Economy os defined as a concept replacing the open-ended linear
concept by introducing a closed loop of material and energy. This is done with focusing on
keeping the embedded value of the products and energy in circulation as long as possible
with the highest possible value and quality. Thereby introducing a hierarchy of possible
circular solutions [6],[3]. This can be achieved by implementing circular strategies in the
production, distribution, and consumption processes [4]. It operates on the micro, meso,
and macro levels, accomplishing the three bottom lines, environmental, economic, and
social [4]. There will in this thesis only be looked on circular economy from the technical
side of the butterfly diagram [12] and the value chain layers will be following the proposed
from [14] when identifying and structuring companies.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
17
==PAGE:34==
3.4
IQ 2: Collaboration for circular economy transition
3.4.1
Circular economy transition
Collaboration The literature describes collaboration as an enabler for transition to cir-
cular economy. This could be inter-organizational collaboration between a networks of
companies on material and energy utilization or to prolong life cycle of products [6]. It
could be industrial symbiosis(IS) by exchanging byproducts, taking waste output from one
process and use it as feedstock for another process [7] or sharing services like cleaning/-
maintenance [5]. Eco-industrial parks (EIP) is an example of industrial symbiosis used
in a collaborative network of geographic proximity [8]. A Case example on this could be
Kalundborg Eco-Industrial Park, in Denmark. Kalundborg is a bottom-up created park.
Starting with industrial symbiosis created by companies discovering the opportunity of
using each others by-products [5]. Five co-located companies have economic profit from
by-product sharing. In the beginning the reduction of environmental effects was not a
motivation factor and only a later realization. The same has been found in similar cases
where they were unaware of environmental benefit. [5].
Different types of collaboration was found described in the literature and are placed in
table 3.1. These collaboration types are not necessity between two actors but could also
be between a network of actors [6].
There is a tendency for the papers/articles to describe collaboration for implementation of
CE principle by performing a literature study followed by a focus on a specific company
([21], [22]), a case in a company ([15]), or the industry ([23], [16], [17], [20]). Lacking a
more general approach like with the collaboration guide done by the UN [10]. The UN,
and other development actors are trying to build a more systematic engagement with
businesses towards the SDG’s [11], seeing businesses as key development actors. The
SDG Partnership Guidebook [10], introduces the framework ”Partnership Life cycle”, the
key ”Building Blocks” of successful partnerships, and the ”Journey To Action” plan which
will is shortly described in ??. These frameworks focus on enabling and structuring multi-
stakeholder collaboration towards the 17 sustainability goals (SDG) [11]. The motivation
is the partners using the same tool should be able to compare notes, and placement in
the process and identify needs of support. Following the same path should also makes it
possible to quickly identify deal breakers or specific issues that need to be solved [10].
Even though the focus of the industry papers were specific, the same challenges and
barriers seem to show up, especially in the challenge of transformation of the ecosystem
have to happen collectively in the industry [21], [16], [15].
e.g. in the EV battery sector a shift to CBM has implications on the entire electrical and bat-
tery value chain [20]. ”... the importance of multi-actor collaboration and network-centric
CBM innovation within the EV battery ecosystem highlighting the need for an ecosystem-
level perspective in circular economy research” [20], p.16. The government together with
the brand owners are seen as key responsible for steering the innovation ecosystem to
a more sustainable solution [21]. Simultaneously the government is also seen as the en-
couraging factor where the roles of responsibility in the value chain and the sustainable
goal are not clearly defined [21], [22].
This thesis will tackle collaboration as a partnership with the intention of providing re-
sources to each other for transitioning to CE with the aim of co-value creation. The value
18
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:35==
Table 3.1: Different collaboration types
Value chain or supply chain collab-
oration
This are vertical collaboration done in the value
chain or supply chain. This could be to develop a
new circular strategy, product or business model
[15], [16], [17]. Here the actors can have worked
together before making it less complex.
Sector or industry collaboration
This is horizontal collaboration where the sector
or industry goes together to create a solution [17].
Here the actors most likely already are competing
against each other on the market, however want
to collaborate in on the environmental agenda,
introducing a higher complexity to the collabora-
tion.
Cross-sector collaboration
In cross-sector collaboration or cross value chain
the actors are not in direct competition with each
other.
This could be Ford and Heinz going
together across their value chain to utilize by-
products of production [18]. This could be indus-
trial symbiosis [8], [7], [6]
Multi-stakeholder collaboration
This are with the focus of collaboration between
different stakeholder types. This could be Busi-
ness, Academia, United Nations, Government,
Foundations or NGO and Civil Society [10]. Intro-
ducing the dynamic of several different responsi-
bilities and priorities. Where as an example the
business has the market-based or value creation
approach the government or UN has the more so-
cial, and environmental approach.
Innovative collaborations
This could be strategic collaborations with a con-
sultant firm e.g. Stena Consulting, where the aim
are to develop and start-up a circular transition
[19]. Here the firm would normally not be part of
the existing value chain. In this could also be a
innovation developed e.g. on DTU in collabora-
tion with a manufacturing firm through a course
and then continued as a start-up afterwards with
the manufacturing firm helping by bringing capa-
bilities.
Collaboration for regulations
Here is an sector needed to work together to cre-
ate a solution based on regulations. This could
be in the EV sector of automotive [20] where the
supply chain focus on design of CBM for extend-
ing, sharing, or looping enabled through collabo-
rations to meet new regulations. It could both be
a vertical or horizontal collaboration depending
on the size and shape of the regulations. How-
ever in this case the scope of the goal has been
set by the regulation.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
19
==PAGE:36==
creation has to be higher than the resources of partnering, transitioning, and developing
requiring a structured process with alignment and information sharing.
The partners has to put effort form outside of the normal value chain before it is collabo-
ration, this can be through the resources of knowledge, time, workforce, skills, material,
technology, energy or finance. This resource is added to solve a problem through develop
innovation in infrastructure, technology or business strategy.
Net-value creation
Net-value creation of the collaboration should be aimed higher than if the companies work
alone. Net-value creation covers the economic return of investment of resources. Often
in order to have motivation from companies and investors their need to be a economic
return of investment [5]. In the Eco-industrial parks the aim of the collaboration is to have
a competitive advantage as a collective [8]. For example could the net-value creation in
industrial symbiosis be lowering overall operation cost. This could be from substituting
virgin energy and material or reduce cost from discharge fees or disposal of by-product
[7], [5]. The driver of industrial symbiosis is often economic benefits, however it is also
providing an environmental benefit as well as a in-direct benefits which could be better rep-
utation, ability to attract and retain employees, increase of supply security and innovation
[5]. Some researcher also question how to determine the net-sustainability contribution,
because it may from a network perspective perform better than for the individual [6] as an
example Korhonen argument that it in some cases it could be justified for the companies
to maximize the by-product flow instead of reducing it, because the other actors in the
network may use it as alternative to raw/virgin-material and source for energy.
The improvement or positive outcome should be compared to situation before. The com-
plexity in quantifying the before and after may result in systems where the improvement
is more a problems displacement or problems shifting from one part of the system to an-
other [6]. The flow of materials and energy crossing organizations, administration and
geographical boundaries is complex, changing and dynamic [6]. It has been found that
the design structure of the system has to be developed together with the business model.
Therefor if the business model is kept static it may affect the innovation of the design
structure and limit the net-value creation. The net value created by the collaboration has
to be understand by every partner to sustain the partnership. Otherwise a partner will
want to seek other opportunities seeing the value chain situation as unsustainable [10].
Alignment of the strategic vision and ensuring net-value creation s therefore seen two
highlighted dynamics in the literature.
Orchestrator
There are questions in areas of who has the responsibility, risk and control or what is the
network decision-making platform and who organize the collaboration [6]. This introduce
the role of an orchestrator. They are mainly mentioned in the research as experts or ac-
tors, enabling the management of collaboration.
Not only innovative concepts are a necessity also innovative actors is requires for a suc-
cessful transition to CE [5]. It may be essential that the companies have resources in the
shape of these actors. The actors works as an enabler with their capability to create link
and suitable patterns for sustainability and circular business models [5]. Alignment and
assessment of companies capabilities and readiness are therefore mentioned as some of
the initial steps in collaboration [16], [15]. Circular economy requires a higher involvement
of the collaborating partners for a successful sustainable development [5]. The role of en-
abling that involvement by navigating the partners is suggested undertaken by the orches-
trator described through different synonyms in the industry like cross-functional leadership
20
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:37==
[23], platform owner [16], the matchmaker and promoters [15], driver of the supply chain
[17]. The orchestrator are in the industry described as a critical role in the implementation
of the strategy [16] and is enabling the lack of coordination [23] in the ecosystem. Many
of the articles agree on the need for an orchestrator, however they all focus on different
roles. Though do they agree that the role carrier is one with high influence on the product
and resources like the large manufacturing companies and brand owners [16],[15], [17].
The value recovery company, enables the link between several value chains and toke a
role as orchestrator in innovative collaborations. This were shown in the capabilities like
coordination, managing a portfolio of partners, match-making capabilities, and sharing
expertise in recycling. This is unlike the orchestrator description made by the articles of
the industry. The articles focus mainly on the brand owners or manufacturing compa-
nies whom has financial and product ownership. Another value recovery company Stena
Recycling has also developed a managing consultant arm, undertaking task of helping
transitioning companies to circular economy, acting as a independent mediator orches-
trating dialog and cooperation among the value chain partners [24]. There case examples
are describes through a collaborative approach setting them self as the orchestrator [19].
Value recovery companies taking the role as orchestrators can be an argumentation on
expanding the frameworks in the literature to not solely look onto manufacture or OEM.
Thereby not depending on the OEM or brand owners to initiate or specialize in the trans-
formation. Only one paper are suggesting the Raw material provider could take the role
as facilitator of value chain transformation, however this were more with the focus on there
ability to innovate new materials enabling the rest of the value chain to transition [17].
Competition
Path-dependency describes the phenomenon where the first innovation in the market
achieves the best markets and receives most awareness thereby becomes stronger than
innovations joining the market later on [6]. This is also said to be the ”survival of the first”
not the fittest. [6]. There will be competition between existing and new CE models as
well as the linear alternatives. The existing are mainly focusing on conventional recy-
cling and low quality of material utilization. The new innovative CE models focusing more
on product reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishment and sharing have to compete against
the established structure and culture of recycling [4]. Path dependency may therefore
work against new innovative CE models from penetrating the market. [6]. Business also
tends continue the old way of doing instead of adopt new technologies or models. As a
result thereof technological superiority and management does not guarantee long-term
success.
An opportunity could be that the first business that won in the path dependency could be
introduced to collaboration with the emerging new innovative CE models. Thereby using
the strength they have on the market as a resource.
CE can increase a company’s brand value and corporate reputation, this could be through
sustainability performance, academic validation of sustainability, or high-ranking collabo-
ration with leading companies, [25], [26].
For the pharmaceutical industry [23], the competition of the market limits the transforma-
tion; four large companies highlight the main barriers to the transition towards a circular
supply chain management (CSCM) were information sharing, cooperation, and collabora-
tion together with a lack of coordination in the supply chain network [23]. The competition
in the market hinders the exchange of expertise and information [23].
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
21
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.6: Value recovery company’s placement in value chains
22
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:39==
3.4.2
IQ 2: Conclusion
Collaboration are seen as an enabler to implementation of circular strategies for all actors
of the value chain. There are different types of collaboration which all are affecting the
value chain (value chain, Sector, cross-sector, multi stakeholder, innovative and collabo-
ration for regulation). The system, dynamic and development of collaboration are complex
and therefore requiring an orchestrator.
The orchestrator were in the academia mostly a role described of manufacturing firms and
required many resources. With the ecosystem map in a value recovery company is was
found that this company also could deliver the orchestrator role. One of the main barriers
are competition and the amount of time and resources used in initial stages of developing
collaboration, affecting the net-value creation of the partnership.
There are in the literature lacking more general research and understanding of collabo-
ration for circular economy transition in the value chain. The focus are highly on man-
ufacturing companies and OEMs. This creates a gap in support for implementation of
CE principles — for all partners to enable collaboration and distribute roles. Such an ap-
proach would reduce dependence on the manufacturing companies or product owner to
initiate or specialize in the transformation. Most of the papers uses specific value chains
for the case company of industry investigated with out implementing it to a more general
take on a more general value chain.
A list of different collaboration types have be developed showing the many different types
of collaboration and intent there was found. The focus on net-value creation and align-
ment of partners knowledge of circular economy are found as two important fundamental
elements in collaboration for circular economy transition.
Conceptual confusion
Comes from the different understanding of what the net-value creation and sustainable
development is. If not aware of the different understandings or goals it can be a barrier
in both the process of innovate the business model and design strategy. It may lead to
misleading results in knowledge accumulation attempts. It can also be the barrier for
advancing [4].
This underlines the need of an academic definition of terminologies for alignment of the
target. Using value chain from ready 2 and the technical cycle. Add additional focus on
how there is a lack of detailed support more appicable for collaboration with element more
than just a case description. To help guide the collaboration.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
23
==PAGE:40==
3.5
Research gaps and questions
From the Research Clarification described in chapter 3. There are found three research
gaps:
• Lack of common language about collaboration in CE transition.
• Lack of general approach which is not developed or focused on a specific industry
or case.
• Lack of focus on other than OEM or Brand owners as enabler of collaboration in CE
transition.
Based on the three identified research gaps this thesis will work with the following research
gap.
Research Gap: Lack of generic understanding for the implementation of collabora-
tion for CE transition
Based on the findings during the Research Clarifications research gaps, the first research
question (RQ1) was formulated. For a further understanding of the generic challenges
leading to opportunities, the second research question (RQ2) was developed.
Research Question 1 aims to investigate the existing structure, and dynamics supported
in the literature for collaboration for CE transition in the technical cycle.
Research Question 2 aims to investigate the existing challenges in the literature for col-
laboration for CE transition in the technical cycle.
RQ 1: How is the literature supporting collaboration for CE transition?
• RQ 1.1: Which focus areas are found in the literature for supporting collabo-
ration for CE transition?
• RQ 1.2: Which dynamics are described in the literature supporting collabora-
tion for CE transition?
RQ 2: What are the existing challenges for collaboration for CE transition docu-
mented in the literature?
• RQ 2.1: In which focus areas are the challenges for collaboration for CE
transition?
• RQ 2.2: In which stages of the collaboration are the challenges for collabora-
tion for CE transition?
24
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:41==
4
Results of DS-1
4.1
Phase 2: Identification of support and mechanisms for
collaboration for CE transition.
4.1.1
Planning
Development of search string
The focus of the systematic literature review is to identify how the literature is supporting
collaboration for CE transition in the technical cycle.
The keywords have been developed with the focus of five criteria:
1. The papers have to have a main focus on the circular economy or circular economy
transition.
2. The collaboration in the papers has to be with a focus on the SC, VC, or in the
ecosystem.
3. The paper has to contain an industry focus in the technical cycle.
4. The paper has to contain the dynamic or role of orchestrators or organization.
5. The paper has to contain collaboration or partners.
The following keywords are chosen after testing:
CE:
”circular”
Placement organization or orchestration of collaboration:
”supply chain”
”value chain”
”ecosystem”
Technical cycle and industry:
”manufacture”
”producer”
”industry”
Dynamic of organization or orchestrator:
”orchestrator”
”organization”
Collaboration or collaborator:
”collaborate”
”partner”
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
25
==PAGE:42==
The search string is adjusted based on whether it needs to be broadened or made more
specific, depending on the relevance of the papers.
The term ”orchestrator” was added after identifying the value recovery company as one
within the ecosystem workshop conducted during the initial study and research clarifi-
cation. This was done to gain a deeper understanding of this dynamic and how it is
supported.
When testing a search using only the combination of:
TITLE(”Supply chain” OR ”Value chain” OR ”Ecosystem”) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY(”Manufacture”
OR ”Producer” OR ”Industry”) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY(”Orchestrator”) AND KEY(”Circular”)
Only 3 documents were found, where one was focusing on the biological cycle of the food
sector see fig. 4.1. By adding the ”organization” the search gave 99 results.
Adding the ”collaborate” and ”partner” and limiting it to articles or literature review the
search ended up giving 16 papers.
Figure 4.1: Initial search with ”orchestrator”
The final string used the 16/10/2024 in Scopus, with additional spelling and keyword vari-
ation added by using * and ?.
TITLE ( ”Supply chain” OR ”Value chain” OR ”Ecosystem” )
AND
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ”Manufacture*” OR ”Producer*” OR ”Industry*” )
AND
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ”Orchestrat?r” OR ”organi?ation” )
AND
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ”collaborat*” OR ”partner*” )
AND
KEY ( ”Circular*” )
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The inclusion and exclusion criteria are developed to define which articles are possible
candidates and which should be excluded, they can be seen in table 4.1.
For the inclusion criteria, the studies must provide a support related to collaboration. This
26
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:43==
support can take the form of a framework, tool, guide, model or an illustration of best
practices.
For the exclusion criteria, the studies that focus on the biological cycle will be excluded.
Table 4.1: Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria
IC-1
A support for collaboration, collab-
oration mechanism or dynamics for
circular economy transition.
IC-2
A support to enable collaboration or
classify it for circular economy tran-
sition.
Exclusion criteria
EC-1
Studies with a focus on the food
supply chain.
EC-2
Studies with a focus on industry 4.0
EC-3
The study are to specific and nar-
rowly focused
4.1.2
Execution
The search string was run in Scopus on the 16/10/2024.
Selection of papers
The procedure for selection of relevant studies is illustrated in fig. 4.2. The publication are
read and sorted using the following list from top to bottom:
• Filter 1: Read title, keywords
• Filter 2: Read abstract
• Filter 3: Look through the paper if there are developed a support
• Filter 4: Read the complete article
If a article meets exclusion criteria EC-1 or EC-2, it is removed. Filter 1 eliminated two
articles based on their titles, as they focused on the biological cycle. Filter 2 didn’t remove
any article however, the majority were excluded in Filter 3, either because their support
primarily focused on technology implementation or because they lacked a support.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
27
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.3: Snapshot of included and excluded articles,appendix C
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the selection process
The search delivered 16 papers and the final selection of relevant studies contained 5
paper. The full list of all papers can be found in appendix C, a snapshot of the document
is shown in fig. 4.3.
Extraction
At this stage, the goal is to collect support elements from the articles. A single article
may contain multiple support elements. After each paper has been reviewed, its support
elements are extracted and assigned a unique ID number.
When reviewing the article the following criteria are collected:
• Industry: The industry, its role, or the case study’s context, in the circular economy
transition.
28
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:45==
• Empirical data: Short description of what empirical data is included in the develop-
ment of the support.
• Collaboration element: How collaboration are mentioned, what type of collaboration,
and what role is play in the circular economy transition.
The collected overview after reviewing the articles are in table: table 4.2 and table 4.3.
After reviewing the article and extracting the elements, each element is then described
based on its focus, differences, and what makes it unique compared to the others. Addi-
tionally, the title, year, and DOI of the corresponding paper are recorded for easily being
able to find the article. This can be found in fig. 4.4 and fig. D.2.
The five selected papers are compared in a small overview on their empirical data collec-
tion, industry focus and collaboration element table 4.2 and table 4.3.
Table 4.2: Overview of articles included 1:2
Title
Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in circular economy: A two-stage
transformation model for large manufacturing companies [16]
Industry
Six Manufacturing company’s circular economy transition:
Heavy
construction
equipment,
Performance-based
service,
Telecoms
equipment(capacity-based service),
Machine tools(Outcome-based
service), Automotive vehicles(Sharing service), Aircraft (Performance-
based), Cables (Sustainable cable packaging)
Empirical data
53 interviews across organizational levels on transformation challenges.
Collaboration ele-
ment
Value chain collaboration: The six large manufacturing companies as
ecosystem orchestrators. Stages to follow when transition ecosystem
and ecosystem partners to circular economy strategies.
Title
Orchestrating cradle-to-cradle innovation across the value chain: Over-
coming barriers through innovation communities, collaboration mecha-
nisms, and intermediation [15].
Industry
Product manufacturing - Household chemical case company ”Werner &
Mertz”: The case of implementing a cradle-to-cradle (C2C) product in
their value chain.
Empirical data
Analyzing a 10-year time frame of archival documents, interviews and
observation on the implementation of one C2C product.
Collaboration ele-
ment
Value chain collaboration: Promotor community working with collabora-
tion mechanisms to overcome barriers in the firm, value chain or with
linking partners. Promotor community as orchestrator and guide to over-
come barriers.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
29
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.3: Overview of articles included 2:2
Title
Circular supply chain governance: A qualitative-empirical study of the
European polyurethane industry to facilitate functional circular supply
chain management [17].
Industry
European polyurethane (plastic) industry: Investigating supply chain
management and commitment for circular economy transition.
Empirical data
Semi-structured interviews with 22 experts in the supply chain from Raw
material producer to End-application producer.
Collaboration ele-
ment
Vertical and horizontal collaboration: Focus on the commitment of sup-
ply chain actors and the different roles and dynamics in the supply chain
depending on the a cross-sector, industry or supply chain collaboration.
Facilitators can be ”Raw material provider” or ”Product manufacture and
Retailers”
Title
Enabling
battery
circularity:
Unlocking
circular
business
model
archetypes and collaboration forms in the electric vehicle battery
ecosystem [20].
Industry
EV battery ecosystem: Investigate emerging concepts in circular busi-
ness models (CBM) for EV battery second life.
Empirical data
24 Semi-structured interviews and 22 workshops with 15 companies in
the supply chain.
Collaboration ele-
ment
Collaboration for regulation: Focus on collaboration ecosystem engage-
ment in value co-creation of the CBM. The level of collaboration inten-
sity and ownership dynamics required depending on implementation of
different CBM.
Title
Lessons on business model scalability for circular economy in the fash-
ion retail value chain: Towards a conceptual model [27]
Industry
Textile and fashion retailers BM for transition to circular economy
Empirical data
39 Case studies from papers from systematic literature review.
Collaboration ele-
ment
Industry collaboration: Collaboration intensity for business model scal-
ability. Strategic partnerships to access complementary resources to
facilitate scaling of circular business model- categorized along; efficien-
cy/adaptability and closeness/openness of business model strategy.
30
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.4: Support comparison overview appendix D
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
31
==PAGE:48==
(a) Element 1 [20]
(b) Element 2 [16]
(c) Element 3 [17]
(d) Element 4 [27]
(e) Element 5 [15]
(f) Element 6 [15]
Figure 4.5: Screenshot of support for the comparison ?? a more detailed description of
the elements can be found in appendix D
4.2
Supporting element characterization
The aim is to compare the supporting elements by creating an overview of their strength.
They are organized into a table, each placed in its own column fig. 4.6. To create an
overview of the strength of the chosen 6 support elements, they are organized into a table,
each placed in its own column fig. 4.6. The rows represent the building block categories
from [10]. This framework was chosen because it was developed as the fundamental
boxes for creating multi-stakeholder collaboration for sustainable development.
32
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:49==
The four categories, or ”boxes,” are: Fundamentals, Relationships, Structure & Set-up,
and Management & Leadership. If a support element aligns with any of these categories,
it is marked with an ’x’ in the corresponding cell. Below the table, a brief description is
provided for each element, explaining the reasoning behind its classification and how it
relates to the selected categories. This table will be referred to as the comparison matrix
in later sections fig. 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Element comparison matrix
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
33
==PAGE:50==
Element 1: Detailed archetypes of CBM
The EV study by [20] focuses on identifying potential archetypes of circular business mod-
els (CBM) for EV batteries fig. 4.7. It investigates the specific co-creation value and the
implications for company collaborations when extending, sharing, or looping EV batteries.
Figure 4.7: Element 1: Detailed archetypes of CBM [20] ??
Net-value creation or the value co-creation is a key element highlighted in [20], depend-
ing on the intent and commitment to collaboration, as well as the ownership dynamics
of the product.The key business model elements highlighted in the support are: Value
proposition, co-creation, delivery and capture.
The aim is to provide a clear description of Key Stakeholder collaboration as guidance
for stakeholders among the value chain [20]. However, the main focus is on OEMs (or-
chestrators), with energy utility companies and material suppliers as project partners. By
utilizing CBM archetypes, OEMs can assess, develop, and scope new business models
[20], ensuring alignment with Governance, Management, and Operational structures.
The ownership structure and how they can change influence the design, the adoption and
implementation can be seen as the the Accountability and Commitment of the actors. The
suggested CBM are characterized on the different levels of product-service combination
in the value co-creation.
The potential CBM archetypes involves the Mutual Benefits of stakeholder partnerships
within the ecosystem, highlighting the importance of co-creating value and fostering in-
novation. Since each stakeholder brings unique competencies, alignment through col-
laborative mechanisms is suggested, such as strategic alliances, to secure access to
resources, expertise, and markets.
Element 2: Two stage ecosystem
In the study of 6 manufacturing companies a more generic two-stage process for trans-
formation framework was developed, fig. 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Element 2: Two stage ecosystem [16] ??
In the framework are mainly focusing on the Orchestrator Function. The requirements for
the orchestrator role is to be a focal firm who need to be resourceful, stable, simplifying the
34
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:51==
connection between different stakeholders, encouraging innovation and niche creation,
and can enforce game rules, promote transparency and imposing sanctions [16]. The
others actors in the value chain are seen as ecosystem partners.
The framework consist of two-stages.
The first stage is the assessment of the readiness level of the ecosystem for transforma-
tion involving. This stage involves assessments of business model (Net-value creation,
Mutual benefits), ecosystem partners (Organizational values, Accountability and commit-
ment) and external environment. The assessment stage is to help identify and understand
gaps. For managers in the companies it is to identify new opportunities, gather external
information and understand their own capacity in relation to CE transformation [16].
The second stage is orchestration mechanisms for transformation covering Trust and
Transparency, Leadership, Communication, Learning & Knowledge sharing and Gover-
nance, Management & Operational structure table 4.4. The orchestration mechanisms
are standardization, nurturing, and negotiation to achieve benefits of circular implemen-
tation, [16]. Identifying actions to manage and influence the transition or transformation
of the core, peripheral and new ecosystem partners [16].
Table 4.4: Orchestration mechanisms stage 2 [16]
Standardization
Action to define and legitimize the goal for ecosystem partners.
Promoting establishment of industrial standards.
Pursuing technological standard co-development.
Seeking formal certification through broader adoption.
Nurturing
Action to ensure the necessary resources and capabilities
Bearing early investment to reduce uncertainty.
Support ecosystem competences development.
Sharing core knowledge and intellectual property within industry.
Negotiation
Action to coordinate the ecosystem participants.
Establish give-and-take rules for ecosystem.
Reducing likelihood of conflicts through relational interdependence.
Controlling inclusion of new partners based on risk and benefit analysis.
Element 3: Governance mechanism
In the study of the plastic (PUR) industry a framework of commitment is investigated with
focus on vertical and horizontal collaborations [17], fig. 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Element 3: Governance mechanism [17] ??
Collaborations commitment: Accountability and commitment, and the stakeholders hav-
ing the Orchestrator function as enabler and facilitator are structured into four models.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
35
==PAGE:52==
Shultz, [17] highlight two facilitators The Raw-Material Producers and End-Application
Producers argumentation that this is because of their position at each end of the supply
chain.
This include the description of different dilemma structures: Power structure, Mutual ben-
efits. The dilemma structures are grouped into one-sided or many-sided. One-sided
means asymmetric situation where one actor can exploit another. Many-sided means a
symmetric situation where all actors can equally exploit each others [17]. Through the four
models Key stakeholders and their enabling or facilitating actions are described together
with their interactions of Governance, management, operations structures.
Table 4.5: Vertical and horizontal collaboration by [17]
Vertical
collaboration: Individual self commitmen
Overcome one-sided dilemma. This could be a firm making a commitment to
a stakeholder on not exploiting them e.g. Warranty, repair service [17]. Asym-
metric power because the End-Application Producer require it from suppliers by
”Taking responsibility”.[17]
Vertical
collaboration: Service for Individual Commitment
Overcome partners one-sided dilemma through a service e.g. certification, as-
sessment, consultant [17]. End-Application producer delivers commitment ser-
vice to suppliers who is on highly competitive market and can’t take CE initiatives
alone. By provide support to supplier with resources and training [17]
Horizontal collaboration: Collective self commitment
Competing firms collaborate in certain areas to overcome a many-sided dilemma
however still compete in other areas. “co-opetition” allow the firms to combine
their strength and resources to achieve mutual goal. It has to be a win-win situ-
ation where both firms gain for the effort [17].
PULL -
From End-Application producer
Large or well-organized multinational brand facing pressure from end-consumer
to move towards CE and can receive moral gratification by offering CE-products.
Could be industry e.g. mattress, furniture, automotive, building or construction
[17].
PUSH -
From Raw Material Producers
Can create closed-loop for a industry, innovate and create inter-industrial or inter-
sectoral open-loops, incentivize up-stream and down-stream [17].
Element 4: Business model strategy
This conceptual model identifies four strategic approaches to enable business model scal-
ability depending on the commitment and intent of collaboration. These are categorized
along two dimensions: closed/open business model and efficiency/adaptability centered
fig. 4.10 [27].
36
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.10: Element 4: Business model strategy [27] ??
The model focus also highlight the dynamic capabilities necessary for the organizations
to transition between the different strategic approaches [27]. The focus on absorbing
external ideas and opportunities together with the Accountability and commitment of col-
laboration with Key stakeholders, depending on chosen business model. The model give
an overview of what is needed by the company and what Net-value creation the business
model strategy should provide.
Table 4.6: Strategic approaches, [27]
Closed and Efficiency-centered
Internal organization to improve scalability and reduce fixed costs.
Commitment focus on utilizing internal resources and capabilities.
Efficiency through standardization, automation and centralization.
Closed and Adaptability-centered
Utilize internal resource while being open to external influence.
Commitment focus on absorbing external ideas and opportunities
Adaptability through listening, experimenting and adapting strategies to scale up.
Open and Efficiency-centered
Looking outside the organization for collaboration while aiming for efficiency.
Commitment focus by engagement in partnerships that allow shared labor and
resources.
Efficiency through achieving economies of scale through collaborative strategies.
Open and Adaptability-centered
Collaboration with external partners to innovate and create new opportunities.
Commitment focus on collaboration with customers and stakeholders in the de-
velopment process.
Adaptability through integrating external insights into the business model.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
37
==PAGE:54==
Element 5: Promoter community
A case company (W&M) developing a Cradle-2-Cradle (C2C) product strategy co-developed
a network of partners to support the design strategy this are structured through a team of
promotors who orchestrated the network of partners and suppliers fig. 4.11,[15].
Figure 4.11: Element 5: Promoter community [15] ??
The promotors roles, are the role of matchmaking, with relevant partners and orchestrate
the overall network. why Communication are placed in between all promoters.
Here a promoter is defined as a “individuals who actively and intensively support the
innovation process” [15].
The promoters are structured into five types table 4.7. These types describe the role and
responsibility distribution in between the promoters; the Orchestrator function, their Power
structure, Accountability and commitment. The promoter type power and universal speaks
into the Senior-level commitment and Leadership. Where the Alignment of interest along
the value chain are shown in the relationship and power promoter. The process promoter
has a responsibility of Organizational values.
The structure and interaction of the promoters in the firm level, value chain level and
linking level illustrate how the Governance, management, operational structures could be
structured.
Table 4.7: Promoter types
The Power
Pushes innovation through hierarchical power.
The Expert
Contribute with expert knowledge.
The Relationship
Facilitate and build up innovation-related relationships inside and out-
side the company.
The Process
Have knowledge of the processes in the organization and translate the
different languages spoken in the firm.
The Universal
A combination of expert and power and either relationship or process.
38
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:55==
Element 6: Innovation community
On qualitative data from the case company (W&M), Hansen, illustrated the network of
the promotors’ collaboration mechanisms when developing a C2C product and resolving
barriers, fig. 4.12,[15].
Figure 4.12: Element 6: Innovation community [15] ??
The barriers to overcome was grouped into 4 categories see table table 4.8 and eight
different collaboration mechanics were defined see table table 4.9. The collaboration
mechanics is a process in the system which function as a solving factor on the specific
barriers. Grouping the barriers overcome by collaboration mechanics into categories they
illustrate the methods possible to use or develop in management of CE transition; Result
oriented project management, Alignment of interest, Trust and transparency, Learning
and knowledge sharing.
In a map the actors promoter roles and used collaboration mechanics are linked together
including the Key stakeholders. Making it possible to identify the used Communication
and Orchestrator function.
The illustration visualize the breaking of barrier as a timeline of stages for development
and transition of the C2C to market. First breaking the individual then the firm followed by
the value chain.
Table 4.8: Barriers categories
Individual barrier (IB)
Understanding circularity and forming a community of promo-
tors.
Firm barrier(FB)
Build up organizational capabilities and kick off formal innova-
tion project.
Value chain barrier(VCB)
Screening and building up value chain for product strategy. Ex-
panding community of second-layer promoters.
Institutional barrier(InsB)
Promote circularity to improve framework conditions.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
39
==PAGE:56==
Table 4.9: Collaboration mechanics
The Perspective
Knowledge from outside experts/government and
then distributed inside the firm.
The Power displacement
Moves power from the initiator to the right promoter
inside the firm.
The synchronizing of circular knowl-
edge
Ensuring everyone is on the same page together with
the experts/government.
The developing and replacing of
suppliers
Developing new technology or business models to-
gether with initial partners. Replace rigid partners with
more dynamic, innovative ones.
The partnering up
Developing sectorial partnering community for mate-
rial recovery.
The certifying
Collaborate with the consumer and certification body
for product approval.
The trusting
Ensuring third-party acknowledgment and lab assess-
ment for trusting new products.
Advocating circularity
Collaborating with government, certification bodies,
and experts to improve regulations and landscape.
4.2.1
Analysis and discussion
Bibliometric
When comparing the publishing years of the papers, most are from 2021. However, there
has been an increasing number of publications in the field from 2022 to 2024 fig. 4.13a.
The included papers are from 2019, 2021, and 2024, with three of them published in 2021.
Regarding the exclusion criteria fig. 4.13b, a significant number of papers were excluded
due to their focus on Industry 4.0 (EC-2). In 2024 alone, three papers were excluded
for this reason. This could suggest that collaboration and partnership are increasingly
discussed in the literature, along with implementing Industry 4.0, which is becoming an
area of increasing focus.
The number of citations tends to be lower for more recent papers fig. 4.13c, which is
expected since it takes time for citations to accumulate. The included papers are among
those with a higher number of citations.
Among the Journals, only two had more than one paper included in the search: ”The Jour-
nal of Cleaner Production” with three papers, followed by ”The Journal of Environmental
Management” fig. 4.13d. All the papers included come from different journals.
40
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:57==
(a) Publish year of papers
(b) Exclusion criteria and publish year
(c) Average citation
(d) Journal of papers
Figure 4.13: Excluded and included papers
Paper comparison
While all included articles explore approaches to circular economy transition and the im-
plementation of new circular strategies or business models, they differ in structure. Some
focus on specific strategies and case studies [15], while others provide an overview of
potential business models [27], [20]. Only two articles take a broader approach, empha-
sizing implementation and partner dynamics [16], [17].
The extracted elements vary in detail. Some serve as guides for transition [16], while
others identify possible solutions [20], [27]. Others primarily describe case studies to il-
lustrate the application of collaboration mechanisms and dynamics [17], [15].
Focus areas found in the literature for collaboration for CE transition.
• Primary focus on product manufacturers and product owners:
While empirical data is collected from multiple supply chain actors, most studies
primarily seek solutions for product manufacturers or product owners, often identi-
fying them as orchestrators [16], [15], [20]. Only [27] emphasizes strategic partner-
ships, while [17] highlights two key facilitators: Raw-Material Producers and End-
Application Producers(product manufacturer). The Raw-Material producer is in [17]
described in what would be a value recovery company on the value chain from the
research clarification fig. 3.5.
• Types of Collaboration:
Two articles focus on value chain collaboration [16], [15] one on collaboration for
regulation [20] and then there are two focusing on industry or cross-sector collabo-
ration [27],[17]. Two papers [17] and [16].
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
41
==PAGE:58==
• The dynamic change depending on the type of collaboration:
Two papers [17], [15] include the change of dynamics depending on whether the
collaboration is between the value chain or industry (competing companies). [15]
adds the additional need for ”Linking Partners” (governmental, political, industry as-
sociations, etc.) for the competing collaboration.
• Collaboration initiative and level of commitment:
Collaboration commitment [17] and intensity [20], [27] are described as factors in-
fluencing:
The choice of circular business model [20].
The scalability [27]
The environmental impact of CE initiatives [17].
Element comparison matrix
The key categories which got 3 or more elements supporting them were:
• Accountability and commitment (5)
• Governance,
Management
and
Operational Structure (5)
• Net-Value Creation (4)
• Key Stakeholders (4)
• Orchestrator Function (4)
• Alignment of interest (3)
• Mutual benefits (3)
• Communication (3)
Figure 4.14: Element comparison ma-
trix, a bigger version is at fig. 4.6
Commitment and accountability:
All papers incorporate some level or intent of commitment and accountability within their
structure. This suggests that aligning commitment in collaborations and partnerships can
have a high impact and that understanding its requirements is essential for participating
actors.
Governance, Management and Operational Structure:
All papers, except one [27], include aspects of operational structure and management
in their support. This could highlight the importance of structuring collaborations, possi-
bly reflecting or indicating the challenges and complexities of managing and structuring
circular economy transitions.
Categories with strong support:
The following categories received support in four out of the six support elements. Indicat-
ing they have a strong role in circular economy collaboration: ”Net-Value Creation,” ”Key
Stakeholders,” and ”Orchestrator Function.”
They are also all placed in the fundamental group.
Management and leadership and Structure and Set-up:
In the block of management and leadership and the block of structure and set-up, there
is a lower amount of categories supported by the elements. There isn’t enough data to
draw firm conclusions, but this could suggest:
42
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:59==
• Collaborations may still be struggling with fundamental and relationship-building as-
pects, requiring stronger foundations before addressing management and structure.
• The building block structure used in this analysis may not fully align with circular
economy transitions, potentially missing relevant criteria.
4.2.2
Scoping SLR
This data-collection process has been documented and structured using the systematic
literature review process described in [2]. Evaluation of the planned protocol followed in
the execution phase showed some boundaries.
The systematic literature review identified five articles that included support focused on
collaboration for circular economy transition. Excluded articles mainly focused on tech-
nological implementation rather than collaboration. The chosen exclusion and inclusion
factors excluded articles were mainly with a higher focus on technological implementa-
tion than collaboration. There was a limitation in the low number of included articles and
the high number of excluded articles with a focus on technological implementations. The
included articles had a main focus on product manufacturers, which is also a boundary
for the aim of a more general analysis.
The included studies featured papers with a relatively high amount of empirical data gath-
ered through interviews and workshops across different parts of the value chain. Addi-
tionally, some papers provided a high level of detail but focused on a single case example.
No gray literature or snowballing methods were used to extract additional papers. The
primary focus of this SLR is to understand the collaboration elements and dynamics de-
scribed in the literature from the search string.
4.3
Phase 3: Support elements for collaboration for CE transition
In the support elements developed for circular economy (CE) transition through collabo-
ration, the main focus is on the platform owner or facilitator. The papers had an increased
focus on manufacturing companies as the orchestrators or enablers of ecosystem transi-
tion [17], [16], [15]. These studies also identify the orchestrators role and responsibility of
supporting the rest of the value chain [15], supply chain [17], or ecosystem partners [16],
acting as investors providing resources to enable the transition.
In the research clarification, it was identified that a value recovery company can also act
as an orchestrator, using its knowledge and expertise as key resources.
To gain a more diverse understanding of the orchestrator role, a workshop is developed
to explore the needs of a value recovery company. The results from this workshop will
then be used to further analyze and extract support elements from the comparison matrix.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
43
==PAGE:60==
4.3.1
Workshop
The aim of the workshop is to understand the needs, challenge and opportunities for the
value recovery company with their work on collaboration for circular economy transition.
Participants
This company works mainly with collaboration in the value chain like the focus of [16] and
[15]. These were determined by the experience in the company and knowledge on ex-
isting collaboration. The participants of this workshop were responsible for supply chain,
partnership and business innovation.
There were 3 participants to the workshop.
Scope
The workshop was scoped to focus on the value recovery company’s challenges and
experience, with the aim of identifying and understanding their needs when collaborating
with other actors for circular economy transition.
Structure and execution
The workshop was made in Miro for all participants to enter. Five questions were devel-
oped to collect experience and challenges in development of collaboration. The structure
of the workshop was the following.
1. The participants gets one question.
2. The participants has 5 minutes to brainstorm answers and write notes in Miro.
3. The participants has 1 minute to place 1 vote on the challenge they find most im-
portant to solve.
The five question were the following:
1. What challenges do you experience?
2. What benefits would they bring if they were solved?
3. What challenges have you already tried to solve/answer?
4. Did they improve?
5. Do you have en idea of what factors impacts the problem or why the solution did not
work?
After all the questions the participants would have placed in total 5 votes each. To help
structuring the answers the four blocks from the building blocks developed by [10] were
used like in the comparison matrix of the support elements in fig. 4.6. This allows for
easier comparison later with the frameworks. The Miro board un-used is illustrated in
fig. 4.15.
44
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.15: Workshop board in Miro
Results from workshop
The workshop identified the main challenges (gray boxes), along with smaller challenges
(yellow), wishes (green), and values (orange), representing the benefits of solving these
challenges. Additionally, solutions (purple) were noted for challenges the company has
already addressed, and questions (blue) were raised about roles and dynamics.
Top five challenges identified in the workshop table 4.10: The following five challenges
received the highest votes and had the most value if solved.
1. Structure and Set-up: Resource allocation
2. Partnership Relationship: Different company culture
3. Fundamentals: Scope of project
4. Management and Leadership: Information sharing
5. Management and Leadership: Running success criteria
These challenges were considered the most valuable to resolve.
The next step is to compare these challenges with the selected support elements from
Phase 2. The goal is to determine whether these elements address similar issues and
whether they can support companies beyond manufacturers and product owners, extend-
ing across the value chain.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
45
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.16: The workshop results
Table 4.10: The five challenges with the most votes
Resource allocation
Challenge Limited amount of data. Planning for an unknown fu-
ture (a dynamic situation where things move fast). Not
having the information when the decision needs to be
made. Getting the information too late.
Wish
x
Value
Avoid doing the task twice.
Realistic expectations.
Using the resources at the right place and time.
Running success criteria
Challenge How to measure the KPI or success criteria
Wish
All partners have the same level of information
Value
Ensure the project is on track. Know if it delivers the
desired results.
Different company cultures
ChallengesDifferent ways of Documentation, formality, role dis-
tribution, and organizing.
Wish
Talk the same language
Value
Efficiency, Easier process, Better ”vibe” in collabora-
tion.
Information sharing
ChallengesLack of alignment of information.
Wish
Transparent information sharing, Same level of infor-
mation.
Value
Common purpose, common project.
Scope of project
Challenge Scoping the project wrong or starting too big. Insecu-
rity in results.
Wish
Clear scope of project. Start at a realistic level.
Value
Higher success rate.
4.3.2
Elements highlighted
The challenges identified during the workshop have been added to the element compari-
son matrix and are highlighted as yellow rows in fig. 4.18.
46
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:63==
• Wrongly scoping a project is categorized under the orchestrator function, as the
challenge stemmed from attempting to orchestrate too much at once.
• Resource allocation is placed under Net-value creation and Governance, manage-
ment, and operational structure, as the challenge involves either misplacing re-
sources or discovering additional, unforeseen resource needs.
• Differences in company culture are categorized under Organizational values and
Governance, management, and operational structure to reflect the impact of cultural
misalignment.
• Lack of information sharing is placed under Communication and Learning and Knowl-
edge Sharing, as the need for improvement was identified in both areas.
• Measuring success is categorized under Measures of success, as the challenge
involved the absence of clear success criteria and ongoing evaluation metrics.
(a) Before
(b) After with highlighted elements
Figure 4.17: Element comparison matrix
Among the highlighted criteria, two support elements stood out, addressing three or more
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
47
==PAGE:64==
(a) Element 2: The two stage ecosystem [16]
(b) Element 8: Innovation community [15]
Figure 4.18: Chosen frameworks
of them. These are Element 2 and Element 6: the Two-Stage Ecosystem [16] and Inno-
vation Community [15] fig. 4.18.
The strengths of these two support elements could serve as a foundation for further in-
vestigation in developing a framework for collaboration in the circular economy transition.
The element of stages
Both elements incorporate a timeline or stages of collaboration development.
These
stages help structure the tasks at hand and clarify what needs to be completed before
progressing to the next stage. However, they can also function as iterative phases with
key gateways, such as conducting a readiness assessment before implementing orches-
tration mechanisms [16].
The stages may also align with milestones related to product development, strategic im-
plementation in the market, or the formation of an innovation community [15].
A proposed framework for ecosystem transformation could follow a staged approach, as
illustrated in fig. 5.4.
Stage 1: Ecosystem Readiness Assessment
This phase involves evaluating ecosystem readiness, including:
• Business model assessment (value creation, capture, and delivery) [16].
• Environment assessment (industry trends, customer interest, technology, regulatory
factors) [16].
• Partners assessment (roles and responsibilities) [16] [15].
This structured approach may provide a more straightforward pathway for collaboration
and circular economy transition. The three assessments could be done as an iterative
process with a key gateway, such as milestones that need to be developed or a defined
promoter team.
Stage 2: Ecosystem Orchestration Mechanisms [16].
This stage focuses on establishing orchestration mechanisms to facilitate collaboration
and resource sharing. It includes:
• Standardization – Defining and legitimizing goals and guidelines [16].
• Nurturing – Allocating resources and developing competencies [16].
48
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:65==
• Negotiation – Enhancing collaboration and resource-sharing practices [16].
In addition to Ecosystem Orchestration Mechanisms, specific actions (collaboration mech-
anisms) can be done by different actors to overcome barriers. These actions often in-
volve communication, verification, or structuring processes.
A list of examples taken
from table 4.9[15] could be; Perspective, Power displacement, Synchronizing of circular
knowledge, Trusting, Advocating circularity, etc. The actors responsible for implementing
these collaboration mechanisms are referred to by various terms in the literature, includ-
ing promoters [15], facilitators, organization representatives [17], or orchestrators [16].
The actors could have roles of responsibility like the promoters, taken from table 4.7 [15];
Power(top-management), Expert(knowledge sharing structure), Relationship(innovation
partners), Process(organization structure), Universal(multiple roles and responsibility).
Stage 3: Operation and Maintenance [15]
This phase involves the established structure of an innovation community, which should
have been developed through stages 1. and 2., incorporating various promoter roles and
support mechanisms to ensure long-term success.
Figure 4.19: The three stages
The element of challenges
Through the stages, there are most likely challenges that need to be solved. The chal-
lenges could be like [15] structured into four spaces. The four spaces of challenges used
by [15] are: Individual, Firm, Value chain, and Linking partners fig. 4.20.
• The individual describes the barriers between the individual people in a team this
could be things like lack of knowledge or skills [15].
• The firm describes the barriers across the teams when trying to collaborate between
the different units inside an organization. This could be the teams working in silos
with a lack of alignment, or communication in between [15].
• For the value chain, the barriers are outside the company or organization and could
be the struggle of partnering, trusting, developing, and replacing to create the new
collaborative structure [15].
• The institutional barriers are often between the value chain partners and the gov-
ernment or regulations either they go together to overcome these barriers or they
divide the workload [15].
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
49
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.20: Four space of barriers
50
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:67==
4.4
Phase 4: Identification of barriers for collaboration for CE
transition
4.4.1
Planning
Development of search string
The focus of the systematic literature review is the identification and systematization of
barriers to collaboration for CE transition in the technical cycle.
The keywords have been developed with the focus of five criteria:
1. The papers have to have a main focus on the circular economy or circular economy
transition.
2. The collaboration in the papers has to be across the SC, VC, or in the ecosystem.
3. The paper has to contain an industry focus in the technical cycle.
4. The paper has to contain collaboration or the dynamic of the partners
5. The paper has to contain barriers or challenges in the collaboration.
The following keywords are chosen after testing
CE:
”circular”
Placement for collaboration:
”supply chain”
”value chain”
”ecosystem”
Technical cycle and industry:
”manufacturer”
”producer”
”industry”
Collaboration or collaborator:
”collaborator”
”partner”
”stakeholder”
”relationship”
”facilitator”
”orchestrator”
”enabler”
Barriers:
”barrier”
”boundary”
”challenge”
The search string is modified while analyzing if it is worth keeping a more restrictive or
broader search string depending on the relevance of the papers. This is done through iter-
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
51
==PAGE:68==
ations by testing the different placement of keywords, adding or removing keywords, their
spelling, and choosing the string that returns the most relevant papers. The chosen ad-
dition of an asterisk(*) to include multiple spelling or similar words is included in table 4.11.
Initially, a limit of papers from the years 2019-2024 was incorporated into the search string,
giving 70 articles. However, removing the limit only introduced 8 more articles. Deeming
that there were no good reasons for not including the last 8 in the search.
”Circular” was tested as both TITLE or KEY limitation. This gave two different groups of
articles. Where the latter included 20 more articles; however, when comparing the differ-
ent articles, the ones with ”circular” in the title were seen as more relevant to this study.
The final string used the 28/12/2024 in Scopus.
TITLE ( ”supply chain” OR ”value chain” OR ”ecosystem” )
AND
TITLE ( ”circular” )
AND
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ”manufacturer*” OR ”producer*” OR ”industr*” )
AND
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ”collaborat*” OR ”partner*” OR ”stakeholder” OR ”relationship”
OR ”facilitator” OR ”orchestrator” )
AND
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ”barrier*” OR ”boundar*” OR ”challenge*” )
Table 4.11: Additional keywords variations included in the search
Spelling of keyword
Included words
manufacturer*
manufacturer, manufacturers
producer*
producer, producers
industr*
industry, industries, industrialization, industrial,
industrialized, industrializing, industrialize, industrializes,
industrialized, industrializing, industrially
collaborat*
collaborate, collaborating, collaborated,
collaboration, collaborations, collaborator,
collaborators, collaborative, collaboratively
partner*
partner, partners, partnered, partnering, partnership, partnerships
barrier*
barrier, barriers
boundar*
boundary, boundaries
challenge*
challenge, challenges, challenged,
challenging, challenger, challengers
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The inclusion and exclusion criteria are developed to define which articles are possible
candidates and which should be excluded, they can be seen in table 4.12.
For the inclusion criteria, the studies must present barriers, boundaries, or challenges
concerning collaboration. For the exclusion criteria, the studies collected must not focus
52
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:69==
on the food chain or barriers concerning the implementation of technology.
Table 4.12: Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria
IC-1
Barriers are described as being in the VC- or SC-collaboration,
partnership, or relationship between different actors.
IC-2
Barriers are suggested to be overcome through collaboration,
as an enabler or opportunities.
IC-3
Studies with a focus on collaboration in SC or VC
and naming barriers.
Exclusion criteria
EC-1
Studies with a focus on the food supply chain.
EC-2
If the papers about implementing industry 4.0
(blockchain, AI, or other technical solutions).
EC-3
The study are to specific and narrowly focused
Extraction of barriers
The extraction requirements are developed to define which barriers to collect from the fi-
nal selection of papers. The barriers from the final selection of papers are solely collected
if they follow:
1. The barrier is well-defined and is described as hindering collaboration, partnership,
or the relationship between the different actors.
2. The barrier is well-defined and is suggested to be overcome by collaboration, part-
nership, or the relationship between the different actors.
This excludes barriers in the papers with other focus. An example could be barriers due
to the transition of CE or the implementation of new technology.
4.4.2
Execution
The search string is run in Scorpus, the 28/12/2024.
Selection of papers
The procedure for the selection of relevant studies is illustrated in fig. 4.21.
The publications are read and sorted using the following list from top to bottom:
• Filter 1: Read title, keywords
• Filter 2: Read abstract
• Filter 3: Read the introduction and conclusions
• Filter 4: Read the complete article.
If a publication at one point is deemed to fulfill EC-1 or EC-2 it is removed.
Filter 1. mainly removed publications with ”Title” or ”Keywords” containing ”Agriculture,”
”Bio-economy,” or ”Food.” Assuming they were focusing on the biological cycle (EC-2).
Filter 2. mainly removed publications lacking a description of collaboration from reading
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
53
==PAGE:70==
the abstract.
At filter 3. The publications left would all have a description of collaboration or barriers in
their abstract. Filters 3. and 4. mainly remove articles where the provided barriers did not
fulfill the inclusion criteria.
Figure 4.21: Illustration of the selection process
The search delivered 78 papers whereas the final selection of relevant studies contained
16 papers. One additional paper [16] was added to the collection from a backward search
of another study [28] included in the search. Giving a total of 17 papers. The full list of all
papers can be found in appendix E, and a snapshot of the document is shown in fig. 4.22.
Figure 4.22: Snapshot of included and excluded articles, appendix E
54
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:71==
Extraction
This stage aims to collect the barriers from the final selection of papers without relating
them to each other. This process is illustrated in fig. 4.23.
The barriers are extracted when following the extraction requirements.
Figure 4.23: Extraction process of barriers
First, the title, year, and DOI are copied from the selected papers into a new Excel book
creating sheet A, fig. F.1. As each paper is read, it is noted in Sheet A, along with rele-
vant criteria described in table 4.13. The papers are analyzed one at a time to ensure a
systematic extraction process.
In Sheet B, fig. G.1, all extracted barriers are collected, with each row assigned a unique
ID number. Every barrier is added to an individual row, ensuring that each barrier re-
mains distinct. The relevant criteria from table 4.13 are documented in separate columns,
allowing for a structured overview.
The description and context of each barrier vary across papers. In some cases, a barrier
may be framed as a root cause, a stopping factor, a conclusion, an influencing factor, or
a logical resolution. Capturing these different perspectives helps to enhance the under-
standing of why a particular issue is considered a barrier in each study.
If a criterion cannot be extracted from a study, it is left unanswered. Additionally, while
”Circular Aim” and ”Classification from Literature” are documented, they are not included
in the further investigation of the barriers to the risk of including bias. However, they
provide valuable insights into the context in which the barriers were identified.
A total of 224 individual barriers were collected, representing the raw data for further
analysis. In section 4.5, the characteristics of these collected barriers are explored in
more depth.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
55
==PAGE:72==
Table 4.13: Criteria collected in the extraction process
Sheet A: Criteria
Year
Year of the paper.
Citation code
Main author and year.
Title
Title of the paper.
DOI
So the paper is easy to collect.
Study methodology
What methodology for collection and analysis of barriers.
Main contribution
What the paper brings to the field.
Collaboration focus
How the paper describe collaboration.
CE transition focus
How the paper describe CE transition or
the CE strategy focus of the paper.
Industry
Industry focus of the paper.
Sheet B: Criteria
ID number
Unique for each barrier.
Study methodology
How the paper collect and analyze the barriers.
Industry
Industry focus of the paper.
Circular aim
What CE focus their are in the paper or with the barrier.
Citation code
Possible to identify main author and year.
Classification from literature
Barriers grouped class in the literature.
Barrier
Shortest description of barrier.
Description
Further detailed description of barrier can include an example.
Context
More details in the context of the barrier.
This could be the relationship between actors,
further examples, how to overcome it,
what the barrier consequently are effecting.
56
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.24: Snapshot of Sheet B: Barrier collection appendix G
Figure 4.25: Snapshot of Sheet A: Final collection appendix F
4.4.3
Analysis
Bibliometric
From the final selection of papers, relevant information is extracted for a small bibliometric
analysis. The bibliometric method is to have a further understanding and reflection of the
SLR process as well as potential research gaps.
The number of papers pr. Year are increasing fast and more than half of the papers are
from the last 3 years more than 67% of the papers were published, fig. 4.26. This could
be an indication that Collaboration for CE is a new and growing field.
Figure 4.26: Number of papers pr. year
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
57
==PAGE:74==
When looking at papers pr. Year the included papers are almost a normal distribution. In
the years 2023, and 2024 there is a relatively low number of included papers.
Comparing this with the exclusion criteria pr. Year on fig. 4.27 it could also be an example
of fewer studies focusing on barriers.
The criteria ”Lack of barriers” was mainly given to papers from the technical cycle in the
industry, which covered collaboration to some degree but focused the research on other
indicators e.g. drivers, management, or technology advancement like industry 4.0. There
was a tendency in these papers to focus more on enabling collaboration through various
strategies, frameworks, and technology and less focus on barriers.
(a) Excluded papers criteria pr. year
(b) Exclusion criteria for excluded papers
Figure 4.27: Excluded papers
Industry perspective:
The analysis of the collected papers’ industry perspective, fig. 4.28, reveals the earlier
years of research in CE were more inclined towards VC, stakeholder, and management,
whereas the most recent papers focus on topics like logistics, industry 4.0, and food sup-
ply chain.
Figure 4.28: Article industry focus
Average citation:
When comparing the average citation pr. year fig. 4.29 and the number of papers pr.
year fig. 4.26. Has the included papers a relatively high citation pr. Paper compared to
the excluded papers. Even in the years where there are a few included papers they have
almost the same average of citations as the excluded ones. This could indicate the se-
lected papers are academically acknowledged. The low citation numbers on the newest
papers are understandable because it takes time to develop citations.
58
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:75==
Figure 4.29: Average citation of included and excluded papers
Journal:
A total of 78 articles were distributed across 40 different journals, which could suggest
that the topic is explored across multiple disciplines.
The final selection of papers included studies from various journals, with only the ”Journal
of Cleaner Production” featuring more than one published paper table 4.14. This journal
had the highest number of publications, with 15 papers included in the initial search.
The second most frequent journal was Business Strategy and the Environment, with 10
papers found in the search. However, only one paper was included in the final selection.
Most were excluded due to either a lack of barriers discussed in the paper or a focus on
the food supply chain. This suggests that different approaches and focus areas when
addressing collaboration for circular economy (CE) transition.
All other journals included between 1 and 5 papers, making ”Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction” and ”Business Strategy and the Environment” stand out as the most prominent
sources.
Table 4.14: Included papers: Source title
Journal of Cleaner Production
4
Business Strategy and the Environment
1
International Journal of Production Economics
1
Circular Economy and Sustainability
1
International Journal of Production Research
1
Sustainable Production and Consumption
1
Computers and Industrial Engineering
1
Environment, Development and Sustainability
1
Industrial Robot
1
International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications
1
Journal of Business Research
1
Logistics
1
Sustainable Development
1
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review
1
4.4.4
Scoping SLR
This data-collection process has been documented and structured using the systematic
literature review process described in [2]. Evaluation of the planned protocol followed in
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
59
==PAGE:76==
the execution phase showed some boundaries.
For the selection of primary studies, the inclusion and exclusion criteria left some papers
of the newest studies from 20023 and 2024 in a gray zone. These papers were with a
main focus on collaboration however, their lack of defined barriers or challenges excluded
them. They were first excluded at filter 4 after a complete read of the article. Some chal-
lenges may have been possible to retrieve from the text of these papers, but from the
lack of clearly defined barriers and out of the risk of adding a bias of perspective on the
collection, they were excluded. These papers are addressed as filter 4 (F4) in appendix E.
The extraction requirements when collecting the barriers. This procedure required the
collection of barriers which was fulfilling the requirements. It could be challenging to de-
termine if the barriers were connected to collaboration or if they were connected to CE
transition. The collected barriers had very different abstraction levels. Some barriers had
generic descriptions that lacked specifying examples making them harder to classify. e.g.,
B.99.: ”Lack of vision and trust.”
4.5
Phase 5: Systematization of barriers for collaboration for CE
transition
When you know what to overcome this barrier becomes opportunities.
In this phase, the 224 collected barriers for collaboration for CE transition are further
analyzed. This is done through a process of 3 steps.
1. Step. Determine shared characteristics between the barriers.
2. Step. Cluster barriers.
3. Step. Extract information from barriers
4.5.1
Determine shared characteristics
It is of interest to determine the shared characteristics between the barriers to classify and
map them. This is done through a process.
1. Step. Barriers are roughly grouped into groups of similar characteristics.
2. Step. Each group is revisited with a full overview of collected characteristics.
3. Step. In each group, the subgroups are created.
First, they are roughly grouped into groups of similar characteristics. This process is an
iterative process where several different characteristics are tested.
Second, each group is revisited with a full overview of the characteristics. Identifying if
they are correctly placed or should be moved from the primary characteristic.
Lastly in each group, subgroups are created.
Determining similar characteristics is done by creating a new Excel sheet containing; The
Source code, ID number, Barrier, Description, and Context from Sheet B (appendix G).
These are then printed onto A3 paper and cut out so each barrier is on an individual card,
60
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:77==
see fig. 4.30a. All the cards are placed into a pile and the barriers are read one by one.
The barrier was then categorized through the following process. If the cards barrier con-
cerns a common area with other cards they are placed on the same table in a row. The
common area is the overall topic the barrier describes and is further described as a theme.
A new theme is created if a barrier can’t be placed in any other themes. This is done until
all the cards are placed on the tables fig. 4.30b.
(a) Barrier cards
(b) Tables with cards
Figure 4.30: Cluster process
Before beginning step 2 all rows are piled up again. Now there are piles of barriers con-
cerning similar areas. Each pile has a theme. Each theme is written on a sticky note
and placed at the tables as headlines. The list of themes includes: Trust, Data, Com-
munication, Data as a resource, Transparency, Data exchange, Type of data parame-
ters, Resources, Competition, Cross-Sector, Pricing, Organization structure, Guidance,
Business Model, Management, Product, Scale, Standards, Regulations, CE strategies,
Stakeholder, Value proposition, Strategy, Alignment, Information exchange, Geographic,
Power, Data sharing, Consumer, Reverse Logistic, Ecosystem readiness, Return on in-
vestment, Investment cost, Commitment, Culture, Linear organization legacy, Standards,
Scoping, Knowledge and skills.
When placing the themes, it became clear that some of them were similar or subgroups
of an even bigger theme, for example, the theme ”Data,” which then included: Data as
a resource, Data, Data exchange, Type of data parameters, Information exchange, Data
sharing. They all shared the characteristic of information between partners in SC or VC.
When all the themes were structured the barriers were again one pile at a time read and
placed under the theme where the barrier had the strongest connection. The total list of
themes can be seen in table 4.15.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
61
==PAGE:78==
In step 3. the barriers under each theme were collected into subgroups. At this point,
there are still 224 barrier cards, however after reading through the collected barriers 9
are removed from further investigation due to lack of information, to industry-specific, or
because it is a barrier for CE strategy implementation. The list can be found in appendix H.
Table 4.15: Theme list
Theme
Number
of barri-
ers
Description
Information flow & Data
39
Barriers against collecting, transferring, utilizing, and
extracting data, and information between actors.
Trust
6
Barriers against developing trust or affected by a lack
of trust.
Ecosystem Readiness
46
The internal and external readiness of actors, the
regulatory framework, incentives, CE strategies, and
technology in the ecosystem.
Organization
18
Barriers in the internal organization structure and cul-
ture.
Management
19
Barriers in management internal and external of an
organization.
Commitment
11
Barriers with focus on the different actors’ commit-
ment and their intent for collaboration in their circular
strategy.
Competition
10
Barriers with focus on competition between actors or
the free-market.
Economic
18
Barriers with focus on investment, cost, and ROI
Power asymmetry
2
Barriers because of the asymmetry of power between
actors.
Scalability
4
Barriers in the scalability of the partnership or strategy.
Alignment
15
Barriers with focus on shared goals, visions and ca-
pabilities.
Standards
27
Barriers with focus on regulation, metric standards,
quality and assessment.
Removed
9
Barriers with lack of collaboration, SC or VC context.
Total
224
Reflection on the process
This process has been done over several iterations because of the complexity of the topic.
Several different characteristics have been tried to classify the barriers. These were again
disqualified because of the high number of assumptions required to place many of the
barriers. The assumptions could be due to a lack of information, the barrier not belonging
to the category, or the barrier belonging to multiple categories.
A characteristic tried was:
• Internal / External placement of barrier. Internal barriers occur inside the firm or
individually. External barriers occur in the VC or SC.
62
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:79==
• Individual, firm, value chain and linking partners criteria from [15].
• Circular strategy supported or strengthened by overcoming the barrier.
• Knowledge / Money / Time resource needed to overcome the barrier or used on the
barrier.
The process of developing the characteristics while reading the barriers compared to hav-
ing them preliminary chosen. Required a clear definition of what each theme included
when developed. This also resulted in the additional step 2. of revisiting them all.
4.5.2
Clustering of barriers
The printed barriers are then clustered, if they cover a similar challenge. An example
could be the six barriers in table 4.16, which all concern standards. Number 1, 109, and
190 all concern almost the same issue of lacking standards for performance assessment.
Therefore, they are clustered into ”Lack of standard system performance indicators con-
cerning: evaluating collaboration, management, and CE in SC.” and written into a new
sheet called Barrier matrix fig. 4.31. Giving a lower level of detail but a higher level of
systematic overview.
Barrier 36 and 59 are not clustered together because they do not focus on performance
assessment. These two are written into the matrix individually.
The barrier ID numbers given at the raw data collection (Sheet B fig. G.1) are kept in
the barrier matrix fig. 4.31. Making it possible to back-track the clustering, grouping, and
more details if necessary. In the Barrier matrix, the following criteria are documented: ID
number, Source, Barrier, Detail/Examples, Theme, Subgroup.
Table 4.16: Examples of barriers
ID number
Barrier
Source
1
Lack of performance evaluation system (common standards)
[29]
36
Lack of data availability, reliability and verification because of
self-declaration and no standards.
[30]
59
Complicated ecosystem: Existing standards do not keep up.
[30]
109
Lack of standard system performance indicators for measuring CE in SC
[31]
190
Lack of system standardization for performance management
[32]
When writing the barriers into the barrier matrix with the created themes, it was clear that
some barriers had one main theme as primary effect and another of the developed themes
mentioned as secondary impact.
Table 4.17: Examples of barriers
ID number
Barrier
Source
15
Lack of shared vision and willingness to collaborate
[29]
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
63
==PAGE:80==
For example, barrier 15, is in the context describing a secondary impact in lack of trust.
Therefore, the barriers are connected to the themes in the barrier matrix with a strong
connection(1), a weak connection(4), and subgroup(2) fig. 4.32. If the barrier does not
include any of the other Themes in its description, it is not given a weak connection.
Figure 4.31: Snapshot from barrier matrix: Cluster example
Figure 4.32: Snapshot from barrier matrix
Reflection on the process
This process required a balance of the level of detail. The motivation for collecting the bar-
riers was to identify opportunities. It was also hoped to identify packages of opportunities.
If the level of detail is too high, the mapping could become too complex and muddying the
overview. If the level of detail is too low, there is the risk of losing the accurate picture of
the situation and the function of the mapping.
This process made it clear that the current situation is complex, and the barriers found
were not in just one specific area; they required multiple actors and roles.
64
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:81==
4.5.3
Interview
Four interviews were conducted with three companies to collect other barriers from the
industry. The barriers were collected through a semi-structured interview following the
interview guide described in appendix K. The interview was separated into three parts.
1. Part. Setting the scene by describing the objective, motivation, and goal of the
master’s thesis and barrier collection.
2. Part. Asking interview questions from the interview guide while adding follow-up
questions based on the conversation. The goal is to understand the companies’
current situations, collaboration, and experienced barriers without priming them with
material found in the literature.
3. Part. Showing an overview of themes from the barriers collection to collect additional
examples or context on barriers. The development of the overview is described in
the interview guide.
The barriers are mapped on individual sheets in the barrier matrix Excel, following the
same structure as the barriers described in section 4.5.2 see fig. 4.33. And then added
to the theme cards developed in the final stage. The result can be found in ??.
Additional information from interviews is structured in a separate sheet. Each column rep-
resents a characteristic, such as CE strategy, collaboration, orchestrator, governmental,
or customer. If an interview mentions a characteristic, a relevant quote is added. New
characteristics can be added as needed. This is solely to help maintain an overview of
what has been said in the interviews and to identify if any of the interviews mention sim-
ilar topics. Each cell contains only one quote and a new row is added to the company if
they have several quotes in the same topic fig. 4.34. All interviews key takeaways and
selected quotes are documented in appendix L, appendix M, appendix N, appendix O.
Figure 4.33: Snapshot of Interviews barrier collection
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
65
==PAGE:82==
Figure 4.34: Interview overview
Case companies
This section briefly introduces the three interviewed companies and why they were deemed
interesting. They are all well-established companies with more than 25 years on the mar-
ket. They all have different products and customer segments shown in table 4.18. They
are all placed at product manufacture in the value chain fig. 4.35. Company C manufac-
tures its components, whereas Company A sells its product to the customer. Adding them
a place a ”Component Manufacture” and ”Product Retailer”.
What makes them especially interesting is the companies’ different implementation stages
of CE strategies. One company is in the initial phase of understanding the potential and
assessing their readiness, another is in the piloting phase, and the last is in the scale-up
or full-scale implementation phase.
Figure 4.35: Illustration value chain based on Ready2Loop.org
66
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:83==
Table 4.18: Companies Interview
Company
Person
Product
Customer
A
Senior Sustainability
Product with
B2B
Specialist Engineer
onetime use components
B
Senior Sustainability engineer
Hardware with
B2B
Engineer
software as a service
C
Project lead
Onetime use product
B2C
(Corporate environmental strategy)
C
Head of Take-Back
Onetime use product
B2C
Program
Company A Is a B2B company selling equipment with one-time-use components. Their
circular strategy is the implementation of Reverse Logistics. They are in the pilot phase
of a Take-back system at EOL. As a company selling to multiple countries, the company
needs collaboration from a network of partners, which a second company orchestrates.
Another thing we have is a take-back program. A partnership is also involved here. It
involves data, transportation, a recycler, and ultimately also a buyer of the plastic.”... ”At
least the most challenging case, because it is fundamentally new.”... ”The incentive here
is that there are probably others who are better at this than us. We are not essentially a
waste management company.” (A. Q. 10.)
Company B is a B2B company selling hardware products with a software-as-a-service.
They are in the early stages of exploring the potential and assessing their readiness for
different Circular Economy (CE) strategies. They are especially looking into data collec-
tion from their supply chain to establish a baseline. Their retailers and customers have
approached them with innovative ideas, and currently, they are developing their strategy
and focus areas.
”There will be more of that (collaborations) later. Right now, we have some sparring net-
works. In a way, we are innovating together. And in my experience, many people face
the same challenges. If you’re kind, offer a cup of coffee, and ask insightful questions,
most people are willing to help, I think.” (B. Q. 7)
Company C is the only B2C company selling one-time-use products through retailers
to private consumers. Two employees from this company were interviewed. One is a
specialist in the internal organization and has a lot of experience in the company’s sus-
tainability development. While the other is a specialist in their take-back program. This
company’s take-back program is in the scale-up phase.
”No one has challenged industry collaboration, aside from the fact that it comes with high
complexity. And there is a complexity to it. This is the next thing we need to address...”
(C2. Q. 35)
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
67
==PAGE:84==
4.5.4
Barrier theme cards
The barrier theme cards are developed by combining the interview and the literature chal-
lenges. This has the lowest level of detail. The number of unique barriers in each theme
card is shown in fig. 4.36. The total number of unique obstacles is 130. The interviews
confirmed barriers in all themes and added additional barriers.
Figure 4.36: Graph number of barriers
30
6
Exchange
Missing interface for 
data exchange
Asymmetric 
information sharing
Risk of sharing core 
knowledge and 
intellectual property
Lack of incitement 
for Collaboration for 
data sharing 
Challenge in 
collecting data from 
sub supplier
Lack of knowledge 
sharing
Governance
Lack of framework 
for data gathering 
and sharing
Lack of incitement to 
raise transparency
GDPR - Limited 
consumer data 
Utilization
Missing data sharing 
structure
Challenge in 
identifying relevant 
data 
Lack of capabilities 
to utilize others’ data
Missing information 
to decisionmakers
Information 
disruption
Lack of data system, 
management, 
security and 
capacity 
Lack of knowledge 
on data management 
and I4.0
Lack of 
understanding value  
Challenge in data 
storage placement
Visibility
Lack of transparency 
beyond 1st, 2nd tier 
in VC
Imbalanced 
transparency 
upstream/downstrea
m
Lack of transparency 
beyond life cycle 
stages
Inward focus in data 
collection
Responsibility
Challenge in data 
reporting 
responsibility
Lack of data affect 
allocation of 
responsibility 
Traceability
Lack of product 
traceability
Lack of technology 
to support data 
collection and 
sharing
Poor product 
traceability
Standards
Standard system for 
performance 
assessment
Parameters to 
evaluate circularity
Data sharing 
protocols and global 
standards
Verification 
mechanism for data
Standardized 
circularity indicators
Setting standards 
between 
stakeholders with 
different objectives
How to measure 
sustainability
DATA – THEME CARD
(a) Front page:
Big circle:
literature barrier,
Small circle: interview barriers.
Data - Standards 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018, 
Luthra et al., 2022,  
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2022, 
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, 
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of a pre-defined standard system for performance 
assessment. 
Standard system for 
performance 
assessment
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of quantitative and qualitative parameters to evaluate 
circularity.
Parameters to evaluate 
circularity
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of global standards and sharing data protocols leading to 
weak performance measurements system.
Data sharing protocols 
and global standards
Gebhardt et al., 2023
Lack of verification mechanism for reliability of self-declared data 
with no standards. (Trust)
Verification mechanism 
for data
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of standardized circularity indicators: 
Threat that expected environmental benefit will not be realized 
after modifications in the stakeholder operations (Serna-Guerrero 
et al., 2022)
Standardized circularity 
indicators
Havinga et al., 2023, 
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Gebhardt et al., 2022,
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of setting standards between stakeholders with different 
objectives or practices.
The challenge that stakeholders monitor performance in different 
contexts creating complexity in developing collaboration. (Luthra 
et al., 2022). Different metrics and indicators makes it difficult to 
communicate in-between companies. (Chari et al., 2022)
Setting standards 
between stakeholders 
with different objectives
Company A
Company B
Challenge in how to measure sustainability and assess initiatives.
“…how do you measure sustainability? What initiatives gives 
most environment for the money?“ - A
"We measure it in different ways. We measure one thing in our 
LCA and another in our sustainability reporting, there We need to 
talk more about material quantities. What kind of impact do we 
want to achieve in relation to the cost? There are some really 
interesting trade-offs in this.“(B. Q.13)
How to measure 
sustainability
(b) Page 2: Barrier collection at lowest level of
detail. One barrier is connected to ”trust”
Figure 4.37: Theme card and barriers
68
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:85==
The theme cards are a front page featuring the main headline assigned to each barrier
fig. Q.1a. A large circle indicates the total number of barriers from the literature, while a
smaller number represents barriers identified from interviews. The theme cards provide
a broad overview with minimal detail but ensure a high-level overview to identify oppor-
tunities. On the subsequent pages, a table is created for each sub-criteria, including the
Headline on the theme card, barrier description, and sources that support the claimed
barriers and interviews. Some barriers are illustrated with examples written in italic. If
a barrier has an additional link to another theme, it is highlighted in red text. For those
seeking more details about the theme cards, the barriers can be arranged according to the
theme and sub-criteria in the barrier matrix appendix I, where examples are also included.
The developed theme cards can be found in full size in appendix Q including the table
of barriers belonging to each. The following text briefly introduces each theme, its main
barriers from interviews and literature, and its subcategories.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
69
==PAGE:86==
(a) Data
(b) Trust
(c) Ecosystem R.
(d) Organization
(e) Management
(f) Commitment
(g) Competition
(h) Economic
(i) Power
(j) Scale
(k) Alignment
Figure 4.38: Theme cards 2:2
70
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:87==
Figure 4.39: Data
Data
Data is the theme car with most barriers and consists of all the barriers related to mea-
suring, collecting, and exchanging data and information flow. This also includes com-
munication, as collaboration requires data engagement (Company C). The data theme
comprises 30 unique barriers from the literature and six barriers identified in the inter-
views. All the interviewed companies face challenges with data. It is divided into seven
subcategories: Standards, Traceability, Visibility, Responsibility, Data exchange, Data
utilization, and Data governance.
Standards address the lack of consensus among stakeholders and the challenges of dif-
fering objectives or practices among them [28]. According to [32], this leads to increased
complexity in developing collaboration. Eleven different sources identified barriers within
this category. The most frequently mentioned barrier is ”Lack of a pre-defined standard
system for performance assessment.” This includes evaluating the performance of imple-
menting a circular strategy within supply chain (SC) or value chain (VC) collaborations
[31], [32], [29], [33], [34]. The absence of standardized circular indicators can create un-
certainty regarding whether the expected environmental benefits are realized following
modifications in stakeholders’ operations [35]. Various metrics and indicators, such as
material savings, energy, or water, are used in measuring sustainability. This presents a
challenge in determining which metric has the highest impact (Company A, B) and adds
to the complexity of stakeholders monitoring performance in different contexts [28], [32],
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
71
==PAGE:88==
[30], [36]. These factors are viewed as potential hindrances and complexities in develop-
ing collaboration [32].
Traceability addresses the absence of tracking for materials or products. The two most
frequently mentioned issues were ”Lack of material or product traceability, including ori-
gins, quality, lifecycle monitoring, and trust in shared information” [29] [33]. This leads to a
secondary impact on trust between partners and hampers performance assessment. The
second barrier is the lack of technology to enable data collection and exchange through-
out the entire supply chain, rather than just between two partners [30] [31]. Five different
sources identified barriers within this category.
Visibility encompasses the lack of transparency across the value chain. Unlike traceability,
which involves data on materials moving through the supply chain. The challenge lies in
the lack of transparency beyond the first or second tier of the value chain [30], or in the
insufficient data sharing both upstream and downstream, leading to an imbalanced level
of transparency [30]. It is primarily the original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) that
require data but fail to provide their own data in return [30]. The visibility challenge may
also stem from companies not understanding what data exists or could be collected within
the value chain, as they primarily focus on their own needs when measuring data. This
can result in stakeholders lacking data in certain areas of the value chain, unaware that
the data is actually being collected in other segments [35], [33]. Three different sources
highlight barriers in this area.
Responsibility involves the challenge of determining who is responsible for collecting what
data, what the requirements should be [30], and how the lack of data impacts the allocation
of responsibilities and the relationships between the suppliers [36]. Only two different
sources imposed barriers in this category.
Utilization addresses the lack of structure and how to use received data [35][30]. This is
the subcategory with the most barriers (9 unique). However, it was only collected from
7 individual sources. The challenges lie in how to utilize others’ data to promote circular
economy [35], getting the information to decision-makers at the right time [31], and being
able to store and manage it [36][34]. Company A observed that it took years for the
sustainability department to gather data before other parts of the organization recognized
its actual value.
Governance addresses the lack of frameworks and incentives for data gathering and shar-
ing [30], as well as the impact of GDPR on product and system lifetime data that could be
collected [35]. Only two distinct sources imposed barriers in this category.
Exchange addresses the insufficient flow of data [30], communication [37] [31], and infor-
mation [28] [35] [23]. This subcategory has six unique barriers sourced from nine distinct
references. The issues of delay and asymmetric communication and information shar-
ing within this category are also mentioned, potentially hindering supplier integration [37].
The limited sharing of knowledge and intellectual property [28] [35] [23], coupled with
data discrepancies and excessively strict specifications and regulations [35], contributes
to trust issues. Company C also highlighted it as a prerequisite, stating: “Knowledge
is often something companies are reluctant to share, but at the same time, it is the key
prerequisite for achieving truly great results.” (C1. Q. 23).
72
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:89==
Figure 4.40: Trust
Trust
Trust comprises all the barriers related to building or affected by trust. Five unique barri-
ers were identified from six different papers and two interviews. The most frequently men-
tioned barrier is ”Lack of trust in other actors or partners in the value chain”[30][35][29][33].
One argument is that the partnerships are young and have therefore not yet developed,
requiring third-party involvement [30]. The trust categories can be separated into barriers
of needing, having, and developing trust. Trust is needed for transparency [30][36] or
collaboration (Company A, C). Having trust in the value chain [30][35][29][33] and sectors
[35] is vital. Developing trust between companies that do not conduct business with each
other [35] is also essential. Trust is connected to data because the lack of trust affects
confidence in the data [30].
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
73
==PAGE:90==
Figure 4.41: Ecosystem
Ecosystem readiness
Ecosystem readiness comprises all barriers related to readiness of actors, supply chain,
frameworks, incentitives, strategies and technology. Ecosystem readiness are the second
biggest theme consisting of 17 barriers from the literature and 7 barriers from interviews.
It are split into three subcategories; Regulation and standardization, Frameworks and
theory and Industry.
Regulation and standardization address frameworks and incentives provided by govern-
mental stakeholders in the ecosystem, such as the EU or UN. There are nine barriers,
four of which stem from Company C. Seven papers discuss barriers in the context of
regulations. These barriers encompass deficiencies in the enforcement of regulations
[34][37][30], overregulation [30], lack of standardization [29],[36][38][30], and outdated
regulations [39][30]. This indicates that there are various perspectives on whether there
should be more or less regulation and whether it should be broader or more specific. Com-
pany C also faces the challenge of ensuring compliance with regulations like competition
laws while developing industry collaborations:
“One of the major challenges is when bringing competing companies together. We are
naturally extremely cautious to ensure that no issues arise regarding cartel formation or
any other legal concerns.” (C2 Q. 11),
74
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:91==
supported by [30] in the literature. Moreover, Company C identifies a lack of legislation or
mechanisms to support collaborative initiatives.
Frameworks and theory address theoretical knowledge, frameworks, and support within
the ecosystem. There are six barriers, two of which originate from interviews. Eleven
different papers highlight barriers in this subcategory. The barrier mentioned most fre-
quently is the inadequate awareness of circular economy principles among supply chain
partners and organizations [29], [34], [37], [31], [23], [38], and [36]. Company B also
identifies the challenge and necessity of choosing between the conceptual frameworks of
circular economy and eco-design.
”...There is a significant overlap between the two. But what we call things also matters in
terms of how we communicate and operationalize them...”(B Q.5).
This could indicate a lack of skills, knowledge, experience, training, awareness, and know-
how, aligning with the second most cited barrier: the absence of successful business mod-
els, practical guidance, and frameworks for implementing circular economy principles in
the supply chain and fostering a collaborative process [31], [39], [33], [37], [16]. Company
C also points out the lack of systemic mechanisms for fostering collaboration.
The industry addresses ecosystem challenges based on technology and infrastructure.
There are nine barriers identified, with only one stemming from an interview. These bar-
riers were gathered from ten different papers. The most commonly cited barriers, men-
tioned by four papers, are the lack of infrastructure and suppliers [29][33][23][36], where
insufficient investment in appropriate technology limits potential candidates for collabora-
tion [36]. The shortage of suppliers mentioned is primarily for circular processes such as
disassembly and recycling. This may suggest a shortage of value recovery companies,
as well as maintenance and repair firms, which were also mentioned by company C.
”Getting a recycling partner up and running in this field, which is a relatively new area, has
also been a challenge. Again, when it comes to value recovery companies—how many
are there, and can they build a viable business case around this? (C2. Q. 14).
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
75
==PAGE:92==
Figure 4.42: Organization
Organization
Organization includes all barriers related to the structure and culture of an organization.
There are nine barriers along with two identified from the interviews. Organizations are
divided into two subcategories: organizational structure and culture, and organizational
resistance.
The organization structure and culture pose challenges in transitioning to a circular econ-
omy due to a lack of flexibility [37] [36], insufficient collaboration across departments [36],
inadequate readiness assessments [16], and the time required to create awareness and
foster a mindset within the organization (Companies A, B). Another challenge involves
the differing cultures and structures between organizations in cross-sector collaborations,
with varying logics, belief systems, and behaviors [32].
Organizational resistance to transitioning has the main barrier of lack of willingness/re-
luctance to change [32][36][34][28] or being bound to the current business model [40][30]
and a linear incentive system that favors linear targets [39][35]. The incentive system is
viewed as a management decision that hinders the organization and gives a connection
to management.
76
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:93==
Figure 4.43: Management
Management
Management encompasses all barriers related to internal organizational management and
external management of collaboration. Management is therefore divided into two cate-
gories: Internal and External. There are 11 unique barriers identified in the literature and
2 from interviews.
Internal management involves six barriers identified across ten different papers. Three
of these barriers focus on willingness and readiness, while the other three emphasize
planning and risk. The primary barrier is a lack of support and commitment from top man-
agement [23][31][32][34][29][36][37]. This barrier can narrow the organization, limiting its
potential for collaboration [32], and is also identified as a necessity for implementing a
circular strategy in the supply chain [36]. Company C supports this view, mentioning it as
a starting point for initiating collaboration:
”You need to have your top management with you. You must anchor what you do in top
management - so that is where we start.” (C2 Q.20).
The second most frequently mentioned barrier was a lack of knowledge and experience
regarding circular economy concepts, business opportunities and vision [41][34][32].
External barriers across collaboration identified six barriers across six different papers
and one interview, which revealed one new barrier and reinforced another. The most
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
77
==PAGE:94==
frequently mentioned barrier was the challenge of developing a coordination plan due to
the complexity of operating and monitoring the supply chain [23][17][16]. This barrier was
also acknowledged by Company C, which also indicated a lack of experts in orchestrating
or managing partnerships.
”It’s also worth considering whether there’s a need for more professional expertise to
manage these partnerships so that not everyone who needs to learn it. Because it is a
discipline in itself...” (C1 Q. 12)
Other barriers included differences among the actors in their practices and risk manage-
ment approaches [30][32] and limited transparency due to fear of sharing proprietary in-
formation [37].
Figure 4.44: Commitment
Commitment
Commitment involves all barriers associated with the level of intent in collaboration and
implementing circular strategies.
There are eight barriers to commitment, two identi-
fied through interviews. Eight different papers discuss these barriers. The most men-
tioned barriers are the lack of willingness and acceptance of new circular business models
among stakeholders [29][33][36]. It is also noted that there is a dilemma regarding which
of the multiple circular strategy initiatives to prioritize (Company A) or the different level
of intent among actors in the supply chain [36] or reducing the intent to simplify collabo-
78
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:95==
ration with anyone other than the closest or most trusted partner in the value chain [39].
Company C also mentions partnership as a long-term resource commitment, which can
be a barrier for those companies that cannot afford it.
Figure 4.45: Competition
Competition
Competition involves barriers hindering collaboration due to the market competition. There
are five unique barriers, and one from an interview. The barriers come from five different
papers. The most mentioned barrier is the lack of transparency and information sharing,
from the fear of losing market opportunities [32] [29] [30] or competitive advantage among
actors in the supply chain if they can calculate resale value in advance [35]. Company C
also mentions the uncertainty surrounding the confidentiality barrier in collaboration with
competitors and how the perception of it is a barrier as well:
” One of the major barriers can be confidentiality. How do you collaborate with a competi-
tor? How do you share information in a way that doesn’t harm your own production?”...
”But how do you prevent it from being perceived as a barrier and instead create a process
where everyone can fully engage and contribute in the best possible way to achieve the
highest level of circularity—or whatever the goal may be?”(C1 Q. 21)
This is also supported by [32] mentioning that competitions create tension among collab-
orators leading to frustration and violation of ”true spirit”.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
79
==PAGE:96==
Figure 4.46: Economic
Economic
Economic has four barriers from the literature mentioned in 9 different papers and three
from interviews. Economic involves barriers hindering collaboration due to the lack of eco-
nomic attractiveness and uncertainty on return of investment [31][29][33][34][30][42][37].
This can be due to the fear of not being able to manage the supply chain properly [37],
the unstable prices of secondary resources [37][31] or the limited financial resources and
funding [34][23]. Company C mentions the shortage of long-term resources to orchestrate
the collaboration effectively. Where Company A mentions the uncertainty in net-value
creation and ownership,
”There isn’t necessarily an existing system in place. So, there is also a certain level of
mutual risk or a shared investment along the way. Who owns the outcome? ... What
is the value for us? Do we have an interest in owning this system? What’s in it for us?
What’s in it for you? When is the price right?... what is net-value?” (A. Q. 16)
80
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:97==
Figure 4.47: Power structure
Power structure
Power structures are only mentioned in two papers, each presenting its own unique bar-
rier. From the interviews, two companies agreed on one common barrier, bringing the total
to three barriers. One of the barriers from the literature is asymmetric resources in organi-
zations [32]. Where the other is asymmetric market power due to many small companies
and few large suppliers [39]. Both companies interviewed recognized the asymmetric
power from economies of scale when collaborating with their suppliers, strengthening the
first barrier.
“…I think we’re missing some economy of scale to be able to change much.”... ”That’s just
natural. And as I see it, we simply don’t have a large enough critical mass. Our suppliers
are big enough that they have other, larger customers than us.” (B Q. 9.)
“… Even though we see ourselves as a large company, for many suppliers, we are just a
small and insignificant player. But when we unite as an industry, we often share the same
suppliers, and that allows us to exert greater pressure.”(C1 Q. 11)
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
81
==PAGE:98==
Figure 4.48: Scale
Scale
The scale consists of three barriers mentioned in only three papers from the literature;
however, there are also three identified in the interviews. The main challenges are the
lack of scalability due to the need for stakeholder collaboration [39] and the uncertainty
associated with scaling up:
”…We are in a pilot phase now, but when we scale up—that’s important. Can we scale
up without breaking the bank?” (A. Q. 19)
For the company in the scaling phase, there was the challenge of how to scale and how
to establish a long-term solution within the value chain.
”That’s the challenge we’re facing—how do you scale? It’s not an art to run a small pilot
project in one or two cities. The real challenge is scaling it into something with a significant
impact—something that becomes an integrated part of the entire value chain. That’s what
we are working on.” (C2 Q. 26) And then there were how to structure and standardize the
scaling phase also mentioned by company C.
82
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:99==
Figure 4.49: Alignment
Alignment
Alignment focuses on the challenge of alignment between collaborative partners. There
are six barriers from 10 different papers and two from the interviews. The main barrier are
the lack of shared vision [36][34][29][33],[28][37][32] or misalignment or strategic priorities
and business model [36]. The versatility of the ecosystem is also cited as a challenge
in finding mutual value opportunities [39]. There is also a misalignment of capacities
and capabilities, which, according to [36], is often realized in the implementation phase.
Additionally, there is the alignment of roles and responsibilities, both mentioned by [16]
and Company A.
4.5.5
Barrier connection
When reading the context and description of the barriers, it was noticed that some barriers
had a second effect, which also connected with one of the other themes. This connec-
tion was documented when clustering the barriers in the barriers matrix from appendix I
where each barrier got a number 4 if the connection was deemed valid. This connection
has now been drawn, giving the following diagram fig. 5.6. Where Data standard was
linked to trust through the ”Lack of verification mechanism for reliability of self-declared
data” [30]. The absence of verification has a secondary effect on trust between part-
ners. In data traceability, the ”Lack of material or product traceability, including origins,
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
83
==PAGE:100==
Figure 4.50: Connection between barriers
quality, lifecycle monitoring, and trust in shared information” [29] [33]. This leads to a
secondary impact on trust between partners and hampers performance assessment. In
data exchange: data discrepancies and excessively strict specifications and regulations
[35], contribute to trust issues. Trust is also connected to data because the lack of trust
affects confidence in the data [30]. Competition was also connected to data due to the
lack of transparency because of market competition [35], [30],[32]. Competition was con-
nected by management due to limited transparency and willingness from management
[37]. Management is connected by economic due to the uncertain financial cost manage-
ment of circular supply chain, which is highlighted as important [37]. Organizations are
also pointing at management due to the barrier of linear incentive systems and institu-
tional conditions set by the management are a barrier in the organization, slowing down
the implementation of circular economy [39][35][36]. Management points to commitment
because they lower their priorities of implementing circular economy to other things like
production, expansion, or market share [31]. Commitment points on alignment due to the
collaboration partners can have misaligned their commitment level of implementation of
circular economy [36]. Alignment connects with trust because of the lack of shared vision,
trust and fear of losing control are all mentioned in the same combination [34][29][33].
The last one also points at trust in organizations because the organization’s resistance to
change is also due to a lack of trust [36][34].
These connections found are not supported enough to say how the connection should be.
And there could be different connections depending on the situation or types of collabo-
ration. However, in the interviews, the interviewees mentioned things in specific orders
and used phrasing like: ”firstly, these are done..” and ”after this, it is possible to”. This
could indicate that there could be a better or worse structure of how and when to handle
the different barriers. However first the barriers should be seen as opportunities.
84
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:101==
5
Discussion
The developed theme cards from phase 5 and the support elements from phase 3 have
been discussed and reflected on in this chapter, along with the research questions.
5.1
Phase 6: Mapping opportunities
5.1.1
From barrier to opportunity
The theme cards developed in Phase 5 can be seen as representing key building blocks
for circular collaboration. Each block gives insights into actions, and critical stages requir-
ing attention. These cards document barriers and act as opportunity triggers, illustrating
where targeted interventions could support collaboration for circular economy transition
in the value chain.
Figure 5.1: From barrier to opportunity
It is under the connection that understanding and overcoming barriers can actively create
opportunities. A suggestion could be to systematically flip each barrier into a correspond-
ing opportunity, thereby allowing companies to build structured capability maps that can
help them clarify current capabilities and desired future competencies. This approach
builds on concepts from orchestration literature, such as the orchestration mechanics
proposed by Parida et al.[16] and collaboration mechanics described by Hansen [15].
It could also integrate with other capabilities mentioned in the literature like dynamic ca-
pabilities(human, knowledge, leadership, culture, mindset, management strategy, opera-
tional strategy, resilience etc.) [36] of management strategies (reducing & coping, training
& education, performance indicators, tools & digitalization, pricing strategy, risk manage-
ment etc.) [37], cross-sector strategies [32]. Other papers brought enablers like techno-
logical aspects from industry 4.0 (digital transform process, remote assistance and guid-
ance, system integration and interoperability) [38] or data sharing structures to promote
different solutions [35].
These maps could offer a structured way to create awareness and guide decision-making,
helping companies assess where they stand today and where they need to improve their
collaborative capabilities.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
85
==PAGE:102==
Figure 5.2: Capability maps
A capability map could help companies identify capability gaps — indicating where invest-
ment is needed in skills, technology, or processes. It could also function as a guide for
structured collaboration, helping companies align their collaboration efforts by highlighting
shared priorities, potential risks, and weaknesses. For example, the challenges related to
data sharing, performance measurement, and cross-company data utilization were found
to be central barriers across the companies interviewed.
Data - an example
Data can serve as an example of how to use the capability map based on the collected
barriers fig. 5.3.
• For the identified practical gap relates to data standardization [35]. There could be
a developed, standardizing format and data protocols [16] [37].
• To reduce information asymmetry and lack of sustainability assessment, there could
be proposed information-sharing schemes and five performance indicators [35] work-
ing as common proof points. The aim is that decisions are made based on shared,
transparent goals, with all actors optimizing toward the same parameters or targets.
This was also used by one of the interviewees: ”With four companies, we entered
the market together, creating a joint initiative to solve this challenge collectively.
We identified five proof points to work on, demonstrating that an industry-solution
and collaboration are the right things to do, more than individual companies doing it
alone. And so far, we have been quite successful in achieving this.” (C2 Q. 5).
• Knowledge on new technologies such as product passports could further facilitate
data sharing and transparency across the value chain [30].
• Setting clear guidelines when having meetings and discussions: ”We have actually
built a high level of trust, allowing us to have good discussions on these matters.
86
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:103==
However, when it comes to anything related to marketed products, competition in
the market, and pricing, we do not discuss these topics at all. We have clear guide-
lines in place for every meeting, ensuring that these subjects are off-limits. Meeting
agendas are set, and minutes are taken. Naturally, there are important considera-
tions when collaborating with direct competitors.” (C2 Q. 13)
Figure 5.3: Capability map focus points
However, this approach remains conceptual and requires further validation. Future work
could involve pilot studies where companies apply the capability mapping process in real-
life collaborations, mainly to test its adaptability across different industries and collabora-
tion types in a PS-phase.
5.1.2
Stages
From the support element for collaboration stages of the implementing and building pro-
cess was defined fig. 5.4.
Figure 5.4: The three stages
An insight from the interviews is the importance of structuring collaboration into clear
stages and analyzing support elements in Phase 3 [16][15]. All companies described
similar initial steps when initiating their circular transition. One company also suggested,
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
87
==PAGE:104==
if it were possible, to place the themes in sequence.
”... perhaps it can also be se-
quenced. I try to consider: How do you initiate it? How do you structure the discussion?
How do you work towards a clear end goal in what you are doing?” (C2 Q. 30) The steps
all the companies described were:
• Collecting data - To establish a baseline, understanding the areas of impact, and
strategy development. Enabling fact-based discussions where they are speaking
with data.
• Knowledge sharing - By developing training material and guidelines.
• Top management support - Ensure the the top management are onboard.
There are a indication that there could be developed a structure of how these building
blocks can be placed in order as illustrated in fig. 5.5. It could be a sequence the building
block could be placed or followed. Maybe one building block has to be fully developed as
a key before initiating the second.
Figure 5.5: Building blocks
This could suggests that collaboration could benefit from a sequenced model. It could be
where certain elements must be in place before others can succeed. Or the connection
could maybe also not be generic but specific from company to company or collabora-
tion type to collaboration type. Connecting with the readiness assessment suggested by
Parida [16].
Figure 5.6: Connection between barriers
The interlinks between the theme cards could also be an initial suggestion of mapping the
desired structure. Going back to thinking about the mapping of stages. There could also
be an indication that the building blocks with most arrows could be the ones to begin with
in the company. It could also be that a company should try to make their own sugges-
88
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:105==
tions of arrows between the building block and then identify where they have the biggest
opportunities and what should be handled first, taking the connection into consideration.
These interlinks are solely an indication, building on the context of the barriers from the
structured literature review and the interviews. There has been no methodology used in
the weighing of the connection. For robustness of the study, this would require further
investigation with the stages of developing a partnership as the focus.
Future work could explore whether such a sequencing guide could be generalized across
industries, or in different collaboration types (value chain, industry, cross-sector).
5.2
The role of the orchestrator
The orchestrator role was highlighted in both the literature and empirical data. The com-
plexity of circular collaborations, particularly those including multiple companies or even
competing firms. The complexity was also found as an unavoidable consequence be-
cause of various added operations [38] or that to enable circular strategy of recycling and
reverse logistic there has to be developed a sector or industry solution (company C,A).
Requiring company C and A to work with competing firms or a network of firms
According to Hansen, [15] collaboration can be split into cooperation and coordination.
Cooperation as the motivation and commitment of the collaboration with the pursuit of a
shared goal and benefits, with contributing. Coordination is on the other hand describing
the structure and process of collaboration with the aim of aligning actions and facilitating
information sharing [15]. According to Hansen, does a higher uncertainty need more
extensive coordination [15]. This coordination role is also described in other literature as
the orchestration role [16].
This need for a central orchestrator to manage alignment, coordination, and progress
tracking resulted in company C taking the orchestrator role itself, driving collaborative in-
novation, building commitment and trust, data sharing, and business model development.
The company tells that the role of orchestrating is a key success factor for the collaboration
to continue and the strategy to be implemented.
”Right now this is what we orchestrate, we are driving innovation, developing business
models, building commitment and trust, and organize ourselves around these efforts. We
are also collecting and utilizing data, so we talk with data and so on. This is actually
what we orchestrate right now, and we do it in a period to drive this to get things moving.
However, to make it sustainable in the long run, there needs to be a separate structure
where these activities can be.” (C2 Q. 36)
However, company C also emphasizes the need of a separate structure. Company A, not
acting as orchestrator themselves, relied on a third-party orchestrator who had a network
portfolio of suppliers. Having the orchestrator as an external facilitator rather than one
from the collaborating companies. The value recovery company from the initial workshop
also took the orchestration role as a value chain partner. This was not for the sector
or industry collaborations, but for the value chain and cross-value chains collaboration.
Another value recovery company, Stena Recycling, has developed Stena Consulting [19],
helping companies orchestrate their new networks as a mediator or facilitator. Company
C and A both state that they are not value recovery companies, so they don’t expect
to keep the role as orchestrator. This could indicate a link between orchestration and
value recovery companies - when the circular strategy includes reverse logistics. A car
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
89
==PAGE:106==
company, Renault, has developed a holding company including different small companies
with a focus on the different stages in the closed loop of an electric car. This holding
company works as a legal orchestrator.
This opens up an interesting business opportunity: the development of independent or-
chestration entities that act as neutral facilitators. These entities could help with:
• Compliance with laws and regulations. Especially when it is collaboration between
competitors.
• Alignment of goals, process and data-sharing
• Neutral facilitation of trust-building and conflict resolution.
The combination of all this could indicate that there is a value proposition for a standalone
orchestration service, especially when the collaborations are between competing or cross-
sector actors.
5.3
Types and dynamics of collaboration for circular economy
transition
The research identified the three collaboration types that companies engage in for circu-
lar economy transition. These three types were mentioned several times and included
different dynamics.
• Value chain collaboration - Includes direct collaboration between value chain actors.
• Sector/Industry collaboration - Includes collaboration between competitors.
• Cross-sector collaboration - Includes collaboration of actors with different cultures,
logics, and incentives.
Each type brings different dynamics and challenges. For value chain collaboration, exist-
ing customer-supplier relationships often provide a starting point for trust and data sharing
[35]. For sector collaboration, competitors must overcome concerns around intellectual
property and competition law, requiring clear governance structures [30]. For cross-sector
collaboration, partners face cultural and knowledge asymmetries, requiring additional ef-
fort in aligning expectations, value proposition and creating a common language [32].
A recurring theme across all collaboration types was the importance of trust, transparency
and commitment — all frequently mentioned in the literature and highlighted in all inter-
views. Transparency, particularly through data sharing, emerged as a key enabler of trust
[35].
The support elements from the literature had an increased focus on the commitment to
collaboration depending on the chosen strategy or business model [17] [27] [20]. The level
of collaboration intent and ownership dynamics [20] can turn out to be some of the main
focus companies have to align before starting a collaboration. As company C mentioned,
are the complexity changing, whether it is a value chain or a sector partnership.
”And this can become even more complicated if you have to collaborate with competitors...
It could be partnerships with those who are aligned on a shared mission. But then there
are also those who are used to not sharing anything at all—let alone collaborating—who
are suddenly expected to work together instead of competing against each other. So,
there are many different dynamics in partnerships.” (C1. Q. 1)
90
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:107==
5.4
Conclusion
This thesis initially focused on exploring collaboration within the value chain to support
the transition to a circular economy. The aim was to develop a generic, initial form of
support to guide such collaborations. However, as the research progressed, it became
evident that value chain collaboration is not a single, uniform concept. Instead, there
are multiple distinct types of collaboration, each with different characteristics, challenges,
and dynamics depending on factors such as the position in the value chain, the industries
involved, and the specific circular strategies being pursued.
A finding was that the responsibility for enabling and driving circular collaborations is often
placed on the orchestrator. This is largely due to the complexity and resource demands
associated with initiating and managing these partnerships. The literature similarly em-
phasizes the orchestrator’s role, and existing collaboration frameworks were found to tar-
get orchestrators, offering support in three key areas primarily: The first one was ”De-
cision support” for selecting the appropriate circular business model or strategy based
on the intent of the collaboration. The second was ”Guidance” on the stages and pro-
cess for implementing the collaboration. The third was ”Descriptions of collaboration”
and orchestration mechanics, such as governance structures, communication protocols,
and decision-making processes. The most frequently supported areas were the ”Deci-
sion support” followed by the ”Descriptions of collaboration,” with only one ”Guidance”
support, which was Paridas [16]. It was however found relatively close to also being a
”Descriptions of collaboration”.
The dynamics of collaboration were consistently framed around the importance of trust,
commitment, and transparency. These factors were seen as fundamental enablers for
successful collaboration, especially when partners had divergent interests or competing
priorities.
A range of challenges were identified through both literature and empirical data, which
could be grouped into the following categories: Data, Trust, Ecosystem Readiness, Orga-
nization, Management, Commitment, Competition, Economic, Power, Scale, Alignment,
and Standards. Among these, ”Data” emerged as the most critical challenge, serving
as both a barrier and a potential enabler for overcoming many of the other challenges.
This finding was strongly supported by the industry representatives, who highlighted data
sharing and standardization as their first priority in circular collaborations.
Additionally, the nature of the challenges shifts depending on the type of collaboration. In
competitor collaborations(industry collaboration), trust becomes a top priority. In cross-
sector collaborations, the organizational differences and cultural had an effect ass well.
The proposed support concept developed in this thesis focuses on reducing collabora-
tion complexity by mapping goals, expectations, and anticipated challenges early in the
process, while simultaneously enhancing transparency between actors. The most critical
challenges often arise at the beginning of collaborations, when uncertainty is high, and
the orchestrator typically addresses these.
Finally, the research found that orchestrators themselves exist in different forms — they
can be manufacturing companies, value recovery companies, independent consultancy
firms specialized in orchestration, or legally established entities such as holding compa-
nies. This diversity in orchestrator roles suggests a potential need for further research into
what needs there are in a support tool — particularly if the role of orchestration evolves
into a standalone business model in its own right.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
91
==PAGE:108==
5.5
Reflection and further work
5.5.1
Further work
The comprehensive DS-I developed in this thesis suggests how the findings could be used
to develop support for collaboration, but the complexity of the field makes it difficult to
conclude whether the proposed support fully addresses all relevant aspects. Due to time
constraints, this study was limited to empirical data collected from four companies — one
value recovery company and three product manufacturers. This narrow sample presents
a limitation, as only two value chain partners were involved in the empirical phase.
Future research could benefit from expanding the empirical data collection to include other
value chain actors, maintenance and repair services, product retailers, sub suppliers, and
logistic providers, to gain a more holistic perspective. Additionally, broadening the scope
across multiple industries would help in providing insights into whether there are more
general patterns and where collaboration opportunities lie.
It would also be valuable to explore how collaboration dynamics shift depending on the
type of collaboration — for example, whether the collaboration takes place within the value
chain, across different sectors, or within the same industry.
Future work could also benefit from applying alternative methods, such as cross-sector
or cross-value chain workshops that bring together different actors to co-create a support
for collaborative solutions.
Longitudinal studies, where the development of collaborations is tracked over time, could
also provide a better understanding of how different building blocks evolve and interact
throughout the process. Investigating how and if the importance of the different stages
in the collaboration process changes depending on this context, to help tailor the support
more effectively.
5.5.2
Reflection
Throughout this thesis project, I developed several academic and research-related skills,
particularly in conducting systematic literature reviews. The second literature review fol-
lowed a more structured process compared to the first, due to my progression in under-
standing both the field and the methodology. Reflecting on the first review, I recognize
that improvements could have been made in the design of the search string and the se-
lection criteria for papers. If the project were to be repeated, the search strategy would
have a higher focus on literature related specifically to collaboration support and tools,
rather than just the broader context.
This research aimed to develop a general form of support that could be applied across
industries, without targeting a specific industry or layer in the value chain. However, due
to the heavy representation of manufacturers in both the literature and the empirical data,
the resulting support can carry a degree of bias toward the manufacturing sector. Because
both the academic and empirical focus is skewed toward one type of actor.
Overall, this thesis has provided valuable learning not only in terms of academic research
processes but also in understanding the complexities of collaborative processes in circular
value chains. It has strengthened my ability to critically assess methodologies, handle
empirical data, and reflect on the implications and limitations of my own work.
92
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:109==
6
Met Learning Objectives
Analysis
• Investigate, describe, and present different barriers, risk and failures that may
occur when implementing value chain collaborations for circular economy
transition. Through the phase 4 of this thesis, barriers are collected and analyzed
from the literature. The literature has collected the barriers from many different ac-
tors in the value chain, giving a total of 224 barriers. After analyzing and clustering
of the barriers, a total of 130 barriers were structured into theme cards, where most
of the risks were highlighted.
• Investigate, describe, and present different collaboration dynamics for CE. Dynam-
ics were found and discussed throughout both phase 3 and 5. They were compared
to different collaboration types(value chain, sectorial, and cross-sector) and a part
of the understanding and discussion for the developed support usage and value.
• Define relevant knowledge within the field of CE in relation to linear economy and
sustainability. In phase 1 of the research clarification, the dynamics, terms, and
different frameworks describing circular economy were presented. Giving an insight
into the complexity and diversity of circular economy transition.
Design & Evaluation
• Develop an overview of Opportunities for value chain collaboration for CE transition.
The capability map gives an overview of where to determine strength and opportu-
nities. The developed overview of opportunities is a combination of phase 5 and 6.
In phase 5, a run-through of the placement and structure of the main challenges is
made. Understanding and knowing the placement of the typical pitfalls helps under-
stand the opportunities which are possible in phase 6. Mapping the opportunities in
the capability map.
• Develop an initial support that guides the establishment of collaboration in CE tran-
sition. The capability map in combination with the stages of iteration for when a
company should revisit and update the map to keep the target, and be able to guide
where the strength and opportunities are in collaboration for circular economy tran-
sition. The guiding phase is the stages of iteration and sequence, which the building
blocks can be placed.
• Identify future research areas enabling collaboration for CE transition. Future re-
search areas are developed and described in the future research. Here, different
methodological types of research and focus areas are mentioned.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
93
==PAGE:110==
94
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1]
Lucienne Blessing. DRM, a Design Research Methodology. 2009. isbn: 978-1-84882-
586-4.
[2]
Jorge Biolchini et al. “Systematic Review in Software Engineering”. In: (2005).
[3]
M. Geissdoerfer et al. “The Circular Economy – A new sustainability paradigm?” In:
Journal of Cleaner Production 143 (2017), pp. 757–768. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.
2016 . 12 . 048. url: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 -
85008162813 & doi = 10 . 1016 % 2fj . jclepro . 2016 . 12 . 048 & partnerID = 40 & md5 =
03e5f54cc80682e3fc2c95445b588e4f.
[4]
J. Kirchherr, D. Reike, and M. Hekkert. “Conceptualizing the circular economy: An
analysis of 114 definitions”. In: Resources, Conservation and Recycling 127 (2017),
pp. 221–232. doi: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.005. url: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85029397642&doi=10.1016%2fj.resconrec.2017.09.
005&partnerID=40&md5=86fec55bb69197c637ff3cfb1f3072e9.
[5]
P. Ghisellini, C. Cialani, and S. Ulgiati. “A review on circular economy: The ex-
pected transition to a balanced interplay of environmental and economic systems”.
In: Journal of Cleaner Production 114 (2016), pp. 11–32. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.
2015 . 09 . 007. url: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 -
84945954752 & doi = 10 . 1016 % 2fj . jclepro . 2015 . 09 . 007 & partnerID = 40 & md5 =
4fc5ec3ad9b81a0f2c9c1b4cc4d12537.
[6]
J. Korhonen, A. Honkasalo, and J. Seppälä. “Circular Economy: The Concept and
its Limitations”. In: Ecological Economics 143 (2018), pp. 37–46. doi: 10.1016/j.
ecolecon.2017.06.041. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-
s2.0-85030676608&doi=10.1016%2fj.ecolecon.2017.06.041&partnerID=40&md5=
28d1b774d7d8106d9420831d1567d04c.
[7]
N.M.P. Bocken et al. “Product design and business model strategies for a circu-
lar economy”. In: Journal of Industrial and Production Engineering 33.5 (2016),
pp. 308–320. doi: 10.1080/21681015.2016.1172124. url: https://www.scopus.com/
inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 - 84975267199 & doi = 10 . 1080 % 2f21681015 . 2016 .
1172124&partnerID=40&md5=989b60b5a6a2389a372b4600aee95946.
[8]
M. Lieder and A. Rashid. “Towards circular economy implementation: A compre-
hensive review in context of manufacturing industry”. In: Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction 115 (2016), pp. 36–51. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . jclepro . 2015 . 12 . 042. url: https :
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84957849870&doi=10.1016%
2fj.jclepro.2015.12.042&partnerID=40&md5=ac196ee035746fa3085623c60408cbca.
[9]
A. Tukker. “Product services for a resource-efficient and circular economy - A re-
view”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 97 (2015), pp. 76–91. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
jclepro . 2013 . 11 . 049. url: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 -
s2.0-84928770369&doi=10.1016%2fj.jclepro.2013.11.049&partnerID=40&md5=
62c087660e947a8c7e7560fd006c793a.
[10]
Darian Stibbe and Dave Prescott. The SDG Partnership Guidebook. 1st ed. Vol. 1.
1. United Nations and The Partnering Initiative, 2020. 93 pp. url: https://sdgs.un.
org/sites/default/files/2022- 02/SDG%20Partnership%20Guidebook%201.11.pdf
(visited on 09/10/2024).
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
95
==PAGE:112==
[11]
THE 17 GOALS | Sustainable Development. url: https://sdgs.un.org/goals (visited
on 12/02/2024).
[12]
The technical cycle of the butterfly diagram. May 23, 2022. url: https : / / www .
ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/articles/the-technical-cycle-of-the-butterfly-diagram
(visited on 07/06/2024).
[13]
Circular Strategies Scanner. CIRCit Nord. url: https://circitnord.com/tools/the-
circular-strategies-scanner2/ (visited on 11/08/2024).
[14]
ready2LOOP.org. ready2LOOP. ready2LOOP. url: https : / / ready2loop . org / en /
process (visited on 02/23/2025).
[15]
E.G. Hansen and J.C. Schmitt. “Orchestrating cradle-to-cradle innovation across
the value chain: Overcoming barriers through innovation communities, collabora-
tion mechanisms, and intermediation”. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology 25.3 (2021),
pp. 627–647. doi: 10.1111/jiec.13081. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.
uri?eid=2-s2.0-85096666421&doi=10.1111%2fjiec.13081&partnerID=40&md5=
9cc4658211bd0bf679c8617a4de6a007.
[16]
V. Parida et al. “Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in circular economy: A two-stage
transformation model for large manufacturing companies”. In: Journal of Business
Research 101 (2019), pp. 715–725. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.01.006. url: https:
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85059949371&doi=10.1016%2fj.
jbusres.2019.01.006&partnerID=40&md5=74e11a012add522efa84c76f4dc97bc3.
[17]
F.C. Schultz, S. Everding, and I. Pies. “Circular supply chain governance: A qualitative-
empirical study of the European polyurethane industry to facilitate functional circu-
lar supply chain management”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 317 (2021). doi:
10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128445. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-
s2.0-85111550722&doi=10.1016%2fj.jclepro.2021.128445&partnerID=40&md5=
e823b97060be9ba7b4910f1fb881ad13.
[18]
You Say Tomato; We Say Tom-Auto: Ford and Heinz Collaborate on Sustainable
Materials for Vehicles | Ford Media Center. url: https://media.ford.com/content/
fordmedia/fna/us/en/news/2014/06/10/ford-and-heinz-collaborate-on-sustainable-
materials-for-vehicles.html (visited on 02/24/2025).
[19]
Designing electronics for a circular economy | Stena Recycling. July 5, 2023. url:
https://www.stenarecycling.com/what-we-offer/stena-circular-consulting/success-
stories-tools/success-stories/designing-electronics-for-a-circular-economy/ (visited on
02/24/2025).
[20]
K. Chirumalla et al. “Enabling battery circularity: Unlocking circular business model
archetypes and collaboration forms in the electric vehicle battery ecosystem”. In:
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 199 (2024). doi: 10.1016/j.techfore.
2023 . 123044. url: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 -
85179128201 & doi = 10 . 1016 % 2fj . techfore . 2023 . 123044 & partnerID = 40 & md5 =
94e22b8965cafd9b96779e0833c76449.
[21]
Lotta Ruippo et al. “Innovating for Sustainability: Attributes, Motivations, and Re-
sponsibilities in the Finnish Food Packaging Ecosystem”. In: Circular Economy and
Sustainability 3.2 (June 2023), pp. 919–937. issn: 2730-597X, 2730-5988. doi: 10.
1007/s43615-022-00217-2. url: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s43615-022-00217-
2 (visited on 07/08/2024).
[22]
Doraid Dalalah et al. “An integrated framework for the assessment of environmental
sustainability in wood supply chains”. In: Environmental Technology & Innovation
27 (Aug. 1, 2022), p. 102429. issn: 2352-1864. doi: 10.1016/j.eti.2022.102429. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352186422000827 (visited on
07/08/2024).
96
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:113==
[23]
F. Khan and Y. Ali. “Implementation of the circular supply chain management in the
pharmaceutical industry”. In: Environment, Development and Sustainability 24.12
(2022), pp. 13705–13731. doi: 10.1007/s10668- 021- 02007- 6. url: https://www.
scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85122657653&doi=10.1007%2fs10668-021-
02007-6&partnerID=40&md5=b1e7c435fa74f0789120ca5e57ac5b2e.
[24]
Circular transformation & change | Stena Recycling. May 7, 2024. url: https : / /
www.stenarecycling.com/what-we-offer/stena-circular-consulting/circular-business-
solutions/circular-transformation-change/ (visited on 02/24/2025).
[25]
A. Eisenreich et al. “Toward a circular value chain: Impact of the circular economy on
a company’s value chain processes”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 378 (2022).
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.134375. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?
eid=2-s2.0-85139596157&doi=10.1016%2fj.jclepro.2022.134375&partnerID=40&
md5=7bcd95e8d4d2e232794bd882a7fe893d.
[26]
Circular-ish: embracing the messy reality of circular economy innovation. Sept. 29,
2022. url: https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/articles/circular-ish-embracing-
the-messy-reality-of-circular-economy-innovation (visited on 11/11/2024).
[27]
E. Hultberg and R. Pal. “Lessons on business model scalability for circular economy
in the fashion retail value chain: Towards a conceptual model”. In: Sustainable Pro-
duction and Consumption 28 (2021), pp. 686–698. doi: 10.1016/j.spc.2021.06.033.
url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85109615488&doi=10.
1016%2fj.spc.2021.06.033&partnerID=40&md5=8b3c137dffdc6518a180e0ffa6b72ffb.
[28]
F. Havinga, M. Mahdad, and W. Dolfsma. “Unpacking ecosystem dynamics in the
construction industry: The transition toward circular construction ecosystems”. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production 414 (2023). doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137455.
[29]
Ipek Kazancoglu et al. “A conceptual framework for barriers of circular supply chains
for sustainability in the textile industry”. In: Sustainable Development 28.5 (2020).
_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/sd.2100, pp. 1477–1492. issn:
1099-1719. doi: 10.1002/sd.2100. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/sd.2100 (visited on 12/23/2024).
[30]
Maximilian Gebhardt et al. “Determining requirements and challenges for a sustain-
able and circular electric vehicle battery supply chain: A mixed-methods approach”.
In: Sustainable Production and Consumption 33 (Sept. 1, 2022), pp. 203–217. issn:
2352-5509. doi: 10.1016/j.spc.2022.06.024. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2352550922001701 (visited on 12/23/2024).
[31]
Kannan Govindan and Mia Hasanagic. “A systematic review on drivers, barriers,
and practices towards circular economy: a supply chain perspective”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Production Research 56.1 (Jan. 17, 2018). Publisher: Taylor &
Francis _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1402141, pp. 278–311. issn:
0020-7543. doi: 10.1080/00207543.2017.1402141. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2017.1402141 (visited on 12/23/2024).
[32]
Sunil Luthra et al. “Overcoming barriers to cross-sector collaboration in circular sup-
ply chain management: a multi-method approach”. In: Transportation Research Part
E: Logistics and Transportation Review 157 (Jan. 1, 2022), p. 102582. issn: 1366-
5545. doi: 10.1016/j.tre.2021.102582. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1366554521003392 (visited on 12/23/2024).
[33]
Ipek Kazancoglu et al. “Investigating barriers to circular supply chain in the tex-
tile industry from Stakeholders’ perspective”. In: International Journal of Logistics
Research and Applications 25.4 (May 4, 2022). Publisher: Taylor & Francis _eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/13675567.2020.1846694, pp. 521–548. issn: 1367-5567. doi:
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
97
==PAGE:114==
10.1080/13675567.2020.1846694. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/13675567.2020.
1846694 (visited on 12/23/2024).
[34]
Emilia Taddei et al. “Circular supply chains theoretical gaps and practical barriers:
A model to support approaching firms in the era of industry 4.0”. In: Computers
& Industrial Engineering 190 (Apr. 1, 2024), p. 110049. issn: 0360-8352. doi: 10.
1016/j.cie.2024.110049. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360835224001700 (visited on 12/23/2024).
[35]
Rodrigo Serna-Guerrero et al. “Overcoming data gaps for an efficient circular econ-
omy: A case study on the battery materials ecosystem”. In: Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction 374 (Nov. 10, 2022), p. 133984. issn: 0959-6526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.
133984. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652622035569
(visited on 12/23/2024).
[36]
Arpita Chari et al. “Dynamic capabilities for circular manufacturing supply chains—
Exploring the role of Industry 4.0 and resilience”. In: Business Strategy and the Envi-
ronment 31.5 (2022). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/bse.3040,
pp. 2500–2517. issn: 1099-0836. doi: 10.1002/bse.3040. url: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/bse.3040 (visited on 12/23/2024).
[37]
Felipe Alexandre De Lima and Stefan Seuring. “A Delphi study examining risk and
uncertainty management in circular supply chains”. In: International Journal of Pro-
duction Economics 258 (Apr. 1, 2023), p. 108810. issn: 0925-5273. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijpe.2023.108810. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925527323000427
(visited on 12/23/2024).
[38]
Somesh Agarwal, Mohit Tyagi, and Rajiv Kumar Garg. “Framework development
and evaluation of Industry 4.0 technological aspects towards improving the circu-
lar economy-based supply chain”. In: Industrial Robot: the international journal of
robotics research and application 49.3 (Apr. 21, 2022), pp. 555–581. issn: 0143-
991X, 0143-991X. doi: 10.1108/IR-10-2021-0246. url: https://www.emerald.com/
insight/content/doi/10.1108/IR-10-2021-0246/full/html (visited on 12/26/2024).
[39]
Mateusz Wielopolski and Willem Bulthuis. “The Better Building Initiative — a Collab-
orative Ecosystem Involving All Stakeholders as Catalyst to Accelerate the Adoption
of Circular Economy Innovations in the Construction Sector”. In: Circular Economy
and Sustainability 3.2 (June 1, 2023), pp. 719–733. issn: 2730-5988. doi: 10.1007/
s43615-022-00205-6. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s43615-022-00205-6 (visited on
12/26/2024).
[40]
R. Agrawal et al. “Building a Greener Supply Chain with Blockchain: A Review and
Future Research Directions”. In: Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering. 2024,
pp. 139–152. doi: 10.1007/978-981-99-8343-8_12. url: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85187654430&doi=10.1007%2f978-981-99-8343-
8_12&partnerID=40&md5=0ee1cc8623205fc1f5f409e79d9a2588.
[41]
J.A. Cerqueira-Streit et al. “Sustainable Supply Chain Management in the Route
for a Circular Economy: An Integrative Literature Review”. In: Logistics 5.4 (2021).
doi: 10.3390/logistics5040081. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?
eid=2-s2.0-85132298820&doi=10.3390%2flogistics5040081&partnerID=40&md5=
e777cc3e31cbd053ac8ec0b7f3424dab.
[42]
Abhijit Majumdar et al. “A triple helix framework for strategy development in circu-
lar textile and clothing supply chain: an Indian perspective”. In: Journal of Cleaner
Production 367 (Sept. 20, 2022), p. 132954. issn: 0959-6526. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
jclepro . 2022 . 132954. url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S095965262202546X (visited on 12/26/2024).
98
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:115==
[43]
ready2LOOP.org. Ecosystem Map. ready2LOOP. url: https://ready2loop.org/en/
169/Ecosystem+Map (visited on 07/07/2024).
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
99
==PAGE:116==
100
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:117==
A
Digital appendix NEEDS to be
updated!
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
101
==PAGE:118==
Table A.1: Digital appendix NEEDS to be updated!
Appendix
Url
The folder
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/
1bW32FzXKzcuja_vJ_OJdM4-j1WHG0Cgy?usp=
sharing
Phase 4 Paper selection
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/
1fGHzJC7eY3yscgjP_7M1YQU68X1WYK9f/edit?
usp=sharing&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=
true&sd=true
Phase 4 Sheet A
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1r_
2SOMhbrOOm_A4hoMPfgU-ImV7n0IgL/edit?usp=
sharing&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=true&
sd=true
Phase 4 Sheet B
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/
1ZjuOqKYHgm7JAzprw8zT51XgUqbs8D57/edit?
usp=sharing&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=
true&sd=true
Excluded barriers
https://drive.google.com/file/d/11ofEkOWHX9er6p_
17AlfljkWFYKZrEsa/view?usp=sharing
102
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:119==
B
Initial Study
Initial research and data collection was done to develop search terms and conduct a
workshop in the case company. This was done through three different actions; Preliminary
literature search, visiting LOOP Forum 2024 https://www.loopforum.dk/, and meeting with
key stakeholders in the case company.
Development of workshop
Participants
These were determined by the distribution of knowledge in the company. Having the
participants responsible for stakeholders, partnerships, and business innovation.
Scope
The workshop was scoped to focus on the case company’s ecosystem with the aim of
identifying and understanding the interaction with key actors in the ecosystem. This it
described as key flows.
Framework
The framework for the workshop was the ”Ecosystem Map” from Ready2LOOP toolbox
[43] with modified cards to fit the company’s interactions and preliminary experience.
The cards were developed to help map the interaction between the stakeholders The first
three cards: Challenge, Dependency, and Information focused on the type of relationship
there was between the stakeholders.
The second three cards: End-Of-Production, End-Of-Use, and End-Of-Life focused on
the placement of the product-interaction compared to the placement of the loop in the
technical side of the butterfly diagram, see figure ??.
The bottom three cards: Regeneration Quality, Material (Quality and Amount), and Pro-
duct/Portfolio focused on value generation of the relationship between the stakeholder
and the recovery firm.
To investigate who or what was the initiator of a partnership an arrow was made in the
initiator’s direction. A red dot symbolizes the ”Motivation starting point” to illustrate the
reason for initiation. To understand what was a success for a partnership or the company
a green dot symbolizes the ”Success Measure Point”.
Execution
The company did not have a previous ecosystem map so the following steps were exer-
cised;
1. Identification of relevant stakeholders
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
103
==PAGE:120==
Figure B.1: Workhop cards
104
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:121==
2. Define the boundary of the ecosystem. Here government, legislation, and investors
were excluded.
3. Define the interactions between the actors of the ecosystem. Here the cards were
used.
4. Discuss and reflect on the ecosystem. Here the participants were asked if they saw
any new patterns in their ecosystem. Or saw some engagement with stakeholders
they could do differently?
Results from workshop
The case company is a Northern value recovery company that focuses on recirculating at
material levels. This can be discarded products, manufacturing waste, or post-consumer
when the product no longer can be reused. The company specialize in plastic, and the
sorting service of separating different types of plastic from each other. The company are
versatile with many types of plastic and are therefore working across different industries
and sectors.
The companies eco-system was mapped through a workshop to identify different stake-
holders, sectors and structures. The company were build on circular economy principle,
as one of the new players in the value chain. Its collaboration mechanics are specially
interesting compared to companies build on the linear principle, who need the transition to
circular economy. Through the workshop three network positions were detected; closed-
loop, open-loop, and institutions/academic research, see figure B.2. With the closed-loop
the company delivers a transformational development to the ecosystem.
Collaboration
Two motivational starting points for the creation of new relationships were found as; ”skills
and knowledge” and ”academic validation”.
With the company’s skills and knowledge from previous experience. The company acted
as a path-maker, educator, and match-maker for the actors in the ecosystem. Especially
actors who were working with the transition to CE. Alignment of strategies and needs were
highlighted as very important for a successful partnership. Making the value recovery
taking the function of orchestrating.
The academic validation of previous collaborations, tests or research that the company
had done enhanced their credibility for companies needing tests and joint co-creation of
new circular solutions. However a one of the main challenges for the company was the
lack of readiness, skills, or know-how from the company in re-introducing the recycled
material back into the company, leading to open-loop solutions.
It was found that the value recovery company has different roles in the position of the three
different networks. In general, the company has the orchestrating role in the closed-loop
and open-loop, managing information, match-making, and pushing business innovation.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
105
==PAGE:122==
Closed-loop
The company was founded and developed on the idea of closed-loop manufacturing. This
is where the company provides a service for mainly plastic converters (material sourcing),
brand owner, and manufacturing enabling the companies to recirculate their material from
their production waste or post-consumer to a new product. The company never owns the
material in the closed loop but provide the service. The material recovery enable the firms
who is using the company as a supplier to develop new design strategies and business
models, or optimize their production with less waste material.
The value creation is recycled mono-material which the firms can reintroduce to their own
product by substituting some of the virgin material.
Open-loop
It is not always possible for the manufacturer to reuse their material, this can be because
of legislation, mechanical properties, or lack of skill-set and knowledge. However, their
controlled waste streams, can be sorted into mono-materials utilized by another company,
introducing and industrial symbiosis.
The receiving company could be from the same sector or a completely different one.
Open-loop is seen as the less circular solution, why it is more seen as the last resort or
an enabler for the manufacturing company and legislation to evolve. The match-making
of the upstream and downstream is done by the value recovery company.
The value creation is recycled mono-material which can be utilized by another industry or
firm substituting some of the virgin material.
Academic Research, Legislation and institutions
The company participates in different collaborations with institutions and networks advo-
cating academic research. This could be assessment labs, certification body or material
providers. Especially the closed-loop model network requires a certifying and entrusting
of the product using the recovered material as a substitute minimizing the volume of virgin
material.
Key actors
The key actors found were; manufacturing companies, brand owners, plastic converters,
and academic partners e.g. universities, certification body, assessment labs.
For the actors the company worked as a business innovations partner, conducting tests
and trials together with the actors to co-create a solution.
Key flows
The key flows were material and information. The most used card in the workshop was
the information card. Every actor has a high amount of information flow, by speaking with
106
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:123==
Figure B.2: Material recovery company’s placement in value chains
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
107
==PAGE:124==
data.
With the matchmaking function of the open-loop solutions the company, is ensuring co-
ordination between different stakeholders in the network.
In the closed-loop solution, the company did not only have contact with the nearest stake-
holders like manufacture or material sourcing but also the distribution logistics and sales
and retail. Especially information, experience, skill-set, and data validation, when orches-
trating the co-created solution were a key flow between the company and all the actors of
the ecosystem.
Readiness of manufacturing firms
It was found that a certain initial readiness has to be assessed in the firm. Making the
recycling company work as a general assessor or consultant before becoming a supplier
or partner. The firms had barriers needing to be resolved before enabling the value chain.
This were both individual and on firm level barriers.
An individual barrier was mainly understanding the perspective and possibility of CE and
value of recycled/reintroduced material.
A firm barrier was mainly synchronizing the knowledge between the actors of the firm. This
could be knowledge about their waste handling ass is, developing of internal goals, limits,
resources and motivation. Waste has often been neglected and therefore documented in
a less detailed level as other processes in the production, resulting in a low knowledge
about, volume, quantity and quality of waste streams. This process may be developed or
initiated together with the case company.
A Value chain barrier were that Production and manufacturing cite are developed after lin-
ear approach and optimization. Making the infrastructure a challenge for implementation
of waste management or initial waste deposit places for initial sorting. Controlled waste
streams was seen as a barrier needed to be resolved before a partnership or collaboration
could be a possibility.
Design strategies and business model development
The material recovery enable the firms to develop new design strategies and business
models. It was observed that the manufacture companies mainly develop a new branch
in their production using the recovered material. This could be for a lower aesthetic re-
quirement product where e.g. the color does not matter.
Partnership or supplier
In the case company partnerships are seen as having a higher impact on decisions and
being dynamic with the manufacture/brand owner. This sets the company in a better
market position with the others company’s partnership as a brand reference for quality.
However a partnership requires the case company to allocate resources into develop-
ment together with the manufacture/brand owner e.g. for new business models, design
strategies, test different step-ups, and even facilitate or orchestrate the partnership struc-
ture and communication. The allocation on resources in collaborative innovation is a long
108
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:125==
term investment without a direct value capture, because the partnership is often about the
transitioning and innovation of CE models.
If the company takes the role as solely a supplier the company has a limited impact on
the decisions. However the relationship are static and well defined. The value capture is
stable and resources are used at a constant rate depending on the contract. The case
company has experience moving from supplier to partner after, a prove of concept and
knowledge phase.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
109
==PAGE:126==
C
Phase 2: Paper selection
Key
Date
16/10/2024
Filter
Criteria
Title
DOI
Year
Source title
Cited by
Excluded
Lacking support
Impediments of product recovery in circular supply chains: Implications for sustainable 
development
10.1002/sd.2472
2023 Sustainable Development
15
Excluded
Lacking collaboration
Toward a circular value chain: Impact of the circular economy on a company's value chain 
processes
10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.134375
2022 Journal of Cleaner Production
48
Excluded
EC-1
Crossing actors' boundaries towards circular ecosystems in the organic food sector: Facing 
the challenges in an emerging economy context
10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137093
2023 Journal of Cleaner Production
7
Excluded
Lacking support
Circular economy practices among Chinese manufacturers varying in environmental-
oriented supply chain cooperation and the performance implications
10.1016/j.jenvman.2010.02.013
2010 Journal of Environmental Management
424
Excluded
EC-2
Towards the integrated supply chain practices through industry 4.0: A bibliometric and 
systematic review
10.1002/bsd2.70037
2024 Business Strategy and Development
0
Excluded
EC-2
Implementation of the circular supply chain management in the pharmaceutical industry
10.1007/s10668-021-02007-6
2022 Environment
48
Excluded
EC-2
The Blockchain Effect on Courier Supply Chains Digitalization and Its Contribution to 
Industry 4.0 within the Circular Economy
10.3390/su16167218
2024 Sustainability (Switzerland)
2
Excluded
EC-2
Impact pathways: digital product passport for embedding circularity in electronics supply 
chains
10.1108/IJOPM-01-2024-0012
2024
International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management
2
Excluded
EC-2
The effects of digital technology application and supply chain management on corporate 
circular economy: A dynamic capability view
10.1016/j.jenvman.2023.118082
2023 Journal of Environmental Management
47
Excluded
EC-1
Digitalization of Bio-Based Value Chains
10.1007/978-3-030-80876-1_16
2021 Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems
1
Excluded
Lack of support
Sustainable Supply Chain Management in the Route for a Circular Economy: An Integrative 
Literature Review
10.3390/logistics5040081
2021 Logistics
26
Included
IC-1
Orchestrating cradle-to-cradle innovation across the value chain: Overcoming barriers 
through innovation communities, collaboration mechanisms  and intermediation
10.1111/jiec.13081
2021 Journal of Industrial Ecology
42
Included
IC-2
Lessons on business model scalability for circular economy in the fashion retail value 
chain: Towards a conceptual model
10.1016/j.spc.2021.06.033
2021 Sustainable Production and Consumption
45
Included
IC-2
Enabling battery circularity: Unlocking circular business model archetypes and 
collaboration forms in the electric vehicle battery ecosystem
10.1016/j.techfore.2023.123044
2024 Technological Forecasting and Social Chang
22
Included
IC-2
Circular supply chain governance: A qualitative-empirical study of the European 
polyurethane industry to facilitate functional circular supply chain management
10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128445
2021 Journal of Cleaner Production
40
Included
IC-1
Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in circular economy: A two-stage transformation model 
for large manufacturing companies
10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.01.006
2019 Journal of Business Research
261
 TITLE ( ( "supply chain" OR "value chain" OR "ecosystem" ) AND ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( "manufacturer*" OR "producer*" OR "industry*" ) AND ( "collaborat*" OR "partner*" ) 
AND ( "orchestrat?r*" OR "organ?ation*" ) ) )AND (KEY("circular*")) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , "ar" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , "re" ) )
Figure C.1: Phase 2: Paper selection from search string
(TITLE ( ( ”supply chain” OR ”value chain” OR ”ecosystem” ) AND ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( (
”manufacturer*” OR ”producer*” OR ”industry*” ) AND ( ”collaborat*” OR ”partner*” ) AND (
”orchestrat?r*” OR ”organ?ation*” ) ) )AND (KEY(”circular*”)) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE
, ”ar” ) OR LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , ”re” ) )) - [16.10.2024] - Scopus
Google sheet: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/17zo4CjCMzk1joGgfdTceTHDBSZMZ77N3/
edit?usp=sharing&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=true&sd=true
It is recommended to view the file in Microsoft Excel to have the same formation as in the
shown figure fig. C.1
110
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:127==
Key
Date
16/10/2024
Filter
Criteria
Title
DOI
Year
Source title
Cited by
Excluded
Lacking support
Impediments of product recovery in circular supply chains: Implications for sustainable 
development
10.1002/sd.2472
2023 Sustainable Development
15
Excluded
Lacking collaboration
Toward a circular value chain: Impact of the circular economy on a company's value chain 
processes
10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.134375
2022 Journal of Cleaner Production
48
Excluded
EC-1
Crossing actors' boundaries towards circular ecosystems in the organic food sector: Facing 
the challenges in an emerging economy context
10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137093
2023 Journal of Cleaner Production
7
Excluded
Lacking support
Circular economy practices among Chinese manufacturers varying in environmental-
oriented supply chain cooperation and the performance implications
10.1016/j.jenvman.2010.02.013
2010 Journal of Environmental Management
424
Excluded
EC-2
Towards the integrated supply chain practices through industry 4.0: A bibliometric and 
systematic review
10.1002/bsd2.70037
2024 Business Strategy and Development
0
Excluded
EC-2
Implementation of the circular supply chain management in the pharmaceutical industry
10.1007/s10668-021-02007-6
2022 Environment
48
Excluded
EC-2
The Blockchain Effect on Courier Supply Chains Digitalization and Its Contribution to 
Industry 4.0 within the Circular Economy
10.3390/su16167218
2024 Sustainability (Switzerland)
2
Excluded
EC-2
Impact pathways: digital product passport for embedding circularity in electronics supply 
chains
10.1108/IJOPM-01-2024-0012
2024
International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management
2
Excluded
EC-2
The effects of digital technology application and supply chain management on corporate 
circular economy: A dynamic capability view
10.1016/j.jenvman.2023.118082
2023 Journal of Environmental Management
47
Excluded
EC-1
Digitalization of Bio-Based Value Chains
10.1007/978-3-030-80876-1_16
2021 Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems
1
Excluded
Lack of support
Sustainable Supply Chain Management in the Route for a Circular Economy: An Integrative 
Literature Review
10.3390/logistics5040081
2021 Logistics
26
Included
IC-1
Orchestrating cradle-to-cradle innovation across the value chain: Overcoming barriers 
through innovation communities, collaboration mechanisms  and intermediation
10.1111/jiec.13081
2021 Journal of Industrial Ecology
42
Included
IC-2
Lessons on business model scalability for circular economy in the fashion retail value 
chain: Towards a conceptual model
10.1016/j.spc.2021.06.033
2021 Sustainable Production and Consumption
45
Included
IC-2
Enabling battery circularity: Unlocking circular business model archetypes and 
collaboration forms in the electric vehicle battery ecosystem
10.1016/j.techfore.2023.123044
2024 Technological Forecasting and Social Chang
22
Included
IC-2
Circular supply chain governance: A qualitative-empirical study of the European 
polyurethane industry to facilitate functional circular supply chain management
10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128445
2021 Journal of Cleaner Production
40
Included
IC-1
Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in circular economy: A two-stage transformation model 
for large manufacturing companies
10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.01.006
2019 Journal of Business Research
261
 TITLE ( ( "supply chain" OR "value chain" OR "ecosystem" ) AND ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( "manufacturer*" OR "producer*" OR "industry*" ) AND ( "collaborat*" OR "partner*" ) 
AND ( "orchestrat?r*" OR "organ?ation*" ) ) )AND (KEY("circular*")) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , "ar" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , "re" ) )
==PAGE:128==
D
Phase 2: Support Comparison
Special
Lacking
Focus
Article
Number
Criteria used for identifying different CBMs, characterizing and 
categorizing them into archetypes:
•
Resource flow
•
Collaborative ecosystem engagement
•
Ownership dynamic 
Lacking a general 
approach with a focus on 
the EV battery value 
chains.
Value proposition, value co-creation, value delivery, value 
capture for three CBM archetypes: Extending, Sharing, 
Looping. 
Value co-creation indicates:
•
The level of collaboration intensity (open, semi-open 
or closed relationship).
•
The depth and breadth of required collaboration.
Enabling battery circularity: Unlocking 
circular business model archetypes 
and collaboration forms in the electric 
vehicle battery ecosystem. 
(chirumalla_enabling_2024)
DOI: 10.1016/j.techfore.2023.123044
1
Developed for ecosystem orchestrators as leaders or owner of 
platform and large resourceful  manufacturing companies. 
•
Ecosystem orchestrators are seen as the ones to set, develop 
(with partner) and impose certain standards on the ecosystem 
partners.
•
Ecosystem orchestrators bears the nurturing investment cost,  
facilitates investment and competence development of key 
ecosystem partners. 
•
Ecosystem orchestrators coordinate negotiation with e.g. risk-
benefits, give-take rules.  
Lack of distribution of 
roles and responsibilities 
of actors. 
Circular economy transformation of ecosystem require an 
orchestrator. 
The two-stage model of ecosystem transformation to 
circular economy run by ecosystem orchestrator.
1.
Readiness assessment – Goal: Identification of the 
transformation gap.
2.
Orchestration mechanisms (Standardization, 
negotiation, nurturing mechanism)
Bottom line outcome : Financial, environmental, social
Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in 
circular economy: A two-stage 
transformation model for large 
manufacturing companies. 
(parida_orchestrating_2019)
DOI: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.01.006
2
Focus on the commitment of supply chain players and the 
difference of vertical versus horizontal collaboration. 
Looking into the change of complexity with horizontal 
collaborations and the higher environmental gain. 
Facilitator can be Raw Material or Product Manufacture and 
Retailer.  
Lack of value co-creation, 
BM, and other CE 
strategies than recycling. 
Horizontal or vertical collaboration. 
Facilitator of supply chain collaboration. 
Looking into the different dynamics coming for different 
commitment in the SC:
•
Collective self-commitment
•
Individual self-commitment
•
Service for collective commitment 
•
Service for individual commitment 
Circular supply chain governance: A 
qualitative-empirical study of the 
European polyurethane industry to 
facilitate functional circular supply 
chain management 
(Schultz_circular_2021)
DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128445
3
Business model strategies approaches depending on 
collaboration intensity (open, semi-open or closed 
relationship).
Lessons on business model scalability 
for circular economy in the fashion 
retail value chain: Towards a 
conceptual model
(Hultberg_Pal_2021)
DOI: 10.1016/j.spc.2021.06.033
4
Continue on next page
Figure D.1: Phase 2: Support comparison
112
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:129==
Special
Lacking
Focus
Article
Number
Criteria used for identifying different CBMs, characterizing and 
categorizing them into archetypes:
•
Resource flow
•
Collaborative ecosystem engagement
•
Ownership dynamic 
Lacking a general 
approach with a focus on 
the EV battery value 
chains.
Value proposition, value co-creation, value delivery, value 
capture for three CBM archetypes: Extending, Sharing, 
Looping. 
Value co-creation indicates:
•
The level of collaboration intensity (open, semi-open 
or closed relationship).
•
The depth and breadth of required collaboration.
Enabling battery circularity: Unlocking 
circular business model archetypes 
and collaboration forms in the electric 
vehicle battery ecosystem. 
(chirumalla_enabling_2024)
DOI: 10.1016/j.techfore.2023.123044
1
Developed for ecosystem orchestrators as leaders or owner of 
platform and large resourceful  manufacturing companies. 
•
Ecosystem orchestrators are seen as the ones to set, develop 
(with partner) and impose certain standards on the ecosystem 
partners.
•
Ecosystem orchestrators bears the nurturing investment cost,  
facilitates investment and competence development of key 
ecosystem partners. 
•
Ecosystem orchestrators coordinate negotiation with e.g. risk-
benefits, give-take rules.  
Lack of distribution of 
roles and responsibilities 
of actors. 
Circular economy transformation of ecosystem require an 
orchestrator. 
The two-stage model of ecosystem transformation to 
circular economy run by ecosystem orchestrator.
1.
Readiness assessment – Goal: Identification of the 
transformation gap.
2.
Orchestration mechanisms (Standardization, 
negotiation, nurturing mechanism)
Bottom line outcome : Financial, environmental, social
Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in 
circular economy: A two-stage 
transformation model for large 
manufacturing companies. 
(parida_orchestrating_2019)
DOI: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.01.006
2
Focus on the commitment of supply chain players and the 
difference of vertical versus horizontal collaboration. 
Looking into the change of complexity with horizontal 
collaborations and the higher environmental gain. 
Facilitator can be Raw Material or Product Manufacture and 
Retailer.  
Lack of value co-creation, 
BM, and other CE 
strategies than recycling. 
Horizontal or vertical collaboration. 
Facilitator of supply chain collaboration. 
Looking into the different dynamics coming for different 
commitment in the SC:
•
Collective self-commitment
•
Individual self-commitment
•
Service for collective commitment 
•
Service for individual commitment 
Circular supply chain governance: A 
qualitative-empirical study of the 
European polyurethane industry to 
facilitate functional circular supply 
chain management 
(Schultz_circular_2021)
DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128445
3
Business model strategies approaches depending on 
collaboration intensity (open, semi-open or closed 
relationship).
Lessons on business model scalability 
for circular economy in the fashion 
retail value chain: Towards a 
conceptual model
(Hultberg_Pal_2021)
DOI: 10.1016/j.spc.2021.06.033
4
Continue on next page
==PAGE:130==
Special
Lacking
Focus
Article
Number
A community between firm, value chain and linking partners. 
Different resource / type of actors:
•
Power promotor – push innovation through hierarchical power
•
Expert promotor – contribute expert knowledge
•
Process promotor – Organization knowledge, translate effect of 
innovation and language spoken in firm
•
Relationship promotor – build innovation-related relationship 
inside and outside of company
•
Universal promotor – Power and expert + (process / 
relationship) can be critical for overcoming barriers. 
Lacking circular economy 
focus. Linked to circular 
economy because 
transition of ecosystem to 
circular economy requires 
orchestrators.
Promotor community
•
Orchestrator network supporting the innovation 
process by overcoming barriers. 
•
Actor and their capabilities (resources)
•
Promotors must see them self as a team require social 
cohesion and trust.
Orchestrating cradle-to-cradle 
innovation across the value chain: 
Overcoming barriers through innovation 
communities, collaboration 
mechanisms  and intermediation.
(hansen_orchestrating_2021)
DOI: 10.1111/jiec.13081
5
Promotors resources and collaboration mechanics they can use to 
implement CE strategy. 
Orchestrators as a promotor network. 
Lacking general approach: 
build on implementation 
and transformation of a 
specific ecosystem with a 
C2C strategy. 
This is mainly focusing on 
implementation strategy 
and not development of 
CE strategy or BM
Innovation community
•
Collaboration mechanisms in innovation community
•
Implementation of CE strategy in value chain
•
Focused on collaboration mechanics to overcome 
barriers.
•
Barriers structured into firm, value chain and linking 
level.
•
Promotor community orchestrate and guide to 
overcome barriers depending on individual 
capabilities.
Orchestrating cradle-to-cradle 
innovation across the value chain: 
Overcoming barriers through innovation 
communities, collaboration 
mechanisms  and intermediation.
(hansen_orchestrating_2021)
DOI: 10.1111/jiec.13081
6
==PAGE:131==
(a) Element 1 [20]
(b) Element 2 [16]
(c) Element 3 [17]
(d) Element 4 [27]
(e) Element 5 [15]
(f) Element 6 [15]
Figure D.2: Support for the comparison
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
115
==PAGE:132==
E
Phase 4: Paper selection
Key
Date
28/12/2024
Filter
Criteria
Title
DOI
Year
Source title
Cited by
Excluded
EC-1
Antecedents for circular bioeconomy practices towards sustainability of supply chain
10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.131329
2022
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
17
Excluded
EC-1
Barriers to circular food supply chains in China
10.1108/SCM-10-2018-0345
2019
Supply Chain 
Management
196
Excluded
EC-1
Cheese whey recycling in the perspective of the circular economy: Modeling 
processes and the supply chain to design the involvement of the small and medium 
enterprises
10.1016/j.tifs.2022.06.013
2022
Trends in Food Science 
and Technology
42
Excluded
EC-1
Circular economy adoption challenges in the food supply chain for sustainable 
development
10.1002/bse.3191
2023
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
72
Excluded
EC-1
Circular supply chain management in post-pandemic context. A qualitative study to 
explore how knowledge, environmental initiatives and economic viability affect 
sustainability
10.1108/QMR-10-2023-0140
2024
Qualitative Market 
Research
0
Excluded
EC-1
Crossing actors' boundaries towards circular ecosystems in the organic food sector: 
Facing the challenges in an emerging economy context
10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137093
2023
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
6
Excluded
EC-1
Explorative Multiple-Case Research on the Scrap-Based Steel Slag Value Chain: 
Opportunities for Circular Economy
10.3390/su14042284
2022
Sustainability 
(Switzerland)
6
Excluded
EC-1
From circular business models to circular business ecosystems
10.1002/bse.2895
2021
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
121
Excluded
EC-1
How does business model redesign foster resilience in emerging circular value 
chains?
10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.125823
2021
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
44
Excluded
EC-1
Impact of information technology and knowledge sharing on circular food supply 
chains for green business growth
10.1002/bse.2988
2022
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
47
Excluded
EC-1
Industry readiness measurement for circular supply chain implementation: an Irish 
dairy industry perspective
10.1007/s10479-023-05602-0
2024
Annals of Operations 
Research
3
Excluded
EC-1
Operationalizing sustainability in pharmaceuticals: Green supply chain metrics for 
circular economy
10.1016/j.sftr.2024.100413
2025 Sustainable Futures
Excluded
EC-1
Optimal supply chain networks for waste materials used in alkali-activated concrete 
fostering circular economy
10.1016/j.resconrec.2023.106949
2023
Resources, Conservation 
and Recycling
14
Excluded
EC-1
Prospectives for the development of a circular bioeconomy around the banana value 
chain
10.1016/j.spc.2021.12.014
2022
Sustainable Production 
and Consumption
27
Excluded
EC-1
Redesigning quick commerce fresh and short food supply chains: circular economy 
strategies for sustainable last-mile operations
10.1108/BFJ-05-2024-0560
2024 British Food Journal
0
Excluded
EC-1
The Contribution of Sustainable Packaging to the Circular Food Supply Chain
10.1002/pts.2802
2024
Packaging Technology 
and Science
6
Excluded
EC-1
Toward the circular economy into the olive oil supply chain: A case study analysis of a 
vertically integrated firm
10.3389/fsufs.2022.1005604
2022
Frontiers in Sustainable 
Food Systems
3
Excluded
EC-1
Unveiling the rules for creating circular business ecosystems: A case study in the 
chemical industry
10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.139185
2023
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
7
Excluded
EC-2
Blockchain-enabled circular supply chain management: A system architecture for 
fast fashion
10.1016/j.compind.2020.103324
2020 Computers in Industry
154
Excluded
EC-2
Dress code: the digital transformation of the circular fashion supply chain
10.1080/17543266.2021.2013956
2022
International Journal of 
Fashion Design, 
Technology and Education
13
Excluded
EC-2
Drone as a Service (DaaS) in promoting cleaner agricultural production and Circular 
Economy for ethical Sustainable Supply Chain development
10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.125522
2021
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
65
Excluded (F4)
EC-2
Evaluation of circular supply chains barriers in the era of Industry 4.0 transition using 
an extended decision-making approach
10.1108/JEIM-09-2021-0396
2022
Journal of Enterprise 
Information Management
37
Excluded
EC-2
Industry 4.0 technologies as enablers of collaboration in circular supply chains: a 
systematic literature review
10.1080/00207543.2021.1999521
2022
International Journal of 
Production Research
102
Excluded
EC-2
Integrating blockchain technology success factors in the supply chain of circular 
economy-driven construction materials: An environmentally sustainable paradigm
10.1016/j.jclepro.2024.142577
2024
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
3
Excluded
EC-2
The adoption of I4.0 technologies for a sustainable and circular supply chain: an 
industry-based SEM analysis from the textile sector
10.1002/bse.3645
2024
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
5
Excluded
EC-2
The Blockchain Effect on Courier Supply Chains Digitalization and Its Contribution to 
Industry 4.0 within the Circular Economy
10.3390/su16167218
2024
Sustainability 
(Switzerland)
1
Excluded
EC-2
To identify industry 4.0 and circular economy adoption barriers in the agriculture 
supply chain by using ISM-ANP
10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126023
2021
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
264
Excluded
EC-3
The Portuguese Circular Entrepreneurial Ecosystem: Experts Advice on How to 
Overcome the Challenges
10.3390/su15054642
2023
Sustainability 
(Switzerland)
3
Included
Found through 
backwards search
Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in circular economy: A two-stage transformation 
model for large manufacturing companies
10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.01.006
2019
Journal of Bussiness 
Research
260
Included
IC-1
A conceptual framework for barriers of circular supply chains for sustainability in the 
textile industry
10.1002/sd.2100
2020 Sustainable Development
122
Included
IC-1
A systematic review on drivers, barriers, and practices towards circular economy: a 
supply chain perspective
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.20
17.1402141
2018
International Journal of 
Production Research
966
Included
IC-1
A triple helix framework for strategy development in circular textile and clothing 
supply chain: an Indian perspective
10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.132954
2022
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
25
Included
IC-1
Dynamic capabilities for circular manufacturing supply chains—Exploring the role of 
Industry 4.0 and resilience
10.1002/bse.3040
2022
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
108
Included
IC-1
Framework development and evaluation of Industry 4.0 technological aspects 
towards improving the circular economy-based supply chain
10.1108/IR-10-2021-0246
2022 Industrial Robot
14
Included
IC-1
Investigating barriers to circular supply chain in the textile industry from 
Stakeholders’ perspective
10.1080/13675567.2020.1846694
2022
International Journal of 
Logistics Research and 
Applications
77
Included
IC-1
Overcoming data gaps for an efficient circular economy: A case study on the battery 
materials ecosystem
10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.133984
2022
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
25
( TITLE ( ( "supply chain" OR "value chain" OR "ecosystem" ) AND ( "circular" ) ) AND ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( "manufacturer*" OR "producer*" OR "industr*" 
) AND ( "collaborat*" OR "partner*" OR "stakeholder" OR "relationship" OR "facilitator" OR "orchestrat?r" ) AND ( "barrier*" OR "boundar*" OR 
"challenge*" ) ) ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , "ar" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , "re" ) )
Figure E.1: Phase 4: Paper selection from search string
( TITLE ( ( ”supply chain” OR ”value chain” OR ”ecosystem” ) AND ( ”circular” ) ) AND (
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( ”manufacturer*” OR ”producer*” OR ”industr*” ) AND ( ”collaborat*”
OR ”partner*” OR ”stakeholder” OR ”relationship” OR ”facilitator” OR ”orchestrat?r” ) AND
( ”barrier*” OR ”boundar*” OR ”challenge*” ) ) ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , ”ar” ) OR
LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , ”re” ) ) - [28.12.2024] - Scopus
Google sheet: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1fGHzJC7eY3yscgjP_7M1YQU68X1WYK9f/
edit?usp=drive_link&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=true&sd=true
It is recommended to view the file in Microsoft Excel to have the same formation as in the
shown figure fig. E.1
116
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:133==
Key
Date
28/12/2024
Filter
Criteria
Title
DOI
Year
Source title
Cited by
Excluded
EC-1
Antecedents for circular bioeconomy practices towards sustainability of supply chain
10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.131329
2022
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
17
Excluded
EC-1
Barriers to circular food supply chains in China
10.1108/SCM-10-2018-0345
2019
Supply Chain 
Management
196
Excluded
EC-1
Cheese whey recycling in the perspective of the circular economy: Modeling 
processes and the supply chain to design the involvement of the small and medium 
enterprises
10.1016/j.tifs.2022.06.013
2022
Trends in Food Science 
and Technology
42
Excluded
EC-1
Circular economy adoption challenges in the food supply chain for sustainable 
development
10.1002/bse.3191
2023
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
72
Excluded
EC-1
Circular supply chain management in post-pandemic context. A qualitative study to 
explore how knowledge, environmental initiatives and economic viability affect 
sustainability
10.1108/QMR-10-2023-0140
2024
Qualitative Market 
Research
0
Excluded
EC-1
Crossing actors' boundaries towards circular ecosystems in the organic food sector: 
Facing the challenges in an emerging economy context
10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137093
2023
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
6
Excluded
EC-1
Explorative Multiple-Case Research on the Scrap-Based Steel Slag Value Chain: 
Opportunities for Circular Economy
10.3390/su14042284
2022
Sustainability 
(Switzerland)
6
Excluded
EC-1
From circular business models to circular business ecosystems
10.1002/bse.2895
2021
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
121
Excluded
EC-1
How does business model redesign foster resilience in emerging circular value 
chains?
10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.125823
2021
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
44
Excluded
EC-1
Impact of information technology and knowledge sharing on circular food supply 
chains for green business growth
10.1002/bse.2988
2022
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
47
Excluded
EC-1
Industry readiness measurement for circular supply chain implementation: an Irish 
dairy industry perspective
10.1007/s10479-023-05602-0
2024
Annals of Operations 
Research
3
Excluded
EC-1
Operationalizing sustainability in pharmaceuticals: Green supply chain metrics for 
circular economy
10.1016/j.sftr.2024.100413
2025 Sustainable Futures
Excluded
EC-1
Optimal supply chain networks for waste materials used in alkali-activated concrete 
fostering circular economy
10.1016/j.resconrec.2023.106949
2023
Resources, Conservation 
and Recycling
14
Excluded
EC-1
Prospectives for the development of a circular bioeconomy around the banana value 
chain
10.1016/j.spc.2021.12.014
2022
Sustainable Production 
and Consumption
27
Excluded
EC-1
Redesigning quick commerce fresh and short food supply chains: circular economy 
strategies for sustainable last-mile operations
10.1108/BFJ-05-2024-0560
2024 British Food Journal
0
Excluded
EC-1
The Contribution of Sustainable Packaging to the Circular Food Supply Chain
10.1002/pts.2802
2024
Packaging Technology 
and Science
6
Excluded
EC-1
Toward the circular economy into the olive oil supply chain: A case study analysis of a 
vertically integrated firm
10.3389/fsufs.2022.1005604
2022
Frontiers in Sustainable 
Food Systems
3
Excluded
EC-1
Unveiling the rules for creating circular business ecosystems: A case study in the 
chemical industry
10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.139185
2023
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
7
Excluded
EC-2
Blockchain-enabled circular supply chain management: A system architecture for 
fast fashion
10.1016/j.compind.2020.103324
2020 Computers in Industry
154
Excluded
EC-2
Dress code: the digital transformation of the circular fashion supply chain
10.1080/17543266.2021.2013956
2022
International Journal of 
Fashion Design, 
Technology and Education
13
Excluded
EC-2
Drone as a Service (DaaS) in promoting cleaner agricultural production and Circular 
Economy for ethical Sustainable Supply Chain development
10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.125522
2021
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
65
Excluded (F4)
EC-2
Evaluation of circular supply chains barriers in the era of Industry 4.0 transition using 
an extended decision-making approach
10.1108/JEIM-09-2021-0396
2022
Journal of Enterprise 
Information Management
37
Excluded
EC-2
Industry 4.0 technologies as enablers of collaboration in circular supply chains: a 
systematic literature review
10.1080/00207543.2021.1999521
2022
International Journal of 
Production Research
102
Excluded
EC-2
Integrating blockchain technology success factors in the supply chain of circular 
economy-driven construction materials: An environmentally sustainable paradigm
10.1016/j.jclepro.2024.142577
2024
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
3
Excluded
EC-2
The adoption of I4.0 technologies for a sustainable and circular supply chain: an 
industry-based SEM analysis from the textile sector
10.1002/bse.3645
2024
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
5
Excluded
EC-2
The Blockchain Effect on Courier Supply Chains Digitalization and Its Contribution to 
Industry 4.0 within the Circular Economy
10.3390/su16167218
2024
Sustainability 
(Switzerland)
1
Excluded
EC-2
To identify industry 4.0 and circular economy adoption barriers in the agriculture 
supply chain by using ISM-ANP
10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126023
2021
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
264
Excluded
EC-3
The Portuguese Circular Entrepreneurial Ecosystem: Experts Advice on How to 
Overcome the Challenges
10.3390/su15054642
2023
Sustainability 
(Switzerland)
3
Included
Found through 
backwards search
Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in circular economy: A two-stage transformation 
model for large manufacturing companies
10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.01.006
2019
Journal of Bussiness 
Research
260
Included
IC-1
A conceptual framework for barriers of circular supply chains for sustainability in the 
textile industry
10.1002/sd.2100
2020 Sustainable Development
122
Included
IC-1
A systematic review on drivers, barriers, and practices towards circular economy: a 
supply chain perspective
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.20
17.1402141
2018
International Journal of 
Production Research
966
Included
IC-1
A triple helix framework for strategy development in circular textile and clothing 
supply chain: an Indian perspective
10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.132954
2022
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
25
Included
IC-1
Dynamic capabilities for circular manufacturing supply chains—Exploring the role of 
Industry 4.0 and resilience
10.1002/bse.3040
2022
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
108
Included
IC-1
Framework development and evaluation of Industry 4.0 technological aspects 
towards improving the circular economy-based supply chain
10.1108/IR-10-2021-0246
2022 Industrial Robot
14
Included
IC-1
Investigating barriers to circular supply chain in the textile industry from 
Stakeholders’ perspective
10.1080/13675567.2020.1846694
2022
International Journal of 
Logistics Research and 
Applications
77
Included
IC-1
Overcoming data gaps for an efficient circular economy: A case study on the battery 
materials ecosystem
10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.133984
2022
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
25
( TITLE ( ( "supply chain" OR "value chain" OR "ecosystem" ) AND ( "circular" ) ) AND ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( "manufacturer*" OR "producer*" OR "industr*" 
) AND ( "collaborat*" OR "partner*" OR "stakeholder" OR "relationship" OR "facilitator" OR "orchestrat?r" ) AND ( "barrier*" OR "boundar*" OR 
"challenge*" ) ) ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , "ar" ) OR LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , "re" ) )
==PAGE:134==
Included
IC-1
The Better Building Initiative — a Collaborative Ecosystem Involving All Stakeholders 
as Catalyst to Accelerate the Adoption of Circular Economy Innovations in the 
Construction Sector
10.1007/s43615-022-00205-6
2023
Circular Economy and 
Sustainability
6
Included
IC-2
A Delphi study examining risk and uncertainty management in circular supply chains
10.1016/j.ijpe.2023.108810
2023
International Journal of 
Production Economics
37
Included
IC-2
Circular supply chains theoretical gaps and practical barriers: A model to support 
approaching firms in the era of industry 4.0
10.1016/j.cie.2024.110049
2024
Computers and Industrial 
Engineering
13
Included
IC-2
Determining requirements and challenges for a sustainable and circular electric 
vehicle battery supply chain: A mixed-methods approach
10.1016/j.spc.2022.06.024
2022
Sustainable Production 
and Consumption
27
Included
IC-2
Implementation of the circular supply chain management in the pharmaceutical 
industry
10.1007/s10668-021-02007-6
2022
Environment, 
Development and 
Sustainability
41
Included
IC-2
Sustainable Supply Chain Management in the Route for a Circular Economy: An 
Integrative Literature Review
10.3390/logistics5040081
2021 Logistics
25
Included
IC-2
Unpacking ecosystem dynamics in the construction industry: The transition toward 
circular construction ecosystems
10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137455
2023
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
3
Included
IC-3
Circular supply chain governance: A qualitative-empirical study of the European 
polyurethane industry to facilitate functional circular supply chain management
10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128445
2021
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
39
Included
IC-3
Overcoming barriers to cross-sector collaboration in circular supply chain 
management: a multi-method approach
10.1016/j.tre.2021.102582
2022
Transportation Research 
Part E: Logistics and 
Transportation Review
90
Excluded (F4)
Lack of barriers 
Analyzing the drivers of smart sustainable circular supply chain for sustainable 
development goals through stakeholder theory
10.1002/bse.3087
2022
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
49
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
Circular fashion supply chain through textile-to-textile recycling
10.1108/JFMM-04-2018-0058
2019
Journal of Fashion 
Marketing and 
Management
177
Excluded (F4)
Lack of barriers 
Circular supply chain management: A definition and structured literature review
10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.04.303
2019
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
515
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
Environmental supply chain cooperation and its effect on the circular economy 
practice-performance relationship among Chinese manufacturers
10.1111/j.1530-9290.2011.00329.x
2011
Journal of Industrial 
Ecology
157
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
Evaluating the adoption of circular economy practices in industrial supply chains: An 
empirical analysis
10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122966
2020
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
65
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
Evolving trajectories of circular supply chain domain: a citation path analysis
10.1108/JEIM-03-2023-0147
2023
Journal of Enterprise 
Information Management
1
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
Examining how government subsidies influence firms’ circular supply chain 
management: The role of eco-innovation and top management team
10.1016/j.ijpe.2023.108893
2023
International Journal of 
Production Economics
23
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
Green Open Innovation and Circular Economy: Investigating the Role of Big Data 
Management and Sustainable Supply Chain
10.1109/TEM.2024.3387107
2024
IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Management
8
Excluded (F4)
Lack of barriers 
Key Enablers for Transitioning to Circular Supply Chains in Electronics: An ISM 
MICMAC Analysis
10.59038/jjmie/180414
2024
Jordan Journal of 
Mechanical and Industrial 
Engineering
0
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
Managing Circularity in Industrial Ecosystems: Introducing the Concept of Circular 
Maturity and its Application in NLMK Group
10.14716/ijtech.v14i8.6836
2023
International Journal of 
Technology
0
Excluded (F4)
Lack of barriers 
Strategic closed-loop supply chain configuration in the transition towards the circular 
economy of EV batteries: an evolutionary analytical framework
10.1108/IJLM-06-2021-0337
2023
International Journal of 
Logistics Management
1
Excluded (F4)
Lack of barriers 
Supply chain management strategies, types and tactics for circular economy 
transitions: Supply chain management strategies, types and tactics for circular…: A. 
C. Braz, A. M. de Mello
10.1007/s11301-023-00354-4
2024
Management Review 
Quarterly
0
Excluded (F4)
Lack of barriers 
Supply chain relationship dependencies and circular economy performance: The 
contingency role of digitalization capability
10.1016/j.pursup.2024.100902
2024
Journal of Purchasing and 
Supply Management
7
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
Sustainable and risk-resilient circular supply chain: A Peruvian paint manufacturing 
supply chain model
10.1016/j.sftr.2024.100207
2024 Sustainable Futures
2
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
Sustainable packaging for supply chain management in the circular economy: A 
review
10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.07.057
2019
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
213
Excluded
Lack of barriers 
The role of capabilities in shaping sustainable supply chain flexibility and enhancing 
circular economy-target performance: an empirical study
10.1108/SCM-05-2021-0246
2023
Supply Chain 
Management
88
Excluded (F4)
Lack of barriers 
Understanding whether, how and when circular supply chain management influences 
firm performance
10.1002/bse.3865
2024
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
2
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
A systematic literature review of the solar photovoltaic value chain for a circular 
economy
10.3390/su13179615
2021
Sustainability 
(Switzerland)
54
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Barriers to circular supply chain: the case of unorganized tire retreading in India
10.1108/IJLM-04-2022-0162
2023
International Journal of 
Logistics Management
6
Excluded (F4)
Lack of collaboration
Circular economy and the policy: A framework for improving the corporate 
environmental management in supply chains
10.1002/bse.2641
2021
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
180
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Comparing linear and circular supply chains: A case study from the construction 
industry
10.1016/j.ijpe.2016.06.008
2017
International Journal of 
Production Economics
346
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Enabling value retention in circular ecosystems for the second life of electric vehicle 
batteries
10.1016/j.resconrec.2024.107942
2025
Resources, Conservation 
and Recycling
1
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Implementation barriers to the circular supply chain mode for pre-consumer textile 
waste reprocessing in China
10.1016/j.resconrec.2024.107621
2024
Resources, Conservation 
and Recycling
0
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Prioritizing Performance Indicators for the Circular Economy Transition in Healthcare 
Supply Chains
10.1007/s43615-024-00436-9
2024
Circular Economy and 
Sustainability
2
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Seaports as nodal points of circular supply chains: Opportunities and challenges for 
secondary ports
10.3390/su12093926
2020
Sustainability 
(Switzerland)
37
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Supply chain management and the circular economy: towards the circular supply 
chain
10.1080/09537287.2018.1449244
2018
Production Planning and 
Control
435
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Sustainable strategies and circular economy ecosystems: A literature review and 
future research agenda
10.1002/bse.4022
2024
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
0
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Sustainable supply chain management and circular economy capability: Based on the 
perspective of institutional pressure
10.12011/1000-6788(2017)07-1793-12
2017
Xitong Gongcheng Lilun 
yu Shijian/System 
Engineering Theory and 
Practice
10
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Sustainable supply chain management and the transition towards a circular 
economy: Evidence and some applications
10.1016/j.omega.2015.05.015
2017 Omega (United Kingdom)
985
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Sustainable supply chain management of automotive sector in context to the circular 
economy: A strategic framework
10.1002/bse.3112
2022
Business Strategy and the 
Environment
25
==PAGE:135==
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Towards a circular supply chain for PV modules: Review of today's challenges in PV 
recycling, refurbishment and re-certification
10.1002/pip.3193
2020
Progress in Photovoltaics: 
Research and 
Applications
115
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Understanding the Brazilian expanded polystyrene supply chain and its reverse 
logistics towards circular economy
10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.06.319
2019
Journal of Cleaner 
Production
88
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Understanding the views of the UK food packaging supply chain in order to support a 
move to circular economy systems
10.1002/pts.2474
2019
Packaging Technology 
and Science
26
Excluded
Lack of collaboration
Unlocking circular supply chain 4.0: identifying key barriers through bibliometrics and 
TISM-MICMAC
10.1108/BIJ-10-2023-0717
2024 Benchmarking
0
==PAGE:136==
F
Phase 4: Sheet A
Year
Citation 
code 
Title
DOI
Study methodology (Type of study)
Main contribution and elements of investigation
Collaboration focus 
 CE transition focus
Industry
2019
Parida et 
al., 2019
Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in 
circular economy: A two-stage 
transformation model for large 
manufacturing companies
10.1016/j.j
busres.20
19.01.006
Data collection involved 53 open-ended 
interviews with respondents from different 
organizational levels and units within the 
case companies. The interviews were 
conducted in two steps: first within the 
manufacturing company (ecosystem 
orchestrator) and then within the associated 
ecosystem partner's organization. 
Secondary data were also collected from 
archival materials and websites to validate 
results and enhance data triangulation.
Ecosystem orchestrators achieve the transition toward a 
circular economy in two stages: ecosystem readiness 
assessment and ecosystem transformation.
Collaboration transition thorugh two stages: Readiness 
assesment and Ecosystem transformation. The study 
identifies three key readiness assessments: External 
Environmental Assessment, Business Model Assessment, 
Ecosystem Partner Assessment. Ecosystem 
transformation involves three 
mechanisms:Standardization Mechanisms, Nurturing 
Mechanisms, Negotiation Mechanisms
The role of the ecosystem orchestrator is critical 
for implementing circular economy principles. 
Standardization, nurturing, and negotiation 
mechanisms are crucial for coordinating and 
managing ecosystem transformation.
Manufacturing 
2023
Havinga 
et al., 
2023
Unpacking ecosystem dynamics in the 
construction industry: The transition 
toward circular construction ecosystems
10.1016/j.j
clepro.202
3.137455
Data was collected through a multiple-case 
study involving seven ecosystems, with a 
combination of individual interviews and 
company website information. A total of 13 
semi-structured interviews were conducted 
across the seven case studies.
Standardization Mechanisms: Setting standards for 
ecosystem partners, Implementing modular product 
architecture, Resulted in higher control over design and greater 
predictability in materials and processes.Nurturing 
Mechanisms: Development of new routines and processes, 
Openness towards sharing core knowledge and intellectual 
property, Enhanced innovation and long-term relationships 
with suppliers, Ownership Mechanism: Greater ownership 
over the construction process in PDB approaches, Enabled 
higher standards and more significant sustainability practices. 
The PDB (Product Development Based) and PJB (Project-
Based) approaches are two distinct methodologies used in 
construction and project management, particularly regarding 
how partner alignment and interdependencies are managed.
Multi-case study suggests that product-based ecosystems 
have better alignment and orchestration mechanisms 
compared to project-based ecosystems.Construction 
ecosystems with PDB approaches have a higher degree of 
standardization and longer-term relationships.
The transition towards a circular economy in the 
construction industry is hindered by complex 
inter-organizational arrangements.
Construction 
industry 
2020
Kazancog
lu et al., 
2020,
A conceptual framework for barriers of 
circular supply chains for sustainability in 
the textile industry
10.1002/s
d.2100
Industry case (IC), exploratory research
Framework to identify/classify barriers encountered in terms 
of the SC in the transition to CE in the textile industry(Turkish). 
Barriers related to SC preventing companies to implement CE 
is valitated with a small focus group. Sugest different actions 
manegers and government can do to overcome barriers. 
Barriers in the SC in transitioning to CE. Managers, policy 
makers, I4.0 and technology are seen as main enabler to 
overcome barriers. The SC are with focus on recycling. 
SSC - (C2C). Product (clothes) design so post-use 
and post-production fibers can be reinterduced. 
Recycle (material focus). "Collecting, sorting, 
seperating, recovering" added to SC. SC actors: 
(retailer, brand owner, garment manufacture, 
material converters)
Textile 
2023
De Lima 
and 
Seuring, 
2023
A Delphi study examining risk and 
uncertainty management in circular supply 
chains
10.1016/j.i
jpe.2023.1
08810
Delphi study over industry, governmental, ngo Identify risk: organizational, SC, external. Management 
strategies: Reducing and Coping strategies. 
“Enhancing CE would transform previous linear supply 
chains to more open instances of cross-sectoral 
collaboration (K ̈ ohler et al., 2022), requiring alignment of 
interests among the organizations to facilitate sustainable 
development (Herrero-Luna et al., 2022). The 
organizations thus become increasingly reliant on active 
collaboration among different actors in realizing, 
providing, and partaking in the value creation (Chesbrough 
et al., 2018).” ([Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, p. 2]
Management 
2022
Majumda
r et al., 
2022
A triple helix framework for strategy 
development in circular textile and 
clothing supply chain: an Indian 
perspective
10.1016/j.j
clepro.202
2.132954
LR + Survey to rate the barriers collected 
between SC actors 
“understand the barriers of circular textile and clothing supply 
chain and to devise strategies to overcome the cause-group 
barriers.” ([Majumdar et al., 2022,) A triple helix framework 
focusing on textile industry, academia and government are 
suggested to overcom the barriers through collaboration, 
innovation and political support.
Lack of SC collaboration, effective planing and technical 
know-how are seen as the barriers with causial effect.  
“Industry-academia-government need to work 
collaboratively to create and develop circular clothing 
design, automated sorting technology, chemical recycling 
technology, collaboration with sorters and recyclers, 
economic competitiveness of recycled fibre, favouring 
circular textiles in public procurement, enacting incentives 
for circular practices and generating consumer 
awareness.” ([Majumdar et al., 2022, p. 11]
The most dominant barrier against CE transition  
is lack of technical know-how about circularity. 
“The strategies for circular textiles and clothing 
should start from the circular design focussing on 
longevity and recycling. Clothing having a single 
fibre is always easy to recycle. However, such 
clothing is functionally inferior. Circular design 
should facilitate easy sorting, disassembly and 
recycling. For example, most of the shirtsmade 
with organic cotton is often stitched with polyester 
sewing threads and therefore, their segregation at 
the post-consumer stage becomes difficult. In this 
context, collaboration between clothing 
designers, recyclers and design universities are 
needed so that designers can understand how to 
design for repair and recycling.” ([Majumdar et 
al., 2022, p. 9]) “New business models based on 
rental and subscription should be popularised 
against the traditional ownership-based model of 
clothing.” ([Majumdar et al., 2022, p. 9]
Textile 
2021
Schultz 
et al., 
2021
Circular supply chain governance: A 
qualitative-empirical study of the 
European polyurethane industry to 
facilitate functional circular supply chain 
management
10.1016/j.j
clepro.202
1.128445
Semi-structured interviews of experts in 
industry
Three strategic prerequisites for facilitating horizontal 
relationships: CE-enabling environment, CBM, and strategic 
alliances with specialized partners. Implying mainly raw-
material manufacture or end-application-producer and 
retailer are the only ones in the SC whom can facilitate or 
enable CSCM because of their position in the ends of the SC. 
Split collaboration into vertical and horizontal. Looking 
into interventions and outcome of these. Vertical: 
Implemented by Raw-material manufacture or End-
Application-producer and Retailers. The outcome is niche 
market sustainability and optimization of individual SC. 
Horizontal: Push or Pull depending if it is implemented by 
Raw-matieral manudacturer or End-application-producer 
and retailers. Push by raw-material are seen most 
effective but there is a lack of incentitives. “the building of 
strategic alliances with specialized partners hold an 
immense potential to facilitate supply chain managers 
implementing CSCM practices in a real-world context.” 
([Schultz et al., 2021, p. 11]
Focus on closing ressource loop with circular SC. 
Plastic 
2024
Taddei et 
al., 2024
Circular supply chains theoretical gaps 
and practical barriers: A model to support 
approaching firms in the era of industry 4.0
10.1016/j.
cie.2024.1
10049
Delphi study over industry, governmental, 
ngo and academic actors, international, 
Transparent information-sharing schemes mitigate the risk 
ans uncertainties inherent in the information flow of CSC. 
Properly flexible plans and strategies help companies cope 
with the fast-changing dynamics of markets and recovery 
processes in CSC. Inter-firm collaboration reduces the risk 
and uncertainties inherent in the varius flow of CSCs. Risk and 
uncertainty management in implementation of CSC. 
Sepperate them into 3 groups organizationa, SC and external. 
Then define the relationship with appropriate 
countermeasures through management strategies, comprising 
of different collaboration mechanics. 
Management strategies focus on inter-firm and external-
firm collaboration mechanichs like information sharing, 
flexibility, financial risk management. Inter-firm 
collaboration are seen as an reduce risk and uncertainty 
strategy. Mangers task to understand the implementation 
of CE to ensure smooth transition. They should invest 
effort in fostering collaboration, design of product with CE 
thinking, transparency and financial risk management 
tools. Study in guiding managers in redesigning SC 
opreation for CE. “P6.Inter-firm collaboration reduces the 
risks and uncertainties inherent in the various flows of 
CSCs.” 
Study in guiding managers in redesigning SC 
opreation for CE. : Risk and uncertainty reducing 
strategies such as inter-firm collaboration, 
circular design strategies. Reverse logistic, 
Redesign of decision policies and procedures. 
Coping strategies (information sharing, flexibility 
and financial risk management) “In addition, the 
results reflect those of Wang et al. (2022), 
highlighting the fact that circular product design is 
the first step toward the CE. This strategycan be 
used to reducerisks and uncertainties at the 
product level. Based on these results, the 
following propositions are posited.” ([De Lima 
and Seuring, 2023, p. 14]
Manufacturing 
2022
Gebhardt 
et al., 
2022
Determining requirements and challenges 
for a sustainable and circular electric 
vehicle battery supply chain: A mixed-
methods approach
10.1016/j.
spc.2022.
06.024
Mixed-method: LR, stakeholder 
interviews,workshop, delphi study
Information gathering and exchange barriers for sustainability 
assesment and successful implementation of CSC (lithium-
batteries). 30 barriers and 29 sustainability aspects for 
evaluation of LIBSC. Bring recommendation for key 
stakeholders: Scholars, Practitioners, Policymakers,  
Information flow, gathering and exchange as a prerequisite 
for many of the collaboration mechanics and meaningful 
sustainability assesments. In early implementation phase 
transparency on hindrances so SCM constructs goals and 
strategies formultated in a targeted and efficient manner. 
Transparency on barriers for information exchange for 
sustainability assesment in multi-stakeholder VC is 
nedded to be able to taget it in SCM goals and strategies.
The sustainability assesment of LIBSC thorugh 
economic, social, governmental and 
environmental. Mainly end-of-life (recycling focus) 
Automotive
Figure F.1: SLR for phase 4. Sheet A: Included papers in Structured Literature Review
Google sheet: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1r_2SOMhbrOOm_A4hoMPfgU-ImV7n0IgL/
edit?usp=drive_link&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=true&sd=true
It is recommended to view the file in Microsoft Excel to have the same formation as in the
shown figure fig. F.1
120
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:137==
Year
Citation 
code 
Title
DOI
Study methodology (Type of study)
Main contribution and elements of investigation
Collaboration focus 
 CE transition focus
Industry
2019
Parida et 
al., 2019
Orchestrating industrial ecosystem in 
circular economy: A two-stage 
transformation model for large 
manufacturing companies
10.1016/j.j
busres.20
19.01.006
Data collection involved 53 open-ended 
interviews with respondents from different 
organizational levels and units within the 
case companies. The interviews were 
conducted in two steps: first within the 
manufacturing company (ecosystem 
orchestrator) and then within the associated 
ecosystem partner's organization. 
Secondary data were also collected from 
archival materials and websites to validate 
results and enhance data triangulation.
Ecosystem orchestrators achieve the transition toward a 
circular economy in two stages: ecosystem readiness 
assessment and ecosystem transformation.
Collaboration transition thorugh two stages: Readiness 
assesment and Ecosystem transformation. The study 
identifies three key readiness assessments: External 
Environmental Assessment, Business Model Assessment, 
Ecosystem Partner Assessment. Ecosystem 
transformation involves three 
mechanisms:Standardization Mechanisms, Nurturing 
Mechanisms, Negotiation Mechanisms
The role of the ecosystem orchestrator is critical 
for implementing circular economy principles. 
Standardization, nurturing, and negotiation 
mechanisms are crucial for coordinating and 
managing ecosystem transformation.
Manufacturing 
2023
Havinga 
et al., 
2023
Unpacking ecosystem dynamics in the 
construction industry: The transition 
toward circular construction ecosystems
10.1016/j.j
clepro.202
3.137455
Data was collected through a multiple-case 
study involving seven ecosystems, with a 
combination of individual interviews and 
company website information. A total of 13 
semi-structured interviews were conducted 
across the seven case studies.
Standardization Mechanisms: Setting standards for 
ecosystem partners, Implementing modular product 
architecture, Resulted in higher control over design and greater 
predictability in materials and processes.Nurturing 
Mechanisms: Development of new routines and processes, 
Openness towards sharing core knowledge and intellectual 
property, Enhanced innovation and long-term relationships 
with suppliers, Ownership Mechanism: Greater ownership 
over the construction process in PDB approaches, Enabled 
higher standards and more significant sustainability practices. 
The PDB (Product Development Based) and PJB (Project-
Based) approaches are two distinct methodologies used in 
construction and project management, particularly regarding 
how partner alignment and interdependencies are managed.
Multi-case study suggests that product-based ecosystems 
have better alignment and orchestration mechanisms 
compared to project-based ecosystems.Construction 
ecosystems with PDB approaches have a higher degree of 
standardization and longer-term relationships.
The transition towards a circular economy in the 
construction industry is hindered by complex 
inter-organizational arrangements.
Construction 
industry 
2020
Kazancog
lu et al., 
2020,
A conceptual framework for barriers of 
circular supply chains for sustainability in 
the textile industry
10.1002/s
d.2100
Industry case (IC), exploratory research
Framework to identify/classify barriers encountered in terms 
of the SC in the transition to CE in the textile industry(Turkish). 
Barriers related to SC preventing companies to implement CE 
is valitated with a small focus group. Sugest different actions 
manegers and government can do to overcome barriers. 
Barriers in the SC in transitioning to CE. Managers, policy 
makers, I4.0 and technology are seen as main enabler to 
overcome barriers. The SC are with focus on recycling. 
SSC - (C2C). Product (clothes) design so post-use 
and post-production fibers can be reinterduced. 
Recycle (material focus). "Collecting, sorting, 
seperating, recovering" added to SC. SC actors: 
(retailer, brand owner, garment manufacture, 
material converters)
Textile 
2023
De Lima 
and 
Seuring, 
2023
A Delphi study examining risk and 
uncertainty management in circular supply 
chains
10.1016/j.i
jpe.2023.1
08810
Delphi study over industry, governmental, ngo Identify risk: organizational, SC, external. Management 
strategies: Reducing and Coping strategies. 
“Enhancing CE would transform previous linear supply 
chains to more open instances of cross-sectoral 
collaboration (K ̈ ohler et al., 2022), requiring alignment of 
interests among the organizations to facilitate sustainable 
development (Herrero-Luna et al., 2022). The 
organizations thus become increasingly reliant on active 
collaboration among different actors in realizing, 
providing, and partaking in the value creation (Chesbrough 
et al., 2018).” ([Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, p. 2]
Management 
2022
Majumda
r et al., 
2022
A triple helix framework for strategy 
development in circular textile and 
clothing supply chain: an Indian 
perspective
10.1016/j.j
clepro.202
2.132954
LR + Survey to rate the barriers collected 
between SC actors 
“understand the barriers of circular textile and clothing supply 
chain and to devise strategies to overcome the cause-group 
barriers.” ([Majumdar et al., 2022,) A triple helix framework 
focusing on textile industry, academia and government are 
suggested to overcom the barriers through collaboration, 
innovation and political support.
Lack of SC collaboration, effective planing and technical 
know-how are seen as the barriers with causial effect.  
“Industry-academia-government need to work 
collaboratively to create and develop circular clothing 
design, automated sorting technology, chemical recycling 
technology, collaboration with sorters and recyclers, 
economic competitiveness of recycled fibre, favouring 
circular textiles in public procurement, enacting incentives 
for circular practices and generating consumer 
awareness.” ([Majumdar et al., 2022, p. 11]
The most dominant barrier against CE transition  
is lack of technical know-how about circularity. 
“The strategies for circular textiles and clothing 
should start from the circular design focussing on 
longevity and recycling. Clothing having a single 
fibre is always easy to recycle. However, such 
clothing is functionally inferior. Circular design 
should facilitate easy sorting, disassembly and 
recycling. For example, most of the shirtsmade 
with organic cotton is often stitched with polyester 
sewing threads and therefore, their segregation at 
the post-consumer stage becomes difficult. In this 
context, collaboration between clothing 
designers, recyclers and design universities are 
needed so that designers can understand how to 
design for repair and recycling.” ([Majumdar et 
al., 2022, p. 9]) “New business models based on 
rental and subscription should be popularised 
against the traditional ownership-based model of 
clothing.” ([Majumdar et al., 2022, p. 9]
Textile 
2021
Schultz 
et al., 
2021
Circular supply chain governance: A 
qualitative-empirical study of the 
European polyurethane industry to 
facilitate functional circular supply chain 
management
10.1016/j.j
clepro.202
1.128445
Semi-structured interviews of experts in 
industry
Three strategic prerequisites for facilitating horizontal 
relationships: CE-enabling environment, CBM, and strategic 
alliances with specialized partners. Implying mainly raw-
material manufacture or end-application-producer and 
retailer are the only ones in the SC whom can facilitate or 
enable CSCM because of their position in the ends of the SC. 
Split collaboration into vertical and horizontal. Looking 
into interventions and outcome of these. Vertical: 
Implemented by Raw-material manufacture or End-
Application-producer and Retailers. The outcome is niche 
market sustainability and optimization of individual SC. 
Horizontal: Push or Pull depending if it is implemented by 
Raw-matieral manudacturer or End-application-producer 
and retailers. Push by raw-material are seen most 
effective but there is a lack of incentitives. “the building of 
strategic alliances with specialized partners hold an 
immense potential to facilitate supply chain managers 
implementing CSCM practices in a real-world context.” 
([Schultz et al., 2021, p. 11]
Focus on closing ressource loop with circular SC. 
Plastic 
2024
Taddei et 
al., 2024
Circular supply chains theoretical gaps 
and practical barriers: A model to support 
approaching firms in the era of industry 4.0
10.1016/j.
cie.2024.1
10049
Delphi study over industry, governmental, 
ngo and academic actors, international, 
Transparent information-sharing schemes mitigate the risk 
ans uncertainties inherent in the information flow of CSC. 
Properly flexible plans and strategies help companies cope 
with the fast-changing dynamics of markets and recovery 
processes in CSC. Inter-firm collaboration reduces the risk 
and uncertainties inherent in the varius flow of CSCs. Risk and 
uncertainty management in implementation of CSC. 
Sepperate them into 3 groups organizationa, SC and external. 
Then define the relationship with appropriate 
countermeasures through management strategies, comprising 
of different collaboration mechanics. 
Management strategies focus on inter-firm and external-
firm collaboration mechanichs like information sharing, 
flexibility, financial risk management. Inter-firm 
collaboration are seen as an reduce risk and uncertainty 
strategy. Mangers task to understand the implementation 
of CE to ensure smooth transition. They should invest 
effort in fostering collaboration, design of product with CE 
thinking, transparency and financial risk management 
tools. Study in guiding managers in redesigning SC 
opreation for CE. “P6.Inter-firm collaboration reduces the 
risks and uncertainties inherent in the various flows of 
CSCs.” 
Study in guiding managers in redesigning SC 
opreation for CE. : Risk and uncertainty reducing 
strategies such as inter-firm collaboration, 
circular design strategies. Reverse logistic, 
Redesign of decision policies and procedures. 
Coping strategies (information sharing, flexibility 
and financial risk management) “In addition, the 
results reflect those of Wang et al. (2022), 
highlighting the fact that circular product design is 
the first step toward the CE. This strategycan be 
used to reducerisks and uncertainties at the 
product level. Based on these results, the 
following propositions are posited.” ([De Lima 
and Seuring, 2023, p. 14]
Manufacturing 
2022
Gebhardt 
et al., 
2022
Determining requirements and challenges 
for a sustainable and circular electric 
vehicle battery supply chain: A mixed-
methods approach
10.1016/j.
spc.2022.
06.024
Mixed-method: LR, stakeholder 
interviews,workshop, delphi study
Information gathering and exchange barriers for sustainability 
assesment and successful implementation of CSC (lithium-
batteries). 30 barriers and 29 sustainability aspects for 
evaluation of LIBSC. Bring recommendation for key 
stakeholders: Scholars, Practitioners, Policymakers,  
Information flow, gathering and exchange as a prerequisite 
for many of the collaboration mechanics and meaningful 
sustainability assesments. In early implementation phase 
transparency on hindrances so SCM constructs goals and 
strategies formultated in a targeted and efficient manner. 
Transparency on barriers for information exchange for 
sustainability assesment in multi-stakeholder VC is 
nedded to be able to taget it in SCM goals and strategies.
The sustainability assesment of LIBSC thorugh 
economic, social, governmental and 
environmental. Mainly end-of-life (recycling focus) 
Automotive
==PAGE:138==
2022
Chari et 
al., 2022
Dynamic capabilities for circular 
manufacturing supply chains—Exploring 
the role of Industry 4.0 and resilience
10.1002/b
se.3040
The challenges to implement circular 
economy in manufacturing SCs identified 
from the literature, project and expert 
interviews
Dynamic capabilities (DC)  and CE challenges requiering 
organizations to constantly adapt to changing demands and 
develop resilience. Capabilites: sensing, seizing, and 
transforming of internal and external skills, resources and 
competences. Microfoundations are unique to specific 
organisations creating sustainable competition advantage. 
Capability for against barriers developing SC and 
collaboration when transitioning to CE. Focus on 
manufacturing SC and IS. Has more a ressource/solving 
focus.
Enabler of CE: Industrial symbiosis, I4.0 (digital 
twins, data strategies) 
Manufacturing 
2022
Agarwal 
et al., 
2022
Framework development and evaluation of 
Industry 4.0 technological aspects 
towards improving the circular economy-
based supply chain
10.1108/IR
-10-2021-
0246
LR + industry interviews and voting
“The goal of the present study is to support sustainable 
practices by creating a decision management system in the SC 
network integrated with CE principles through Industry 4.0 
technologies.” Finding a connection between challenges in 
adapting CE and I 4.0 as a enabler. “These outcomes of the 
study might assist managers and policymakers in identifying 
the critical advantages of technological advancements in the 
context of CE implementation. This could assist in creating a 
more robust and efficient SC network.” 
“However, they are struggling to achieve the CE principles 
in their SC network due to various issues in its adaption. 
The present work aimed to provide a roadmap to the 
managers and policymakers of the industrial firm to 
establish CE principles in their practices.'""The highest 
weightage was attained by the criterion CT1, and the least 
weightage was attained by CT7, inferring that the 
information disruption in the SC network was the most 
dominant criteria hindering the CE adoption,” (Agarwal et 
al., 2022, p. 575). “the vulnerability in the decision 
management system stood at last”
“the findings of the present research imply that 
Industry 4.0 technologies might act as a 
breakthrough to overcome the difficulties 
occurred in the execution of CE in designing a 
manufacturing SC.” ([Agarwal et al., 2022, p. 575]
Manufacturing 
2022
Khan and 
Ali, 2022
Implementation of the circular supply 
chain management in the pharmaceutical 
industry
10.1007/s
10668-
021-
02007-6
Pharmaceutical industry, LR + 
semistructures interviews to shortlist the list 
of barriers 
Collect barriers and enablers with focus on CSCM in pharma 
industry. The barriers are mainly towards adoption of CE 
strategies
Collaboration are one of the main barriers, because of 
lack of information sharing, complexity and competition 
on the market. 
Industrial symbiosis, reverse logsitic and block 
chain are the top ranked enabler for adoption of 
CE. 
Pharma 
industry
2022
Kazancog
lu et al., 
2022
Investigating barriers to circular supply 
chain in the textile industry from 
Stakeholders’ perspective
10.1080/1
3675567.2
020.18466
94
Barriers found through LR + expert 
interviews.  Then verified and couse/effect 
sorted with: case company + experts
CSC barriers classified according to the relationship of one or 
more stakeholder. Retail and brandowner trigger SC transition 
to CE (promoting, creating awareness). Retailer require 
supplier to produce circular and turn consumer towards CE by 
creating CE-collection and awareness. 
CSC barriers classified according to the relationship of 
one or more stakeholder. Visualiing the same barriers are 
affecting the whole SC. 
Recycling and eco-design of textile. 
Textile 
2022
Luthra et 
al., 2022
Overcoming barriers to cross-sector 
collaboration in circular supply chain 
management: a multi-method approach
10.1016/j.t
re.2021.10
2582
Litterature study focusing on overcomming 
barriers for cross-sectorial supply chain 
collaboration. Mainly focus on India and 
with "experts" to range the barriers.“To 
answer the first research question, 27 
barriers to C-SC for CSM have been explored 
through a literature review;” ([Luthra et al., 
2022, p. 22]
“Collaborative value capture modelling and co-creating a 
change-making culture will enhance collaboration as this will 
create a shared value chain in which all collaborators mutually 
benefit. It will reduce issues of power asymmetry, mistrust and 
lack of a common vision. This strategy will also develop a 
change adapting model and facilitate legitimacy toward 
developing circular supply” ([Luthra et al., 2022, p. 19]. “There 
is a need for a C-SC enabled culture in organisations and co-
creation of production through waste as a resource. This 
includes formal joint decision making for enhancement of 
collaborative performance Brown et al. (2021).” ([Luthra et al., 
2022, p. 20](zotero://select/library/items/LPMCU4J6)) 
([pdf](zotero://open-
pdf/library/items/TCTHC4WB?page=20&annotation=KDCHVB
2U))
“The current study is based on the stakeholder theory’s 
notion suggesting that an organisation’s success is 
dependent on the relationship with its stakeholders. This 
implies that successful organisations consider the 
relationship with the stakeholders that they affect as well 
as those that affect them (Freeman, 1994). By adopting C-
SC, inter-relationships among stakeholders such as 
business, government and Non-Governmental 
Organisations (NGOs), are enhanced, amplifying the 
overall effectiveness of supply chains. The barriers 
identified in the study are assessed by their potential 
impact to limit stakeholder collaboration to develop CSCs. 
Stakeholder inter-relationships are a key element in 
developing C-SC and hence the barriers to it need to be 
evaluated.” ([Luthra et al., 2022, p. 3] This study assesses 
mutual trust and aligned interest from a collaboration 
perspective
Focus on indusrial waste, industrial symbiosis, 
zero waste. Resourced Based view (RBV) 
proposes the adoption of CE strategies are 
competences required to bring innovation in the 
BM. 
Manufacturing 
2022
Serna-
Guerrero 
et al., 
2022
Overcoming data gaps for an efficient 
circular economy: A case study on the 
battery materials ecosystem
10.1016/j.j
clepro.202
2.133984
Barriers in implementation of CE models in 
practice - collected along VC thorugh 
interviews of different companies. 
Implementation of bottom-up data exchange practice in 
industry. Properly designed parameters could be used to 
codify relevant data without a negative impact on the 
confidentiality of companies. At the same time provice clarity 
of purpose for the CE. 
The collaboration and usage of 3-party data is still not 
utalized. Data collected and needed in different parts of 
the VC are not transferd to the one needing it. Data are 
equalized to know-how, strategy, valueable ressource, 
competition advantage and not to be shared with others. 
Parameterization could facilitate collaboration among the 
different actors on a common goal/target for optimization 
without the need of sharing "to much" information. 
“For instance, data can promote circularity by 
providing the necessary input to determine 
circularity parameters (” (Serna-Guerrero et al., 
2022, p. 2). A table of overview of different types 
of data to facilitate different CE R-strategies.
EV - 
Automotive
2021
Cerqueira
-Streit et 
al., 2021
Sustainable Supply Chain Management in 
the Route for a Circular Economy: An 
Integrative Literature Review
10.3390/lo
gistics504
0081
LR
Focus on managers role for implementation of CE. Managers 
should guid the transition, plan with barriers and 
strategies/possible solution for these barriers making it 
possible to perpare transition at the lowest cost and maximize 
results. The managers need to have fully knowledge of CE 
principle. They should collaborate on strategic level and in the 
formation of CSC implement I 4.0 to build sustainable SC.
Collaboration in SC can positively impact in two ways; 
formal thorugh contracts and standards and informal 
thorugh trust and cooperation between the actors in the 
chain. The main barrier is the lack of collaboration 
between the actors in the SC. 
For organizations aiming to transition from linear 
economy to CE must be aware of their products 
and process must undergo af significant changes. 
Informations tech I4.0 can contribute to the 
formation of SC. Also the importance in changing 
the culture within the organization, 
Management 
focus
2023
Wielopols
ki and 
Bulthuis, 
2023
The Better Building Initiative — a 
Collaborative Ecosystem Involving All 
Stakeholders as Catalyst to Accelerate the 
Adoption of Circular Economy Innovations 
in the Construction Sector
10.1007/s
43615-
022-
00205-6
LR
“CE approach to innovation can be practically implemented in 
the building and construction industry to provide an 
ecosystem for innovation, which is based on a manifesto that 
fosters flexible, transparent, and exponentially scalable CE 
innovation targets. Thereby, we propose a globally open 
platform approach to catalyze effective collaboration between 
intrinsically motivated stakeholders in the absence of external 
or regulatory pressure and consequently accelerate the 
innovation and implementation dynamics. The term “catalyst” 
is being used deliberately to make the bridge to a chemical 
catalysis process, in which the activation energy for a 
substantial transformation is lowered, and like this, the 
transformation process is exponentially accelerated (Fig. 1). 
Such a shift from incremental to exponential change dynamics 
requires an innovation environment that is interdisciplinary 
(involving all stakeholders) and resolves the current blockers, 
which stem from the building industry structure/culture 
(Fig. 2).” ([Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 2023, p. 727]
CE is a systemic approach requiring the involvment of 
interdiceplinary stakeholders to become effective. 
Adopting CE approach has the potential to accelerate 
development and adpotion of innovation in a sector 
because of the needed multidisciplinary collaboration 
To ensure true and ambitius innovation in the 
construction sector, retaining ownership, 
motivate lifetime extention of the material is 
suggessted. CE is currently considered to rovide 
practical solutions that can accelerate holistic 
innovation making the construction industry more 
sustainable. Circular innovation requireing not 
only change of material or process but also 
business model transformation. 
Construction 
industry 
2018
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagi
c, 2018,
A systematic review on drivers, barriers, 
and practices towards circular economy: a 
supply chain perspective
https://doi
.org/10.10
80/002075
43.2017.1
402141
LR
Framework of drivers, practices and barriers for 
implementation of CE in SC. Insight into the best way to get CE 
implemented in an enterprise's SC from different stakeholder 
point of view.
Barriers, drivers and practices for organization and SC. 
Barriers calsified after internal / external and by how one 
or more stakeholders are related to the barriers. Only the 
ones containing more than one stakeholder are collected. 
CE practices: how CE should be adapted into a 
SC. Main practice is to design a product for 
remanufacturing, make sufficient laws and 
policies so enterprices are willing to adopt the CE 
in SC. 
General aim 
(mainly 
manufacturing 
 and 
electronics)
==PAGE:139==
G
Phase 4: Sheet B
ID
Study Methodology Industry Circular 
aim 
Source 
(citation 
code)
Classification from 
litterature 
Barrier
Description
Context
1
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
In management and 
decision-making 
Lack of performance evaluation system 
(common standards)
“The lack of clear, standardized, quantitative measurement 
system and goals, the lack of feedback information, data 
discrepancies, performance indexes.”
The firms should evaluate the performance of their circular 
practices at the firm level. But there are lack of common 
standards. 
2
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
In management and 
decision-making 
Lack of acceptance of new business models 
( willingness and readiness)
Most businesses stuck into linear business models. Switching a 
new business model requires fundamental changes in 
organization structure, company culture, supply systems, 
manufacturing methods, and target market.
the general administration of CE practices in a firm. It 
expresses managerial decision making, company culture, 
controlling the success of business processes and material, 
information flow. Willingness and readyness (management). 
The support and commitment of the top management is 
inevitable to conduct circular operations among the SC.
3
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
In management and 
decision-making 
Lack of traceability
CE requires traceability to monitor recycled material, and to 
know where materials came from and whether the information 
shared is true.
Succesful CE practice requires controlling SC partners, 
tracing the flow of materials and sharing information
4
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Labour
“Lack of trained intermediate staff” 
(Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1483)
“SC members may be in lack of knowledge about eco-literacy. 
Trained intermediate staff is critical since textile industry 
includes many intermediate processing steps.” (Kazancoglu et 
al., 2020, p. 1483)
Affect quality of the CE
5
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Design
Design challenge: “Lack of complementary 
processes” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1483]
“Lack of availability of sustainable complementary processing 
may harden the design process and it negatively affects the 
speed of product development” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1483]
“CE as there is a lack of availability of sustainable 
complementary processes (e.g., disassembly, separation, 
recycling).”
6
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Design
Design challenge: “Complexity in product 
architecture” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1483]
“In textile industry there may be a lag between design and 
diffusion as most fabrics are a blend of different fiber types.” 
([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1483]
disassembly, separation, recycling, and production problems
7
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Material
Materials: Lack of technical know-how
Technical knowledge of companies about how they can 
implement the CE is low.
hard and expensive to find substitutes for many materials
8
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Material
Materials: Lack of quality 
Difficult to maintain quality throughout the product life cycle 
Shredding affect quality (lack of technology). Low quality 
recycled material leads to discarding products, reduced 
durability, problem with consumers.
9
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Material
Materials: “Availability of recyclable 
materials” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1483]
“Limited availability and quality of recycling materials. Some 
components of products such as petroleum-based plastics and 
metals make them unsuitable for recycling.” (Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, p. 1483)
hard and expensive to find substitutes. Recycled material is 
costly because of the process.
10
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Government 
Rules and regulations: “Lack of sectorial 
standardization” 
“The failure in certain standards for collecting and recycling of 
wastes can lead to problems such as not guaranteeing quality 
and efficiency, monitoring and measuring the SC.” (Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020, p. 1484)
Lack of governmental knowlegde and regulation to promote 
CE . “policy makers should focus on preparing new rules and 
regulations as well as revising and modifying the current ones 
to be in line with the transition to the CE. The companies 
conducting the circular activities should be certified by the 
related authorities to prevent the misuse of circular activities 
and to regulate the market. In addition to that, the standards 
should be set in order to assure a uniform level of quality 
which is critical to achieve the desired circular and 
sustainable outcome.” 
11
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Government 
Rules and regulations:  “Lack of 
certifications” 
“Certification is required to monitor whether recycled raw 
materials and materials purchased from suppliers comply with 
the standards.” (Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1484)
“sectorial standardizations, specifications and supporting 
policies of governments on recycled materials and reuse for 
products” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1486]
12
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Knowledge and 
awareness
Knowledge and awareness: “Lack of CE 
awareness” (Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1484)
“Inadequate awareness on CE principles within SC partners. The 
lack of information in company and SC about the benefits of 
switching to the CE.” (Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1484)
Specially deficult for Small/medium size companies
13
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Knowledge and 
awareness
Knowledge and awareness: Lack of 
theoretical information
Lack of theoretical information about the type of materials that 
should be used in the products and how to produce the textile 
products by applying the CE.
Specially deficult for Small/medium size companies
14
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Knowledge and 
awareness
Knowledge and awareness: Lack of 
technical know-how
Technical knowledge of companies about how they can 
implement the CE is low.
Specially deficult for Small/medium size companies
15
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
 Integration and 
collaboration: 
Integration and collaboration: Lack of 
sharing information and communication
Lack of effective communication, integration, and cooperation 
among SC members which will increase their competitiveness 
and productivity.
Long-term relationships of the SC is based on transparency 
and information sharing. The length of SC and the nature of 
competition they are reluctant to share information among 
firms. “The trust is the key factor for convincing the textile 
supply to implement such a new business model. Hence, 
information sharing and improved communication should be 
the initial step. It is going to contribute the traceability of the 
products and services. Block chain-based technology and 
radio frequency identification (RFID) can be used in 
traceability for textile supply chain (Kelepouris, Pramatari, & 
Doukidis, 2007; Rusinek, Zhang, & Radziwill, 2018). 
Afterwards, the transparency of circular operations in all 
stages of the SC will be achieved. Finally, this will proceed 
with the SC to achieve a common vision and shared goals” 
(Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1487)
16
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
 Integration and 
collaboration: 
Integration and collaboration: Lack of 
constant supplier
Lack of regular suppliers within the SC can lead to quality 
problems from raw material to finished product. Changing 
suppliers often prevent achieving the CE goals.
17
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
 Integration and 
collaboration: 
 Integration and collaboration: Lack of 
shared vision and willingness to collaborate
SC partners can be reluctant to integrate, co-create, and join the 
partnership throughout the SC. This may be due to a lack of 
common vision, fear of losing control, or lack of trust between 
them.
Long-term relationships of the SC is based on transparency 
and information sharing. The length of SC and the nature of 
competition they are reluctant to share information among 
firms. Trust, transparency, transition of linear operation in SC, 
information sharing, allingment of vision
Figure G.1: SLR for phase 4. Sheet B: Raw data on barriers
Google sheet: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ZjuOqKYHgm7JAzprw8zT51XgUqbs8D57/
edit?usp=drive_link&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=true&sd=true
It is recommended to view the file in Microsoft Excel to have the same formation as in the
shown figure fig. G.1.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
123
==PAGE:140==
ID
Study Methodology Industry Circular 
aim 
Source 
(citation 
code)
Classification from 
litterature 
Barrier
Description
Context
1
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
In management and 
decision-making 
Lack of performance evaluation system 
(common standards)
“The lack of clear, standardized, quantitative measurement 
system and goals, the lack of feedback information, data 
discrepancies, performance indexes.”
The firms should evaluate the performance of their circular 
practices at the firm level. But there are lack of common 
standards. 
2
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
In management and 
decision-making 
Lack of acceptance of new business models 
( willingness and readiness)
Most businesses stuck into linear business models. Switching a 
new business model requires fundamental changes in 
organization structure, company culture, supply systems, 
manufacturing methods, and target market.
the general administration of CE practices in a firm. It 
expresses managerial decision making, company culture, 
controlling the success of business processes and material, 
information flow. Willingness and readyness (management). 
The support and commitment of the top management is 
inevitable to conduct circular operations among the SC.
3
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
In management and 
decision-making 
Lack of traceability
CE requires traceability to monitor recycled material, and to 
know where materials came from and whether the information 
shared is true.
Succesful CE practice requires controlling SC partners, 
tracing the flow of materials and sharing information
4
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Labour
“Lack of trained intermediate staff” 
(Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1483)
“SC members may be in lack of knowledge about eco-literacy. 
Trained intermediate staff is critical since textile industry 
includes many intermediate processing steps.” (Kazancoglu et 
al., 2020, p. 1483)
Affect quality of the CE
5
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Design
Design challenge: “Lack of complementary 
processes” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1483]
“Lack of availability of sustainable complementary processing 
may harden the design process and it negatively affects the 
speed of product development” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1483]
“CE as there is a lack of availability of sustainable 
complementary processes (e.g., disassembly, separation, 
recycling).”
6
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Design
Design challenge: “Complexity in product 
architecture” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1483]
“In textile industry there may be a lag between design and 
diffusion as most fabrics are a blend of different fiber types.” 
([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1483]
disassembly, separation, recycling, and production problems
7
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Material
Materials: Lack of technical know-how
Technical knowledge of companies about how they can 
implement the CE is low.
hard and expensive to find substitutes for many materials
8
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Material
Materials: Lack of quality 
Difficult to maintain quality throughout the product life cycle 
Shredding affect quality (lack of technology). Low quality 
recycled material leads to discarding products, reduced 
durability, problem with consumers.
9
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Material
Materials: “Availability of recyclable 
materials” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1483]
“Limited availability and quality of recycling materials. Some 
components of products such as petroleum-based plastics and 
metals make them unsuitable for recycling.” (Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, p. 1483)
hard and expensive to find substitutes. Recycled material is 
costly because of the process.
10
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Government 
Rules and regulations: “Lack of sectorial 
standardization” 
“The failure in certain standards for collecting and recycling of 
wastes can lead to problems such as not guaranteeing quality 
and efficiency, monitoring and measuring the SC.” (Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020, p. 1484)
Lack of governmental knowlegde and regulation to promote 
CE . “policy makers should focus on preparing new rules and 
regulations as well as revising and modifying the current ones 
to be in line with the transition to the CE. The companies 
conducting the circular activities should be certified by the 
related authorities to prevent the misuse of circular activities 
and to regulate the market. In addition to that, the standards 
should be set in order to assure a uniform level of quality 
which is critical to achieve the desired circular and 
sustainable outcome.” 
11
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Government 
Rules and regulations:  “Lack of 
certifications” 
“Certification is required to monitor whether recycled raw 
materials and materials purchased from suppliers comply with 
the standards.” (Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1484)
“sectorial standardizations, specifications and supporting 
policies of governments on recycled materials and reuse for 
products” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1486]
12
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Knowledge and 
awareness
Knowledge and awareness: “Lack of CE 
awareness” (Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1484)
“Inadequate awareness on CE principles within SC partners. The 
lack of information in company and SC about the benefits of 
switching to the CE.” (Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1484)
Specially deficult for Small/medium size companies
13
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Knowledge and 
awareness
Knowledge and awareness: Lack of 
theoretical information
Lack of theoretical information about the type of materials that 
should be used in the products and how to produce the textile 
products by applying the CE.
Specially deficult for Small/medium size companies
14
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Knowledge and 
awareness
Knowledge and awareness: Lack of 
technical know-how
Technical knowledge of companies about how they can 
implement the CE is low.
Specially deficult for Small/medium size companies
15
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
 Integration and 
collaboration: 
Integration and collaboration: Lack of 
sharing information and communication
Lack of effective communication, integration, and cooperation 
among SC members which will increase their competitiveness 
and productivity.
Long-term relationships of the SC is based on transparency 
and information sharing. The length of SC and the nature of 
competition they are reluctant to share information among 
firms. “The trust is the key factor for convincing the textile 
supply to implement such a new business model. Hence, 
information sharing and improved communication should be 
the initial step. It is going to contribute the traceability of the 
products and services. Block chain-based technology and 
radio frequency identification (RFID) can be used in 
traceability for textile supply chain (Kelepouris, Pramatari, & 
Doukidis, 2007; Rusinek, Zhang, & Radziwill, 2018). 
Afterwards, the transparency of circular operations in all 
stages of the SC will be achieved. Finally, this will proceed 
with the SC to achieve a common vision and shared goals” 
(Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1487)
16
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
 Integration and 
collaboration: 
Integration and collaboration: Lack of 
constant supplier
Lack of regular suppliers within the SC can lead to quality 
problems from raw material to finished product. Changing 
suppliers often prevent achieving the CE goals.
17
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
 Integration and 
collaboration: 
 Integration and collaboration: Lack of 
shared vision and willingness to collaborate
SC partners can be reluctant to integrate, co-create, and join the 
partnership throughout the SC. This may be due to a lack of 
common vision, fear of losing control, or lack of trust between 
them.
Long-term relationships of the SC is based on transparency 
and information sharing. The length of SC and the nature of 
competition they are reluctant to share information among 
firms. Trust, transparency, transition of linear operation in SC, 
information sharing, allingment of vision
==PAGE:141==
18
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Cost 
High investment cost
Companies should change their infrastructure in transition to the 
CE. Use of new technology, certification process, and training 
employees increase the investment cost. In addition, the cost of 
recycled fibers, used in the production and the collection of 
waste fabrics, are high.
Therefore, firms do not want to invest and take risks because 
of the uncertainty in profitability and the long-term benefits it 
will provide within the SC. “These high costs are related to the 
producing and/or selling circular products. In order for textile 
companies to benefit from economies of scale, they need to 
increase the amount of products they produce. This increase 
in production quantity depends on consumer demand for 
circular products. Therefore, the more information 
consumers have about these products and its benefits, the 
more they will buy these products, then the more producers 
will increase production quantities and eventually, unit cost 
per product will decrease.” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1487]
19
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Cost 
Uncertainty in profitability
The uncertainty in profitability and return on investment affect 
companies’ expectations and causes them to be reluctant in 
making investments.
Therefore, firms do not want to invest and take risks because 
of the uncertainty in profitability and the long-term benefits it 
will provide within the SC
20
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Cost 
Failure to provide the scale of production
Since the demand for circular products in textile industry is low, 
there is currently no large volume of production, which prevents 
companies to benefit from the advantages of economies of 
scale.
Therefore, firms do not want to invest and take risks because 
of the uncertainty in profitability and the long-term benefits it 
will provide within the SC. “These high costs are related to the 
producing and/or selling circular products. In order for textile 
companies to benefit from economies of scale, they need to 
increase the amount of products they produce. This increase 
in production quantity depends on consumer demand for 
circular products. Therefore, the more information 
consumers have about these products and its benefits, the 
more they will buy these products, then the more producers 
will increase production quantities and eventually, unit cost 
per product will decrease.” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 
1487]
21
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Technical 
infrastructure
Insufficiency of reverse logistics 
infrastructure
Lack of reverse logistics infrastructure complicates the 
implementation of the CE.
“Therefore, there is a need for reverse logistics infrastructure, 
necessary facilities, and technology in collecting and 
separating recyclable products to turn them into high quality 
raw materials” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2020, p. 1486]
22
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Technical 
infrastructure
Inadequate of facility infrastructure
Lack of textile recycling, reprocessing, collecting, and sorting 
facilities complicates the implementation of the CE.
23
Exploratory 
research method
Textile
recycling 
(C2C)
 Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Technical 
infrastructure
Collection and separation problem
Only a small amount of textile waste can be collected and 
recycled. Unofficial waste sellers carry out the sorting and 
classification of used products.
24
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Legislative/political 
barriers
Lack of tax policiesand incentives
governments fail to encourage the process since there are no tax 
rebate policies to promote CSCM (Khandelwal & Barua, 2020) or 
incentives for greener activities and tax policies to promote 
circular models (Mangla et al., 2018);
25
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Legislative/political 
barriers
Weak environmental laws and regulations
deficiency in enforcement rules and systematic regulations for 
environmental
26
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Legislative/political 
barriers
Lack of global standards and performance 
measurements
effective mapping of performances and SC activities tracking 
(Kumar et al., 2021; G. Yadav et al., 2020) are lacking due to a 
weak performance measurement system and inexistent global 
standards and sharing data protocols (Luthra & Mangla, 2018).
27
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Limited financial resources and support
28
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Financial/economic 
barriers:
Uncertainties about economic benefits and 
circular flows in the short run. Limited 
financial resources and support
the return of investment is mostly unknown and the uncertain 
nature of circular flows increases the risk (Ozkan-Ozen et al., 
2020) affecting companies expectations and reluctancies in 
making investments (I. Kazancoglu et al., 2020).
29
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Social barrier 
Inadequacy of knowledge and awareness (
conscious lack of CSCM initiatives (B9) was denounced both at 
an organizationalpoint of view, leading to a lack in the motivation 
(Kumar et al., 2021), and from a customer perspective 
(Khandelwal & Barua, 2020).
30
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Organizational 
barriers:
Lack of coordination and collaboration 
among the SC members
SC actors are reluctant to collaborate and support CSC 
initiatives (Farooque et al., 2019). This is due to a lack of 
common vision, fear of losing control, or a lack of trust between 
them (I. Kazancoglu et al., 2020);
31
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Organizational 
barriers:
Lack of appropriate training and educational 
programmmes
appropriate training and development programmes for SC 
members and HR are fundamental (Mangla et al., 2018). For 
instance, human–machine interaction is a promising approach 
for circular operations, however it requires a detailed and 
efficient training to be managed successfully (Ozkan-Ozen et al., 
2020 ). Organisational culture and resource optimization are, 
indeed, fundamental factors for achieving sustainable goals 
through emerging technologies (Gupta & Singh, 2021);
==PAGE:142==
32
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Organizational 
barriers:
Lack of organization willingness and trust. 
the transition from linear to circular flow requires redesigning the 
SC network while embracing a sustainable point of view and 
conducting, simultaneously, an I4.0 transition.Organizations, 
however, do not fullytrust this new concept (Ozkan-Ozen et al., 
2020 ) lacking a futuristic outlook (M. Sharma et al., 2020);
33
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Organizational 
barriers:
Poor management support and commitment
due to a lackof a full comprehension of business opportunities 
(Cezarino et al., 2019 ), vision, and financial resources, the 
management is usually reluctant in supporting activities for 
sustainable operations (Kumar et al., 2021);
34
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Organizational 
barriers:
Lack of effective strategic planning
deficiency of the planning and management of CSCM concepts 
was reported by Mangla et al. (2018) and strongly confirmed by 
Khandelwal & Barua (2020).
35
LR + Delphi study 
over industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
uring 
Taddei et al., 
2024
Technical barriers
Lack of information systems and data 
management
while in the linear economy, the number of stakeholders is not 
high and relationships among them are usually one sided, in a 
CSC the complexity increases tremendously resulting in a greater 
need for data management skills (Ozkan-Ozen et al., 2020). 
Indeed, a lack of information systems and data management is 
considered a relevant barrier. The security and the capacityof 
data storage systems are also denounced as important issues.
36
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Data availability and validity
Lack of data reliability and verification because of self-
declaration and no standards . Lack of data availability.
“Companies across the value chain can't create 
comprehensive cross–value chain assessments, e.g., for CO2 
footprint, along the supply chain, as they just don't have the 
data.”–Delphi comment. “We often have to rely on the 
self–declaration of many upstream partners. There's no real 
verification mechanism in place for many sustainability 
dimensions.”–OEMCo2 “Of course, the miners will vouch for 
absolutely no child labor in their operations. But before we 
checked every single mine, how can we be 
sure?”–RefiningCo. “When we recollect the battery, much of 
the data we get out of the battery management system is 
insufficient, inaccessible, or 
unstandardized.”–BatteryComponentCo
37
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Transparency: Visibility (main barrier)
Downstream and upstream visibility. Lack of interrest in sharing. 
Lack of visibility beyond 1st tier and 2en tier in value chain to be 
transparent and report. 
“Sustainability assessment stops once we ship the raw cobalt 
somewhere else, we do not have visibility on the broader 
sustainability of the product it is going to be used 
for.”–MiningCo1“Stakeholders themselves might not have 
the transparency to report on sustainability up their value 
chain, even if they wanted to, as they do not have visibility 
beyond their 1st tier or 2nd tier.”–Delphi comment 
38
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Transparency: Data sharing and balance 
appropirate disclosure both ways
Lack of transparency both ways between upstream and 
downstream partners. OEM/downstream requireing transpareny 
and data but does not deliver them self. Difficulty in balancing 
appropriate disclosure levels with exchange partners
Data sharing on sustainability should go both ways. Currently, 
it's imbalanced. It's more the OEMs and other downstream 
players requesting transparency. The upstream should also 
see the downstream data, this would increase the willingness 
to share.”–Mining Co2 “Organizations might opt out at a 
certain disclosure level due to their commercial interests. It 
shouldn't be a one-way street.”–Delphi comment “We often 
deal with bulk traders for our input materials like refined 
cobalt or nickel. Those partners are rather tight-lipped 
regarding transparency about the exact product origin. It's not 
in their interest to share this, and they are not forced to do 
so.”–ActiveMaterialsCo2. “Particularly upstream 
stakeholders pointed out that transparency often only goes 
one way when powerful OEMs request data but are unwilling 
to share themselves” 
39
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Transparency: Traceability
Traceability of sustainability aspects across the supply chain. 
Many perspectives on who in the VC are responsable for acertain 
sustainablility.
“It's tough to tell the individual stakeholders in the value 
chain what they have to report on. There are many 
perspectives on who is responsible for a certain sustainability 
aspect in the battery industry. And there's no definitive 
answer.”–PolicyMaker1. “How do you connect social data 
gathered at the mining site with a battery system produced 
downstream?”–Delphi comment
40
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Governance: Alignment and rules
Lack of alignment on governance and rules of engagement
“Product-level traceability and even company-level 
traceability of sustainability indicators is tough. For instance, 
how do you operationalize social indicators like health and 
safety for one battery system?”–Battery ProducerCo. “It is 
difficult to agree on assessment methods and a potential 
independent body with multiple stakeholders across the 
value chain.”–NonGovernmentalOrg
41
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Governance: Trust in partners and 3rd 
parties
Lack of trust in exchange partners and third parties
“There needs to be a basic set of rules and an agreement on 
what we are aiming for: you need to dissect sustainability 
from commercial objectives. For this, you need involvement 
of the right representatives of the industry, if you do not 
involve them, you will not be able to derive a workable 
solution.”–ActiveMaterialsCo1. “Whenever we conduct 
sustainability assessments, we have to involve independent 
parties. Even if disclosures of other actors are reliable, the 
battery industry and its partnership are just forming to a 
certain scale. We don't know the others well enough 
yet.”–OEMCo1
==PAGE:143==
42
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Governance: Data sharing/Transparency
Complex management of permissioned data access to protect 
commercial interest
“Trust in the right data is a big issue in the battery industry. 
No one will share bad data about sustainability if they don't 
have to.”–Delphi comment. “Full transparency will hurt a 
metal trader's business. If there is full transparency, who 
needs a trader anymore?”–RefiningCo
43
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Incentivization: Data gathering / 
Transparency
Lack of incentivization for data gathering. Difficulty to balance 
incentives for information sharing with potential of penalization 
for non-compliance.
Data access must be steered between the car or battery 
manufacturer and the entities who want the data, for 
example, the consumers. It has to be a permissioned access 
and this complex governance has to be worked out. There has 
to be an agreed framework for this.”PolicyMaker3. “It all 
comes down to commercial contracts and incentives. 
Whenever they see value in transmitting that data down the 
supply, they will see to its execution.”–RecyclingCo1. “It is 
essential that disclosure is first stimulated in the battery 
value chain before we focus on penalizing. If a trader 
discloses all mining locations with a clear intention to 
increase sustainability, that should be positive and should 
not lead to a business decline.”PolicyMaker1. The 
assessment has to be a solution-oriented benchmarking that 
acknowledges progress rather than blaming actors. That is 
what's often happening right now and prevents actors from 
becoming more transparent.”–RefiningCo.
44
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Regulation
Restrictive antitrust regulations. Risk of overregulating 
sustainability assessment for batteries. 
The assessment has to be a solution-oriented benchmarking 
that acknowledges progress rather than blaming actors. That 
is what's often happening right now and prevents actors from 
becoming more transparent.”–RefiningCo. “Too specific 
legislation might come into play, it's not a good idea to 
exactly regulate how a battery management system should 
store information and how it should share information, the 
agreement should rather be voluntary among private 
stakeholders, to increase the 
flexibility.”BatteryComponentCo. “Particularly in Europe, 
data protection and competition laws are sometimes 
incompatible with creating full transparency on certain 
sustainability issues. At least everybody is cautious not to 
breach any of this, which makes holistic sustainability 
assessments more cumbersome.”OEMCo1. “Centralized 
databases for assessment along the value chain might be a 
big issue, as this might be a breach in antitrust.”–Delphi 
comment
45
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Standards: Customization and variability of 
standards
Lack of customization of sustainability standards. Value chain 
step specific standards. High variability of sustainability 
standards.
“Standards are not specific enough for certain value chain 
steps (e.g., OEMs send sustainability questionnaires to 
miners, which are actually defined to evaluate refiners). It's a 
little bit like putting a circle in a square.”–Delphi comment. 
“We should have a fair bit of flexibility for which kind of 
standards will be accepted; the mining site should ideally be 
able to choose a credible reporting standard, out of the many 
that exist, that fits their operations.”–MiningCo2. “A myriad 
of national standards exist across the battery value chain, 
many of them with completely different concepts. [...] 
Stakeholders will be very hesitant to get certified by yet 
another standard. We face this problem often when we try to 
onboard new suppliers.”OEMCo1
46
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Standards: Unrealistic requirements
High amount of sustainability requirements by OEMs
“The OEMs have a massive wish list, that sometimes is not 
manageable.”–ActiveMaterialsCo1.
47
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Standards: Varying risk
Varying risk level for different sustainability aspects. Riskiest 
spots, hot spots in VC.
“Risks regarding different sustainability indicators is very 
different in different geographies. Data gathering 
management systems must be designed accordingly and 
have to function risk-driven.”–NonGovernmentalOrg. 
“Assessments have to prioritize and look at the hot spots, the 
riskiest spots in the value chain. Usually, companies have the 
issues at the same spots.”–Delphi comment Gebhardt et al., 
2022
48
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Standards: component standardization
Lack of battery (component) standardization across supply chain 
stakeholders. Lack of comparison
“There's a new type of electric vehicle battery every day, so 
many companies are pouring money into R&D [...]. The limited 
degree of standardization makes it challenging to compare 
their sustainability performance.”–NonGovernmentalCo. 
“according to this study's results, in terms of battery design, 
comprehensive standardization with sustainability 
assessment across all four dimensions (environmental, 
social, governance, and economic) in mind can not only ease 
assessment but contribute towards a much easier 
collaboration in the LIBSC.” ([Gebhardt et al., 2022, p. 214]
49
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Operation: Capacity in design
Lack of capacity to focus on sustain-ability in design and 
operations
“We design batteries first and foremost to fulfill the service 
that the OEM demands, it's the first design, and it's much 
more demanding with every year. We don't have time and 
resources to focus on sustainable design, it's all about 
performance.”–BatteryProducerCo
50
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Operation: Capacity in reporting
Lack of capacity and methods to conduct sustainability 
assessments and required data gathering. Inaccurate 
assessment through data aggregation.
“You don't want to put a reporting burden on areas where 
there is not inherently a risk. Additional audit burdens will not 
have a positive outcome, that will not add any value in terms 
of sustainability.”–Delphi comment. For aspects like water 
management, circularity, or material depletion it is very hard 
to define commonly accepted calculation methods that are 
not overcomplicated.”NonGovernmentalOrg. 
==PAGE:144==
51
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Operation: System boundaries
Difficulty to define system boundaries for sustainability aspects
“Where do we draw the system boundaries? Do we stop at 
the cell, or do we include other scopes? Both considerations 
are justified.”–BatteryProducerCo
52
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Technology: system enablers
Lack of appropriate technologies to support data gathering, 
aggregation, and exchange
“Data systems are often still focused on one company or the 
exchange between two stakeholders. I don't see yet how we 
can implement systems that enable traceability across an 
entire supply chain.”–Delphi comment. “The technology 
coming up is not aligned with the current industry processes 
and complexities [...]. IT companies think they know how the 
world works, and these solutions will still not be adoptable by 
the industry. Results are often not a workable 
thing.”–RefiningCo
53
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Technology: Interface for SC exchange
Lack of interfaces with supply chain exchange partners, (public) 
institutions, and third parties
As now battery sustainability needs to be assessed 
holistically, OEMs and component manufacturers want to 
directly talk to us – something we haven't done before. This 
requires us to set up new data exchanges with all of them, 
which is quite an effort.”–RefiningCo
54
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Competition: Market information
Fear of losing market opportunities through information sharing. 
Lack of willingness to share due to confidentiality requirements
“Where companies like cathode producers actually get their 
recycling feed is a big competitive advantage [...]. Where do 
they get the recycled material from is something they will not 
easily like to share.”–RecyclingCo1. “To give an example of 
battery recyclers versus battery manufacturers: Full 
transparency on the value of materials in the battery that can 
be recycled will enable upfront calculation of process cost 
minus resale value. The battery recycler will accept only 
valuable batteries, that leave them with net positive value 
waste, and leave the manufacturer with a decreasing 
competitive advantage through this former proprietary 
information.”–BatteryProducerCo.  “The industry, or we as a 
battery manufacturer, will never agree to give to a third party 
the [bill of materials] of our batteries. You might sometimes 
not even want to share this across 
plants.”BatteryProducerCo. “Confidentiality will always be 
an issue, no matter what, companies will always be hesitant 
to share data with direct or indirect competitors. This is 
always a core requirement when we supply battery 
management systems.”–BatteryComponentProducer
55
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Market 
Unfavorable public perception and market response after 
sustainability disclosure.
“Take the carbon footprint example: It's a sensitive topic as 
willingness to share might be very different for different 
actors. Many of them feel that they are shooting themselves 
in the foot as some companies are big polluter and customers 
might discriminate against them.”NonGovernmentalOrg. 
“Even if we promise progress, if I make all the negative things 
happening in our supply chain fully transparent, I am very 
concerned whether our customers will still purchase our 
electric vehicles. We have to be very careful.”–OEMCo1
56
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Information gathering 
and sharing barriers
Market: Beyond regulations
Insufficient demand and commitment from the private sector to 
raise transparency 
“Supply chain actors will comply with regulatory disclosure 
requirements [...]. But very few will go beyond that. Beyond 
regulation, there is a very limited pull from our 
partners.”–Delphi comment
57
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Reuse, 
recycle, 
dispose
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Financial/economic 
barriers:
Economic attractiveness
Uncertainty regarding economic attractiveness of sustainable 
supply chain practices
“There's a big question mark on many environmental 
practices. Raw materials are much cheaper than recycled 
materials, recycling processes are not profitable, there's high 
uncertainty about the value of second-life 
applications.”–BatteryComponentCo “We are already 
pushed to produce batteries as cheaply as possible. If 
sustainable criteria become fully transparent and we are 
measured against that, we will have to increase our prices to 
look good on that front.”–BatteryProducerCo. “industry 
representatives stated that more sustainable practices such 
as using recycled instead of raw materials are not necessarily 
always economically more attractive. As cost-efficiency or 
profitability remain among the most prominent performance 
indicators business organizations are measured against, 
more transparency on sustainable practices is not always 
aligned with their interest.” ([Gebhardt et al., 2022, p. 214]
58
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Dynamic
Complicated ecosystem
VC evolving fast and new players appear quickly. Mutually 
interdependent actors. 
“Stakeholders from industry players, policy-making 
organizations, and NGOs agreed that the LIB value chain is 
evolving rapidly, and new players appear quickly, creating a 
complicated ecosystem of mutually interdependent actors 
and thus significant interface complications.” 
59
Mixed-method: LR, 
stakeholder 
interviews,worksho
p, delphi study
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Dynamic
Complicated ecosystem
Existing standards does not keep up.
Rapid growth, SC and product complexity are increasing fast 
and dynamic.
==PAGE:145==
60
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Multi-domain 
challenges
Complexity and uncertainty in material flow, 
BM, product design, Service and distribution
“A practical definition of CE principles applicable to 
manufacturing is urgently required to remedy this lack of clarity. 
This definition extends to the SC as well: if business models are 
not aligned across the SC, then circular solutions may not be 
technically or economically feasible, for example, products are 
not designed for longevity, repair, disassembly and 
remanufacturing, or cannot be collected and reprocessed in 
ways that retain their value. In addition, circular strategies, 
definitions and practices are not standardized, complicating 
conceptualization in the sense stage.” ([Chari et al., 2022, p. 
2507]
“The type of company information, data or knowledge will 
affect the allocation of responsibilities between suppliers and 
users (causal relationship). Dynamic collaboration in the 
value network and the type of competencies that exist 
outside of the focal company are other aspects to consider 
for successful collaboration within the SC.” (Chari et al., 
2022, p. 2510) “Companies will constantly need to iterate 
between measuring (collect data and select indicators) and 
improving (interpret results) due to constantly changing 
business environments when manufacturing processes and 
business models are developed, modified or changed.” 
(Chari et al., 2022, p. 2510)
61
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Collaboration
Misaligned interests
62
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Collaboration
Lack of organizational capabilities
63
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Collaboration
Cultual mindset 
“Experts mentioned that company culture can bring employees 
onboard with the changes in manufacturing processes, by 
facilitating skills development. The right skills coupled with the 
company culture affects collaboration and these have together 
been depicted with positive valences” (Chari et al., 2022, p. 
2510)
64
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Collaboration
Leadership and inability to take necessary 
risk
“When critical knowledge on a specific material is missing, 
companies use other alternatives. Due to this lack of knowledge 
and uncertain consequences of designing a product for CE, 
companies are unwilling to take the necessary risks and develop 
the necessary strategical capabilities” (Chari et al., 2022, p. 
2507)
65
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Stakeholder 
Lack of knowledge 
Lack of knowledge and understanding about data management , 
I4.0, CE approaches
66
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of training
67
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of Organizational willingness
68
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of Management support 
69
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of comprehensive data and 
information
“Experts also described that understanding data sharing needs 
leads to better cross-functional collaboration. Without this 
understanding, it is difficult to develop a long-term strategy, 
hence showcasing a dependency between knowledge, data and 
collaboration.” (Chari et al., 2022, p. 2510)
lack of comprehensive data and information on wastes (due 
to poor quality, volume and types of data due to varying 
geographical locationslarge distances reduce economic 
viability, shortages of basic materials; lack of infrastructure, 
utilities, services and facilities; lack of active community 
engagement).“The type of company information, data or 
knowledge will affect the allocation of responsibilities 
between suppliers and users (causal relationship). Dynamic 
collaboration in the value network and the type of 
competencies that exist outside of the focal company are 
other aspects to consider for successful collaboration within 
the SC.” ([Chari et al., 2022, p. 2510]
70
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
IS 
implement
ation
Chari et al., 
2022
Regulations
Lack of regulations: firm level
on firm level: environmental regulations for by-product reuse and 
water and energy utility regulations; contractual issues; 
confidentiality issues [70]
71
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
IS 
implement
ation
Chari et al., 
2022
Regulations
Lack of regulations: national level
limit the ability of firms to alter their business processes; 
ingrained market models; lack of specific IS policy; uncertainty 
on direction of national politics
72
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of capabilities
Lack of capabilities
Human ressource and skills shortages
“To transition to CE, negotiating and collaborating to develop 
the skills of SC partners (horizontal integration), and across 
functions (vertical integration) should remain a priority 
(Eamonn, 2015). The empirical data also show that DCs such 
as a mindset change (open-mindedness and freedom to act) 
and specialised expertise for IS, can enable resource 
synergies between companies.” (Chari et al., 2022, p. 2512) 
“Experts mentioned that company culture can bring 
employees onboard with the changes in manufacturing 
processes, by facilitating skills development. The right skills 
coupled with the company culture affects collaboration and 
these have together been depicted with positive valences” 
(Chari et al., 2022, p. 2510)
==PAGE:146==
73
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of capabilities
Mismatch of capacities/capabilites
“A practical definition of CE principles applicable to 
manufacturing is urgently required to remedy this lack of clarity. 
This definition extends to the SC as well: if business models are 
not aligned across the SC, then circular solutions may not be 
technically or economically feasible, for example, products are 
not designed for longevity, repair, disassembly and 
remanufacturing, or cannot be collected and reprocessed in 
ways that retain their value. In addition, circular strategies, 
definitions and practices are not standardized, complicating 
conceptualization in the sense stage.” (Chari et al., 2022, p. 
2507)
“As Porter and Linde (1995) described, manufacturing 
companies trade capabilities against each other to prioritise 
certain competitive capabilities. However, others suggest 
that three to five capabilities achieved simultaneously could 
give rise to long-term improvements and competitive 
advantage (Ünal & Shao, 2019).” (Chari et al., 2022, p. 2510). 
“Competitive capabilities such as cost, delivery, quality and 
flexibility can help firms achieve long-term sustainable 
competitive goals in SCs (Ünal & Shao, 2019).” ([Chari et al., 
2022, p. 2511] “IS transition is generally hindered in the 
implementation phase. That is, the concept of selling waste 
as an input to another industry is easily conceptualised, but 
the more challenging step is in the implementation or the 
‘seizing’ capabilities phase. A quantity mismatch of by-
products can hinder the seizing of symbiotic opportunities 
and cannot be overlooked in this phase.” ([Chari et al., 2022, 
p. 2507]
74
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of capabilities
Mismatch Leadership support and cultural 
mindset
Lack of motivation, social inertia, mindset from negative 
experiences
“Experts mentioned that company culture can bring 
employees onboard with the changes in manufacturing 
processes, by facilitating skills development. The right skills 
coupled with the company culture affects collaboration and 
these have together been depicted with positive valences” 
([Chari et al., 2022, p. 2510] “Over the last few years, it has 
been seen that organisations are increasingly building their IS 
infrastructure, and this could bring tremendous opportunities 
for increased value capture for the organisation. Cultivating a 
different cultural mindset that goes beyond environmental 
regulations is the need of the hour, requiring support not only 
from the top-level management, but the workers who will 
implement the solutions as well.” ([Chari et al., 2022, p. 
2509]
75
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
IS 
implement
ation
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of investments in appropirate 
technologies
Lack of appropirate technology among the diffferent partners 
affected the identification of potential candidate for symbiotic 
ressource exchange 
76
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Standards
No standardized conceptualization of CE 
No standardized conceptualization of CE among organizations is 
a barrier to implement CE practices. 
“Similarly, data should be able to be measured and defined 
consistently for successful cross-functional collaboration 
among partners. The plurality in CE definitions and 
interpretations makes it difficult to build new business 
models and tools (value capture) within the organisation and 
in other SC partners” (Chari et al., 2022, p. 2510). 
77
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Standards
Measurement 
Lack of knowledge in using the appropirate quantitative methods 
to measure the environmental impact 
“Similarly, data should be able to be measured and defined 
consistently for successful cross-functional collaboration 
among partners. The plurality in CE definitions and 
interpretations makes it difficult to build new business 
models and tools (value capture) within the organisation and 
in other SC partners” (Chari et al., 2022, p. 2510). “For 
instance, expert B mentioned that some metal companies 
communicate the weight of waste produced, others express 
waste as the number of products being disposed of, and 
others define waste in terms of monetary value. These 
different metrics and indicators of waste make it difficult to 
communicate between companies, but also miss the value 
embedded in waste” ([Chari et al., 2022, p. 2507]
78
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Refurbish, 
recycled
Chari et al., 
2022
The right customers
Logistic system, design challenges in finding the right customers, 
for refurbished or recycled products. And understand the user-
case 
“Capabilities such as culture (openness to recycled 
products), user-centred design, dematerialisation and 
creation of CE indicators were identified for different 
production and SC levels (de Sousa Jabbour et al., 2019).” 
(Chari et al., 2022, p. 2511). “Customer and supplier 
management along with product and process management 
capabilities also enable circular transition (Laumann & 
Tambo, 2018).” ([Chari et al., 2022, p. 2511]
79
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Existing institutional conditions
Constraints the transistion to circular practice 
80
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of suitable financing mechanisms
Inhibits transition to circular practice 
81
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Level of intent or size of goal
Support from SC network may not always have the same 
level/niveau they want to implement CE practices.
82
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Collaboration in departments within an 
organization
 Lack of cross-functional or horizontal/vertical integration of 
comperencies and communication.
Environmental manager cooperate with R&D department in 
product development. Marketing department with R&D for 
communication of results. Lack of collaboration internally 
could lead to sustainability decisions as stand-alone 
activities.
==PAGE:147==
83
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Trade-off in I4.0
Using new technology giving sustainablility trade-off needed to 
be taken into acount
“from the interviews that sustainability trade-offs exist in 
firms when using I4.0 technologies. For instance, although 
blockchain is being used to monitor material flows and trace 
products along the SCs, one needs to be aware of the energy 
source of these technologies.” (Chari et al., 2022, p. 2505). 
automotive industries are developing new materials using I4.0 
technologies to build structural components of electric 
vehicles. Using these new materials could present a 
sustainability issue even though driving the electric vehicle 
has a positive environmental impact. “The experts stated that 
novel digital manufacturing technologies like 3D printing are 
being used to develop new materials, optimize productivity 
and create profits; without considering the quality, content, 
behaviour and lifetime of these materials.” ([Chari et al., 
2022, p. 2509]. “Workforce skills and knowledge such as 
programming, big data analytics and artificial intelligence are 
important tacit capabilities (Bag, Gupta, & Kumar, 2021). I4.0 
can support procurement for resource flexibility (adaptive 
capability), integrate internal and external integration 
(absorptive capability) and innovation (innovative capability) 
to gain competitive advantage (Bag et al., 2020). Conversely, 
greater the organisational flexibility, higher the I4.0 
technology adoption (Bag, Gupta, & Kumar, 2021).” ([Chari et 
al., 2022, p. 2512)
84
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
I4.0 for CE
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of understanding, commitment and  
Organizational willingness
Lack of understanding and commitment for transforming 
business-as-usual activities. Organisation has to develop 
strategic and capabilities to integrate, prevent errors and 
increase efficiency. 
Despite the potential of I4.0 for CE, decision makers may not 
recognise it as a viable strategy. Expert F pointed to a lack of 
understanding and commitment, without which I4.0 will not 
help change business-as-usual activities. This showcases a 
strong link between organisational and digital technological 
capabilities. Some organisations may already have digital 
infrastructure in place (robots, sensors, IT capabilities) but 
have yet to develop strategic and organisational capabilities 
to integrate these and make them more flexible to prevent 
errors and increase efficiency.
85
LR+experts(9) + 
Case study (IS)
IS / 
Manufact
uring 
Chari et al., 
2022
Lack of trust, data and transparency
“The empirical data pointed to trust, data and transparency 
issues; thus, leadership and strategy capabilities are needed 
for I4.0 to support collaboration capabilities which play a 
significant role for CE transition.” ([Chari et al., 2022, p. 
2512]. “Trust is an important factor, as it is needed to 
overcome the problems associated with moving by-products 
or waste, such as variations in quality, cost and time. Trust 
can be achieved by the development of skills, which can 
improve collaborations and communication between the 
different entities of the SC. Accessing reliable information is 
critical for larger commodity supply chains, where a single 
source of information (supplier) may be insufficient to 
guarantee trust (Villena & Gioia, 2018). Specifically, lower-tier 
suppliers have typically less awareness and knowledge about 
sustainability-related practices, receive less pressure from 
public society and are located in countries where social and 
environmental regulations are not prioritized (Villena & Gioia, 
2018).” ([Chari et al., 2022, p. 2507]
86
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
Uncertainties
Uncertainties: Quality, Availability and 
delivery of secondary resources. Uncertain 
demand for CE products and service 
High variablility in the quality, volume and delivery of customer 
returns in take-back systems. Contractual agreements and 
supply market. 
In this regard, the expert panelists shared that secondary 
resources (e.g., recycled MCPs) pose quality, availability, and 
delivery uncertainties that cause delays and disruptions in 
CSCs.“Moreover, the expert panelists stressed consumers’ 
poor opinions about the quality and performance of 
recovered products. Finally, they affirmed that take-back 
systems pose risks regarding the quality, volume, and delivery 
of customer returns, as CSCs face high variability of returns, 
stocks, and lead times.” ([De Lima and Seuring, 2023, p. 8]
87
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
Risk
Lack of supplier integration and information 
sharing 
“The expert panelists argued that poor communication and 
asymmetric information hamper the effective integration of 
suppliers into circular processes. In effect, this risk negatively 
impacts the information flows in CSCs” ([De Lima and Seuring, 
2023, p. 8]. 
“They argued that manufacturers can exchange information 
with key suppliers to increase the forecast accuracy of end-of-
life customer returns in CSCs.” ([De Lima and Seuring, 2023, 
p. 10]
88
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
External risk 
Market competition with linear-oriented 
companies and SC
Challenges in making the price of products competitive, 
“According to the expert panelists, CSCs require well-
coordinated recovery processes to reduce environmental 
impacts. Furthermore, CSCs compete with supply chains that 
do not complywith or foster CE practices.” 
89
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
External uncertainty Lack of adequate regulatory frameworks and 
indicators. 
Regulatory requirements
“At the external level, the “lack of adequate regulatory 
frameworks and indicators ” received relatively frequent 
attention (see Table 2). According to the expert panelists, 
companies face uncertainty regarding which regulatory 
frameworks and CE indicators should be followed or 
employed accordingly. Consequently, this uncertainty makes 
the implementation of CSCs complex and risky.” (De Lima 
and Seuring, 2023, p. 8)
90
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
External uncertainty Lack of governmental taxes, benefits and 
incentives.
Poor regulation and laws challenge CE implementation and 
stabilization in competition.
Competition, regulatory requirements, and price fluctuations 
negatively affect performance and continuity, thereby 
requiring the proper consideration of external factors in 
CSCs.
==PAGE:148==
91
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
External risk 
Unstable prices for virgin and secondary 
resources. 
Price fluctuations
“They mentioned that companies are likely to use virgin 
resources if the price of secondary resources is not attractive. 
Hence, policymakers need to foster recovery networks and 
the supply of secondary resources to make prices attractive 
for companies.” (De Lima and Seuring, 2023, p. 8)
92
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
Organizational 
uncertainty 
Uncertain Financial cost / Financial 
investment 
management of CSC implementation cost 
“uncertain financial cost” is the most frequently mentioned 
uncertainty. According to the expert panelists, companies 
require financial investments to implement CE practices. If 
they cannot properly manage CSC implementation costs, 
they are likely to face financial risks.” (De Lima and Seuring, 
2023, p. 7)
93
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
Organizational 
uncertainty 
Lack of knowledge and expertise 
Lack  of skilled workforce and familiarity with core CE strategies 
and culture change
“For “lack of knowledge and expertise,” the expert panelists 
highlighted that companies usually lack a skilled workforce 
and familiarity with core strategies when implementing the 
CE. Consequently, building strategic and technical 
capabilities is of pivotal importance if companies want to 
thrive in the CE.” (De Lima and Seuring, 2023, p. 7). “This 
result supports the assumption that implementing CE 
practices in companies demands a systemic redesign of 
related linear business models and supply chain 
configurations.” ([De Lima and Seuring, 2023, p. 10]
94
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
Organizational 
uncertainty 
Organizational resistivity
Top executives locked into the business-as-usual model. Lack of 
flexibility
“Regarding “resistance to change by top management, ” the 
expert panelists argued that a linear mindset hinders the 
transition to the CE. If top executives are “locked into” the 
business-as-usual model, they are likely to delay their 
companies’ implementation of the CE. This behavior is known 
as organizational resistivity, primarily influenced by fears of 
financial risks or environmental factors such as cultural and 
market structures.” (De Lima and Seuring, 2023, p. 
8).“According to the expert panelists, the transition toward 
the CE requiresthat companies adopt flexible plans and 
strategies. Attention should therefore be given to CE projects 
and activities that are more likely to enhance cost-efficiency 
and foster win-win opportunities.” ([De Lima and Seuring, 
2023, p. 10]
95
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
Organizational 
uncertainty 
Managers unwillingness to share. Fear of 
sharing proprietary information
concerns for interlectuel property and sensitive information 
““Intellectual property and sensitive information concerns” 
refer to managers’ unwillingness to open up, possibly for fear 
of sharing proprietary information. The expert panelists 
highlighted that this uncertainty primarily affects the 
information flows in CSCs.” (De Lima and Seuring, 2023, p. 
8). “Although information sharing is central to ensuring the 
continuous supply of MCPs in CSCs, some suppliers are 
unwilling to share information because they fear “leakage of 
sensitive business information.” Hence, companies need to 
work closely with key suppliers to build trust and foster 
information sharing.” ([De Lima and Seuring, 2023, p. 11]
96
Delphi study over 
industry, 
governmental, ngo 
and academic 
actors, 
international, 
Manufact
ure 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 
2023
Organizational 
uncertainty 
Individualistic behavior 
Misallignment of strategic priorities. Conflicting goals 
(environmental Vs. Economic). 
““conflicting goals and decisions, ” the expert panelists 
affirmed that misalignment of strategic priorities, conflicting 
environmental and economic goals, and individualistic 
behavior lead to delays and disruptions. These issues 
negatively affect the companies ’ ability to prosper in the CE” 
(De Lima and Seuring, 2023, p. 8)
97
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
recycling
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Collaboration
Communication and coordination
difficulties about collaboration, information sharing, and getting 
feedback with SC actors
 reduces the effectiveness of the CE implementation as it 
diminishes synchronisation, communication and monitoring. 
“In the complex structure of the CSC in textile industry, each 
stakeholder acts as an independent actor that needs to 
implement collaboration, communication, and coordination 
in the network structure (Fontell & Heikkilä, 2017).” 
98
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
recycling
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Collaboration
Supplier inconsistency
“Due to the length of the SC in textiles, the fact that too many 
suppliers are included in the process from the harvest to the 
finished product creates a shortage of consistent supplier” 
(Kazancoglu et al., 2022, p. 528)
99
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
recycling
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Collaboration
Lack of vision and trust 
problems on losing control and trust are experienced frequently
In order to act jointly within the SC, loss of control in the 
sharing of information about the CE and absence of trust 
among stakeholders such as manufacturers, designers, retail 
and brands, collectors, and recyclers arise as a barrier
100
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Collaboration
vagueness in profit margins and return on 
investment 
cost development of new business model are unknown and the 
long-range effects are deficult to measure 
“The return on investment is uncertain as it is cumbersome to 
identify and measure the long-range effects of the benefits of 
the CE by manufacturers, collectors, and recyclers.” 
([Kazancoglu et al., 2022, p. 529] “since the cash flow, 
income, and cost development of the new business model 
are not known by the companies, this model has been 
defined as a barrier in the short-term adoption of the CSC due 
to the lack of economic benefits”
101
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Collaboration
Lack of scale
small quantities are produced in the uncertainty of profitability 
“Due to the fact that technology in textile is not sufficiently 
developed, difficulties in recycling products cause these 
products to not be produced very much, which make the 
development of economies of scale difficult for collectors 
and recyclers.”
==PAGE:149==
102
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Complexity of product and lack of 
technology 
“Combining and developing technologies to generate suitable 
raw materials from post-consumption textile waste and 
production waste is vital to close the loop (Pandit, Nadathur, 
and Jose 2019). However, technology may be insufficient for 
the collection, classification, and separation of textile wastes 
with the existing infrastructure of textile companies 
especially for collectors and recyclers” (Kazancoglu et al., 
2022, p. 529)
103
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
recycling
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Shortage of Regional infrastructure 
Lack of collection and sorting problem. Lack of technology and 
lock-in on PET bottles.
“This is in parallel with the findings of Baltussen (2019) study 
stated that waste textile materials collection, sorting and 
separation systems should be developed for better treatment 
of recycled textile waste. Paletta et al. (2019) emphasised 
that the collection and classification of the PET bottle have 
become increasingly important to ensure the continuity of the 
secondary raw material production volume. At the same time, 
as Pasqualotto (2015) stated that another problem in 
collection and sorting is that this process is done by informal 
institutions” (Kazancoglu et al., 2022, p. 538)
104
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Reluctance of acceptance of CE 
Pressens of companies doing linear business, stakeholders in 
network not willing to adopt the new busienss model. One of the 
main barriers against transitioning. 
“Kirchherr et al. (2018), as stated in the study, all companies 
in the SC should adopt the CE model in the formation of the 
CSC. As Tura et al. (2019) point out the fact that some of the 
stakeholders within the network are not willing to adopt the 
new business model and that the corporate culture does not 
support the companies in this direction is considered as an 
important barrier. Therefore, adopting the linear economy 
model is an important barrier for this type of company.” 
(Kazancoglu et al., 2022, p. 538)
105
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Lack of standardization and metrics
“Kirchherr et al. (2017) underlined that the lack of 
standardisation is a crucial barrier within the transition to CE. 
Lack of metrics and standards for recycled product and 
production standardisation also creates a significant barrier 
in terms of material efficiency (Hart et al. 2019).” 
(Kazancoglu et al., 2022, p. 539)
106
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Lack of accademical and feasible 
information about CE principle
Seen as the most influencing factor in the cause of transitionning 
problems. 
“ack of academic and feasible information about the CE 
principles is a barrier to the CE. The lack of information 
regarding implementing CE, especially about the benefits of 
the CE for companies, is the biggest barrier for companies to 
invest and implement the CE (Herrero Rodríguez 2017). As 
stated in the study of Pasqualotto (2015), companies do not 
have sufficient technical information, knowledge, and 
managerial capacity for companies to change their current 
business models and implement the CE. In addition to the 
lack of information, education programme is a critical barrier 
in the implementation of sustainable production (Malek and 
Desai 2019). Likewise, Rizos et al. (2015) and Tura et al. 
(2019) emphasised that the lack of technical and managerial 
knowledge and skills is an important barrier especially in the 
adoption of the CE business model of SMEs.” ([Kazancoglu et 
al., 2022, p. 539]
107
Barriers found 
through LR + then 
verified and 
couse/effect sorted 
with: case company 
+ experts
Textile 
Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Lack of traceability and data
applying CE is found risky and difficult to monitor.
“Beyond performance assessment problems, companies 
may hesitate to accept the CE as a business model and this 
affects yarn, fabric and garment manufacturers, designers, 
brand owners and retailers, and governments/policymakers 
(Cao et al. 2008; Govindan and Hasanagic 2018; Kirchherr et 
al. 2018). This happens when there are negative reactions to 
change, short-term focus and applying the CE is found risky 
(Kumar et al. 2019; Kumar and Suganya 2019). Problems of 
tracking and tracing refer difficulty of monitoring the 
product’s life cycle and material flows in the CE experienced 
by yarn, fabric and garment manufacturers, brand owners 
and retailers, collectors and recyclers (Elia, Grazia Gnoni, and 
Tornese 2017; Govindan and Hasanagic 2018; Kumar and 
Suganya 2019). This difficulty also occurs because of the lack 
of data (e.g. about material location, the determination of 
components and materials and their related typology, status, 
and quantity) and suitable information for decision-making 
processes” ([Kazancoglu et al., 2022, p. 527]
108 LR 
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Consumer persception 
“The main barrier that appeared most often in this research was 
the consumer perception towards remanufactured products” 
(Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018, p. 301)
109 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Governmental issues 
(Internal + 
Organization + 
Supplier)
Lack of standard system performance 
indicators with regard to measuring CE in SC Lack of standard system for performance assesment
110 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Economic+ internal
Difficulty in pricing resources
Challenges in accurately determining resource costs lead to 
incorrect product pricing in supply chains.
==PAGE:150==
111 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Economic+ internal
High Upfront Investment Costs
Implementing circular economy practices requires significant 
initial investments in redesigning facilities, training staff, and 
adopting technologies, posing challenges for SMEs and micro-
industries. [111]
112 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
net-value 
creation
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Economic+ internal
B10. High Costs vs. Low Immediate Benefits Enterprises face high short-term costs and low short-term 
economic benefits when adopting circular economy practices.
113 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
recycling
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Economic+ internal
B11. Higher Costs of Recycled Materials
Recycled materials are often more expensive than virgin 
materials, leading consumers to prefer cheaper options without 
considering the full product lifecycle.
114 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Economic+ internal
B12. High purchasing cost of 
environmentally friendly materials by the 
supplier
High purchasing cost of environmentally friendly materials and 
packaging. [114]
115 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Economic+ internal
B13. Production costs are getting higher
Production costs are getting higher in circular economy.
116 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
reuse, 
recovery
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Technological + 
Internal
B14. Technological limitations by tracking 
recycled materials
117 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
lifecycle
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Technological + 
Internal
B15. It is difficult for enterprises to manage 
product quality through the lifecycle of a 
product
Difficult to manage product quality through the lifecycle of a 
product.
118 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
recovery, 
recycling
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Technological + 
Internal
B16. Maintaining quality of products made 
from recovered materials
Difficult to manage quality of products made from recovered 
materials.
119 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
reuse, 
recovery
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Technological + 
Internal
B17. Design challenges to reuse and 
recovery products
Design challenges to durable, reuse and recovery products.
120 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
B19. Make the right decision in SC to 
implement CE in the most efficient way
Decision making on effective technologies, practices and actors 
can improve the chances of CE implementation in SC.
121 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
B20. Accurate information regarding 
materials/tracking in SC towards recycling is 
not available
Precise information is not available to decisionmakers, or it is not 
provided in a timely way.
122 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
difficult to 
reuse, 
recycle, 
remanufact
ure 
products
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Knowledge and skill
B21. Lack of reliable information to public 
and therefore it is difficult to 
reuse/recycle/remanufacture products
Lack of reliable information to the enterprises.
==PAGE:151==
123 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
difficult to 
reuse, 
recycle, 
remanufact
ure 
products
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Knowledge and skill
B22. Lack of public awareness; therefore, it 
is difficult to reuse/recycle/remanufacture 
products
Lack of awareness and sense of urgency by public.
124 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Knowledge and skill
B23. Lack of skills by employees in CE
Enterprises lack the skills to get the circular economy 
implemented in their supply chains.
125 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
refurbished
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Knowledge and skill
B24. Consumers knowledge and awareness 
about refurbishment
Consumer knowledge and awareness about refurbishment 
products are not correct. Many people think today that new 
products are of better quality than refurbished products. 
Customers generally have the wrong perceptions on refurbished 
products and question their quality, health, and safety.
126 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Management 
B25. Poor leadership and management 
towards CE in SC
Poor leadership and management increases the chances of lack 
of interest on circular economy implementation. For instance, 
nearly 70% of the firms did not adopt cleaner production auditing 
and 93% did not establish a special circular economy 
management department. Limited top management 
commitment and support for sustainability initiatives.
127 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Management 
B26. Higher priority of other issues or 
requirements in SC
Higher priority of other issues or requirements, e.g., production 
expansion/market share by the management.
128 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Organization 
structure
B27. Organisational structure makes it 
difficult to implement CE in SC
Firm’s organisational structures, such as an inefficient 
bureaucracy, are a barrier.
129 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
famework
B28. Lack of successful business models 
and frameworks to implement CE in SC
Lack of successful business models and frameworks for circular 
economy. Informal recovery and integration into the framework 
are needed for the circular economy.
130 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
sub-suppliers
B29. The whole SC needs are not included
Many developed nations outsource their products to low wage 
nations, which brings products as well as waste generation. 
However, there is no specificity on circular economy dealing with 
the focus on sub-suppliers.
131 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Relationships 
B31. Lack of enthusiasm towards CE in SC
Research shows that nearly 90% of the industries don’t have 
good relationships within the industrial parks and other 
neighbour industries to establish eco-industrial chains. Linear 
technologies are deeply rooted.
132 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Tack-back
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
B34. Challenges of take-back from other 
companies
There are challenges to develop a take-back mechanism from 
other companies.
133 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Refurbishm
ent
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Standards
B35. No standards on refurbishment 
products
As there are no standards on refurbishment products, the quality 
is not consistently high.
134 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Reuse
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Consumer
B36. Ownership issues for taking 
advantages of reuse opportunities of CE in 
SC
Consumer acceptance of "access to service" rather than 
ownership needs to be strengthened.
==PAGE:152==
135
LR + Survey to rate 
the barriers 
collected between 
SC actors 
Textile
Majumdar et 
al., 2022
Lack of effective planning for CSC
Upstream SC players Manufactures are reluctant to implement 
adopt circularity
“upstream supply chain players i.e., yarn, fabric and clothing 
manufacturers are reluctant to adopt circularity in their 
planning (B15) and develop practices for measuring and 
monitoring the circularity implementation (B16). This leads to 
the lack of supply chain collaboration (B12).” (Majumdar et 
al., 2022, p. 9)
136
LR + Survey to rate 
the barriers 
collected between 
SC actors 
Textile
Majumdar et 
al., 2022
Lack of incentives for circularity in SC
Lack of incentives for circularity in SC is thorugh analysis 
significantly influencing lack of SC collaboration. The incentives 
of CE are to low.
“Lack of incentives for circularity in supply chains (B14) is 
signifi cantly influencing lack of supply chain collaboration 
(B12), lack of effective planning for CSC (B15), lack of 
circular performance monitoring and evaluation (B16) and 
lack of benchmarking for circularity standards (B17).” 
(Majumdar et al., 2022, p. 8) “The textile and clothing supply 
chain is very price sensitive and most of the suppliers 
operating in South Asian countries carry out the lean part of 
production for their foreign buyers who leverage on the low 
labour cost in these countries. Therefore, though brands can 
attract the consumers showing their commitment to 
circularity, the financial incentive does not percolate back in 
the upstream side of the clothing supply chain.” (Majumdar 
et al., 2022, p. 8)
137 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Remanufac
turing 
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Remanufacturing process planning
Remanufacturing process planning is traditionally heavily 
dependent on experiences and knowledge.
138 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Stakeholders
impossible for firm to satisfy all goals from 
stakeholders
Managers must pay strategic attention to the level of influence of 
the stakeholders because it is impossible to satisfy all 
stakeholders goals and pressure. 
Firms want to create value in there business so managers 
needs to consider different relevant stakeholders perspective 
on the environment and society. 
139 Interview with 
experts
Plastic
Schultz et 
al., 2021
Lack of scope for circular SC collaboration.
Intra-industrial collaboration pulled by the end-appliacation 
manufacture is closing the ressource loop with a limited in scope 
140 Interview with 
experts
Plastic
Schultz et 
al., 2021
Complexity of collaboration across sectors
Complexity of inter-industrial and inter-sectorial collaboration 
poses a challenge for implementation of CSCM
141
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Lack of natural ways to build trust between 
companies when not having a customer-
supplier dynamics
Trust as a fundamental part of the ecosystem. 
“This amplifies the need for trust among the actors in the 
value chain (Rajala et al., 2018). While trust is strongly driven 
by social aspects and people, it has been noted that the 
strategies for CE and circular manufacturing tend to ignore 
them as fundamental parts of the ecosystem (Acerbi and 
Taisch, 2020).” (Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, p. 2).  “The 
inherent challenge is that there is no natural way to build trust 
for companies that do not otherwise conduct business with 
each other. On the other hand, customer-supplier dynamics 
are capable of building relationships of trust, hence 
facilitating data exchange. One of our interviewees (Process 
engineer, Manufacturing) stated for example: “with 
customers, we share quite a lot of data because, [if] we get to 
develop our products together with the customer, [it] brings 
value to both.” Perhaps it is necessary to promote a vision in 
which, due to the cyclic nature of the circular economy, all 
actors in the value chain are at some point customers and 
suppliers. As mentioned in the work by Gupta et al. (2019) 
trust, commitment, and accountability are prerequisites for 
information exchange, an aspect vital to implementation of 
circular supply chains.” ([Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, p. 5]
142
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Procedural factors hindrances CE 
advancement 
143
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Companies understand the advantage of 
using data but only regarding their own stage 
in the VC 
144
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Access to data is over restricted / Limitation 
of data acessibility
Sharing data happen occasionally between companies but it is 
restricted to parties. Data discrepancies inhibit data usage 
thorughout the VC.
Data is only shared between companies 
collaboration/conducting business with each other and under 
heavilly controlled with overly strict specifications and rules. 
Only minimal data is shared, eventhough only a fraction of all 
the data is strategically critical. 
==PAGE:153==
145
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Linear profit-driven economy hinders data 
opennes
Market competition. Data is seen as a strategic resource, a mean 
to generate competitive advantages, a factor that could sabotage 
financial gains if given to competitors. 
Low motivation for data sharing. 
146
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Data from one actor in the VC does not 
reach beyond the immediate stages of the 
life cycle. 
The VC actors not next to each other could also benefit from 
collaboration and data sharing. 
Data of the battery composistion does not reach part of the 
VC beyond manufacturing. Actors that do not conduct direct 
business with each other are unaware that they could still 
benefit form data exchange.
147
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Measureing CE is poorly understood and 
scarce data is used 
Formulation of circularity indicators are not well defined. 
148
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Competitiveness
Implementation if CE is seen as a decreased competitiveness.
149
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Lack of environmental value 
The environmental value are seen to low to implmement  CE 
without external pressure.  
Top-down motivation are percieved required from the 
companies
150
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Threat that expected environmental benefit 
will not be realized after modifications in the 
stakeholder operations
Absence of standardized circularity indicators, so companies can 
measure their progress towards environmental impact reduction Data collection is considered an enabler with low priority. 
151
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Public generated data is not specific 
enought to cover the data gaps
The varying need of the different actors in the VC means that the 
public generated data for circularity promotion is insufficiently 
Publicly generated data does not solve data gaps 
152
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Strong bias between circularity and 
recycling
Recycling and recovery actions are more commonly mentioned 
than means related to reuse or reduce 
153
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Inward-focused approach instead of 
outward-focused approach
Data considered missing in some parts of the VC are collected at 
some other parts of the value chain for inward-focus
Data is used to optimize the circularity within the VC stages 
opposed to utilization to promote consumption of more 
circular products
==PAGE:154==
154
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Lack on capabilities in utilization of 3-party 
data
Lack of understanding on how other actors in the VC could utilize 
data to promote CE. Dificulties in utilizing data collected by other 
actors.
When it was companies own data they could: exploit it to 
generate insights that led to better decisions, use tools that 
transformed data into useful knowledge. Companies also had 
an understanding on what data could be utilized to improve 
CE in their own business
155
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Company woul unlikely collaborate solely 
for data sharing purpose.
Companies see data as a ressource expecting compensation if 
other actors use it. 
156
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Data is equated with valuable know-how
Confidentiality practices hinders openness 
“And according to Barbrook (1998), companies get the full 
value of their data most likely by making it available for 
others, enabling so-called “hi-tech gift economy.” As 
mentioned in the introduction, it is data transfer and not its 
collection that determines the most efficient systems. 
Findings supporting this claim have also been made by other 
researchers. For instance, Turunen et al. (2018) found that in 
industrial service networks, mere data ownership or exclusive 
access do not provide strategic advantages. Instead, they 
suggest companies succeed when they can utilize and steer 
vast information flows.” ([Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, p. 
6](zotero://select/library/items/ECAYRMNJ)) 
([pdf](zotero://open-
pdf/library/items/BHE3NLLF?page=6&annotation=GZ9ANJJC)
)
157
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Identifying relevant data for CE
“Admittedly, it may be challenging to identify which of the 
large amounts of data gathered is relevant for the CE to begin 
with. It is thus necessary to find a vehicle by which data can 
be shared without the fear of revealing strategic and 
confidential information.” (Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, p. 6)
158
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
GDPR afftect handling of data
Consumer behavior, product and system lifetime data can only 
be collected in limited fashion.
Hinder CE as understanding consumer behavior
159
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Data discrepancies hinder utilization of data 
from other actors. 
Different standards, systems, formats and structure makes it 
labor, time and financial expensive to share data. There is a 
practical gap in standardizing data. 
“Each company within the value chain currently has its own 
data systems, formats, and structures, leading to data not 
being commensurate across the value chain. As stated by 
one of our interviewees (Technology Director, Applications): 
“If we want [data] from some customer’s background system 
or from some other device manufacturer’s system ... there 
are many, many types of standards and the data [are] in 
different formats and there are different information systems, 
data sources, and it is quitesome mishmash (sic) in the end. 
So, if that data [is transferred] to our servers ... then it might 
be that it needs nine months of software development before 
one gets computers to send [the data].” Utilizing combined 
data from several sources would require transforming it into a 
standardized format, which was considered laborious, time-
consuming and costly by the interviewees.” ([Serna-Guerrero 
et al., 2022, p. 6]
160
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Lack of data sharing structures
Companies lack protocol to transform data collected by other 
actors into a usable format. 
“Data discrepancies also indicate the absence of data-
sharing structures throughout the value chain. While 
companies did claim to have sufficient resources and 
capabilities for collecting and utilizing their own data, these 
capabilities do not yet exist at a system-level perspective. 
Companies do not have protocols to successfully transform 
data” (Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, p. 6)
161
Mixed method 
(Barriers in 
implementation of 
CE models in 
practice - collected 
along VC thorugh 
interviews of 
different 
companies. )
Automoti
ve 
(Lithium-
ion 
Battery)
Serna-
Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Information 
exchange 
Lack of quantitative and qualitative 
parameters to evaluate circularity
Parameter so collective actions would focous on one 
level/target. Foster cooperation for the optimization of the CE. 
Discussions at system level would be carried out based on their 
impact on the parameter value at any given point in the life cycle, 
"black box" internal operation from the other actors. 
“Utilizing circularity indicators requires vast data inputs, but 
they can provide clear guidance on which information is 
relevant to trace the impact of circularity strategies. Indeed, 
parametrization is a prerequisite for the effective cooperation 
and promotion of CE ecosystems, including management 
decisions, policies, and new technologies. Circularity 
indicators may also serve as a practical vehicle by which 
relevant data is exchanged without compromising sensitive 
data of companies. In the absence of system-wide indicators, 
companies are at risk of making uninformed decisions related 
to circularity without fully understanding the impacts and 
ramifications of their actions.” (Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, 
p. 8)
==PAGE:155==
162 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Incremental 
innovation 
Narrowing circularity goals to avoid multiple 
stakeholder complexity 
Often bilateral collaboration with the closest or most trusted 
partners in the value chain. Risk-averse and slow to adopt, 
implement and scale innovation 
far-reaching, scalable circular innovation need broad scope 
of innovation by supporting all ecosystem 
actors/stakeholders in collaborating with them 
simultaneously. Suggesting innovation environment to allign 
all stakeholders from key parts of the value chain. Circular 
innovation requireing not only change of material or process 
but also business model transformation 
163 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Mutual value 
Versatility of the ecosystem
Varying regulatory frameworks, economic interest, historical 
value logic, and conservatism pose significant challenges. 
Difficult in practice in finding mutual value opportunities and 
overcome barriers for adoption of true innovation.
164 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Framework
Lack of practical guidance 
Lack of practical guidance to stakeholders for engaging in 
collaborative processes 
165 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Organization 
structure
Lack of scalability 
Highly diverse culture, way of working, business model and 
priorities 
Require multi-stakeholder collaboration introducing a high 
complexity. Scalability can only happen with multi-
stakeholder collaboration for circular transformation 
166 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Organization 
structure
Economic challenges 
High investmens requirement, increased operation cost, longer 
payback period, long-term risks of new technologies, the 
uncertainty of future benefits, the cannibalizations effects of CE 
solutions. 
Typical venture capital seeks fast ROI and avoid risks. 
167 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Organization 
structure
Incentive systems favoring linear solutions
Slow down the implementation of CE when companies focus 
intently on linear businessmodel
An incentive system is a structured framework implemented 
by organizations to motivate and reward individuals or teams 
for achieving specific goals, behaviors, or performance 
targets.
168 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
External barriers
Lack of stakeholder support 
Unsupportive legislation, uninterested customers, risk-averse 
investors
Envolvement of broader external stakeholders like akademia, 
private sector and government.
169 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Ecosystem network
Direct participation of all relevant 
stakeholders
Innovation approaches employees from different departments 
should be part of the innovation process and stakeholders from 
all areas of the industry need to be equally engaged into the 
created innovation space.
170 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Regulations
High material regulations
Only well-estrablished materials and methods are forseen in 
rgulations. Outdates regulations are not removed
Regulators are slow to adapt 
171 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Ecosystem network
high degree of fragmentation
Manu small building companies and suppliers with limited 
power, and a few very big suppliers 
172 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Pilot 
Large-scale demonstrators are missing
Lage-scale demonstrators are missing. Many innovations 
struggle to get large-scale demonstrators funded and accepted. 
173 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Innovation
Limited insight in innovations (visibility)
Promissing innovations from universities and start-ups are not 
very visible to the construction industry 
174 LR
Construc
tion 
industry 
Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 
2023
Pilot 
Pilot partners are hard to find
Pilot partners are hard to find, companies that are willing and 
able to experiment with new materials and methods are difficult 
to find for innovators 
175 LR
Managem
ent fokus
Cerqueira-
Streit et al., 
2021
Management 
Mangers implications and knowledge
Managers must fully inderstand the concept CE to be able to 
coordinate the traditional SC tranformation to a CSC 
Managers are the one facing the barriers and needs to guid 
the possible solutions making the transistion occour at the 
lowest cost and max result. 
176 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Operational Barriers 
(OPB)
Distinct operational and management 
practices
Sectors are restricted by their independent planning and 
management practices and are thus unable to develop 
integrated planning toward CSCM.
177 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Operational Barriers 
(OPB)
Monitoring performance within multiple 
contexts
Stakeholders monitor performance in different contexts creating 
complexity in developing C-SC for CSCM.
178 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Operational Barriers 
(OPB)
Risk of information loss
Employees and managers do not know what information can be 
shared to support collaboration for CSCM and thus worry about 
information loss.
179 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Operational Barriers 
(OPB)
Loss of control over operations
Different sectors do not collaborate as they fear losing control 
over their operations. Their fear is a barrier in their Cross sector -
SC for CSCM.
180 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Operational Barriers 
(OPB)
Duplication of responsibility and authority
Cross sectors may have duplication in responsibilities of 
individuals that makes them uninterested in being part of a 
collaborative circular network.
==PAGE:156==
181 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Operational Barriers 
(OPB)
Lack of transparency and low-quality 
disclosures
Different stakeholders may be reluctant to share information and 
disclose information; this may act as a barrier for C-SC for 
CSCM.
182 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Contextual Barriers 
(COB)
Diverse institutional logics
Distinct broader belief systems shape cognition and behavior of 
cross-sector collaborators to adopt CSCM practices.
183 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Contextual Barriers 
(COB)
Organisational norms and culture
Organisational norms and culture restrict stakeholder 
competencies and force them to focus on their interests, thus 
impacting the decision not to collaborate across sectors for 
CSCM.
184 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Contextual Barriers 
(COB)
Inbuilt organisational resistance
The resistance to embrace change in an organisation after Cross 
sector-SC adoption for CSCM restricts the ability to move away 
from traditional approaches.
185 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Perceptual Barriers 
(PEB)
Misaligned interests of individuals across 
sectors
Individuals can become misaligned when their interests do not 
match. The mismatched interest may hamper C-SC to develop 
CSCM.
186 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Perceptual Barriers 
(PEB)
Lack of trust among cross-sector 
collaborators
Partners have trust issues in relation to other sectors. The 
perceived trust varies from organisation to organisation and thus 
limits collaboration and development of shared goals toward 
CSCM.
187 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Strategic and 
Management Barriers 
(SMB)
Internal bureaucracy
Administrative structures are complex and overlap; it becomes 
difficult to collaborate with other sectors for CSCM.
188 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Strategic and 
Management Barriers 
(SMB)
Lack of common vision and policy 
framework
Due to a lack of vision, management is often reluctant to support 
activities for sustainable operations. It may be difficult for 
organisations to develop one policy and vision across sectors as 
their business operations, models and processes are different.
189 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Strategic and 
Management Barriers 
(SMB)
Competition vs. collaboration
Competition creates tension among collaborators that leads to 
frustration and violates the ‘true spirit’ of collaboration.
190 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Strategic and 
Management Barriers 
(SMB)
Absence of system standardisation for 
performance management
Lack of pre-defined systems to measure the impact of 
collaboration as well as lack of parameters to evaluate costs and 
savings for developing CSCM.
191 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Strategic and 
Management Barriers 
(SMB)
Risk management approaches
Different sectors have their own autonomous approaches to 
perceive and mitigate risk. Thus, it is difficult to manage among 
partners/ collaborators across sectors.
192 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Strategic and 
Management Barriers 
(SMB)
Limited knowledge/experience among 
decision makers
Lack of experience/ knowledge about how to facilitate Cross 
sector-SC for developing CSC chains.
193 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Strategic and 
Management Barriers 
(SMB)
Absence of commitment by organisations 
toward sustainability
Due to lack of commitment from top-level management for 
sustainable practices, the focus of the organisation is narrowed, 
restricting the potential to collaborate for CSCM.
194 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Governance Barriers 
(GOB)
power asymmetry
There is a mismatch between the powers of partner organisations 
because of different levels of resources. The difference in their 
power delegation in the new collaborative environment acts as a 
barrier for CSC for CSCM.
==PAGE:157==
195 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Governance Barriers 
(GOB)
Isomorphic institutionalism
The pressure to follow existing institutional culture sometimes 
limits the organisation to use their skills and knowledge in the 
area where investment has been made. This makes the 
organisation bound to their current processes and closed to a 
collaborative approach. 
196
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Lack of financial resources and funding
High investment and production cost for involving in green 
practices and adopting CE principles
197
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Limited expertise, technology, and 
information
Lack of knowledge, skilled workers, technology, research and 
development, and information sharing among pharma industries
198
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Organizational culture and management
Lack of support from top management and weak or non-existent 
circular economy models
“Most of the supply chain managers during the interview 
process were unaware of the concept of CSCM. Therefore, 
informing these managers about the new concept would 
require training and development programs. The awareness 
campaigns should be extended towards the consumer level 
as well.” (Khan and Ali, 2022, p. 13720)
199
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Social challenges
Lack of knowledge and support of the public towards circular 
economy practices
200
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Market challenges
Lack of availability of suppliers of quality and green raw materials 
and competition among pharma industries
201
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Lack of inofrmation sharing, cooperation 
and collaboration  among pharmaceutical 
industries
Lack of cooperation among the entire supply chain network 
including manufacturers, wholesalers, GPs, pharmacies, and 
patients
“Hence, the challenges faced by the pharmaceutical 
companies in adopting the CSCM such as the lack of financial 
resources, market challenges, and lack of collaboration 
within the supply chain network can be surmounted by the 
adoption of strategies such as industrial symbiosis, RL 
infrastructure, and block chain technology accordingly. These 
strategies or enablers would not just ensure environmental 
sustainability but would also ensure economic sustainability. 
The aforementioned enabler would not only give a 
competitive advantage to the companies but would also 
create employment opportunities. Thus through this way, 
several targets of SDGs can be achieved.” ([Khan and Ali, 
2022, p. 13720]
202
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Reduce
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Lack of production and inventory planning
Lack of demand forecasting disturbs the demand and supply 
gap, resulting in overproduction and expired medications
203
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Reduce
Khan and Ali, 
2022
The low shelf life of medicines
Low quality and quick expiry of the medicines
204
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Difficulty in the visibility of the supply chain
The complexity of the pharmaceutical supply chain makes it 
difficult to monitor the entire supply chain
205
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Recycle
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Ineffective segregation of waste
Ineffective segregation of waste in the pharma industry and 
hospitals makes it difficult to further treat the waste
206
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Non-uniformity in the market (competition)
Collaboration in therms of exchanging expertise, information and 
green raw materials would help the industry in being more 
sustainable. However competition hinders the companies.
207
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
RL
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Challeng of developing coordination plan 
Complexity, operation and monitoring of the SC in RL makes it 
difficult to develop a proper coordination plan during a closed 
loop SC. Chemicals has to be manage properly. It is estimated if 
a collected corrdination plan was made 28% more products 
could be included in RL. 
208
LR + industry 
interviews and 
voting
Manufact
uring
Agarwal et 
al., 2022
Main barrier
Information disruptions among the SC 
members due to multiple channels
The CE-based SCs have various added operations that make the 
SC complex and generate difficulty in precise information 
exchange and its management.
209
LR + industry 
interviews and 
voting
Manufact
uring
product life 
/ reusability 
/ product 
performanc
e
Agarwal et 
al., 2022
Poor product traceability
Product traceability is a significant challenge in CE-based SC to 
track product performance, maintenance, and rejection. Proper 
tracking could enhance product life and boost its reusability.
210
LR + industry 
interviews and 
voting
Manufact
uring
recycling , 
remanufact
uring, 
reclaiming 
and qulity 
monitoring
Agarwal et 
al., 2022
Ineffective system standardization
A standardized system is essential to reduce economies of scale 
and increase interoperability. Ineffective standardization hinders 
CE practices such as recycling, remanufacturing, reclaiming, and 
quality monitoring.
==PAGE:158==
211
LR + industry 
interviews and 
voting
Manufact
uring
Agarwal et 
al., 2022
Vulnerability in abrupt decision 
management system for CE aligned 
practices
CE phases involve instant decision-making. Failing to act quickly 
can result in system collapse. Better technical support could aid 
decision-making, but its absence hinders CE operations.
212
LR + industry 
interviews and 
voting
Manufact
uring
BM
Agarwal et 
al., 2022
Complexity in business models and 
frameworks
Current industrial business models are highly sophisticated, 
hindering participation in new paradigm shifts like CE due to 
business competency and time-bound delivery requirements.
213
LR + industry 
interviews and 
voting
Manufact
uring
RL / End of 
use / end of 
life
Agarwal et 
al., 2022
Lack of customer connection and 
coordination
Strong customer connectivity governs better traceability of 
returned products and timely maintenance. Current 
inadequacies in customer connection hinder effective CE 
implementation.
214
LR + industry 
interviews and 
voting
Manufact
uring
Reuse / 
recovery
Agarwal et 
al., 2022
Redesigning issues for reuse and recovery 
processes
CE requires product redesign for better reusability, which 
involves complexity. Technical assistance is essential for 
productive redesign, and its absence creates interruptions in CE 
adaptation.
215 Interview 
Manufact
uring 
industry
Parida et al., 
2019
Lack of awareness
There is a significant gap in business awareness regarding the 
principles of the circular economy. This lack of awareness can 
hinder the development of circular business models (page 6)
216 Interview 
Manufact
uring 
industry
Parida et al., 
2019
Coordination Challenges and lack of 
standards 
The transformation to a circular economy requires manufacturing 
companies to coordinate and manage the incentives and 
investments of multiple ecosystem partners. This complexity 
poses a major challenge for effective implementation. (page 9 )
217 Interview 
Manufact
uring 
industry
Parida et al., 
2019
Limited knowledge / examples on 
transformation
Current research lacks insights into how transformation should 
occur, which can lead to uncertainty and hesitation among 
companies
Lack of Orchestration mechanism (orchestrator)
218 Interview 
Manufact
uring 
industry
Parida et al., 
2019
Ecosystem dynamics (roles and 
responsabilities)
There is a need for a thorough understanding of the roles and 
responsibilities of ecosystem partners. Manufacturing 
companies emphasized that knowing their partners' challenges 
and dynamics is crucial for successful orchestration (page 6)
Lack of Standardize and alligned goals and partners
219 Interview 
Manufact
uring 
industry
Parida et al., 
2019
Internal and External Readiness 
Assessments
Companies may overlook the importance of conducting 
comprehensive internal and external readiness assessments, 
which are crucial for understanding the full impact of the 
transformation on their own operations and those of their 
partners.
220 Interview 
Construc
tion 
industry 
Havinga et 
al., 2023
Lack of setting standards
Establishing standards can be complex and face resistance from 
several stakeholders with different objectives or practices
221 Interview 
Construc
tion 
industry 
Havinga et 
al., 2023
Lack of openness towards sharing core 
knowledge and intellectual property
There is often hesitation on sharing proprietary knowlegde and it 
is percieced as a risk 
222 Interview 
Construc
tion 
industry 
Havinga et 
al., 2023
Reluctance to development of new routines 
and processes
Implementation of new rutines and processes requires change in 
existing rutines, which can be met with reluctance from 
organization 
223 Interview 
Construc
tion 
industry 
Havinga et 
al., 2023
Coordination Challenges(difficult to allign 
efforts towards common goal)
The loose coupling inherent in open modular architectures can 
lead to coordination issues among ecosystem partners, making it 
difficult to align efforts toward common goals
224 Interview 
Construc
tion 
industry 
Havinga et 
al., 2023
Lack of ressource Accessibility
Ensuring that all ecosystem partners have access to necessary 
resources and capabilities is critical, yet often challenging due to 
disparities in resource availability among partners.
==PAGE:159==
H
Phase 4: Excluded barriers
ID
Study Methodology Industry Circular 
aim 
Source 
(citation 
code)
Classification from 
litterature 
Barrier
Description
Context
119 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
reuse, 
recovery
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Technological + 
Internal
B17. Design challenges to reuse and 
recovery products
Design challenges to durable, reuse and recovery products.
120 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
B19. Make the right decision in SC to 
implement CE in the most efficient way
Decision making on effective technologies, practices and actors 
can improve the chances of CE implementation in SC.
122 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
difficult to 
reuse, 
recycle, 
remanufact
ure 
products
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Knowledge and skill
B21. Lack of reliable information to public 
and therefore it is difficult to 
reuse/recycle/remanufacture products
Lack of reliable information to the enterprises.
137 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Remanufac
turing 
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Remanufacturing process planning
Remanufacturing process planning is traditionally heavily 
dependent on experiences and knowledge.
178 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Operational Barriers 
(OPB)
Risk of information loss
Employees and managers do not know what information can be 
shared to support collaboration for CSCM and thus worry about 
information loss.
202
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Reduce
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Lack of production and inventory planning
Lack of demand forecasting disturbs the demand and supply 
gap, resulting in overproduction and expired medications
203
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Reduce
Khan and Ali, 
2022
The low shelf life of medicines
Low quality and quick expiry of the medicines
205
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Recycle
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Ineffective segregation of waste
Ineffective segregation of waste in the pharma industry and 
hospitals makes it difficult to further treat the waste
214
LR + industry 
interviews and 
voting
Manufact
uring
Reuse / 
recovery
Agarwal et 
al., 2022
Redesigning issues for reuse and recovery 
processes
CE requires product redesign for better reusability, which 
involves complexity. Technical assistance is essential for 
productive redesign, and its absence creates interruptions in CE 
adaptation.
Figure H.1: Barrier analysis for phase 5. Excluded barriers
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
143
==PAGE:160==
ID
Study Methodology Industry Circular 
aim 
Source 
(citation 
code)
Classification from 
litterature 
Barrier
Description
Context
119 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
reuse, 
recovery
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Technological + 
Internal
B17. Design challenges to reuse and 
recovery products
Design challenges to durable, reuse and recovery products.
120 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
B19. Make the right decision in SC to 
implement CE in the most efficient way
Decision making on effective technologies, practices and actors 
can improve the chances of CE implementation in SC.
122 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
difficult to 
reuse, 
recycle, 
remanufact
ure 
products
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Knowledge and skill
B21. Lack of reliable information to public 
and therefore it is difficult to 
reuse/recycle/remanufacture products
Lack of reliable information to the enterprises.
137 LR
General 
aim 
(mainly 
manufact
uring and 
electroni
cs)
Remanufac
turing 
Govindan 
and 
Hasanagic, 
2018,
Remanufacturing process planning
Remanufacturing process planning is traditionally heavily 
dependent on experiences and knowledge.
178 LR + survey
Manufact
uring 
Cross-
sector 
supply 
chain / 
Open loop / 
IS / RBV
Luthra et al., 
2022
Operational Barriers 
(OPB)
Risk of information loss
Employees and managers do not know what information can be 
shared to support collaboration for CSCM and thus worry about 
information loss.
202
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Reduce
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Lack of production and inventory planning
Lack of demand forecasting disturbs the demand and supply 
gap, resulting in overproduction and expired medications
203
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Reduce
Khan and Ali, 
2022
The low shelf life of medicines
Low quality and quick expiry of the medicines
205
 LR + 
semistructures 
interviews to 
shortlist the list of 
barriers
Pharma 
industry
Recycle
Khan and Ali, 
2022
Ineffective segregation of waste
Ineffective segregation of waste in the pharma industry and 
hospitals makes it difficult to further treat the waste
214
LR + industry 
interviews and 
voting
Manufact
uring
Reuse / 
recovery
Agarwal et 
al., 2022
Redesigning issues for reuse and recovery 
processes
CE requires product redesign for better reusability, which 
involves complexity. Technical assistance is essential for 
productive redesign, and its absence creates interruptions in CE 
adaptation.
==PAGE:161==
I
Phase 5: Barrier Matrix
Number
Source
Barrier
Detail / Example / Contex
x
Data (metric and information)
Data governance
Data exchange
Data utilization
Visibility
Responsability
Traceability
Standards
Trust
Needing Trust
Having Trust
Develop Trust
Ecosystem readiness
Industry
Framework and theory
Regulations and standardization
Organization
Organization structure and culture
Organization resistance
Management
Internal
External
Commitment
Competition
Economic
Power
Scale
Alignment
171
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
High degree of fragmentation. Many small building companies and suppliers with 
limited power and few very big suppliers 
x
1
194
Luthra et al., 2022
Power asymmetry. Mismatch between the powers of partner organizations 
because of different levels of resources. The difference in their power delegation 
in the new collaborative environment acts as a barrier 
x
1
58
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Complicated ecosystem: VC evolving fast and new players appear quickly. 
Mutually interdependent actors. 
“Stakeholders fro x
1
2
44
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Restrictive antitrust regulations. Risk of overregulating sustainability assessment 
for batteries. 
The assessment h x
1
2
24, 25, 90, 40
Taddei et al., 2024, 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023, 
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of alignment on governance and rules of engagement. [40 ] Deficiency in 
enforcement rules and systematic regulations for the environmental 
benefits.[24,25]  
Poor regulation anx
1
2
48
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of component (battery) standardization across supply chain stakeholders. 
Lack of comparison
“There's a new typx
1
2
45
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Standards: lack of Customization and variability of standards. 
“Standards are no x
1
2
46
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Standards: Unrealistic requirements. High amount of sustainability requirements 
by OEMs
“The OEMs have a x
1
2
59
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Complicated ecosystem: Existing standards does not keep up.
Rapid growth, SC x
1
2
76
Chari et al., 2022
No standardized conceptualization of CE among organizations is a barrier to 
implementing CE practices. 
“Similarly, data sh x
1
2
133
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
No standards on refurbishment products
As there are no stax
1
2
210
Agarwal et al., 
2022
lack of system standardization
A standardized sy x
1
2
10, 11, 70
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Chari et al., 
2022
Rules and regulations: Lack of sectorial standardization and certifications 
Lack of governme x
1
2
129, 164, 106, 8
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018, 
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023, 
Kazancoglu et al., 
2022, De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023
Lack of successful business models, practical guidance, and frameworks to 
implement CE in SC and to engage in collaborative processes
Lack of successfu x
1
2
173
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
Promissing innovations from universities and start-ups are not very visible to the 
construction industry 
x
1
2
174
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
Pilot partners are hard to find, companies that are willing and able to experiment 
with new materials and methods are difficult to find for innovators 
Pilot partners are x
1
2
215
(Parida et al., 2019) Lack of awareness in CE BM
There is a significax
1
2
224
Havinga et al., 
2023
Lack of ressource Accessibility
Ensuring that all e x
1
2
217
Parida et al., 2019
Limited knowledge / examples on CE transformation
Current research x
1
2
71
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of regulations: national level
limit the ability of x
1
2
75
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of investments in appropirate technologies
Lack of appropria x
1
2
86
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023
Uncertainties: Quality, Availability and delivery of secondary resources. Uncertain 
demand for CE products and service 
In this regard, the x
1
2
130
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
Lack of focus on sub-suppliers (the whole SC are not included)
1
2
132
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
There are challenges to develop a take-back mechanism from other companies.
x
1
2
152
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Strong bias between circularity and recycling
Recycling and rec x
1
2
170
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
Only well-established materials and methods are foreseen in regulations. 
Outdated regulations are not removed
1
2
16, 98
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Integration and collaboration: Lack of constant supplier
Lack of regular su x
1
2
, 123, 108, 125,
Khan and Ali, 
2022, Govindan 
and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Lack of knowledge and support of the public towards circular economy practices
1
2
4, 6, 7, 12, 13, 
14, 29, 31,  
66, 93, 119, 
124, 137, 
197, 214
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Taddei et al., 
2024, De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023, 
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018, 
Khan and Ali, 
2022, Agarwal et 
al., 2022, Chari et 
al., 2022
Inadequate awareness on CE principles within SC partners and organization. 
Limited knowledge, experience, skills, training, awareness, theoretical 
information, know-how
“For “lack of knowx
1
2
02, 103, 200, 22
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020,  Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022, Khan 
and Ali, 2022,
Inadequate facility infrastructure: lack of availability of suppliers of quality and 
sustainable complementary processes (e.g., disassembly, separation, recycling) “Lack of availabili x
1
2
78, 213
Chari et al., 2022, 
Agarwal et al., 
2022
Logistic system, design challenges in finding the right customers, for refurbished 
or recycled products. And understand the user-case 
“Capabilities suchx
1
2
8, 117, 118
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Govindan 
and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Difficult to maintain and manage quality throughout the product life cycle 
Shredding affect qx
1
2
169, 168, 138
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023, 
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
Direct participation of all relevant stakeholders, Lack of stakeholder support, 
impossible for firm to satisfy all goals from stakeholders
Innovation approax
1
60
Chari et al., 2022
BM, product design, service and distribution needs to be allinged across the SC 
(complexity and uncertainty)
“A practical defin x
1
Figure I.1: Barrier Matrix
Google drev: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1IThnlh4j7mi0FCuU5kudBOslBeZuXEkf/
edit?usp=drive_link&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=true&sd=true
It is recommended to view the file in Microsoft Excel to have the same formation as in the
shown figure fig. I.1.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
145
==PAGE:162==
Number
Source
Barrier
Detail / Example / Contex
x
Data (metric and information)
Data governance
Data exchange
Data utilization
Visibility
Responsability
Traceability
Standards
Trust
Needing Trust
Having Trust
Develop Trust
Ecosystem readiness
Industry
Framework and theory
Regulations and standardization
Organization
Organization structure and culture
Organization resistance
Management
Internal
External
Commitment
Competition
Economic
Power
Scale
Alignment
171
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
High degree of fragmentation. Many small building companies and suppliers with 
limited power and few very big suppliers 
x
1
194
Luthra et al., 2022
Power asymmetry. Mismatch between the powers of partner organizations 
because of different levels of resources. The difference in their power delegation 
in the new collaborative environment acts as a barrier 
x
1
58
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Complicated ecosystem: VC evolving fast and new players appear quickly. 
Mutually interdependent actors. 
“Stakeholders fro x
1
2
44
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Restrictive antitrust regulations. Risk of overregulating sustainability assessment 
for batteries. 
The assessment h x
1
2
24, 25, 90, 40
Taddei et al., 2024, 
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023, 
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of alignment on governance and rules of engagement. [40 ] Deficiency in 
enforcement rules and systematic regulations for the environmental 
benefits.[24,25]  
Poor regulation anx
1
2
48
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of component (battery) standardization across supply chain stakeholders. 
Lack of comparison
“There's a new typx
1
2
45
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Standards: lack of Customization and variability of standards. 
“Standards are no x
1
2
46
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Standards: Unrealistic requirements. High amount of sustainability requirements 
by OEMs
“The OEMs have a x
1
2
59
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Complicated ecosystem: Existing standards does not keep up.
Rapid growth, SC x
1
2
76
Chari et al., 2022
No standardized conceptualization of CE among organizations is a barrier to 
implementing CE practices. 
“Similarly, data sh x
1
2
133
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
No standards on refurbishment products
As there are no stax
1
2
210
Agarwal et al., 
2022
lack of system standardization
A standardized sy x
1
2
10, 11, 70
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Chari et al., 
2022
Rules and regulations: Lack of sectorial standardization and certifications 
Lack of governme x
1
2
129, 164, 106, 8
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018, 
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023, 
Kazancoglu et al., 
2022, De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023
Lack of successful business models, practical guidance, and frameworks to 
implement CE in SC and to engage in collaborative processes
Lack of successfu x
1
2
173
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
Promissing innovations from universities and start-ups are not very visible to the 
construction industry 
x
1
2
174
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
Pilot partners are hard to find, companies that are willing and able to experiment 
with new materials and methods are difficult to find for innovators 
Pilot partners are x
1
2
215
(Parida et al., 2019) Lack of awareness in CE BM
There is a significax
1
2
224
Havinga et al., 
2023
Lack of ressource Accessibility
Ensuring that all e x
1
2
217
Parida et al., 2019
Limited knowledge / examples on CE transformation
Current research x
1
2
71
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of regulations: national level
limit the ability of x
1
2
75
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of investments in appropirate technologies
Lack of appropria x
1
2
86
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023
Uncertainties: Quality, Availability and delivery of secondary resources. Uncertain 
demand for CE products and service 
In this regard, the x
1
2
130
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
Lack of focus on sub-suppliers (the whole SC are not included)
1
2
132
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
There are challenges to develop a take-back mechanism from other companies.
x
1
2
152
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Strong bias between circularity and recycling
Recycling and rec x
1
2
170
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
Only well-established materials and methods are foreseen in regulations. 
Outdated regulations are not removed
1
2
16, 98
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Integration and collaboration: Lack of constant supplier
Lack of regular su x
1
2
, 123, 108, 125,
Khan and Ali, 
2022, Govindan 
and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Lack of knowledge and support of the public towards circular economy practices
1
2
4, 6, 7, 12, 13, 
14, 29, 31,  
66, 93, 119, 
124, 137, 
197, 214
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Taddei et al., 
2024, De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023, 
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018, 
Khan and Ali, 
2022, Agarwal et 
al., 2022, Chari et 
al., 2022
Inadequate awareness on CE principles within SC partners and organization. 
Limited knowledge, experience, skills, training, awareness, theoretical 
information, know-how
“For “lack of knowx
1
2
02, 103, 200, 22
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020,  Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022, Khan 
and Ali, 2022,
Inadequate facility infrastructure: lack of availability of suppliers of quality and 
sustainable complementary processes (e.g., disassembly, separation, recycling) “Lack of availabili x
1
2
78, 213
Chari et al., 2022, 
Agarwal et al., 
2022
Logistic system, design challenges in finding the right customers, for refurbished 
or recycled products. And understand the user-case 
“Capabilities suchx
1
2
8, 117, 118
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Govindan 
and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Difficult to maintain and manage quality throughout the product life cycle 
Shredding affect qx
1
2
169, 168, 138
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023, 
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
Direct participation of all relevant stakeholders, Lack of stakeholder support, 
impossible for firm to satisfy all goals from stakeholders
Innovation approax
1
60
Chari et al., 2022
BM, product design, service and distribution needs to be allinged across the SC 
(complexity and uncertainty)
“A practical defin x
1
==PAGE:163==
96, 185, 188
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023, 
[Luthra et al., 
2022, Chari et   al., 
2022
Individualistic behavior Misallignment of strategic priorities. Conflicting goals 
(environmental Vs. Economic). Misaligned interests of individuals across 
sectors. Lack of common vision and policy framework
““conflicting goal x
1
30, 17, 99
Taddei et al., 2024,  
 (Kazancoglu et al., 
2020), Kazancoglu 
et al., 
2022,Havinga et 
al., 2023
Lack of coordination and collaboration among the SC members.  Integration and 
collaboration: Lack of shared vision and willingness to collaborate, Lack of vision 
and trust:problems on losing control and trust are experienced frequently
SC actors are relu x
4
1
218
Parida et al., 2019
Lack of understanding of roles and responsability
There is a need fo x
1
163
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
Versatility of the ecosystem
Varying regulatory x
1
73, 72
Chari et al., 2022
Mismatch of capacities/capabilites, Lack of capabilities: Human ressource and 
skills shortages
“As Porter and Linx
1
81
Chari et al., 2022
Level of intent or size of goal: Actors in SC network may have different level/nivau 
of implementation of CE practices.
x
1
4
172
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
Large-scale demonstrators are missing
Lage-scale demonx
1
165
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023
Lack of scalability: Highly diverse culture, way of working, business model and 
priorities 
Require multi-stakx
1
101, 20
Kazancoglu et al., 
2022, Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Lack of scale: Small quantities are produced in the uncertainty of profitability. 
Makes the development of economies of scale difficult for collectors and 
recyclers [101], Firms don't want to invest and take risk because of the 
uncertainty in profitability and long-term benefits [20]
“Due to the fact thx
1
160, 159, 36
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022, 
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of data sharing structure: Companies lack protocol to transform data 
collected by other actors into a usable format. Different standards, systems, 
formats and structure makes it labor, time and financial expensive to share data. 
“Data discrepanc x
1
2
154, 143
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Use data. Lack of capabilities on how to utilize the 3-party data 
(knowledge) to promote CE. Difficulties in utilizing data collected by other actors. 
Companies understand the advantage of using data but only regarding their own 
stage in the VC 
When it was compx
1
2
162, 140
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023, 
Schultz et al., 2021
Incremental innovation: Narrowing circularity goals to avoid multiple stakeholder 
complexity. Often bilateral collaboration with the closest or most trusted 
partners in the value chain. Risk-averse and slow to adopt, implement and scale 
innovation.
far-reaching, scal x
1
92
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023
Uncertain Financial cost / Financial investment 
“uncertain financ x
4
1
91, 110
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023, 
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
Price fluctuations: Unstable prices for virgin and secondary resources. 
“They mentioned x
1
00, 28, 57, 19, 1
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018, 
Kazancoglu et al., 
2022,Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020, Taddei 
et al., 2024, 
Gebhardt et al., 
2022, Majumdar et 
al., 2022
Lack of economic attractiveness and uncertain return on investment 
Enterprises face h x
1
1,114, 113, 115
 (Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Govindan 
and Hasanagic, 
2018, Wielopolski 
and Bulthuis, 2023 High investment cost
Companies shoul x
1
27, 196
Taddei et al., 2024, 
Khan and Ali, 2022 Limited financial resources and funding
1
206
Khan and Ali, 2022 Competition hinders companies in changing 
Collaboration in thx
1
1, 54, 145, 15, 1
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Gebhardt et al., 
2022, Serna-
Guerrero et al., 
2022, Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Fear of loosing market opportunities by information sharing. (Competitive 
advantage and pricing advantage between actors in supply chain.) [54]
[145] [15] fear of low quality or sustainability disclosure [181]. Data is equated 
with valuable know-how. Confidentiality practices hinders openness.[156]
Lack of transpare x
4
1
55
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Unfavorable public perception and market response after sustainability 
disclosure.
“Take the carbon x
4
1
88
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023
Market competition with linear-oriented companies and SC: Challenges in 
making the price of products competitive, 
“According to the x
1
148
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Implementation if CE is seen as a decreased competitiveness.
x
x
1
189
[Luthra et al., 2022
Competition creates tension among collaborators that leads to frustration and 
violates the ‘true spirit’ of collaboration.
x
x
1
95
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023
Managers unwillingness to share. Fear of sharing proprietary information
““Intellectual propx
1
2
4
42
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of trust for Transparency
“Trust in the right x
1
2
4
51
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
System boundaries: Difficulty to define system boundaries for sustainability 
aspects
“Where do we dra x
1
131
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018
Lack of enthusiasm towards CE in SC (Lack of good relationships in industrial 
parks: 90% of the industries does not have at good relationship within the 
industrial parks and other neighbor industries to establish eco-industrial chains. ) Research shows t x
1
104, 2, 84
Kazancoglu et al., 
2022,  Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020, Chari 
et al., 2022
Reluctance of acceptance of CE business model between stakeholders in 
network. Lack of acceptance of new business models ( willingness and 
readiness). Most businesses stuck into linear business models. Switching a new 
business model requires fundamental changes in organization structure, 
company culture, supply systems, manufacturing methods, and target market.( 
Kazancoglu et al., 2022,  Kazancoglu et al., 2020)
Pressens of comp x
1
139
Schultz et al., 2021 Lack of or limited scope for circular SC collaboration.
Intra-industrial co x
1
179, 30
Luthra et al., 2022,  
 Kazancoglu et al., 
2020
Fear of losing control. Different sectors does not collaborate as they fear losing 
control over their operations.
Different sectors dx
1
136
Majumdar et al., 
2022
Lack of commitment from upstream manufacturers in planning and develop 
practice for measuring circularity implementation. 
“upstream supply x
1
127
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
Higher priority of other issues or requirements in SC by the management 
(production, expansion, market share) 
B26. Higher priori
x
1
2
4
==PAGE:164==
212, 49
Agarwal et al., 
2022, Gebhardt et 
al., 2022
Current industrial business models are hindering participants from shifting to CE 
due to business competency and time-bound delivery requirements. [212]Lack 
of capacity to focus on sustainability in design and operations because of 
performance requirements from OEM in SC. [49]
Complexity in bus x
1
2
64
 De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023
organizational resistivity: Top executives locked into the business-as-usual 
model. 
“Regarding “resis x
1
2
180
Luthra et al., 2022
Duplication of responsibility and authority. Cross sectors may have duplication in 
responsibilities of individuals that makes them uninterested in being part of a 
collaborative circular network.
Cross sectors mayx
1
2
68, 198, 126, 19
Khan and Ali, 
2022, Govindan 
and Hasanagic, 
2018, Luthra et al., 
2022, Taddei et al., 
2024, Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020, Chari 
et al., 2022
Lack of support and commitment from top management [198, 126] Due to lack of 
commitment from top-level management for sustainable practices, the focus of 
the organisation is narrowed, restricting the potential to collaborate for 
CSCM.[193] Willingness and readyness (management). The support and 
commitment of the top management is inevitable to conduct circular operations 
among the SC.
Limited top mana x
1
2
34
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of effective strategic planning: deficiency of the planning and management 
of CSCM concepts 
x
x
1
2
74
Chari et al., 2022
Mismatch of leadership support and cultural mindset. Lack of motivation, social 
inertia, mindset from negative experiences
“Experts mentionex
1
2
176
Luthra et al., 2022
Distinct operational and management practices. Sectors are restricted by their 
independent planning and management practices and are thus unable to develop 
integrated planning toward CSCM.
x
1
2
211
Agarwal et al., 
2022
Vulnerability in abrupt decision management system for CE aligned practices
CE phases involve x
1
2
175, 33, 192
Cerqueira-Streit et 
al., 2021, Taddei et 
al., 2024, Luthra et 
al., 2022
Lack of knowledge and experience in management on the CE concept, business 
opportunities, vision and how to facilitate. 
Managers implica x
1
2
191, 47
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Different risk management approaches: Different sectors have their own 
autonomous approaches to perceive and mitigate risk. Thus, it is difficult to 
manage among partners/ collaborators across sectors. 
Different sectors hx
1
2
140, 207, 216
Khan and Ali, 
2022, Schultz et 
al., 2021, Parida et 
al., 2019
The challenge of developing a coordination plan: Complexity, operation and 
monitoring of the SC make it difficult to develop a proper coordination plan.
Complexity, operax
1
2
183, 63, 79, 
128, 187
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Chari et al., 2022, 
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022, 
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
Organisational norms and culture restrict stakeholder competencies and force 
them to focus on their interests, thus impacting the decision not to collaborate 
across sectors for CSCM. Existing institutional conditions constraints the 
transistion to circular practice. Firm’s organisational structures, such as an 
inefficient bureaucracy, are a barrier.
Organisational no x
1
2
4
167, 142
Wielopolski and 
Bulthuis, 2023, 
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Incentive systems favoring linear solutions. Slow down implementation of CE 
when companies motivate and reward for linear targets.  Linear procedural 
factors hinders CE advancement.
x
x
1
2
4
64, 94
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023, 
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of flexibility in organizations.
.“According to thex
1
2
82
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of collaboration across departments within an organization. Lack of cross-
functional integration of competencies and communication. (R&D, environment 
manager, marketing department does not communicate) Could lead to 
sustainability decisions as stand-alone activities.
Environmental max
1
2
182
Luthra et al., 2022
Different organizational structure/culture. Diverse institutional logics, belief 
systems and behavior.
Distinct broader b x
1
2
32, 67
Chari et al., 2022. 
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of organizational willingness and trust [67], Organization do not fully trust 
the new concept [32]
the transition fromx
4
1
2
219
Parida et al., 2019
Lack of internal and external readiness assessment 
Companies may o x
1
2
184
Luthra et al., 2022
Organizational resistance to embrace change and move from traditional 
approach [184]
The resistance to x
4
1
2
222
Havinga et al., 
2023
Reluctance to development of new routines and processes
Implementation o x
1
2
195
Luthra et al., 2022
Isomorphic institutionalism. Pressure to follow existing institutional culture limits 
the organization to use skills and knowledge in the new area. Makes organization 
bound to their current processes.
The pressure to fo x
1
2
85
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of trust, data and transparency. Trust  is needed to overcome the problems 
associated with moving by-product or waste, such as variation in quality, cost 
and time.
“The empirical da x
4
1
2
41
Gebhardt et al., 
2022,  Kazancoglu 
et al., 2020
Lack of trust in other actors or partners in value chain.
“There needs to b x
1
2
141
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Lack of natural way to build trust between companies when they don't have a 
customer-supplier dynamics
“This amplifies thex
1
2
186
[Luthra et al., 2022
Lack of trust among cross sector collaboration. Perceived trust varies from 
organization to organization.
Partners have trus x
1
2
144
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Limitation of accessibility. Data discrepancies. Overly strict specifications and 
rules. 
Sharing data happx
1
2
4
38
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of data sharing both upstream and downstream. Imbalanced transparency.
"Data sharing on sx
1
2
4
3, 107
Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Lack of material traceability where it comes from, quality, and trust of shared 
information. Hampering performance assessment.
CE requires traceax
1
2
4
36
Gebhardt et al., 
2023
Lack of verification mechanism for reliability of self-declared data and no 
standards. 
“Companies acro x
1
2
4
43
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of framework for incentivization for data gathering and sharing. Now it is 
permissioned access, commercial contracts. Lack of penalization for non-
compliance 
Data access must x
1
2
56
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of commitment from the private sector to raise transparency and go beyond r “Supply chain act x
1
2
151
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Public generated data is not specific enough to cover data gaps.
The varying need ox
1
2
158
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
GDPR afftect handling of data. Consumer behavior, product and system lifetime 
data can only be collected in limited fashion.
x
1
2
121
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018,
Lack of information from SC in a timely way. Making information not available to 
decisionmakers. 
Accurate informa x
1
2
53
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of interfaces for data exchange between supply chain manufactures and 
refinement companies.
"As now battery sux
1
2
87
De Lima and 
Seuring, 2023
Poor communication and asymmetric information hampers integration of 
supplier and has a negative impact on the information flows. 
“The expert panel x
1
2
221
Havinga et al., 
2023
Lack of openness towards sharing core knowledge and intellectual property
There is often hes x
1
2
==PAGE:165==
155
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Lack of incitiment to collaborate solely for data sharing purpose. E.g. Company 
woul unlikely collaborate solely for data sharing purpose. Companies see data as 
a ressource expecting compensation if other actors use it. 
x
1
2
201
Khan and Ali, 2022
Lack of inofrmation sharing, cooperation and collaboration 
x
1
2
204
Khan and Ali, 2022
Difficulty in the visibility of the supply chain: The complexity of the 
pharmaceutical supply chain makes it difficult to monitor the entire supply chain
x
1
2
157
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Challenge to indetify which of the large amounts of data is relevant for CE
“Admittedly, it ma x
1
2
208
Agarwal et al., 
2022
Information disruptions among the SC members due to multiple channels
The CE-based SCsx
1
2
37
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Lack of visibility beyond 1st, 2nd tier in VC
Downstream and x
1
2
146
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Data from one actor in the VC does not reach beyond the immediate stages of the 
life cycle. (beyond direct business partners)
Data of the batteryx
1
2
153, 97
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022, 
Kazancoglu et al., 
2022
Inward focus instead of outward focus (Data considered missing in some parts of 
the VC are collected in other parts of the VC for inward focus) e.g. Difficult to get 
feedback, information sharing with SC actors - each actor acts as an 
independent actor [97]
Data considered mx
1
2
39
Gebhardt et al., 
2022
Many perspectives on who is responsible for certain sustainability goals and data 
reporting requirements. It is difficult to tell what stakeholders in VC should report 
on.
Traceability of sus x
1
2
69
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of comprehensive data, knowlegde and information. This affect allocation of 
responsabilities between suppliers (relationship) 
“Experts also descx
1
2
209
Agarwal et al., 
2022
Lack of traceability to track product performance, maintenance and rejection in SCProduct traceabili x
1
2
52, 116
Gebhardt et al., 
2022, Govindan 
and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Lack of appropriate technologies to support data gathering, aggregation, and 
exchange for traceability across the whole SC
“Data systems arex
1
2
109, 190, 1, 105
Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018, 
Luthra et al., 2022,  
 Kazancoglu et al., 
2020, Kazancoglu 
et al., 2022
Lack of a standard system for performance indicators with regard to measuring 
CE in SC. Absence of system standardisation for performance management 
[190] Lack of performance evaluation system (common standards) [1]
Lack of standard syste
1
2
161
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Lack of quantitative and qualitative parameters to evaluate circularity 
Lack of quantitativx
1
2
147
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Lack of well defined formulation of circularity indicators.
e.g. Measuring CE is poorly understood,  and scarce data is used.
x
1
2
26
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of global standards and sharing data protocols leading to weak performance effective mapping x
1
2
150
Serna-Guerrero et 
al., 2022
Absence of standardized circularity indicators: Threat that expected 
environmental benefit will not be realized after modifications in the stakeholder 
operations
Absence of standax
1
2
220, 177, 50, 77
Havinga et al., 
2023, Luthra et al., 
2022, Gebhardt et 
al., 2022, Chari et 
al., 2022
Lack of setting standards between stakeholders with different objectives or practic
Establishing stand
x
1
2
35
Taddei et al., 2024 Lack of information systems and data management together with security and 
the capacity of data storage systems
while in the linear x
1
2
65
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of knowledge and understanding about data management and I4.0
x
1
2
==PAGE:166==
J
Phase 5: Barriers Interview
Company Barrier 
Detail
Data (metric and information)
Data governance
Data exchange
Data utilization
Visibility
Responsability
Traceability
Standards
Trust
Needding  trust
Having trust
Develop trust
Ecosystem readiness
Industry
Framework and theory
Regulations and strandards
Organization
Organization structure & culture
Organization resistance
Management
Internal
External
Commitment
Competition
Economic
Power
Scale
Alignment
A
Uncertainties in net-value creation and ownership. There is collected risk and 
investment in partnership when innovating and developing something new.
Assessment of Net value creation and ownership. There isn t necessarily an 
existing system in place. So, there is also a certain level
of mutual risk or a shared investment along the way. Who owns the outcome? ...
What is the value for us? Do we have an interest in owning this system? What’s in
it for us? What’s in it for you? When is the price right?... what is net-value?” (A. Q. 
1
C1
A shortage of long-term resources hinders effective orchestration and partnership 
success.
”Sometimes we take the lead, and other times we end up going
with it.”... ”And other times, we might find ourselves in a situation where we opt 
out
of something because we don’t have the resources to take on a leading role. And
if no one else has the resources to take the lead either, I do worry that some things
might fall in between chairs. It’s a huge challenge to overcome and orchestrate
everything.” (C1 Q.15.) ”I would say it requires strength—it takes resources to 
make it happen.
Going back to resources, a short-term effort of 14 days with some external support
is not enough. You need sustained resources and competencies to invest in it. And
that, in itself, can be a challenge. If a company doesn’t have a financial surplus but
could significantly benefit from collaborating with others, they might never get 
there
simply because they lack the opportunity to do so.”...”So, there could be support
1
C2
High investment cost
”There are many challenges. This is expensive to do, it is difficult to enter the 
market and there are many regulatory barriers for bringing circular economy 
solutions to the market.” (C2 Q. 34)
1
A
Alignment of roles and responsabilites in partnership. 
Defining the role in partnerships. What roles should the company have and what
should the partner have. e.g." So, it has been more about identifying which 
activities actually make sense for us to handle. There are many activities that we 
are probably not the best suited to manage. ” (A Q.12)
1
A
Uncertainties in alignment of capabilites and competences. A testing phase of 
competence. 
Assessment and alignment of capabilities. Understand what capabilities there are
in the company and what a partner should bring. Tried many recycling partner who 
were lacking the
full solution and only able to deliver a small part of the solution. ”Entering into a 
completely new partnership—it could be with anyone. There is a
sort of testing phase... You have to test each other a bit — what can you do? What
are your competencies? But at the same time, in a way, you are already in the
process of co-creating a solution that doesn’t yet exist.” (A. Q.15)
1
A
Mismatch of capabilites
3’rd party consultant house. Validation through a partner, who is unfamiliar with, or
do not understand the product and need to communicate it to the customer.
1
A
Different focus from different companies because of different requirements. 
Focus can be different from company to company. They can be measured on dif-
ferent requirements and legislation.
1
x
4
A
Uncertainties about scalability
Scale of solution. Solution has to be scalable. ”How do we create a business case? 
What is the cost per product? ”We are in a
pilot phase now, but when we scale up—that’s important. Can we scale up without
breaking the bank?” (A. Q. 19)
1
C2 
Scaling the solution for long-term implementation in the value chain remains a 
challenge.
”That’s the challenge we’re facing—how do you scale? It’s not an art to
run a small pilot project in one or two cities. The real challenge is scaling it into
something with a significant impact—something that becomes an integrated part 
of
1
C2
Challenge of standardizing the scaling phase and develop a operating model.
”We are also in a scaling phase. How do we standardize this? It’s one thing to do
it in Denmark, but how can we scale this further? You are actually showing many
of the key elements needed for a systemic approach to scaling, and that’s exactly
what we are working on now. How do we develop what we call an operating model.”
(C2. Q 31)
1
B
Lack of economy of scale to collaborate with suppliers. 
More challenging to collect data because lack of scale and placement of SC geo-
graphically. Low scale production. Lacking economy of scale to collaborate with
manufactures in SC. The manufactures in the SC are bigger than the company so
they are a small fish. We get custom-made items in relatively small volumes. If we 
go out and tell some-
one that we want it in a specific way, it usually costs a bit extra. And I think we’re
missing some economy of scale to be able to change much.”... ”That’s just natural.
And as I see it, we simply don’t have a large enough critical mass. Our suppliers
are big enough that they have other, larger customers than us.” (B Q. 9.)
1
C1, C2
Uncertainty around confidentiality creates a perceived barrier, with no clear solutions 
to prevent it from impacting the process
”One of the major barriers can be confidentiality. How do you collaborate with a 
competitor? How do you share information in a way that doesn’t harm your own 
production?”... ”But how do you prevent it from being perceived as a barrier and 
instead create a process where everyone can fully engage and contribute in the 
best possible way to achieve the highest level of circularity—or whatever the goal 
may be?”(C1 Q. 21) ”Of course, when you first enter into a collaboration with direct 
competitors and so on, there is a natural caution about how things will unfold.”(C2. 
Q. 12, 13)
1
A
Uncertainty in ranking and commitment of different CE strategies and resource 
allocation. 
Strategy and commitment: Distribution of effort and resources. There are different 
sustainability strategies. How much effort and resources should be put in the differ-
ent solutions and strategies. They can be competing solutions e.g. take-back and 
biodegradable solutions. Return of investment: It has to be a business case. ” 
When we talk about strategy and prioritization within a company, you also have 
to
consider—how many eggs do I put into take-back and recycling? How much do I 
invest in other initiatives or our product line?... Circular economy efforts
have different focus areas, right? So which one is actually the most important to 
1
C1 
Orchestrating partnerships demands long-term resource allocation.
”Also because it requires a continuous resource commitment from the companies 
involved in a partnership. It’s not something you just do for three months and then
it’s done. It requires the company to allocate resources over a long period of time. 
So, it might make sense to outsource it—just like you would hire an accountant.” 
(C1 Q. 13)
1
C1
A shortage of experts to manage partnerships (orchestrators), so not everyone has to 
learn it.
”It’s also worth considering whether there’s a need for more professional expertise
to manage these partnerships so that not everyone who needs to learn it. Because 
it
is a discipline in itself—there are even educational programs where people special-
ize in partnerships. I can say for sure that the people in our social sector, who are
masters of partnerships, have a completely different approach and expertise in ar-
eas like communication, contract drafting, resolving obstacles, delegation, legal as-
pects, and so on. So sometimes, not everyone needs to be able to do everything—
not even at the company level. It could very well be a service that companies could
1
2
C2
How to adress the high complexity of collaboration
”No one has really challenged industry collaboration, aside from the fact that it 
comes with high complexity. And there is a complexity to it. This is the next thing 
we need to address...” (C2. Q. 35)
1
2
A
There is work advocating sustainability to the other departments e.g. training, 
understanding and awareness.  To ensure they make the right choices.
Distribution and adjustment of sustainability to all the different roles in an R&D de-
partment. Different responsibilities: Mechanics, materials, safety, project, market-
ing. All have a little to do with sustainability but not 100. evelop tools and 
recommendation to help other departments make the right choices.
What parameters they can work with. There is work advocating sustainability to the
other departments e.g. training, understanding and awareness.
1
2
B
It takes time to create awareness and develop a mindset in the organization. Develop 
material to increase knowledge and train employees. 
Knowledge and training. Need to make detailed description of the process for other 
departments to follow, so they can make the right decisions. How do we increase
awareness and give enough material for training. Ambitions are high but it takes 
time to create awareness and the mindset in the organization. "There is also a lot 
of work in figuring out how we equip people with the knowledge they need about 
1
2
C2
Difficult to find recycling or value recovery partner with viable business case. 
ECOSYSTEM: ”Getting a recycling partner up and running in this field, which is
a relatively new area, has also been a challenge. Again, when it comes to value
recovery companies—how many are there, and can they build a viable business
case around this? That’s the reality of business—if there isn’t a strong business
case, if they don’t see a financial opportunity or a strategic investment, it won’t be
sustainable in the long run. That’s why it has been crucial for us to establish a close
and strategic partnership.” (C2. Q. 14)
1
2
C1
Lack of legislations or mechanisms to support and incentivize collaboration 
”There is also no legislation supporting these initiatives. It’s something one might
wish existed.” ... ”There are no real mechanisms in place to support it as such. It’s
just the hope that 2 plus 2 equals 5—or a mission-driven ambition to contribute to
change.” (C1 Q. 16)
1
2
C1
Lack of standardization of products or material types in the industry 
If, at the EU level or even beyond, certain things could be standardized—for exam-
ple, something like Ø-pict chargers, which are fortunately becoming more aligned
than they were initially—it would be a step in the right direction. Standardization 
can
help remove some roadblocks, and I believe that’s the way forward.” (C1 Q. 28)
1
2
C2
Legal challenges in uniting the sector while ensuring a free market and preventing 
cartel formation.
”One of the major challenges is when bringing competing companies together. We
are naturally, extremely cautious to ensure that no issues arise regarding cartel-
formation or any other legal concerns.” (C2 Q. 11)
1
2
C2
Many regulatory barriers for bringing CE solutions to the market 
”There are many challenges. This is expensive to do, it is difficult to enter the 
market
and there are many regulatory barriers for bringing circular economy solutions to 
the
1
2
B
Challenge in chosing between conceptual frameworks. Needs to chose one to work 
with 
"Which conceptual framework should we align with? There is something called eco-
design, and there is something called circular economy. There is a significant over-
lap between the two. But what we call things also matters in terms of how we com-
municate and operationalize them. I think we will end up using the circular 
economy
framework here—but more to emphasize that this is a choice we need to make.” (B 
Q. 5)
1
2
C1
Lack of systemic mechanisms for building collaboration
"When something new is started, you reach out to those already working in the 
field.
So, learning is definitely built on top of existing knowledge. But new employees
also join, and sometimes we even get people who are experts in partnerships—so
we learn from them as well. I believe, and I hope, that this is something we will
all get better at over time. I just don’t think there are necessarily all the systemic
1
2
C2
Trust has to be developed
”We’ve talked about trust. It’s incredibly important to build it, 
without it, everything called partnerships and collaborations fall 
to the ground.”
1
A
Lack of trust 
From overview of themes
1
Figure J.1: Barriers from interview
Google drev:https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1jDkCIa2DbX7DVf7G0w-pAozDEh-KlhJo/
edit?usp=drive_link&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=true&sd=true
It is recommended to view the file in Microsoft Excel to have same formation as on the
shown figure fig. J.1
150
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:167==
Company Barrier 
Detail
Data (metric and information)
Data governance
Data exchange
Data utilization
Visibility
Responsability
Traceability
Standards
Trust
Needding  trust
Having trust
Develop trust
Ecosystem readiness
Industry
Framework and theory
Regulations and strandards
Organization
Organization structure & culture
Organization resistance
Management
Internal
External
Commitment
Competition
Economic
Power
Scale
Alignment
A
Uncertainties in net-value creation and ownership. There is collected risk and 
investment in partnership when innovating and developing something new.
Assessment of Net value creation and ownership. There isn t necessarily an 
existing system in place. So, there is also a certain level
of mutual risk or a shared investment along the way. Who owns the outcome? ...
What is the value for us? Do we have an interest in owning this system? What’s in
it for us? What’s in it for you? When is the price right?... what is net-value?” (A. Q. 
1
C1
A shortage of long-term resources hinders effective orchestration and partnership 
success.
”Sometimes we take the lead, and other times we end up going
with it.”... ”And other times, we might find ourselves in a situation where we opt 
out
of something because we don’t have the resources to take on a leading role. And
if no one else has the resources to take the lead either, I do worry that some things
might fall in between chairs. It’s a huge challenge to overcome and orchestrate
everything.” (C1 Q.15.) ”I would say it requires strength—it takes resources to 
make it happen.
Going back to resources, a short-term effort of 14 days with some external support
is not enough. You need sustained resources and competencies to invest in it. And
that, in itself, can be a challenge. If a company doesn’t have a financial surplus but
could significantly benefit from collaborating with others, they might never get 
there
simply because they lack the opportunity to do so.”...”So, there could be support
1
C2
High investment cost
”There are many challenges. This is expensive to do, it is difficult to enter the 
market and there are many regulatory barriers for bringing circular economy 
solutions to the market.” (C2 Q. 34)
1
A
Alignment of roles and responsabilites in partnership. 
Defining the role in partnerships. What roles should the company have and what
should the partner have. e.g." So, it has been more about identifying which 
activities actually make sense for us to handle. There are many activities that we 
are probably not the best suited to manage. ” (A Q.12)
1
A
Uncertainties in alignment of capabilites and competences. A testing phase of 
competence. 
Assessment and alignment of capabilities. Understand what capabilities there are
in the company and what a partner should bring. Tried many recycling partner who 
were lacking the
full solution and only able to deliver a small part of the solution. ”Entering into a 
completely new partnership—it could be with anyone. There is a
sort of testing phase... You have to test each other a bit — what can you do? What
are your competencies? But at the same time, in a way, you are already in the
process of co-creating a solution that doesn’t yet exist.” (A. Q.15)
1
A
Mismatch of capabilites
3’rd party consultant house. Validation through a partner, who is unfamiliar with, or
do not understand the product and need to communicate it to the customer.
1
A
Different focus from different companies because of different requirements. 
Focus can be different from company to company. They can be measured on dif-
ferent requirements and legislation.
1
x
4
A
Uncertainties about scalability
Scale of solution. Solution has to be scalable. ”How do we create a business case? 
What is the cost per product? ”We are in a
pilot phase now, but when we scale up—that’s important. Can we scale up without
breaking the bank?” (A. Q. 19)
1
C2 
Scaling the solution for long-term implementation in the value chain remains a 
challenge.
”That’s the challenge we’re facing—how do you scale? It’s not an art to
run a small pilot project in one or two cities. The real challenge is scaling it into
something with a significant impact—something that becomes an integrated part 
of
1
C2
Challenge of standardizing the scaling phase and develop a operating model.
”We are also in a scaling phase. How do we standardize this? It’s one thing to do
it in Denmark, but how can we scale this further? You are actually showing many
of the key elements needed for a systemic approach to scaling, and that’s exactly
what we are working on now. How do we develop what we call an operating model.”
(C2. Q 31)
1
B
Lack of economy of scale to collaborate with suppliers. 
More challenging to collect data because lack of scale and placement of SC geo-
graphically. Low scale production. Lacking economy of scale to collaborate with
manufactures in SC. The manufactures in the SC are bigger than the company so
they are a small fish. We get custom-made items in relatively small volumes. If we 
go out and tell some-
one that we want it in a specific way, it usually costs a bit extra. And I think we’re
missing some economy of scale to be able to change much.”... ”That’s just natural.
And as I see it, we simply don’t have a large enough critical mass. Our suppliers
are big enough that they have other, larger customers than us.” (B Q. 9.)
1
C1, C2
Uncertainty around confidentiality creates a perceived barrier, with no clear solutions 
to prevent it from impacting the process
”One of the major barriers can be confidentiality. How do you collaborate with a 
competitor? How do you share information in a way that doesn’t harm your own 
production?”... ”But how do you prevent it from being perceived as a barrier and 
instead create a process where everyone can fully engage and contribute in the 
best possible way to achieve the highest level of circularity—or whatever the goal 
may be?”(C1 Q. 21) ”Of course, when you first enter into a collaboration with direct 
competitors and so on, there is a natural caution about how things will unfold.”(C2. 
Q. 12, 13)
1
A
Uncertainty in ranking and commitment of different CE strategies and resource 
allocation. 
Strategy and commitment: Distribution of effort and resources. There are different 
sustainability strategies. How much effort and resources should be put in the differ-
ent solutions and strategies. They can be competing solutions e.g. take-back and 
biodegradable solutions. Return of investment: It has to be a business case. ” 
When we talk about strategy and prioritization within a company, you also have 
to
consider—how many eggs do I put into take-back and recycling? How much do I 
invest in other initiatives or our product line?... Circular economy efforts
have different focus areas, right? So which one is actually the most important to 
1
C1 
Orchestrating partnerships demands long-term resource allocation.
”Also because it requires a continuous resource commitment from the companies 
involved in a partnership. It’s not something you just do for three months and then
it’s done. It requires the company to allocate resources over a long period of time. 
So, it might make sense to outsource it—just like you would hire an accountant.” 
(C1 Q. 13)
1
C1
A shortage of experts to manage partnerships (orchestrators), so not everyone has to 
learn it.
”It’s also worth considering whether there’s a need for more professional expertise
to manage these partnerships so that not everyone who needs to learn it. Because 
it
is a discipline in itself—there are even educational programs where people special-
ize in partnerships. I can say for sure that the people in our social sector, who are
masters of partnerships, have a completely different approach and expertise in ar-
eas like communication, contract drafting, resolving obstacles, delegation, legal as-
pects, and so on. So sometimes, not everyone needs to be able to do everything—
not even at the company level. It could very well be a service that companies could
1
2
C2
How to adress the high complexity of collaboration
”No one has really challenged industry collaboration, aside from the fact that it 
comes with high complexity. And there is a complexity to it. This is the next thing 
we need to address...” (C2. Q. 35)
1
2
A
There is work advocating sustainability to the other departments e.g. training, 
understanding and awareness.  To ensure they make the right choices.
Distribution and adjustment of sustainability to all the different roles in an R&D de-
partment. Different responsibilities: Mechanics, materials, safety, project, market-
ing. All have a little to do with sustainability but not 100. evelop tools and 
recommendation to help other departments make the right choices.
What parameters they can work with. There is work advocating sustainability to the
other departments e.g. training, understanding and awareness.
1
2
B
It takes time to create awareness and develop a mindset in the organization. Develop 
material to increase knowledge and train employees. 
Knowledge and training. Need to make detailed description of the process for other 
departments to follow, so they can make the right decisions. How do we increase
awareness and give enough material for training. Ambitions are high but it takes 
time to create awareness and the mindset in the organization. "There is also a lot 
of work in figuring out how we equip people with the knowledge they need about 
1
2
C2
Difficult to find recycling or value recovery partner with viable business case. 
ECOSYSTEM: ”Getting a recycling partner up and running in this field, which is
a relatively new area, has also been a challenge. Again, when it comes to value
recovery companies—how many are there, and can they build a viable business
case around this? That’s the reality of business—if there isn’t a strong business
case, if they don’t see a financial opportunity or a strategic investment, it won’t be
sustainable in the long run. That’s why it has been crucial for us to establish a close
and strategic partnership.” (C2. Q. 14)
1
2
C1
Lack of legislations or mechanisms to support and incentivize collaboration 
”There is also no legislation supporting these initiatives. It’s something one might
wish existed.” ... ”There are no real mechanisms in place to support it as such. It’s
just the hope that 2 plus 2 equals 5—or a mission-driven ambition to contribute to
change.” (C1 Q. 16)
1
2
C1
Lack of standardization of products or material types in the industry 
If, at the EU level or even beyond, certain things could be standardized—for exam-
ple, something like Ø-pict chargers, which are fortunately becoming more aligned
than they were initially—it would be a step in the right direction. Standardization 
can
help remove some roadblocks, and I believe that’s the way forward.” (C1 Q. 28)
1
2
C2
Legal challenges in uniting the sector while ensuring a free market and preventing 
cartel formation.
”One of the major challenges is when bringing competing companies together. We
are naturally, extremely cautious to ensure that no issues arise regarding cartel-
formation or any other legal concerns.” (C2 Q. 11)
1
2
C2
Many regulatory barriers for bringing CE solutions to the market 
”There are many challenges. This is expensive to do, it is difficult to enter the 
market
and there are many regulatory barriers for bringing circular economy solutions to 
the
1
2
B
Challenge in chosing between conceptual frameworks. Needs to chose one to work 
with 
"Which conceptual framework should we align with? There is something called eco-
design, and there is something called circular economy. There is a significant over-
lap between the two. But what we call things also matters in terms of how we com-
municate and operationalize them. I think we will end up using the circular 
economy
framework here—but more to emphasize that this is a choice we need to make.” (B 
Q. 5)
1
2
C1
Lack of systemic mechanisms for building collaboration
"When something new is started, you reach out to those already working in the 
field.
So, learning is definitely built on top of existing knowledge. But new employees
also join, and sometimes we even get people who are experts in partnerships—so
we learn from them as well. I believe, and I hope, that this is something we will
all get better at over time. I just don’t think there are necessarily all the systemic
1
2
C2
Trust has to be developed
”We’ve talked about trust. It’s incredibly important to build it, 
without it, everything called partnerships and collaborations fall 
to the ground.”
1
A
Lack of trust 
From overview of themes
1
==PAGE:168==
A
Challenge in how to measure sustainability and asses initivatives
" how do you measure sustainability? What initiatives gives most environment
for the money?"
1
2
A
Takes time before the value of collected data is realized in organization
Making other the departments understand the value of collected data and 
measuring
on the improvement. Took years before the value was understood by other places
in organization.
1
2
A
Not always the most usable placement of data  storage 
Data is not always placed where you would like it as sustainability engineer.
1
2
A
Challenge in collecting data from sub supplier.
”There will be data you don’t have access to. It could be a process running at
a subcontractor. In such cases, you rely on communicating why you are asking
these questions—and that it’s not as intimidating as they might think. We also face
challenges in this regard.” (A. Q. 8.)
1
2
B
Challenge in collecting data from supplier.
"Data, for sure. I just mentioned different metrics for sustainability.But there’s also
something more practical, like getting suppliers to provide data on how they manu-
facture the things we order from them.” (B. Q. 14) 
1
2
C1
Lack of knowledge sharing. 
”Knowledge is often something companies are reluctant to share, but at
the same time, it is the key prerequisite for achieving truly great results.” (C1. Q. 
1
2
B
Different sustainability metrics (What kind of impact do we want to achieve in relation 
to the cost?)
”We measure it in different ways. We measure one thing in our LCA and another
in our sustainability reporting, there we need to talk more about material 
quantities.
What kind of impact do we want to achieve in relation to the cost? There are some
==PAGE:169==
K
Phase 5: Interview Guide
The structure of the Interviews is described below. The interview was separated into 3
parts.
1. Part. Setting the scene by describing the objective, motivation, and goal of the
master’s thesis and barrier collection.
2. Part. Ask the following questions from this interview guide while adding follow-up
questions based on the conversation. The goal is to understand the companies’
current situations, collaboration, and experienced barriers without priming them with
material found in the literature.
3. Part. Showing an overview of themes from the barriers collection to collect additional
examples or context on barriers.
Part 2. Questions
The aim of the interview is to hold it as a conversation, where there is room to dive into
elements said by the interviewee. There are overall 3 areas of focus distributed on 6
Questions. If the company is coming into the subject of a question through one of the
others it is not used.
The interview aims to be a conversation, allowing space to dive into topics introduced
by the interviewee. There are three focus areas, distributed across six questions. If a
particular question-answer naturally emerges in response to another question, the corre-
sponding question is not asked.
Initial experience
The overall rationale is to assess the interviewee’s and the company’s knowledge and
experience in Circular Economy.
• Q. What is your role in the company?
Rationale: Title, Experience, Level in Organization
• Q. How has the company implemented a circular economy strategy?
Rationale: CE strategies, Level of readiness/implementation
Collaboration and Relationship
The overall rationale is to determine their experience with collaboration and bring forward
this experience when asking about barriers in focus 3. Also to understand where they
collaborate their development and intentions.
• Q. Do you work in collaboration or partnership with any company? About what?
Rationale: About what, intention, experience
• Q. How does it work?
Rationale: Roles, dynamics
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
153
==PAGE:170==
Barriers and resources
The overall rationale is to collect barriers or resource-heavy challenges from their experi-
ence with collaboration. Also to understand how they have overcome them.
• Q: Did you have any challenges on which you have used a lot of resources (time,
knowledge, test)?
Rationale: What was the challenge, was it solved, how was it solved
• Q: Did you have any challenges that stopped the collaboration or development of
innovation together?
Rationale: What was the challenge, why did it stop the collaboration, how far was
the collaboration in development
Part 3. Overview of themes from barrier collection
This overview was used to collect additional challenges. The time of introduction of it
depended on the context of the conversation. If the interviewee brought up a lot of chal-
lenges by themselves it was first added late in the interview.
Development of overview
The interviews and barrier analysis were conducted simultaneously due to time con-
straints. The initial barrier themes, established at the beginning of Phase 5., were used to
develop an overview. Each box included a theme headline, keywords, and 2–3 examples
to make them more relatable.
Business Model
Alignment, Core value creation, 
Capabilities, Complexity
Lack of cross-functional integration of 
competencies.
Mis-alignment of vision.
Trust
Safety, Transparency, Resistance to 
change
Perceived trust varies from organization to 
organization
Lack of natural way to build trust when not 
doing business
Commitment
Performance, Responsibility, 
Traceability, Synchronizing, Monitoring
Different expectation of roles. 
Fear of losing control.
Many perspective and difficult to align 
responsibility
Data
Utilization, analyzing, sharing, collection, 
standardization
Different metrics for sustainability
Different programs or formation
Easier to use own data
Orchestrators
Responsibility, Dynamic, Resource 
expensive
Challenge in developing and coordination 
plan.
Many different stakeholders 
Innovation
Pilot partners, Test facilities, Consultant
Pilot partners can be hard to find 
Allocating a lot of resources (Time, 
knowledge) 
Management
Bottom-up, Knowledge, Coordination, 
Motivation, Risk
Duplication of responsibility and authority
Planning and management practices 
difficult in a dynamic system
Organization
Linear structure, Experience, Knowledge
Linear procedural factors hindering the 
change
Incentive system favoring linear solutions
Ecosystem readiness
Supplier inconsistency, Reverse 
logistics, Lack of partners
Lack of partners in ecosystem to recycle 
material 
Many different small suppliers instead of 
one
Economic
High investment cost, Low experience, 
Difficult resource allocation  
Lack of knowledge on price setting of 
product
Long and unsure return of investment 
Scale
Scalability, Examples, High complexity, 
Sector focus
Small level of intent of size of goal
Narrowing goal to avoid multi stakeholder 
complexity
Lack of big scale examples
Power structure 
Power asymmetry, Fragmentation
Mismatch between the powers of partner or
ganizations because of different levels
of resources.
Many small building companies and
suppliers with limited power and few very bi
g suppliers
Figure K.1: Interview themes overview
154
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:171==
L
Interview Company A
Date
29.01.2025
Medium
Face-to-face (30 minutes)
Language:
Danish (quotes translated to english)
Participant:
Josephine Friis Jensen(Student - Danish Technical University)
Participant A - Senior sustainability specialist engineer
Type of interview:
Informal, Semi-structured
Question focus:
1. What is your role?
2. What kind of CE strategies does the company focus on?
3. How do you collect your data?
4. Do you have any partnerships?
5. You have connection with an orchestrator? How does this work?
6. Is there any place in this process where you have used more resources or time than
expected?
7. Did you have any barrier or challenges that stopped a partnership?
Key findings:
Main barriers highlighted from overview:
• Data
• Trust
• Business model
CE strategies
• Working on take-back system.
• Sees that this may require partnerships.
• Readiness are the first step, general organizationally, Strategy, Knowledge and
training of organization. Then work with the product and the network development.
• Short- and long-term agenda. Short-term is prof of concept (pilot project). Long-
term is the sector solution.
Collaboration/Network:
• Material collaboration to source circular.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
155
==PAGE:172==
• Take-back program. With a combination of many partners to solve it (Data, transport,
recycler and recipient of the plastic). This has to bee a network solution including
many partners in many countries.
• Collaboration with an orchestrator with a portfolio of companies. Simplify the con-
tact, resource used and collaboration. Brings different capabilities: Data, Design
feedback to recycling and so on. To go into a collaboration with some who can
make it at scale.
Orchestrator: Is a company with value proposition of orchestrating.
• Convener in ISO and IEC to try update the standards to minimize the blocks they
create.
Dynamics and challenges
• Distribution and adjustment of sustainability to all the different roles in an R&D de-
partment. Different responsibilities: Mechanics, materials, safety, project, market-
ing. All have a little to do with sustainability but not 100.
• Develop tools and recommendation to help other departments make the right choices.
What parameters they can work with. There is work advocating sustainability to the
other departments e.g. training, understanding and awareness.
• Collecting data from sub supplier could be a challenge. Has to communicate the
need for data from supplier, why it is collected. Importance they understand the
reason of the collection, it is not as frightening as they think.
• Making other the departments understand the value of collected data and measuring
on the improvement. Took years before the value was understood by other places
in organization.
• Data is not always placed where you would like it as sustainability engineer.
• Develop through projects. Has to let it mature bit by bit.
• Internal work: What should we do? How do we work with our products?
• Understand customers and their needs when creating take-back. How are they
handling the emballage from the products. Understand their waste management
needs. How accessible is it? How can we change this with a partner.
• Develop the take-back program are the most challenging case. Big and difficult
challenge to solve. Developing and innovating something new. Nobody else in the
sector has done it yet.
• Assessment of Net-value creation and ownership. There is a collected risk and
investment in the partnership when innovating and developing something new. Who
owns the solution? What are the value of the solution. Do you want to own it? What
is in it for us? what is in it for you? when is the price right?
• Defining the role in partnerships. What roles should the company have and what
should the partner have. e.g. There are companies better at the take-back challenge
than us. We are not a recycler or value recover company in our center.
• Assessment and alignment of capabilities. Understand what capabilities there are
in the company and what a partner should bring. e.g. as a retailer the company
has direct customer contact with the users and can create collection point at EOL in
156
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:173==
a take-back program. However the company needs a partner for (data, transport,
recycling, etc.).
• Validation of competences. In collaboration there is a testing phase of the different
partners. What are there competences. The work in screening a new partner and
understand what the solution is. Tried many recycling partner who were lacking the
full solution and only able to deliver a small part of the solution.
• 3’rd party consultant house. Validation through a partner, who is unfamiliar with, or
do not understand the product and need to communicate it to the customer.
• Challenge to develope around the high niche requirements and standards. Med-
tech has high niche requirements and safety standards. Is convener in ISO and
IEC to try update the standards to minimize the blocks they create.
• Take-back geographically. A lot of test of different setups in different countries to
develop the right solution and network. Wast collection and treatment is a geo-
graphically local agenda up to a certain radius. The solution has to be where the
end-of-life product is collected.
• Scale of solution. Solution has to be scalable but what is the cost?
• Lack of space for all companies to develop their own solution. Not room for all to
make individual take-back systems. e.g. lack of space at collection point at the
customer.
• Strategy and commitment: Distribution of effort and resources. There are different
sustainability strategies. How much effort and resources should be put in the differ-
ent solutions and strategies. They can be competing solutions e.g. take-back and
biodegradable solutions. Return of investment: It has to be a business case.
• Focus can be different from company to company. They can be measured on dif-
ferent requirements and legislation.
Quotes:
1. How do you measure sustainability? What initiatives gives most environment for the
money?
2. ”A lot of work has gone into training, education, awareness, and also understanding
all the different roles in a development department. The person responsible for me-
chanics, materials, biosafety, project management, and marketing. You essentially
have people who are all somewhat involved in sustainability, but not 100%.”
3. ”How we can integrate sustainability into these roles, which, at the end of the day,
are the ones constantly making decisions.”
4. ”Develop good tools and recommendations, but also ensure they are implemented.
How do we best help the mechanical engineer make the right decisions? What
levers can they adjust? What levers can Biosafety adjust? What does marketing
stand to gain from this?”
5. ”Develop a data-driven approach, measure things—how do we do that? ..., but I
think it took a few years before the value of this data became clear to other parts of
the organization.”
6. ”Then you can make it more and more formal as you train and mature the organi-
zation in this. In this conversation, it is very much about the internal perspective.
What do we need to do? What is our strategy? Why are we doing this?”
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
157
==PAGE:174==
7. ”It is somewhat embedded that we have quality management, and we have data
stored somewhere. But it’s not necessarily in the place you would want it as a
sustainability engineer..”
8. ”There will be data you don’t have access to. It could be a process running at
a subcontractor. In such cases, you rely on communicating why you are asking
these questions—and that it’s not as intimidating as they might think. We also face
challenges in this regard.”
9. ”We are dependent on the people in the value chain. It could be a raw material
supplier, someone casting components for us, or ultimately even our customers.
How do you handle our packaging? What kind of waste sorting is available to you?
If we wanted to change it together with a partner, how could we get started?”
10. ”Another thing we have is a take-back program. A partnership is also involved here,
and in reality, it requires a whole network of collaborators to make it successful. It
involves data, transportation, a recycler, and ultimately also a buyer of the plastic.”...
”At least the most challenging case, because it is something fundamentally new.”...
”The incentive here is that there are probably others who are better at this than us.
We are not essentially a waste management company.”
11. ”We have a collaboration with some who act as orchestrator for the rest. So, I try to
make it a bit easier, in a way, for us to manage the contract or partnerships. Then
we have someone with the right incentives to help us drive it forward. But again,
there are some interfaces where we haven’t fully outsourced it.”
12. ”We have direct contact with our customers. So, it has been more about identifying
which activities actually make sense for us to handle. There are many activities that
we are probably not the best suited to manage. ”
13. ”In the short term, someone needs to take the lead and make it work... We are
willing to do that, and there is an advantage in solving a problem for the customer.
But we also know that if everyone ... just sets up a bin, we will eventually run out of
space ... So, we need to work towards a sector-wide solution.”
14. ”They (orchestrator) are some who wants to live on this solution... they want to
make recycling a success... i believe it is a company not like a extended producer
responsibility group.”
15. ”Entering into a completely new partnership—it could be with anyone. There is a
sort of testing phase... You have to test each other a bit — what can you do? What
are your competencies? But at the same time, in a way, you are already in the
process of co-creating a solution that doesn’t yet exist.”
16. ”There isn’t necessarily an existing system in place. So, there is also a certain level
of mutual risk or a shared investment along the way. Who owns the outcome? ...
What is the value for us? Do we have an interest in owning this system? What’s in
it for us? What’s in it for you? When is the price right?... what is net-value?”
17. ”I think, for example, this challenge is really a network solution. It involves an incred-
ible number of partners across countries. So, there is probably a strong incentive to
find someone who can drive scale and develop expertise in this area.” (orchestrator)
18. ”Waste management is quite a local agenda. There is a specific material that needs
to be sent somewhere, and there are clear cut-off points—up to a certain distance,
it is environmentally justifiable to transport it, but beyond that, it isn’t.”
158
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:175==
19. ”How do we create a business case? What is the cost per product? ”We are in a
pilot phase now, but when we scale up—that’s important. Can we scale up without
breaking the bank?”
20. ”I think it has actually been fairly smooth. It’s also a bit like—if you compare it to
going at it alone. I believe I know and have heard about many of the partners that
others have approached individually. But I think that entering into a collaboration
with someone who can, once again, drive it at scale makes it relatively easy.” (pro-
cess with orchestrator)
21. ”There are some tasks that are core responsibilities for us. Then there are things
we cannot do on our own. It could be related to validation or third-party validation…
In such cases, you need to find a partner... where it’s somewhat embedded, for
example, in selling through a consultant...you do all the work, send data to someone
who doesn’t understand the product, who then tries to create a report that turns out
to be extremely expensive. Then they go directly to a customer and communicate
it to them, even though they don’t really know the customer either.”
22. ”We have gone through several potential recycling partners, and we’ve been talking
to many of them to understand what’s out there... There is definitely a screening pro-
cess when finding new partners and also understanding what the solution actually
is.”
23. ”We are trying to create some work on standards to make it easier... There are a lot of
small barriers that just make the process frustrating and more resource-intensive... I
work within ISO and IEC, which are international standardization bodies. I’ve acted
as a convener, which is somewhat like a project manager, to establish a working
group and promote the initiative... It can be a long and tough process.”
24. ” When we talk about strategy and prioritization within a company, you also have to
consider—how many eggs do I put into take-back and recycling? How much do I
invest in our bioplastics initiatives or our product line?... Circular economy efforts
have different focus areas, right? So which one is actually the most important to
start with? I imagine companies must weigh these decisions”
25. ”So we shouldn’t be choosing bioplastics—something biodegradable—while also
running a recycling program separately. Trying to recycle plastic in that setup would
not be smart. So, we have done some preliminary work to define a design strategy—
this is what we are pursuing, and these elements need to align. Then there are
certain agendas we can move forward on more quickly.”
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
159
==PAGE:176==
M
Interview Company B
Date
31.01.2025
Medium
Face-to-face
Language:
Danish (translated to english)
Participant:
Josephine Friis Jensen(Student - Danish Technical University)
Participant B - Senior sustainability engineer
Type of interview:
Informal, Semi-structured
Question focus:
1. What is your role?
2. What kind of CE strategies does the company focus on?
3. Do you have any partnerships or collaboration?
4. You mentioned you are part of some networks. What kind of networks are you a
part of?
5. Are there any of your new challenges which you think will be difficult to solve?
6. Have you looked into sector solutions?
7. How about other circular strategies like take-back?
8. Did you have any other barriers or challenges?
9. Do you see sustainability as a competitive parameter?
Key findings:
CE strategies
• Readiness assessment. Relative new (7 months)
• Quantitative: Life cycle Analysis to know the situation as is.
• Quantify to make strategies. Implement an assessment of where to start. 6 focus
areas.
• Sell product to retailers and take-back has not been done yet.
Collaboration
• Sparring network and consultant houses.
• Consulent house on LCA. (3’rd party verification)
• Pilot partners we have some line-up. The initiation of contacts. Resellers and End-
Users input.
160
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:177==
Dynamics & Challenges
• Ambitions are high but it takes time to create awareness and the mindset in the
organization.
• Many different reporting obligations.
• Knowledge and training. Need to make a details description of the process for other
departments to follow, so they can make the right decisions. How do we increase
awareness and give enough material for training.
• Discussion should you use ECO-design or CE-strategy conceptual framework? What
is the focus area?
• Many companies have the same challenges.
• 3’rd party verification helps give trust to the numbers.
• More challenging to collect data because lack of scale and placement of SC geo-
graphically. Low-scale production. Lacking economy of scale to collaborate with
manufacturers in SC. The manufacturers in the SC are bigger than the company so
they are a small fish.
• Low volume in materials.
• Different metrics for sustainability: It is also about finding the right placement of
impact depending on reporting obligations. Is it in material or energy? The trade-off
on impact and cost.
• Supplier if they optimize the process, the company still pays the same price.
• Sustainability is a competitive parameter.
• The sustainability asymmetry of power with supplier.
• Scale is not necessarily a good solution with competitors.
• We are not coupled to the material.
Quotes:
1. ”To identify where we can make sustainability improvements. And then we have a
lot of reporting obligations concerning CSRD. There are various tender demands.”
2. ”Ideally, we should be able to report on something that then provides input for the
next generation of products or the next reporting phase. This way, we can make
improvements in iterative loops.”
3. ”There is also a lot of work in figuring out how we equip people with the knowledge
they need about this.”
4. ”Right now, we are primarily working with quantification, meaning life cycle analyses
of our products, so that we have some form of baseline and that is our starting point
because — where should we take action? We don’t know. We don’t really know
what it looks like. Of course, we have assumptions about how things are, but until
we have actual numbers to back it up, it quickly becomes vague.”
5. ”Which conceptual framework should we align with? There is something called eco-
design, and there is something called circular economy. There is a significant over-
lap between the two. But what we call things also matters in terms of how we com-
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
161
==PAGE:178==
municate and operationalize them. I think we will end up using the circular economy
framework here—but more to emphasize that this is a choice we need to make.”
6. ”These are just two Danish examples, but there are more, where six seems to
be the right number. It’s a manageable amount of focus areas that initiatives can
be linked to while still keeping everyone engaged. Everyone has some reference
point—something about materials, something about how we manufacture things,
and something about how we ship and package products.”
7. ”There will be more of that (collaborations) at a later stage. Right now, we have some
sparring networks. In a way, we are innovating together. And in my experience,
many people face the same challenges. If you’re kind, offer a cup of coffee, and ask
insightful questions, most people are willing to help, I think.”
8. ”Sure, we can crunch some numbers ourselves, but there’s a lot of value in bringing
in third parties. That way, we can use the data more actively and say—it’s not just
something we made up.”
9. ”We get custom-made items in relatively small volumes. If we go out and tell some-
one that we want it in a specific way, it usually costs a bit extra. And I think we’re
missing some economy of scale to be able to change much.”... ”That’s just natural.
And as I see it, we simply don’t have a large enough critical mass. Our suppliers
are big enough that they have other, larger customers than us.”
10. ”... we are not a single-use injection molding factory like many other Danish compa-
nies. So, the volume we purchase is minimal compared to other Danish companies.”
11. ”A lot of sustainability efforts are tied to some form of data. There are also many
companies asking for it. So asking for this kind of information requires some per-
suasion. Sometimes, you have to sweet-talk a bit to get it prioritized. Especially if
you have a very global supplier network.”
12. ”Take-back has mostly been at a service level. If a product breaks, we, of course,
deliver a new one. We have never implemented take-back from a sustainability point
of view. But that is something very exciting and relatively high on our to-do list.”
13. ”We measure it in different ways. We measure one thing in our LCA and another
in our sustainability reporting, there We need to talk more about material quantities.
What kind of impact do we want to achieve in relation to the cost? There are some
really interesting trade-offs in this.”
14. ”Data, for sure. I just mentioned different metrics for sustainability.But there’s also
something more practical, like getting suppliers to provide data on how they manu-
facture the things we order from them.”
15. ”And in being a software-as-a-service company, there is inherently some circular
potential—at least in theory—that we are not yet leveraging. That misalignment of
vision might mean that we need to gain more clarity on the fact that this potential is
worth exploring.”
16. ”Pilot partners. In Denmark—or in the Nordics, since we are based here—I think it’s
relatively easy for us. We already have a few lined up where there is potential.” ”It
has actually gone both ways. There have also been people who have reached out
to us and said, ’We have an idea—couldn’t we do this?’”
17. ”We actually have a pretty good dialogue with our resellers and end users. So if they
162
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:179==
say, ‘Hey, does it make sense that when you send it this way, we end up throwing
this part out anyway? Should this even be included, or could we do something
differently?’—then we take that into account. It mostly comes from reseller and
end-user input, not so much from industry input.”
18. ”Our suppliers—if they see waste, they optimize, but they still charge the same
price.”
19. ”There are definitely a lot of stakeholders when it comes to sustainability. And there
are many things that need to align within a busy business. So it takes time.”
20. ”I think we see ourselves as having the most innovative product, with others following
our lead. And if we are not also at the forefront of sustainability, we risk being
overtaken. That’s why it’s a major priority.”
21. ”But it could also be that just by starting the conversation about sustainability, the
power balance in sustainability becomes asymmetric. Even if it’s a larger supplier,
if they are not focusing on it to the same extent, then simply by us asking, they may
not have the resources to address it.”
22. ”Because who would we scale to? It would have to be other companies. That’s not
necessarily a good business case for us.”
23. ”We don’t really have any direct involvement—we are, in a way, disconnected from
our material flows at both ends. We don’t deal with scrap or production because we
order a lot of components from our suppliers, send them out and then we no longer
have any contact with them.”
24. ”So maybe we end up with six focus areas—we don’t know yet. But it’s interesting
how that seems to be a manageable number for most companies.”
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
163
==PAGE:180==
N
Interview Company C1
Date
05.02.2025
Medium
Face-to-face (60 minutes)
Language:
Danish (Translated to English)
Participant:
Josephine Friis Jensen(Student - Danish Technical University)
Participant C1 - Project Lead (Corporate environmental strategy)
Type of interview:
Informal, Semi-structured
Question focus:
1. What is your role?
2. What kind of CE strategies are you focusing on?
3. What do you mean when you say you conduct innovation challenges? Is it both
internal and external?
4. Regarding the partnerships you have established, do you have any good examples
of ones that you feel have provided significant value?
5. This whole orchestrating body—who is responsible for it?
6. Now you’re talking about how managing collaboration requires a lot of resources.
Do you feel that you have improved in this area? And how?
7. Are there any other barriers or challenges?
Key findings:
CE strategies
• Push for circular thinking.
• Makes projects across the whole company and facilitates collaboration internally in
the company.
• Focus on reducing plastic, minimize impact of materials and take-back system.
• Take-back as an industry solution.
• Prolong life of product
• Developing on BM
Collaboration
• Partnerships are seen as the way to go and generally a good thing.
164
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:181==
• Different collaboration dynamics: With competitors who in the beginning are not
aligned on a shared mission. With partners from VC or SC or against suppliers.
With start-ups maturing innovation. With NGO’s to push the circular agenda. Or
cluster of companies comming together to solve a problem.
• Different collaboration goals: Strategic, Practical and technical.
• The nature of partnerships: Starting at one place but may involve into something
different setting a new agenda
• Collaboration to move actors in SC by pressure them as an unit.
• Manage partnerships is a field on its own. Could use 3’rd party for confidentiality
and alignment.
Challenges
• the strategy
• There are many potential pitfalls and after a long time there can still be a lack of
alignment.
• Lack of experts to manage partnerships (orchestrators). So not everyone need to
learn it. It is a field on its own.
• Lack of systematic mechanisms to orchestrate partnership.
• Uncertainty in confidentiality and the perceived barrier of it. Lack of ways to avoid it
affecting the process and being seen as a barrier.
• LAck of knowledge sharing.
• High amount of sustained resources and competences. If lack of financial surplus
or long term resources it may result in the collaboration fading out or never getting
started. Lack of opportunity to collaborate for small or medium size companies.
• Lack of standardization in the industry. e.g. materials.
Quotes:
1. ”And this can become even more complicated if you have to collaborate with com-
petitors... It could be partnerships with those who are aligned on a shared mission.
But then there are also those who are used to not sharing anything at all—let alone
collaborating—who are suddenly expected to work together instead of competing
against each other. So, there are many different dynamics in partnerships.”
2. ”I think there are a lot of potential pitfalls,... — it can take an incredibly long time,
and sometimes, even after investing a lot of time, the issue still can’t be resolved.”
3. ”I primarily work internally with internal partnerships.”
4. ”In that way, a company like (company C) have both corporate-level strategic part-
nerships as well as very practical and highly technical partnerships.”
5. ”We have a plastics strategy focused on reducing plastic use, minimizing the impact
of the materials we use, and implementing a take-back system.”
6. ”In our device development and innovation area, they launched an innovation chal-
lenge a few years ago to identify alternative plastic types or other innovative solu-
tions. From there, partnerships can be established,... DTU can also be involved,
supporting the maturation of a startup by testing on our machines, etc.”
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
165
==PAGE:182==
7. ”To scout for new emerging opportunities for innovation within the circular agenda
and material types. We can support this in various ways. On one hand, by acting as
a case company, and on the other, by entering into closer partnerships depending
on how the solution matures. Many may show interest in the beginning, and then
either the collaboration continues or partners go their separate ways. But in any
case, we also play a role in maturing some of these initiatives. That’s the nature
of partnerships—what you initially think it will be may evolve into something entirely
different.”
8. ”Take-back was, from the very beginning, based on the idea that we cannot suc-
cessfully carry out this project unless we turn it into an industry-wide solution. That
means collaborating within our own industry to bring together competitors.”
9. ”Ellen MacArthur Foundation — we are a member of their foundation. Can it be
called a partnership? Maybe not entirely in the traditional sense. But for us, it is a
kind of partnership because it is the way we think about the circular economy. We
collaborate with them on how they can develop their program in ways that create
value for us. We also use many of their resources in our training and internal ed-
ucation. So, we engage with them frequently and have an ongoing exchange of
ideas.”
10. ”What’s special about the ... collaboration is that it is actually CEO-led. This means
that our CEO sits at the table a couple of times a year alongside his peers. So, they
have brought top executives together to discuss and take ownership of the agenda
we want to drive collectively.”
11. ”It’s important for us to collaborate and that we find common solutions. Because
by working together, we can drive a larger agenda—toward e.g. against suppliers.
Around 95% or more of most companies’ total impact lies within the supply chain.
Even though we see ourselves as a large company, for many suppliers, we are just
a small and insignificant player. But when we unite as an industry, we often share
the same suppliers, and that allows us to exert greater pressure.”
12. ”It’s also worth considering whether there’s a need for more professional expertise
to manage these partnerships so that not everyone who needs to learn it. Because it
is a discipline in itself—there are even educational programs where people special-
ize in partnerships. I can say for sure that the people in our social sector, who are
masters of partnerships, have a completely different approach and expertise in ar-
eas like communication, contract drafting, resolving obstacles, delegation, legal as-
pects, and so on. So sometimes, not everyone needs to be able to do everything—
not even at the company level. It could very well be a service that companies could
outsource.”
13. ”Also because it requires a continuous resource commitment from the companies
involved in a partnership. It’s not something you just do for three months and then
it’s done. It requires the company to allocate resources over a long period of time.
So, it might make sense to outsource it—just like you would hire an accountant.”
14. (Take-back orchestration - C2) ”But he is the one with that role, and he has it because
it is a key success factor for the project to even continue. The project’s continuation
depends on that discipline succeeding. If they hadn’t managed to bring the industry
together, the project would have been shut down, because it’s not something we
can—or should—handle alone. It was a non-negotiable design criterion that this
had to be an industry-wide solution.”...”It has required blood, sweat, and tears over
166
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:183==
the years, along with countless tough negotiations—especially on the legal side.”
15. (orchestrator role) ”Sometimes we take the lead, and other times we end up going
with it.”... ”And other times, we might find ourselves in a situation where we opt out
of something because we don’t have the resources to take on a leading role. And
if no one else has the resources to take the lead either, I do worry that some things
might fall in between chairs. It’s a huge challenge to overcome and orchestrate
everything.”
16. ”There is also no legislation supporting these initiatives. It’s something one might
wish existed.” ... ”There are no real mechanisms in place to support it as such. It’s
just the hope that 2 plus 2 equals 5—or a mission-driven ambition to contribute to
change.”
17. ”It’s not necessarily just two companies coming together to solve a single issue, but
rather a cluster of companies joining forces to tackle a common problem and find a
solution.”
18. ”When something new is started, you reach out to those already working in the field.
So, learning is definitely built on top of existing knowledge. But new employees
also join, and sometimes we even get people who are experts in partnerships—so
we learn from them as well. I believe, and I hope, that this is something we will
all get better at over time. I just don’t think there are necessarily all the systemic
mechanisms in place to remove every barrier along the way.”
19. ”Imagine if there were a smooth process—so if two partners were interested, they
could just call a company, buy 30 hours of expert consultancy, and get a sharp
consultant who says, ’Here’s how we do it.’ That way, they would be much further
along instead of having to dance around it themselves.”
20. (Barrier) ”One of the major barriers can be confidentiality. How do you collaborate
with a competitor? How do you share information in a way that doesn’t harm your
own production?”... ”But how do you prevent it from being perceived as a barrier
and instead create a process where everyone can fully engage and contribute in the
best possible way to achieve the highest level of circularity—or whatever the goal
may be?”
21. (Barrier) ”Yes, and one could consider whether a third party could handle confidential
information in such cases. If we are looking at external facilitators for partnership
thinking, there could be a third party managing confidential data on behalf of both
companies. This way, they could act as an intermediary, finding common ground
without disclosing sensitive information to either company.”
22. (Barrier) ”Knowledge is often something companies are reluctant to share, but at
the same time, it is the key prerequisite for achieving truly great results.”
23. (Barrier) ”I would say it requires strength—it takes resources to make it happen.
Going back to resources, a short-term effort of 14 days with some external support
is not enough. You need sustained resources and competencies to invest in it. And
that, in itself, can be a challenge. If a company doesn’t have a financial surplus but
could significantly benefit from collaborating with others, they might never get there
simply because they lack the opportunity to do so.”...”So, there could be support
schemes to help facilitate this. It could also mean placing more focus on startups
and how they can be supported.”
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
167
==PAGE:184==
24. ”And again, we are dealing with knowledge-sharing. Companies want to protect
their own business. So, who builds these bridges, and who can actually see them?
What are the mechanisms that bring people together? There could be innovation
hubs, that step in to facilitate collaborations and create new partnerships.”
25. ”I think all of these aspects are valid. But I believe that business models are among
the hardest things to change—at least for a company like us, which already operates
within an established business model. If we were to follow the Circularity playbook
completely, we would have to change our entire business model. That’s a huge
challenge. But we are working on it.”
26. ”But our devices—most of them—are used for about a month and then discarded.
If we could extend their lifespan, it would be a huge advantage.”
27. ”In most areas, we are fierce competitors, but when it comes to environmental is-
sues, it’s the only space where we collaborate.”
28. ”If, at the EU level or even beyond, certain things could be standardized—for exam-
ple, something like Ø-pict chargers, which are fortunately becoming more aligned
than they were initially—it would be a step in the right direction. Standardization can
help remove some roadblocks, and I believe that’s the way forward.”
168
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:185==
O
Interview Company C2
Date
05.02.2025
Medium
Online (30 minutes)
Language:
Danish (Translated to English)
Participant:
Josephine Friis Jensen(Student - Danish Technical University)
Participant C2 - Head of program
Type of interview:
Informal, Semi-structured
Question focus:
1. What is your role?
2. What kind of CE strategies are you working with?
3. Do you have any partnerships or collaborations, and if so, why? What was the
reason for establishing them?
4. Does other companies in the value chain orchestrate the collaboration?
5. Have you experienced any challenges that have been taken up a significant amount
of focus?
6. Are there specific resources you have used?
7. You tell me that you have built trust. Have you used a specific strategy, or has it
developed naturally over time?
Key findings:
CE strategies
• Take-back as an industry solution with focus on reintroducing recycled plastic
Collaboration
• Stages for collaboration: Initial dialog meeting. Involve the whole VC. Create five
proof points to work on prof-of-concept (validation). Including industry partners.
Guideline in how to act in meetings (off limit topics).
• All collaboration need trust, belief in the project. Understand the actors placement
in relation to each other. Building through active listening, designing solutions for
the common good. Mindset of making collaboration work. Seeking compromise.
• Vertical value chain collaboration and Horizontal industry or sector collaboration (in-
cluding the competing factor).
• Economies of scale by collaborating with partners.
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
169
==PAGE:186==
• Orchestrating in Denmark, but individual company in another country with the role.
Solely taking the role to ensure success and not seen as part of long-term strategy.
• Geographically are the ecosystem readiness high in Denmark.
• The barrier overview could maybe be sequenced (how do you initiate? how do you
structure the discussion? How do you work towards a clear end goals?)
Challenges
• Legal concerns of bringing sector together ensuring the free market and not to have
cartel-formation.
• Uncertainties about competitors. (Guideline)
• The challenge of building trust ensuring trust in the project as well.
• Difficult of find recycling or value recovery partner with viable business case around
it and financial opportunities.
• The challenge of scaling the solution and ensuring it is fully sustainable in VC.
Quotes:
1. (Take-back) ”And to do it so efficiently that we can actually use the recycled plastic
to mold new components for our devices. That, in short, is the strategy we are
following now.”
2. ”We have many partnerships, and from day one—when we started in Denmark back
in 2020. We actually started with what we call a dialogue meeting, where we invited
all our value chain partners to participate.”
3. ”It is actually the whole value chain we have involved because the solutions like the
one we are working on her cannot and should not be developed alone. We see
this as a broad collaboration across the entire value chain, where everyone must
contribute to ensuring successful recycling.”
4. ”There are both horizontal collaborations within the value chain, as I just mentioned,
and then there are more sector-/industry-focused vertical collaborations. This is
where we are saying — we don’t see this as an area where we should compete. Of
course, we compete in the market when it comes to selling our products, but when
it comes to sustainability, we believe that collaboration is the way forward to tackle
the major challenges.”
5. ”With four companies, we entered the market together, creating a joint initiative to
solve this challenge collectively. We identified five proof points to work on, to demon-
strate that an industry-solution and collaboration are the right thing to do more than
individual companies going at it alone. And so far, we have been quite successful
in achieving this.”
6. ”And of course, with four partners sharing the costs, it also becomes more cost-
effective. That’s also a part of it - ensuring we can do this as efficiently as possible.
Our goal is to recover as much plastic as possible from patients while also doing it
in the most cost-effective way. When we first started, it was extremely expensive in
the first year.”
7. ”We can achieve economies of scale, doing it with our partners, making everything
more cohesive. That’s why we have concluded that our strategy moving forward is
centered around collaboration and it is collaboration in the wide sense — both within
170
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:187==
the value chain and even more across the sector. We need to bring more and more
companies on board, and by mid-2025, we expect to welcome four new partners in
Denmark to further expand our collaboration network.”
8. ”In Denmark, we take on an orchestrating role, but we do so in close collaboration
with our partners. We have project groups in place to ensure that it’s not just about
what we do, but rather a joint effort. Our approach is ensuring that all partners are
well represented in the communication. In [another country], there is an independent
company called... They are also supported by a consulting firm, which acts as the
host. So, it is them who handle the operations.”
9. ”I believe our strategic goal is not to be the ones organizing this—quite the opposite.
We want to be part of driving the development to ensure that the entire value chain
you have established also functions effectively within our products. And our goal is
rather to step back and have a third-party solution handle it for us. This could, for
example, be a value recovery company, if that’s the right term. We have a close
collaboration with a recycling partner.”
10. ”So, partnerships and strategic alliances are very important for making the circular
economy a reality. You can’t do it alone — or rather, you can, but it would require
very large budgets and extensive resources to make it happen. At the end of the
day, this isn’t something a single company should take on. It requires a value chain
approach or even a sector-wide approach to truly succeed.”
11. ”One of the major challenges is when bringing competing companies together. We
are naturally, extremely cautious to ensure that no issues arise regarding cartel-
formation or any other legal concerns.”
12. ”Of course, when you first enter into a collaboration with direct competitors and so
on, there is a natural caution about how things will unfold.”
13. GUIDELINES: ”We have actually built a high level of trust, allowing us to have good
discussions on these matters. However, when it comes to anything related to mar-
keted products, competition in the market, and pricing, we do not discuss these top-
ics at all. We have clear guidelines in place for every meeting, ensuring that these
subjects are off-limits. Meeting agendas are set, and minutes are taken. Naturally,
there are important considerations when collaborating with direct competitors.”
14. ECOSYSTEM: ”Getting a recycling partner up and running in this field, which is
a relatively new area, has also been a challenge. Again, when it comes to value
recovery companies—how many are there, and can they build a viable business
case around this? That’s the reality of business—if there isn’t a strong business
case, if they don’t see a financial opportunity or a strategic investment, it won’t be
sustainable in the long run. That’s why it has been crucial for us to establish a close
and strategic partnership.”
15. TRUST: ”How do you build trust? That’s a big and important question. There hasn’t
necessarily been a strict strategy behind it, if I may put it that way, but there have
been some guidelines for what we have done. Of course, we have also had legal
discussions, but always with the mindset that it’s about making the collaboration
work rather than creating conflict, so the focus has been on finding solutions and
compromises. That might be one way to build trust—by always approaching situ-
ations with openness and a willingness to find common ground. We also prioritize
transparency, and I believe that’s another key factor in building trust. We don’t have
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
171
==PAGE:188==
a specific written strategy for this. But it’s clear that when you are transparent in
your approach — not just about what is going well, but also about the challenges
and problems — then you also build trust. We have made a great effort in being as
transparent as possible, sharing as much as we can to create a trust-based collab-
oration. And based on both our own experience and the feedback we receive from
our partners in Denmark, we believe that this trust is there. All collaborations begin
with understanding where you stand in relation to each other. Can you truly trust
one another? Can you rely on the fact that what we do is the right thing? These are
essential questions that need to be addressed from the start.”
16. ”When we start in [Another country], we are beginning from a different place than in
Denmark. In Denmark, we have a very mature collaboration, whereas in [Country],
we are in the process of building trust—through collaboration, active listening, and
designing solutions for the common good.”
17. TRUST: ”How do you create a strategic relationship in what you do, especially if
one doesn’t already exist? It’s not something you get instantly. It’s something you
build over time, and it’s something you earn rather than receive immediately. I also
believe that actions speak louder than words — though what you say is, of course,
important. But ultimately, it is through actions that you gradually build more trust
and time into the relationship.”
18. ”Well, there are some things, and I would say they come in different orders.”
19. COMMITMENT: ”Do you have the right commitment? That is something we have
taken action on by going out and conducting a test—a form of due diligence — to
see if we share the same visions. So, it is necessary to have a commitment from
companies to move forward”
20. MANAGEMENT: ”You need to have your top management with you. You must an-
chor what you do in top management - so that is where we start.”
21. ORCHESTRATE: ”Then there is something about taking an approach. How do we
organize ourselves, how do we orchestrate this? It’s also important that you orches-
trate it in a good way, and It’s something about project management, and how you
have steering groups, so that you also get the management involved in what you
do.”
22. BM: ”There’s something about the business model, the model you’re building. What
kind of model are you building? - That takes and includes the companies, so you
do the right thing for the industry, so That’s also part of it, That’s important, ”
23. ECONOMIC: ”Then there is economics. We are all companies that have to ask
about budget. So when you have economics, you also have to ask about data - you
have to have data to support what you are asking about in the economics.”
24. TRUST: ”We’ve talked about trust. It’s incredibly important to build it, without it,
everything called partnerships and collaborations fall to the ground.”
25. POWER STRUCTURE: ”I think we need to be very mindful of power structures...If
you have power, you should always exercise it with humility—that’s how I see it, at
least. But sometimes you have to dose it of course to get the right setup. You don’t
just have to bend over backwards. You also have to say this is the right thing to do
based on our experience. You should talk with data, and be convincing with data.”
172
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:189==
26. SCALE: ”That’s the challenge we’re facing—how do you scale? It’s not an art to
run a small pilot project in one or two cities. The real challenge is scaling it into
something with a significant impact—something that becomes an integrated part of
the entire value chain. That’s what we are working on.”
27. ECOSYSTEM: ”Scandinavia consists of countries where the sustainability agenda
is thriving or well-established. We have learned this through launching in seven
different countries, giving us a sense of readiness across different markets. We are
present in ...to test where companies and industries are prepared to embrace these
initiatives.”
28. INNOVATION: ”What we do is highly innovative, and innovation is crucial in every-
thing we do because, essentially, we are creating something new.”
29. ECOSYSTEM: ”Denmark is considered a hotspot and it is something we’ve also
heard from our international colleagues and competitors. That’s one of the reasons
why Denmark is an excellent place to run pilot projects. It also ties into ecosystem
readiness, which we also are testing and assessing on - Where do we see a maturity
in the market”
30. (barrier overview) ”I think it covers a broad scope, and perhaps it can also be se-
quenced.I try to consider: How do you initiate it? How do you structure the discus-
sion? How do you work towards a clear end goal in what you are doing?”
31. ”We are also in a scaling phase. How do we standardize this? It’s one thing to do
it in Denmark, but how can we scale this further? You are actually showing many
of the key elements needed for a systemic approach to scaling, and that’s exactly
what we are working on now. How do we develop what we call an operating model.”
32. ”That is actually something we are discussing right now. As I mentioned earlier,
our goal is not to be the ones handling this in 5 or 10 years. We are not waste
management handlers, and that is not the role we aim to take on.”
33. ”What we’re discussing isn’t actually about creating a holding company, but rather
whether we should establish a separate legal entity to handle this. In a way, it’s
similar to what Renault has done in relation to a holding company, I believe. We are
creating some kind of defined corporate structure, where all of this will actually be
housed.”
34. ”There are many challenges. This is expensive to do, it is difficult to enter the market
and there are many regulatory barriers for bringing circular economy solutions to the
market.”
35. ”No one has really challenged industry collaboration, aside from the fact that it
comes with high complexity. And there is a complexity to it. This is the next thing
we need to address...”
36. ”Right now this is what we orchestrate, we are driving innovation, developing busi-
ness models, building commitment and trust, and organize ourselves around these
efforts. We are also collecting and utilizing data, so we talk with data and so on.
This is actually what we orchestrate right now, and we do it in a period to drive this
to get things moving. However, to make it sustainable in the long run, there needs
to be a separate structure where these activities can be.”
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
173
==PAGE:190==
P
Phase 5: Interview quotes
Company CE strategy 
Implementation step
Short / Long term
Collaboration
Orchestrator 
Governmental
Customer
Allignment 
Validation 
Geographic
Sector solution
Power
Management
A 
Working on take-back system.
Readiness are the first step, general organizationally, Strategy, Knowledge and training of organization. Then work 
with the product and the network development. Develop through projects. Has to let it mature bit by bit.
Short- and long-term agenda. Short-term is 
prof of concept (pilot project). Long-term is the
sector solution.
Take-back program. With a combination of 
many partners to solve it (Data, transport, 
recycler and recipient of the plastic). This has 
to bee a network solution including
many partners in many countries.
Collaboration with an orchestrator with a 
portfolio of companies. Simplify the contact, 
resource used and collaboration. Brings 
different capabilities: Data, Design
feedback to recycling and so on. To go into a 
collaboration with some who can make it at 
scale. Orchestrator: Is a company with value 
proposition of orchestrating.
Convener in ISO and IEC to try update the 
standards to minimize the blocks they create
Understand customers and their needs when 
creating take-back. How are they handling the 
emballage from the products. Understand 
their waste management
needs. How accessible is it? How can we 
change this with a partner
Assessment and alignment of capabilities. 
Understand what capabilities there are in the 
company and what a partner should bring. e.g. 
as a retailer the company
has direct customer contact with the users 
and can create collection point at EOL in a 
take-back program. However the company 
needs a partner for (data, transport,
recycling, etc.).
Validation of competences. In collaboration 
there is a testing phase of the different 
partners. What are there competences. The 
work in screening a new partner and
understand what the solution is. Tried many 
recycling partner who were lacking the full 
solution and only able to deliver a small part of
the solution.
Take-back geographically. A lot of test of 
different setups in different countries to 
develop the right solution and network. Wast 
collection and treatment is a geo-
graphically local agenda up to a certain radius
The solution has to be where the end-of-life 
product is collected
Lack of space for all companies to develop 
their own solution. Not room for all to make 
individual take-back systems. e.g. lack of 
space at collection point at the
customer.
A 
 ”So we shouldn’t be choosing 
bioplastics—something biodegradable—while 
also running a recycling program separately. 
Trying to recycle plastic in that setup would
not be smart. So, we have done some 
preliminary work to define a design strategy— 
this is what we are pursuing, and these 
elements need to align. Then there are
certain agendas we can move forward on 
more quickly.” (A. Q. 25)
Another thing we have is a take-back program. 
A partnership is also involved here, and in 
reality, it requires a whole network of 
collaborators to make it successful. It
involves data, transportation, a recycler, and 
ultimately also a buyer of the plastic.”... ”At 
least the most challenging case, because it is 
something fundamentally new.”...
”The incentive here is that there are probably 
others who are better at this than us. We are 
not essentially a waste management 
company.” (A. Q. 10.)
”We have a collaboration with some who act 
as orchestrator for the rest. So, I try to make it 
a bit easier, in a way, for us to manage the 
contract or partnerships. Then
we have someone with the right incentives to 
help us drive it forward. But again, there are 
some interfaces where we haven’t fully 
outsourced it.” (A. Q. 11.)
We are trying to create some work on 
stnadards to make it easier... There are a lot of 
small barriers that just make the process 
frustrating and more resource-intensive... I
work within ISO and IEC, which are 
international standardization bodies. I’ve 
acted as a convener, which is somewhat like a
project manager, to establish a working
group and promote the initiative... It can be a 
long and tough process.” (A. Q. 20)
A 
”They (orchestrator) are some who wants to 
live on this solution... they want to make 
recycling a success... i believe it is a company 
not like a extended producer
responsibility group.” (A. Q. 14.)
A 
I think, for example, this challenge is really a 
network solution. It involves an incredible 
number of partners across countries. So, there
is probably a strong incentive to
find someone who can drive scale and develop
expertise in this area.” (A. Q. 17)
A 
 ”I think it has actually been fairly smooth. It’s 
also a bit like—if you compare it to going at it 
alone. I believe I know and have heard about 
many of the partners that
others have approached individually. But I 
think that entering into a collaboration with 
someone who can, once again, drive it at 
scale makes it relatively easy.” (pro-
cess with orchestrator) (A. Q. 20)
B
Working on the baseline as is. Readiness 
assessment.
 ”There is also a lot of work in figuring out how we equip people with the knowledge they need about this." (B. Q. 3)
”There are definitely a lot of stakeholders 
when it comes to sustainability. And there are 
many things that need to align within a busy 
business. So it takes time.” (B. Q. 19 )
”We actually have a pretty good dialogue with 
our resellers and end users. So if they say, 
‘Hey, does it make sense that when you send it
this way, we end up throwing
this part out anyway? Should this even be 
included, or could we do something 
differently?’—then we take that into account. 
It mostly comes from reseller and
end-user input, not so much from industry 
input.” (B. Q. 17)
Because who would we scale to? It would 
have to be other companies. That’s not 
necessarily a good business case for us.” (B Q.
22)
”But it could also be that just by starting the 
conversation about sustainability, the power 
balance in sustainability becomes 
asymmetric. Even if it’s a larger supplier,
if they are not focusing on it to the same 
extent, then simply by us asking, they may not 
have the resources to address it.” (B. Q. 21)
B
 ”Right now, we are primarily working with 
quantification, meaning life cycle analyses of 
our products, so that we have some form of 
baseline and that is our starting point
because — where should we take action? We 
don’t know. We don’t really know what it looks 
like. Of course, we have assumptions about 
how things are, but until
we have actual numbers to back it up, it 
quickly becomes vague.” (B. Q. 4)
”These are just two Danish examples, but there are more, where six seems to be the right number. It’s a manageable
amount of focus areas that initiatives can
be linked to while still keeping everyone engaged. Everyone has some reference point—something about materials, 
something about how we manufacture things,
and something about how we ship and package products.” (B Q. 6)
”There will be more of that (collaborations) at 
a later stage. Right now, we have some 
sparring networks. In a way, we are innovating 
together. And in my experience,
many people face the same challenges. If 
you’re kind, offer a cup of coffee, and ask 
insightful questions, most people are willing to
help, I think.” (B. Q. 7)
”Sure, we can crunch some numbers 
ourselves, but there’s a lot of value in bringing 
in third parties. That way, we can use the data 
more actively and say—it’s not just
something we made up.” (B. Q. 8)
”What’s special about the ... collaboration is 
that it is actually CEO-led. This means that our
CEO sits at the table a couple of times a year 
alongside his peers. So, they
have brought top executives together to 
discuss and take ownership of the agenda we 
want to drive collectively.” (C1 Q. 10)
B
”Which conceptual framework should we align
with? There is something called ecodesign, 
and there is something called circular 
economy. There is a significant over-
lap between the two. But what we call things 
also matters in terms of how we communicate
and operationalize them. I think we will end up
using the circular economy
framework here—but more to emphasize that 
this is a choice we need to make.” (B. Q. 5)
 ”Take-back has mostly been at a service level. If a product breaks, we, of course, deliver a new one. We have never 
implemented take-back from a sustainability point
of view. But that is something very exciting and relatively high on our to-do list.” (B. Q. 12)
Pilot partners. In Denmark—or in the Nordics, 
since we are based here—I think it’s relatively 
easy for us. We already have a few lined up 
where there is potential.” ”It
has actually gone both ways. There have also 
been people who have reached out to us and 
said, ’We have an idea—couldn’t we do this?’” 
(B Q. 16)
”It’s important for us to collaborate and that 
we find common solutions. Because by 
working together, we can drive a larger 
agenda—toward e.g. against suppliers.
Around 95% or more of most companies’ total 
impact lies within the supply chain. Even 
though we see ourselves as a large company, 
for many suppliers, we are just
a small and insignificant player. But when we 
unite as an industry, we often share the same 
suppliers, and that allows us to exert greater 
pressure.”(C1 Q. 11)
B
 ”And in being a software-as-a-service 
company, there is inherently some circular 
potential—at least in theory—that we are not 
yet leveraging. That misalignment of
vision might mean that we need to gain more 
clarity on the fact that this potential is worth 
exploring.” (B. Q. 15)
”So maybe we end up with six focus areas—we don’t know yet. But it’s interesting how that seems to be a 
manageable number for most companies.” (B. Q. 24)
B
”We don’t really have any direct 
involvement—we are, in a way, disconnected 
from our material flows at both ends. We don’t 
deal with scrap or production because we
order a lot of components from our suppliers, 
send them out and then we no longer have any 
contact with them.” (B. Q. 23)
C1
"We have a plastics strategy focused on 
reducing plastic use, minimizing the impact of 
the materials we use, and implementing a 
take-back system" (C. Q. 5)
"When something new is started, you reach out to those already working in the field. So, learning is definitely built on 
top of existing knowledge. But new employees
also join, and sometimes we even get people who are experts in partnerships—so we learn from them as well. I 
believe, and I hope, that this is something we will
all get better at over time. I just don’t think there are necessarily all the systemic mechanisms in place to remove 
every barrier along the way." (C1 Q. 18)
"And this can become even more complicated
if you have to collaborate with competitors... It
could be partnerships with those who are 
aligned on a shared mission.
But then there are also those who are used to 
not sharing anything at all—let alone 
collaborating—who are suddenly expected to 
work together instead of competing
against each other. So, there are many 
different dynamics in partnerships.” (C1. Q. 1)
It’s also worth considering whether there’s a 
need for more professional expertise to 
manage these partnerships so that not 
everyone who needs to learn it. Because it
is a discipline in itself—there are even 
educational programs where people 
specialize in partnerships. I can say for sure 
that the people in our social sector, who are
masters of partnerships, have a completely 
different approach and expertise in areas like 
communication, contract drafting, resolving 
obstacles, delegation, legal as-
pects, and so on. So sometimes, not everyone 
needs to be able to do everything not even at 
the company level. It could very well be a 
service that companies could
outsource.” (C1 Q. 12)
"—we are a member of their foundation. Can it 
be called a partnership? Maybe not entirely in 
the traditional sense. But for us, it is a kind of
partnership because it is the way we think 
about the circular economy. We collaborate 
with them on how they can develop their 
program in ways that create value for
us. We also use many of their resources in our 
training and internal education. So, we engage 
with them frequently and have an ongoing 
exchange of ideas.” (C1 Q. 9)
"I think there are a lot of potential pitfalls,... — 
it can take an incredibly long time, and 
sometimes, even after investing a lot of time, 
the issue still can’t be resolved." (C1 Q. 2)
”In most areas, we are fierce competitors, but 
when it comes to environmental issues, it’s 
the only space where we collaborate.” (C1. Q. 
27)
"In our device development and innovation 
area, they launched an innovation challenge a 
few years ago to identify alternative plastic 
types or other innovative solutions. From 
there, partnerships can be established,... DTU 
can also be involved, supporting the 
maturation of a startup by testing on our 
machines, etc." (C1. Q. 6) 
C1
"Take-back was, from the very beginning, 
based on the idea that we cannot successfully 
carry out this project unless we turn it into an 
industry-wide solution. That
means collaborating within our own industry 
to bring together competitors" (C1 Q. 8)
”Imagine if there were a smooth process—so if two partners were interested, they could just call a company, buy 30 
hours of expert consultancy, and get a sharp
consultant who says, ’Here’s how we do it.’ That way, they would be much further along instead of having to dance 
around it themselves.” (C1 Q. 19)
"In that way, a company like (company C) 
have both corporate-level strategic 
partnerships as well as very practical and 
highly technical partnerships." (C1 Q. 4)
”Also because it requires a continuous 
resource commitment from the companies 
involved in a partnership. It’s not something 
you just do for three months and then
it’s done. It requires the company to allocate 
resources over a long period of time. So, it 
might make sense to outsource it—just like 
you would hire an accountant.” (C1. Q. 13)
”There is also no legislation supporting these 
initiatives. It’s something one might wish 
existed.” ... ”There are no real mechanisms in 
place to support it as such. It’s
just the hope that 2 plus 2 equals 5—or a 
mission-driven ambition to contribute to 
change.” (C1 Q. 16)
Yes, and one could consider whether a third 
party could handle confidential information in 
such cases. If we are looking at external 
facilitators for partnership
thinking, there could be a third party managing
confidential data on behalf of both companies.
This way, they could act as an intermediary, 
finding common ground
without disclosing sensitive information to 
either company.” (C1 Q. 22)
C1
”But our devices—most of them—are used for 
about a month and then discarded. If we could 
extend their lifespan, it would be a huge 
advantage.” (C1 Q. 26)
To scout for new emerging opportunities for 
innovation within the circular agenda and 
material types. We can support this in various 
ways. On one hand, by acting as
a case company, and on the other, by entering 
into closer partnerships depending on how the 
solution matures. Many may show interest in 
the beginning, and then
either the collaboration continues or partners 
go their separate ways. But in any case, we 
also play a role in maturing some of these 
initiatives. That’s the nature
of partnerships—what you initially think it will 
be may evolve into something entirely 
different.” (C1 Q. 7)
Take-back orchestration - C2) ”But he is the 
one with that role, and he has it because it is a 
key success factor for the project to even 
continue. The project’s continuation
depends on that discipline succeeding. If they 
hadn’t managed to bring the industry together,
the project would have been shut down, 
because it’s not something we
can—or should—handle alone. It was a non-
negotiable design criterion that this had to be 
an industry-wide solution.”...”It has required 
blood, sweat, and tears over
the years, along with countless tough 
negotiations—especially on the legal side.” 
(C1 Q. 14)
If, at the EU level or even beyond, certain 
things could be standardized—for example, 
something like Ø-pict chargers, which are 
fortunately becoming more aligned
than they were initially—it would be a step in 
the right direction. Standardization can help 
remove some roadblocks, and I believe that’s 
the way forward.” (C1 Q. 28)
C1
I think all of these aspects are valid. But I 
believe that business models are among the 
hardest things to change—at least for a large 
‘supertanker’ like us, which already
operates within an established business 
model. If we were to follow the Circularity 
playbook completely, we would have to 
change our entire business model. That’s a
huge challenge. But we are working on it.” (C1.
Q. 25)
In our device development and innovation 
area, they launched an innovation challenge a 
few years ago to identify alternative plastic 
types or other innovative solu-
tions. From there, partnerships can be 
established,... DTU can also be involved, 
supporting the maturation of a startup by 
testing on our machines, etc.” ... (C1 Q. 6)
”Sometimes we take the lead, and other times
we end up going with it.”... ”And other times, 
we might find ourselves in a situation where 
we opt out
of something because we don’t have the 
resources to take on a leading role. And if no 
one else has the resources to take the lead 
either, I do worry that some things
might fall in between chairs. It’s a huge 
challenge to overcome and orchestrate 
everything.” (C1 Q.15.)
C1
And again, we are dealing with knowledge-
sharing. Companies want to protect their own 
business. So, who builds these bridges, and 
who can actually see them?
What are the mechanisms that bring people 
together? There could be innovation hubs, that
step in to facilitate collaborations and create 
new partnerships.” (C1 Q. 24)
C2
(Take-back) ”And to do it so efficiently that we 
can actually use the recycled plastic to mold 
new components for our devices. That, in 
short, is the strategy we are
following now.” (C2 Q. 1)
We have many partnerships, and from day one—when we started in Denmark back in 2020. We actually started with 
what we call a dialogue meeting, where we invited
all our value chain partners to participate.” (C2 Q. 2)
”And of course, with four partners sharing the 
costs, it also becomes more cost-effective. 
That’s also a part of it - ensuring we can do this
as efficiently as possible.
Our goal is to recover as much plastic as 
possible from patients while also doing it in 
the most cost-effective way. When we first 
started, it was extremely expensive in
the first year.” (C2. Q6.)
It is actually the whole value chain we have 
involved because the solutions like the one we
are working on her cannot and should not be 
developed alone. We see
this as a broad collaboration across the entire 
value chain, where everyone must contribute 
to ensuring successful recycling.”(C2. Q. 3)
”In Denmark, we take on an orchestrating role,
but we do so in close collaboration with our 
partners. We have project groups in place to 
ensure that it’s not just about
what we do, but rather a joint effort. Our 
approach is ensuring that all partners are well 
represented in the communication. In 
[another country], there is an independent
company called... They are also supported by 
a consulting firm, which acts as the host. So, it
is them who handle the operations.”(C2 Q. 8)
”With four companies, we entered the market 
together, creating a joint initiative to solve this
challenge collectively. We identified five proof 
points to work on, to demon-
strate that an industry-solution and 
collaboration are the right thing to do more 
than individual companies going at it alone. 
And so far, we have been quite successful
in achieving this.” (C2 Q. 5)
”Scandinavia consists of countries where the 
sustainability agenda is thriving or well-
established. We have learned this through 
launching in seven
different countries, giving us a sense of 
readiness across different markets. We are 
present in ...to test where companies and 
industries are prepared to embrace these
initiatives.” (C2. Q. 27)
There are both horizontal collaborations within
the value chain, as I just mentioned, and then 
there are more sector-/industry-focused 
vertical collaborations. This is
where we are saying — we don’t see this as an 
area where we should compete. Of course, we
compete in the market when it comes to 
selling our products, but when
it comes to sustainability, we believe that 
collaboration is the way forward to tackle the 
major challenges.” (C2. Q4)
POWER STRUCTURE: ”I think we need to be 
very mindful of power structures. We are 
strong in Denmark because our headquarters 
is here, which naturally gives us
influence. But that power must be managed 
with humility.If you have power, you should 
always exercise it with humility—that’s how I 
see it, at least. But sometimes
you have to dose it of course to get the right 
setup. You don’t just have to bend over 
backwards. You also have to say this is the 
right thing to do based on our
experience. You should talk with data, and be 
convincing with data.” (C2 Q. 25)
Figure P.1: Interview quotes structure
Google sheet: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/14erLfoDQgk67-_He9D1hAcuEe_NHs5PT/
edit?usp=drive_link&ouid=102889409715429080697&rtpof=true&sd=true
It is recommended to view the file in Microsoft Excel to have the same formation as in the
shown figure fig. P.1
174
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
==PAGE:191==
Q
Phase 5: Barrier theme cards
This is the full collection of barrier theme cards, with the front page being the theme card,
followed by the more detailed pages of barriers. If there is a red word, it describes a
connection to another theme. This connection is made based on the description and
context of the barrier from the collection phase.
30
6
Exchange
Missing interface for 
data exchange
Asymmetric 
information sharing
Risk of sharing core 
knowledge and 
intellectual property
Lack of incitement 
for Collaboration for 
data sharing 
Challenge in 
collecting data from 
sub supplier
Lack of knowledge 
sharing
Governance
Lack of framework 
for data gathering 
and sharing
Lack of incitement to 
raise transparency
GDPR - Limited 
consumer data 
Utilization
Missing data sharing 
structure
Challenge in 
identifying relevant 
data 
Lack of capabilities 
to utilize others’ data
Missing information 
to decisionmakers
Information 
disruption
Lack of data system, 
management, 
security and 
capacity 
Lack of knowledge 
on data management 
and I4.0
Lack of 
understanding value  
Challenge in data 
storage placement
Visibility
Lack of transparency 
beyond 1st, 2nd tier 
in VC
Imbalanced 
transparency 
upstream/downstrea
m
Lack of transparency 
beyond life cycle 
stages
Inward focus in data 
collection
Responsibility
Challenge in data 
reporting 
responsibility
Lack of data affect 
allocation of 
responsibility 
Traceability
Lack of product 
traceability
Lack of technology 
to support data 
collection and 
sharing
Poor product 
traceability
Standards
Standard system for 
performance 
assessment
Parameters to 
evaluate circularity
Data sharing 
protocols and global 
standards
Verification 
mechanism for data
Standardized 
circularity indicators
Setting standards 
between 
stakeholders with 
different objectives
How to measure 
sustainability
DATA – THEME CARD
(a) Front page:
The big circle describes the
number of barriers collected in the literature.
The small circle describes barriers collected
from interviews.
Data - Standards 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018, 
Luthra et al., 2022,  
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2022, 
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, 
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of a pre-defined standard system for performance 
assessment. 
Standard system for 
performance 
assessment
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of quantitative and qualitative parameters to evaluate 
circularity.
Parameters to evaluate 
circularity
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of global standards and sharing data protocols leading to 
weak performance measurements system.
Data sharing protocols 
and global standards
Gebhardt et al., 2023
Lack of verification mechanism for reliability of self-declared data 
with no standards. (Trust)
Verification mechanism 
for data
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of standardized circularity indicators: 
Threat that expected environmental benefit will not be realized 
after modifications in the stakeholder operations (Serna-Guerrero 
et al., 2022)
Standardized circularity 
indicators
Havinga et al., 2023, 
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Gebhardt et al., 2022,
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of setting standards between stakeholders with different 
objectives or practices.
The challenge that stakeholders monitor performance in different 
contexts creating complexity in developing collaboration. (Luthra 
et al., 2022). Different metrics and indicators makes it difficult to 
communicate in-between companies. (Chari et al., 2022)
Setting standards 
between stakeholders 
with different objectives
Company A
Company B
Challenge in how to measure sustainability and assess initiatives.
“…how do you measure sustainability? What initiatives gives 
most environment for the money?“ - A
"We measure it in different ways. We measure one thing in our 
LCA and another in our sustainability reporting, there We need to 
talk more about material quantities. What kind of impact do we 
want to achieve in relation to the cost? There are some really 
interesting trade-offs in this.“(B. Q.13)
How to measure 
sustainability
(b) Page 2: Barrier collection at lowest level of
detail
Figure Q.1: Theme card and barriers
Mapping value chain collaboration opportunities for circular economy transition
175
==PAGE:192==
30
6
Exchange
Missing interface for 
data exchange
Asymmetric 
information sharing
Risk of sharing core 
knowledge and 
intellectual property
Lack of incitement 
for Collaboration for 
data sharing 
Challenge in 
collecting data from 
sub supplier
Lack of knowledge 
sharing
Governance
Lack of framework 
for data gathering 
and sharing
Lack of incitement to 
raise transparency
GDPR - Limited 
consumer data 
Utilization
Missing data sharing 
structure
Challenge in 
identifying relevant 
data 
Lack of capabilities 
to utilize others’ data
Missing information 
to decisionmakers
Information 
disruption
Lack of data system, 
management, 
security and 
capacity 
Lack of knowledge 
on data management 
and I4.0
Lack of 
understanding value  
Challenge in data 
storage placement
Visibility
Lack of transparency 
beyond 1st, 2nd tier 
in VC
Imbalanced 
transparency 
upstream/downstrea
m
Lack of transparency 
beyond life cycle 
stages
Inward focus in data 
collection
Responsibility
Challenge in data 
reporting 
responsibility
Lack of data affect 
allocation of 
responsibility 
Traceability
Lack of product 
traceability
Lack of technology 
to support data 
collection and 
sharing
Poor product 
traceability
Standards
Standard system for 
performance 
assessment
Parameters to 
evaluate circularity
Data sharing 
protocols and global 
standards
Verification 
mechanism for data
Standardized 
circularity indicators
Setting standards 
between 
stakeholders with 
different objectives
How to measure 
sustainability
DATA – THEME CARD
==PAGE:193==
Data - Standards 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018, 
Luthra et al., 2022,  
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2022, 
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, 
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of a pre-defined standard system for performance 
assessment. 
Standard system for 
performance 
assessment
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of quantitative and qualitative parameters to evaluate 
circularity.
Parameters to evaluate 
circularity
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of global standards and sharing data protocols leading to 
weak performance measurements system.
Data sharing protocols 
and global standards
Gebhardt et al., 2023
Lack of verification mechanism for reliability of self-declared data 
with no standards. (Trust)
Verification mechanism 
for data
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of standardized circularity indicators: 
Threat that expected environmental benefit will not be realized 
after modifications in the stakeholder operations (Serna-Guerrero 
et al., 2022)
Standardized circularity 
indicators
Havinga et al., 2023, 
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Gebhardt et al., 2022,
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of setting standards between stakeholders with different 
objectives or practices.
The challenge that stakeholders monitor performance in different 
contexts creating complexity in developing collaboration. (Luthra 
et al., 2022). Different metrics and indicators makes it difficult to 
communicate in-between companies. (Chari et al., 2022)
Setting standards 
between stakeholders 
with different objectives
Company A
Company B
Challenge in how to measure sustainability and assess initiatives.
“…how do you measure sustainability? What initiatives gives 
most environment for the money?“ - A
"We measure it in different ways. We measure one thing in our 
LCA and another in our sustainability reporting, there We need to 
talk more about material quantities. What kind of impact do we 
want to achieve in relation to the cost? There are some really 
interesting trade-offs in this.“(B. Q.13)
How to measure 
sustainability
==PAGE:194==
Traceability
Kazancoglu et al., 2020,
Kazancoglu et al., 2022
Lack of material or product traceability where it comes from, quality, 
monitoring life cycle and trust of shared information. Hampering 
performance assessment.
(Trust)
Lack of product 
traceability
Gebhardt et al., 2022, 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Lack of appropriate technologies to support data gathering, 
aggregation, and exchange for traceability across the whole SC
“Data systems are often still focused on one company or the 
exchange between two stakeholders. I don't see yet how we can 
implement systems that enable traceability across an entire supply 
chain.”–Delphi comment. (Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Lack of technology to 
support data collection 
and sharing
Agarwal et al., 2022
Poor product traceability. Track performance. Maintenance and 
rejection.
Poor product 
traceability
Responsibility
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Many perspectives on who is responsible for certain sustainability 
goals and data reporting requirements. It is difficult to tell what 
stakeholders in VC should report on.
Challenge in data 
reporting 
responsibility
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of comprehensive data, knowledge and information will affect 
allocation of responsibilities between suppliers (relationship).
Lack of data affect 
allocation of 
responsibility 
Governance
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Lack of framework for incentivization for data gathering and sharing.
Now it is permissioned access, through commercial contracts and 
incentives, (Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Lack of framework for 
data gathering and 
sharing
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of commitment from the private sector to raise transparency 
and go beyond regulations and disclosure requirements.
Lack of incitement to 
raise transparency
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
GDPR affects handling of data. Consumer behavior, product and 
system lifetime data can only be collected in limited fashion.
GDPR - Limited 
consumer data 
==PAGE:195==
Visibility
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Lack of visibility to be transparent or report beyond 1st, 2nd tier in 
value chain.
“Sustainability assessment stops once we ship the raw cobalt 
somewhere else, we do not have visibility on the broader 
sustainability of the product it is going to be used for.”–
MiningCo1”(Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Lack of transparency 
beyond 1st, 2nd tier in 
VC
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Lack of data sharing both upstream and downstream. Imbalanced 
transparency where is shared downstream to actors (e.g. OEM) but 
not upstream. 
Imbalanced 
transparency 
upstream/downstream
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Data from actors in the VC does not reach beyond the immediate 
stages of the life cycle. (Beyond direct business partners)
Lack of transparency 
beyond life cycle 
stages
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2022
Inward focus instead of outward focus where data considered 
missing in some parts of the VC are collected in other parts of the VC 
for inward focus - each actor acts as an independent actor. 
Inward focus in data 
collection
==PAGE:196==
Utilization
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Lack of data sharing structure. 
Companies lack protocol to transform data collected by other actors 
into a usable format. Different standards, systems, formats and 
structure makes it labor, time and financial expensive to share data. 
(Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022)
Missing data sharing 
structure
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Challenge to identify which of the large amounts of data is relevant 
for CE.
Challenge in 
identifying relevant 
data 
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of capabilities on how to utilize others’ data to promote CE. 
Difficulties in utilizing data collected by other actors. Companies 
understand the advantage of using data but only regarding their own 
stage in the VC.
Lack of capabilities to 
utilize others’ data
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Information from SC are not available to decisionmakers or provided 
in a timely way ( Accurate information regarding materials/tracking in 
SC towards recycling)
Missing information to 
decisionmakers
Agarwal et al., 2022
Information disruptions among the SC members due to multiple 
channels.
Information disruption
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of information systems and data management together with 
security and the capacity of data storage systems.
Lack of data system, 
management, security 
and capacity 
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of knowledge and understanding about data management and 
I4.0
Lack of knowledge on 
data management and 
I4.0
Company A
Takes time before the value of collected data is realized in 
organization.
Making other the departments understand the value of collected data 
and measuring on the improvement. Took years before the value 
was understood by other places in organization.- A
Lack of understanding 
value  
Company A
Not always the most usable placement data is stored.
“Data is not always placed where you would like it as sustainability 
engineer. “ - A
Challenge in data 
storage placement
==PAGE:197==
Exchange
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Lack of interfaces for data exchange between supply chain 
manufactures and refinement companies.
Missing interface for 
data exchange
De Lima and Seuring, 2023, 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018,
Asymmetric communication and information sharing 
Hampers integration of supplier (De Lima and Seuring, 2023, ) 
and makes information not available to decisionmakers in a 
timely way. (Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018,)
Asymmetric information 
sharing
Havinga et al., 2023
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Khan and Ali, 2022
Lack of openness towards sharing core knowledge and 
intellectual property - perceived as a risk. 
Fear of oversharing resulting in limitation of accessibility, data 
discrepancies and overly strict specifications and rules. (Serna-
Guerrero et al., 2022) (Trust)
Risk of sharing core 
knowledge and 
intellectual property
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of incitement to collaborate solely for data sharing purpose. 
Company would unlikely collaborate solely for data sharing 
purpose. Companies see data as a resource expecting 
compensation if other actors use it. (Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022)
Lack of incitement for 
Collaboration for data 
sharing 
Company A
Company B
Challenge in collecting data from sub supplier.
”There will be data you don’t have access to. It could be a 
process running at a subcontractor. In such cases, you rely on 
communicating why you are asking these questions—and that it’s 
not as intimidating as they might think. We also face challenges 
in this regard.” (A. Q. 8.)
"Data, for sure. I just mentioned different metrics for 
sustainability. But there’s also something more practical, like 
getting suppliers to provide data on how they manufacture the 
things we order from them.” (B. Q. 14) 
Challenge in collecting 
data from sub supplier
Company C
Lack of knowledge sharing 
”Knowledge is often something companies are reluctant to share, 
but at the same time, it is the key prerequisite for achieving truly 
great results.” (C1. Q. 23)
Lack of knowledge 
sharing
==PAGE:198==
 Needing Trust  .
Lack of trust needed for transparency
Lack of trust needed for collaboration
 Having Trust  .
Lack of having trust in value chain
Lack of having trust in the sectors
 Developing Trust .
Lack of a way to develop trust between companies
4
2
TRUST – THEME CARD
==PAGE:199==
Trust 
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of trust for transparency. (data)
Trust  is needed to overcome the problems associated with moving 
by-product or waste, such as variation in quality, cost and time. 
(Chari et al., 2022)
Trust in the right data is a big issue in the battery industry. 
(Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Lack of trust needed 
for transparency
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Kazancoglu et al., 2020
Kazancoglu et al., 2022
Lack of trust in other actors or partners in value chain.
The partnerships are too young so assessments require the 
involvement of 3’rd parties. (Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Lack of having trust in 
value chain
Luthra et al., 2022
Lack of trust to other sectors. 
The perceived trust varies from organization to organization and 
thus limits collaboration and development of shared goals (Luthra et 
al., 2022)
Lack of having trust in 
sectors
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Lack of natural way to build trust between companies that don’t 
conduct business with each other.
Lack of developing 
trust 
Company A
Company C
Trust are essential to have build 
”We’ve talked about trust. It’s incredibly important to build it, without 
it, everything called partnerships and collaborations fall to the 
ground.”(C Q. 24)
Lack of trust needed 
for collaboration
==PAGE:200==
17
Industry
Complicated 
ecosystem
Uncertainties with 
secondary resources
Other companies take-
back
Lack of infrastructure 
and suppliers
Design challenge of 
refurbishment and 
recycling
Product life cycle 
challenges
Lack of visibility of 
Innovation to industry 
Lack of test subjects 
for pilot testing
Difficult to find 
recycling partner with 
viable business case.
Framework & Theory
Unstandardized 
conceptualization of CE
Different overlapping 
conceptual frameworks 
or theory
Lack of practical 
guidance and 
frameworks for 
implementation
Lack of public 
awareness
Lack of knowledge, 
experience and skills
Lack of systemic 
mechanisms for 
building collaboration.
Regulation & Standards
Overregulation 
Deficiency in 
enforcement of 
regulations
Outdated standards
Lack of system 
standardization
Lack of sectorial 
standards and 
certifications
Lack of product or 
material 
standardization
Lack of legislation 
supporting and 
incentivize 
collaboration
Legal challenges in 
uniting the sector while 
ensuring a free market 
High regulations for 
bringing CE solution to 
the market
7
ECOSYSTEM READINESS – THEME CARD
==PAGE:201==
Ecosystem – Regulations and standardization
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Restrictive antitrust regulations. Risk of overregulating 
sustainability assessment for batteries. 
Data protection and competition laws can be incompatible with 
transparency on certain issues (Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Overregulation 
Taddei et al., 2024, 
De Lima and Seuring, 2023, 
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Deficiency in enforcement rules and systematic regulations.
Deficiency in 
enforcement of 
regulations
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 2023
Complicated ecosystem: Existing standards does not keep up.
Only well-established materials and methods are foreseen in 
regulations. Outdated regulations are not removed (Wielopolski
and Bulthuis, 2023)
Outdated standards
Agarwal et al., 2022
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Lack system standardization for practices as recycling, 
remanufacturing, reclaiming, and quality monitoring.
Lack of component (battery) standardization across supply chain 
stakeholders. Lack of comparison (Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Lack of system 
standardization
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Chari et al., 2022
Rules and regulations: Lack of sectorial standardization and 
certifications.
Lack of sectorial 
standards and 
certifications
Company C
Lack of standardization of products or material types in the 
industry.
If, at the EU level or even beyond, certain things could be 
standardized—for example, something like Ø-pict chargers, 
which are fortunately becoming more aligned than they were 
initially—it would be a step in the right direction. Standardization 
can help remove some roadblocks, and I believe that’s the way 
forward.” (C1 Q. 28)
Lack of product or 
material standardization 
in the industry
Company C
Lack of legislations or mechanisms to support and incentivize 
collaboration.
”There is also no legislation supporting these initiatives. It’s 
something one might wish existed.” ... ”There are no real 
mechanisms in place to support it as such. It’s just the hope that 
2 plus 2 equals 5—or a mission-driven ambition to contribute to 
change.” (C1 Q. 16) 
Lack of legislation 
supporting and 
incentivize collaboration
Company C
Legal challenges in uniting the sector while ensuring a free 
market and preventing cartel formation.
”One of the major challenges is when bringing competing 
companies together. We are naturally, extremely cautious to 
ensure that no issues arise regarding cartel-formation or any 
other legal concerns.” (C2 Q. 11)
Legal challenges in 
uniting the sector while 
ensuring a free market 
Company C
Many regulatory barriers for bringing CE solutions to the market 
”There are many challenges. This is expensive to do, it is difficult 
to enter the market and there are many regulatory barriers for 
bringing circular economy solutions to the market.” (C2 Q. 34)
High regulations for 
bringing CE solution to 
the market
==PAGE:202==
Ecosystem - Frameworks and theory
Chari et al., 2022
Gebhardt et al., 2022
No standardized conceptualization of CE among organizations is a 
barrier to implementing CE practices. 
Strong bias between circularity and recycling (Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Unstandardized 
conceptualization of 
CE
Company B
Challenge in chosing between conceptual frameworks. Needs to 
chose one to work with 
"Which conceptual framework should we align with? There is 
something called eco-design, and there is something called circular 
economy. There is a significant overlap between the two. But what 
we call things also matters in terms of how we communicate and 
operationalize them. I think we will end up using the circular 
economy framework here—but more to emphasize that this is a 
choice we need to make.” (B Q. 5)
Different overlapping 
conceptual 
frameworks or theory
Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018, 
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 2023, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2022, 
De Lima and Seuring, 2023
Parida et al., 2019
Lack of successful business models, practical guidance, and 
frameworks to implement CE in SC and to engage in collaborative 
processes
Lack of practical 
guidance and 
frameworks for 
implementation
Khan and Ali, 2022, 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018,
Lack of knowledge and support of the public towards circular 
economy practices
Lack of public 
awareness
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Taddei et al., 2024, 
De Lima and Seuring, 2023, 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018, 
Khan and Ali, 2022, 
Agarwal et al., 2022,
Chari et al., 2022
Inadequate awareness on CE principles within SC partners and 
organization. Limited knowledge, experience, skills, training, 
awareness, theoretical information, know-how
Lack of knowledge, 
experience and skills
Company C
Lack of systemic mechanisms for building collaboration.
"When something new is started, you reach out to those already 
working in the field. So, learning is definitely built on top of existing 
knowledge. But new employees also join, and sometimes we even 
get people who are experts in partnerships—so we learn from them 
as well. I believe, and I hope, that this is something we will all get 
better at over time. I just don’t think there are necessarily all the 
systemic mechanisms in place to remove every barrier along the 
way." (C1 Q. 18)
Lack of systemic 
mechanisms for 
building collaboration.
==PAGE:203==
Ecosystem – Industry
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Complicated and dynamic ecosystem where VC evolves fast and 
new players appear quickly. 
Complicated 
ecosystem
De Lima and Seuring, 2023
Havinga et al., 2023
Uncertainties: Quality, Availability and delivery of secondary 
resources. 
Uncertainties with 
secondary resources
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018,
There are challenges to develop a take-back mechanism from other 
companies.
Other companies take-
back
Kazancoglu et al., 2020,  
Kazancoglu et al., 2022, 
Khan and Ali, 2022,
Chari et al., 2022
Inadequate facility infrastructure: lack of availability of suppliers of 
quality and sustainable complementary processes (e.g., 
disassembly, separation, recycling) 
Lack of investments in appropriate technologies limiting potential 
candidates.(Chari et al., 2022)
Lack of infrastructure 
and suppliers
Chari et al., 2022, 
Agarwal et al., 2022
Logistic system, design challenges in finding the right customers, 
for refurbished or recycled products. And understand the user-
case 
Design challenge of 
refurbishment and 
recycling
Kazancoglu et al., 2020,
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Difficult to maintain and manage quality throughout the product life 
cycle 
Product life cycle 
challenges
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 
2023
Promising innovations from universities and start-ups are not very 
visible to the construction industry.
Lack of visibility of 
Innovation to industry 
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 
2023
Pilot partners are hard to find, companies that are willing and able 
to experiment with new materials and methods are difficult to find 
for innovators in the construction industry. 
Lack of test subjects 
for pilot testing
Company C
Difficult to find recycling or value recovery partner with viable 
business case. 
”Getting a recycling partner up and running in this field, which is a 
relatively new area, has also been a challenge. Again, when it 
comes to value recovery companies—how many are there, and 
can they build a viable business case around this? (C2. Q. 14)
Difficult to find 
recycling partner with 
viable business case.
==PAGE:204==
9
2
Structure & culture
Organization structure 
and culture
Static organization
structure
Departments isolation / 
bubbles
Structure and culture 
difference
Lack of readiness 
assessment
Challenge of increasing  
awareness in 
organization
Organization resistance
Organizational 
resistance and 
willingness
Bound to current 
process
Isomorphic 
institutionalism
Linear incentive system
ORGANIZATION – THEME CARD
==PAGE:205==
Organization structure and culture
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Chari et al., 2022, 
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Organization structure and culture constraints the transition to circular 
practice. 
Organizational norms and culture restrict stakeholder competencies 
and force them to focus on their interests, thus impacting the decision 
not to collaborate across sectors for CSCM. (Luthra et al., 2022, 
Chari et al., 2022).  
Firm’s organizational structures, such as an inefficient bureaucracy, 
are a barrier.(Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018) (management)
Organization structure 
and culture
De Lima and Seuring, 2023, 
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of flexibility in organizations plans and strategies.
Static organization
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of collaboration across departments within an organization. 
Lack of collaboration between department could lead to sustainability 
decisions as stand-alone activities (Chari et al., 2022)
Departments isolation 
/ bubbles
Luthra et al., 2022
Different organizational structure and culture in cross-sector 
collaboration (Institutional logics, belief systems and behavior).
Structure and culture 
difference
Parida et al., 2019
Lack of internal and external readiness assessment 
Readiness 
assessment
Company B
Company A
It takes time to create awareness and develop a mindset in the 
organization. Develop material to increase knowledge and train 
employees.
"There is also a lot of work in figuring out how we equip people with 
the knowledge they need about this.“ – (B Q.3)
There is work advocating sustainability to the other departments e.g.
training, understanding and awareness.  To ensure they make the 
right choices. - A
Challenge of 
increasing  awareness 
in organization
==PAGE:206==
Organization resistance 
Luthra et al., 2022
Chari et al., 2022. 
Taddei et al., 2024
Havinga et al., 2023
Organizational resistance to embrace change and move from 
traditional approach 
Lack of organizational willingness and trust to new concept. (Chari
et al., 2022. Taddei et al., 2024)
Reluctance to development of new routines and processes 
(Havinga et al., 2023)
Organizational 
resistance 
Agarwal et al., 2022, 
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Organizations bound to their current processes.
Current industrial business models are hindering participants from 
shifting to CE due to business competency and time-bound delivery 
requirements. (Agarwal et al., 2022)
Lack of capacity to focus on sustainability in design and operations 
because of performance requirements from actors in supply chain. 
(Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Bound to current 
process
Luthra et al., 2022
Isomorphic institutionalism. 
Pressure to follow existing institutional culture limits the 
organization to use skills and knowledge in the new area where 
investment has been made. (Luthra et al., 2022)
Isomorphic 
institutionalism
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 2023, 
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Linear incentive systems favoring linear solutions. Lack of 
incitement to implement CE when companies motivate and reward 
for linear targets. (management)
Linear incentive 
system
==PAGE:207==
11
External
Different risk managements 
approach.
Complexity in developing 
coordination plan
Duplication of authority
Different operational and 
management practice
Limited transparency
Lack of experts in Orchestrating / 
Managing partnerships
Internal
Willingness and readiness: 
Prioritization
Willingness and readiness: 
Support and commitment from 
top management
Willingness and readiness: 
Readiness of leaders and 
employees
Planning and risk: 
Strategic planning
Planning and risk: 
Fast decision-making
Planning and risk: 
Knowledge and experience
2
MANAGEMENT – THEME CARD
==PAGE:208==
Internal 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Lack of priority over other issues or requirements. (commitment)
Management having higher priority of other issues or requirements in 
the supply chain (production, expansion, market share) Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018
Low prioritization
Khan and Ali, 2022, 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018, 
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Taddei et al., 2024, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Chari et al., 2022
De Lima and Seuring, 2023
Lack of support and commitment from top management. (commitment)
Lack of commitment from top management can make the focus of the 
organization narrowed, restricting the potential to collaborate. (Luthra et 
al., 2022)
Lack of willingness and readiness of management. The support and 
commitment of the top management is inevitable to conduct circular 
operations among the SC. (Chari et al., 2022)
Organizational resistivity when top management is locked into the 
business-as-usual model. (De Lima and Seuring, 2023)
Missing support and 
commitment for top 
management
Chari et al., 2022
Mismatch between leadership support and cultural mindset of 
employees (Lack of motivation, social inertia, mindset from negative 
experiences)
Imbalanced 
readiness of leaders 
and employees
Taddei et al., 2024
Lack of effective strategic planning. - There is a deficiency in in the 
planning and management of circular supply chain concepts.
Inefficient strategic 
planning
Agarwal et al., 2022
Vulnerability and uncertainty in fast decision-making needed in 
management system for CE aligned practices. 
Vulnerability in fast 
decision-making
Cerqueira-Streit et al., 2021, 
Taddei et al., 2024, 
Luthra et al., 2022
Managements lack of knowledge and experience on the CE concept, 
business opportunities, vision and how to facilitate. 
Managers as facilitators must fully understand the concept CE to 
coordinate the transformation. Managers are the ones facing the 
barriers and need to guide the possible solutions.(Luthra et al., 2022)
Lack of knowledge 
and experience
==PAGE:209==
External – Across collaboration
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Different risk management approaches between actors.
Different sectors have their own autonomous approaches to perceive 
and mitigate risk. Making it difficult to manage collaboration across 
sectors. (Luthra et al., 2022)
Risk regarding sustainability indicators  is different depending on 
geographies. (Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Different risk 
managements 
approach.
Khan and Ali, 2022, 
Schultz et al., 2021, 
Parida et al., 2019
Company C
The challenge of developing a coordination plan: Complexity, operation 
and monitoring of the SC make it difficult to develop a proper 
coordination plan.
Transformation to circular economy requires manufacturing companies 
to coordinate and manage the incentives and investments of multiple 
ecosystem partners. This complexity poses a challenge for effective 
implementation.(Parida et al., 2019)
”No one has really challenged industry collaboration, aside from the fact 
that it comes with high complexity. And there is a complexity to it. This 
is the next thing we need to address...” (C2. Q. 35)
Complexity in 
developing 
coordination plan
Luthra et al., 2022
Duplication of responsibility and authority. 
In cross sectors collaboration there can be a duplication in 
responsibilities of individuals that makes them uninterested in being 
part of the collaboration. Luthra et al., 2022
Duplication of 
authority
Luthra et al., 2022
Different operational and management practices between sectors. 
Sectors are restricted by their independent planning and management 
practices and are thus unable to develop integrated planning toward 
CSCM.
Different operational 
and management 
practice
De Lima and Seuring, 2023
Lack of willingness from managers to share information. Fear of sharing 
proprietary information . (competition)
Limited transparency
Company C
A shortage of experts to manage partnerships (orchestrators), so not 
everyone has to learn it.
”It’s also worth considering whether there’s a need for more 
professional expertise to manage these partnerships so that not 
everyone who needs to learn it. Because it is a discipline in itself—there 
are even educational programs where people specialize in 
partnerships. I can say for sure that the people in our social sector, who 
are masters of partnerships, have a completely different approach and 
expertise in areas like communication, contract drafting, resolving 
obstacles, delegation, legal aspects, and so on. So sometimes, not 
everyone needs to be able to do everything …” (C1 Q. 12)
Lack of experts in 
Orchestrating / 
Managing 
partnerships
==PAGE:210==
6
Missing commitment to new business model
Missing commitment from supply chain actors
Fear of losing control of operations
Lack of size of intent and goal
Different intent and goal between actors
Uncertain placement and scoping of system boundaries
Uncertainty in prioritizing different CE initiatives
Lack of continuous resource commitment
2
COMMITMENT – THEME CARD
==PAGE:211==
Commitment
Kazancoglu et al., 2022, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Chari et al., 2022
Lack of willingness and acceptance of new CE business model 
between stakeholders in network and in organization. (alignment)
Lack of commitment 
to new BM
Majumdar et al., 2022
Lack of commitment from upstream manufacturers in planning and 
develop practice for measuring circularity implementation. 
Lack of commitment 
from SC actors
Luthra et al., 2022
Kazancoglu et al., 2020
Fear of losing control. Different sectors does not collaborate as they 
fear losing control over their operations.
Fear of losing control 
of operations
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 
2023, 
Schultz et al., 2021
Lack of size of intent and goal in CE implementation incrementing 
innovation to minimize complexity. 
Companies narrowing their circularity goals to avoid multiple 
stakeholder complexity. Often solely collaboration with the closest or 
most trusted partners in the value chain (Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 
2023)
Lack size of intent 
and goal
Chari et al., 2022
Different level of intent and size of goal between actors in SC network 
when implementing CE practices.
Different intent and 
goal between actors
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Uncertainty in system boundaries: Where to place system boundaries 
and scope?
Placement and 
scoping of system 
boundaries
Company A
Uncertainty in ranking and commitment of different CE strategies and 
resource allocation. 
” When we talk about strategy and prioritization within a company, you 
also have to consider—how many eggs do I put into take-back and 
recycling? How much do I invest in our other initiatives or our product 
line?... Circular economy efforts have different focus areas, right? So 
which one is actually the most important to start with? I imagine 
companies must weigh these decisions” (A. Q. 24)
Uncertainty in 
prioritizing CE 
initiatives
Company C
Partnerships demands long-term resource allocation.
”Also because it requires a continuous resource commitment from the 
companies involved in a partnership. It’s not something you just do for 
three months and then it’s done. It requires the company to allocate 
resources over a long period of time…” (C1 Q. 13)
Continuous resource 
commitment
==PAGE:212==
Lack of transparency because of competitive disadvantage.
Lack of transparency because of reputation on market
Competitive disadvantage in relation to linear companies.
CE and competitive disadvantage
Tension from competition violating collaboration spirit
Confidentiality creates a perceived barrier impacting the 
process.
5
1
COMPETITION – THEME CARD
==PAGE:213==
Competition
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Gebhardt et al., 2022, 
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2020
Fear of loosing market opportunities by information sharing. 
(Competitive advantage and pricing advantage between actors in 
supply chain.) (data)
Data is equated with valuable know-how. Confidentiality practices 
hinders openness. (Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022)
By transparency on the value of materials in a battery being recycled 
will enable manufactures to do upfront calculation of process cost 
minus resale value for recyclers. (Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022)
Data is seen as a strategic resource, a mean to generate competitive 
advantages, a factor that could sabotage financial gains if given to 
competitors(Gebhardt et al., 2022)
Transparency: Fear of 
losing competitive 
advantage.
Gebhardt et al., 2022
Luthra et al., 2022
Fear of unfavorable public perception and market response after 
sustainability disclosure. (data)
Fear of low quality or sustainability disclosure. (Luthra et al., 2022)
Transparency: 
Fear of losing 
reputation
De Lima and Seuring, 2023
Khan and Ali, 2023
Market competition with linear-oriented companies and SC: Challenge 
to make competitive prices on products. 
Competition hinders companies in changing (Khan and Ali, 2022)
Lack of competitive 
advantage to linear-
companies.
Serna-Guerrero et al., 2022
Implementation of CE is seen as a decreased of competitiveness.
CE as a decrease of 
competitiveness.
Luthra et al., 2022
Competition creates tension among collaborators that leads to 
frustration and violates the ‘true spirit’ of collaboration.
Tension from 
competition
Company C
Uncertainty around confidentiality creates a perceived barrier, with no 
clear solutions to prevent it from impacting the process. 
”One of the major barriers can be confidentiality. How do you 
collaborate with a competitor? How do you share information in a way 
that doesn’t harm your own production?”... ”But how do you prevent it 
from being perceived as a barrier and instead create a process where 
everyone can fully engage and contribute in the best possible way to 
achieve the highest level of circularity—or whatever the goal may 
be?”(C1 Q. 21) 
Uncertainties around 
confidentiality creates 
a perceived barrier 
impacting the 
process.
==PAGE:214==
Unstable prices for secondary resources
Lack of economic attractiveness and return of investment
High investment cost 
Limited founding and financial resources
Uncertainty in net-value creation and ownership. 
Shortage in long-term resources to invest in collaboration
4
3
ECONOMIC – THEME CARD
==PAGE:215==
Economic
De Lima and Seuring, 2023, 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Price fluctuations: Unstable prices for virgin and secondary 
resources.
The challenge in accurately determine resource cost lead to 
incorrect product pricing in supply chain. (Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018)
If the price of secondary resource is to high companies are likely to 
use virgin. (De Lima and Seuring, 2023).
Unstable prices for 
secondary resources
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2022,
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Taddei et al., 2024, 
Gebhardt et al., 2022, 
Majumdar et al., 2022
De Lima and Seuring, 2023
Lack of economic attractiveness and uncertain return on investment  
(management)
If companies can properly manage circular supply chain they are 
likely to face financial risk (De Lima and Seuring, 2023)
There is high short-term cost and low short-term economic benefits 
in implementation of CE. (Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018)
The cost of development of new business models are unknown and 
the long-term effect are difficult to measure (Kazancoglu et al., 2022)
Lack of economic 
attractiveness and 
uncertain ROI
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018, 
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 2023
Company C
High investment cost
Transition to CE requires new technology, certification process, 
training of employees. The cost of recycled material and collection of 
waste are high. (Kazancoglu et al., 2020)
Implementing CE requires significant initial investment in 
redesigning facilities, training staff, adopting technology. (Govindan 
and Hasanagic, 2018)
”There are many challenges. This is expensive to do, it is difficult to 
enter the market and there are many regulatory barriers for bringing 
circular economy solutions to the market.” (C2 Q. 34)
High investment cost 
Taddei et al., 2024, 
Khan and Ali, 2022
Limited financial resources and funding
Limited founding and 
financial resources
Company A
Uncertainties in net-value creation and ownership. There is collected 
risk and investment in partnership when innovating and developing 
something new.
”There isn’t necessarily an existing system in place. So, there is also 
a certain level of mutual risk or a shared investment along the way. 
Who owns the outcome? ... What is the value for us? Do we have an 
interest in owning this system? What’s in it for us? What’s in it for 
you? When is the price right?... what is net-value?” (A. Q. 16)
Uncertainty in net-
value creation and 
ownership. 
Company C
A shortage of long-term resources hinders effective orchestration 
and partnership success.
”I would say it requires strength—it takes resources to make it 
happen...You need sustained resources and competencies to invest 
in it. And that can be a challenge in itself. If a company doesn’t have 
a financial surplus but could significantly benefit from collaborating 
with others, they might never get there simply because they lack the 
opportunity to do so.”... (C1 Q. 23)
Shortage of sustained 
resources to invest in 
collaboration
==PAGE:216==
Asymmetric market power
Asymmetric resource power
Asymmetric power from economy of scale
2
1
POWER – THEME CARD
==PAGE:217==
Power Structure
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 2023
High degree of fragmentation. Many small building companies and 
suppliers with limited power and few very big suppliers.
Asymmetric market 
power
Luthra et al., 2022
Mismatch between the powers of partner organizations because of 
different levels of resources. The difference in their power delegation 
in the new collaborative environment acts as a barrier 
Asymmetric resource 
power
Company B
Company C
Lack of economy of scale to collaborate with suppliers. 
“…I think we’re missing some economy of scale to be able to change 
much.”... ”That’s just natural. And as I see it, we simply don’t have a 
large enough critical mass. Our suppliers are big enough that they 
have other, larger customers than us.” (B Q. 9.)
“… Even though we see ourselves as a large company, for many 
suppliers, we are just a small and insignificant player. But when we 
unite as an industry, we often share the same suppliers, and that 
allows us to exert greater pressure.”(C1 Q. 11)
Asymmetric power 
from economy of scale
==PAGE:218==
Missing large-scale demonstrators
Lack of scalability due to complexity
Uncertainty of economies of scale 
Challenge in standardizing scaling phase and 
developing an operating model
Challenge of scaling solution for long-term 
implementation 
SCALE – THEME CARD
3
3
==PAGE:219==
Scale
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 
2023
Lack of large-scale demonstrators. Making it difficult to get 
founded.  
Lack of large-scale 
demonstrators
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 
2023
Lack of scalability. 
Scalability requires stakeholder collaboration introducing 
complexity: diverse culture, way of working, business model and 
priorities.(Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 2023) 
Lack of scalability
Kazancoglu et al., 2022, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2020
Lack of economies of scale, because of small quantities.
Lack of economies of 
scale 
Company C
Challenge of standardizing the scaling phase and develop an 
operating model.
”We are also in a scaling phase. How do we standardize this? It’s 
one thing to do it in Denmark, but how can we scale this further?... 
the key elements needed for a systemic approach to scaling, and 
that’s exactly what we are working on now. How do we develop 
what we call an operating model.” (C2. Q 31)
Challenge of 
standardizing the 
scaling phase and 
develop an operating 
model
Company C
Scaling solution for long-term implementation in the value chain 
remains a challenge.
”That’s the challenge we’re facing—how do you scale? It’s not an 
art to run a small pilot project in one or two cities. The real 
challenge is scaling it into something with a significant impact—
something that becomes an integrated part of the entire value 
chain. That’s what we are working on.” (C2 Q. 26)
Scaling solution for 
long-term 
implementation 
Company A
Uncertainty about economy of scale. 
”…We are in a pilot phase now, but when we scale up—that’s 
important. Can we scale up without breaking the bank?” (A. Q. 19)
Uncertainty about 
economy of scale. 
==PAGE:220==
6
Missing stakeholder support
Misaligned vision
Misaligned business model across supply chain
Lack of understanding role and responsibility of 
ecosystem partner.
Versatility of ecosystem – lack of mutual value 
opportunities
Misaligned capabilities and capacities
Misaligned roles and responsibilities
2
ALIGNMENT – THEME CARD
==PAGE:221==
Alignment
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 2023, 
Govindan and Hasanagic, 
2018,
Lack of stakeholder support. (Unsupportive legislation, uninterested 
customers, risk-averse investors)
Impossible for firm to satisfy all goals from stakeholders with 
different perspective on the environment and society (Govindan and 
Hasanagic, 2018)
Lack of stakeholder 
support
De Lima and Seuring, 2023,
Luthra et al., 2022, 
Chari et   al., 2022
Taddei et al., 2024,  
Kazancoglu et al., 2020, 
Kazancoglu et al., 2022,
Havinga et al., 2023
Lack of common vision.
Misalignment of strategic priorities: Conflicting goals (environmental 
Vs. Economic). (De Lima and Seuring, 2023)
Misaligned interests of individuals across sectors. (Luthra et al., 
2022)
Misaligned organizations when trying to develop one policy and 
vision across sectors with different business operations, models and 
processes. (Luthra et al., 2022)
This is due to a lack of common vision, fear of losing control, or a 
lack of trust between them (Kazancoglu et al., 2020,) (trust)
Misaligned vision
Chari et al., 2022
BM, product design, service and distribution needs to be aligned 
across the SC (complexity and uncertainty)
Misaligned BM across 
SC
Parida et al., 2019
Lack of understanding of roles and responsibility of ecosystem 
partners and their challenges and dynamics. 
Lack of understanding 
role and responsibility 
of ecosystem partner
Wielopolski and Bulthuis, 2023
Versatility of the ecosystem because of different regulatory 
frameworks, economic interest, historical value logic and 
conservatism pose a challenge in finding mutual value opportunities. 
Versatility of 
ecosystem.
Chari et al., 2022
Company A
Mismatch of capacities or capabilities.
“The concept of selling waste as an input to another industry is 
easily conceptualized, but the more challenging step is in the 
implementation or the ‘seizing’ capabilities phase.”(Chari et al., 2022  
p. 2507)
Assessment and alignment of capabilities. Understand what 
capabilities there are in the company and what a partner should 
bring. Tried many recycling partner who were lacking the full solution 
and only able to deliver a small part of the solution. - A
Misaligned capabilities 
or capacities
Company A
Alignment of roles and responsibilities in partnership. 
" So, it has been more about identifying which activities actually 
make sense for us to handle. There are many activities that we are 
probably not the best suited to manage. ” - A
Alignment of roles and 
responsibilities
==PAGE:222==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
