==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Robot
Navigation
Eduardo Andres Guiraud Castillo (s220501)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Lars Dittmann
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 63 52
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Autonomous robot navigation is a critical area in robotics, with applications in logistics, exploration,
and disaster response. Traditional methods such as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
rely on pre-built maps and localization techniques, but they often struggle in dynamic and unstructured
environments due to their high computational cost and sensitivity to sensor inaccuracies. Deep Rein-
forcement Learning (DRL) has emerged as a promising alternative by enabling robots to learn navigation
policies directly from raw sensor data (e.g., LiDAR), without the need for pre-constructed maps. This
thesis investigates the application of DRL to mapless navigation by comparing two continuous-action
algorithms: Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (TD3) and Deep Deterministic Policy
Gradients (DDPG).
Simulation environments in Gazebo, designed with both static and dynamic obstacles and augmented
with realistic sensor noise, were used to train and evaluate the models. Reward functions were written
and etsted to prioritize collision avoidance, time-eﬀicient goal-directed navigation, and smooth trajectory
control. Key performance metrics—such as success rate and collision rate—were recorded to assess each
algorithm.The system was implemented using ROS2 Foxy on a custom TurtleBot3 platform, equipped
with an RPLiDAR C1 and an MPU6050 IMU for environmental perception and motion tracking; however,
challenges were encountered when transferring the trained policies to the physical robot.
Results demonstrate that while both TD3 and DDPG eventually learn effective navigation policies,
TD3 exhibits higher convergence and a superior overall success rate, especially in complex and dynamic
scenarios. DDPG, though competitive in moderately complex environments, was slightly less consistent
when confronted with rapidly changing conditions.
This work contributes a modular and scalable framework for autonomous navigation that integrates
DRL with robotic hardware. The findings reinforce the potential of DRL to overcome the limitations of
traditional mapping techniques in dynamic, unstructured environments. Future work will focus on refin-
ing reward functions for outdoor applications, incorporating additional sensors for enhanced perception,
and extending the framework to support multi-robot collaborative systems. Overall, this research demon-
strates the viability of DRL for real-time autonomous navigation, paving the way for robust applications
in logistics, disaster response, and beyond.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
Author: Eduardo Andres Guiraud Castillo
Supervisor: Lars Dittmann
Credits: 30 ECTS
Starting Date: September 1st, 2024
End Date: February 1st, 2025
Extension provided
Kongens Lyngby, February 11, 2025
Eduardo A. Guiraud C.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and Literature Review
3
2.1
Autonomous Navigation in Robotics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Deep Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Policy Gradient Algorithms for Continuous Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Sensors for Robot Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7
ROS2 Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.8
Gazebo Simulation Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.9
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Methodology
20
3.1
System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Experiments and Results
38
4.1
Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Real-World Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Conclusion and Future Work
43
5.1
Summary of Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A An Appendix
45
A.1 Circuit Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Bibliography
46
==PAGE:6==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Advancements in robotics and artificial intelligence have allowed us the possibility to ideate automati-
zation like never before. At the heart of this automatization, autonomous navigation plays a pivotal
role, working independently in complex environments can already be achieved, but to be able to traverse
environments and adapt to new ones without human intervention is still a work in progress.
This has opened new possibilities, allowing robots to perform tasks like exploring new places, de-
livering goods, move eﬀiciently through warehouses, transporting goods, assisting in disaster response,
sometimes they’re sent into hazardous areas to search for survivors or assess damage. But traditional
navigation methods, like relying on pre-made maps or fixed rules, often fall short in these scenarios.
They just can’t adapt quickly enough to unexpected changes or obstacles in the environment. Unlike
traditional control methods, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) works by trial and error, much like a
child, it is an alternative that provides a way to overcome limitations by gathering raw sensor data and
allows robots to learn navigation policies independently. This approach makes it easier to change when
encountering a dynamic environment without requiring prior knowledge. DRL is particularly effective
in handling high-dimensional inputs, such as those from LiDAR sensors, which provide detailed spatial
information. This thesis aims to explore the potential of DRL in autonomous navigation, focusing on a
mapless navigation framework using LiDAR as the primary sensor.
1.2
Problem Definition
Navigating autonomously in unknown, dynamic environments without a global map presents several
critical challenges. Traditional methods, such as SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and Mapping), de-
pend heavily on the accuracy of global maps, which are often computationally expensive to generate and
maintain. These methods struggle in environments with dynamic obstacles, such as moving people or
vehicles, or significant changes in the terrain due to weather or structural modifications.
Sensor noise is another major challenge, as it can lead to errors in localization and obstacle detection.
Moreover, resource constraints, such as limited computational power and battery life on mobile robots,
further complicate the implementation of traditional navigation systems. These limitations point the
need for a more flexible and eﬀicient approach to autonomous navigation.
This thesis proposes DRL to design a navigation system that learns directly from LiDAR sensor
data. By avoiding reliance on pre-constructed maps, the proposed system aims to improve adaptability
and robustness in real-time navigation tasks. Specifically, this research employs DRL algorithms such
as Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) and Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(TD3) to develop policies that enable eﬀicient, collision-free navigation in various environments. The
integration of DRL with additional sensors, such as the MPU6050 IMU, aims to enhance the system’s
robustness and adaptability.
1.3
Research Objectives
The primary objectives of this research are as follows:
• Design and Implementation: Develop a DRL-based navigation system that uses LiDAR and
IMU data for real-time decision-making.
==PAGE:7==
2
1 Introduction
• Algorithm Evaluation: Compare the performance of DDPG and TD3 algorithms in both sim-
ulated and real-world environments, focusing on metrics such as success rate, collision rate, and
path eﬀiciency.
• Hardware Integration: Deploy the navigation system on a physical robot built using ROS2 Foxy,
Raspberry Pi, and Arduino Nano, ensuring compatibility and real-time operation.
1.4
Contributions
This thesis makes the following contributions:
• Framework Development: A framework for mapless navigation using DRL with LiDAR and
IMU sensors, capable of operating in dynamic environments.
• Performance Analysis: Evaluation of DRL algorithms, highlighting the strengths and limitations
of each in navigation tasks.
• Real-World Validation: Deployment and testing of the proposed system on a physical robot,
challenges were encountered when trying to transfer the trained learning policies to the physical
robot.
• Hardware-Software Integration: Implementation of a system that combines hardware compo-
nents such as LiDAR, IMU, and encoders with software components.
1.5
Thesis Structure
This thesis is organized as follows:
• Chapter 1: Introduction introduces the motivation, problem statement, and objectives.
• Chapter 2:
Background and Literature Review provides an overview of DRL, relevant
sensors, and related work in autonomous navigation.
• Chapter 3: Methodology describes the system design, DRL algorithms, and experimental setups
used in this research.
• Chapter 4: Experiments and Results presents the simulation and real-world results, along
with a detailed discussion of findings.
• Chapter 5: Conclusion and Future Work summarizes the contributions and outlines potential
directions for further research.
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 2
Background and Literature
Review
2.1
Autonomous Navigation in Robotics
Autonomous navigation is a fundamental capability for robots, enabling them to operate independently
in diverse environments. Traditional navigation techniques, such as those based on SLAM, rely heavily
on precise localization and pre-constructed maps. While effective in controlled settings, these methods
face significant challenges in dynamic and unstructured environments [RT15].
For accomplishing simple and repetitive tasks, decision-making may be straightforward. But more
complicated tasks, such as attempts to simulate human behavior or automate driving, involve interaction
with high-variable and mutable real-world environments. Research shows deep reinforcement learning
with deep neural networks aids such tasks, especially with respect to generalization and mapping high-
dimensionally sensory input to controlled systems outputs. [IBM24].
Recent advances in machine learning have introduced new approaches for navigation, particularly
DRL, which allows robots to learn navigation policies directly from sensor data without requiring explicit
mapping [TLL17]. This approach reduces computational overhead and increases adaptability, making it
well-suited for real-world applications where environments are constantly changing.
2.2
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a core area of artificial intelligence (AI) that focuses on enabling systems to learn
from data and improve their performance without explicitly being programmed. The field is broadly
categorized into different learning approaches, each tailored for specific types of tasks.
Figure 2.1: Venn diagram Machine Learning [Hu+23]
• Supervised Learning: Supervised learning involves training a model on a dataset where both
inputs and corresponding outputs are labeled. The goal is to learn a mapping from inputs to outputs
that generalizes to new, unseen data. The training process minimizes the error between predicted
outputs and actual labels, often using loss functions such as mean squared error or cross-entropy.
==PAGE:9==
4
2 Background and Literature Review
• Unsupervised Learning: Unlike supervised learning, unsupervised learning deals with unlabeled
data, where the goal is to discover hidden patterns or structures in the dataset. Clustering is used
to group data points into clusters based on similarity. Unsupervised learning is foundational in
exploratory data analysis and anomaly detection.
Figure 2.2: Machine Learning [Tec24]
• Reinforcement Learning: Reinforcement learning (RL) is a learning approach where an agent
interacts with an environment, taking actions to maximize a cumulative reward signal. The agent
explores the environment and learns policies—strategies for selecting actions—based on feedback
in the form of rewards or penalties. RL excels in sequential decision-making tasks and has been
used in developing AI systems for complex applications like game playing (e.g., AlphaGo), robotics,
and self-driving cars. The trial-and-error approach in RL often involves models like Q-learning and
policy optimization, balancing exploration and exploitation for optimal learning.
• Deep Learning: Deep learning is a specialized subset of machine learning that uses artificial
neural networks with multiple layers to model high-level abstractions in data.
Deep networks
excel at tasks involving unstructured data such as images, text, and audio. Deep learning has
driven breakthroughs in fields like autonomous vehicles, facial recognition, and speech synthesis.
However, its success often depends on large datasets, significant computational resources, and
careful architecture design.
2.3
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a branch of machine learning where agents learn optimal behaviors
through interactions with an environment.
Unlike supervised learning, where models are trained on
labeled data, RL agents learn by receiving feedback in the form of rewards or penalties based on their
actions. This feedback-driven learning process enables RL to solve complex sequential decision-making
tasks, such as autonomous driving, robotics, and gaming.
In this section, concepts of RL are defined, focusing on the agent-environment interaction, action
spaces, policies, value functions, and popular RL algorithms used to learn optimal behaviors.
==PAGE:10==
2.3 Reinforcement Learning
5
Figure 2.3: Reinforcement Learning structure [IBM24]
2.3.1
Agent and Environment
In an RL setup, the agent and environment interact in a loop where the agent takes actions based on
the current state, and the environment provides feedback in the form of new states and rewards. The
objective of the agent is to maximize its cumulative rewards over time.
Figure 2.4: Agent-Environment Interaction Loop [IBM24]
• Agent: The decision-making entity that perceives the state of the environment, selects actions,
and learns from the rewards it receives.
• Environment: The external system which the agent interacts with. It provides the agent with
the current state and rewards based on the agent’s actions.
In many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving or robotics, the agent’s task is to
navigate through an environment while interacting with obstacles or dynamic entities.
2.3.2
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
An RL problem is typically formalized as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), which consists of the
following components:
• States (S): The set of all possible states in the environment.
==PAGE:11==
6
2 Background and Literature Review
• Actions (A): The set of possible actions the agent can take.
• Rewards (R): The feedback received by the agent based on its actions.
• Transition Probabilities (P(s′|s, a)): The probability of transitioning from state s to state s′
by taking action a.
The Markov Property assumes that the future state depends only on the current state and action,
not on the previous states or actions. This simplification makes it possible to model complex decision-
making tasks eﬀiciently.
2.3.3
States and Observations
A state is a complete representation of the environment at a given point in time. States contain all the
necessary information for the agent to make decisions. In practice, however, the agent may not have
access to the full state, and only a partial observation may be available. This requires the agent to infer
the full state from its observations.
• States: A state fully describes the environment at a given moment. For example, a robot’s position
and velocity could be part of the state.
• Observations: A partial or incomplete representation of the state, commonly encountered in
real-world applications. Observations often require agents to use inference techniques to estimate
unobserved components of the state.
In many cases, the environment may provide noisy or incomplete observations, and the agent must
deal with this uncertainty to make effective decisions.
2.3.4
Action Spaces
The action space defines the set of possible actions the agent can choose from. Actions can be discrete
or continuous, depending on the problem and the agent’s capabilities.
Figure 2.5: Types of states and action spaces [Ban20]
• Discrete Action Spaces: The agent chooses from a finite set of actions, such as moving left,
right, up, or down in a grid-based environment.
• Continuous Action Spaces: The agent’s actions are continuous and can take on any value within
a specified range. For example, controlling the angle of a robotic arm or adjusting the throttle of
a vehicle.
==PAGE:12==
2.3 Reinforcement Learning
7
Choosing the appropriate action space is critical for RL, as it directly affects the complexity of the
task and the learning algorithms used.
2.3.5
Policies
A policy is the strategy used by the agent to determine which action to take based on its current state.
Policies can be deterministic or stochastic.
Figure 2.6: Deterministic vs Stochastic Policies [<empty citation>]
• Deterministic Policies: For each state, a fixed action is assigned, meaning the agent will always
take the same action in the same state.
• Stochastic Policies: The policy assigns probabilities to different actions, allowing the agent to
explore different actions in the same state, which is important for exploring the environment.
The goal of RL is to learn an optimal policy that maximizes cumulative rewards over time. Stochastic
policies are commonly used in RL to promote exploration of the environment.
2.3.6
Reward and Return
Rewards are the primary feedback mechanism in RL. A reward is a scalar value the agent receives after
taking an action in a given state. The reward can be positive or negative, indicating the immediate
benefit or cost of an action.
Figure 2.7: Reward example [Van23]
• Reward: Immediate feedback the agent receives after performing an action.
For example, a
positive reward could be assigned for reaching a goal, while a negative reward could result from
colliding with an obstacle.
• Return: The total accumulated reward over time, often discounted by a factor γ to account for
the importance of future rewards. The return starting from time t is defined as:
Gt = Rt + γRt+1 + γ2Rt+2 + . . .
where Rt represents the reward at time t and γ is the discount factor.
The discount factor γ determines the trade-off between immediate and future rewards. A higher value
of γ encourages the agent to consider long-term rewards, while a lower value emphasizes short-term gains.
==PAGE:13==
8
2 Background and Literature Review
2.3.7
Exploration vs. Exploitation
An important challenge in reinforcement learning is balancing exploration and exploitation. This
trade-off determines how an agent interacts with its environment to improve decision-making over time.
• Exploration: The process of selecting actions that may not yield the highest immediate reward
but help the agent discover better strategies. For example, an agent might take an unfamiliar
action to gather more information about its consequences. High Uncertainty
• Exploitation: The act of choosing actions that are known to provide the highest reward based on
past experience. While this approach maximizes short-term gains, it can prevent the agent from
discovering superior strategies. Low Uncertainty
Striking a balance between exploration and exploitation is important. Common strategies include the
ϵ-greedy method, which chooses a random action with probability ϵ and the best-known action otherwise,
and more sophisticated techniques like Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) and Thompson Sampling.
2.3.8
On-Policy vs. Off-Policy Learning
Reinforcement learning algorithms differ in how they use collected experience:
Figure 2.8: On-Policy vs Off-Policy [Van23]
• On-Policy Learning: The agent updates its policy based on the actions it currently follows.
This means it continuously refines the same policy it uses for interaction. A well-known on-policy
algorithm is SARSA, which updates its action-value estimates based on the actual actions taken
under its policy.
• Off-Policy Learning: The agent learns from data that may have been collected under a different
policy. This enables more flexible learning, allowing the agent to update a separate policy from
the one used for gathering experience. Q-learning is a common off-policy algorithm, as it learns
an optimal policy regardless of how actions were selected.
Off-policy learning is advantageous for using stored data and learning from demonstrations, whereas
on-policy learning adapts more directly to an agent’s behavior in dynamic environments.
2.3.9
Value Functions
Value functions estimate the expected return from a given state or state-action pair, helping an agent
evaluate different choices. The primary value functions are:
• State Value Function V π(s): The expected return when starting in state s and following policy
π.
==PAGE:14==
2.3 Reinforcement Learning
9
• Action-Value Function Qπ(s, a): The expected return after taking action a in state s and then
following policy π.
• Optimal State Value Function V ∗(s): The highest possible return achievable from state s
under an optimal policy.
• Optimal Action-Value Function Q∗(s, a): The maximum return attainable from state s and
action a under the optimal policy.
The Bellman equation [SB18] expresses a recursive relationship between value functions.
For
action-value functions:
Qπ(s, a) = R(s, a) + γ
X
s′
P(s′|s, a)V π(s′),
where P(s′|s, a) represents the transition probability from state s to state s′ given action a.
Additionally, the advantage function measures the benefit of taking a specific action over the
average expected return:
Aπ(s, a) = Qπ(s, a) −V π(s).
This function is particularly useful in policy optimization, as it highlights actions that offer greater
rewards compared to the expected baseline.
2.3.10
Policy Optimization
Policy optimization methods aim to directly improve the agent’s policy to maximize cumulative re-
wards. One popular algorithm is Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), which is particularly effec-
tive for continuous action spaces. PPO uses a clipped objective function to ensure that updates to the
policy are not too large, improving stability during training.
The goal of policy optimization is to find the optimal policy π∗that maximizes the expected return,
often through gradient ascent.
2.3.11
Q-Learning
Q-learning is a model-free, off-policy RL algorithm that learns the optimal action-value function
Q∗(s, a). It updates the Q-values using the following rule:
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α

R + γ max
a′ Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)

where α is the learning rate. This update rule establishes that the agent gradually learns the optimal
action by comparing the current value with the expected future reward.
2.3.12
Trade-offs Between Policy Optimization and Q-Learning
Policy optimization methods are principled, they directly optimize for what you want. This tends to make
them stable and reliable. Q-learning methods indirectly optimize for agent performance, by training Qθ
to satisfy a self-consistency equation. There are many failure modes for this kind of learning, so it tends
to be less stable. But, Q-learning methods have the advantage of being significantly more sample eﬀicient
when they do work, because they can reuse data more effectively than policy optimization techniques.
[Ope25]
2.3.13
Interpolating both Policy Optimization and Q-Learning
Interestingly, policy optimization and Q-learning are not mutually exclusive. Several algorithms com-
bine aspects of both, combining their respective strengths while mitigating weaknesses. These hybrid
approaches refine policy learning through value estimation.
==PAGE:15==
10
2 Background and Literature Review
Figure 2.9: ggg [Sea20]
• DDPG (Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient): This algorithm simultaneously learns a de-
terministic policy and a Q-function, using each to refine the other, leading to improved learning
eﬀiciency in continuous action spaces.
• TD3 (Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient): An improvement over DDPG,
TD3 addresses its instability by incorporating twin Q-networks to reduce overestimation bias and
delaying policy updates to enhance learning stability.
By blending policy optimization with value-based methods, these algorithms strike a balance be-
tween stability and sample eﬀiciency, making them well-suited for continuous control problems such as
autonomous robot navigation.
2.4
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Deep Reinforcement Learning combines deep learning with reinforcement learning, enabling agents to
make sequential decisions in high-dimensional state spaces [SB18].
Unlike traditional reinforcement
learning methods, DRL uses neural networks as function approximators, allowing it to handle complex
input data such as images or point clouds from LiDAR sensors.
Figure 2.10: Reinforcement Learning ALgorithms [Ope25]
The algorithms explored in this thesis include:
2.5
Policy Gradient Algorithms for Continuous Control
In continuous control tasks, traditional reinforcement learning algorithms that rely on discrete action
spaces are not suitable. Policy gradient methods, especially actor-critic approaches like DDPG and TD3,
==PAGE:16==
2.5 Policy Gradient Algorithms for Continuous Control
11
have proven to be effective for solving such problems. Below both algorithms will be briefly explained,
for a more detailed explanation with relevant equations see subsections 3.2.2.1 and 3.2.2.2
2.5.1
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)
An actor-critic algorithm designed for continuous action spaces.
It combines the benefits of policy
gradient methods with deterministic policies, enabling stable convergence [Lil+15].
DDPG uses two
neural networks: an actor network for determining actions and a critic network for evaluating state-action
pairs. This architecture allows the algorithm to learn both policies and value functions simultaneously.
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) improves on traditional policy gradient methods by
introducing a deterministic policy. This means that instead of learning a probability distribution over
actions, the actor network directly outputs a single action for each state.
DDPG is well-suited for
continuous action spaces, such as robotic control and autonomous driving tasks.
2.5.1.1
Key Components of DDPG
• Actor and Critic Networks: The actor network selects actions, while the critic network evaluates
these actions by estimating the expected cumulative reward (Q-value). These networks are updated
simultaneously during training.
• Replay Buffer: Stores past experiences (s, a, r, s′) and allows the algorithm to sample mini-
batches for training. This breaks the correlation between consecutive experiences, improving learn-
ing stability and eﬀiciency.
• Target Networks: Two slowly updated target networks (one for the actor and one for the critic)
are used to stabilize training. These target networks prevent large updates and reduce the risk of
divergence.
• Exploration Noise: Since the policy is deterministic, exploration noise is added to encourage
the agent to explore the environment. Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise is commonly used to generate
temporally correlated exploration for smooth control tasks.
2.5.1.2
Applications of DDPG
DDPG is widely used in continuous control tasks, including:
• Robotic Manipulation: Controlling robotic arms for grasping, manipulation, and trajectory
optimization.
• Autonomous Vehicles: Steering control, lane-following, and continuous navigation.
• Industrial Automation: Optimization of continuous processes in industrial environments.
2.5.2
Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3)
TD3 improves upon DDPG by addressing overestimation bias, a common issue in actor-critic meth-
ods. It introduces innovations such as clipped double Q-learning, delayed policy updates, and target
policy smoothing [FHM18a]. These enhancements make TD3 particularly effective for high-dimensional
navigation tasks, ensuring more reliable decision-making in dynamic environments.
Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3) enhances the stability and performance of
DDPG by reducing the impact of overestimation in Q-value estimation—a known weakness in determin-
istic policy algorithms. TD3 adopts multiple strategies to achieve this.
2.5.2.1
Key Innovations in TD3
• Clipped Double Q-Learning: TD3 maintains two separate critic networks and uses the min-
imum Q-value between the two as the target.
This reduces the overestimation bias present in
traditional Q-learning methods, leading to more accurate value estimates.
==PAGE:17==
12
2 Background and Literature Review
• Delayed Policy Updates: The actor network is updated less frequently than the critic net-
works. This allows the critic to stabilize before the policy is adjusted, improving convergence and
preventing premature updates.
• Target Policy Smoothing: During the target value computation, TD3 adds noise to the target
actions, ensuring that small errors in Q-value estimation do not propagate and cause instability.
This smoothing effect helps the algorithm remain robust in environments with high sensitivity to
action noise.
2.5.2.2
Applications of TD3
TD3 has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in continuous control tasks, particularly in environ-
ments with complex dynamics and high-dimensional action spaces:
• Autonomous Navigation: Used for high-dimensional navigation tasks such as path planning in
drones and self-driving vehicles.
• Robotics: Eﬀiciently controls multi-joint robotic systems for tasks that require precise movements,
such as locomotion and manipulation.
• Simulated Environments: Outperforms many algorithms in benchmark tasks such as continuous
control in Gazebo and OpenAI Gym environments.
Deep Q-Networks are widely used for grid-based or discrete-action navigation problems, while DDPG
and TD3 are better suited for real-world applications requiring continuous control. The implementation
of these algorithms in this research is heavily inspired by open-source frameworks, such as the Turtlebot3
DRL repository [ROBnd] and [Tomnd], which provides implementations and example scenarios.
2.6
Sensors for Robot Navigation
Autonomous robots rely on multiple sensors for perception, localization, and navigation. These sensors
provide critical data for odometry, mapping, and localization, allowing the robot to move eﬀiciently while
avoiding obstacles. By integrating complementary sensing modalities, robots achieve robust autonomy
and adapt to dynamic environments.
2.6.1
Odometry and Motion Estimation
Odometry refers to estimating a robot’s position over time using onboard sensors. This is necessary for
navigation, as it helps the robot track its movements and determine its location within an environment.
However, odometry alone is prone to cumulative errors, making it necessary to integrate multiple sensors
for improved accuracy.
Figure
2.11:
Odometry estimation example
[Ope25].
Figure 2.12: Wheel encoder used for odometry
[Ope25].
==PAGE:18==
2.6 Sensors for Robot Navigation
13
• Wheel Encoders: These sensors measure the rotation of the robot’s wheels to estimate distance
traveled and velocity. The total displacement can be determined by counting the number of wheel
rotations and multiplying by the wheel circumference. However, wheel encoders suffer from inac-
curacies due to wheel slippage and uneven terrain, leading to long-term drift [JF96].
Figure 2.13: IMU diagram [For23]
• Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU): IMUs consist of accelerometers and gyroscopes that mea-
sure linear acceleration and angular velocity, respectively. These sensors help track the robot’s
orientation and motion. However, standalone IMUs also experience drift over time. To mitigate
errors, IMU data is often combined with wheel encoder readings using sensor fusion techniques like
Kalman filtering [DT99].
2.6.2
Environmental Perception and Mapping
Mapping sensors help the robot understand its surroundings by creating spatial representations of the
environment. These representations enable effective path planning, obstacle avoidance, and localization.
Figure 2.14: LiDAR Diagram [BC22].
• LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging): LiDAR sensors use laser pulses to measure distances
to surrounding objects, generating a detailed 2D or 3D point cloud. This technology is widely
used in Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) due to its precision and ability to scan
the entire environment in 360 degrees. LiDAR is particularly useful for autonomous vehicles and
mobile robots operating in dynamic environments [SF02].
• Cameras: Vision-based sensors, including monocular and stereo cameras, capture images that can
be processed for mapping and obstacle detection.
2.6.3
Localization and Sensor Fusion
Localization enables a robot to determine its position within an environment. Since no single sensor
provides perfect localization, multiple sources of information are often combined to improve accuracy.
• Global Positioning System (GPS): GPS provides absolute positioning using satellite signals,
making it effective for outdoor navigation. However, GPS signals are unreliable in indoor environ-
ments, tunnels, and urban canyons. To compensate for these limitations, GPS data is often fused
with IMU and LiDAR-based localization methods [KM07].
==PAGE:19==
14
2 Background and Literature Review
• Sensor Fusion Techniques:
– Extended Kalman Filter (EKF): The Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is a popular technique
used for state estimation in systems where the process and sensor models are nonlinear, such
as in robotics for localization and navigation. It combines predictions from a system’s dynamic
model with actual sensor measurements, adjusting the estimated state by considering the un-
certainty in both the model and the sensors. The EKF operates in two main steps: prediction
and correction. In the prediction step, the filter uses the system’s dynamics to forecast the
state and its uncertainty. In the correction step, it refines this prediction by incorporating
new sensor data, updating the state estimate based on the difference between the predicted
and observed measurements.
The advantage of the EKF is its ability to handle noisy and uncertain measurements, making
it well-suited for real-world applications where sensor data is often imperfect. The algorithm
continuously balances trust between the model and the sensor data, adjusting the estimate and
its associated uncertainty. Tuning parameters such as process noise and initial state covariance
is essential to ensuring that the EKF functions correctly and eﬀiciently. By appropriately
balancing these components, the EKF can provide accurate state estimates in dynamic and
noisy environments.
– Particle Filter (PF): The Particle Filter (PF) is a probabilistic method used to estimate a
system’s state by maintaining multiple hypotheses, or ”particles,” each representing a possible
state. As the system evolves, particles are propagated based on the system’s dynamics, and
their weights are updated according to the consistency between predicted and observed data.
This method is particularly effective for nonlinear systems and non-Gaussian noise, making
it robust in dynamic and uncertain environments, such as robot localization and tracking.
While the PF is highly flexible and can handle complex situations, such as multimodal state
distributions, it is computationally intensive, especially when a large number of particles is
needed, limiting its real-time applicability.
Integrating multiple sensors so the robot maintains an accurate estimate of its position even in the
presence of noise and drift.
2.7
ROS2 Framework
Robot Operating System 2 (ROS2) is an open-source middleware framework designed to facilitate the
development of modular, scalable, and distributed robotic applications [MKA16]. It builds upon the
foundation of ROS1 while addressing limitations in real-time performance, security, and multi-platform
support. ROS2 introduces improvements in communication mechanisms, computational eﬀiciency, and
flexibility, making it suitable for a wide range of robotics applications, from autonomous vehicles to
industrial automation.
Figure 2.15: ROS2
==PAGE:20==
2.7 ROS2 Framework
15
ROS2 provides developers with a wide array of tools, libraries, and conventions that streamline the
process of designing, simulating, testing, and controlling robotic systems. Its robust communication
framework, based on the Data Distribution Service (DDS) standard, allows for eﬀicient and reliable
data exchange between distributed components, such as sensors, actuators, and processing units.
ROS2’s strengths lie in its ability to enable complex systems that require high performance, flexibility,
and real-time capabilities. These features make it an ideal choice for use in robotics applications where
responsiveness, security, and scalability are important.
2.7.1
Features and Benefits of ROS2
• Real-Time Capabilities: ROS2 introduces support for multi-threading, real-time scheduling,
and deterministic execution, making it suitable for time-sensitive tasks [MKA16]. These features
guarantees that robotic systems can handle high-frequency sensor data, perform dynamic motion
control, and respond to environmental changes with minimal latency.
• Cross-Platform Support: Unlike earlier versions of ROS, ROS2 is designed to run on multiple
operating systems, including Linux, Windows, macOS, and real-time embedded systems [ES21].
This allows developers to deploy robotic software across a variety of hardware architectures, from
powerful industrial PCs to resource-constrained microcontrollers.
• Security Enhancements: With the growing need for secure robotic systems, ROS2 incorporates
encryption, authentication, and access control mechanisms [MMP20]. These security features pro-
tect data transmission, prevent unauthorized access, and establishes safe operation in networked
environments.
• Eﬀicient Package Management: The introduction of colcon, a powerful build system, simpli-
fies the compilation and dependency management of ROS2 projects [Mac+22]. This tool enhances
workflow eﬀiciency by supporting parallel builds and automated package discovery.
• Improved Simulation Support: ROS2 integrates with Gazebo, Webots, and other simulation
tools, allowing developers to test robotic algorithms in realistic virtual environments before deploy-
ing them on physical hardware [KH04]. This accelerates development while reducing costs and
risks associated with real-world testing.
2.7.2
ROS2 Architecture
The core architecture of ROS2 is built around DDS, a middleware standard designed for high-performance,
distributed communication. DDS enables publish-subscribe and request-response communication models
while providing fine-grained control over data flow through QoS settings [Vin15].
One of the advantages of ROS2’s architecture is its scalability. It allows for decentralized com-
munication, meaning that robots can exchange messages without relying on a central master node.
This makes ROS2 highly suitable for large-scale multi-robot systems and applications that require fault
tolerance.
Figure 2.16: ROS2 communication nodes and topics [Rob23]
==PAGE:21==
16
2 Background and Literature Review
Moreover, ROS2 follows a modular approach, meaning individual components (such as sensor drivers,
control algorithms, and planning modules) can be developed and tested independently. This modularity
simplifies debugging and enables integration of additional functionalities as systems evolve.
Figure 2.17: ROS2 architecture [Add23]
ROS 2 (Robot Operating System 2) is built on a layered architecture for modularity, flexibility, and
portability. The layers, from top to bottom, are as follows:
• Application Layer: Robotics apps (nodes, packages, launch files).
• Client Layer: APIs/tools (e.g., rclcpp, rclpy).
• Abstract DDS Layer: Middleware abstraction (DDS standard).
• DDS Implementation Layer: Specific DDS (e.g., Fast DDS, Cyclone DDS).
• Operating System Layer: OS/hardware (e.g., Linux, Windows).
These layers work together to provide a robust framework for robotics development. Here’s why this
layered architecture is important:
• Modularity: Clear separation of concerns for easier development and maintenance.
• Flexibility: Ability to swap components (e.g., DDS implementations) without affecting the entire
system.
• Portability: Runs on multiple operating systems and hardware platforms.
2.7.3
ROS2 Foxy Fitzroy: A Stable LTS Distribution
Foxy Fitzroy is an LTS (Long-Term Support) release of ROS2, providing five years of stability and
oﬀicial maintenance [Rob20]. It is widely adopted in both academia and industry due to its reliability,
extensive documentation, and strong community support.
The choice of Foxy Fitzroy for this research is based on its maturity, compatibility with a wide range
of ROS2 packages, documentation available, and previous experience.
==PAGE:22==
2.8 Gazebo Simulation Environment
17
2.7.4
ROS2 in This Research
In this thesis, ROS2 serves as the primary middleware for handling sensor data, executing control algo-
rithms, and managing actuator commands. The following aspects of ROS2 are particularly relevant to
the research:
• Sensor Data Management: ROS2 integrates LiDAR and IMU data streams, providing real-
time feedback essential for localization, mapping, and navigation tasks [Mac+22].
• Control Algorithms: This research implements motion planning and decision-making algorithms
using ROS2. The framework’s real-time capabilities allow for precise execution of control policies,
including Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)-based behaviors.
• Actuator Communication: ROS2 permits so that motor control commands are executed with
minimal delay for robotic locomotion and navigation.
• System Modularity and Extensibility: The modular architecture of ROS2 permits expansion
of functionalities. If additional sensors, actuators, or control strategies are needed, they can be
integrated into the system with minimal modifications.
2.8
Gazebo Simulation Environment
Gazebo is an advanced robotics simulation platform designed to test and validate algorithms in a con-
trolled virtual environment. It enables researchers to develop robotic systems without requiring immedi-
ate access to physical hardware, reducing development costs and risks. With support for physics-based
simulation, sensor emulation, and multi-robot coordination, Gazebo is widely used in academia and
industry for testing autonomous navigation strategies [KH04].
Figure 2.18: Gazebo diagram [sma]
2.8.1
Features and Benefits
• Physics-Based Simulation: Gazebo incorporates physics engines such as ODE and Bullet, en-
abling accurate modeling of forces, collisions, and dynamics.
This ensures realistic interaction
between robots and their environment.
==PAGE:23==
18
2 Background and Literature Review
• Sensor Emulation: The platform includes support for LiDAR, IMU, cameras, and depth sensors,
allowing developers to test perception-based algorithms before deploying them on physical robots.
• Integration with ROS2: Through the gazebo_ros_pkgs interface, Gazebo seamlessly communi-
cates with ROS2 nodes, enabling real-time data exchange between the simulation and the control
algorithms [Mac+22].
• Customizable Environments: Users can create and modify simulated worlds using SDF (Simu-
lation Description Format) or import 3D models, making it possible to design scenarios that closely
resemble real-world operating conditions.
• Scalability for Multi-Robot Testing: Gazebo supports multiple robot instances in a single
environment, making it useful for studying swarm robotics, collaborative systems, and decentralized
navigation strategies.
2.8.2
Gazebo in This Research
Gazebo serves as a critical component in this research, allowing for rigorous testing of the autonomous
navigation framework before real-world deployment. The following aspects explain its role:
• Training and Evaluating DRL Policies: The robot’s navigation model, based on Deep Re-
inforcement Learning (DRL), is trained in Gazebo to simulate complex environments with
obstacles, varying terrains, and dynamic elements.
• Simulated Sensor Data: LiDAR and IMU measurements generated in Gazebo closely mimic
real-world sensor outputs, enabling validation of mapping, localization, and obstacle detection
algorithms.
• Control System Testing: Motion planning and decision-making algorithms are evaluated in
Gazebo to ensure stable and eﬀicient navigation before being transferred to physical hardware.
• Stress Testing in Dynamic Scenarios: Various environmental conditions, such as moving
obstacles, lighting variations, and different terrains, are simulated to assess the robustness of the
robot’s navigation stack.
By utilizing Gazebo, this research has a structured approach to developing and validating the navi-
gation system, minimizing the risks and uncertainties associated with real-world testing.
2.9
Related Work
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has gained significant traction in the field of autonomous robot
navigation, offering a data-driven approach to decision-making in complex environments. Several studies
have explored various aspects of DRL-based navigation, from vision-based control to hybrid methods
that integrate classical navigation techniques.
Tai et al. [TLL17] provided a comprehensive survey on DRL applications in robotic control, with
a particular emphasis on mapless navigation. Their work demonstrated the feasibility of end-to-end
learning-based navigation using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and vision-based sensors. They
highlighted the advantages of DRL in handling unstructured environments where conventional mapping-
based techniques struggle. Their findings suggest that DRL-based navigation can effectively generalize
to unseen scenarios, making it a viable alternative to traditional methods.
Fujimoto et al. [FHM18b] introduced the Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3)
algorithm, an improvement over the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) method. Their study
addressed the overestimation bias in actor-critic architectures by incorporating twin Q-networks and
delayed policy updates. This advancement significantly enhanced stability and performance in continuous
control tasks, including autonomous navigation, by mitigating the harmful effects of overestimation errors
during training. Given the reliance of DRL-based navigation on stable policy learning, TD3 has become
a cornerstone for many modern DRL implementations.
Liu et al. [Liu+22] developed an adaptive hybrid DRL-SLAM framework, integrating the strengths of
both learning-based and traditional Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) approaches. Their
==PAGE:24==
2.9 Related Work
19
method dynamically adjusts navigation strategies based on real-time environmental feedback, achieving a
balance between exploration and exploitation. This research underscores the potential of combining DRL
with classical robotics techniques, offering both adaptability and precision in real-world deployment.
Open-source implementations have played a significant role in advancing DRL-based navigation. The
TurtleBot3 DRL repository [Dev23] provides practical implementations of DRL algorithms, including
DDPG and PPO, for mobile robot navigation.
It serves as a valuable resource for researchers and
developers by offering a standardized benchmarking framework for DRL-based autonomous navigation
systems.
These studies are relevant to DRL techniques in robotic navigation, from purely learning-based
approaches to hybrid methodologies that integrate classical robotics concepts. The advancements in
DRL algorithms combined with open-source contributions have laid the foundation for more robust and
adaptable autonomous navigation solutions.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
3.1
System Overview
In this work, a novel approach to robot navigation is implemented using Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL), where traditional path planning methods, such as A* or dynamic programming, are replaced
by self-learning algorithms. This method enables the robot to adapt to its environment dynamically,
learning optimal behaviors through trial and error rather than relying on predefined rules.
Figure 3.1: Overview
The navigation system is based on two prominent DRL algorithms: Deep Deterministic Policy Gradi-
ent (DDPG) and Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3). Both algorithms are designed
for continuous action spaces, making them well-suited for robotics applications, where fine-grained con-
trol over movement is essential.
The robot and simulation integrate multiple hardware components to enable deep reinforcement
learning-based navigation. The Raspberry Pi serves as the primary computing unit, running the ROS 2
framework to manage communication between various sensors, actuators, and the deep learning model.
Odometry data is gathered using motor encoders and an IMU, while a LiDAR sensor provides real-time
mapping and localization capabilities. The Arduino Nano assists in low-level motor control and obstacle
detection, relaying data to the Raspberry Pi.
==PAGE:26==
3.1 System Overview
21
Figure 3.2: System overview
3.1.1
ROS 2 Communication and Data Examples
The system uses ROS 2 for message-based communication between different components. The Raspberry
Pi acts as the main computational unit, subscribing to sensor topics and publishing motor commands.
Below are examples of messages exchanged between components.
3.1.1.1
LiDAR Data (/scan)
The LiDAR provides a sensor_msgs/LaserScan message, which contains an array of distance readings:
1 header:
2
stamp: 1717650191.25
3
frame_id: "laser_frame"
4 angle_min: -1.57
5 angle_max: 1.57
6 angle_increment: 0.01
7 range_min: 0.1
8 range_max: 12.0
9 ranges: [0.58, 0.60, 0.62, ..., 1.20]
3.1.1.2
IMU Data (/imu)
The IMU provides orientation, angular velocity, and linear acceleration in a sensor_msgs/Imu message:
1 header:
2
stamp: 1717650192.12
==PAGE:27==
22
3 Methodology
3
frame_id: "imu_frame"
4 orientation:
5
x: 0.01
6
y: -0.02
7
z: 0.99
8
w: 0.03
9 angular_velocity:
10
x: 0.01
11
y: 0.02
12
z: -0.01
13 linear_acceleration:
14
x: 0.12
15
y: 0.03
16
z: 9.81
3.1.1.3
Odometry Data (/odom)
The odometry message nav_msgs/Odometry includes position, velocity, and orientation:
1 header:
2
stamp: 1717650193.50
3
frame_id: "odom"
4 pose:
5
position:
6
x: 1.24
7
y: 0.57
8
z: 0.0
9
orientation:
10
x: 0.01
11
y: -0.02
12
z: 0.99
13
w: 0.03
14 twist:
15
linear:
16
x: 0.15
17
y: 0.0
18
z: 0.0
19
angular:
20
x: 0.0
21
y: 0.0
22
z: 0.05
3.1.1.4
Motor Control Commands (/cmd_vel)
Motor commands are published as a geometry_msgs/Twist message:
1 linear:
2
x: 0.2
3
y: 0.0
4
z: 0.0
5 angular:
6
x: 0.0
7
y: 0.0
8
z: 0.1
3.1.2
Communication Flow
The Raspberry Pi processes incoming sensor data and publishes control commands to the Arduino Nano,
which directly controls the motor driver. The communication architecture follows the ROS 2 publisher-
subscriber model with eﬀicient real-time processing.
==PAGE:28==
3.1 System Overview
23
3.1.3
Observation Space
The robot’s decision-making process is informed by a rich set of sensory inputs, which form the observa-
tion space. These inputs include:
• LiDAR scans: Providing a detailed representation of the environment, LiDAR data allows the
robot to perceive obstacles and navigate through complex terrains.
• IMU data: Offering feedback on the robot’s motion stability, the IMU helps maintain smooth
and precise movement, particularly during turns or acceleration.
• Velocity feedback: This allows the robot to adjust its speed in real-time based on its current
velocity, aiding in more accurate control during navigation.
Together, these sensors form a comprehensive understanding of the robot’s state, which is necessary
for effective learning and decision-making.
3.1.4
Action Space
The robot operates within a continuous action space, where the available actions include:
• Linear velocity: Control over the robot’s speed, allowing it to move forward or backward.
• Angular velocity: Control over the robot’s turning rate, enabling precise adjustments in heading
direction.
These actions are translated into velocity commands, sent through ROS topics like /cmd_vel, directly
influencing the robot’s movement.
3.1.5
Actor-Critic-Based Navigation
To effectively navigate and make decisions, the robot employs an actor-critic reinforcement learning
framework. This consists of two neural networks working in tandem:
• The actor network selects actions based on the sensory inputs s (LiDAR, IMU, and odometry
data). It outputs velocity commands that aim to drive the robot toward its goal.
• The critic network evaluates the chosen actions, providing feedback to the actor regarding the
quality of its decisions. This evaluation helps refine the policy by assigning values to different
actions and guiding the learning process.
Through this approach, the robot continuously learns to optimize its movement strategies by improv-
ing the actor’s ability to select beneficial actions and refining the critic’s capacity to evaluate them.
3.1.6
Reward Function
The reward function plays a crucial role in guiding the robot’s learning.
It is designed to reinforce
desirable behaviors and discourage mistakes:
• Positive rewards are granted when the robot moves closer to the goal, encouraging eﬀicient
progress.
• Negative rewards are given for undesirable actions, such as collisions with obstacles or ineﬀicient
navigation.
• A timeout penalty is implemented to avoid situations where the robot becomes stuck or stagnant,
ensuring continuous exploration and progress.
These rewards serve as feedback signals that direct the learning process, helping the robot fine-tune
its policies over time.
==PAGE:29==
24
3 Methodology
3.1.7
Training and Deployment
The policy is first trained in a simulation environment, where the robot interacts with a virtual version of
its real-world environment. This training process utilizes an NVIDIA RTX 3070 GPU. Once the policy
reaches satisfactory performance levels, it is transferred to the real robot for deployment.
The real-world implementation is ongoing and involves deploying the trained neural network on a
Raspberry Pi, which controls the robot’s actions. This step bridges the gap between simulated learning
and real-world application, marking the final stage of the robot’s development.
3.2
System Architecture
In this system architecture, figure 3.3 shows a simplified version of the navigation system, it is based
on the node graphs from ROS2, it combines robotics hardware (TurtleBot3) or a simulated environment
(Gazebo) with reinforcement learning techniques to enable autonomous navigation and decision-making.
Figure 3.3: System architecture
1. The Simulation / Turtlebot3 (either a real TurtleBot3 or a Gazebo simulation) streams data
via topics.
2. The DRL Environment Node processes the sensory input (/pose, /scan, /odom) into a state,
calculates rewards, and sends actions (via /cmd_vel) back to the robot.
3. The DRL Algorithm Node learns optimal policies (using TD3 or DDPG) to achieve goals like
navigation, obstacle avoidance, or exploration.
This architecture provides a setup where hardware, simulation, and learning components are clearly
separated, allowing flexible development and testing.
3.2.1
DRL Environment Node
This component bridges the ROS2 world and the DRL algorithm. It performs the following tasks:
• State: Receives data from ROS2 topics (/pose, /scan, /odom) and processes them into a state
representation understandable by the DRL algorithm.
• Reward: Computes a reward signal based on the robot’s actions and their outcomes (e.g., prox-
imity to the goal, collision penalties, etc.).
• Action: Takes actions (velocity commands) generated by the DRL algorithm and publishes them
to the /cmd_vel topic in ROS2.
==PAGE:30==
3.2 System Architecture
25
This node effectively acts as the ”environment” for the reinforcement learning process.
3.2.2
DRL Algorithm Node
The DRL Algorithm Node serves as the core computational unit where the Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) algorithms are implemented and executed. This component is responsible for learning optimal
policies through interaction with the environment by processing state observations, computing actions,
and updating the policy based on reward feedback. It integrates two DRL methods, those are TD3 and
DDPG. By utilizing neural networks for policy and value function approximation, this node provides
eﬀicient decision-making and policy improvement in complex environments. Below, a detailed description
and pseudocode for the algorithms utilized in this node.
Figure 3.4: DDPG vs TD3 [triplet_avg_ddpg]
3.2.2.1
Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3)
TD3 is a reinforcement learning algorithm for continuous action spaces, enhancing the Deep Determinis-
tic Policy Gradient (DDPG) by mitigating overestimation errors and stabilizing training. It achieves this
through clipped double Q-learning (using the minimum of two Q-value estimates), target policy smooth-
ing (adding noise to target actions to reduce exploitation of overestimated Q-values), and delayed policy
updates (updating the actor less frequently than the critic). These improvements make TD3 robust for
tasks like autonomous robot navigation, where stable and precise control is essential.
• Double Q-learning: Uses two critic networks to reduce overestimation bias.
• Target smoothing: Adds noise to the target Q-values to prevent overfitting.
• Delayed updates: The actor and target networks are updated less frequently than the critics.
TD3 Algorithm steps
1. Initialize the Actor and Critic networks, and two target Q networks.
2. Initialize an empty replay buffer.
3. For each episode:
a) Select action at using the actor’s policy with added exploration noise.
b) Execute action at in the environment, observe rt and st+1.
c) Store the transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in the replay buffer.
d) Sample a mini-batch from the buffer.
==PAGE:31==
26
3 Methodology
e) Compute the target Q-value using both critic networks:
y = rt + γ min(Qtarget1(st+1, µtarget(st+1)), Qtarget2(st+1, µtarget(st+1)))
(3.1)
f) Update critics by minimizing the Bellman error:
L(θQ) = E(st,at,rt,st+1)[(Q(st, at; θQ) −y)2]
(3.2)
g) Delayed update of actor:
∇θµJ = Est[∇aQ(st, a; θQ)|a=µ(st)∇θµµ(st)]
(3.3)
h) Soft update the target networks:
θtarget
µ
←τθµ + (1 −τ)θtarget
µ
(3.4)
θtarget
Q1
←τθQ1 + (1 −τ)θtarget
Q1
(3.5)
θtarget
Q2
←τθQ2 + (1 −τ)θtarget
Q2
(3.6)
i) Add noise to the Q-value to smooth the target:
y = y + N,
N ∼N(0, σ2)
(3.7)
Algorithm 1 TD3 Algorithm Implementation
1: procedure TD3(device, sim_speed)
2:
Initialize noise with Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process
3:
Initialize TD3 parameters: policy_noise, noise_clip, policy_freq
4:
Initialize actor and critic networks and their targets
5:
Initialize optimizers for actor and critic networks
6:
Perform hard_update on actor and critic target networks
7:
function get_action(state, is_training, step, visualize=False)
8:
Convert state to tensor and pass through actor network if is_training then
9:
Add noise from Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process to action
10:
Clamp action between [−1.0, 1.0]
11:
12:
return action as a numpy array
13:
end function
14:
function get_action_random
15:
return Random action clipped to [−1.0, 1.0]
16:
end function
17:
function train(state, action, reward, state_next, done)
18:
Add noise to target policy and clamp it
19:
Compute next action using target actor
20:
Compute Qnext as the minimum of Q1 and Q2 from target critic
21:
Compute Qtarget using reward and Qnext
22:
Compute Q1 and Q2 from critic network
23:
Compute critic loss as MSE of Q1 and Q2 against Qtarget
24:
Optimize critic network if policy update condition is met then
25:
Compute actor loss as −E[Q1(s, π(s))]
26:
Optimize actor network
27:
Perform soft_update on actor and critic targets
28:
29:
return Critic loss and actor loss
30:
end function
31: end procedure
==PAGE:32==
3.2 System Architecture
27
3.2.2.2
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)
DDPG is a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm tailored for continuous action control. It employs
an actor-critic framework, where the actor outputs actions and the critic evaluates their quality. Features
include experience replay (sampling past transitions to improve stability) and target networks (slowly
updated copies of the actor and critic for smooth learning). DDPG is effective in robotic applications,
enabling an autonomous mobile robot to handle tasks requiring precise decision-making and control.
Figure 3.5: DDPG [You+23]
• Actor Network: A neural network that learns the policy function µ(s) to map state s to action
a.
• Critic Network: A neural network that estimates the Q-value function Q(s, a) for the state-action
pair (s, a).
• Target Networks: Both the actor and critic networks have target networks (slowly updated
copies) to stabilize training.
DDPG Algorithm Steps
1. Initialize the Actor-Critic networks with random weights.
2. Initialize target networks as copies of the actor and critic networks.
3. Initialize an empty replay buffer.
4. For each episode:
a) Select action at using the actor’s policy with exploration noise.
b) Execute action at in the environment, observe the reward rt and next state st+1.
c) Store the transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in the replay buffer.
d) Sample a mini-batch from the buffer.
e) Compute the target Q-value using the target networks:
y = rt + γQtarget(st+1, µtarget(st+1))
(3.8)
f) Update the critic by minimizing the Bellman error:
L(θQ) = E(st,at,rt,st+1)[(Q(st, at; θQ) −y)2]
(3.9)
g) Update the actor using the deterministic policy gradient:
∇θµJ = Est[∇aQ(st, a; θQ)|a=µ(st)∇θµµ(st)]
(3.10)
h) Soft update the target networks:
θtarget
µ
←τθµ + (1 −τ)θtarget
µ
(3.11)
θtarget
Q
←τθQ + (1 −τ)θtarget
Q
(3.12)
==PAGE:33==
28
3 Methodology
Algorithm 2 DDPG Algorithm Implementation
1: procedure DDPG(device, sim_speed)
2:
Initialize noise with Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process
3:
Initialize actor and critic networks and their targets
4:
Initialize optimizers for actor and critic networks
5:
Perform hard_update on actor and critic target networks
6:
function get_action(state, is_training, step, visualize=False)
7:
Convert state to tensor and pass through actor network
8:
if is_training then
9:
Add noise from Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process to action
10:
Clamp action between [−1.0, 1.0]
11:
return action as a numpy array
12:
end function
13:
function get_action_random
14:
return Random action clipped to [−1.0, 1.0]
15:
end function
16:
function train(state, action, reward, state_next, done)
17:
Compute next action using target actor
18:
Compute Qnext from target critic using statenext and actionnext
19:
Compute Qtarget using reward and Qnext
20:
Compute Q from critic using state and action
21:
Compute critic loss as MSE of Q against Qtarget
22:
Optimize critic network
23:
Compute predicted action from actor
24:
Compute actor loss as −E[Q(s, π(s))]
25:
Optimize actor network
26:
Perform soft_update on actor and critic targets
27:
return Critic loss and actor loss
28:
end function
29: end procedure
3.2.3
Reward Function Design
The reward function plays a critical role in guiding the agent’s behavior for successful navigation toward
the goal. It incorporates various factors that motivate the agent to prioritize goal achievement, avoid
obstacles, and reach faster. The following breakdown details each component of the reward function and
its corresponding purpose.
1
2 def get_reward_A(finish, action_linear , action_angular , goal_dist, goal_angle ,
min_obstacle_dist , time_lapse):
3
"""
4
Calculate the reward for the DRL-based navigation system based on various factors.
5
"""
6
# Yaw alignment reward: [-3.14, 0]
7
r_yaw = -2 * abs(goal_angle)
8
9
# Angular velocity penalty: [-4, 0]
10
r_vangular = -0.5 * (action_angular * 2)
11
12
# Distance to goal reward: [-1, 1]
13
r_distance = (2 * goal_dist_initial) / (goal_dist_initial + goal_dist) - 1
14
15
# Obstacle proximity penalty: [-20, 0]
16
r_obstacle = -20 if min_obstacle_dist < 0.22 else 0
17
18
# Linear velocity penalty: [-2 * (0.22^2), 0]
19
r_vlinear = -1 * ((0.22 - action_linear) * 20)
20
==PAGE:34==
3.2 System Architecture
29
21
# Base reward calculation
22
reward = r_yaw + r_distance + r_obstacle + r_vlinear + r_vangular - 1
23
24
# Adjust reward based on success or failure
25
if finish == SUCCESS:
26
reward += 2100
27
time.sleep(0.1)
# This delay is to prevent time_lapse bug
28
if 0 < time_lapse < 50:
#Time lapse is a countdown until TIMEOUT (50 SECONDS)
29
reward += time_lapse * 20
30
elif finish in (COLLISION_OBSTACLE , COLLISION_WALL):
31
reward -= 2000
32
elif finish == TIMEOUT:
33
reward -= 2100
34
35
return float(reward)
Listing 3.1: Reward function in python
3.2.3.1
Yaw Alignment Reward (ryaw)
• Formula: ryaw = −2 · |goal_angle|
• Purpose: Penalizes the agent for deviating from the ideal heading direction toward the goal. The
larger the deviation (in radians), the greater the penalty.
• Range: [−3.14, 0].
3.2.3.2
Angular Velocity Penalty (rvangular)
• Formula: rvangular = −0.5 · (action_angular2)
• Purpose: Discourages excessive angular velocity to promote smooth navigation.
• Range: [−4, 0].
3.2.3.3
Distance to Goal Reward (rdistance)
• Formula: rdistance =
2·goal_dist_initial
goal_dist_initial+goal_dist −1
• Purpose: Rewards the agent for reducing the distance to the goal. This term scales based on the
initial and current distances to make sure the reward is proportional.
• Range: [−1, 1].
3.2.3.4
Obstacle Proximity Penalty (robstacle)
• Formula:
robstacle =
(
−20
if min_obstacle_dist < 0.22
0
otherwise
• Purpose: Strongly penalizes the agent for getting too close to obstacles, encouraging collision-free
navigation.
• Range: [−20, 0].
3.2.3.5
Linear Velocity Penalty (rvlinear)
• Formula: rvlinear = −1 · ((0.22 −action_linear) · 20)
• Purpose: Penalizes the agent for reducing linear velocity below a threshold, incentivizing faster
and eﬀicient movement toward the goal.
• Range: [−2 · (0.222), 0].
3.2.3.6
Success and Failure Rewards
• On Success:
– Adds +2100 to the reward when the goal is reached.
==PAGE:35==
30
3 Methodology
– If the time remaining (time_lapse) is within a favorable range (0 < time_lapse < 50), the
reward is boosted by time_lapse · 20. This encourages the agent to complete the task quickly.
Rs =
(
2100 + τ · 10,
if 0 < τ < 50,
2100,
otherwise.
(3.13)
• On Failure:
– Adds −2000 for collisions (with obstacles or walls).
Rc =
(
−2000,
if s ∈{collision_obstacle, collision_wall},
0,
otherwise.
(3.14)
– Adds −2100 for timeouts, discouraging prolonged navigation attempts without success.
Rto =
(
−2100,
if s = timeout,
0,
otherwise.
(3.15)
3.2.3.7
Total Reward
In the total reward formula, the initial reward is calculated first during the exploration phase, based on
the robot’s behavior, such as its yaw angle, angular velocity, and distance to the goal. These components
are used to guide the agent through its navigation task in the early stages of the process.
Rinitial = −2 · |θg|
|
{z
}
ryaw
+ −0.5 · ω2
|
{z
}
rangular
+
 2 · d0
d0 + dg
−1

|
{z
}
rdistance
+
(
−20,
if dmin < 0.22
0,
otherwise
|
{z
}
robstacle
+ −1 · ((0.22 −v) · 20)
|
{z
}
rlinear
−1
(3.16)
Once exploration is complete and the robot encounters a success, failure, collision, or timeout event,
these rewards are then adjusted and added to the initial reward, as detailed in the success and failure
reward sections:
Rfinal = Rinitial + Rcollision + Rsuccess + Rtimeout
(3.17)
Thus, the total reward is calculated by adding the initial exploration reward to the success, failure,
collision, or timeout rewards. The total reward helps reinforce the agent’s learning by evaluating its
performance in different scenarios.
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Simulation
31
Algorithm 3 Reward Function
1: procedure get_reward_A(finish, alinear, aangular, dgoal, θgoal, dmin_obstacle, tlapse)
2:
rθ ←−2 · |θgoal|
3:
rω ←−0.5 · (a2
angular)
4:
rdist ←
2·dgoal_initial
dgoal_initial+dgoal −1 if dmin_obstacle < 0.22 then
5:
robstacle ←−20 else
6:
robstacle ←0
7:
8:
rvlinear ←−1 · ((0.22 −alinear) · 20)
9:
rtotal ←rθ + rdist + robstacle + rvlinear + rω −1 if finish == SUCCESS then
10:
rtotal ←rtotal + 2100
11:
time.sleep(0.1) if 50 > tlapse > 0 then
12:
rtotal ←rtotal + (tlapse · 10)
13:
14:
if finish == COLLISION_OBSTACLE or finish == COLLISION_WALL then
15:
rtotal ←rtotal −2000
16: if finish == TIMEOUT then
17:
rtotal ←rtotal −2100
18:
19:
return float(rtotal)
end procedure
20:
3.3
Simulation
The simulation environment is designed to replicate real-world navigation challenges for the TurtleBot3
robot. It is built using Gazebo and integrated with ROS2, facilitating realistic physics-based interactions
with obstacles, sensor noise, and control dynamics. The environment includes various elements to test
the Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) models effectively.
It is important to note that Ubuntu 20.04 and ROS2 Foxy are being used for the simulation set up,
this is due to a practical decision based on previous experience and available documentation.
These component represents the interaction with the robotic hardware or its simulation:
• Real TurtleBot3 or Gazebo Simulation: The system is designed to work with a physical robot
(TurtleBot3) or a simulated environment in Gazebo.
• Topics Used:
– /pose: Provides the robot’s position or localization data.
– /scan: Supplies data from the robot’s LIDAR sensor (e.g., obstacle information).
– /odom: Delivers odometry information, such as velocity and position over time.
– /cmd_vel: The topic used to send velocity commands to the robot to control its movement.
– /imu: Provides data from the Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), which includes:
∗Linear acceleration (acceleration along the x, y, and z axes).
∗Angular velocity (rotation rate around the x, y, and z axes).
∗Orientation (roll, pitch, and yaw angles)
This data helps monitor the robot’s orientation and movement, enabling tasks like navigation
and monitoring dynamic behaviors. During simulation the IMU is not used except to detect
a tumble, if this occurs then it registers it and resets it to the initial position. It is important
to note that it is mainly used with the Real Turtlebot3, hence that the matrix is constrained
as not all those variables are needed.
ROS2 handles the communication between these topics and the DRL Environment Node.
==PAGE:37==
32
3 Methodology
Using as reference figure 3.6 and figure 3.7, each simulation environment contains a designated goal
box (red circle) where the robot must navigate successfully. The TurtleBot3 (gray circle with white
center) moves around according to the DRL model, the purpose is to optimize trajectories toward this
goal while avoiding obstacles. The robot receives a reward for reaching the goal eﬀiciently and penalties
for collisions or deviating from the optimal path. It is important to note that it is actually a 3 dimensional
space, so each element also has a height, and as such, according to the physics engine, the robot can
”tumble” if the speed is not adjusted.
Figure 3.6: Gazebo simulated environment 1
Figure 3.7: Gazebo simulated environment 2
Figure 3.6 and 3.7 show examples of simulation scenarios used for training and testing the DRL
models.
Simulated Environment 1
This simulated environment consists of a square perimeter enclosing the
navigation area, with seven internal walls placed to create narrow corridors and obstacles. Two moving
dynamic obstacles are included to challenge the robot’s ability to navigate unpredictable surroundings.
Simulated Environment 2
This simulated environment adds complexity, it consists of a square
perimeter enclosing the navigation area, with eight internal walls placed to create narrow corridors
and obstacles. Six moving dynamic obstacles are included to challenge the robot’s ability to navigate
unpredictable surroundings.
The environments include:
• Goal Box:
– Each simulation environment contains a designated goal box where the robot must navigate
successfully. The DRL model is trained to optimize trajectories toward this goal while avoiding
obstacles.
The robot receives a reward for reaching the goal eﬀiciently and penalties for
collisions or deviating from the optimal path.
• Static Obstacles:
– Fixed objects are walls or barriers that the robot must navigate around.
– Designed to test fundamental path-planning capabilities and collision avoidance in a structured
space.
• Dynamic Obstacles:
– Dynamic obstacles are modeled as white cylinders.
– They introduce additional complexity, requiring the robot to continuously adapt its policy
rather than relying on static waypoints.
==PAGE:38==
3.4 Hardware
33
– Presence of unpredictable motion patterns enhances the realism of the training scenarios.
• Sensor Noise:
– Artificial noise is added to LiDAR and IMU data to bridge the gap between simulation and
reality.
– Proofs that trained policies remain effective when deployed on a real TurtleBot3, where sensor
readings are subject to variations and inaccuracies.
– Noise models account for factors such as LiDAR reflections, measurement drift, and IMU bias.
• Gazebo World Variations:
– Multiple environment configurations prevent overfitting and improve generalization.
– Figures 3.6 and
3.7 illustrate two distinct simulated environments with varying obstacle
quantity and navigation challenges.
– Diversity in these maps makes sure that the robot learns a robust navigation policy applicable
to real-world settings.
• Evaluation Metrics:
– The robot’s navigation performance is periodically assessed using metrics:
∗Collision rate – Measures how often the robot collides with obstacles.
∗Path eﬀiciency – In this case the only measurement taken into account is time, less time
equal higher reward, episode duration. Steps taken could be added, but that would be
for future work.
∗Success rate – Determines how frequently the robot reaches its goal without failure.
3.4
Hardware
The robotic platform used in this research is a customized version of the TurtleBot3, designed using
Fusion 360 for 3D modeling and component integration. The system was built with modularity and
expandability in mind, ensuring compatibility with ROS2 and deep reinforcement learning (DRL)-based
navigation. Figure 3.14 shows the CAD model of the robot.
Figure 3.8: Fusion 360 model of the robot design
Figure 3.9: Real robot
3.4.1
Components
The robot consists of several hardware components necessary for eﬀicient navigation and real-time
decision-making.
==PAGE:39==
34
3 Methodology
Component
Description
Connection
Motors
Two
DG001D-E
motors
with encoders for control
and localization
Connected to L298N motor driver
Motor Driver
L298N motor driver for
precise motion control
Connected to Arduino Nano
Sensors
RPLiDAR C1 (360-degree
scanning) for obstacle de-
tection
Connected to Raspberry Pi via USB
MPU6050 IMU (angular
velocity and acceleration)
for localization
Connected to Raspberry
Processing Units
Raspberry Pi 4 B (8GB)
for high-level DRL infer-
ence
Communicates with Arduino via serial
Arduino
Nano
for
low-
level motor control
Runs independent motor control logic
Power Supply
5000mAh power bank for
Raspberry Pi and Arduino
Provides stable 5V power
Battery
12V
battery
regulated
down to 9V for motors
Connected to LM2596 step-down regulator
Step-Down Regula-
tor
LM2596 (5V output) for
motor driver
Guarantees correct voltage supply
Table 3.1: Hardware Components and Their Connections
Figure 3.10: Diagram block of components
3.4.2
Real-World Robot Implementation
To validate the system, the hardware components were integrated into a real-world robotic platform.
Figures below showcase the circuit schematic and assembled robot showcases the final assembled robot.
==PAGE:40==
3.4 Hardware
35
Figure 3.11: Circuit Schematic
Figure 3.12: Top view of the robot
Figure 3.13: Rear view of the robot
Figure 3.14: Lateral view of the robot
Figure 3.15: Front view of the robot
==PAGE:41==
36
3 Methodology
3.4.3
LiDAR-Based Mapping and Visualization
The robot constructs an internal map of its surroundings using a combination of LiDAR and IMU sensors.
• LiDAR-Based Mapping: The RPLiDAR C1 continuously scans the environment, generating a
2D occupancy grid based on detected obstacles.
• IMU for Localization: The MPU6050 tracks angular velocity and acceleration, helping to esti-
mate the robot’s orientation.
• Sensor Fusion: LiDAR and IMU data are combined using an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) to
improve localization accuracy.
Figure 3.16: LiDAR-generated room scan in RViz2, showing detected obstacles in the real test area
Figure 3.17: Close-up view of LiDAR scan in RViz2, demonstrating fine details in obstacle detection
==PAGE:42==
3.4 Hardware
37
3.4.4
Odometry and Motion Estimation
The robot estimates its movement using a combination of wheel encoders and sensor feedback.
• Wheel Encoders: Each motor is equipped with encoders to measure rotational speed and dis-
placement.
• Estimated Position: The system estimates position based on encoder data, though errors accu-
mulate over time.
• Drift Correction: IMU feedback helps correct drift in estimated positioning calculations.
3.4.5
Obstacle Avoidance
The robot’s obstacle avoidance strategy is policy-driven, meaning it does not use explicit obstacle detec-
tion and path planning but instead learns to react based on reinforcement learning.
• LiDAR Feedback: The robot receives distance measurements and learns to adjust its velocity.
• Collision Penalties: The DRL model penalizes collisions, encouraging safe navigation.
• Adaptive Behavior: Over time, the robot learns to optimize movement patterns based on past
experiences.
3.4.6
ROS2 Communication: Role of Arduino and Raspberry Pi
The robot employs a ROS 2-based communication architecture to coordinate tasks between the Raspberry
Pi (high-level processing) and Arduino (low-level motor control).
• Raspberry Pi 4 B (8GB):
– Runs ROS 2 nodes for sensor data processing.
– Handles DRL-based decision-making (work in progress, at the moment it transmits and re-
ceives only).
– Publishes velocity commands to Arduino using the /cmd_vel topic.
• Arduino Nano:
– Receives velocity commands (/cmd_vel) from Raspberry Pi via a ROS 2 serial bridge.
– Controls motor speed and direction (only forward at the moment, for simplicity).
– Reads encoder data and transmits odometry information back to Raspberry Pi.
3.4.7
DRL-Based Navigation Strategy
Unlike classical methods that rely on predefined algorithms, the robot follows a deep reinforcement
learning approach using DDPG and TD3.
• Observation Space: - LiDAR scans (environmental perception) - IMU data (motion stability) -
Velocity feedback
• Action Space: - Linear velocity (move forward/backward) - Angular velocity (turn left/right)
• Actor-Critic Based Navigation: The robot uses an actor-critic reinforcement learning approach,
where the actor network selects actions (velocity commands - /cmd_vel) based on sensory inputs
(LiDAR - /scan, IMU - /imu, odometry data - /odom), while the critic network evaluates these
actions to improve decision-making.
• Reward Function: - Positive rewards for moving toward the goal - Negative rewards for collisions
or ineﬀiciency - Timeout penalty to prevent stagnation
• Training and Deployment: The policy was trained in simulation using an NVIDIA RTX 3070
GPU and is currently being transferred to the real-world robot for deployment on the Raspberry
Pi.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments and Results
4.1
Simulation Results
The Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) models, including TD3 and DDPG, were tested in two distinct
simulated environments to assess their performance in navigating through complex obstacle-laden spaces.
These environments were designed to replicate real-world challenges the TurtleBot3 robot might face
while autonomously navigating towards a goal, while avoiding static and dynamic obstacles.
To access the github repository use the following link: https://github.com/eaguiraud/EAGthesisREPO
4.1.1
TD3 in Simulated Environments
The TD3 algorithm, which is designed to address overestimation bias in action-value estimates, was
implemented and evaluated across two simulation environments with increasing levels of complexity.
TD3 operates in a continuous action space, enabling more precise control over the robot’s movement. In
the first simulation environment (Figure 3.6), TD3 showed a remarkable ability to navigate the robot
through narrow corridors, avoid static obstacles, and successfully adjust its path when encountering
moving dynamic obstacles. TD3 is eﬀicient at the handling of continuous action spaces, which allowed
the robot to make small, adaptive adjustments in real-time, leading to higher path eﬀiciency and a
reduced collision rate.
Figure 4.1: TD3 implementation 5600 episodes
In the second simulation environment (Figure 3.7), where six dynamic obstacles were introduced, TD3
again slightly outperformed other algorithms. The algorithm’s robustness in the face of unpredictably
moving obstacles and its ability to learn complex control strategies enabled the robot to navigate through
a cluttered environment with minimal collisions. TD3’s success rate in both environments remained high,
with the algorithm consistently reaching the goal within a reasonable amount of time, making it the most
reliable in handling the dynamic challenges posed by these environments.
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Simulation Results
39
Table 4.1: TD3 Averaged Statistics Every 200 Episodes
Episodes
Avg Reward
Avg Steps
Critic Loss
Actor Loss
Finish
1–200
-2760.00
190.00
21.20
36.50
{S:3.15, CW:73.50, CO:23.35, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
201–400
-2570.00
202.00
27.50
76.10
{S:13.65, CW:46.50, CO:38.75, T:0.00, Tm:1.10}
401–600
-2560.00
237.00
36.60
127.00
{S:20.85, CW:30.50, CO:47.95, T:0.70, Tm:0.00}
601–800
-2380.00
443.00
42.90
191.00
{S:44.55, CW:6.00, CO:40.95, T:8.00, Tm:0.50}
801–1000
-1890.00
523.00
46.20
271.50
{S:52.05, CW:0.55, CO:32.90, T:14.50, Tm:0.00}
1001–1200
-1790.00
475.00
45.90
320.00
{S:64.55, CW:1.05, CO:23.40, T:11.00, Tm:0.00}
1201–1400
-935.00
440.00
44.50
347.50
{S:63.55, CW:1.05, CO:24.90, T:10.50, Tm:0.00}
1401–1600
-745.00
443.00
42.60
370.00
{S:71.55, CW:1.05, CO:20.40, T:7.00, Tm:0.00}
1601–1800
-148.00
450.00
41.60
393.00
{S:72.55, CW:0.55, CO:17.90, T:9.00, Tm:0.00}
1801–2000
170.00
443.00
39.90
414.00
{S:78.55, CW:0.05, CO:10.40, T:11.00, Tm:0.00}
2001–2200
305.00
386.00
38.70
428.00
{S:74.55, CW:0.05, CO:13.40, T:12.00, Tm:0.00}
2201–2400
690.00
379.00
38.40
438.00
{S:84.05, CW:0.55, CO:9.90, T:5.50, Tm:0.00}
2401–2600
1055.00
348.00
38.30
444.00
{S:88.55, CW:0.55, CO:5.90, T:5.00, Tm:0.00}
2601–2800
1230.00
321.00
37.80
446.00
{S:90.55, CW:1.05, CO:5.40, T:3.00, Tm:0.00}
2801–3000
1135.00
314.00
36.70
442.00
{S:88.05, CW:0.05, CO:7.90, T:4.00, Tm:0.00}
3001–3200
1150.00
319.00
35.20
436.00
{S:87.55, CW:1.55, CO:6.40, T:4.50, Tm:0.00}
3201–3400
1156.00
330.00
34.20
431.00
{S:86.55, CW:0.55, CO:5.40, T:7.00, Tm:0.50}
3401–3600
1285.00
302.00
33.90
427.50
{S:90.05, CW:0.05, CO:5.90, T:4.00, Tm:0.00}
3601–3800
1120.00
310.00
33.90
426.00
{S:85.55, CW:1.05, CO:6.90, T:6.50, Tm:0.00}
3801–4000
1360.00
287.00
33.95
425.50
{S:89.55, CW:0.05, CO:5.90, T:4.50, Tm:0.00}
4001–4200
1135.00
317.00
34.20
424.80
{S:86.05, CW:2.05, CO:5.40, T:6.50, Tm:0.00}
4201–4400
1365.00
306.00
34.40
424.00
{S:91.05, CW:0.55, CO:4.90, T:3.50, Tm:0.00}
4401–4600
1280.00
337.00
34.65
423.40
{S:89.55, CW:0.05, CO:3.40, T:7.00, Tm:0.00}
4601–4800
1378.00
332.00
34.60
422.20
{S:93.55, CW:0.05, CO:3.40, T:3.00, Tm:0.00}
4801–5000
1290.00
319.00
34.70
420.00
{S:91.55, CW:0.05, CO:5.40, T:3.00, Tm:0.00}
5001–5200
1225.00
344.00
34.55
416.00
{S:89.50, CW:0.10, CO:5.00, T:5.40, Tm:0.00}
5201–5400
1270.00
294.00
34.20
413.30
{S:89.00, CW:0.10, CO:7.50, T:3.40, Tm:0.00}
5401–5600
1270.00
278.00
34.10
411.50
{S:87.50, CW:0.10, CO:7.00, T:5.40, Tm:0.00}
4.1.2
DDPG in Simulated Environments
The DDPG algorithm, which also works in a continuous action space, was evaluated in the same two simulation
environments.
DDPG demonstrated stable performance, but with occasional instabilities, particularly when
navigating confined spaces with tight corners or moving obstacles. In the first simulation environment, DDPG
was able to avoid static obstacles eﬀiciently and reached the goal in a reasonable amount of time. However,
during episodes with dynamic obstacles, the algorithm showed signs of over-rotation or drifting, resulting in a
higher collision rate compared to TD3.
Figure 4.2: DDPG implementation 7200 episodes
==PAGE:45==
40
4 Experiments and Results
In the second environment, with more dynamic obstacles, DDPG’s performance was more variable. Although
it was able to adapt to the moving obstacles and achieve a relatively high success rate, its path eﬀiciency was
lower than TD3’s. DDPG struggled with balancing smoothness and stability, especially when interacting with
dynamic obstacles that required the robot to make real-time adjustments.
Table 4.2: DDPG Averaged Statistics Every 200 Episodes
Episodes
Avg Reward
Avg Steps
Critic Loss
Actor Loss
Finish
1–200
-6300.00
1030.00
3.35
126.50
{S:5.65, CW:85.50, CO:8.85, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
201–400
-3740.00
530.00
5.65
236.50
{S:15.75, CW:56.50, CO:26.65, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
401–600
-2930.00
409.00
7.85
276.00
{S:20.65, CW:26.50, CO:52.85, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
601–800
-3240.00
449.00
10.05
303.00
{S:24.65, CW:20.50, CO:54.35, T:0.60, Tm:0.00}
801–1000
-2085.00
364.00
11.95
325.50
{S:33.65, CW:9.50, CO:56.85, T:0.60, Tm:0.00}
1001–1200
-1790.00
303.00
13.75
341.50
{S:35.15, CW:9.50, CO:55.35, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
1201–1400
-935.00
386.00
15.25
352.00
{S:56.65, CW:7.50, CO:35.85, T:0.60, Tm:0.00}
1401–1600
-745.00
405.00
14.95
336.00
{S:63.65, CW:7.50, CO:28.85, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
1601–1800
-148.00
411.50
14.15
316.00
{S:75.15, CW:1.55, CO:22.85, T:0.50, Tm:0.00}
1801–2000
88.00
399.50
13.55
297.50
{S:79.65, CW:1.55, CO:18.80, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
2001–2200
190.00
352.50
13.35
283.50
{S:75.25, CW:0.05, CO:23.80, T:0.50, Tm:0.00}
2201–2400
635.00
359.50
13.75
271.50
{S:83.55, CW:0.55, CO:15.90, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
2401–2600
463.00
358.50
14.15
261.00
{S:80.15, CW:0.05, CO:19.80, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
2601–2800
645.00
373.50
14.75
253.50
{S:84.15, CW:0.05, CO:15.80, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
2801–3000
808.00
357.00
15.05
244.00
{S:85.05, CW:0.05, CO:14.90, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
3001–3200
1173.00
360.00
15.15
231.00
{S:91.55, CW:0.05, CO:8.40, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
3201–3400
1018.00
359.00
15.15
221.00
{S:90.05, CW:1.05, CO:8.90, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
3401–3600
620.00
355.00
15.35
212.00
{S:82.55, CW:1.55, CO:15.40, T:0.50, Tm:0.00}
3601–3800
852.00
330.00
15.45
203.00
{S:85.05, CW:0.05, CO:14.90, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
3801–4000
902.00
367.00
15.15
194.00
{S:89.05, CW:0.05, CO:10.90, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
4001–4200
965.00
338.00
14.85
189.00
{S:88.05, CW:0.05, CO:11.90, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
4201–4400
987.00
325.00
14.65
185.00
{S:86.55, CW:0.05, CO:13.40, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
4401–4600
1076.00
303.00
14.45
180.00
{S:87.55, CW:0.05, CO:12.40, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
4601–4800
943.00
329.00
14.35
176.00
{S:86.55, CW:0.05, CO:13.40, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
4801–5000
970.00
322.00
14.05
172.00
{S:86.55, CW:0.05, CO:13.40, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
5001–5200
957.00
325.00
13.95
169.00
{S:86.05, CW:2.00, CO:11.95, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
5201–5400
1080.00
328.00
13.85
167.00
{S:89.55, CW:0.05, CO:10.40, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
5401–5600
1002.00
316.00
13.85
164.00
{S:86.55, CW:1.05, CO:12.40, T:0.00, Tm:0.00}
4.1.3
Performance Comparison in Simulated Environments
The results of the simulation revealed the following trends:
• TD3: Outperformed both DDPG in terms of collision avoidance, success rate, and path eﬀiciency, par-
ticularly in complex, dynamic environments. Its continuous action space allowed for smooth, real-time
adjustments, making it highly effective in navigating unpredictable environments.
• DDPG: Showed stable performance but struggled with occasional instabilities, particularly in tight spaces
or when dealing with dynamic obstacles.
Explanation of Results:
Table 4.3 provides a side-by-side comparison of the finish status for two algorithms—DDPG and TD3—across
several representative 200-episode blocks. In this table, the finish status has been decomposed into individual
outcomes:
• CW: Percentage of episodes ending due to a collision with the wall.
• CO: Percentage of episodes ending due to a collision with an obstacle.
• S: Percentage of episodes that end in success.
• T: Percentage of episodes ending in a timeout.
• Tm: Percentage of episodes ending due to a tumble.
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Simulation Results
41
Table 4.3: Comparison of Finish Status for DDPG vs TD3 (Averaged every 200 Episodes)
Episode Range
DDPG
TD3
CW
CO
S
T
Tm
CW
CO
S
T
Tm
1–200
85.50
8.85
5.65
0.00
0.00
73.50
23.35
3.15
0.00
0.00
201–400
56.50
26.65
15.75
0.00
0.00
46.50
38.75
13.65
0.00
1.10
401–600
26.50
52.85
20.65
0.00
0.00
30.50
47.95
20.85
0.70
0.00
601–800
20.50
54.35
24.65
0.60
0.00
6.00
40.95
44.55
8.00
0.50
801–1000
9.50
56.85
33.65
0.60
0.00
0.55
32.90
52.05
14.50
0.00
1001–1200
9.50
55.35
35.15
0.00
0.00
1.05
23.40
64.55
11.00
0.00
1201–1400
7.50
35.85
56.65
0.60
0.00
1.05
24.90
63.55
10.50
0.00
1401–1600
7.50
28.85
63.65
0.00
0.00
1.05
20.40
71.55
7.00
0.00
1601–1800
1.55
22.85
75.15
0.50
0.00
0.55
17.90
72.55
9.00
0.00
1801–2000
1.55
18.80
79.65
0.00
0.00
0.05
10.40
78.55
11.00
0.00
2001–2200
0.05
23.80
75.25
0.50
0.00
0.05
13.40
74.55
12.00
0.00
2201–2400
0.55
15.90
83.55
0.00
0.00
0.55
9.90
84.05
5.50
0.00
2401–2600
0.05
19.80
80.15
0.00
0.00
0.55
5.90
88.55
5.00
0.00
2601–2800
0.05
15.80
84.15
0.00
0.00
1.05
5.40
90.55
3.00
0.00
2801–3000
0.05
14.90
85.05
0.00
0.00
0.05
7.90
88.05
4.00
0.00
3001–3200
0.05
8.40
91.55
0.00
0.00
1.55
6.40
87.55
4.50
0.00
3201–3400
1.05
8.90
90.05
0.00
0.00
0.55
5.40
86.55
7.00
0.50
3401–3600
1.55
15.40
82.55
0.50
0.00
0.05
5.90
90.05
4.00
0.00
3601–3800
0.05
14.90
85.05
0.00
0.00
1.05
6.90
85.55
6.50
0.00
3801–4000
0.05
10.90
89.05
0.00
0.00
0.05
5.90
89.55
4.50
0.00
4001–4200
0.05
11.90
88.05
0.00
0.00
2.05
5.40
86.05
6.50
0.00
4201–4400
0.05
13.40
86.55
0.00
0.00
0.55
4.90
91.05
3.50
0.00
4401–4600
0.05
12.40
87.55
0.00
0.00
0.05
3.40
89.55
7.00
0.00
4601–4800
0.05
13.40
86.55
0.00
0.00
0.05
3.40
93.55
3.00
0.00
4801–5000
0.05
13.40
86.55
0.00
0.00
0.05
5.40
91.55
3.00
0.00
5001–5200
2.00
11.95
86.05
0.00
0.00
0.10
5.00
89.50
5.40
0.00
5201–5400
0.05
10.40
89.55
0.00
0.00
0.10
7.50
89.00
3.40
0.00
5401–5600
1.05
12.40
86.55
0.00
0.00
0.10
7.00
87.50
5.40
0.00
Early Training (Episodes 1–200):
Both algorithms start off poorly. DDPG suffers from extremely high wall collisions (85.5%) with very low success
(5.7%) and minimal obstacle collisions (8.9%). TD3, while having fewer wall collisions (73.5%), endures much
higher obstacle collisions (23.4%) and an even lower success rate (3.2%).
Transition (Episodes 201–400):
During this phase, both methods begin to adjust. DDPG reduces wall collisions (56.5%) and improves success
(15.8%, though obstacle collisions rise to 26.7%. TD3 also decreases wall collisions (46.5%) and slightly increases
success (13.7%), but experiences a surge in obstacle collisions (38.8%) along with a small timeout rate (1.1%).
Intermediate Training (Episodes 801–1800):
Between episodes 801 and 1800, both algorithms exhibit significant changes. For DDPG, success rates climb
markedly—from 33.7% in the 801–1000 block to 75.2% in the 1601–1800 range—while obstacle collisions drop
sharply from 56.9% to 22.9%, and wall collisions also decline. TD3 continues to maintain very low wall collisions
(around 0.5–1.0%), with its success rate rising from 52.1% to approximately 72% and obstacle collisions reducing
from 32.9% to 17.9%. Timeout rates for TD3 show moderate fluctuations. This intermediate phase is critical as
both algorithms substantially refine their policies, with DDPG showing particularly rapid improvement in overall
success and collision reduction.
Later Training (Episodes 1801–2000 and Beyond):
In the later stages, both methods converge to optimal performance. DDPG nearly eliminates wall collisions (1.6%)
and achieves a high success rate (79.7%) with moderate obstacle collisions (18.8%). TD3 further minimizes wall
collisions (0.1%), attains comparable success (78.6%), and reduces obstacle collisions (10.4%), though it maintains
a slightly higher timeout rate (11.0%). In subsequent ranges, both methods consistently exhibit minimal collisions
and success rates approaching 90%.
==PAGE:47==
42
4 Experiments and Results
Overall Conclusion:
While TD3 initially struggles with high obstacle collisions and timeouts compared to DDPG’s wall collision issues,
both algorithms refine their policies over time. The intermediate phase (801–1800) is particularly critical, with
significant improvements in success rates and collision reduction for both. Ultimately, both methods converge to
high-performing policies. On average, TD3 experiences a higher success rate throughout the later stages.
4.2
Real-World Testing
The next phase of testing was intended to validate the trained policies in real-world conditions on a physical
TurtleBot3 robot. However, real-world deployment encountered several challenges that hindered successful test-
ing.
4.2.1
Challenges in Real-World Testing
1. Hardware Integration: One of the major obstacles was integrating the trained DRL policies with the
physical TurtleBot3 robot. While the simulation environment used Gazebo to provide accurate physics
modeling, the transition to real hardware presented a range of diﬀiculties. These included sensor calibration
inconsistencies, where the IMU and LiDAR sensor data did not perfectly match the simulation, and issues
related to actuator response variability, which led to discrepancies in the robot’s motion compared to
simulated trajectories.
2. Network Communication Delays: The ROS2 communication system, which is essential for relaying
data between the robot’s sensors and the DRL model, suffered from occasional delays in real-time execution.
These delays negatively impacted the robot’s decision-making process, as the robot would sometimes receive
outdated sensor information, leading to suboptimal actions and increased collision rates.
3. Power Management: Power management was another significant issue. Due to the TurtleBot3’s reliance
on a battery, which was missing, maintaining a steady power supply for continuous testing was challenging.
Instead of using a battery a long wire was connected to a power source for testing.
4. Actuator Response Variability: Differences between the simulated and real-world actuator responses
were also a concern. In the simulation, the robot’s movements were predictable and smooth, but in the
real world, the actuators exhibited slight variations in movement due to physical factors such as motor
calibration and mechanical wear, making precise control more diﬀicult.
This was slightly mitigated by providing more grip to the wheels and also adjusting the IMU position on
the robot, as there was a slight offset.
4.3
Discussion
The simulation results and challenges in real-world testing provide valuable insights into the performance of DRL
algorithms for autonomous robot navigation.
• TD3: The TD3 algorithm demonstrated the highest performance in both simulated environments, particu-
larly in complex and dynamic scenarios. Its ability to handle continuous action spaces effectively mitigated
overestimation bias, leading to smoother navigation and fewer collisions. However, TD3 is computationally
intensive, and hyperparameter tuning is neccesary for optimal performance. These factors may limit its
deployment in real-time applications, where computational resources are more constrained.
• DDPG: DDPG offered a good balance between performance and computational eﬀiciency, making it a
suitable choice for environments with moderate complexity. However, its performance in highly dynamic
environments could be improved, especially in terms of stability and smooth control.
The simulation results provide useful benchmarks for selecting the most appropriate DRL algorithm based
on the complexity of the task and the environment. While TD3 showed the best overall performance, DDPG
remains a viable option for less complex scenarios.
In the future, with improvements in hardware integration and real-world testing, these algorithms have the
potential to enable highly effective autonomous navigation systems for mobile robots like the TurtleBot3. Future
work will focus on refining the models and resolving the hardware challenges to move towards fully operational
systems capable of real-world deployment.
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER5
Conclusion and Future Work
5.1
Summary of Findings
This thesis developed a deep reinforcement learning (DRL)-based navigation system that integrates LiDAR and
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) sensors to enable autonomous robotic navigation. The system was tested in
a simulated environment using two DRL algorithms: Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) and Twin
Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3). The objective was to train an agent capable of navigating
unknown environments while avoiding obstacles and optimizing its path eﬀiciency.
The key findings of this research are as follows:
• TD3 demonstrated superior performance: Among the tested algorithms, TD3 consistently outper-
formed DDPG in terms of success rate, collision avoidance, and trajectory eﬀiciency.
• Training in a simulated environment was successful: The DRL agent was trained using a reward
function designed to encourage obstacle avoidance and eﬀicient path planning. Training results showed
that the system effectively learned navigation strategies, adjusting its trajectory based on LiDAR and
positioning feedback.
• Challenges in real-world implementation: Although the trained policy performed well in simulation,
transferring the learned policy to a real-world robot presented significant challenges. The primary diﬀi-
culties included sensor noise, environmental variations, and discrepancies between the simulated and real
sensor models. These limitations prevented the system from achieving reliable autonomous navigation in
physical environments, further research is needed in this area.
While the simulation results demonstrate the potential of DRL-based navigation, the challenges encountered
in real-world deployment indicate that additional improvements are necessary before the system can be reliably
used in practical autonomous navigation applications. Addressing these challenges is essential for future research,
as discussed in the next section.
5.2
Future Directions
Despite the promising outcomes in simulation, the real-world implementation of the trained DRL models did
not achieve the expected level of performance.
Future research should focus on addressing these challenges
for effective deployment in real robotic platforms. Several areas for improvement and further investigation are
identified:
• Enhancing reward functions for real-world adaptability: The reward functions used in training
were primarily designed for simulation, where environmental conditions are controlled. Future work should
develop adaptive reward mechanisms that take into account real-world uncertainties such as dynamic
obstacles, uneven terrain, and sensor inaccuracies. Reinforcement learning models can be refined using
techniques like inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) or human-in-the-loop training to create more realistic
reward structures.
• Incorporating additional sensor modalities: The current system relies on LiDAR and IMU sensors,
but additional perception capabilities could improve real-world navigation. Depth cameras, RGB cameras,
and radar sensors can enhance environmental awareness and provide redundancy in case of sensor failures.
Sensor fusion techniques, such as Extended Kalman Filters (EKF) or deep learning-based sensor integration,
can be employed to combine data from multiple sources for more robust navigation.
• Bridging the sim-to-real gap through transfer learning: One of the primary reasons for the real-
world implementation failure was the discrepancy between simulated and real-world conditions. To miti-
gate this, transfer learning approaches can be explored, where a DRL model pre-trained in simulation is
fine-tuned using real-world data. Additionally, domain randomization techniques, where the simulation
environment is intentionally varied during training, can help improve generalization to real-world settings.
• Reducing training time and computational costs: Training DRL models from scratch is computation-
ally expensive and time-consuming. Future research could investigate methods to speed up training, such
==PAGE:49==
44
5 Conclusion and Future Work
as utilizing pre-trained policies, using imitation learning, or employing meta-learning strategies to improve
sample eﬀiciency. Cloud-based training frameworks and distributed reinforcement learning architectures
could further enhance scalability and eﬀiciency.
• Implementing robust real-world testing protocols:
The failure to achieve successful real-world
navigation points out the need for improved evaluation methods. Future studies should establish systematic
testing protocols that gradually introduce the DRL model to real-world environments.
• Exploring multi-robot coordination and collaborative navigation: While this research focused on
a single robot, extending DRL-based navigation to multi-robot systems presents an exciting avenue for
future work. Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) techniques can be employed to enable robots to
cooperate in tasks such as distributed mapping, search-and-rescue, and warehouse automation.
Future research can enhance the reliability and practicality of DRL-based navigation, making it viable for
real-world autonomous robotic applications. The integration of advanced learning techniques, additional sensor
modalities, and real-world adaptive strategies will be necessary to overcome current limitations and unlocking
the full potential of reinforcement learning in robotic navigation.
==PAGE:50==
APPENDIXA
An Appendix
A.1
Circuit Diagram
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[Add23]
Automatic Addison. ROS 2 Architecture Overview. 2023. url: https://automaticaddison.
com/ros-2-architecture-overview/.
[Ban20]
Chandan Banerjee. States, Observation and Action Spaces in Reinforcement Learning. 2020.
url: https : / / medium . com / swlh / states - observation - and - action - spaces - in -
reinforcement-learning-569a30a8d2a1.
[BC22]
Brown and Caldwell. Innovative LiDAR Scanning Helps Utilities Above and Below. March
2022. url: https://brownandcaldwell.com/2022/03/innovative- lidar- scanning-
helps-utilities-above-and-below/.
[Dev23]
ROBOTIS Developers. TurtleBot3 DRL Repository. 2023. url: https://github.com/
ROBOTIS-GIT/turtlebot3_machine_learning.
[DT99]
W. Burgard D. Fox and S. Thrun. “Monte Carlo Localization: Eﬀicient Position Estimation
for Mobile Robots.” In: Proc. National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI). 1999,
pages 343–349.
[ES21]
M. Elbanhawi and M. Simic. “ROS2 for autonomous vehicle applications.” In: Proc. IEEE
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV). 2021, pages 181–186.
[FHM18a]
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. “Addressing Function Approximation Error
in Actor-Critic Methods.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09477 (2018). url: https://arxiv.
org/pdf/1802.09477.
[FHM18b]
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. “Addressing Function Approximation Error
in Actor-Critic Methods.” In: Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML). 2018, pages 1587–1596.
[For23]
16rd Forum. Thread: 603603. 2023. url: https://bbs.16rd.com/thread- 603603- 1-
1.html.
[Hu+23]
Mingzhe Hu et al. “Reinforcement Learning in Medical Image Analysis: Concepts, Appli-
cations, Challenges, and Future Directions.” In: ResearchGate (January 2023). url: https:
/ / www . researchgate . net / publication / 367011623 _ Reinforcement _ learning _ in _
medical_image_analysis_Concepts_applications_challenges_and_future_directions.
[IBM24]
IBM. Reinforcement Learning Topic. 2024. url: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/
reinforcement-learning.
[JF96]
H. R. Everett J. Borenstein and L. Feng. Where am I? Sensors and Methods for Mobile
Robot Positioning. University of Michigan, 1996.
[KH04]
N. Koenig and A. Howard. “Design and use paradigms for Gazebo, an open-source multi-
robot simulator.” In: Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
2004, pages 2149–2154.
[KM07]
G. Klein and D. Murray. “Parallel Tracking and Mapping for Small AR Workspaces.” In:
Proc. IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR).
2007, pages 225–234.
[Lil+15]
Timothy Lillicrap et al. “Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning.” In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1509.02971 (2015). url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1509.02971.
[Liu+22]
Yuxin Liu et al. “An Adaptive Hybrid Deep Reinforcement Learning and SLAM Framework
for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments.” In: IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters
7.2 (2022), pages 3568–3575.
[Mac+22]
S. Macenski et al. Programming Robotics with ROS 2. O’Reilly Media, 2022.
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
47
[MKA16]
Y. Maruyama, S. Kato, and T. Azumi. “Exploring the performance of ROS2.” In: Proc. ACM
SIGBED Int. Conf. Embedded Software. 2016, pages 1–10.
[MMP20]
A. Mukul, P. Marcon, and J. F. Parker. “Security enhancements in ROS2: A comparison
with ROS1.” In: Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 2020,
pages 10235–10242.
[Ope25]
OpenAI. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning - Spinning Up. 2025. url: https : / /
spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/spinningup/rl_intro.html.
[Rob20]
Open Robotics. ROS2 Foxy Fitzroy. 2020. url: https://docs.ros.org/en/foxy/.
[Rob23]
Open Robotics. ROS - Robot Operating System. Accessed: [Insert Date Here]. 2023. url:
https://ros.org/.
[ROBnd]
ROBOTIS-GIT. TurtleBot3. https://github.com/ROBOTIS-GIT/turtlebot3. Accessed:
2025-01-29. n.d.
[RT15]
J. M. M. Montiel R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tardos. “ORB-SLAM: A Versatile and Accu-
rate Monocular SLAM System.” In: IEEE Transactions on Robotics. Volume 31. 5. 2015,
pages 1147–1163.
[SB18]
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. 2nd.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2018. isbn: 978-0262039246.
[Sea20]
Robotic Seabass. Introduction to Deep Reinforcement Learning. August 2020. url: https://
roboticseabass.com/2020/08/15/introduction-to-deep-reinforcement-learning/.
[SF02]
W. Burgard S. Thrun and D. Fox. Probabilistic Robotics. MIT Press, 2002.
[sma]
smartinternz. An Object Detection Robot Simulation using ROS. https://smartinternz.
com/saas-guided-project/1/an-object-detection-robot-simulation-using-ros.
[Tec24]
Techplayon. Machine Learning: Supervised, Unsupervised, Reinforcement. 2024. url: https:
//www.techplayon.com/machine-learning-supervised-unsupervised-reinforcement/.
[TLL17]
Lei Tai, Giuseppe Li, and Ming Liu. “A Survey of Deep Reinforcement Learning for Robotics.”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.05866 (2017).
[Tomnd]
Tomasvr. turtlebot3_drlnav. https://github.com/tomasvr/turtlebot3_drlnav/tree/
main. Accessed: 2025-01-29. n.d.
[Van23]
Cédric Vandelaer. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction — Part 3/4. 2023. url: https:
//medium.com/@cedric.vandelaer/reinforcement-learning-an-introduction-part-
3-4-e7d883dcbba2.
[Vin15]
S. Vinoski. “Introducing DDS.” In: IEEE Internet Computing 19.3 (2015), pages 86–90.
[You+23]
Ayman Yousif et al. “Comparison of Various Reinforcement Learning Environments in the
Context of Continuum Robot Control.” In: MDPI (August 2023). doi: 10.13140/rg.2.
2 . 36049 . 20327. url: https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication / 373090701 _
Comparison_of_Various_Reinforcement_Learning_Environments_in_the_Context_
of_Continuum_Robot_Control.
