==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle 
assessment of recirculated materials and absolute 
sustainability
Benedikte Berner Harden
DTU Wind-M-0866
Februay 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0866
February 2025
ECTS: 32.5
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Asger Bech Abrahamsen
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for graduation in the 
above education at the Technical 
University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Benedikte Berner Harden
Title:
Future wind energy capacity analysis and 
life cycle assessment of recirculated 
materials and absolute sustainability
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5.5 months at the Department of Wind and Energy
Systems at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
The reader is assumed to have basic knowledge in the area of wind energy technology.
Benedikte Berner Harden ­ s184097
Signature
Date
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The transition towards a sustainable energy system requires evaluation of the materials
and related emissions from the renewable wind energy expansion. Scaling functions of
the major wind turbine components are proposed, and an inventory of the materials of all
wind turbines in Denmark has been developed, with special attention to the steel volume
and related emissions. Denmark has as a pioneer in wind energy a fleet of wind turbines
that soon faces end of their design lifetime. A depletion model for the Danish wind turbine
fleet has been fitted to the Master Data Register on Danish wind turbines from the Danish
Energy Agency, which revealed a lifetime of 29.6 years based on the total onshore and
offshore installed and decommissioned capacity, with Weibull parameters λ=30.97 years
and k=7.97. This reveals a prolonged experienced lifetime compared to the design lifetime
of 20 years for onshore turbines and 25 years for offshore turbines, which suggests that
material decommissioning will occur later than expected.
Life Cycle Assessment of different Direct Reduced Iron­Electric Arc Furnace (DRI­EAF)
steel production scenarios were performed with different recycled steel input fractions.
These were able to simulate conventional steelmaking with a carbon footprint of 2.57
tonCO2/ton steel produced, while increasing the recycled steel input to 99% resulted in a
carbon footprint of 0.77 tonCO2/ton steel.
Future scenarios for the expansion of the Danish offshore wind energy fleet suggest a
constant installed steel mass of 2 Mton from 2056 onwards, while assuming a constant
capacity of 14 GW. Also, a suggestion of an onshore expansion with constant results in
installed steel mass of 0.7 Mton from 2060, while assuming a constant capacity of 10 GW.
Conventional steel production for the wind energy sector on a global scale could contribute
to approx. 1 GtonCO2eq by 2050, accounting for around 10% of the global emissions
allowed to stay within the 1.5°C temperature limit. However, implementing remelted steel
could reduce the emissions by 70%. For the wind energy industry to lower its emissions
while expanding global capacity, the implementation of both low­carbon steel production
technologies as well as increased material recirculation will be essential for manufacturing
more sustainable new­generation wind turbines.
iv
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:5==
Resume
Omstillingen til et bæredygtigt energisystem kræver evaluering af materialer og relaterede
emissioner fra udbygningen af vedvarende vindenergi. Dette projekt foreslår skalerings­
funktioner for de primære vindmøllekomponenter, og der er udviklet en opgørelse over
materialerne i alle vindmøller i Danmark med særlig vægt på stålvolumen og de relaterede
emissioner fra stålproduktion. Danmark har som pioner inden for vindenergi en flåde af
vindmøller, der snart ender deres designlevetid. En udtømningsmodel for den danske
vindmølleflåde er tilpasset data i Stamdatabasen over de danske vindmøller fra Ener­
gistyrelsen, som afslørede en levetid på 29,6 år baseret på den samlede onshore og
offshore installerede og nedtagede kapacitet, med Weibull parametrene λ=30,97 år og
k=7,97. Dette afslører en forlænget reel levetid sammenlignet med designlevetiden på
20 år for landmøller og 25 år for havmøller, hvilket tyder på, at nedtagningen af materialer
vil ske senere end forventet.
Livscyklusvurdering af forskellige scenarier for stålproduktion med direkte reduceret jern­
elektrisk arc ovn (DRI­EAF) er blevet udarbejdet med forskellige inputfraktioner af genan­
vendt stål. Disse var i stand til at simulere konventionel stålproduktion med et CO2­
fodaftryk på 2,57 tonCO2/ton produceret stål, mens en forøgelse af inputtet af genanvendt
stål til 99% resulterede i et kulstofaftryk på 0,77 tonCO2/ton stål.
Fremtidige scenarier for udvidelsen af den danske havvindenergiflåde tyder på en kon­
stant installeret stålmasse på 2 Mton fra 2056 og frem, når der antages konstant kapacitet
på 14 GW. Samtidig foreslås der en udvidelse på land med konstant installeret stålmasse
på 0,7 Mton fra 2060, når der antages konstant kapacitet på 10 GW.
Konventionel stålproduktion til vindenergisektoren på globalt plan vil kunne bidrage med
ca. 1 GtonCO2eq i 2050, hvilket er et bidrag på omkring 10% af de globale emissioner,
der er tilladt for stadig at blive inden for temperaturgrænsen på 1,5°C. Implementering af
gensmeltet stål kan dog reducere emissionerne med 70%. For at vindenergiindustrien kan
sænke sine emissioner og samtidig udvide den globale kapacitet, er implementeringen af
både teknologier for stålproduktion med lavt carbon fodaftryk samt øget materialerecirku­
laritet afgørende for fremstilling af en ny generation af mere bæredygtige vindmøller.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
v
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgments
Benedikte Berner Harden, MSc Sustainable Energy, Bioenergy, DTU
I would like to thank Eugene Goli­Oglu from NLMK DanSteel for providing insight into
the steel production technology and providing inspiration and industry insight at the steel
rolling facility in Frederiksværk.
I would also like to thank Mikkel Friis­Møller from DTU Wind and Energy Systems for
sharing his knowledge and bringing interesting conversations about offshore monopiles,
and how to approach advanced modeling of this topic.
I would also like to thank Stig Irving Olsen from DTU Management, Department of Environ­
mental and Resource Engineering for offering his time to support in life cycle assessment
of steel production.
Finally, I would like to thank Asger Bech Abrahamsen for great supervision and endless
inspiration, and for always making time for meaningful discussions and interesting obser­
vations.
vi
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Resume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Wind turbine design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Wind turbine scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Lifetime model and lifetime extension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Offshore wind farms in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Description of Life Cycle Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Description of steel production methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Data description and processing
17
3.1
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Bill Of Materials and Inventory model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Scaling of wind turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Methods
19
4.1
Steel product system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Life Cycle Assessment
21
5.1
Goal and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Life Cycle Inventory analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.3
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.4
Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Results
31
6.1
Data on Danish wind turbine fleet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
Scaling of wind turbine component masses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.3
Mass intensity of the Danish turbine fleet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.4
Comparison of inventory with Joint Research Centre study
. . . . . . . . . 43
6.5
Wind turbine mass depletion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.6
Steel­related emissions from Danish wind turbine fleet . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.7
Future wind turbine fleet scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.8
European and global outlook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.9
Comparison to global GHG emissions pathways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7
Discussion
62
7.1
Bill Of Materials and Inventory model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7.2
Fleet model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.3
Comparison to Joint Research Centre study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.4
LCA setup in SimaPro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
vii
==PAGE:8==
7.5
NLMK DanSteel green steel production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
7.6
Steel carbon footprint
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
7.7
Steel emissions from wind turbine fleet expansion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7.8
Sustainability and global outlook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
8
Conclusions
68
9
Outlook
69
Bibliography
70
A Support structure model surrogate (SSMS) variables and results
75
B Supplementary scenarios
78
C Notes on ecoinvent steel processes
88
D SimaPro workflow
89
viii
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The global demand for renewable energy is rapidly increasing, with wind energy playing
a crucial role in the transition to a low­carbon energy system. As wind energy capacity
expands and turbines grow larger, the rising material requirements necessitate a thorough
assessment of their environmental implications.
One major challenge in ensuring the sustainability of wind energy materials is the lack
of insight into the volume of decommissioned materials expected in the future. Wind tur­
bines have a design lifetime of 20–25 years, making the evaluation of decommission rates
and material recovery essential. Denmark, as a pioneer in wind energy, has a substantial
portfolio of especially onshore wind turbines installed since the late 1970s, many of which
are approaching the end of their design lifetimes. However, these turbines continue to
operate beyond their expected lifespan, raising the need to investigate how design life­
times compare to actual operational lifetimes. The limited experience with decommission
rates and disposal methods presents a barrier to developing circular economy strategies
for the wind industry, making it crucial to address this knowledge gap for sustainable wind
energy deployment.
The environmental impact of wind turbine blades and their end­of­life handling has been a
topic of ongoing debate. Research has focused on sustainable solutions and technologies
for blade recycling, with predictions suggesting a significant volume of decommissioned
blade materials. However, the expected volume of these decommissioned blade materials
are not seen due to the extended wind turbine lifetime [1]. The case of prolonged blade
lifetime compared to design lifetime should also apply to the rest of wind turbine materials,
which highlights the need for lifetime models on experienced wind turbine lifetime of the
Danish fleet.
The bulk materials of wind turbines are structural materials such as concrete and steel,
and as wind turbine capacity and size scales up, the demand for steel increases, making
its environmental impact a critical consideration. Traditional steel production is carbon
intensive, contributing significantly to greenhouse gas emissions. Performing Life Cycle
Assessment (LCA) of different steelmaking production methods helps clarify the envi­
ronmental impacts between technologies and pathways and help in decision­making for
future sustainable strategies in wind energy development.
This study aims at modeling the installed wind turbine mass of its different components
and the related steel contents while proposing scenarios on the amounts of materials
to expect from end­of­life turbines in the future. In line with these scenarios, the study
investigates methods of recirculation of steel from end­of­life wind turbines in the Danish
landscape and strategies to close the loop to decrease the carbon footprint from new
generations of installed wind turbines.
1.2
Content
This report is aimed at peers in the wind energy industry with basic knowledge in wind
energy design and technology. The aim is to try to give an overview and understanding
of LCA on steel for wind turbine manufacturing while trying to put the amounts into per­
spective. The report has been written with an eye for both peers with a solid background
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
1
==PAGE:10==
in LCA and peers in the wind energy industry who do not necessarily have the required
knowledge in LCA. Therefore, a description of LCA methodology has been incorporated
in Theory (section 2.5.1) which can be read if needed, and the complete LCA reporting
has been put in chapter 5.
The rest of the study is structured the following way:
The Theory chapter will introduce the subjects of wind turbine design and scaling of com­
ponents and a presentation of how to model wind turbine lifetime. Also, a short description
of the Danish offshore wind farms as they are subject to deepened investigations in the
study, the description of LCA methodology, and theory on conventional and sustainable
steel production methods are presented in Theory.
The chapter on Data description and processing aims at introducing the data used as basis
in the study from the Danish Energy Agency and how this has been used for establishing
the inventory. Also an overview of relevant literature data for comparison to the scaling
results of the study is presented.
The Methods chapter will present the steel product system and the related industry col­
laboration which is in the scope of the LCA. Next in Life Cycle Assessment, the complete
LCA of steelmaking is presented which can be read as a separate part of the report.
The Results chapter present the model results of Danish wind turbine fleet masses and
capacities, with a comparison to data from the Joint Research Centre under the European
Commissions. The Results chapter also presents modeling of wind turbine mass deple­
tion and steel­related emissions with three scenarios of how Danish wind energy materials
could be expected in the future. The scope is broadened by investigating the European
and global scenarios of steel­related emissions, and compared to the IPCC global GHG
emissions scenarios of maximum 1.5°C temperature increase.
2
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
2.1
Wind turbine design
This section will present in general terms wind turbine design and scaling of the major
components, which can be seen in Figure 2.1. A wind turbine consists of several compo­
nents to convert wind energy into electricity. The tower provides support and elevates the
turbine to capture stronger winds, where the nacelle on top houses the generator, poten­
tially a gearbox, and other electrical components. Modern turbines include three blades
attached to the nacelle to drive the generator for electricity production. The substructure
provides stabilization of the turbine, whether being concrete­based foundations in ground
for land­based turbines and several options for sea­based turbines, with the steel­based
monopile mounted in seabed being the most widely used.
2.1.1
Tower
The wind turbine tower height is typically determined by the rotor radius and the need to
place the rotor at a sufficient height above ground level to avoid turbulence and ensure
efficient energy capture. The tower must be designed to withstand significant mechanical
loads, including wind, gravitational forces, and the dynamic loads induced by rotor move­
ment. The steel grade mostly used for wind turbine tower manufacture is steel grade S355
which is a commonly used in many building applications [2].
2.1.2
Substructures
Onshore wind turbines typically use steel­reinforced concrete foundations placed under­
ground to support the turbine. These foundations are designed to withstand wind and
structural loads, ensuring the stability of the turbine. Offshore turbines, usually rely on
steel­based monopiles, which are large steel tubes driven into the seabed to stabilize the
turbine. Monopiles also include a steel­based transition piece that connects the turbine
tower to the monopile. In deeper waters, steel­framed jacket structures are commonly
used, offering enhanced stability. For very deep waters, floating platforms are employed,
anchored via mooring systems. Another option for offshore installations is gravity founda­
tions, primarily made of concrete, which use their mass to remain stable. These founda­
tions are particularly effective in areas with soft seabeds, as they do not require anchoring
piles, making them ideal for certain offshore locations.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Offshore wind turbine substructure designs. a) monopile, b) steel jacket,
c) gravitation­based substructure, reproduced from [4].
Figure 2.1: Overview of general setup of an offshore wind turbine with monopile
substructure. Reproduced from IEA 15MW Reference Wind Turbine [3].
2.1.3
Blades
Wind turbine blades are aerodynamically designed to maximize energy capture from the
wind. They are typically made from glass fiber reinforced polymer composite with a ther­
moset resin, such as epoxy or polyester. This material design provides sufficient stiffness
at a relatively low weight and cost. However, this complex composition makes it a turbine
component hard to recycle at end­of­life [5] [6].
4
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:13==
2.1.4
Nacelle and power­generating components
The nacelle houses the power­generating components, including the main shaft, gearbox,
generator, and control systems. It is designed to protect these elements while ensuring ef­
ficient power conversion. The nacelle is mounted on top of the tower and can rotate (yaw)
to align the rotor in perpendicular plane with the wind direction. Cooling systems are inte­
grated to prevent overheating of mechanical and electrical components, ensuring reliable
operation under varying load conditions. The generator converts mechanical energy from
the rotating shaft into electrical energy. Since wind turbine blades rotate at relatively low
speeds, the gearbox steps up this speed to meet the high­speed requirements of the gen­
erator. Most wind turbines use either induction or synchronous generators, depending on
the specific drivetrain configuration.
Wind turbines can employ either gearbox (GB) or direct drive (DD) drivetrain systems,
where gearboxes are most commonly used in onshore wind turbines, due to their rela­
tively lower weight and cost efficiency. These turbines benefit from well­established gear­
box technology, making them the dominant choice in commercial wind farms, including
Vestas [7]. However, gearboxes require regular maintenance, as mechanical compo­
nents experience wear over time. In contrast, direct drive systems are more frequently
used in offshore wind turbines, where maintenance is more challenging and costly. By
eliminating the gearbox, a direct­drive drivetrain reduce the number of mechanical parts,
lowering the risk of mechanical failure and increasing reliability. This makes them ideal for
offshore applications, where accessibility is limited and costly. While direct drive turbines
require larger and heavier generators, advancements in permanent magnet technology
have made them increasingly viable for large­scale offshore applications [8].
2.2
Wind turbine scaling
2.2.1
Power output scaling
Scaling wind turbines is a fundamental aspect of wind energy engineering, as larger tur­
bines can capture more energy from the wind while introducing new design and oper­
ational challenges. The power output of a wind turbine and its geometric scaling follow
distinct relationships based on aerodynamic and physical principles. The power extracted
from the wind by a turbine is given by eq. (2.1).
P = 1
2ρA2u3Cp
(2.1)
where P is the power output (W), ρ is the air density (kg/m3), A2 is the rotor swept area
(m3), u is the wind speed (m/s), and Cp is the power coefficient (­), representing the
efficiency of the turbine.
Since the swept area is related to the rotor diameter as given by eq. (2.2).
A = π ·
(Drotor
2
)2
(2.2)
where Drotor is rotor diameter (m).
An increase in rotor diameter significantly affects the power output, where double the
rotor size yields four times more power. Additionally, because power depends on the
cube of the wind speed, even small increases in wind speed highly increases the power
generation.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2.2
Turbine component mass scaling
The rated power of a wind turbine scales generally with the rotor diameter as seen in eq.
(2.3).
Prated ≈Drotor 2
(2.3)
where Prated is the turbine rated power and Drotor is the rotor diameter.
The mass of a wind turbine or its components scales generally with the rotor diameter as
seen in eq. 2.4.
mcomponent ≈Drotor 3
(2.4)
where mcomponent is the mass of the turbine component and Drotor is the rotor diameter
[9].
From eq. (2.4), the mass of major turbine components can be scaled according to a basic
scaling law relative to a reference turbine, as in eq. (2.5).
mcomponent = mcomponent,0 ·
( Drotor
Drotor,0
)α
(2.5)
where mcomponent is the mass of the component in study, mcomponent,0 is the mass of com­
ponent of a reference turbine, Drotor is the rotor diameter of the turbine in study, Drotor,0
is the rotor diameter of reference turbine, and α is the scaling factor [10].
The scaling factor α varies between components but is crucial in turbine component de­
sign, as it determines how mass increases relative to the rotor diameter. This directly
impacts how the mass of each component scales with overall turbine size. Seeing the
(
Drotor
Drotor,0
)
as a constant, then eq. (2.5) can be seen as a power law function. Literature
estimates on α ≈3 for different turbine components but which can be lower [11] [12]. This
scaling law will be applied to scaling of the towers and onshore foundations of the Danish
wind turbine fleet with same initial turbines for reference, based on Faurskov & Laurberg
who found values on α=2.25 for turbine tower and α=2.14 for onshore foundation [13].
Generally, the height of the tower is the rotor radius plus an additional 20­30 meters [3],
as described in eq. (2.6). This is to ensure sufficient space between blade tip and ground
level. Offshore turbines generally have lower Hhub as they are closer to sea level than
onshore turbines are to ground level.
Hhub =
(Drotor
2
)
+ (20 −30m)
(2.6)
where Hhub is the hub height (m), and Drotor is the rotor diameter (m).
2.3
Lifetime model and lifetime extension
2.3.1
Wind turbine decommission model
A widely used model for estimating the lifetime of wind turbines is the Weibull distribution
function f(t, λ, k), which is particularly suitable as it can evaluate lifetimes at different
failure rates. This distribution function can be used as expression for the turbine mass
decommissioned per year, as seen in eq. (2.7).
f(t, λ, k) = k
λ
( t
λ
)k−1
· e−( t
λ)k
(2.7)
where t is the time variable (yr), λ is the time constant of depletion (yr), and k is the
shape parameter describing the shape of distribution (­).
6
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:15==
In the context of wind turbine lifetime modeling, the scale parameter λ describes the typical
time of a turbine’s end of life, and the shape parameter k describes the time range where
the depletion might takes place.
The integral of eq. (2.7) gives the cumulative probability, i.e., the failure function of turbines
over time F(t, λ, k), which can be used as expression for the fraction of the turbine fleet
or the turbine mass that has been decommissioned at a given time point, eq. (2.8).
F(t, λ, k) = 1 −e−( t
λ )k
(2.8)
with similar parameters as given for eq. (2.7).
The complement of the failure function gives the survival function S(t, λ, k), i.e., the cu­
mulative probability of turbines survived over time, eq. (2.9).
S(t, λ, k) = e−( t
λ )k
(2.9)
A simple illustration of the Weibull distributions can be seen in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Weibull distributions. Here plotted with scale parameter λ=20 years and
shape parameter k=10.
If assuming the turbine fleet follows a Weibull distribution F(t, λ, k), then to predict the
decommissioned turbine mass at a given year j can be expressed as the sum of contri­
butions of the previous years i, eq. (2.10).
mdecom (tj) =
j
∑
i=1
mti · f(tj −ti, λ, k)
(2.10)
where mti is the total installed turbine mass in year i, f(t, λ, k) is the Weibull distribution
function given by eq. (2.7), ti is the year of the installation of the turbine mass mti, and tj
is the given year of determining the decommissioned turbine mass.
The median time tp is the time when 50% of the fleet has been depleted t50%. Inserting
tp in eq. (2.8), eq. (2.11) is established with the median denoting the time when half of
the fleet has been decommissioned. An expression of tp, where p = 50%, results in eq.
(2.12) depending on the Weibull parameters λ and k [1].
F(tp, λ, k) = 1 −e−( tp
λ )k = p →tp = λ · (ln(1 −p)−1)
1
k
(2.11)
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
7
==PAGE:16==
t50% = λ · ln(2)
1
k = λ · (0.6931)
1
k
(2.12)
For use in the context of wind turbine mass depletion estimations, the decommission rate
can be written as the fraction of decommissioned turbine mass per installed turbine mass,
as in eq. (2.13).
decommission ratei = mdecom,i
minstal,i
(2.13)
where mdecom,i is the turbine mass decommissioned in year i, minstal,i is turbine mass
installed in year i.
2.3.2
Lifetime extension
According to the IEC standards, wind turbine design considers a target probability of fail­
ure, typically in the range of 5 · 10−4 or 0.05% within the design lifetime, ensuring a low
likelihood of catastrophic failure within the design life. This probability is relevant when
determining turbine lifetime, as lower­than­expected failure rates, coupled with ongoing
monitoring and preventive maintenance, enable safe operation beyond the design limits
[14] [15].
The design lifetime of onshore turbines are 20 years, whereas it for offshore turbines is
25 years [16].
DLTonshore = 20years
; DLToffshore = 25years
(2.14)
The decision on whether to lifetime extend a given wind turbine lies at the turbine owner
and operator which are influenced by the economic incentives on operating the turbine
to exceed its design lifetime, where the benefits should outweigh the lifetime extension
related costs. Deciding on lifetime extension based on profit is described by Natarajan et
al. [17].
Z(p) = B(p) −C(p) −D(p) −OM(p)
(2.15)
where Z is profit, B is benefit, C is costs put into lifetime extension, D is expected failure
costs, and OM is the operations and maintenance costs. A positive Z(p) makes it feasible
to lifetime extend.
There is generally a distinction between the design lifetime and the experienced lifetime
of wind turbines, because the design lifetime acts as basis for economic valuations of
turbine commissioning and operation which thus acts as a safety margin, and where the
experienced lifetime is seen to be higher due to conservative engineering, improved main­
tenance, and operational optimizations that extend turbine longevity beyond initial projec­
tions. The economic lifetime (LTeconomic) is thus lower than the design lifetime (DLT),
and the experienced lifetime (LTexperienced) is higher than the design lifetime, eq. (2.16)
[16].
LTeconomic < DLT < LTexperienced
(2.16)
2.4
Offshore wind farms in Denmark
The Danish wind energy capacity is currently at around 7 GW with offshore wind con­
tributing with 2.3 GW [18], thus the offshore wind energy share is 33% of the total wind
capacity. A complete list of established offshore wind farms with related number of tur­
bines, production size (MW) and commission year can be seen on the webpage of the
Danish Energy Agency at [19].
8
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Overview of Danish offshore wind farms (existing and in progress) with
production size in MW. Reproduced from the Danish Energy Agency [19]
.
Below in Table 2.1 and 2.2 can be seen a table of commissioned and decommissioned
offshore wind turbine farms, respectively, as identified in the Master Data Register, which
will be introduced in chapter 3. Note that the Samsø wind farm has an additional upgraded
turbine SWT 2.3­93 installed after one turbine crashed during a storm. The Frederikshavn
wind farm consists of three different turbine models used for test and demonstration in
relation to development of larger turbine types. The three turbines are placed at Frederik­
shavn Havn and have a rarer bucket foundation as substructure.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
9
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.1: Table of existing offshore wind farms with model, number of turbines,
farm name, related substructure type, and water depth modeled at location in
Global Wind Atlas (GWA) with the selected water depth for modeling. The 10­year
period indicates the time period in which the wind farm was installed.
Model
No. Prated
Wind farm
Substr.
hwater
hwater
10­year period
MW
type
GWA m
selected m
V90­3MW
7
3
Sprogø
Gravity [20]
11­13
12
2005­2015
SWT 2.3­93
90 2.3
Rødsand 2
Gravity [20]
6­12
9
2005­2015
BONUS 2.3MW
72 2.3
Nysted (Rødsand 1) Gravity [20]
7­8
7.5
1995­2005
SWT 8.4­167 DD 72 8.4
Kriegers Flak
Monopile [19] 20­30 (­20) 20
2015­2022
V80 2MW
80 2
Horns Rev 1
Monopile [20] 9
9
1995­2005
SWT 2.3­93
91 2.3
Horns Rev 2
Monopile [20] 11­14
12.5
2005­2015
V164­8.3MW
49 8.3
Horns Rev 3
Monopile [20] 15­18
16.5
2015­2022
V80 2MW
4
2
Rønland (Harboøre) Jacket [19]
8
8
1995­2005
BONUS 2.3MW
4
2.3
Rønland (Harboøre) Jacket [19]
8
8
1995­2005
SWT­7.0­154
4
7
Nissum Bredding
Jacket [21]
2­6
4
2015­2022
SWT 3.6­120
111 3.6
Anholt 1
Monopile [20] 17
17
2005­2015
V39 0.5MW
10 0.5
Tunø knob
Gravity [19]
7
7
1995­2005
BONUS 2.3MW
9
2.3
Samsø
Monopile [20] 14­16
15
1995­2005
SWT 2.3­93
1
2.3
Samsø
Monopile [20] 14­16
15
1995­2005
BONUS 2MW
20 2
Middelgrunden
Gravity [20]
14­15
14.5
1995­2005
SWT 3.6
3
3.6
Avedøre
Gravity [20]
0­2
1
2005­2015
BONUS 2.3MW,
1
2.3
Frederikshavn
Bucket [22]
3
3
1995­2005
V90­3MW
1
3
Frederikshavn
Bucket [22]
3
3
1995­2005
Nordex N90/2300 1
2.3
Frederikshavn
Bucket [22]
3
3
1995­2005
SUM
630 2304.9
Only one Danish offshore wind farm has ever been decommissioned, which is the wind
farm Vindeby which consisted of 11 BONUS 450kW turbines mounted on gravity­based
substructures. One additional single turbine is registered as decommissioned in the Mas­
ter Data Register, which is one BONUS 2.3MW monopile­based turbine from the Samsø
wind farm, which crashed during a storm in 2015 due to a fracture in the welding connect­
ing the tower top flange with the tower, and was in 2017 replaced by an upgraded model
SWT2.3­93, where the original substructure and cable wiring were kept intact.
Table 2.2: Table of decommissioned offshore wind farms with model, number of tur­
bines, farm name, related foundation type, and water depth at location from Global
Wind Atlas (GWA) and the estimated mean water depth.
Model
No. Rated power Wind farm Substr. type GWA hwater Estimated hwater
MW
m
m
BONUS 450kW 11
0.45
Vindeby
Gravity [19]
4­7
5.5
BONUS 2.3MW 1
2.3
Samsø
Monopile [19] 14­16
15
The number of turbines in the Danish offshore fleet having different foundation types differ
and an overview of both numbers and capacity per foundation type can be seen in Table
2.3.
10
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:19==
Table 2.3: Table of numbers and capacity per foundation type for Danish offshore
wind fleet.
Substructure type Numbers per type MW per type
Monopile
413
1803.4
Gravity
202
449.4
Jacket
4
45.2
Bucket
3
7.6
Total
630
2304.9
Monopiles fraction 65.6%
78.2%
The fraction of monopile foundations of the total number of turbines is 65.6% whereas per
MW is 78.2%. Due to the relatively high fraction of monopile foundations in the Danish
offshore fleet, it is estimated to be valid to model the substructure mass for the whole fleet
as monopiles.
2.5
Description of Life Cycle Assessment
2.5.1
Life Cycle Assessment methodology
When evaluating the sustainability of products, Life Cycle Assessments (LCAs) are of­
ten performed. LCA is a systematic method to evaluate the environmental impacts of a
product, process, or system throughout its life cycle, i.e., from raw material production to
final disposal, and follows the ISO 14044:2006 standard [23]. The methodology follows
a four­phase framework; Goal & Scope, Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) analysis, Life Cycle
Impact Assessment (LCIA), and Interpretation.
Key concepts in Life Cycle Impact Assessment
The type of assessment can be either an Attributional LCA which looks into systems as it
currently is, uses average data, and uses carbon footprint for product comparison, or Con­
sequential LCA which scope is to compare how changes in production or consumption in­
fluence overall environmental impact, uses marginal data, and are used for policy­making
[24]. Comparing different systems requires a common Functional Unit (FU) to which all
quantities in the systems are related. A FU is defined by ISO as ”Quantified performance
of a product system for use as a reference unit in a life cycle assessment study” [23],
and are used to assess the impact per FU. The FU thus allows for comparison of impacts
between different systems providing the same service. A cut­off criteria are defined as a
way to set limits to data collection, which is both critical and can be time­consuming. The
cut­off is the limit of process impact contribution to the overall environmental impacts,
and are often set to 5%. A cut­off of 5% is also often used in visualization of process
flows, known as process trees. The environmental impact of the system can be assessed
according to several impact categories (global, regional, local, and ozone depletion, hu­
man toxicity, land use etc.), where the most used is Global warming (unit: kgCO2eq/kg).
The impacts categories can be assess according to a number of different methods, e.g.,
ReCiPe, CML, ILCD, IMPACT 2002+, with the ReCiPe method being widely used which
comprises of 18 Midpoint indicators and three Endpoint indicators [25]. Figure 2.5 shows
an overview of the Midpoint and Endpoint categories with damage pathways related to
the ReCiPe method.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5: ReCiPe Midpoint (left) and Endpoint (right) categories [25].
The ReCiPe method offers different quite philosophical perspectives, Individualist (I), Hi­
erarchist (H), or Egalitarian (E), with the Individualist perspective focusing on short­term
interests and considers technological optimism as regards human adaptation. Hierarchist
perspective is based on the most common policy principles, and Egalitarian perspective
which focuses on long­term interests and considers the principle that all people are equal
and deserve equal rights, and opportunities and are thus the most precautionary perspec­
tive [26].
Characterization
Characterization is a step in the LCIA where inventory data are converted into impact cat­
egory indicators using characterization factors. These factors express the potential con­
tribution of each material or process to a specific environmental impact, such as global
warming. For example, methane (CH4) have a higher Global Warming Potential (GWP)
(around 28 kgCO2eq/kg) than carbon dioxide (CO2) (around 1 kgCO2eq/kg) [27]. Nor­
malization is an optional step in LCA which help to interpret and put results into context.
Normalization is expressing the impact of each impact category relative to a reference
value, e.g., Person Equivalents (PE), to relate the impact of one category to the impact of
one person in Europe, for example [24].
Normalization
For comparing the impact assessment results and purring it into context, the ISO 14044:2006
standard includes an optional step to support the interpretation. Normalization puts the
indicator scores for all impact categories into a common metric, typically the annual con­
tributions to total environmental impacts of an average person, called person equivalents
(PE) in tCO2eq/PE. For the Global warming impact category, the geographical scope
would be the global total environmental impacts per person, as the global warming effect
is global [24].
2.5.2
Impact assessment calculation in LCIA
A way of expressing the carbon footprint calculations of a product in a certain impact
category is considering the amount of materials required for production of a unit of end­
12
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:21==
product and its related Characterization Factor (CF), i.e., the amount of emissions per
unit of material. The production of product materials will result in emissions, whereas
recycling of materials into new products both have positive and negative emissions, as
the processes of recycling ­ e.g., collecting, sorting, pressing ­ requires energy and have
related emissions, but where recycling will lead to avoided emissions from production of
new primary materials.
Ij =
∑
m
(Mm × CFm,j) −
∑
k
(AMk × CFk,j)
(2.17)
• Ij = net environmental impact for impact category j (e.g., global warming in kg
CO2eq).
• Mm = mass of material input m (e.g., kg of steel, plastic, aluminum).
• CFm,j = characterization factor of material m for impact category j (e.g., kg CO2eq
per kg of steel).
• AMk = mass of avoided material or substance k (e.g., kg of recycled steel).
• CFk,j = characterization factor of avoided material k for impact category j.
An example of Characterization Factors (CFs) is the GWP characterization factors, where
GHG emissions are assigned a CF relative to CFCO2=1, thus CFCH4 ≈28, and CFN2O=298
[27].
Normalization in LCA is a method used to contextualize the environmental impacts of a
product or system by comparing them to a reference value, typically the total environmen­
tal impact of an average person, region, or global population over a year. The normalized
impact for an impact category is calculated as in eq. (2.18) [28].
Normalized Ij = Ij
Rj
(2.18)
where Ij is net environmental impact for impact category j, and Rj is the reference value
for impact category j.
2.6
Description of steel production methods
2.6.1
Current production of steel
Steel production today follows two main routes; Blast Furnace­Blast Oxygen Furnace
(BF­BOF) route and Direct Reduced Iron­Electric Arc Furnace (DRI­EAF) route, with an
overview of the two routes in Figure 2.6. Steel production starts with mining of iron ore
followed by reduction to iron when reducing the oxygen content by adding carbon, then
followed by reducing the carbon content in the decarburization process. In the BF­BOF
route, coke (hard coal with increased carbon content) is used as reducing agent in the
reduction process in a Blast Furnace (BF) to reduce iron ore to molten pig iron. The liquid
iron is further transformed to crude steel in a Blast Oxygen Furnace (BOF), where oxygen
is injected to lower the carbon content from approx. 4­5% to the desired level for the steel
grade produced, typically 0.25% [29] [30].
The DRI­EAF route reduces iron ore directly to sponge iron in a direct reduction process by
adding carbon monoxide and hydrogen, mainly from natural gas, but can also be made
from coke and coal. The direct reduced iron (DRI) is in solid state and called sponge
iron because of its porous structure. Sponge iron is then converted to crude steel in an
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
13
==PAGE:22==
Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) where it is melted by passing electricity through the melt and
the carbon content is also reduced.
Figure 2.6: Schematic of the two conventional steelmaking routes: Blast Furnace­
Blast Oxygen Furnace (BF­BOF) and Direct Reduced Iron­Electric Arc Furnace (DRI­EAF)
routes inspired from [29] [30] [31] [32].
Then, for both BF­BOF and DRI­EAF processes, the crude steel is adjusted to the desired
steel grade in secondary metallurgy process in a ladle furnace by adding various alloys,
removing impurities, and adjusting the temperature required for casting. The molten steel
are added graphite electrodes for heating through electric current, and argon stirring for
homogeneous mixing of the molten steel which also help remove impurities like hydrogen
and nitrogen [33]. Then, the liquid steel is brought to a continuous caster passing it through
a mould to form the steel into slabs and cut into length to semi­finished products like
blooms, billets, or slabs. Post­processing includes hot or cold rolling of slabs and cutting
into desired sizes [34].
2.6.2
Steelmaking and sustainability
Primary steel production refers to that which uses iron ore as its main metallic input,
whereas secondary is that based on recycled scrap. However, secondary steel are of­
ten used in primary production, which cause the distinction less well­defined. In the EAF
route, primary steel production is the DRI­EAF route, and secondary steel production is
the scrap­based EAF route. The input fraction of scrap steel are generally 20­30% [30]
[35], but at regions with high scrap availability, scrap­based EAF route can operate on up
to 100% scrap steel. Around 70% of steel today are produced as primary steel. The BOF
route account for 70% of global steel production and around 90% of primary production,
whereas the EAF route account for almost the remaining 30%. The main inputs to steel­
making today are iron ore, energy (mainly coal, natural gas, and electricity), limestone,
and steel scrap [29] [30]. Both BF­BOF and DRI­EAF routes produces slag, a byproduct
from lime fluxes added to the iron ore reduction to remove non­iron impurities (silica, man­
ganese, and phosphorous), while producing CO2, but where the DRI­EAF route produces
slag at half the rate and with a different chemical composition than BF­BOF route. The
BF­BOF slag in particular are used for conventional Portland cement production as a sub­
stitute for clinker, leading to almost halving the emission intensity of cement production
[30].
Energy intensities of crude steel of the main production routes are highlighted in Table
2.4, with direct emissions referring to emissions that a company controls directly (Scope
1) and indirect emissions referring to upstream and downstream emissions not owned or
14
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:23==
controlled by the company (Scope 2 and 3) [36]. Examples of direct Scope 1 emissions
in steelmaking are CO2 from BF and DRI reducing units, CO2 and CO from coke pro­
duction in the BF­BOF route, and various GHG emissions from reheating furnaces and
rolling mills. Examples of indirect Scope 2 and 3 emissions are emissions from electricity
generation used in steelmaking, especially in the electrically­driven EAF route (Scope 2),
and upstream and end­of­life emissions (Scope 3).
Table 2.4: CO2 emission intensities of main production routes. Table reproduced
from IEA [30].
Methodology
BF­BOF
Scrap­based EAF
Natural gas­based DRI­EAF
IEA (direct)
1.2 tonCO2/ton
0.04 tonCO2/ton
1.0 tonCO2/ton
IEA (direct + indirect)
2.2 tonCO2/ton
0.3 tonCO2/ton
1.4 tonCO2/ton
worldsteel
2.2 tonCO2/ton
0.3 tonCO2/ton
1.4 tonCO2/ton
BF­BOF steelmaking has high CO2 emission intensity, emitting approximately 2.2 tonCO2/ton
crude steel, largely due to its reliance on coal as both an energy source and a reducing
agent. In contrast, the scrap­based EAF route emits only 0.3 tonCO2/ton crude steel,
making it a significantly better choice in terms of carbon intensity. The DRI­EAF route,
which typically relies on natural gas as a reducing agent, has emission intensity of 1.4
tonCO2/ton crude steel. However, the development of hydrogen­based DRI (H2­DRI) is
an emerging technology to drastically reduce emissions, as hydrogen can replace natural
gas, emitting only water as a byproduct [29]. An additional approach to achieving more
sustainable steel production involves integrating alternative energy sources, such as re­
newable energy, into the steelmaking process. Implementing this strategy in the DRI­EAF
route can significantly reduce emission intensity, and when combined with a high fraction
of scrap steel input, the overall emission intensity can be substantially reduced [29].
2.6.3
Chemical processes of iron and steelmaking
BF­BOF and DRI­EAF steel production routes have same output, crude steel, but differ in
the chemical processes. Below is a description of the chemical process involved in each
of the two routes.
BF­BOF route
1) Iron­making: Iron ore (Fe2O3) reduction by carbon monoxide (CO) from coke in Blast
Furnace (BF) [37].
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(s) →2Fe(l) + 3CO2(g)
(2.19)
Simultaneously, limestone (CaCO3) is added to remove impurities and forming slag (Ca2SiO4).
CaCO3 →CaO + CO2
(2.20)
2 CaO + SiO2 →Ca2SiO4
(2.21)
2) Steelmaking: Oxygen is added to the pig iron to reduce carbon content in Blast Oxygen
Furnace (BOF) [38].
C + O2 →CO2
(2.22)
C + 1
2O2 →CO
(2.23)
Simultaneously, other iron impurities are reduced by oxygen, with M denoting compounds
like silica, manganese. and phosphorous:
FeM + O2 →MOx
(2.24)
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
15
==PAGE:24==
DRI­EAF route
1) Iron­making: Direct reduction of iron ore (Fe2O3 or Fe3O4) by carbon monoxide (CO)
or hydrogen (H2) from natural gas, which results in sponge iron and CO2 and H2O [39]:
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(s) →2Fe(s) + 3CO2(g)
(2.25)
Fe2O3(s) + 3H2(g) →2Fe(s) + 3H2O(g)
(2.26)
2) Steelmaking: The direct reduced iron (DRI) or scrap steel is first melted in Electric Arc
Furnace (EAF):
Fe(s) →Fe(l)
(2.27)
Oxygen is added to the sponge iron to reduce the carbon content [40].
C + O2 →CO2
(2.28)
C + 1
2O2 →CO
(2.29)
Slag formers like lime (CaO) remove impurities and form slag (CaSiO3):
CaO + SiO2 →CaSiO3
(2.30)
16
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:25==
3
Data description and processing
3.1
Input data
The Danish Energy Agency (DEA) collects annual data on commissioned and decommis­
sioned power producing wind turbines >6 kW in Denmark for public access. The database
is named Master Data Register (Stamdatabasen) and is in Excel format. The dataset is
divided into two sheets, one for existing turbines and one for decommissioned turbines,
and contains information such as capacity, location (X­,Y­coordinates), onshore or off­
shore location, model, date of original grid connection, and annual and monthly power
production for each registered turbine.
The Master Data Register with both data sheets on existing and decommissioned wind tur­
bines has been studied in Spyder (Python v.3.11.4). When working with the Master Data
Register, it is evident that it contains some inaccurate and incomplete data. The DEA
underlines this in their description of the data, and therefore some adjustments for work­
ing with the data has been made. As Denmark has been in the forefront of wind energy
technology and one of the first countries to establish wind turbines for power production
since the 1970ies, a lot of test turbines are included in the dataset. Due to Denmarks
well­established wind energy industry, several test facilities include test turbines, e.g., in
Østerild, a national test center for full size turbines located on the west coast of northern
Jutland, which also test offshore turbines before commercialization [41]. Therefore, some
of the newest and largest turbines developed are placed onshore at a test center like Øs­
terild, even though it has been designed for offshore locations due to lower cost for testing.
Small size household turbines are seen to be hard to scale and used for analysis in this
project, and because the scope of the project is especially to investigate the future land­
scape of wind turbines and related materials, only commercial size turbines are chosen
to be part of the analysis. Therefore, all small size household turbines <100 kW has been
sorted out, as these were seen to disturb the results. This corresponds to around 30%
of the whole dataset. Another correction to the dataset is the sorting out of all turbines
>12000 kW (12 MW), to sort out one data point which is registered with a capacity 14000
kW and a rotor diameter of 125 m, which is most probably the prototype model SG­DD­
236 with 14 MW capacity [41]. To further sorting out small household turbines, all turbines
with rotor diameter <1 m and hub height <1 m are sorted out. The dataset contains data
for the period 1978 to 2022 and this is therefore the period under assessment.
3.2
Bill Of Materials and Inventory model
The initial step in this study is to develop a Bill Of Materials (BOM) for the Danish fleet
of wind turbines, providing the basis for turbine mass estimations. In this study, the term
fleet refers to the complete collection of installed wind turbines, and fleet model thus refers
to the developed model of all installed Danish wind turbines. Various methods have been
evaluated, and the resulting mass scaling of the four main components represents a rea­
soned approximation based on available data and established methods. Existing detailed
literature on turbine scaling are rare, especially scaling and literature values on offshore
monopile mass, which therefore has been made with aid and insights from the Depart­
ment of DTU Wind and Energy Systems and their related paper on a surrogate model for
estimation of offshore monopile masses [42].
Throughout the report, different definitions are used. The Master Data Register acts as
basis for BOM and the definitions used in the database are used the same way: Existing
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
17
==PAGE:26==
data denotes all turbines in operation, Decommissioned data denotes all turbines taken
out of operation, and the installed are thus the sum of existing and decommissioned tur­
bines. The terms existing, decommissioned, and installed are as defined in eq. (3.1­3.2).
existing = installed −decommissioned
(3.1)
decommissioned = installed −existing
(3.2)
installed = existing + decommissioned
(3.3)
When presenting information about turbine foundations, the term substructure is used, re­
ferring to both onshore foundations and offshore monopiles. The scaling and presentation
of results on turbine blades always includes all three blades, unless otherwise specified.
When presenting information about turbines, this term refers to the total turbine incl. all
four major components, also incl. substructure, unless otherwise specified.
3.3
Scaling of wind turbines
Below can be seen a table of the data found in literature on component masses used for
comparison to the fleet model mass results.
Table 3.1: Component masses from available literature on RWTs and other turbines
used for comparison to fleet model component mass results. Substructure denotes
concrete­based foundations for onshore turbines and steel­based monopiles for offshore
turbines.
Model
Capacity drotor
mtower
msubstructure mblades mnacelle Source
MW
m
ton
ton
ton
ton
Onshore
RWTs
DTU 3.4MW
3.4
130
553
­
49.3
191.8
[43]
DTU 10 MW
10
178.3 628.4
­
143.1
542.6
[43]
Offshore
RWTs
IEA 15MW
15
240
860
1318
195.7
1017
[3]
IEA 22MW
22
284
1574
2097
246.9
1446.1
[44]
Onshore
Other
V80­2MW
2
80
148
1166
19.5
69
[45]
V90­3MW
3
90
256
1041
38.4
­
[46]
V150­4.2MW
4.2
150
647.04 2119
38.9
­
[47]
Offshore
Other
V164­8MW
8
164
805
850
105
375
[13] [48]
V236­15MW
15
236
1343.5 1622
144.7
­
[49]
SWT8.4­167 DD 8.4
167
400
656.5
102
365
[9]
Below can be seen a table of blades mass as described in three Blade Material Passports.
Table 3.2: Blades masses as described in three Blade Material Passport. Values are
for three blades.
Model
drotor mblade Source
m
ton
B45
90
26.7
[50]
LM37.3 P2 74.5
16.8
[51]
V47
47
3.6
[52]
18
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:27==
4
Methods
4.1
Steel product system
4.1.1
NLMK DanSteel
Industry insights has been sought to help carry out LCAs of the steel production scenarios.
The steel manufacturing umbrella company NLMK Europe operates steel production facil­
ities in France, Denmark, Belgium, and Italy, where the NLMK Europe Plate business unit
manufacture heavy steel plates. Here, NLMK Verona produces EAF plates (processes
covering materials extraction and preparation to casting) [53], and NLMK DanSteel pro­
duces hot rolled structural steel plates for wind industry (processes hot rolling and post­
processing) [54]. NLMK DanSteel produces steel products specifically for the offshore
industry and holds a range of different standards certificates hereunder DS / EN ISO
14001:2015 which is the international standard for environmental management [55], and
the Gold EcoVardis 2023 sustainability rating [54]. NLMK DanSteel, has provided insights
to steelmaking and site visit to their hot rolling operation facility at Frederiksværk, Den­
mark.
4.1.2
Production of conventional and more sustainable steel
For investigation of the carbon footprint of steelmaking scenarios, the system boundaries
has been set to cradle­to­gate, covering the production processes from raw materials
preparation to end­product at production facility gate, thus matching the production pro­
cesses covered by NLMK Verona and NLMK DanSteel. The system includes materi­
als preparation, iron­making, steelmaking, secondary metallurgy, casting, hot rolling, and
post­processing, which can be seen in the following flow chart. Processes inside the sys­
tem boundary are part of the LCA. Processes covered by NLMK DanSteel are highlighted
with a red star.
Figure 4.1: Flow chart of the steelmaking product system. The system boundaries are
highlighted in red, with the processes covered by NLMK DanSteel marked with a red star.
The scrap steel input are varying in the different scenarios: The conventional steelmaking
scenario with X=80% sponge iron input and 20% scrap steel input [30], and a scenario
almost completely with remelted steel with X=1% sponge iron input and 99% sponge iron
input.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
19
==PAGE:28==
This illustration gives a basic understanding of the DRI­EAF route with varying primary
and secondary steel inputs ­ X denoting the primary sponge iron input (%) and Y denoting
the secondary scrap steel input (%). The syngas composition for sponge iron production
in the iron­making process is often a mix of mainly 70% carbon monoxide (CO) and 30%
hydrogen (H2) from natural gas. The carbon content from natural gas is the main source of
CO2­emissions from outputs such as gas, dust, and sludge from DRI, EAF, and secondary
metallurgy processes. The energy inputs to run the heavy machinery is covering mainly
electricity and natural gas whose carbon footprint is influenced by the steelmaking facility’s
geographical location and local energy mix. The recycled steel content can be of different
origin and might often be of primary steel origin or produced from the BF­BOF route, and
these considerations has an impact on the final carbon footprint of the final end­product.
The possibility of producing even more sustainable steel, which have been demonstrated
by NLMK Verona and NLMK DanSteel [56], requires a very small fraction of a few percent
of primary steel input to a completely remelted steel scenario. Therefore, the 99% scrap
steel scenario has been developed as the sustainable scenario, with the most optimistic
scenario of 100% remelted steel can be found in Appendix B.
20
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:29==
5
Life Cycle Assessment
5.1
Goal and scope
Performing Life Cycle Assessments are part of this study, along with other methodologies,
and to incorporate the LCA reporting into this report, this section is aimed to include the
Life Cycle Assessments of the steel scenarios in its entirety.
5.1.1
Goal
The goal of the study is to assess the environmental impacts from production of con­
ventional steelmaking process of hot rolled steel plates of standard steel grade S355 for
the manufacturing industry, hereunder the wind energy industry, from production of raw
materials to product leaving the steelmaking factory, not including further processing into
final end­product (e.g., wind turbine tower or monopile) for use in the wind industry. The
production route assessed is the natural gas­based DRI­EAF route with a 20% scrap steel
input to simulate conventional steel production. This conventional scenario is compared
to a second scenario with a higher fraction of remelted steel (70%) as input to the pro­
duction process, and a third scenario considering an almost complete fraction of remelted
steel (99%). The impact results are normalized relative to person equivalents for putting
results into context.
5.1.2
Scope
1. Functional Unit: 1 ton hot rolled steel plates produced for the wind industry.
2. System boundary: The processes involved in the life cycle of steel is every process
step including raw materials extraction and preparation (cradle), iron­making, steel­
making, secondary metallurgy, casting„ hot rolling, and post­processing (cooling) of
final product at factory (gate). A cut­off criteria of 5% is set.
3. Assessment criteria: The selected impact assessment parameter is Global warm­
ing (unit: tonCO2eq/ton) assessed using the ReCiPe method.
4. Time and spatial scale: The scope of the study includes present­day steelmak­
ing technologies which includes facilities in operation and related data. The study
assess steelmaking in the European market.
5. LCI modeling framework: Attributional LCI.
6. Avoided emissions: The system includes avoided emissions from EAF slag for
Portland cement production.
5.1.3
Data processing
Tools and data sources
LCA make use of a comprehensive amount of inventory data from relevant databases on
materials, energy, transport, and industrial processes. Ensuring a reliable data source
helps engineers and scientists to develop decision support for decision­makers to man­
ufacture products in a more sustainable manner. A widely used and acknowledged LCI
database is ecoinvent made and maintained by the Swiss research institutes ETH, EPFL,
Empa, Agroscope, and the Paul Scherrer Institute [57], and is renowned by its consis­
tent and transparent data [58]. A widely used software tool to access and work with the
ecoinvent database is SimaPro [59]. The ecoinvent database and the LCA software tool
SimaPro v9.5.0.2 has been used for the LCA. The ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) V1.06 /
World (2010) H method has been used.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
21
==PAGE:30==
Implementation in SimaPro
For transparency of the data processing in SimaPro, here follows a description of method
and considerations:
The ecoinivent process named Steel, low­alloyed {Europe without Switzerland and Aus­
tria}| steel production, electric, low­alloyed | Cut­off, U was selected to cover the steel
production (process covering materials preparation to casting). This default process in­
cludes 1.1313 kg/kg Iron scrap as input, and this is used to calculate the scrap steel
percentages for the different scenarios. Sponge iron {GLO}| market for sponge iron | Cut­
off, U was added for the remaining amount to sum to 1.1313 kg/kg, under the assumption
there will be an overall 13.13% loss for every combination of these two inputs, which fits
in the range of 1.05­1.2 ton metallic inputs required per ton of steel [30]. This process of
steelmaking was included in the process named Hot rolling, steel {Europe without Aus­
tria}| hot rolling, steel | Cut­off, U (covering hot rolling and post­processing) in unit of 1
kg/kg. Every process unit is given in kg/kg in ecoinvent, and when performing final cal­
culations, the product unit is set to 1 ton to comply with the FU. Details can be seen in
Appendix C and D.
Considerations made include the fact that a process is available named Steel, low­alloyed,
hot rolled {RER}| production | Cut­off, U which already includes hot rolling, but this process
covers steel production from the BF­BOF route, which is not considered in this study.
The LCIA results seen in process trees in section 5.3 shows additions of Steel, unalloyed
{GLO}| market for | Cut­off, U, which is ∼5% additional steel material input. However, steel
input in the hot rolling process should according to theory not be included. It is assumed
ecoinvent includes valid data on the hot rolling technology, and therefore it is decided to
leave the hot rolling process as default.
5.2
Life Cycle Inventory analysis
The Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) analysis is the data collection on physical flows in terms
of input and outputs to the product system. Due to the comprehensiveness of data col­
lection on steel manufacturing, generic secondary data from the ecoinvent database with
unit processes has been used.
The result of the inventory analysis is the Life Cycle Inventory (LCI), which consists of a
quantified list of elementary flows associated with the steel manufacturing system, corre­
sponding to the service or function defined by the functional unit of production of 1 ton hot
rolled heavy steel plates.
5.3
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
5.3.1
Classification
Classification in Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) covers assigning emissions to their
relevant impact categories, e.g., categorized into Global Warming Potential (GWP). This
way, it is evaluated where the emissions contribute to. This is a subsequent process
performed in SimaPro.
5.3.2
Characterization
The impact from each elementary flow in the LCI to the chosen impact category has been
quantified. The aggregated process flow contributions are now measured in a common
metric in tonCO2eq/ton per FU for Global warming.
The resulting characterized impacts with regards to Global warming for each of the steel
scenarios can be seen described in process trees below, along with Impact assessment
figures showing the characterized impacts across all impact categories in the ReCiPe
methodology.
22
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:31==
Conventional steelmaking ­ 20% remelted steel
The process tree of conventional steelmaking with a 20% steel scrap input can be seen in
Figure 5.1. This includes the process of steelmaking followed by hot rolling, and results
in 2.57 tonCO2eq/ton. Note that the 20% scrap steel input is not shown because a cut­off
of 5% have been selected, and the scrap steel contribute to less than 5% of the end­
product carbon footprint. The production of cast steel slabs results in a carbon footprint
of 2.57 tonCO2eq/ton slab, because the hot rolling process contribute with the remaining
0.204 tonCO2eq/ton. The process with the highest contribution is Sponge iron with a
contribution of 1.85 tonCO2eq/ton, while also Iron pellets and Hard coal from raw materials
extraction and Electricity. The energy inputs required to run the heavy machinery is a mix
of electricity and natural gas from various different geographical sources.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.1: Process tree of conventional steelmaking with 20% scrap steel input
incl. hot rolling. Input scrap steel is 0.2262 kg/kg and 0.9050 kg/kg sponge iron for
producing 1 ton steel output. The Direct Reduced Iron­Electric Arc Furnace (DRI­EAF)
route based on European data. Visualized with a 5% cut­off.
All process contributions to each Midpoint impact categories evaluated in the ReCiPe
method for scenario with 20% scrap steel can be seen in Table 5.2, with Global warm­
ing being impacted mostly by Sponge iron and smaller contributions from Hot rolling and
Electricity sum (sum across all electricity sources) and other smaller contributions. All
impact categories are highly impacted by Sponge iron, with varying impacts from Elec­
tricity sum, and with impact category Freshwater toxicity, Marine ecotoxicity, and Human
carcinogenic toxicity being impacted by Electric arc furnace slag.
24
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.2: Impact assessment of all Midpoint impact categories for scenario of
conventional steelmaking with 20% steel scrap input. Note that all contributions from
Electricity and Natural gas each has been summed to one contribution.
Table 5.1: Impact assessment results for Midpoint categories for the 20% remelted
steel scenario for production of 1 ton of steel.
Impact category
Unit
Total impact
Global warming
kg CO2 eq
2575.1043
Stratospheric ozone depletion
kg CFC11 eq
0.00053048
Ionizing radiation
kBq Co­60 eq 178.018486
Ozone formation, Human health
kg NOx eq
4.35883044
Fine particulate matter formation
kg PM2.5 eq
3.06855071
Ozone formation, Terrestrial ecosystems kg NOx eq
4.51425667
Terrestrial acidification
kg SO2 eq
5.46007872
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P eq
2.17058438
Marine eutrophication
kg N eq
0.40067783
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
3195.79209
Freshwater ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
197.001002
Marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
284.572641
Human carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
8559.72814
Human non­carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
2806.06811
Land use
m2a crop eq
40.2509076
Mineral resource scarcity
kg Cu eq
78.7427451
Fossil resource scarcity
kg oil eq
529.935042
Water consumption
m3
42.0102172
To put the impact results into perspective, the scores have been normalized in relation to
the average annual environmental impact per person globally, named person equivalents
(PE). Normalization results can be seen in Figure 5.3 with the unit tonCO2/PE represent­
ing the emissions associated with the average global steelmaking process per person per
year. The impact category Human carcinogenic toxicity show vastly higher normalization
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
25
==PAGE:34==
score of around 800 tonCO2eq/PE compared to the rest of the categories, and are there­
fore shown on a secondary axis. The categories Freshwater eutrophication, Freshwater
ecotoxicity, and Marine ecotoxicity show moderately high normalization scores around 3
tonCO2eq/PE, and Global warming around 0.3 tonCO2eq/PE.
Figure 5.3: Normalization results for steel scenario with 20% scrap steel input incl.
hot rolling. Impact results has been normalized in relation to person equivalents (PE). All
contributions from Electricity and Natural gas each has been summed to one contribution.
Note that the impact category Human carcinogenic toxicity has been plotted on secondary
axis as it is vastly higher than rest of the categories.
Sustainable steel ­ 99% remelted steel
Investigating a green steelmaking scenario with almost complete recirculation of steel into
new steel products with only 1% of primary steel input, the process tree can be seen in
Figure 5.4 with a resulting Global warming contribution of 0.777 tonCO2eq/ton. Compared
to the scenario with 20% scrap steel input, more processes are visible under the 5% cut­
off criteria, especially by different geographical sources of electricity for the steelmaking
process. The far­left column of Steel, unalloyed (GLO) is 0.0529 kg/kg default in the
Hot rolling process. Avoided emissions from EAF slag is seen in the far­right column with
opposite direction of arrows. EAF slag substitutes clinker for concrete production, thereby
reducing the total steel carbon footprint with 51.5 kgCO2/kg.
26
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.4: Process tree of steelmaking with 99% scrap steel input incl. hot rolling.
Input scrap steel is 1.1200 kg/kg and 0.0113 kg/kg sponge iron for producing 1 ton steel
output. The Direct Reduced Iron­Electric Arc Furnace (DRI­EAF) route based on Euro­
pean data. Visualized with a 5% cut­off.
Process contributions to all ReCiPe Midpoint impact categories for scenario 99% can be
seen in Figure 5.5. As expected, Sponge iron contribution to Global warming is lower
and with Electricity sum having a larger contribution compared to the 20% scrap steel
scenario. Hot rolling and the remaining materials or processes has a higher contribution
to Global warming. For the other impact categories, the same pattern is seen with an
overall lower contribution from Sponge iron, and higher contribution from Electricity sum
and remaining materials and processes.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.5: Impact assessment of all Midpoint impact categories for scenario with
conventional steelmaking with 99% steel scrap input.
Table 5.2: Impact assessment results for Midpoint categories for the 99% remelted
steel scenario for production of 1 ton of steel.
Impact category
Unit
Total impact
Global warming
kg CO2 eq
777.034488
Stratospheric ozone depletion
kg CFC11 eq
0.00027345
Ionizing radiation
kBq Co­60 eq 168.423299
Ozone formation, Human health
kg NOx eq
1.82504226
Fine particulate matter formation
kg PM2.5 eq
1.25417612
Ozone formation, Terrestrial ecosystems kg NOx eq
1.91772309
Terrestrial acidification
kg SO2 eq
2.33554596
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P eq
0.54188793
Marine eutrophication
kg N eq
0.03248011
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
2690.61653
Freshwater ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
160.053761
Marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
232.301669
Human carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
8495.20653
Human non­carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
1222.8493
Land use
m2a crop eq
20.8483381
Mineral resource scarcity
kg Cu eq
7.19947956
Fossil resource scarcity
kg oil eq
187.462586
Water consumption
m3
18.8969151
Normalization results for scenario with 99% scrap steel input can be seen in Figure 5.6,
showing normalization scores vastly higher for impact category Human carcinogenic toxi­
city around 800 tonCO2eq/PE compared to the rest of the categories, and which are there­
fore shown on secondary axis. Again, the categories Freshwater eutrophication, Fresh­
water ecotoxicity, and Marine ecotoxicity show moderately high normalization scores around
2.25, 1.75, and 0.75 tonCO2eq/PE, respectively. Global warming show a normalization
28
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:37==
score around 0.1 tonCO2eq/PE.
Figure 5.6: Normalization results for steel scenario with 99% scrap steel input. Im­
pact results has been normalized in relation to person equivalents (PE). All contributions
from Electricity and Natural gas each has been summed to one contribution. Note that
the impact category Human carcinogenic toxicity has been plotted on secondary axis as
it is vastly higher than rest of the categories.
Because a realistic scenario for more sustainable steelmaking, at least in the nearest
future, would be an intermediate scenario between the 20% and 99% scrap steel scenar­
ios presented, an additional intermediate scenario has been established assuming 70%
scrap steel input. This can be found in Appendix B.
Additionally, adding the final 1% of scrap steel as remelted steel content to achieve a 100%
green steel scenario reduces the carbon footprint from 0.777 to 0.754 tonCO2eq/ton,
therefore the final increment of adding just the final percent results in a notable reduc­
tion of carbon footprint. Considering the large amount of remelted steel mass needed for
potential new wind turbine commission in the future, this small decrease in overall carbon
footprint is not insignificant. It will have an impact when choosing the final steel scrap
remelting percentage. Process tree and impact assessment results for the 100% steel
scrap scenario can be found in Appendix B.
These scenarios have been assessed in the European context, and for comparison, a
global scenario has been made covering the same product system and FU. The global
DRI­EAF steel production process in ecoinvent assumes ≈72.1% iron scrap input and
a 14% scrap loss. The resulting impact to Global warming is 1.55 tonCO2eq/ton, which
is higher compared to the 70% scenario for Europe of 1.17tonCO2eq/ton. The global
scenario can be found in Appendix B.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
29
==PAGE:38==
5.4
Interpretation
The results from the LCAs of the steel scenarios showed overall expected carbon foot­
print trends ­ the higher the scrap steel fraction in the steelmaking process, the lower the
carbon footprint of the final product. The conventional scenario with 20% scrap steel in­
put resulted in a carbon footprint of 2.57 tonCO2eq/ton, and a carbon footprint for cast
steel (steelmaking excluding hot rolling) at 2.37 tonCO2eq/ton. The process tree showed
a rather simple product system, visualized with a 5% cut­off, with a high contribution of
1.58 tonCO2eq/ton from Sponge iron production, which is also seen in the impact as­
sessment. Hard coal and iron pellet also contributes to >5% of carbon footprint. The hot
rolling contributes with 0.204 tonCO2eq/ton which is the case for every scenario. The sum
of electricity sources also contributes to some degree to all impact categories. The sus­
tainable steel scenario with 99% scrap steel input showed more processes and materials
which made the 5% cut­off, e.g., further including Quicklime and more Electricity sources.
Because the higher fraction of scrap steel input substitutes primary Sponge iron, the lower
carbon footprint of scrap steel cause a decrease in the overall carbon footprint. The sus­
tainable steel scenario showed a more complex process tree with a carbon footprint of
0.777 tonCO2eq/ton.
30
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:39==
6
Results
6.1
Data on Danish wind turbine fleet
Data from the Master Data Register on existing and decommissioned turbines is pre­
sented below. As described in Theory (chapter 2), Prated ≈Drotor α where α ≈2 or lower,
and the data on the Danish turbine fleet results in α=1.73, see Figure 6.1. This indicates
a reasonable α, meaning capacity scale up faster with increase in rotor diameter. This
is an indication that manufacturing has been able to increase material efficiency when
upscaling turbine sizes.
Figure 6.1: Turbine capacity as a function of rotor diameter. Scaling function is given
as capacity=Drotor 1.73.
When scaling rotor diameter with hub height, data have been separated between onshore
and offshore turbines to distinguish between the different location requirements. Using
linear regression fit to the data points, onshore turbines have an average distance to
ground of 13.56 m, and offshore turbines have an average distance to sea level of 29.41
m, see Figure 6.2, based on eq. (2.6).
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.2: Hub height as a function of rotor diameter.
An overview of number of turbines as well as summed installed and decommissioned
capacity for each year in the period available (1978­2022) is seen in Figure 6.3. Note that
because small turbines (<100 kW) were installed in the early stage, most turbines in the
first years have been sorted out, and therefore not many turbines nor installed capacity is
seen. The graph indicates a development of increase in capacity per turbine following the
development of larger turbine design. The rather small level of decommissioned capacity
shed an indication of a rather long lifetime of the installed capacity, and a decommissioned
wind turbine mass yet to be seen. Note that no decommissioning has taken place in the
years 1978, 1979, 1980, 1981, 2005, 2020, 2021, and 2022.
Figure 6.3: Installed number of turbines and installed and decommissioned capacity
by installation year.
32
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:41==
Below in Figure 6.4 is shown the accumulated installed capacity, indicating the installation
rate which has been slowly increasing up until 2000, then rapidly increasing, followed by
fluctuating increase level up to today.
Figure 6.4: Accumulated capacity of Danish wind fleet through time.
In order to better understand the development of turbine size, the turbine capacity has
been divided into 10­year periods based on installation year. Average turbine capacity is
increasing in time, with a larger spread in capacity for the newest installed turbines (2015­
2022). The large capacity in the period up to 10 MW might be due to large offshore turbines
installed in recent years, as offshore turbines scale to larger sizes than onshore turbines.
To investigate this further, the boxplot has been divided into onshore and offshore turbines,
respectively, which can be seen in Figure 6.6 and 6.7.
The large spread of onshore turbine capacity shows a diversity of turbine models installed
in the Danish landscape, from 0.1 MW to 10 MW in the recent period (2015­2022). The
average turbine capacity is seen increasing from around 0.5 and 1 to 3 MW recently.
The boxplot of offshore turbines does not have data in the first period (1975­1985) as
the first offshore models were commissioned in the world­first offshore wind farm Vindeby
in 1991. This wind farm consisted of 11 Bonus 450 kW turbines with a total capacity of
4.95 MW, and is seen in Figure 6.7 in period 1995­2005. The average turbine capacity is
increasing to 2 MW, 2.5 MW, and to recent 8 MW (2015­2022).
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.5: Total of Danish onshore and offshore turbine capacities grouped by 10­
year periods.
Figure 6.6: Danish onshore turbine capacity grouped by 10­year periods.
34
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.7: Danish offshore turbine capacity grouped by 10­year periods.
6.2
Scaling of wind turbine component masses
The fleet model is based on scaling of component masses of the four major components
in all wind turbines in the Master Data Register; tower, blades, substructure, and nacelle.
Different approaches have been taken to make a best­guess of component mass scaling,
which will be presented. All component masses are compared to literature.
6.2.1
Tower
Tower masses has been scaled according to Faurskov & Laurberg [13] and eq. (2.5),
using Vestas V150­4.2MW for onshore turbines and V164­8MW for offshore turbines as
scaling reference as seen in eq. (6.1) and (6.2).
mtower,onshore = mtower,onshore,0 ·
(
Drotor
Drotor,onshore,0
)α
= 647.04 ton ·
(Drotor
150 m
)2.25
(6.1)
mtower,offshore = mtower,offshore,0 ·
(
Drotor
Drotor,offshore,0
)α
= 805 ton ·
(Drotor
164 m
)2.25
(6.2)
Tower mass results can be seen in Figure 6.8 along with literature values. A power law fit
has been applied to the plotted reference values for comparison.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.8: Tower mass as a function of rotor diameter.
6.2.2
Blades
The mass of the blades are scaled according to a paper investigating the future blade
mass material [1] and which uses a power law function from the DecomBlades project to
estimate mass for a single blade, using eq. (6.3).
mblade = a ·
( L
L0
)b
[ton]
(6.3)
where, a = 1.29 · 10−3 ± 2 · 10−4 ton, b = 2.32 ± 0.03, and L0 = 1 m.
The DecomBlades mass equation assumes mass per blade, therefore multiplying with
three to get mass for all three blades, as seen in eq. (6.4).
mblades = 3 · mblade
(6.4)
The mass of the blades mass scaled for onshore and offshore can be seen in Figure 6.9
along with available literature data on blades mass. Additional data on blades mass of the
blades Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy B45 [50], LM Wind Power LM37.3 P2 [51],
and Vestas V47 [52] available from the Blade Material Passports from the DecomBlades
project are shown as well.
36
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:45==
Figure 6.9: Blades mass as a function of rotor diameter.
6.2.3
Substructure
Turbine substructures are found in different types but are predominantly concrete­based
foundations for onshore applications and steel­based monopiles for offshore applications.
Therefore, the scaling of turbine substructures is divided between these two types.
Onshore foundations have been scaled according to Faurskov & Laurberg [13] and eq.
(2.5), resulting in the scaling law as seen in eq. (6.5) and scaled with the onshore Vestas
V150­4.2MW as a reference turbine.
mfoundation, onshore = mfoundation,0·
( Drotor
Drotor,0
)α
→mfoundation, onshore = 2119 ton·
(Drotor
150 m
)2.14
(6.5)
Scaling of offshore monopile masses seemed to be more complex, and not much literature
is available on monopile masses or scaling estimations. The mass scaling is dependent
on a few more variables than the other components. The mass scaling is based on the
INNWIND model [60] which provides a linear relation between water depth and cost of
monopile (numerator in e), where the monopile cost (denominator) of 8.1 [e/MW] acts as
a scaling factor, which is seen in eq. (6.6).
mmonopile, offshore = (hwater [m] · 21.3 [
e
MW·m] + 137.5 [
e
MW ]) · Prated[MW]
8.1 [e/kg]
(6.6)
The water depths have been estimated using the Global Wind Atlas [61] and identification
of offshore wind farm locations from the Master Data Register, where an overview of
offshore wind farms with associated water depths can be seen in section 2.4 in Table 2.1.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
37
==PAGE:46==
Substructure masses ­ onshore foundation and offshore monopile ­ can be seen in Figure
6.10 along with literature values for each type, respectively.
Figure 6.10: Onshore foundation and offshore monopile mass as a function of rotor
diameter.
Most literature values on monopile masses are available for large offshore turbines, namely
the IEA RWTs on 15MW and 22MW, a Siemens Gamesa SWT 8.4­167 DD, and Vestas
V164 and the new V236. Most operating offshore turbines in the Danish fleet have lower
capacity and are thus not in the same capacity range for comparison.
A paper by McWilliams et al. suggests an offshore wind farm monopile model for wind
farm design and financial valuation using a surrogate model based on a range of tech­
nological and site­specific conditions [42]. A simplified version of this support structure
model surrogate (SSMS) has been used to model the relevant monopile masses for the
Danish offshore wind farms [62], and a table of SSMS model variables used can be seen
in Appendix A.
The height used to extract data for site locations in the Global Wind Atlas is chosen as
the nearest 50 m interval based on the turbine hub height (50 or 100 m). A set of three
different reference turbines (Initial Power) with different capacities are used in the SSMS
model where the closest to the respective turbine has been selected for modeling. Spe­
cific power (SP) is data extracted from Global Wind Atlas as the 50% windiest areas at the
respective height. Due to the very large range of rotor diameters, McWilliams et al. uses
a hub height ratio modeled as Hhub = rh · Drotor, with Hhub is hub height in m, rh is hub
height ratio, and Drotor is rotor diameter in m. This model does not verify for very small
turbines, therefore the values >1 are not included in the paper, and therefore a maximum
hr is 0.88. At higher rotor radius, rh approaches 0.55, which catches almost all turbines,
38
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:47==
while 0.88 catches a lot of the small turbines. Water depth and wind speed have been
modeled in Global Wind Atlas, where water depth values can be found in Table 2.1.
The height of transition piece (Htrans), wave height (Wave height), and wave period (Wave period)
have been set to constant values based on baseline values used in the paper [42].
The scaling of Hhub = rh · Drotor by the paper by McWilliams et al. seems to be an invalid
scaling law as it lacks a constant. Rather, the scaling law Hhub = a · Drotor + b would
be a valid scaling, as presented in Theory (chapter 2) where the hub height is seen to be
sufficiently scaled in Figure 6.2.
SSMS results with relevant variables can be seen in Figure 6.11 along with fleet model
results and corresponding water depths and selected reference turbines. This shows fairly
higher mass estimations by the SSMS model compared to the fleet model, but showing
the same scaling tendencies. This could imply that the SSMS model includes scaling of
the transition piece, where scaling from the INNWIND model does not include transition
piece. This and the selection of SSMS model parameters will be discussed in Discussion
in chapter 7.
Figure 6.11: Offshore monopile mass results shown together with support structure
model surrogate (SSMS) results and literature values as a function of rotor diame­
ter. Fleet model monopile mass results are plotted with their corresponding water depths
seen in colorbar.
6.2.4
Nacelle
Scaling of the nacelle includes different subcomponents; main shaft, gearbox, genera­
tor, brake system, yaw system, cooling system, pitch system, and control system. The
Technical University of Denmark along with 27 European partners in an EU funded project
under the name INNWIND developed in 2017 a model to estimate the scaling and costs
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
39
==PAGE:48==
of emerging up­scaled offshore turbines seen and predicted in the market. This resulted
in an Excel tool for estimation of cost and scaling of 10­20 MW offshore turbines. [60].
Verified and used by Jørgensen & Jakobsen [63], the scaling laws of this model are used
to scale a group of nacelle subcomponents; low speed shaft, main bearing, bed plate,
mechanical brake couplings, nacelle cover, hydraulic cooling system, and yaw system.
Equations can be seen in eq. (6.7)­(6.13) with mass results in kg.
mlow speed shaft =
(Prated · 103
5000
)3/2
· 27210
(6.7)
mmain bearing = 0.0092 ·
( 8
600 · Drotor −0.033
)
·
(
D2.5
rotor
)
· 2
(6.8)
mbed plate = D1.953
rotor · 1.228
(6.9)
mmechanical brake couplings =
(Prated · 103
5000
) 3
2
· 1000
(6.10)
mnacelle cover = 13000 ·
(Prated · 103
5000
) 3
2
(6.11)
mhydraulic cooling system = 0.08 · Prated · 103
(6.12)
myaw system = D3.314
rotor · 0.9 · 10−3 · 1.6
(6.13)
The scaling also needs to cover the mass of a gearbox and generator. These two sub­
components are also scaled in INNWIND with the following eq. (6.14) and (6.15).
mgearbox = 0.65 · 13.25 · τrated
(6.14)
mgenerator = 0.35 · 13.25 · τrated
(6.15)
The relationship between rated power Prated and rated torque τrated is as seen in eq.
(6.16).
Prated = τrated · ωrated
(6.16)
Therefore, an expression for rated torque can be formulated in eq. (6.17).
τrated = Prated
ωrated
= Prated
vtip
Rblade
= Prated · Rblade
vtip
(6.17)
where, vtip is speed at blade tip in m/s, ωrated is the angular velocity in rad/s, and τrated is
rated torque in Nm. Inserting eq. (6.17) in eq. (6.14) and (6.15), and using Rblade = Drotor
2
results in final expressions as seen in eq. (6.18) and (6.19).
mgearbox = 0.65 · 13.25 · Prated · Drotor
2
vtip
(6.18)
mgenerator = 0.35 · 13.25 · Prated · Drotor
2
vtip
(6.19)
Assuming a vtip = 90m/s as is general for most turbine applications, the mass of gearbox
and generator can be modeled.
40
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:49==
Summing all subcomponents results in computed nacelle mass, as seen in eq. (6.20) only
based on the variables Prated and Drotor. All subcomponent masses have been given in
kg, therefore dividing by 103 to convert to ton.
mnacelle =
(mlow speed shaft + mmain bearing + mbed plate + mmechanical brake couplings+
mnacelle cover + mhydraulic cooling system + myaw system + mgearbox + mgenerator)/103
(6.20)
Nacelle mass results can be seen in Figure 6.12 along with literature values for compari­
son.
Figure 6.12: Nacelle mass as a function of rotor diameter.
6.3
Mass intensity of the Danish turbine fleet
The next interesting point of investigation is how the development of turbine mass per
turbine capacity is seen across all periods. Figure 6.13 shows the modeled turbine mass
capacity (ton/MW) as a function of turbine capacity (MW), separated between onshore
and offshore turbines for each period. Note that for this plot only, a further sorting of data
has been carried out, sorting out all turbines <200 kW, as these were seen to be close to
0 MW and thus make noise in the linear fit between data points. Therefore, only one data
point in period 1975­1985 for both onshore and offshore is seen. The linear fits seem to
show rather flat tendencies, indicating a more or less constant mass intensity for turbines
in a given period and even across a large range of turbine capacity. Onshore turbines
are seen to have more mass per capacity compared to offshore turbines. The average
turbine mass per turbine capacity for the whole fleet for onshore and offshore is 511.19
ton/MW and 207.88 ton/MW, respectively.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.13: Onshore and offshore turbine mass per turbine capacity across 10­year
periods. Note for this plot data points <200 kW are not shown.
Figure 6.14 shows turbine mass per installed capacity as a function of the given average
turbine capacities for 10­year periods from Figure 6.6 and 6.7. Because of the historical
turbine size increase experienced in the wind industry through time, the capacity increase
on x axis can be interpreted as the experienced increased turbine size on a time scale.
The curves shows a rather flat tendency for offshore turbine mass per installed capac­
ity, whereas onshore turbines seem to have an increase in mass per installed capacity
which might be due to increase in foundation mass required for larger turbines to with­
stand higher loads. This highlights a difference between onshore and offshore in turbine
intensity of the mass related to installed capacity, while suggesting that offshore turbine
design development might have reached a plateau in regards to mass intensity around
200 ton/MW.
42
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.14: Turbine mass per installed capacity as a function of the average turbine
capacity. Note that time period 1975­1985 is not shown because no offshore turbines was
installed in this period and the small size onshore turbines yields a distorted result.
Below can be seen the results of mass intensity of the Danish onshore and offshore tur­
bines with substructure, along with mass intensities for onshore concrete, onshore steel,
and offshore steel, based on averages from fleet model. Onshore concrete is based on
assuming all foundation mass is concrete, onshore steel is assuming all onshore towers
are made of steel, and offshore steel is assuming all towers and monopiles are made of
steel.
Table 6.1: Average turbine mass intensity for Danish onshore and offshore turbines,
and average concrete and steel intensity for Danish onshore and offshore turbines
based on fleet model.
Onshore
Offshore
Average turbine mass intensity
511.19 ton/MW
207.88 ton/MW
Average onshore concrete intensity
237.94 ton/MW
­
Average onshore steel intensity
70.91 ton/MW
­
Average offshore steel intensity
­
142.40 ton/MW
6.4
Comparison of inventory with Joint Research Centre
study
A way of comparing the wind turbine mass intensity is comparison with a report from the
Joint Research Center (JRC) under the European Commission who made an analysis
on technological and scarce materials demand when considering future forecasts of wind
and solar energy expansion in Europe and globally [64]. Table 6.2 shows a replication
of this table of the material usages for different drivetrain types. A summation has been
added in ton/GW and ton/MW. Notice the summation of the range is considering the sum
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
43
==PAGE:52==
of all lower­estimate and higher­estimate material usages, which by itself might not be
realistic turbine design.
Table 6.2: Material usage estimates in ton/GW for different wind turbine types, re­
produced from JRC report [64].
Material
Range min Range max DD­EESG DD­PMSG GB­PMSG GB­DFIG
Concrete
243000
413000
369000
243000
413000
355000
Steel
107000
132000
132000
119500
107000
113000
Polymers
4600
4600
4600
4600
4600
4600
Glass/carbon composites
7700
8400
8100
8100
8400
7700
Aluminum (Al)
500
1600
700
500
1600
1400
Boron (B)
0
6
0
6
1
0
Chromium (Cr)
470
580
525
525
580
470
Copper (Cu)
950
5000
5000
3000
950
1400
Dysprosium (Dy)
2
17
6
17
6
2
Iron (cast) (Fe)
18000
20800
20100
20100
20800
18000
Manganese (Mn)
780
800
790
790
800
780
Molybdenum (Mo)
99
119
109
109
119
99
Neodymium (Nd)
12
180
28
180
51
12
Nickel (Ni)
240
440
340
240
440
430
Prasedymium (Pr)
0
35
9
35
4
0
Terbium (Tb)
0
7
1
7
1
0
Zinc (Zn)
5500
5500
5500
5500
5500
5500
Sum [ton/GW]
388853
593084
546808
406209
563852
508393
Sum [ton/MW]
389
593
547
406
564
508
Without concrete [ton/MW] 146
180
The different types of drivetrain has different technological properties and thus different
material compositions. A brief overview of the types and their general application can be
seen in Table 6.3, with the description of application according to JRC and comments on
application of drivetrain applications in Denmark.
Table 6.3: Overview of drivetrain types and applications.
Drivetrain Drivetrain type Generator type
Application (JRC)
Application in DK
DD­EESG Direct Drive
Electrically Excited
Synchronous Generator (EESG) Onshore
Mostly Germany
DD­PMSG Direct Drive
Permanent Magnet
Synchronous Generator (PMSG) Onshore and offshore Offshore (modern)
GB­PMSG Gearbox
Permanent Magnet
Synchronous Generator (PMSG) Onshore and offshore Onshore (modern)
and Vestas turbines
GB­DFIG
Gearbox
Double­Fed
Induction Generator (DFIG)
Onshore and offshore Onshore (old)
Generally, onshore turbines are housing Gearbox generators while offshore turbines house
Direct Drive generators. The Danish fleet consists mostly of Gearbox generators. Using
a Gearbox results in a 10 times smaller generator compared to Direct Drive. On the other
hand, using a Gearbox requires maintenance and possibly additional expenses. The
World Bank estimates that by 2050, 75% of offshore turbines will rely on Direct Drive gen­
erators [64].
Even though the wind energy industry has successfully used conventional generators
free of permanent magnets for onshore applications (such as DD­EESG and GB­DFIG),
44
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:53==
these are unsuitable for future offshore applications due to the considerable weight, and
when considering the increasing size and capacity of offshore turbines. Therefore, the
most suitable generator type for offshore applications is including permanent magnets
which offer a reduced generator weight. According to the World Bank, only 20% of next­
generation wind turbines will be based on rare­earth permanent magnets, whereas the
remaining 80% will be either conventional electromagnets or ferrite permanent magnets
without rate earths [64].
The use of rare earth elements in permanent magnet generators is also seen in Table 6.2
with a higher amount of neodymium, prasedymium, and terbium in DD­PMSG compared
to other drivetrain types. Gearboxes need quite an amount of aluminum round the shaft,
which is also the case in Table 6.2.
Further analysis of the different drivetrain and related scarce material usage are not in the
scope of this project.
Additional notes in the report from JRC suggest that mass requirements for onshore and
offshore wind turbines differ, with the lower estimate for DD­PMSG is predominantly used
for offshore sites. This suggests that Table 6.2 is applicable also for offshore turbines,
even though it contains values on concrete. This will be discussed in Discussion (chapter
7).
The modeled mass intensity in ton/MW of the Danish wind turbine fleet has been com­
pared in Figure 6.15 with the material range from JRC found in Table 6.2. Reference
values are shown as well with a few Vestas onshore turbines [7] and one IEA 3.4MW
onshore RWT [43] material intensities, and IEA 15MW [3] and 22MW [44] offshore RWTs
and one SWT8.4­167 DD (Kriegers Flak as reported in Master Data Register [65]) mate­
rial intensities. These reference values are plotted according to their report publish year
and chosen to represent a wide range of sizes and publish dates. Table 6.4 is describing
the chosen turbines for comparison.
Table 6.4: Wind turbines chosen for comparison with fleet model results and JRC
material intensity range. These turbines can also be seen in Table 3.1. Vestas turbines
was found in portfolio of their LCA reports [7]. V236­15MW is reported published in 2024,
but to fit into plot for comparison, the publish year is assumed to be the latest in the
investigated period, year 2022.
Onshore
Publish year Mass intensity Source Offshore
Publish year Mass intensity Source
ton/MW
ton/MW
IEA 3.4MW
2010
233.4
[43]
IEA 15MW
2010
226.0
[3]
V90­1.8/2.0MW 2011
518.5
[66]
IEA 22MW
2010
243.8
[44]
V90­3.0MW
2013
432.3
[46]
SWT8.4­167 DD 2010
181.3
[65]
V100­2.0MW
2015
539.5
[67]
V236­15MW
2024
(2022)
207.3
[49]
V117­3.45MW
2017
549.3
[68]
V117­4.2MW
2019
417.6
[69]
V150­4.2MW
2022
666.9
[47]
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.15: Turbine mass per capacity for each year for the Danish wind turbine
fleet. Notice values both on turbine mass per turbine capacity and installed capacity are
shown, but with curves overlapping. Minimum and maximum values as described in Table
6.2 are seen marked with red horizontal lines. Literature values are marked with unfilled
dots for onshore and offshore for comparison.
It is seen that modern onshore turbines from around 2008 are within the range set by
JRC between 389­593 ton/MW. Offshore turbines seem outside the range, which might
suggest both a lower material intensity for offshore turbines, and that Table 6.2 is not
suitable for offshore turbine evaluation. This figure also suggests an increase in material
intensity over time. Reference values seem within the range and generally higher for both
onshore and offshore, especially before 2008.
As it is questionable whether the JRC table is compatible for offshore turbines as well, it
has been attempted to establish a corresponding table with material intensity estimates for
offshore turbines based on fleet model results on turbine mass. Using a table of material
relative and absolute compositions for offshore wind energy from Li et al. [70], complete
tables of structural and technological material masses for each major component and for
onshore and offshore turbines in the Danish fleet have been obtained. The structural and
technological material masses from these tables for the relevant materials mentioned in
JRC Table 6.2 are evaluated for each individual turbine in Master Data Register, summed
across all components and divided by turbine capacity, and the average fleet value com­
puted. The fraction of each material is given, which is multiplied with the total lower­range
of material usage as given by JRC Table 6.2. The lower range are used as this seems most
comparable because of the scaled turbine component masses is seen to be marginally
lower than literature values, and the average onshore concrete and steel intensities in
Table 6.1 are marginally lower than JRC values. Table 6.5 is only used for comparison to
JRC Table 6.2.
46
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:55==
Table 6.5: Table of average material intensity estimates of Danish offshore wind
turbine fleet in ton/MW based on fleet model and Li et al. [70]. Monopile substructures
is the most relevant for Danish offshore turbines, therefore steel­based monopiles are
considered and no concrete is included. Average material intensity is based on fleet
model and Li et al. material relative composition. The related fraction of each material is
given. Material usage fraction is multiplied with JRC minimum range of 146 ton/MW for
comparison (Table 6.2).
Material
JRC Range min Avg material intensity Fraction
Multiplied with JRC
ton/MW
ton/MW
­
ton/MW
Concrete
0
0.000
0%
0.0
Steel
107.0
58.357
86.2%
125.7
Polymers
4.6
0.459
0.7%
1.0
Glass/carbon composites 7.7
0.441
0.7%
0.9
Aluminium (Al)
0.5
0.370
0.5%
0.8
Boron (B)
0.0
0.000
0.00015% 0.0
Chromium (Cr)
0.5
0.058
0.09%
0.1
Copper (Cu)
1.0
0.363
0.5%
0.8
Dysprosium (Dy)
0.0
0.001
0.0017%
0.0
Iron (cast) (Fe)
18.0
2.042
3.0%
4.4
Manganese (Mn)
0.8
0.080
0.12%
0.2
Molybdenum (Mo)
0.1
0.012
0.018%
0.0
Neodymium (Nd)
0.0
0.004
0.006%
0.0
Nickel (Ni)
0.2
0.024
0.04%
0.1
Prasedymium (Pr)
0.0
0.0004
0.0006%
0.0
Terbium (Tb)
0.0
0.0004
0.0006%
0.0
Zinc (Zn)
5.5
5.5
8.1%
11.8
SUM
145.9
67.7
100.0%
145.9
The results of Table 6.5 is for turbines only without substructure, since the concrete from
JRC Table 6.2 has been neglected. The fleet model result of average material intensity
for offshore turbine­only of 67.7 ton/MW is about half the amount compared to JRC range
min of 146 ton/MW for onshore turbine­only. This trend is similar to the mass intensity for
onshore and offshore as presented for turbine mass per capacity for each year in Figure
6.15 and the average turbine mass intensities from fleet model in Table 6.1.
6.5
Wind turbine mass depletion
Having scaled the four major wind turbine components on section 6.2, the total turbine
mass can be computed as the sum of component masses. The total installed mass is
summed for each year based on installation year. Similarly, the installed capacity per
year is summed for each year based on installation year. Figure 6.16 shows the total
turbine mass installed per year along with the total installed turbine capacity.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.16: Installed Danish turbine mass and turbine capacity per installation year.
For the investigation of the mass expected to be decommissioned in the future based
on assumptions as seen in Theory in chapter 2, a survival function of the Weibull distri­
bution with λ=20 years and k=10 is established. This results in a survival curve for the
total installed turbine mass based on the installation year on x axis is seen in the three­
dimensional Figure 6.17. The installed mass approaches zero through depletion, where
the expected survived mass can be seen on y axis. The lifetime of 20 years can be seen
as the time span of the survival curve (y axis, e.g., from 1980 to 2000). To give an im­
pression of the survival rate of turbine mass at a given time based on installation year,
Figure 6.18 shows the survival curve in two dimensions. The vertical sum of mass yields
the total existing turbine mass at a given point in time.
48
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.17: Survival curve for Danish turbine fleet. Based on variables λ=20 years
and k=10.
1978 1988 1998 2008 2018 2028 2038 2048
Time
1978
1983
1988
1993
1998
2003
2008
2013
2018
Installation year
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Survived mass [ton]
Figure 6.18: Installed mass over time and installation year with expected depletion
of mass over time. Modeled with λ=20 years and k=10.
The expression of depletion from eq. 2.13 on the installed, existing, and decommissioned
capacity is used as presented in Figure 6.3, a depletion curve is shown with the ratio of de­
commissioned capacity from the installed capacity of a given year. Note that the fraction
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
49
==PAGE:58==
is zero in year 1978, 1979, 1980, 1981, 2005, 2020, 2021, and 2022, due to no decom­
mission in these years. The very high depletion ratio in 2004 is caused by the choice of
the Danish test centre facilities Østerild and Havsøre to decommission demonstration tur­
bines after only a few years of testing, and also because of a very low installation volume
in the years 2004 to 2007 [1]. The depletion curve can be seen in Figure 6.19.
Figure 6.19: Depletion curve showing the ratio of decommissioned to installed tur­
bines based on installation year. Also showing the installed, existing, and decommis­
sioned capacity based on installation year on primary axis. The depletion ratio is shown
in yellow on secondary axis.
From the depletion ratio, the lifetime of the turbine fleet as of year 2022 can be visual­
ized as the difference in time between 2022 and the depletion rate. The blue curve in
Figure 6.20 shows again the depletion curve along with the Weibull distribution fitted to
the depletion curve and which results in Weibull parameters λ=30.97 years and k=7.97.
Compared to the paper by Abrahamsen et al. which investigates the depletion of wind
turbine blade mass, both trend and Weibull parameters are comparable, where for on­
shore wind turbine blade mass depletion, Weibull parameters were found to λ=30 years
and k=10 [1]. The time when 50% of the fleet capacity is depleted (eq. 2.12), which is
an estimation of the average turbine lifetime, is t50%=29.6 years. This lifetime estimation
has been based on the data presented in this study on total turbine capacity (onshore and
offshore), whereas the lifetime estimation in the paper by Abrahamsen et al. is based on
onshore turbine blade mass, however the Weibull parameters and resulting wind turbine
lifetime estimations seems comparable.
50
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.20: Depletion of the total Danish wind turbine fleet based on the depletion
ratio between installed capacity and decommissioned capacity for different instal­
lation years as by 2022. The Weibull depletion function has been fitted to the depletion
curve which results in Weibull parameters λ=30.97 years and k=7.97, and the median
turbine lifetime of 29.6 years.
6.6
Steel­related emissions from Danish wind turbine fleet
When considering the steel content in the average Danish turbine (based on results of
average turbine mass intensity in Table 6.1), and applying the carbon footprint of 2.57
tonCO2/ton from production of conventional steelmaking (as investigated in the LCA in
chapter 5), a rough estimation of the historical steel­related emissions from commission
of the Danish wind turbine fleet can be illustrated. This is seen in Figure 6.21, when
assuming all steel historically has a carbon footprint related to conventional steelmaking
i.e., 20% scrap steel input.
However, this is based on one general assumption where many other factors undoubtedly
would influence this picture ­ this is merely to discuss the historical environmental impacts
from steel used in the wind industry, and to use it for comparison with more sustainable
manufacturing choices for future wind energy commission.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.21: Estimated historical steel­related emissions from installed Danish wind
turbine fleet. Assuming a carbon footprint from conventional steelmaking (20% scrap
steel scenario) on 2.57 tonCO2eq/ton steel applied to the total installed wind turbine steel
mass. Based on installed steel mass from onshore tower, offshore tower, and offshore
monopiles.
6.7
Future wind turbine fleet scenarios
In order to estimate the trends in steel decommission based on the fleet model, three
scenarios have been developed which tries to put a rough estimate on expected future
steel mass output from old wind turbines, which has the potential to be recirculated into
new wind turbines using the remelted steel technology. The future steel mass in the fol­
lowing scenarios are modeled using the average onshore and offshore mass per capacity
(ton/MW), which was found for the Danish fleet to 70.91 ton/MW and 142.40 ton/MW,
respectively. The historical installed steel mass has been modeled using the average tur­
bine mass intensity between onshore and offshore: 33% offshore of 142.40 ton/MW and
67% onshore turbines of 70.91 ton/MW resulting in an average installed turbine mass of
94.5 ton/MW.
6.7.1
Scenario 1: Offshore future steel scenario of Denmark
The future decommissioned mass of the offshore steel scenario has been modeled using
the Weibull parameters λ=33.9 years and k=50 based on offshore Weibull estimations
from [1]. Currently (2022), Denmark has an offshore wind capacity of 2.3 GW [71]. The
expansion of planned and expected Danish offshore wind farms are added to the scenario,
from the overview seen in Figure 2.4, namely the future wind farms Thor, Nordsøen I, II,
and III. Kattegat, Kriegers Flak II, Hesselø, and the much debated Bornholm energy island.
The wind farms are added according to provisional plans [72].
The number of 1 GW wind farms has been added after 2050 through optimization in a
scenario to maintain a constant offshore wind capacity of 14 GW, as seen in Figure 6.22.
This is a suggestion on how the landscape focusing exclusively on offshore expansion
could look like in the future, and which is modeled to keep a constant capacity of 14 GW
52
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:61==
until year 2100. The Weibull depletion curve for the historical and future wind installations
is seen as well with its main peaks illustrating decommissioned mass just more than 30
years after its installation.
Figure 6.22: Scenario 1: Offshore future steel scenario with planned wind farms and
hypothetical 1 GW wind farms installed after 2050. Installed Danish yearly capacity
with present capacity shown in yellow and the planned future wind farms shown after
2025. It is assumed that 1 GW wind farms are installed after 2050 with a capacity of
approx. 4 GW per 10 year periods. Weibull depletion function has been modeled using
λ=33.9 years and k=50, based on results from paper by Abrahamsen et al. [1].
The accumulated installed capacity and steel mass are used to determine the time of
break­even between input­output of steel if assuming a scenario where all decommis­
sioned wind turbine steel from offshore towers and monopiles are recirculated into man­
ufacturing of new wind turbines. For this scenario, the steel break­even will take place in
year 2056 with a constant installed steel mass of approx. 2 Mton, which can be seen in
Figure 6.23. From here, the installation rate of 1 GW offshore wind farms four times per
10 years, has been optimized and are seen as hypothetical wind farms in Figure 6.22.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.23: Scenario 1: Accumulated decommissioned fleet steel mass. Scenario is
modeled to maintain a constant fleet capacity around 14 GW after 2056 where steel break­
even is found. Note that since the historical and future wind installations have different
mass intensity, the steel mass and capacity are shown with each their own curve.
6.7.2
Scenario 2: Onshore future fleet scenario according to Danish
governmental plans.
Shifting the focus to a Danish onshore future fleet scenario, it is also possible here to
model capacity expansion from governmental plans [71]. Denmark currently (2021 ultimo)
has an onshore wind capacity of 4.7 GW, and following the prospective plans to increase
the capacity in 2030 to 8.2 GW, this would result in an expansion of around 3.5 GW
between 2025­2030 [71]. When assuming Denmark should aim for a 10 GW constant
capacity by 2050 until 2100, this would require an onshore wind expansion of 6.5 GW
between 2030 to 2050. To maintain this capacity, the yearly installed onshore capacity
should follow approx. 350 MW/yr. The future decommissioned mass of the installed
onshore steel mass has been modeled using the Weibull parameters λ=30 years and
k=10 based on onshore Weibull estimations from [1].
54
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.24: Scenario 2: Onshore future steel scenario with planned onshore ex­
pansion of 3.5 GW between 2025­2030, an estimated 6.5 GW expansion between
2030­2050, and approx. 350 MW/yr from 2050­2100 to maintain 10 GW capacity.
Installed Danish capacity with present capacity shown in yellow and the planned future
onshore expansion shown in 2025­2030 of 3.5 GW as the average expansion per year in
the period shown in green, along with an expected 6.5 GW expansion to reach a 10 GW
wind capacity fleet by 2050 shown in blue. The capacity needed to maintain this 10 GW
capacity from 2050­2100 is approx. 350 MW/yr and are shown in purple.
It is seen that a lot less steel is required for onshore wind expansion compared to the off­
shore scenario, because onshore requires only around half of the steel mass due to the
lack of a steel monopile substructure. On the other hand, onshore turbines are mounted
on concrete foundations which mass and emissions are not evaluated but should be re­
membered when comparing these scenarios.
For scenario 2, the planned onshore expansion leads to a 10 GW expansion up to 2050.
This higher historical installations compared to the future causes a peak in installed steel
mass around 2030­2060 where a steel break­even is seen in year 2060 with a constant
installed steel mass of approx. 0.7 Mton. From here, to maintain a constant fleet capacity
of 10 GW until 2100, optimization results of an average of approx. 25000 ton/yr of steel
or 350 MW/yr is required, as seen in Figure 6.25.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.25: Scenario 2: Accumulated decommissioned fleet steel mass. Scenario
is modeled to maintain a constant fleet capacity around 10 GW. Steel break­even is found
in 2060. Note that since the historical and future wind installations have different mass
intensity, the steel mass and capacity are shown with each their own curve.
6.7.3
Scenario 3: Onshore future fleet scenario with constant yearly
expansion of fleet.
If the prospective plans of onshore wind energy expansion should not be taken too literally,
one can assume an onshore wind expansion on an average annual basis to obtain a
constant fleet capacity of 10 GW. This can be seen modeled in Figure 6.26, where a
realistic scenario could be an annual expansion of 200 MW/yr from 2025­2030, followed
by a doubling to 400 MW/yr from 2030­2050, and onward to 2100. to maintain a constant
capacity of 10 GW. Again, the future decommissioned mass of the installed onshore steel
mass has been modeled using the Weibull parameters λ=30 years and k=10 based on
onshore Weibull estimations from [1].
56
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.26: Scenario 3: Onshore future steel scenario with constant expansion
of onshore fleet of 200 MW/yr between 2025­2030 and 400 MW/yr between 2030
and 2050 and onward to maintain 10 GW capacity. Installed present Danish capacity
are shown in yellow and suggested future onshore expansion shown in 2025­2030 of
200 MW/yr shown in green, along with a doubling in expansion to 400 MW/yr from 2030
onward shown in blue. To maintain a 10 GW capacity requires almost constant yearly
installation of 400 MW/yr except for a few selected years.
For scenario 3, the suggested onshore expansion increases the capacity to 10 GW in the
early 2020s and with a steel break­even in 2060, as can be seen in Figure 6.27. From
here, only a few year of onshore wind expansion can be neglected to maintain the constant
capacity.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.27: Scenario 3: Accumulated decommissioned fleet steel mass. Scenario is
modeled to maintain a constant fleet capacity around 10 GW after 2060 where steel break­
even is found. Note that since the historical and future wind installations have different
mass intensity, the steel mass and capacity are shown with each their own curve.
6.8
European and global outlook
As a means to extend the geographical scope of the investigation of steel­related emis­
sions from wind turbine manufacturing and the potentials of implementing more sustain­
able steel in manufacturing of new generations of wind turbines, a simple model has been
made for a European and global outlook. The report from JRC [64] estimates European
and global capacity scenarios for onshore and offshore wind from 2000 to 2050. These
capacity scenarios are used to determine the steel masses for each 10­year intervals by
multiplying with the average between JRC material intensity from Table 6.2, and applying
the carbon footprint of conventional and sustainable steelmaking, respectively, as pre­
sented in this study. The results for Europe and globally can be seen in Table 6.6 and
6.7 with visual presentations of prospected wind turbine steel mass and the steel­related
emissions in Figure 6.28c and 6.28d.
58
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:67==
Table 6.6: European market ­ Prospected onshore, offshore, and total wind energy
capacity in Europe with related predictions on steel­related emissions from conven­
tional steelmaking (20% scrap steel input) and sustainable steel (99% scrap steel
input).
Time period
Unit
2000 2010 2020 2030 2040
2050
Onshore capacity
GW
0
100
200
250
500
750
Onshore steel mass
Mton
0
12.0
23.9
29.9
59.8
89.6
Steel­related emissions (20%) MtonCO2eq 0
30.7
61.4
76.8
153.6 230.3
Steel­related emissions (99%) MtonCO2eq 0
9.3
18.6
23.2
46.4
69.6
Offshore capacity
GW
0
0
25
75
275
450
Offshore steel mass
Mton
0
0
3.0
9.0
32.9
53.8
Steel­related emissions (20%) MtonCO2eq 0
0
7.7
23.0
84.5
138.2
Steel­related emissions (99%) MtonCO2eq 0
0
2.3
7.0
25.5
41.8
Total capacity
GW
0
100
225
325
775
1200
Total steel mass
Mton
0
12.0
26.9
38.8
92.6
143.4
Steel­related emissions (20%) MtonCO2eq 0
30.7
69.1
99.8
238.0 368.5
Steel­related emissions (99%) MtonCO2eq 0
9.3
20.9
30.2
72.0
111.4
Table 6.7: Global market ­ Prospected onshore, offshore, and total wind energy
capacity globally with related predictions on steel­related emissions from conven­
tional steelmaking (20% scrap steel input) and sustainable steel (99% scrap steel
input).
Time period
Unit
2000 2010 2020
2030
2040
2050
Onshore capacity
GW
0
200
800
1700
2400
3000
Onshore steel mass
Mton
0
23.9
95.6
203.2 286.8 358.5
Steel­related emissions (20%) MtonCO2eq 0
61.4
245.7 522.1 737.1 921.3
Steel­related emissions (99%) MtonCO2eq 0
18.6
74.3
157.8 222.8 278.6
Offshore capacity
GW
0
0
25
150
275
450
Offshore steel mass
Mton
0
0
3.0
17.9
32.9
53.8
Steel­related emissions (20%) MtonCO2eq 0
0
7.7
46.1
84.5
138.2
Steel­related emissions (99%) MtonCO2eq 0
0
2.3
13.9
25.5
41.8
Total capacity
GW
0
200
825
1850
2675
3450
Total steel mass
Mton
0
23.9
98.6
221.1 319.7 412.3
Steel­related emissions (20%) MtonCO2eq 0
61.4
253.4 568.2 821.5 1059.5
Steel­related emissions (99%) MtonCO2eq 0
18.6
76.6
171.8 248.4 320.3
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
59
==PAGE:68==
(a) Turbine mass ­ EU.
(b) Turbine mass ­ Global.
(c) Steel­related emissions ­ EU.
(d) Steel­related emissions ­ Global.
Figure 6.28: Turbine steel mass and steel­related emission projections for the Euro­
pean and global market for the period 2000 until 2050. Based on JRC wind capacity
scenarios using the Medium Demand Scenario (MDS) [64].
This fairly simple model shows an increase in steel­related emissions from the wind en­
ergy sector in the future for both the onshore and offshore parts and in Europe and globally
alike. However, the emissions can be lowered by implementing remelted steel from steel
scrap by approx. 80 MtonCO2eq in 2050 for onshore and offshore on the European mar­
ket and more than 700 MtonCO2eq in 2050 for onshore and offshore. However, total of
onshore and offshore global emissions is projected to 1 GtonCO2eq in 2050. The JRC
report shows three scenarios for their projections ­ less energy materials demand (LDS),
medium energy materials demand (MDS), and high energy materials demand (HDS) ­
and applying these scenarios for the assessment of global steel­related emissions from
both onshore and offshore in 2050 results in a range between 668 and 2426 MtonCO2eq.
This highlight both the substantial carbon footprints related to the expansion of wind en­
ergy on a global level, as well as the substantial potentials of emission reduction if a higher
scrap steel input to new generations of wind turbine manufacturing would be considered.
6.9
Comparison to global GHG emissions pathways
In order to evaluate the global steel­related emissions from the wind energy sector to
be expected from future capacity expansion projections (section 6.8), the numbers are
compared to the global GHG emissions projections under the 1.5°C and 2.0°C pathways,
as presented by the IPCC in Figure 6.29.
60
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.29: Global GHG emissions under different scenarios and the emissions
gap up to 2050. Reproduced from the UN Emissions Gap Report 2022 [73].
To stay within the 1.5°C limit, future global CO2 emissions must be a maximum of 10
GtonCO2eq in 2050. As explored in the previous section, the estimated global steel­
related emissions from production of new wind turbines will result in approx. 1 GtonCO2eq
if conventional steelmaking technology is still applied in the future. Therefore, the wind
energy sector could contribute to 10% of the maximum emissions allowance to stay within
the 1.5°C limit in 2050. This underlines the need for investigating the possibility to supply
the wind energy sector with more sustainable manufacturing options. As seen in Table 6.7,
if using 99% remelted steel, the emissions could decrease from more than 1 GtonCO2eq
to 320 MtonCO2eq in 2050, thereby reducing the emissions with 70%.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
61
==PAGE:70==
7
Discussion
7.1
Bill Of Materials and Inventory model
It has been attempted to estimate inventory data on turbine mass for the Danish turbine
fleet based on the Master Data Register on Danish wind turbines. Around 30% of the
turbines are small household turbines >100 kW which through working with the data has
seen to disrupt the result and not been able to fit the proposed scaling functions. They are
therefore excluded from the dataset. Because of the historical small turbines, even after
excluding the smallest under 100 kW, the relation between rotor diameter and capacity
(eq. 2.3) is seen to scale with a scaling factor α ≈1.73, which is just below the standard
value of α=2. This is probably due to the many smaller turbines and because turbine
material efficiency have increased in time, and this indicates that the scaling relationship
of the Danish turbine fleet between rated power and size is as expected.
The large fraction of smaller turbines in the Danish fleet made it challenging to scale
the turbine components sufficiently, especially because most literature values available
for comparison are on larger turbines (Table 3.1). The scaling of component masses
resulted in heavier turbine towers but lighter substructure and nacelle masses compared
to literature values, and with blades mass scaling quite well compared to literature values
in the same rotor diameter range (Figure 6.9), especially when compared to literature
data on blade mass from the three available Blade Material Passports on Vestas V47,
Siemens B45, and LM37.3 (Table 3.2). The scaling factors α resulting from the different
scaling functions presented are around 2 and 3 for nacelle, which are in accordance with
the general scaling model (eq. 2.4).
The scaling of offshore monopiles were subject to deepened investigation because these
were seen to result in small masses. Wind turbine substructures generally does not lie
within the field of wind turbine design engineering but rather at an external company man­
ufacturing the substructures on order, and therefore foundations and monopiles are not
a design focus for many wind design engineers, which results in a lack of relevant data.
Figure 6.2 depicts the height of towers with onshore tower height scaling with rotor radius
plus 13.56 m on average, and offshore tower height scaling with rotor radius plus 29.41
m on average. According to theory and eq. (2.6), the additional height between blade
tip and ground or sea level should be smaller for offshore than onshore towers because
offshore turbines are closer to sea level. However, the opposite is seen.
Collaboration was sought with the authors of a paper presenting a model to estimate
offshore monopile mass [42], who included more scaling parameters than the INNWIND
model [60], which is used for the scaling in this study. Comparison of the two model
results showed for the SSMS results a rather linear tendency but heavier masses closer
to literature values, while fleet model results showed increase in mass per rotor diameter
similar to literature data. However, literature values on offshore monopile masses are
only available for very large rotor diameters above 164 m, which is above the range of the
fleet model data points. The INNWIND model are approx. 10 years old and the SSMS
model presented in the paper from 2022 offers a newer model which includes more model
parameters.
62
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:71==
7.2
Fleet model
The lifetime assessment of the Danish wind turbine fleet resulted in an average experi­
enced lifetime of 29.6 years, which is longer than both the design lifetime of 20 years for
onshore and 25 years for offshore turbines. The Danish Energy Agency prepared with
EMD International A/S a similar analysis from 2020 on installed onshore turbines con­
cluding that the installed turbines can be in operation for many years left, unless they
are taken down to make space for new projects, known as repowering. Previously, the
expected lifetime was up to 28 years for turbines installed up to 2007 and 25 years for
turbines installed from 2008. Now, the report concludes, turbine lifetime ranges between
25­40 years depending on turbine size and location, resulting in an average of 35 years
for existing turbines [74]. Regarding offshore turbines, turbine lifetime was expected to
be 25 years for turbines installed before 2025, while for new turbines installed from 2025
lifetime is expected to be 30 years [75]. This is agreed upon from several other sources
(ref). A paper by Abrahamsen et al. [1] studying the depletion of wind turbine blade mass
similarly investigated the lifetime of the installed fleet based on blade mass, concluded
a turbine lifetime of 28.9 for onshore and 33.9 for offshore [1], which agrees with the re­
port from the Danish Energy Agency. The paper argues that to accurately determine the
experienced wind turbine lifetime, without simply confirming the design lifetime, not only
should the existing turbines be included in the assessment, as done in previous studies,
but turbines taken out of operation should also be included. Thus, the sum of existing and
decommissioned turbines (i.e., installed) turbine volume should act as basis for lifetime
assessment.
The same approach to include the complete installed volume of wind turbines has been as­
sumed for this study, which evaluated both onshore and offshore capacity. This resulted in
Weibull parameters fitted to the Master Data Register of λ=30.97 years and k=7.97, which
agrees with the paper by Abrahamsen et al. based on onshore blade mass. Even though
these two studies have fitted Weibull functions based on different turbine parameters, the
results are not so surprising as they have the same data foundation.
7.3
Comparison to Joint Research Centre study
To validate the inventory results against literature, the paper from Joint Research Centre
under the European Commission was selected for its high source credibility [64]. The pa­
per presents a table of material usage estimates for different wind turbine types in ton/GW
which claim to be relevant for both onshore and offshore turbines, despite the inclusion of
a vast amount of concrete, which is only related to onshore concrete­based foundations
(Table 6.2). Comparing the average turbine mass intensities from the fleet model, the on­
shore 511.19 ton/MW is within the JRC range and fairly close to the GB­DFIG drivetrain of
508 ton/MW which is relevant for many old onshore turbines. The historical development
of onshore turbines reveals a lower mass intensity but with an increase from 2008, which
matches literature values. If trying to compare Table 6.2 with the fleet model result of av­
erage offshore mass intensity, the 142.4 ton/MW would be compared to the JRC range for
turbine­only of 146­180 ton/MW, when excluding concrete as the mass for substructure.
Here it seems complicated to compare the fleet model mass intensity, including monopile,
with JRC values for turbine­only, however, these seems to match well into the range of
146­180 ton/MW. One could assume the table considers the offshore substructure to be a
gravitation substructure made of concrete, but this is not specified anywhere in the report.
Because concrete amounts are so high, it gets problematic to compare the table with off­
shore applications which can lead to misconceptions. Additionally, the JRC report scale
turbines from 0­4 MW, whereas this study investigates the Danish turbine fleet containing
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
63
==PAGE:72==
turbines up to 10 MW and discussion of 15 and 20 MW turbines. As seen in Figure 6.13
and 6.14, the investigation of the Danish turbine fleet revealed there is a difference in
onshore and offshore mass intensity, which is interesting when the JRC report offers no
clear distinction between onshore and offshore mass intensity.
This highlight the seemingly difficulties in comparing literature values and finding relevant
sources for comparing turbine mass scaling. The scope of the report by JRC is inves­
tigation of future bottlenecks in scarce materials supply when assuming the expected
development in turbine design and installed capacity, and which main focus therefore is
not the structural materials like steel and concrete.
7.4
LCA setup in SimaPro
The product system for investigation of the environmental impacts from remelted steel
scenarios was set up under different assumptions. The scope was to investigate differ­
ences in carbon footprints from conventional steelmaking with different scrap steel inputs,
and from the two conventional steelmaking routes (BF­BOF and DRI­EAF), the EAF route
has the option to add scrap steel, and this route is also the one used by NLMK Verona,
which are the reasons for selection. The modeling of the product system in SimaPro was
setup to simulate conventional DRI­EAF steelmaking including hot rolling with possibility
to change the scrap steel input. Therefore, the ecoinvent process for the product sys­
tem Steel, low­alloyed, hot rolled (RER) was not selected, instead EAF steelmaking was
separately modeled to include hot rolling. It has been verified that the resulting scenarios
yields the same carbon footprint as Steel, low­alloyed, hot rolled (RER). In the process
trees of 70% and 99%, it is seen that Hot rolling takes additional 0.05 kg/kg steel input
(Steel, unalloyed {GLO}| market for | Cut­off, U), which according to Theory 2 should not
apply. It is unclear whether the hot rolling process include material inputs, therefore the
ecoinvent default of 0.05 kg/kg has been kept, however, it adds ∼5% steel material. This
could explain the higher carbon footprint compared to literature values.
7.5
NLMK DanSteel green steel production
A paper on production of low carbon emission heavy steel plates from EAF slabs for
offshore wind foundations, which resulted in an offshore monopile made from remelted
steel by NLMK Verona [76], reported a carbon footprint of 0.73­0.75 tonCO2/ton and ”not
exceeding 0.8 tonCO2/ton” [56]. This is in accordance with the 99% scenario on 0.77
tonCO2eq/ton. In the paper, NLMK Europe argues that if using green electricity for the
steelmaking processes, the carbon footprint can be lowered down to 0.55 tonCO2/ton,
which is the same value obtained in ecoinvent process for steelmaking with 100% scrap
steel input, which thus is without electricity from sustainable sources (see Appendix B).
This implies, according to ecoinvent data, that the carbon footprint of 100% remelted steel
into new steel products can be lowered even further than 0.55 tonCO2eq/ton if sourced
by green electricity. But according to NLMK DanSteel, remelted steel products requires
even just a small fraction of primary steel. Right now, 96­98% of scrap and 2­4% of pig
iron (purchased externally from standard blast furnace) are used, and they argue that if
60% of scrap is 1st choice scrap ­ that is, scrap with low amount of Pb, Sn, Cr, Cu ­ 99% is
also possible [77]. This 1st choice scrap is available at heavy plate mills, such as NLMK
DanSteel, which generates such like offcuts from the heavy plates when cutting them into
final sizes. Thereby, the 99% scrap steel scenario has been established, and a complete
remelted steel scenario of 100% can be found in Appendix B.
One value that could be used for verification between ecoinvent and NLMK DanSteel is
the energy required by the walking beam furnace at NLMK DanSteel for reheating during
64
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:73==
hot rolling. This reheating furnace requires 1.2 GJ natural gas per ton steel, whereas
ecoinvent assumes 1.482 MJ natural gas per kg steel, which is comparable.
7.6
Steel carbon footprint
Manufacturing is the life cycle phase contributing most to total emissions for wind electric­
ity generation with 86% of GHG emissions, and totaling around 9­13 gCO2eq/kWh [78]
[79] [80]. Literature review of life cycle emission factors for wind energy generation pub­
lished and updated by NREL reports that 12 out of 13 gCO2eq/kWh are emitted upstream,
meaning from the production of turbines for wind energy [80]. The bulk of material mass
in wind turbine design (excluding substructure) is structural steel, accounting for around
85% in Vestas’ portfolio of onshore turbines [7], which is also the reason steel especially
in nacelle, tower, and monopile is the material with highest contribution to the overall en­
vironmental impact [79]. LCA of conventional steelmaking with 20% scrap steel input,
including post­processing such as hot rolling, resulted in this study in a carbon footprint
of 2.57 tonCO2/ton steel slab.
There are different carbon footprint results to discuss. Many reported values in literature
evaluates cast steel carbon footprint (processes from raw materials extraction to iron­
making, steelmaking, and casting). This study aimed at investigating a more complex
product system, including hot rolling to form semi­finished products, as has been explored
with industry insight with NLMK DanSteel. The investigated system is thus closer to com­
plete steel products for new wind turbines, and the related carbon footprint from this study
is thus closer to realistic values on a future green wind turbine steel scenario.
Literature values are most often reported per ton of cast steel produced i.e., excluding the
post­processes like hot rolling, and are in the range of 1.4 tonCO2/ton cast steel (Table
2.4). The resulting carbon footprints for the scenarios presented in this study are therefore
including more production processes than often are included in literature values. How­
ever, the 20% scenario’s carbon footprint of 2.57 tonCO2eq/ton steel is higher than natural
gas­based DRI­EAF carbon footprint of around 1.4 tonCO2/ton. This could be explained
by several factors: The 20% scrap steel input represents the lower end of the typical
range of 20–30% which can be higher [30]. Therefore, it can be considered a worst­case
scenario in DRI­EAF steel production. For comparison, the global average steelmaking
scenario using the DRI­EAF route in ecoinvent assumes 72% scrap steel input (Appendix
B). The scrap steel fraction is expected to vary by region, influenced by factors such as
scrap market availability, pricing, and other conditions. Also, the overall loss has been
assumed to be constant across the presented scenarios (13.13%) as the ecoinvent de­
fault process assumes this loss for 100% scrap steel input. The global scenario assumes
14.04% loss at 72% scrap steel input. Since the metallic content of scrap steel (>95%) is
higher than that of iron ore (50–70%) [30], it is reasonable to assume that increasing the
scrap steel input could reduce overall material losses. This, in turn, would lower the total
material input required and decrease the resulting carbon footprint.
NLMK Europe reports in their sustainability report of 2023 their total emissions intensity
being 2.748 tonCO2/ton produced [81], which is much more in line with the modeled con­
ventional steelmaking scenario in this study.
The normalization of the scenarios showed drastic scores in the impact category Human
carcinogenic toxicity of 800 tonCO2eq/PE which is caused by EAF slag in the steelmak­
ing process. Similarly, the impact categories Freshwater toxicity and Marine ecotoxicity
exhibited high scores, though not as extreme. Renzulli et al. [82] describes how these
impact category are also significantly amplified in the BF­BOF route with the BF (iron­
making) using coke ovens being the most contributing process to impact categories in
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
65
==PAGE:74==
LCA, and BOF (steelmaking) the least contributing process to impact categories. This is
in line with chemistry theory of BF­BOF steelmaking, where iron ore reduction contributes
to CO2 emissions (eq. 2.19). For the DRI­EAF route, this study showed vast impacts
from the EAF slag forming in the steelmaking process (eq. 2.30). This suggests that de­
spite the steel production route, steelmaking has substantial impacts on toxicity, but from
different production stages.
7.7
Steel emissions from wind turbine fleet expansion
The sustainability of the Danish wind turbine fleet led to conservative estimates of histor­
ical steel­related emissions, given the high carbon footprint of conventional steelmaking
of 2.57 ton CO2eq/ton steel produced. This estimate is based on the DRI­EAF production
route, which represents 30% of global steel production, while the remaining 70% from
the BF­BOF route with a higher carbon footprint, likely contributed to Denmark’s historical
steel­related emissions. On the other hand, the turbine mass inventory was shown to
be in the lower range when comparing to the JRC report. For the steel­related emission
estimations, only the tower and offshore monopile masses were considered, where other
major components like the nacelle with i.e., hub and gearbox also contain steel which
should be recycled. According to Kainz et al. [79], the steel content in offshore tower and
monopile accounts for around 10% and 22% of total CO2 emissions, respectively, with
the nacelle and hub accounting for around 10% and 3%, respectively. If the steel content
of the remaining components like nacelle and hub could also be scaled and estimated for
recycling, the steel­related emissions of the Danish fleet would be higher than presented.
The potentials of recycled wind turbine materials into new turbines depends on the recy­
cling rates of end­of­life materials after decommissioning. The recycling rates at end­of­
life for the different offshore components, as presented by Demuytere et al. [83], are 98%
for turbine tower, 86% for rotor and nacelle, and 67% for monopile which is assuming
that standard offshore decommissioning practice is to cut off the monopile at sea bed and
leave around 40% in ground. The recycling of steel monopiles therefore has potential to
increase, which is important because the sustainability of wind turbines is dependent on
maximizing the recycling rates.
The sustainability of new­generation wind turbines has been examined from a recircula­
tion point of view, resulting in a carbon footprint of steel production with remelted steel of
0.77 tonCO2eq/ton, but this carbon footprint could technically be lowered if the DRI­EAF
route would be sourced by renewable energy for running the heavy machinery. Also, if
using hydrogen produced from renewable energy sources for the iron­making instead of
natural gas, the carbon footprint could be even further reduced.
The scenarios presented highlighted the installed steel volume needed to maintain con­
stant capacity in the Danish wind energy fleet. Maintaining 14 GW wind energy from
offshore wind farms would require a constant installed steel mass of 2 Mton, and main­
taining 10 GW from onshore wind would require 0.7 Mton constant installed steel mass.
Compared to the global annual crude steel production of 1859 Mton [30], the steel volume
needed for the Danish wind energy fleet expansion is just a minor fraction. The scenarios
has been assuming capacity expansion for either offshore or onshore wind, but a realistic
scenario would be a mix of both. It could be concluded that focusing entirely on onshore
fleet expansion would result in lower steel­related emissions compared to offshore ex­
pansion, however, the concrete foundation for onshore turbines also have a substantial
carbon footprint which is not included in the scenarios, and which is important to include
when deciding between these scenarios.
The electricity production from the 14 GW constant capacity offshore scenario would re­
66
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:75==
sult in an annual production of 49 TWh (assuming 40% capacity factor), and the 10 GW
constant capacity onshore scenarios would result in an annual production of 36.8 TWh
for the onshore scenarios (assuming 30% capacity factor). The annual Danish electricity
demand in 2050 is expected around 88.5 TWh across all sectors, which is still higher than
what the suggested scenarios could supply. The expected electricity production in 2050
by offshore wind is 55.94 TWh and 14.29 TWh by onshore wind, which points at focusing
on expansion of the Danish offshore wind fleet [84].
7.8
Sustainability and global outlook
The outlook on European and global projections of wind energy capacity, steel volume,
and related emissions show a substantial amount of steel needed for the wind energy
capacity expansion, for example 412 Mton total steel required globally in 2050 (Table 6.7),
compared to 1869 Mton current global annual crude steel production [30]. The related
emissions results in more than 1 GtonCO2eq globally in 2050, which is about 10% of
the allowed global emissions if keeping in the trajectory of 1.5°C warming. These high
numbers of steel requirements is a trade­off from the renewable energy investments to a
more sustainable future energy system. If shifting the steel production pathway to include
higher fractions of remelted steel for future wind deployment, the related carbon footprint
would decrease around 70% from 2.57 to 0.77 tonCO2eq/ton steel produced. Similarly,
the steel­related emissions could be reduced by 70%, thus instead result in 320 MtonCO2
in 2050.
The required steel volume needed to expand the wind fleet of Denmark proposed in this
study as either 0.7 Mton for the onshore scenarios and 2 Mton steel for the offshore
scenario is a small amount compared to the European requirement of 143.4 Mton and the
global requirement of 412.3 Mton in 2050. Therefore, the related emissions of Denmark’s
fleet expansion are only a fraction of the European and global emissions.
It is estimated that the volume of steel produced from the EAF route will exceed the BOF
route in Europe during the 21st century. Also, scrap steel could exceed primary steel
supply after 2050, thereby potentially closing the loop, but this requires all manufacturers
to switch to secondary steel [85]. These measures would substantially drive evolution
to a low­carbon steel production. As put by Millford et al. [86], “Emissions reduction
targets cannot be met by energy and emissions efficiency alone, but deploying material
efficiency provides sufficient extra abatement potential”. They also emphasize that the
primary factor influencing future emissions is the balance between primary and secondary
steel production.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
67
==PAGE:76==
8
Conclusions
This study highlights the growing importance of sustainable material management in wind
energy expansion, particularly regarding the scaling of wind turbine components, the han­
dling of decommissioned materials, and the environmental impact of steel production.
The need for qualified data on wind turbine material inventories are highlighted, which
can serve as basis for analyses such as lifetime modeling, material scaling projections,
mass estimations, and environmental impact assessments. Scaling functions for the ma­
jor wind turbine components, i.e., tower, blades, nacelle, and substructure are suggested.
it has been found that most scaling relations follow a power law function between the rotor
diameter and component mass as mcomponent = mcomponent,0 ·
(
Drotor
Drotor,0
)α
, where α ≈2.
A depletion model for the Danish wind turbine fleet has been fitted to data in the Mas­
ter Data Register on Danish wind turbines from the Danish Energy Agency, which have
revealed a lifetime of 29.6 years based on the total onshore and offshore installed and
decommissioned capacity, with Weibull parameters λ=30.97 years and k=7.97. This ex­
perienced lifetime is higher than the 20 year design lifetime for onshore and 25 year design
lifetime for offshore, showing that Danish wind turbines generally exceed their expected
design lifetime. The decommission of materials for end­of­life treatment or recycling can
thus be expected later than previously assumed.
Scenarios for future steel demand in Denmark’s wind turbine installations have been for­
mulated by assuming one scenario for expansion with only onshore wind capacity up to 10
GW based on Danish governmental plans, while maintaining this constant capacity from
2050 onward. This suggest that from around 2060, the input and output of recirculated
steel will reach equilibrium, with 0.7 Mton constant installed steel mass. Another scenario
formulated by assuming only offshore wind capacity expansion up to 14 GW based on
the offshore wind farms in pipeline, while maintaining this constant capacity from 2050
onward, suggests a constant recirculation of steel from 2056 of around 2 Mton.
A key finding is the significant impact of steel production on the overall carbon footprint of
wind turbines, particularly when following the conventional Direct Reduced Iron­Electric
Arc Furnace (DRI­EAF) route with a limited fraction of scrap steel input. Increasing the
scrap steel content to nearly 100% was found to reduce the carbon footprint from 2.57 to
0.77 tonCO2eq/ton of steel slab, indicating a 70% decrease in environmental impact.
European and global projections of steel­related emissions were presented to assess their
impact on wind energy expansion until 2050. Estimates indicate that conventional steel
production could emit approximately 1 GtonCO2eq in 2050, accounting for about 10% of
the total global emissions allowance needed to stay within the 1.5°C limit. To effectively
lower the carbon footprint of wind energy production and align with the Paris Agreement’s
goal of limiting global temperature rise to 1.5°C compared to preindustrial time, both low­
carbon production technologies as well as increased use of recycled materials in steel
production will be essential for manufacturing of next­generation wind turbines.
68
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:77==
9
Outlook
To provide better data for future wind energy analyses on materials and design, better
understanding and tools to estimate wind turbine material inventories would be needed.
There is especially a need for more literature on existing turbines and improved tools to
estimate offshore monopile mass and cost, as attempted by McWilliams et al. [42].
The depletion curve presented in this study was based on the total Danish fleet of both
onshore and offshore capacity. As done in the paper on blade mass by Abrahamsen et al.
[1], it would be interesting to separate the fleet between onshore and offshore capacity
to see if the experienced lifetime match the findings of the paper and other literature,
concluding on extended experienced lifetime compared to the design lifetime.
Another interesting point of investigation would be to do the same study on environmental
impacts from steel in the wind energy sector, but investigating the environmental impacts
per energy produced (e.g., gCO2/kWh) to discard the discrepancy between turbine sizes.
Further, investigation of the impacts from lifetime extension of the Danish fleet, as has
been concluded in this study, would be interesting. While the carbon footprint per ton of
steel (tonCO2/ton) remains constant, prolonging the fleet’s operation by 20, 30, or even
40 years would reduce the energy carbon footprint.
Further work on LCA on steelmaking could be to investigate the potentially reduced im­
pacts when using hydrogen in the DRI­EAF route for the refining in iron­making instead
of using natural gas, as is common practice. This would aid in evaluating the potentials
of increased sustainability of steelmaking in the future.
A future industry supporting remelted steel for production of new­generation wind turbines
in Europe would need a restructure of the steel industry as it is today. The supply and
demand of scrap steel in the wind manufacturing sector should aim for a closed loop
system, where facilities and transportation routes are clearly defined and agreed upon.
For Denmark to get fixed supply to support the future wind capacity expansion, remelting
steel facilities could be located internationally to supply e.g., northern and central Europe,
with NLMK Verona as an example. The environmental impacts from the transport of end­
of­life wind turbine components to remelting facilities, other manufacturing facilities, and
to commissioning of new wind turbines would be an interesting point of investigation.
Transport are generally however not considered a large contributor to global warming in
the LCA framework, but according to Kainz et al. [79], vessel impacts are quite substantial
for the life cycle of offshore wind turbines.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
69
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
[1]
Asger Bech Abrahamsen et al. “Method for estimating the future annual mass of
decommissioned wind turbine blade material in Denmark”. In: Wind Energy (2023).
DOI: 10.1002/we.2882.
[2]
Steel Pro Group. Wind and solar energy steel. 2025. URL: https://steelprogroup.
com/application/wind-and-solar-energy/.
[3]
Evan Gaertner et al. Definition of the IEA Wind 15­Megawatt Offshore Reference
Wind Turbine, Technical Report. 2020. URL: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy20osti/
75698.pdf.
[4]
Maria del Cisne Feijóo et al. “Unsupervised Damage Detection for Offshore Jacket
Wind Turbine Foundations Based on an Autoencoder Neural Network”. In: Sensors
(2021). DOI: 10.3390/s21103333.
[5]
Jonas Pagh Jensen and Kristen Skelton. “Wind turbine blade recycling: Experi­
ences, challenges and possibilities in a circular economy”. In: Renewable and Sus­
tainable Energy Reviews, Vol. 97 (2018). DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2018.08.041.
[6]
Junlei Chen, Jihui Wang, and Aiqing Ni. “Recycling and reuse of composite mate­
rials for wind turbine blades: An overview”. In: Journal of Reinforced Plastics and
Composites, vol. 38, issue 12 (2019). DOI: 10.1177/0731684419833470.
[7]
Peter Garrett. Vestas Life Cycle Assessments. 2025. URL: https://www.vestas.
com/en/sustainability/environment/lifecycle-assessments.
[8]
Amir R. Nejad et al. “Wind turbine drivetrains: state­of­the­art technologies and fu­
ture development trends”. In: Wind Energy Science, vol. 7 (2022). DOI: 10.5194/wes-
7-387-2022.
[9]
Asger Bech Abrahamsen. Validation of EIC offshore turbine scaling model. 2020.
URL: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/238100406/EICScalingLawValidation_
11Dec2020_Abrahamsen_v1.pdf.
[10]
L. Fingersh, M. Hand, and A. Laxson. Wind Turbine Design Cost and Scaling Model,
Technical report. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy07osti/40566.pdf. 2006.
[11]
Marloes Caduff et al. “Wind Power Electricity: The Bigger the Turbine, The Greener
the Electricity?” In: Environmental Science & Trechnology (2012). DOI: 10.1021/
es204108n.
[12]
Mihir Mehta, Michiel Zaaijer, and Dominic von Terzi. Turbine scaling for offshore
wind farms. 2023. DOI: 10.5194/wes-2023-39.
[13]
Maiken Fauerskov and Emilie Lewis Laurberg. Investigation of the carbon footprint
associated with offshore wind power production. https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/
portalfiles/portal/336426355/B-0032_-_Maiken_Fauerskov_Emilie_Lewis_Laurberg.
pdf. 2022.
[14]
International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 61400­1:2019 RVL, Wind energy
generation systems ­ Part 1: Design requirement. 2019.
[15]
John Dalsgaard Sørensen and Henrik Stensgaard Toft. Safety Factors – IEC 61400­
1 ed. 4 . background document. 2014.
[16]
Danish Energy Agency. Fremskrivning af antal vindmøller på land. 2020. URL: https:
//ens.dk/analyser-og-statistik/baggrundsbilag-til-fremskrivninger#landvind.
[17]
Anand Natarajan et al. Demonstration of Requirements for Life Extension of Wind
Turbines Beyond Their Design Life. 2020. URL: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/
portalfiles/portal/204904301/Final_Report_LifeWind_DTU.pdf.
70
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:79==
[18]
International Energy Agency. IEA Wind TCP 2022 Annual Report. Tech. rep. Inter­
national Energy Agency, 2022.
[19]
Anette Norling, Tobias Grindsted, and Anja Lundberg. Etablerede havvindmølleparker.
2025. URL: https://ens.dk/energikilder/etablerede-havvindmoelleparker.
[20]
Ismael Ruiz de Temiño Alonso. Gravity Base Foundations for Offshore Wind Farms
­ Marine Operations and Installation Processes. https://repositorio.unican.es/xmlui/
bitstream/handle/10902/3429/Ruiz%20de%20Temiño%20Alonso%20Ismael.pdf.
2013.
[21]
Per Aarsleff A/S. Nissum Bredding ­ Offshore installation of four wind turbine foun­
dations. ANLÆG­253­rev.1 08/ 2019. 2019.
[22]
Ibsen Lars Bo, Morten Liingaard, and Søren A. Nielsen. Bucket foundation, a sta­
tus. 2005. URL: https://vbn.aau.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/57365677/Proceedings.
_Bucket_Foundation_a_status.
[23]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 14044:2006 ­ Environmental
management — Life cycle assessment — Requirements and guidelines. 2006.
URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/38498.html.
[24]
Michael Z. Hauschild, Ralph K. Rosenbaum, and Stig Irving Olsen. “Life Cycle As­
sessment ­ Theory and Practice”. In: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2018, pp. 59–425.
[25]
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment. ReCiPe 2016 v1.1 ­ A
harmonized life cycle impact assessment method at midpoint and endpoint level
Report I: Characterization. https://www.rivm.nl/documenten/recipe2016v11. 2017.
[26]
SimaPro. Perspectives and weighing approach in ReCiPe method. 2025. URL:
https://support.simapro.com/s/article/Perspectives- and- weighing- approach- in-
ReCiPe-method.
[27]
Greenhouse Gas Protocol. IPCC Global Warming Potential Values. 2024. URL:
https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/2024- 08/Global- Warming- Potential-
Values%20%28August%202024%29.pdf.
[28]
Heidi K. Stranddorf, Leif Hoffmann, and Anders Schmidt. Impact categories, nor­
malisation and weighting in LCA. Tech. rep. Danish Ministry of the Environment,
Environmental Protection Agency, 2005.
[29]
Max Åhman et al. Hydrogen steelmaking for a low­carbon economy. https://www.
sei.org/wp- content/uploads/2018/09/hydrogen- steelmaking- for- a- low- carbon-
economy.pdf. 2018.
[30]
IEA. Iron and Steel Technology Roadmap ­ Towards more sustainable steelmaking.
https://www.iea.org/reports/iron-and-steel-technology-roadmap. 2020.
[31]
NLMK Europe. NLMK Verona ­ Production process. 2025. URL: https://eu.nlmk.
com/en/plate/verona/production-process/.
[32]
Clare Broadbent, Paula Bernstein, and Michiel Oele. Recorded Webinar | worldsteel
data in SimaPro 8.5. 2018. URL: https : / / support . simapro . com / articles / Video /
Recorded-Webinar-worldsteel-data-in-SimaPro-8-5/?l=en_US&c=Products%3AAPI&
fs=RelatedArticle.
[33]
East Carbon. Ladle Furnace ­ The Complete Guide. 2024. URL: https : / / www .
eastcarb.com/ladle-furnace/.
[34]
ArcelorMittal. Making steel. 2025. URL: https://corporate.arcelormittal.com/about/
making-steel.
[35]
ArcelorMittal Europe. XCarb® recycled and renewably produced steel Heavy Plates.
2024. URL: https://europe.arcelormittal.com/repository2/Europe/EPD%20XCarb%
20RRP%20for%20HP.pdf.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
71
==PAGE:80==
[36]
World Resources Institute & World Business Council for Sustainable Development.
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol: A corporate accounting and reporting standard (Re­
vised edition). https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/ghg-protocol-
revised.pdf. 2004.
[37]
Roger N. Wright. “Chapter 14 ­ Relevant Aspects of Carbon and Low­Alloy Steel
Metallurgy”. In: By: Wire Technology (Second Edition), 2016, pp. 201–233. DOI:
10.1016/B978-0-12-802650-2.00014-5.
[38]
Philipp Lehman et al. Uncovering the Chemistry: Steel Making Process ­ Chemical
Reactions. 2023. URL: https://blog.cabaro-group.com/uncovering-the-chemistry-
steel-making-process-chemical-reactions/.
[39]
Abhinav Bhaskar, Mohsen Assadi, and Homam Nikpey Somehsaraei. “Decarboniza­
tion of the Iron and Steel Industry with Direct Reduction of Iron Ore with Green
Hydrogen”. In: Energies (2020). DOI: 10.3390/en13030758.
[40]
Thomas Echterhof. “Review on the Use of Alternative Carbon Sources in EAF Steel­
making”. In: Metals (2021). DOI: 10.3390/met11020222.
[41]
DTU Wind. Test Centre Østerild. 2025. URL: https://wind.dtu.dk/facilities/oesterild.
[42]
Michael K. McWilliam et al. “A surrogate model of offshore wind farm support struc­
tures for wind farm design and financial valuation”. In: Journal of Physics: Confer­
ence Series 2265 042048 (2022). DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2265/4/042048.
[43]
Pietro Bortolotti et al. Systems Engineering in Wind Energy ­ WP2.1 Reference
Wind Turbines, Technical Report. 2019. URL: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy19osti/
73492.pdf.
[44]
Frederik Zahle et al. Definition of the IEA Wind 22­Megawatt Offshore Reference
Wind Turbine, Technical Report. 2024. DOI: 10.11581/DTU.00000317.
[45]
Peter Garrett and Klaus Rønde. Life Cycle Assessment of electricity production
from a V80­2.0 MW Gridstreamer wind plant. 2011. URL: https://www.vestas.com/
content/dam/vestas-com/global/en/sustainability/reports-and-ratings/lcas/LCA_
V802MW_version1.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf.
[46]
Peter Garrett and Klaus Rønde. Life Cycle Assessment of electricity production
from an onshore V90­3.0 MW wind plant. 2013. URL: https://www.vestas.com/en/
sustainability/environment/lifecycle-assessments.
[47]
Sagar Mali and Peter Garrett. Life Cycle Assessment of electricity production from
an onshore V150­4.2 MW wind plant. 2022. URL: https://www.vestas.com/en/
sustainability/environment/lifecycle-assessments.
[48]
wind­turbine­models.com. Vestas V164­8.0. 2015. URL: https://en.wind-turbine-
models.com/turbines/318-vestas-v164-8.0.
[49]
Lukas Allekotte and Peter Garrett. Life Cycle Assessment of electricity production
from an offshore V236­15 MW wind plant. 2024. URL: https://www.vestas.com/en/
sustainability/environment/lifecycle-assessments.
[50]
Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy. “Blade Material Passport”. In: (2023). URL:
https://decomblades.dk/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/SGRE_DecomBlades_0422_
solo-2.pdf.
[51]
LM Wind Power. “Blade Material Passport”. In: (2022). URL: https://www.lmwindpower.
com/sites/default/files/related_documents/LM-37_3-P2-Blade-Material-Passport_
DecomBlades-project.pdf.
[52]
Vestas Wind Systems A/S. “Material Passport”. In: (). URL: https://www.lmwindpower.
com/sites/default/files/related_documents/LM-37_3-P2-Blade-Material-Passport_
DecomBlades-project.pdf.
[53]
NLMK Europe. NLMK Verona. 2025. URL: https://eu.nlmk.com/en/plate/verona/.
72
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:81==
[54]
NLMK Europe. NLMK DanSteel. 2025. URL: https : / / eu . nlmk . com / en / plate /
dansteel/?from=dk.
[55]
Philipp Lehman et al. DS/EN ISO 14001:2015. 2015. URL: https://www.ds.dk/
da/standarder- fns- verdensmaal/miljoeledelse?srsltid=AfmBOopiwJfq1aMoYAwd1_
Z6ZLECTsBj1YAl0kshaTbNWZEFlsx-Aid9.
[56]
Eugene Goli­Oglu, Igor Sarkits, and Alexey Ermolaev. “Low CO2 emission steel for
offshore wind”. In: Stahl und Eisen (2024). URL: https://nlmk.showpad.com/share/
PExEtddmcOSX6wnA5gmXo?utm_source=linkedin&utm_medium=social&utm_
campaign=jobs&utm_content=ap_65noetcrs8.
[57]
ecoinvent. ecoinvent, Mission & History. 2025. URL: https://ecoinvent.org/mission-
history/.
[58]
PRé Sustainability. ecoinvent LCI database. 2025. URL: https : / / simapro . com /
products/ecoinvent/.
[59]
PRé Sustainability. SimaPro ­ Meet the developer. 2025. URL: https://simapro.
com/meet-the-developer/.
[60]
Technical University of Denmark. Deliverable reports on INNWIND.EU. 2017. URL:
http://www.innwind.eu/publications/deliverable-reports.
[61]
Jake Badger et al. Global Wind Atlas (GWA 3.4). 2024. URL: https://globalwindatlas.
info/en/.
[62]
Mikkel Friis­Møller. personal communication. Department of Wind and Energy Sys­
tems, Technical University of Denmark. Dec. 2024.
[63]
Emma Koch Jørgensen and Freja Rølle Jakobsen. Influence of Global Warming
Potential taxation on Levelized Cost of Energy and Life Cycle Assessment of Off
shore Wind Farms. https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/366106373/J_
rgensen_Jacoksen_DTUWind-B-0107_2024_GWPtaxationInLCOE_LCAOffshoreWindFarms.
pdf. 2024.
[64]
S. Carrara et al. Raw materials demand for wind and solar PV technologies in the
transition towards a decarbonised energy system. 2020. DOI: 10.2760/160859.
[65]
Danish Energy Agency. Master Data Register. 2025. URL: https://ens.dk/en/our-
services/statistics-data-key-figures-and-energy-maps/overview-energy-sector.
[66]
Peter Garrett and Klaus Rønde. Life Cycle Assessment of electricity production from
an onshore V90­2.0 MW Gridstreamer wind plant. 2011. URL: https://www.vestas.
com/en/sustainability/environment/lifecycle-assessments.
[67]
Priyanka Razdan and Peter Garrett. Life Cycle Assessment of electricity production
from an onshore V100­2.0 MW wind plant. 2015. URL: https://www.vestas.com/en/
sustainability/environment/lifecycle-assessments.
[68]
Priyanka Razdan and Peter Garrett. Life Cycle Assessment of electricity production
from an onshore V117­3.45 MW wind plant. 2017. URL: https://www.vestas.com/
en/sustainability/environment/lifecycle-assessments.
[69]
Priyanka Razdan and Peter Garrett. Life Cycle Assessment of electricity production
from an onshore V117­4.2 MW wind plant. 2019. URL: https://www.vestas.com/en/
sustainability/environment/lifecycle-assessments.
[70]
Chen Li et al. “Future material requirements for global sustainable offshore wind
energy development”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews (2022). DOI:
10.1016/j.rser.2022.112603.
[71]
Danish Government. Danmark kan mere II. https://www.regeringen.dk/media/
11205/danmark-kan-mere-iidocx.pdf. 2022.
[72]
Danish Energy Agency. Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet 2024 – Havvind. Tech.
rep. Danish Energy Agency, 2024.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
73
==PAGE:82==
[73]
United Nations Environment Programme. Emissions Gap Report 2022: The Closing
Window ­ Climate crisis calls for rapid transformation of societies. Tech. rep. United
Nations Environment Programme, 2022. DOI: 10.18356/9789210023993.
[74]
Danish Energy Agency. Fremskrivning af antal vindmøller på land. 2020. URL: https:
//ens.dk/analyser-og-statistik/baggrundsbilag-til-fremskrivninger.
[75]
Danish Energy Agency. Energistyrelsens basisfremskrivning 2020 – Vindmøller på
havet. https://ens.dk/analyser-og-statistik/baggrundsbilag-til-fremskrivninger. 2020.
[76]
NLMK Europe. NLMK Europe Delivers first­of­its­kind Low CO2 Emissions Heavy
Plates for Offshore Wind Foundations. 2024. URL: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/
nlmk-europe_stahl-und-eisen-eaf-steel-for-offshore-activity-7214546720628588544-
XDHQ/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_android.
[77]
Eugene Goli­Oglu. personal communication. Technology & Product Development
Manager, PhD in Eng., NLMK DanSteel. Jan. 2025.
[78]
United Nations Economnic Commission for Europe. Carbon Neutrality in the UN­
ECE Region: Integrated Life­cycle Assessment of Electricity Sources. Tech. rep.
United Nations Economnic Commission for Europe, 2021. URL: https://backend.
orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/372415474/LCA_3_FINAL_March_2022.pdf.
[79]
Samuel Kainz, Adrien. Guilloré, and Carlo L. Bottasso. “How do technological choices
affect the economic and environmental performance of offshore wind farms?” In:
Journal of Physics: Conference Series (2024). DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2767/8/
082005.
[80]
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emis­
sions from Electricity Generation: Update. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy21osti/
80580.pdf. 2021.
[81]
NLMK Europe. Sustainability Report 2023. Tech. rep. NLMK Europe, 2023.
[82]
Pietro A. Renzulli et al. “Life Cycle Assessment of Steel Produced in an Italian In­
tegrated Steel Mill”. In: Sustainability (2016). DOI: 10.3390/su8080719.
[83]
Célestin Demuytere et al. “Prospective material flow analysis of the end­of­life de­
commissioning: Case study of a North Sea offshore wind farm”. In: Resources, Con­
servation & Recycling (2020). DOI: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2023.107283.
[84]
Poul Alberg Østergaard, Frits Møller Andersen, and Pil Seok Kwon. “Energy Sys­
tems Scenario Modelling and Long Term Forecasting of Hourly Electricity Demand”.
In: International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management (2015).
DOI: 10.5278/ijsepm.2015.7.8.
[85]
Stefan Pauliuk et al. “Life Cycle Assessment of Steel Produced in an Italian Inte­
grated Steel Mill”. In: Environmental Science & Technology (2013). DOI: 10.1021/
es303149z.
[86]
Stefan Pauliuk et al. “The Roles of Energy and Material Efficiency in Meeting Steel
Industry CO2 Targets”. In: Environmental Science & Technology (2013). DOI: 10.
1021/es3031424.
74
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:83==
A
Support structure model surrogate (SSMS) variables and results
Table A.1: SSMS variables and results and fleet model results.
Model
Wind farm
Hub height
Height for GWA
Initial Power (RWT)
Rated power
Specific power
Rotor diameter
m
m
MW
MW
W/m2
m
V90­3MW
Sprogø
80
100
3.4
3
850
90
SWT 2.3­93
Rødsand 2
80
100
3.4
2.3
850
92.6
BONUS 2.3MW
Nysted (Rødsand 1)
68.8
50
3.4
2.3
850
82.4
SWT 8.4­167 DD
Kriegers Flak
104
100
10
8.4
900
167
V80 2MW
Horns Rev 1
70
50
3.4
2
1000
80
SWT 2.3­93
Horns Rev 2
55
50
3.4
2.3
1050
93
V164­8.3MW
Horns Rev 3
105
100
10
8.3
1050
164
V80 2MW
Rønland (Harboøre, nord)
78
100
3.4
2
950
80
BONUS 2.3MW
Rønland (Harboøre, nord)
78.8
100
3.4
2.3
950
82.4
SWT­7.0­154
Nissum Bredding
85.3
100
10
7
950
154
SWT 3.6­120
Anholt 1
81.6
100
3.4
3.6
950
120
V39 0.5MW
Tunø knob
45
50
3.4
0.5
700
39
BONUS 2.3MW
Samsø
61.2
50
3.4
2.3
800
84.6
SWT 2.3­93
Samsø
61.5
50
3.4
2.3
800
93
BONUS 2MW
Middelgrunden
64
50
3.4
2
550
76
SWT 3.6
Avedøre
90
100
3.4
3.6
750
120
BONUS 2.3MW
Frederikshavn
80
100
3.4
2.3
750
82.4
V90 3MW
Frederikshavn
80
100
3.4
3
750
90
Nordex N90/2300
Frederikshavn
80
100
3.4
2.3
750
90
Decom. turbines:
BONUS 450kW
Vindeby
37.5
50
3.4
0.45
700
35
BONUS 2.3MW
Samsø
61.2
50
3.4
2.3
800
84.6
Baseline value:
80
350
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
75
==PAGE:84==
Model
Wind farm
HTrans
HTrans
Hub height ratio
Water depth
Wave height
Wave period
Wind speed
m
m
­
m
m
s
m/s
V90­3MW
Sprogø
10
10.3
0.88
12
3.5
6
9.6
SWT 2.3­93
Rødsand 2
10
9.9
0.86
9
3.5
6
9.6
BONUS 2.3MW
Nysted (Rødsand 1)
10
9.6
0.83
7.5
3.5
6
9.6
SWT 8.4­167 DD
Kriegers Flak
10
11.5
0.62
20
3.5
6
9.7
V80 2MW
Horns Rev 1
10
9.9
0.88
9
3.5
6
10.0
SWT 2.3­93
Horns Rev 2
10
10.4
0.59
12.5
3.5
6
10.0
V164­8.3MW
Horns Rev 3
10
11.0
0.64
16.5
3.5
6
10.0
V80 2MW
Rønland (Harboøre, nord)
10
9.7
0.88
8
3.5
6
9.9
BONUS 2.3MW
Rønland (Harboøre, nord)
10
9.7
0.88
8
3.5
6
9.9
SWT­7.0­154
Nissum Bredding
10
9.1
0.55
4
3.5
6
9.8
SWT 3.6­120
Anholt 1
10
11.1
0.68
17
3.5
6
9.7
V39 0.5MW
Tunø knob
10
9.6
0.88
7
3.5
6
8.6
BONUS 2.3MW
Samsø
10
10.8
0.72
15
3.5
6
8.9
SWT 2.3­93
Samsø
10
10.8
0.66
15
3.5
6
8.9
BONUS 2MW
Middelgrunden
10
10.7
0.84
14.5
3.5
6
8.0
SWT 3.6
Avedøre
10
8.7
0.75
1
3.5
6
9.1
BONUS 2.3MW
Frederikshavn
10
9.0
0.88
3
3.5
6
9.1
V90 3MW
Frederikshavn
10
9.0
0.88
3
3.5
6
9.1
Nordex N90/2300
Frederikshavn
10
9.0
0.88
3
3.5
6
9.1
Decom. turbines:
BONUS 450kW
Vindeby
10
9.3
0.88
5.5
3.5
6
8.7
BONUS 2.3MW
Samsø
10
10.8
0.72
15
3.5
6
8.9
Baseline value:
10
0.7
10
3.5
6
9
76
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:85==
Model
Wind farm
SSMS model
Fleet model
ton
ton
V90­3MW
Sprogø
212.2
145.6
SWT 2.3­93
Rødsand 2
198.1
93.5
BONUS 2.3MW
Nysted (Rødsand 1)
176.8
84.4
SWT 8.4­167 DD
Kriegers Flak
402.2
584.4
V80 2MW
Horns Rev 1
164.9
81.3
SWT 2.3­93
Horns Rev 2
189.4
114.6
V164­8.3MW
Horns Rev 3
354.2
501.0
V80 2MW
Rønland (Harboøre, nord)
163.7
81.3
BONUS 2.3MW
Rønland (Harboøre, nord)
177.3
84.4
SWT­7.0­154
Nissum Bredding
271.3
192.5
SWT 3.6­120
Anholt 1
291.1
222.0
V39 0.5MW
Tunø knob
30.8
17.7
BONUS 2.3MW
Samsø
176.0
129.8
SWT 2.3­93
Samsø
194.9
114.6
BONUS 2MW
Middelgrunden
150.9
110.2
SWT 3.6
Avedøre
253.2
222.0
BONUS 2.3MW
Frederikshavn
173.1
222.0
V90 3MW
Frederikshavn
207.1
222.0
Nordex N90/2300
Frederikshavn
186.1
145.6
Decom. turbines:
BONUS 450kW
Vindeby
19.3
14.1
BONUS 2.3MW
Samsø
176.0
129.8
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
77
==PAGE:86==
B
Supplementary scenarios
70% remelted steel scenario
Figure B.1: Process tree with 70% scrap steel input incl. hot rolling. Input scrap steel
is 0.7919 kg/kg and 0.3393 kg/kg sponge iron for producing 1 ton steel output. The Direct
Reduced Iron­Electric Arc Furnace (DRI­EAF) route based on European data. Visualized
with a 5% cut­off.
The 70% remelted steel scenario is based on following steel inputs:
Iron scrap: 0.7919 kg/kg
Sponge iron: 0.3393 0 kg/kg
Scrap loss ≈13.13%
78
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:87==
Figure B.2: Impact assessment of all Midpoint impact categories for scenario with
conventional steelmaking with 70% steel scrap input.
Table B.1: Impact assessment results for Midpoint categories for the 70% remelted
steel scenario for production of 1 ton of steel.
Impact category
Unit
Total impact
Global warming
kg CO2 eq
1436.92614
Stratospheric ozone depletion
kg CFC11 eq
0.00036778
Ionizing radiation
kBq Co­60 eq 171.944331
Ozone formation, Human health
kg NOx eq
2.75491638
Fine particulate matter formation
kg PM2.5 eq
1.92004326
Ozone formation, Terrestrial ecosystems kg NOx eq
2.87062435
Terrestrial acidification
kg SO2 eq
3.48222507
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P eq
1.13962066
Marine eutrophication
kg N eq
0.16760958
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
2875.87123
Freshwater ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
173.612183
Marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
251.483547
Human carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
8518.88553
Human non­carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
1803.87405
Land use
m2a crop eq
27.9685301
Mineral resource scarcity
kg Cu eq
33.4559794
Fossil resource scarcity
kg oil eq
313.149445
Water consumption
m3
27.3795327
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure B.3: Normalization results for steel scenario with 70% scrap steel input. Im­
pact results has been normalized in relation to person equivalents (PE). All contributions
from Electricity and Natural gas has each been summed to one contribution. Note that
the impact category Human carcinogenic toxicity has been plotted on secondary axis as
it is vastly higher than rest of the categories.
80
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:89==
100% remelted steel scenario
Figure B.4: Process tree with 100% scrap steel input incl. hot rolling. Input scrap
steel is 1.1313 kg/kg and 0 kg/kg sponge iron for producing 1 ton steel output. The Direct
Reduced Iron­Electric Arc Furnace (DRI­EAF) route based on European data. Visualized
with a 5% cut­off.
The 100% remelted steel scenario is based on following steel inputs:
Iron scrap: 1.1313 kg/kg
Sponge iron: 0 kg/kg
Scrap loss ≈13.13%
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure B.5: Impact assessment of all Midpoint impact categories for scenario with
conventional steelmaking with 100% steel scrap input.
Table B.2: Impact assessment results for Midpoint categories for the 100% remelted
steel scenario for production of 1 ton of steel.
Impact category
Unit
Total impact
Global warming
kg CO2 eq
754.268129
Stratospheric ozone depletion
kg CFC11 eq
0.0002702
Ionizing radiation
kBq Co­60 eq 168.301559
Ozone formation, Human health
kg NOx eq
1.79294436
Fine particulate matter formation
kg PM2.5 eq
1.23119814
Ozone formation, Terrestrial ecosystems kg NOx eq
1.88483046
Terrestrial acidification
kg SO2 eq
2.29596937
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P eq
0.52126679
Marine eutrophication
kg N eq
0.02781872
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
2684.1306
Freshwater ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
159.585199
Marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
231.638866
Human carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
8494.38933
Human non­carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
1202.79303
Land use
m2a crop eq
20.60233
Mineral resource scarcity
kg Cu eq
6.2937051
Fossil resource scarcity
kg oil eq
183.12602
Water consumption
m3
18.6042867
82
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:91==
Figure B.6: Normalization results for steel scenario with 100% scrap steel input.
Impact results has been normalized in relation to person equivalents (PE). All contributions
from Electricity and Natural gas has each been summed to one contribution. Note that
the impact category Human carcinogenic toxicity has been plotted on secondary axis as
it is vastly higher than rest of the categories.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
83
==PAGE:92==
Global steel scenario with 72% scrap steel input
Figure B.7: Process tree for global average steelmaking incl. hot rolling. Input scrap
steel is 0.8222 kg/kg and 0.1749 kg/kg sponge iron for producing 1 ton steel output. The
Direct Reduced Iron­Electric Arc Furnace (DRI­EAF) route based on global data. Visual­
ized with a 5% cut­off.
The global steel scenario is based on following steel inputs:
Iron scrap: 0.822 kg/kg
Pig iron: 0.143 kg/kg
Sponge iron: 0.175 kg/kg
Sum = 0.822 kg/kg + 0.143 kg/kg + 0.175 kg/kg = 1.1404 kg/kg » 14% scrap loss
Steel scrap input = 0.822 kg/kg / 1.1404 kg/kg = 0.721 kg/kg = 72.1% scrap steel
84
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:93==
Figure B.8: Impact assessment of all Midpoint impact categories for scenario of
global average steelmaking.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
85
==PAGE:94==
Table B.3: Impact assessment results for Midpoint categories for the global steel
scenario for production of 1 ton of steel.
Impact category
Unit
Total impact
Global warming
kg CO2 eq
1274.07864
Stratospheric ozone depletion
kg CFC11 eq
0.00040476
Ionizing radiation
kBq Co­60 eq 74.0367231
Ozone formation, Human health
kg NOx eq
2.89104008
Fine particulate matter formation
kg PM2.5 eq
2.50262353
Ozone formation, Terrestrial ecosystems kg NOx eq
3.05236018
Terrestrial acidification
kg SO2 eq
3.97928886
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P eq
0.85953847
Marine eutrophication
kg N eq
0.26555967
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
5763.77945
Freshwater ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
132.85675
Marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
192.279097
Human carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
6108.75548
Human non­carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
1643.97071
Land use
m2a crop eq
28.903117
Mineral resource scarcity
kg Cu eq
29.63722
Fossil resource scarcity
kg oil eq
307.986984
Water consumption
m3
23.9570355
86
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:95==
Figure B.9: Normalization results for global steel scenario. Impact results has been
normalized in relation to person equivalents (PE). All contributions from Electricity and
Natural gas has each been summed to one contribution. Note that the impact category
Human carcinogenic toxicity has been plotted on secondary axis as it is vastly higher than
rest of the categories.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
87
==PAGE:96==
C
Notes on ecoinvent steel processes
The three steel scenarios assessed in report plus the two additional scenarios in Appendix
have different assumptions and carbon footprints related to different system processes.
For clarification, some of the relevant values found in the assessments are mentioned
below.
Content of steel scrap inputs per scenario:
The ecoinvent default value of Iron scrap input in a 100% steel scrap scenario is 1.1313
kg/kg, and thus 0% Sponge iron. From this, the other scenario contents of Iron scrap and
Sponge iron are calculated and used for each assessment in SimaPro.
The scrap steel loss indicates the scrap steel fraction loss during remelting of recirculated
scrap steel into new steel products.
Scenario
Iron scrap
[kg/kg]
Sponge iron
[kg/kg]
Pig iron
[kg/kg]
Total material input
[kg/kg]
20% scrap steel
0.2262
0.9050
­
1.1313
70% scrap steel
0.7919
0.3393
­
1.1313
99% scrap steel
1.1200
0.0113
­
1.1313
100% scrap steel
1.1313
0.0000
­
1.1313
Global scenario
0.8222
0.1749
0.1432
1.1404
Process carbon footprints:
Steel production process used for LCA in report, 100% Iron scrap input:
Steel, low­alloyed {Europe without Switzerland and Austria}| steel production electric, low­
alloyed, Cut­off, U = 0.55 tonCO2eq/ton
Hot rolling used for LCA in report:
Hot rolling, steel {Europe without Austria}| Hot rolling, steel | Cut­off, U = 0.204 tonCO2eq/ton
Conventional BOF route:
Steel, low­alloyed {RER}| steel production, converter, low­alloyed | Cut­off, U = 2.09
tonCO2eq/ton
Conventional BOF route + hot rolling:
Steel, low­alloyed, hot rolled {RER}| production | Cut­off, U = 2.16 tonCO2eq/ton
Iron scrap vs. Steel scrap:
Iron scrap, sorted, pressed {RER} market for iron scrap = 0.034 tonCO2eq/ton
Scrap steel {Europe without Switzerland} market for scrap steel = 0.0083 tonCO2eq/ton
88
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:97==
D
SimaPro workflow
Description of SimaPro workflow – similar for all scenarios except Global scenario.
• Creation of a copy of Steel, low­alloyed {Europe without Switzerland and Austria}|
steel production electric, low­alloyed, Cut­off, U.
• Adjust Iron scrap, sorted, pressed {RER}| market for iron scrap, sorted, pressed |
Cut­off, U to scrap steel fraction from 1.1313 kg/kg default value.
• Add Sponge iron {GLO}| market for sponge iron | Cut­off, U to remaining fraction.
• Save process.
• Add Steel, low­alloyed {Europe without Switzerland and Austria}| steel production
electric, low­alloyed, Cut­off, U to Hot rolling, steel {Europe without Austria}| Hot
rolling, steel | Cut­off, U as 1 kg/kg.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
89
==PAGE:98==
90
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
==PAGE:99==
Description of SimaPro workflow – Global scenario.
• Creation of a copy of Hot rolling, steel {RoW}| processing | Cut­off, U.
• Add Steel, low­alloyed {RoW}| steel production, electric, low­alloyed | Cut­off, U as
1 kg/kg.
• Save process.
Future wind energy capacity analysis and life cycle assessment of recirculated materials and absolute
sustainability
91
==PAGE:100==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Risø, Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://wind.dtu.dk
