==PAGE:1==
Continuous catalytic hydrogenation of
model compounds for pharmaceutical
intermediates in a Jet Loop Reactor
Master Thesis
The Technical University of Denmark
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
Nikolaj Sams Falkenberg, s194164
Supervisors
Martin Høj
Pelin Çaglayan
Anker Degn Jensen
Wednesday 26th February, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Catalysis and High-temperature
Engineering Centre, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of Chemical Engineering.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This study investigates the continuous catalytic hydrogenation of acetophenone as
a model compound for pharmaceutical intermediates, focusing on the performance
of Jet Loop Reactors (JLRs) compared to traditional batch reactors. The research
addresses the challenge of mass transfer limitations in heterogeneous hydrogenation,
a critical factor in pharmaceutical manufacturing. Experiments were conducted in
both a batch autoclave and a pilot-scale JLR to evaluate reaction kinetics, mass
transfer efficiency, and the impact of operational parameters such as catalyst load-
ing, solvent choice, and recirculation rates. The results revealed that the hydrogena-
tion of acetophenone follows first-order kinetics at low concentrations but exhibits
inhibitory effects at higher concentrations, necessitating the use of a Langmuir-
Hinshelwood model. The results obtained from autoclave experiments were utilized
to extract kinetic data of acetophenone hydrogenation which further developed the
Langmuir-Hinselwood model. The JLR demonstrated promising mass transfer effi-
ciency, particularly at higher recirculation rates, though mass transfer limitations
remained a challenge. Continuous operation of the JLR was successfully achieved,
with the Langmuir-Hinshelwood model accurately predicting steady-state concen-
trations and transient behavior. The study concludes that JLRs offer significant
advantages in energy efficiency and operational flexibility, providing a promising
alternative for pharmaceutical hydrogenation processes.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would first like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors, Pelin Çaglayan,
Martin Høj, and Anker Degn Jensen, for their invaluable guidance and support
throughout the past six months. A thank you also goes to Lundbeck for giving
me the opportunity to work on this exciting project.
A heartfelt thank you to
my friends for their support, both professionally and personally, throughout this
journey. A special thanks to my family for their unwavering encouragement and to
Ceelin, who has supported me every day.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AP
Acetophenone
API
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients
CE
Cyclohexylethanol
CSTR Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor
EB
Ethylbenzene
EC
Ethylcyclohexane
GC-FID Gas Chromatography - Flame Ionization Detector
IS
Internal Standard
JLR
Jet Loop Reactor
L-H
Langmuir-Hinselwood
PBR Packed Bed Reactor
Pd/C Palladium on Carbon Catalyst
PE
Phenyl Ethanol
PFR
Plug Flow Reactor
PLR
Propeller Loop Reactor
RPM Revolutions Per Minute
RTD Residence Time Distribution
TBR Trickle Flow Packed Bed Reactor
Symbols
α&β
Reaction order
[-]
η
Effectiveness factor
[-]
τ
Residence time
min
iv
==PAGE:6==
θ
Fractional site coverage
[-]
C
Concentration
mol/L
Ea
Activation energy
kJ/mol
F
Molar Flow Rate
mol/min
Hs
Pseudo Henry’s law constant
MPa
K
Equilibrium constant
L/mol
k
Reaction rate constant
1/min/gcat
k′
L-H reaction rate constant
mol/L/min/gcat
k∞
Pre-exponential factor in Arrhenius equation
1/s
kLa
Mass transfer coefficient
1/s
n
Amount of substance
mol
NT
Total number of experimental data points
[-]
P
Pressure
bar
pT
Number of fitted parameters
[-]
pH2
Partial pressure of hydrogen
bar
R
Universal gas constant
J/mol/ K
r
Reaction Rate
mol/L/min
T
Temperature
K
t
Time
min
V
Reactor volume
L
v
Volumetric Flow Rate
mL/L
Vh
Headspace Volume
mL
Y
Yield
%
M
Molar Concentration
mol/L
v
==PAGE:7==
MSC Model Selection Criteria
[-]
r2
Goodness of Fit
[-]
SSE
Sum of Squared Errors
[-]
wt%
Weight Percentage
%
vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Nomenclature
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Hydrogenation Reactions in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing . . . . .
3
2.2
Existing Reactor Technologies for Hydrogenation
. . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Mass Transfer and Kinetics in Hydrogenation Reactions . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Jet Loop Reactors as an Alternative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Reactor Design and Scale-Up Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Indications of Future Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7
Literature Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.8
State of Hydrogenation Reactor Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Materials and Methods of Analysis
24
3.1
Autoclave Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.1
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.2
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.3
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.4
Calibration of Stirrer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Jet Loop Reactor Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1
Nozzle and Jet ejector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.3
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.4
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.5
Batch operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.6
Continuous operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.7
Pump calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Gas Chromatography - Flame Ionization Detector . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Calibration curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Sample Preparation and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
vii
==PAGE:9==
3.5.1
Liquid sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.6
Rate Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.7
Numerical Methods and Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Results and Discussion
45
4.1
Autoclave Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.1
Hydrogen Consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.2
Examination of Mass Transfer Limit
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.3
Model Fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.4
Activation Energy Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2
Solvent and Catalyst Influence on Reaction Kinetics . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2.1
Solvent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2.2
Catalyst Concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.3
Jet Loop Reactor Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.3.1
Mass Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.3.2
Prediction of Continuous Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.3.3
Transient Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.3.4
Continuous Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4.4
Reactor Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.5
Comparison of Langmuir-Hinshelwood Mechanisms
. . . . . . . . .
84
4.6
Order and Site Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5
Refelctions and Future Work
90
6
Conclusion
94
7
References
95
Appendices
100
A GC Example and Calibration curves
100
B Experiments conducted
102
C Catalyst Experiments
104
D JLR Experimental Results
110
E Power Consumption
111
viii
==PAGE:10==
F Hydrogen Consumption Rates
112
G Alternate LH models
115
H MATLAB Script Example
121
ix
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
To improve and enhance the chemical industry, innovations regarding optimizing
and improving ways of producing chemicals are crucial. Reducing the resources and
energy for the production of chemicals will directly increase the profit for compa-
nies and indirectly contribute to the UN sustainable developmental goal number
12, ensuring sustainable consumption and production patterns for the future.
Multi-step reactions from precursors are the norm in the manufacturing of a number
of fine chemicals, such as pharmaceuticals. One commonly used reaction is hydro-
genation reactions. Hydrogenation reactions saturate alkenes, alcohols, or carbonyl
groups to produce alkanes, alkenes, and alcohols, respectively. In the production
of active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), many of the intermediate reactions can
have both alkenes and carbonyl groups where it can be desired to keep some and
remove others to obtain the API. Therefore extensive knowledge and control of the
reactions is necessary.
These reactions can be conducted in homogeneous systems using a liquid as a hy-
drogen donor, such as NaBH4 or LiAlH4, or a heterogeneous system with hydrogen
gas as the donor. Homogeneous hydrogenation has an important role in industry
due to its high selectivity, even in chiral cases, as clear from the awarding of the
Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2001 which was partly awarded to Knowles and Noyori
for their research on the topic [1]. However, due to the homogeneous nature, it
can be more difficult and energy-consuming to separate the product, as well as the
catalyst. This deems heterogeneous hydrogenation the sustainable and economical
choice, as multiple phases naturally occur making the downstream processing more
sustainable [2].
For these reactions to occur with gaseous hydrogen, adding a solid metal cata-
lyst is crucial to bring down the activation energy. This brings an extra dimension
to the difficulty of these reactions as it becomes a multi-phase system. Determining
suitable reactors for heterogeneous hydrogenations is another major challenge in
the industry. For API production, the same reactor can be used for ten to thirty
different chemical reactions during a calendar year. Production quantities are small
and therefore a dedicated unit for a single reaction step is not economically feasible.
Thus a multi-product installation, such as a batch reactor, is optimal. For larger
scale productions, flow reactors can be used to optimize yield and selectivity. Such
1
==PAGE:12==
reactors include trickle flow packed bed reactors (TBR) together with continuous-
stirred tank (CSTR)-slurry configurations, which allow for continuous operation. In
the case of packed bed reactors, the operation is not quite as continuous as desired.
As the catalyst deactivates over time and loses productivity, the production must
be stopped and the catalyst substituted before operation can continue [3]. The de-
activation can happen anywhere from hours to days, depending on the catalyst and
reaction. The major hindrance of hydrogenation reactions is the mass transport of
hydrogen from the gas to the liquid phase. As the mass transfer in autoclaves is hin-
dered at larger scales, it has lead to the interest of alternative reactor types. Hence
a jet loop reactor (JLR) is proposed due to its batch-like flexibility and CSTR-like
reaction behavior.
2
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Hydrogenation Reactions in Pharmaceutical Manufac-
turing
In the chemical industry, hydrogenation reactions are used in a wide range of pro-
cesses, from agricultural to petrochemical, to produce both bulk and fine organic
chemicals. Hydrogenation reactions are exothermic and can be conducted at low
temperatures and pressures as often is the case in the pharmaceutical industry, or at
high pressures or temperatures, as seen in the petrochemical industry. The product
of a hydrogenation reaction for a chemical depends on the catalyst, solvent, and
operating conditions, as these play a significant role in the selectivity [4].
The noble metal catalysts are composed of precious metal particles on a carrier
support. The metal’s ability to absorb hydrogen facilitates hydrogenation reactions
with the solutes. The support is used to disperse the metal into particles, allowing
for a greater surface area compared to bulk metal. The small metal particles also
allow for higher electron densities and, consequently, higher hydrogenation rates.
Hydrogenation catalysts can be broadly divided into two types: heterogeneous,
where the catalyst and substrate are in different phases, and homogeneous, where
the catalyst and substrate are in the same phase.
Acetophenone (AP) has been chosen as a model compound for the experiments
involving the JLR, as it has industrial relevance, with its intermediates and prod-
ucts being used in the pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries. The hydrogenation
of AP is a multi-step reaction with many possible intermediates[5]. As shown by
Figure 1, there are many possible products and intermediates for the hydrogenation
of AP, however, the dominating reaction when using a Pd/C catalyst is marked with
the bold arrows. Being the smallest aromatic ketone, AP is relatively abundant and
comparably low in cost, making it an attractive model compound.
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1: Full reaction scheme of hydrogenation of acetophenone with all major
intermediates.
Activity and selectivity depend not only on the metal type and dispersion but also
on the support as illustrated on Figure 1. Catalysts are designed for specific reac-
tions and reactors. For example, hydrogenation of AP using a Ni or Pt catalysts
typically produces ethylbenzene (EB) as the end product, with phenylethanol (PE)
as an intermediate, whereas Cu catalysts yield PE as the final product. Rh/Al2O3
catalysts, on the other hand, produce cyclohexylethanol (CE) as the end product,
with PE as an intermediate [6]. However, when rhodium is supported on carbon,
the selectivity shifts towards ethylcyclohexane (EC), with methylcyclohexylketone
or PE as intermediates [5]. Palladium metal on carbon support is highly selective
for reducing aromatic carbonyl groups to alkanes, with benzyl alcohols as interme-
diates [7]. Selectivity can be further enhanced by using specific solvents. In Hattori
et al. [7], a chemoselective catalyst based on Pd metal on a carbon support, using
ethylenediamine as a solvent, yielded high selectivity towards benzyl alcohols rather
than fully saturated compounds when hydrogenating various aromatic ketones.
Homogeneous catalysts are seldom used in industry because separating the cat-
alyst and substrate can be challenging, often requiring additional unit operations.
However, in cases where chirality is crucial, such as in the infamous thalidomide
case, the use of homogeneous catalysts is indispensable. These catalysts perform
exceptionally well but are usually non-reusable, further increasing costs [8]. Het-
erogeneous metal catalysts, on the other hand, are significantly easier to separate
from the reaction mixture due to their immiscibility. This also allows for reuse, en-
abling the use in continuous reactors [8]. However, the presence of multiple phases
can lead to mass transportation difficulties between phases. In most heterogeneous
4
==PAGE:15==
hydrogenations, three phases are present: the hydrogen gas, liquid substrate, and
metal catalyst, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Illustration of a heterogeneous reactor with blue, white and yellow repre-
senting liquid, gas and solids respectively.
Since hydrogen must transfer from the gas phase to the liquid phase and then to the
catalyst surface, there are several interfaces the hydrogen must cross, as illustrated
by Figure 3. This results in slower conversion rates as the process becomes mass
transfer-limited between phases.
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3: Illustration of the mass transfer between a gas bubble in bulk liquid
through the film interface.
Bergault et al. [9], reported that the internal mass transfer resistance of hydrogen
was highly limiting for the reaction rate. Therefore, increasing this mass transfer
is of interest to enhance the sustainability of heterogeneous hydrogenation in the
industry.
2.2
Existing Reactor Technologies for Hydrogenation
To carry out heterogeneous hydrogenation, reactor setups often vary depending on
the desired product, catalyst, and scale. Generally, in industry, flow reactors are
preferred due to their high capacity and precise control. However, in API produc-
tion, batch reactors are the preferred reactor installation, as they can be used for
many different reactions and unit operations. Production quantities are often so
small that dedicating a production unit to a single reaction is seldom economically
feasible [3]. Typical batch reactors used for hydrogenation in the industry are so-
called autoclaves. Autoclaves are batch reactors built to withstand high pressures
and temperatures. They are often used for heterogeneous, solid-catalyzed gas-liquid
reaction systems. The primary advantage of the autoclave is its simple design, al-
lowing for great flexibility. Heating and cooling can be managed using a jacket
around the reactor, which can contain steam or cooling water. The main disadvan-
tages of batch reactors are the hold-up time between batches, reduced productivity,
and their inferior volume-to-product ratio [10].
As mentioned, API production typically relies on autoclaves to produce small quan-
tities of various products, making continuous reactors scarcely used. In continu-
6
==PAGE:17==
ous reactor theory, reactors are typically divided into two categories: Continuous
Stirred-Tank Reactors (CSTRs) and Plug Flow Reactors (PFRs). CSTRs are char-
acterized by having a continuous input and output of material that is well mixed
with no dead zones. The well-mixed nature means that the composition at the
reactor outlet corresponds to the contents inside the reactor. PFRs also have con-
tinuous input and output of material, but without mixing the contents throughout
the reactor. The reactor behaves like a pipe, where the material moves from one
end to the other. PFRs can be imagined as a series of CSTRs with perfect mixing
in the radial direction, but with different compositions in each reactor in the series,
and the reactor is modeled as such [10].
The most common continuous reactor designs for hydrogenation in the industry
are trickle flow packed bed reactors (TBR), which are PFR-type reactors. A trickle
flow reactor has gas and liquid phases flowing co-currently downward through the
reactor, where they come into contact with the solid catalyst in the fixed bed. It
approaches ideal plug flow behavior at high flow rates, however, good wetting of
the catalyst requires high liquid velocities. This results in relatively low residence
times, which can be insufficient for slower reactions.
As an alternative, packed bubble column reactors can provide longer residence
times, though at the cost of more axial dispersion and back-mixing, due to the
gas and liquid flowing co-currently upwards in the reactor[3]. PFR reactors can
exhibit high productivity and selectivity; however, there are downsides to using a
packed catalytic reactor bed. When catalyst activity declines, the entire column
must be emptied and refilled, which is a cumbersome and time-consuming process.
CSTR-type reactors are seldom used for hydrogenation reactions in industry. This
is mainly due to wide residence time distribution in a CSTR, which results in low
selectivity for many reactions. This is not the case for batch reactors where higher
yields can be obtained by stopping the reaction at an appropriate time. Slurry-type
CSTR reactors are therefore preferred for reactions without side or intermediate re-
actions. One example is Cleary et al.[11], where (3R)-quinuclidinol was prepared
using a biocatalytic slurry reactor. The authors determined the kinetics of the reac-
tion using a batch reactor, and due to the fast reaction time, a slurry CSTR proved
to be a suitable reactor type. The advantage of CSTR reactors is their simple design
and ease of operation compared to PFRs, and their high throughput compared to
7
==PAGE:18==
batch reactors.
2.3
Mass Transfer and Kinetics in Hydrogenation Reactions
When performing heterogeneous hydrogenation, gaseous hydrogen must be trans-
ported to the liquid phase and then to the catalyst surface, where the hydrogenation
takes place. For heterogeneous hydrogenations, the transfer of hydrogen between
the gas and liquid phases is considered the rate-limiting step. This transport of
mass between phases is a slow and strenuous process, requiring high dispersion of
gas in the liquid to achieve a high surface area and an acceptable rate of transport.
The slow transport is mainly due to the low solubility of hydrogen, which necessi-
tates increased pressures [9].
When studying the reaction kinetics of a given reaction, it is necessary to con-
duct experiments in the reaction-controlled regime, where the measured rate is free
from mass transfer limitations. This can be achieved by designing experiments with
high pressures and high agitation. In the study by Lee et al. [6], an experiment
confirmed this by conducting a series of tests with increasing catalyst loading and
agitation speeds. They found a direct linear proportionality between hydrogen con-
sumption and catalyst load, with agitation speed having no influence on the rate
when in the reaction-controlled regime.
The major disadvantage of batch reactors for hydrogenation reactions is their in-
efficient use of reactor volume and the fact that mass transfer rates do not scale
proportionally with reactor volume. Significant differences in liquid velocity dur-
ing stirring magnify these mass transfer issues [12]. For these reasons, continuous
reactors have been adopted by industry for megaton-scale processes, such as in
petrochemicals, where TBRs are utilized. In these systems, as the liquid and gas
flow concurrently through the reactor and come in contact with the catalyst, a
large surface area is created, allowing for greater mass transfer rates compared to
equal-sized batch reactors. However, in the pharmaceutical industry, commercially
available catalysts often have particle sizes smaller than 50 microns, making them
difficult to pelletize. Pelleting these powders can lead to pore diffusibility issues in
TBR configurations [12].
To describe and predict the reaction behavior in the reaction-controlled regime,
models of the reaction rates are proposed. The intention of a reactor model is to
8
==PAGE:19==
accurately predict the optimal operational parameters that yield the desired con-
version and selectivity. Different rate models vary in complexity and applicability.
While more detailed models may offer better system descriptions, they often require
extensive parameter fitting, making simpler models at times preferable for flexibil-
ity, albeit at the cost of precision.
The simplest reaction model assumes that the reaction constants are dependent
on catalyst concentration, but does not model the adsorption on the catalyst. In
this case, the rate of reaction, denoted ri, can be described by the following differ-
ential equation:
dCi
dt = −ri = k · Cα
i Cβ
H2
(1)
The reaction orders with respect to the organic reactant and hydrogen are denoted
by α and β, respectively, while k represents the reaction rate constant, expressed
in units of inverse time per gram of catalyst (min−1 · g−1
catalyst) with concentration of
the organic reactant and hydrogen represented by Ci and CH2 respectively. If mass
transfer limitations of hydrogen can be neglected by maintaining a high agitation
and constant pressure, the equation can be further simplified to:
−rA = k · Cα
A
(2)
The reaction order of the organic substrate, along with the rate constant, can then
be determined from simple batch experiments where the concentration is measured
as a function of time [13].
When making reaction rate expressions for multistep reactions, it is necessary to
consider each step of the reaction. For the case of hydrogenation of AP, several steps
are present, as shown by Figure 1. Precise modeling and kinetic data are necessary
to have the correct process parameters to obtain the desired product with a high
yield. These rate expressions can be derived from stoichiometric tables considering
the formation of all the products.
For catalytic reactors, the reaction rate can be described differently as the reac-
tion is dependent on the efficacy of the catalyst:
rAP(obs) = η · rAP
9
==PAGE:20==
where η is the overall effectiveness factor. The overall effectiveness factor describes
the observed reaction rate on the catalyst particle divided by the rate if the entire
particle interior was exposed to the bulk concentration. This effectiveness factor
depends on the reaction order, catalyst particle geometry and is generally described
using the Thiele modulus. The Thiele modulus characterizes the ratio between the
rates of reaction and diffusion in a heterogeneous catalyst [14]. As the catalyst used
in this report, is a commercial Pd/C catalyst provided by Lundbeck, the catalyst
specifications necessary to calculate η were not accessible without analytical deter-
mination.
A deeper exploration into reaction kinetics can be achieved with an Arrhenius plot.
In Thiel et al. [15], the pre-exponential factor and the activation energy for a photo-
catalytic hydrogenation of AP on a titanium dioxide-cellulose film were determined,
by conducting hydrogenation at different temperatures. The rate constants derived
from the experiments can then be used to determine the activation energy and
pre-exponential factor, using the Arrhenius equation:
ln k = −EA
R
1
T + ln k∞
(3)
where EA represents the activation energy of the reaction, R the gas constant, T
the temperature, and k∞the pre-exponential factor [15].
Simple models are effective for providing estimates of optimal operating conditions,
but they often fall short in describing heterogeneous systems, which are frequently
limited by mass transfer rather than reaction kinetics. Therefore, models account-
ing for mass transfer are necessary. Mass transfer between phases is commonly
modeled using the two-film theory. This theory describes the driving potential for
mass transfer between phases as proportional to the difference between actual con-
ditions and equilibrium conditions [16]. The transport of hydrogen from the gas
interface to the liquid bulk can be described as:
−dCH2
dt
= kLa(CHi −CL)
(4)
where kLa is the mass transfer coefficient, CHi is the concentration of hydrogen at
the gas interface, and CHL is the concentration of hydrogen in the liquid [17].
10
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4: Sketch illustrating the concentration profiles of reaction components in
heterogeneous hydrogenation. A = organic reactant, H = hydrogen and R = prod-
uct [17].
Similarly, the transport of hydrogen and AP from the bulk liquid to the catalyst
surface can be described, illustrated in Figure 4, building up the different parts of
the reaction model along with the reaction kinetics.
A more detailed model describing the binding of reactants to the catalyst may be
necessary for greater precision and describing inhibition. Typically, the Langmuir-
Hinshelwood (L-H) mechanism is used for modeling heterogeneous hydrogenation
surface reactions. In this mechanism, the two reactants must adsorb onto vacant
sites on the solid catalyst. The next step involves a reaction between two different
species at neighboring sites, forming the product, which must then desorb from the
catalyst surface. These steps are illustrated in Figure 5.
(a) Adsorption
(b) Reaction
(c) Desorption
Figure 5: Langmuir-Hinselwood mechanism.
Illustration of the surface reaction
mechanism where L denotes liquid, G gas, P product.
The rate law for the first reaction, AP to PE, can be described by the following
equation, assuming mass transfer limitations are eliminated with sufficient mixing
and the rate-limiting step is the reaction of the adsorbed molecule:
−rAP = k′KAPCAPKHorH2PH2C(∗)
(5)
where k′ represents the rate constant, K the equilibrium constants, CAP the con-
11
==PAGE:22==
centration of AP, and C(∗) the concentration of vacant sites. Lee et al. [6] devel-
oped kinetic models for the hydrogenation of AP on a Rh/Al2O3 catalyst. Various
models were investigated to determine whether hydrogen and AP adsorption were
competitive on the active sites and whether hydrogen adsorbed dissociatively or
non-dissociatively. These different models estimated C(∗) in varying ways. They
concluded that the non-competitive and dissociative hydrogen adsorption model
for all reaction steps, provided the best fit to experimental data. This model results
in the following expression for vacant sites, considering all possible reaction paths:
C(∗) =
1
(1 + KAPCAP + KPECPE + KCMKCCMK + KCECCE + KBECBE)
·
1
(1 + √KHpH2)2
(6)
A comprehensive model incorporating both L-H kinetics and two-film theory, as
illustrated by Figure 4, for heterogeneous hydrogenations can be found in Gut et
al. [17], where these principles are combined. In this chapter, the rate equations
12
==PAGE:23==
for each reaction step are derived as follows:
Hydrogen transfer from gas interface to bulk liquid
−rH = kHLa (cHI −cHL)
(7)
Hydrogen transfer from bulk liquid to catalyst surface
= k′
HLak (cHL −cHK)
(8)
Substrate transfer from bulk liquid to catalyst surface
= ν k′
ALa (cAL −cAR)
(9)
Adsorption of hydrogen on the catalyst
= mk k′
HK

cHK(1 −θH) −
1
KH
θH

(10)
Adsorption of substrate A on the catalyst
= ν mk KA

cAK(1 −θA −θR) −
1
KH
θA

(11)
Chemical surface reaction
= ν mk k′ η θA θH
(12)
Desorption of product R from the catalyst
= ν mk KR

cRK(1 −θA −θR) −1
KR
θR

(13)
Product transfer from catalyst to the bulk liquid
= ν k′
RLa (cRK −cRL)
(14)
In these equations, the k′s correspond to transfer or rate coefficients, the as to
specific surface areas, the Cs concentrations, the Ks adsorption constants, the θs
fractional occupancies of active sites, mk represents catalyst mass, ν the stoichio-
metric coefficient for hydrogen, and η the effectiveness factor.
Since all mechanisms occur simultaneously in a steady state, different reaction steps
will proceed at varying rates, with some steps being rate-controlling. These rate-
controlling steps allow the model to be simplified. In many continuous reactors,
hydrogen transfer from the gas to the bulk liquid and around catalyst particles
often emerges as the limiting step, as found by Bergault et al. [9]. Under high
agitation and constants pressure where mass transfer limitations are neglected, the
reaction rate is zeroth order with respect to the substrate, so the rate can be de-
scribed using equations 7, 8, and 12, alongside the relationship between hydrogen
13
==PAGE:24==
pressure and concentration, expressed by Henry’s law:
xH2 = pH
H
(15)
where xH2 corresponds to the mole fraction of H2 in the liquid, pH the hydrogen
pressure and H Henry’s constant.
To evaluate and compare results as well as to make predictions of concentration
profiles, mole balances can be employed alongside reaction rate knowledge. The
general mole balance equation for mass conservation in a system becomes:
IN + GENERATED = OUT + ACCUMULATED
For different reactor setups, the mass balance can be specified. In a batch reactor,
no mass enters or leaves, so the mole balance becomes:
GENERATED = ACCUMULATED
The amount generated can be expressed by multiplying the reaction rate by the
volume of the system, while the moles accumulated is the time derivative of the
moles of the substance. For AP in a batch reactor, becoming:
rAP · V = dNAP
dt
(16)
where V represents the reaction volume, and NAP the moles of AP.
In a CSTR, where mass flows into and out of the reactor, and at steady-state,
no accumulation occurs. The mole balance for CSTR is:
IN + GENERATED = OUT
FAP0 + rAP · V = FAP
(17)
where FAP0 represents the molar flow into the reactor, and FAP the molar flow out.
For a PFR, which can be modeled as a series of small CSTRs, the molar flow of
each section is integrated with respect to the volume, giving:
dFAP
dV
= rAP
(18)
14
==PAGE:25==
This mole balance applies to TBRs [10].
In reactors, common operational variables include temperature, pressure, residence
time, and throughput for continuous reactors. Understanding the necessary reaction
time to achieve a desired conversion is critical for design. In CSTRs, the residence
time distribution (RTD) is particularly important for processes with consecutive
reactions. A broad RTD can negatively impact selectivity, especially in hydrogena-
tion reactions involving hydrogen as a reactant in multiple steps. Therefore, for
intermediate product formation, a narrow RTD is advantageous.
2.4
Jet Loop Reactors as an Alternative
With the importance of mass transfer emphasized in the previous sections, along
with the convenience of a versatile setup, the JLR emerges as a promising alter-
native to CSTR and PFRs. JLRs offer excellent mixing performance at relatively
low energy consumption, making them an intriguing possibility for heterogeneous
hydrogenation in API production.
A JLR, illustrated in Figure 6, consists of a reactor vessel containing gas and a
liquid or slurry, recirculating with a jet stream. The reaction liquid, containing the
catalyst and the reactant, is transported with a pump to the top of the reactor and
then sprayed back into the vessel.
Figure 6: Schematic drawing of a JLR.
15
==PAGE:26==
The high-velocity circulating loop is designed to continuously recirculate the re-
action mixture. The loop enables fluids to flow at high velocities, maintaining a
constant flow and circulation of the reactants, which promotes efficient mixing and
minimizes concentration gradients. The ejector system serves as the driving force
for mixing and mass transfer. It consists of a nozzle that injects a high-velocity
stream of liquid or slurry into the reactor. It can also be designed to incorporate
gas into the stream, making it a jet stream, allowing for even higher mass transfer
using the Venturi principle [18].
The reactor operates continuously by adding and removing substances from the
reactor, thereby maintaining a flow through the reactor. The conversion and selec-
tivity of the reactor are controlled via the average residence time of the reaction
liquid. The main advantage of a JLR over a conventional CSTR is the higher mass
transfer due to the jet stream and, therefore, the higher potential conversion rate.
The advantage of JLR over PFR reactors is the versatility of the reactor, being able
to utilize powdered catalysts and easily adjustable residence times and continuously
replace deactivated catalyst.
In Warmeling et al. [18], the residence time distribution (RTD) for different reactor
types is discussed and compared to the JLR. Ideal PFRs and CSTRs exhibit dis-
tinct RTD patterns. In a PFR, the RTD is characterized by a narrow distribution,
similar to a Dirac impulse, ideally with zero deviation from the mean, suggesting
minimal back-mixing. Conversely, in an ideal CSTR, the RTD follows a perfect
Gaussian bell curve due to the mixing nature of the CSTR, as shown by Figure 7.
The RTD of a JLR, however, is a superposition of the RTD characteristics of both
PFR and CSTR. As described by Warmeling et al. [18], the RTD of JLRs can be
modeled as an infinite series of Dirac impulses spaced at intervals determined by the
mixing ratio of the recycle stream flow rate to the inlet flow rate. This highlights
the higher potential conversion due to a tighter RTD compared to a CSTR while
maintaining better mixing than a PFR.
16
==PAGE:27==
Figure 7: Comparison of the RTDs of CSTRs, JLRs, and PFRs [18].
As already highlighted, an essential important factor in continuous heterogeneous
hydrogenation is mass transfer. Considering the two-film theory, the mass transfer
coefficients, kLa, of different reactor types are compared with respect to power
consumption per reactor volume.Figure 8 illustrates the kLa values obtained with
specific power inputs for different reactors.
Figure 8: Comparison of the kLa to the specific energy input of various reactors
[18].
As observed in Figure 8 JLRs can exhibit greater mass transfer efficiency compared
to other reactor types, although with some variance. This variance is due to differ-
17
==PAGE:28==
ent jet nozzle and ejector designs with various mixing properties [18].
Many studies report JLR utilization for heterogeneous hydrogenation.
In Hass
et al. [19], the kinetics of the hydrogenation of 1,3-cyclo-octadiene and cyclooctene
using a Pd/Al2O3 catalyst were investigated. Using the JLR and L-H modeling,
they deduced expressions for the reaction rates for the formation of cyclooctene and
cyclooctane. They further determined that in the presence of 1,3-cyclo-octadiene
on the catalyst surface, cyclooctene could not be hydrogenated. The JLR has also
proven useful in homogeneous catalysis. In Roth et al. [20], high activity and space-
time yield were achieved for the hydroformylation of olefins, a catalyzed three-phase
liquid-liquid-gas multi-product system, using a JLR. The JLR proved superior to
existing CSTR systems due to the high catalyst loss in the CSTR, and the great
mixing capabilities of the JLR. The low catalyst loss and high yields obtained with
the JLR promised a possible starting point for further research into potential ap-
plications of the JLR.
There is a gap in the research regarding the use of a JLR for the hydrogena-
tion of AP, or any other ketone derivatives. There are also a limited number of
studies comparing JLRs to other reactors specifically for hydrogenation reactions.
Moreover, limited knowledge exists on catalyst performance and stability in a JLR.
Overall, there is a significant gap in the literature, emphasizing the need for further
investigation on the subject.
2.5
Reactor Design and Scale-Up Challenges
The design of an efficient reactor is pivotal in chemical engineering, particularly
when considering the transition from laboratory-scale experiments to industrial-
scale production. A key aspect of this design process is ensuring that the reactor can
be reliably scaled up without compromising performance metrics such as production
rate, selectivity, and yield, all while minimizing resource investment. Selecting the
appropriate reactor type for a given reaction becomes crucial, as improper scale-up
can lead to suboptimal or even unprofitable outcomes. Consequently, the challenge
lies in maintaining consistent reaction behavior across scales while balancing oper-
ational efficiency with economic viability.
It is therefore important to consider the transport phenomena and kinetics of the
reaction in models that allow for predictable scale-up of the system. Hickman et al.
18
==PAGE:29==
[13], describe the process of a successful scale-up of a TBR for hydrogenation with a
Pd catalyst. They discovered that the most important parameters to consider when
scaling up the catalytic reaction are catalyst wetting, catalyst activity, and catalyst
deactivation. Wetting and activity issues were overcome by increasing the liquid
superficial velocity and decreasing the particle sizes. Deactivation was addressed by
designing processes and operating principles to prevent catalyst poisoning, which
can occur from contaminated feed used in industry. In Lehtonen et al. [21], the
scale-up of a catalyzed reductive alkylation of aromatic amines was predicted with
satisfactory accuracy using derived models and relations for a loop reactor. Mass
balances were set up for the gas and liquid phases, and a correlation for the mass
transfer coefficient for the ejector was employed. Using these models and relations,
a fit of experimental data was successfully obtained.
One of the crucial aspects scaling up continuous reactors for heterogeneous cataly-
sis is the relationship between the reaction rate and the gas-liquid interfacial area.
As the interfacial area does not scale linearly with reactor volume, reaction rates
tend to decrease with size. With batch reactors and CSTRs often limited to the
impeller for creating interfacial area [22], JLRs utilize reactor volume much more
efficiently, as the mass transfer is significantly greater. This ensures that scaling
up allows for more predictable and consistent performance. Another advantage of
scaling up JLRs is their efficient energy usage, leading to superior sustainability
and profitability.
Common to these articles is the importance of having adequate models of mass
transfer and reaction kinetics. It is also crucial to uphold catalytic activity and
therefore understand what factors influence it for a given catalyst.
2.6
Indications of Future Trends
Modern chemical production faces multiple challenges, such as minimizing energy
and waste generation while improving economic and environmental metrics. Pro-
cess intensification refers to the development of more efficient processes that achieve
higher throughput and yield with reduced energy and resource consumption. There-
fore, advancements in heterogeneous hydrogenation processes are necessary due to
their greener reactants and separation potential. Intensifying the selectivity and
rates of heterogeneous hydrogenation reactors is of great interest. Continuous-flow
hydrogenation reactors, such as JLRs, are part of this trend, allowing for higher
production rates and better control over reaction conditions compared to batch re-
19
==PAGE:30==
actors.
In Tan et al.
[23], a novel microreactor was proposed for the hydrogenation of
AP on a Pd/Al2O3, using PE as a vessel for hydrogen storage in the hydrogen
economy.
The proposed reactor is an intensified TBR design with a gas-liquid
micro-dispersion module. The module consists of a stainless steel microfiltration
membrane as a dispersion medium. The membrane efficiently disperses H2 into
micro-bubbles, which are enveloped by thin liquid films before entering the tubular
reactor. Figure 9 shows the hydrogen consumption rate per gram of pd for various
reactor types and catalysts.
Figure 9: Comparison of hydrogen consumption rates per Pd mass, between batch
reactors with mesoporous Pd networks [80], batch reactors with Pd nanocube cat-
alysts [79], conventional TBRs, CTBR, and the intensified TBR, ITBR [23].
As shown in Figure 9, the proposed reactor setup exhibits superior reaction rates
compared to batch reactors and conventional TBRs. The study does not mention
catalyst activity or catalyst regeneration methods, which are essential properties for
hydrogenation reactors. The scope of the study was more a proof of concept for hy-
drogen storage rather than optimizing heterogeneous hydrogenation, nevertheless,
it could inspire future work on the design. TBRs, however, face significant down-
sides in heat transfer, leading to faster deactivation of the catalyst, together with
the inability of continuously exchanging the catalyst. JLRs have proven capable of
intensifying reactions reliant on mass transfer, such as heterogeneous hydrogena-
tion. Their simplistic design compared to TBRs allows for a broader range of mass
transfer-limited reactions to be conducted in JLRs. Therefore, JLRs have the po-
tential to play a transformative role in pharmaceutical production, particularly for
reactions where multiphase interactions are critical.
20
==PAGE:31==
2.7
Literature Gaps
With catalytic reactions constituting approximately 90% of all reactions in the
industry and having an economic impact contributing 30-40% of global GDP, in-
tensifying these processes is of great interest [24]. While much research has been
conducted on hydrogenation processes, this research tends to focus more on prod-
ucts from petrochemical production, such as olefins, and TBR reactors with large
throughputs. This leaves the fine chemical industry, such as API production, insuf-
ficiently researched, despite its great potential for innovation in continuous hydro-
genation reactors.
The need for catalytic hydrogenation reactors for smaller-scale production has been
emphasized by Westerterp et al. [3]. In this study, the authors identified require-
ments for a good multiproduct catalytic hydrogenation reactor for fine chemicals.
These include universal catalysts, a universal method of heat removal, a wide range
of temperatures and solvents, good selectivities, ease of operation without exten-
sive information on kinetics, ease of control, and good process economics.
The
authors selected a TBR as the preferred multiproduct reactor over slurry reactors
and therefore JLRs, due to the good mixing properties of a slurry reactor leading
to low selectivities in certain reactions. However, with the knowledge that the hy-
drogenation of AP with a Pd/C catalyst is highly selective towards PE [25], even
with good mixing characteristics present, the potential of JLRs in fine chemical
production remains relatively unproven.
Empirical data describing the kinetics of AP hydrogenation using a Pd/C cata-
lyst are scarce. Most studies discuss the yields and selectivities without addressing
the order of reaction for AP and hydrogen, as well as the reaction constants. In
Bernardin et al. [26], the reaction rates of AP hydrogenation using a Pd/CNT
(carbon nanotubes) are determined using L-H modeling in surface reaction regime.
Similar studies are necessary for commercially available powdered Pd/C catalysts
to enhance possibilities for modeling and scale-up.
Comparative studies have been conducted on batch and continuous hydrogena-
tion, such as in Bukhtiyarova et al. [27]. This review concludes that most studies
use batch methods to determine optimal reaction conditions, while continuous flow
reactors are used to estimate catalyst stability in the long term. It was concluded
that some reactions are preferable in batch due to selectivity issues, however, most
21
==PAGE:32==
reactions are preferable in continuous flow. Comparisons of different flow reactor
types are, however, seldom seen and could benefit from more research.
In Warmeling et al. [18], the efficiency of the JLR is highlighted. The JLR proved
to be the most energy-efficient in terms of having the highest potential mass trans-
fer to energy input ratio. However, it was found to be significantly dependent on
the specific reactor design. Such comparisons could be misleading when looking
solely at mass transfer without considering other parameters. Therefore, more con-
crete data on the efficiency of a reactor, taking into account both mass transfer and
the selectivity of a given reaction, is necessary. This could provide a more direct
comparison of the sustainability and profitability of a reactor setup against others.
Some studies mention the difficulties of separating the catalyst from the reaction
medium when operating with a slurry, leading to lower profits [28], however, a di-
rect comparison of catalyst recovery in a PBR is lacking. More information on the
operational challenges of a JLR compared to batch or other continuous reactors is
therefore necessary.
2.8
State of Hydrogenation Reactor Design
The literature review highlights key themes in hydrogenation reactions, particularly
in the pharmaceutical industry. Hydrogenation is critical for the production of fine
chemicals and pharmaceutical intermediates, often involving multi-step reactions.
Heterogeneous hydrogenation is favored due to the benefits to sustainability and
ease of catalyst recovery, despite challenges in mass transfer between phases. The
review emphasizes existing reactor technologies, such as batch reactors, CSTRs,
PFRs, and the novel use of JLRs. JLRs stand out for their efficiency in mixing and
mass transfer, making them a promising alternative to traditional reactors in terms
of flexibility, selectivity, and scalability. Additionally, key insights on mass transfer
limitations, kinetics, and reactor design are explored to underline the current chal-
lenges in reactor performance and scale-up.
This study addresses critical gaps identified in the literature, particularly the limited
research on the use of JLRs for hydrogenation of AP and the lack of comparative
data on reactor efficiencies. The current research aims to contribute by exploring
the hydrogenation of AP using a JLR, which has shown potential for enhanced mass
transfer and flexible operation. By focusing on powdered catalysts, this study also
tackles the challenges in catalyst activity and scalability for pharmaceutical produc-
22
==PAGE:33==
tion, areas where traditional reactors like PFRs and CSTRs fall short. Moreover,
the study will provide empirical data on reaction kinetics, which is currently lack-
ing for the specific reaction, thus offering a foundation for improved modeling and
process intensification.
This project will not only advance the understanding of JLR applications but also
offer valuable insight into the design and optimization of reactors for fine chemical
manufacturing, contributing to more efficient, sustainable, and economically viable
chemical processes.
23
==PAGE:34==
3
Materials and Methods of Analysis
3.1
Autoclave Experiments
Initially, an autoclave equipped with a mass flow meter was used to measure hy-
drogen consumption, employing the method of initial rates. However, the method
was deemed inaccurate due to difficulties in maintaining a stable pressure of 10
bar with the regulator. Consequently, alternative approaches were explored. The
method chosen was intermediate liquid sampling using a dip tube mounted to the
autoclave. This allowed for sampling during the experiment and therefore direct de-
termination of the intermediate concentrations by GC-FID. All pressures presented
in the experiments and results are gauge pressures.
3.1.1
Equipment
• Parr 4848 Reactor Controller
• Parr 4566 300 mL Autoclave
• Brooks SLA5800 Thermal Mass Flow Meter
• LabJack T7-PRO
• Agilent 8890 GC System
• Agilent DB-624 UI column - 122-1364UI
24
==PAGE:35==
Figure 10: Experimental setup. 1 - Gas inlet, 2 - Gas outlet, 3 - Pressure transducer,
4 - Thermocouple, 5 - dip tube, 6 - Stirrer, 7 - Liquid sampling, 8 - Heating jacket,
9 - Reactor vessel.
The reactor setup Parr 4566, shown in Figure 10, is a 300mL autoclave fitted with
pressure indicator and thermocouple. It further has a dip tube which allows for
liquid sampling through a 2-stage valve system.
The maximum pressure is 138
bar and the maximum temperature is 500°C when using a graphite gasket. The
pressure and temperature readings are transmitted through a LabJack T7-PRO to
the laboratory PC running python software, allowing for real time temperature and
pressure readings.
3.1.2
Materials
• 5 wt.% Pd/C catalyst
• Ethanol
• Acetophenone
• Hexadecane
• 1-Phenyl Ethanol
• Isopropyl alcohol
25
==PAGE:36==
3.1.3
Experimental Procedure
For the hydrogenation reaction, a Parr SS autoclave (300 mL) was used. The initial
solution was prepared by mixing ethanol with 5wt% Pd/C catalyst, hexadecane,
and AP in a ventilated hood, presented in Table 1.
Table 1: Amounts needed for a 100mL, 0.25M AP, 1 g/L catalyst experiment
Unit
Acetophenone
Hexadecane
Ethanol
5 wt% Pd/C
mL
2.946
0.150
96.904
-
grams
3.034
0.116
76.457
0.100
The reactor vessel was weighed with and without the solution before being secured
to the stirrer/heater. It was flushed with nitrogen gas multiple times, followed by a
leak test at approximately 5–6 bar of N2 pressure. If the leak test failed, the lid of
the autoclave was tightened and/or the seal replaced, the N2 flushed and the leak
test was repeated. Once the autoclave was leak-free, it was pressurized with H2 to
about 5-6 bar. An additional leak test was then performed. Then the temperature
of 50 to 70 °C was set. When the autoclave reached the set temperature, the reaction
was started by increasing the pressure to about 10 bar with H2 and starting the
stirrer. The time of starting the stirrer was t = 0 min. During the reaction, liquid
samples (1-2 mL) were taken at 0 min, 2 min, 5 min, 20 min, 1 h and 3 h. After
three hours the reaction is done, the stirrer was stopped, the reactor is cooled with
a water bath, the pressure was released, and N2 gas was used for purging. The
reactor vessel was weighed again and the remaining reaction mixture was collected
in a sample container with a lid. A small product sample (1-2 ml) was separated
from the catalyst by filtration, for both the liquid samples and the final reaction
mixture. Analysis of the samples was done with GC-FID.
3.1.4
Calibration of Stirrer
The autoclave controller is equipped with a potentiometer adjusting the stirrer
between 0 and 100%. For better comparison to the experiments conducted in lit-
erature, it was of interest to determine the stirring rate in % corresponding to the
rounds per minute (RPM) on the Parr 4566 stirrer. This was done using a tachome-
ter and adding black tape around the stirrer to leave only a small sliver of metal
exposed. The measurements obtained are shown in Figure 11, which presents the
correlation between the stirrer setting in % and RPM.
26
==PAGE:37==
Figure 11: Correlation between stirring percentage on the Parr 4566 and RPM
The correlation indicates that at 100% stirring speed, the stirrer operates at ap-
proximately 810 RPM.
3.2
Jet Loop Reactor Experiments
In figure Figure 12, the PI diagram of the JLR is presented.
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 12: PI diagram of the experimental JLR setup.
In the JLR the feeding pump, P1, the recirculation pump, P2, the pressure regula-
tors PR1 and PR2, the actuated sample valves, V17, V18 and V23, the hydrogen
inlet together with the heating jacket temperatures are the manipulated variables.
The operating temperatures and pressures were determined by temperature and
pressure transmitters. The inlet flow rate of hydrogen was determined from the
MFM. The first period was spent doing batch experiments, identifying errors, such
as unresponsive MFMs and faulty pressure sensors as well as adjusting the setup
with additional valves and actuators. Batch experiments comparing various recircu-
lation rates and ejectors were conducted with 5 L reaction volumes. Four continuous
experiments were conducted of various reaction volumes and feeding rates.
3.2.1
Nozzle and Jet ejector
In the JLR, gas-liquid mass transfer is driven by the jet stream, which is directed
onto a deflector plate within the reactor. The velocity of the jet stream is directly
proportional to the mass transfer rate, making the design of the jet nozzle a critical
factor. Jet nozzles can be equipped with a jet ejector, which enhances gas entrain-
ment through the Venturi effect. Experiments were conducted using a 4 mm nozzle
produced by Schlick.
28
==PAGE:39==
Figure 13: Schematic representation of the jet ejector, 4D1-1, used in the experi-
ments. Designed by Pelin Çaglayan.
Jet ejectors are commonly integrated with nozzles to enhance multiphase mixing.
The primary fluid accelerates as it passes through the nozzle, gaining kinetic energy,
while a secondary fluid is entrained into the system due to the pressure drop created
by the ejector’s geometry. The efficiency of an ejector is influenced by several key
design parameters, including the throat diameter, area ratio, diffuser length, tube
section length, and divergence angle.
Based on an extensive literature review on ejector design, a set of optimal pa-
rameters was selected for the ejector shown in Figure 13. The 4D1-1 ejector was
initially fabricated using 3D printing and tested in a cold-flow setup with water to
evaluate oxygen saturation using a steady-state method. Following these tests, the
ejector was 3D printed in steel with contributions from DTU Construct.
3.2.2
Equipment
• 2 x Wittmann Tempro primus C 90
• 10L Glass feeding tank
• Ika Eurostar digital 2000 RPM
• Brooks Instruments H2/2000NMLM Digital sensor
• Cemp II2G AB75r 112 M6 electric motor
• Cemp II2G AB75r 71 B4 electric motor
• Wanner G10 Hydra-Cell pump
29
==PAGE:40==
• Sera R 409.2-11ML Diaphragm Pump
• 10L Jet Loop Reactor stainless steel vessel
• LabJack T7-Pro
3.2.3
Materials
• 5 wt.% Pd/C catalyst
• Ethanol
• Acetophenone
• Hexadecane
• 1-Phenyl Ethanol
• Isopropyl alcohol
3.2.4
Experimental Procedure
First, the pressures of hydrogen (H2) and nitrogen (N2) were verified in the over-
head pressure valves, ensuring they were within the range of 12–13 bar to confirm
sufficient pressure in the supply lines.
The pressure regulators were managed cautiously due to the sensitivity of the system
and the time needed to fill the gas supply tubes. Pressure was increased incremen-
tally by 2 bar at a time, allowing stabilization before further adjustments. First the
system was purged with N2 to remove residual oxygen by setting PR2 to 1–2 bar,
opening V22, and partially opening needle valve V6 to allow a low flow of N2. To
purge the section after the pump, P2 was briefly started, as it can circulate gases.
After closing V17 and shutting off P2, the reactor was pressurized to 10 bar via
PR2 for a leak test. Depressurization was achieved by reducing PR2 to 1 bar and
slowly opening V13 and V3.
The reaction solutions were prepared in a well-ventilated hood with a total vol-
ume of 5 L. A slurry solution with an AP concentration of 0.25 M and a catalyst
loading of 1 g/L was prepared by weighing 150.19 g of AP and 5 g of 5 wt.% Pd/C
catalyst. AP was dissolved in ethanol in a 1000 mL blue capped bottle, and the
catalyst was added. The solution was transferred to the glass reactor, and the bot-
tle and funnel were rinsed with 4 L of ethanol to ensure all catalyst and reactant
30
==PAGE:41==
were transferred as well as to flush the feeding tank and pipes.
While the slurry was being fed to the feeding tank, V9 and V8 remained closed.
Once feeding was completed, V19 was opened, and a low N2 flow was initiated
through V20 for blanketing making sure to prevent overpressure, by connecting the
exhaust line to the hood. Stirring and heating were then initiated in the feeding
tank, with the stirrer set to 200 RPM to suspend the catalyst. Heater 1 was started
and adjusted to the temperature set point, and a flow of cooling water was provided
to the heater. Heating and cooling functions were set using the heaters’ control set-
tings.
3.2.5
Batch operation
The slurry was transferred to the JLR after the temperature in the feeding tank
reached the desired value and the reactor heater was turned on to 62°C, due to a 2°C
offset between jacket and reactor temperature during operation. Pump P1 was used
for the transfer, with V8 and V9 opened while V17, V11, and V12 remained closed.
The slurry height in the tank was monitored via the differential pressure sensor by
opening V16. Pump P1 was set to 50 Hz with a 60% stroke length, completing
the transfer within 20–25 minutes.
During this process, V13 and V3 remained
closed. Stabilized differential pressure values were recorded for consistency across
experiments.
The reactor was pressurized with N2 at 3–4 bar by adjusting PR2 and introducing
N2 through V22 and V6. Recirculation of the slurry was performed using pump
P2, at approximately 5 L/min. This process included periodic N2 purging to ensure
complete air removal. After reaching the set temperature, H2 was introduced at
controlled flow until 10 bar was reached with circulation off. The reaction was then
initiated by starting P2.
Samples were collected before reaction, and during the reaction at 2, 5, 10, 20, 60,
120 and 180min. The differential pressure sensor provided an estimate of liquid and
height, but its sensitivity resulted in large fluctuations during high circulation flow
rates. These fluctuations were dampened using a moving average of the readings.
Automated valves in the sampling section were adjusted to restrict the sampling
volume to 8-10 mL. Sampling involved briefly opening V17 to transfer the slurry
to the sampling chamber, purging the sampled slurry with nitrogen through BPV
and V2, and collecting it by opening V18. The slurry exiting V18 and V23 was
31
==PAGE:42==
pressurized, requiring careful handling to prevent residual slurry from remaining
in the tubing. Before taking each sample, the sampling section was purged with
around 10mL from the reactor to ensure any residual solution was removed.
3.2.6
Continuous operation
For continuous operation, the reactor was first filled with the desired volume of re-
action solution. This was done by timing the feeding pump, with the known feeding
rate from the calibration curve. With total reactant volumes over 10 L, the initial
reaction volume was introduced to the feeding tank first, then fed to the reactor
and lastly, the remaining feed was added to the feeding tank. Once the reactor
was filled, the mixture was purged with N2, and heated to 60°C. Once the mixture
reached temperature and had circulated using P2 for a while, the N2 was depres-
surized. Once depressurized P2 was turned off, and V1 turned on to pressurize the
vessel with H2. When 10 bar was reached, P1 and P2 were turned on simultaneously
to start the reaction and CSTR operation.
The liquid was removed from the reactor through the purging valve V17.
The
purging process was timed to match the feeding rate, ensuring a constant reactor
volume. Sampling was carried out approximately every 15–20 seconds, depending
on the feeding rate and liquid level. The sample volume ranged between 10–20 mL,
adjusted based on the desired flow rate and the liquid level in the reactor. The
liquid level was monitored using the differential pressure (dP) curve in LabView,
which correlated to the liquid level in the reactor. Sampling volumes also varied
slightly between samples, making dP measurements essential for maintaining a con-
sistent liquid level in the reactor. This was maintained by adjusting the sampling
intervals. Analysis of samples was carried out using GC-FID.
3.2.7
Pump calibration
To accurately control the flow rates in the system and maintain the liquid level in
the reactor, calibration methods were employed. This was due to the absence of
mass flow meters on the liquid inlets and outlets of the reactor, as shown in the PI
diagram in Figure 12. Different calibration techniques were used to determine the
flow rates for the recirculation and feeding pumps.
For the recirculation pump, a flow meter was utilized to record the flows at various
frequencies, and these measurements were then used to create a calibration curve.
32
==PAGE:43==
The Wanner Hydra-Cell recirculation pump has only the pump frequency as an
adjustable parameter and operates between 0 and approximately 50 Hz. Figure 14
illustrates the calibration curve for the recirculation pump.
Figure 14: Calibration curve for the recirculation pump.
For the feeding pump, the calibration was conducted by recording the time it took
to fill a 100 mL graduated cylinder at different frequencies and stroke lengths. These
values were then used to develop the calibration curve for various stroke lengths, as
shown in Figure 15.
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 15: Calibration curve for the feeding pump at different stroke lengths.
These calibration curves are critical, particularly for the feeding pump, as they
ensure the maintenance of a consistent reaction volume when operating the JLR
continuously.
To be able to feed continuously up against the pressure in the reactor, it was impor-
tant to prime the feeding pump. This was done by closing the inlet to the reactor
and letting liquid through a side stream installed by PRV3.
3.3
Gas Chromatography - Flame Ionization Detector
In this study, a Gas Chromatograph with a Flame Ionization Detector (GC-FID)
was used for quantifying organic compounds in the complex mixtures. It operates
in two primary stages, which are separation by gas chromatography and detection
by flame ionization.
In the gas chromatographic stage, the liquid sample is injected into a heated injec-
tion port, where it vaporizes immediately due to high temperature. A carrier gas,
in this case helium, then transports the vaporized sample through a long, narrow
column, coated with a stationary phase that interacts with the sample molecules.
As the sample moves through the column, components separate based on their in-
34
==PAGE:45==
teractions with the stationary phase and the boiling point of the molecules. The
different compounds in the sample travel at different speeds, leading to distinct
separation of each component by the time they reach the detector.
As AP and PE have very similar boiling points (202 vs 204°C) and polarity, the
column must be chosen carefully. The column used is an Agilent 60m long, 0.32mm
in diameter with a 1.8µ m film thickness. It has a mid-polar stationary phase made
from 6% cyanopropyl/phenyl and 94% polydimethylsiloxane. This design inher-
ently allows low and high polar compounds to elute more quickly and mid-polar
compounds elute slower.
Once separated, each compound reaches the Flame Ionization Detector (FID). Here,
the carrier gas and separated sample components are mixed with hydrogen and
burned in a small flame. Organic compounds, when combusted, produce ions and
electrons as a result of the carbon atoms in the molecules.
The FID contains
electrodes that apply a potential difference across the flame, causing the ions and
electrons to generate a measurable current. The intensity of this current is directly
proportional to the concentration of carbon in the sample, allowing for quantifica-
tion. Examples of results yielded from GC-FID are given in Figure A.1.
3.4
Calibration curves
To relate the GC chromatogram peak areas to concentrations, a calibration curve
with known concentrations was made. First, the retention times for the products
were determined. GC analysis was conducted by injecting each component individ-
ually, diluted in ethanol. This produced two major peaks on the chromatogram:
one for ethanol and another for the component of interest. Other peaks might be
present due to impurities in the samples or solvent. The retention times for the
components are shown in Table 2.
35
==PAGE:46==
Table 2: Table of the retention times identified for each component.
Component
Retention time [min]
Acetophenone
19.09
Phenyl Ethanol
19.02
Ethyl Cyclohexane
14.2
Ethyl benzene
15.17
Cyclohexane ethanol
18.7
Ethanol
5.32
Hexadecane
23.41
With the retention times known, calibration curves for AP, PE, and EB were made.
The calibration curves and samples were diluted as the AP and PE peaks are very
close together, interfering with the peak areas at high concentrations, as shown by
Figure 16.
Figure 16: GC-peaks for AP and PE which are peak fronting and overlapping.
The following calibration curves were produced using the data shown in Appendix A,
following the same procedure with the dilute concentrations:
36
==PAGE:47==
Figure 17: Calibration curve of model compound and products.
Data given in
Appendix A.
The final calibration table was then obtained, allowing for a more precise conversion
from peak areas to molar concentrations:
Table 3: Calibration table for converting GC areas to concentrations.
Retention time [min]
Response factor [M/pA/s]
Acetophenone
19.09
2.13794E-05
Phenyl Ethanol
19.02
2.17672E-05
Ethyl Cyclohexane
14.2
1.70683E-05
Ethyl benzene
15.17
2.10605E-05
Cyclohexane ethanol
18.7
1.79617E-05
Ethanol
5.323
Hexadecane
23.405
The response factors of EC and CE were obtained from a calibration curve contain-
ing all the species which was later discarded due to imprecision and impurities in the
compounds. These compounds however did not appear in significant concentrations
in the experiments and were therefore not included in the calibration.
3.5
Sample Preparation and Analysis
After taking a sample, it was filtered using a 0.25 µm pore size filter, fitted to a
syringe. After filtration, the sample was transferred to a small vial and labeled.
37
==PAGE:48==
250µL of the sample was then transferred with a micropipette to a GC vial with
750µL of EtOH, making the sample ready for analysis.
The data obtained from the GC can be observed in Figure A.1. Samples could
not be run undiluted as the high concentrations might saturate the GC sensor,
leading to fronting and overlapping peaks. To address this, all samples were diluted
1:3 with ethanol. The internal standard (IS), in this case hexadecane, was used to
determine dilution ratios and normalize the results. This was done by measuring
the IS peak of one undiluted sample.
Each sample was analyzed twice to improve accuracy. The average peak area for
each sample was calculated, and normalization was performed to correct for po-
tential dilution errors. This involved using the peak area of the IS, which should
remain constant across all diluted samples in an experiment. The normalization
process adjusted the peak areas using Equation 19.
Normalized Peak Area =
¯
IS
IS · Peak Area
(19)
Here,
¯
IS corresponds to the IS peak area of an undiluted sample, and IS cor-
responds to the individual IS peak area for the sample. In the initial autoclave
experiments, no undiluted samples were analyzed, making ¯
IS calculated as the
average IS concentration across all samples. This necessitated multiplying the nor-
malized peak with the dilution ratio to calculate the sample concentrations. This
method was discontinued and ¯
IS was instead determined from an undiluted sample.
Once the normalized peak areas were obtained, the concentrations were calculated
using the calibration curves. An example of the determination of the AP concen-
tration using Equation 19 is shown below.
CAP = Normalized Peak Area · 2.137 × 10−5 M
pA
For some specific samples (e.g., 0.25 M, 0.1 M, and 0.5 M AP at 1 g/L, 60°C), a 1:1
dilution was initially used. However, this approach was discontinued as it required
twice the sample volume and worsend precision due to overlapping AP and PE
peaks.
38
==PAGE:49==
3.5.1
Liquid sampling
As the hydrogen consumption measurements were deemed unreliable, the collection
of liquid samples during operation became essential. Preliminary tests indicated
that the hydrogenation of AP occurred at a faster rate than the subsequent hydro-
genation of PE. Consequently, a higher sampling frequency was required during the
initial 30 minutes of the experiment, with progressively fewer samples taken over
time. This led to a sampling schedule of 2 mL at 0, 2, 5, 20, 60, and 180 minutes.
For each sample collected, 1 mL was flushed both before and after sampling to
ensure representative measurements.
The experiments were conducted using different batches of catalyst, resulting in
variations in the observed reaction rates. The second batch exhibited higher re-
action rates than the first. This was most likely attributed to differences in the
degree of oxidation of the catalyst powder. An overview of the experiments and
their operational parameters, initial concentrations, and catalyst batch is shown in
Appendix B.
To facilitate a more accurate comparison across various initial concentrations, the
experiments were evaluated using yields. Here yield is defined as the amount of
product produced per amount of product that could be produced, defined by the
equation:
Yi,t =
ni,t
nAP,0
(20)
where Yi,t represents the yield of the ith species at time t and ni,t represents the
amount of moles of species i at time t. Notably for AP,Yi,t represents the fraction
of the unconverted AP.
3.6
Rate Models
As discussed in Section 2.3, the analysis of the catalytic hydrogenation process
necessitates the development of robust kinetic models to accurately describe the
system dynamics and predict reactor performance under varying conditions. The
models presented in this study focus on the hydrogenation of AP to PE, a desired
intermediate, with further transformation to EB as a consecutive product. They
did not consider the side products EC or CE, as they did not appear in the sam-
ples in quantifiable concentrations. A series of rate expressions and mechanistic
considerations were employed to capture the underlying reaction pathways, includ-
39
==PAGE:50==
ing simplified direct models and more sophisticated L-H mechanisms incorporating
catalyst site dynamics and inhibition.
For the consecutive hydrogenation of AP, the reaction rate was described with
the following equations:
rAP = −k1 · Cα
AP
(21)
rPE = k1 · Cα
AP −k2 · Cβ
PE
(22)
rEB = k2 · Cβ
PE
(23)
where k correspond to the rate constants and α and β the reaction orders. This
model was directly fitted to the data to determine the rate constants and reaction
orders, therefore described as the direct model in this study.
Another model which was explored is the rate model. This model assumes both
reactions are first-order when α and β are 1. This yielded the following rate expres-
sions:
rAP = −k1 · CAP
(24)
rPE = k1 · CAP −k2 · CPE
(25)
rEB = k2 · CPE
(26)
The simpler model with less fitting parameters can allow for more precise fitting
of the rate constants, for scenarios where the assumption of first-order reactions is
correct, or a more simple comparison is needed.
The L-H model for heterogeneous catalysis, introduced in Section 2.3 and Equa-
tions (5)–(6), can be adapted to represent various adsorption mechanisms, which
influence the reaction kinetics. Specifically, four possible combinations arise from
the interactions between competitive versus non-competitive adsorption, and disso-
ciative versus non-dissociative adsorption. Furthermore, each reaction, the hydro-
genation and dehydration, can have different adsorption mechanisms.
In the competitive adsorption scenario, both hydrogen and the organic species
compete for the same type of active site on the catalyst surface. This contrasts
with non-competitive adsorption, where hydrogen and the organic species adsorb
on separate sites, avoiding direct competition for the active sites. The dissociative
adsorption mechanism involves assuming the diatomic hydrogen molecule, occupies
40
==PAGE:51==
a different site on the catalyst for each atom, adjacent to each other.
In non-
dissociative adsorption, however, the diatomic hydrogen molecule adsorbs onto a
single site without dissociation.
The choice to adopt a model with dissociative competitive hydrogen adsorption
was supported by literature, which suggests that this mechanism was the most re-
alistic for carbonyl hydrogenation on noble metals [6, 29]. The catalytic sites are
denoted C(∗) here with adsorbed species having (∗) in superscript. The adsorption
equilibria for the reacting species can be expressed as follows:
AP + C(∗) ⇌AP(∗)
H2 + 2C(∗) ⇌2H(∗)
PE + C(∗) ⇌PE(∗)
EB + C(∗) ⇌EB(∗)
The equilibrium adsorption constants, Ki, with units of L · mol−1 are defined as:
KAP =
C(∗)
AP
C(∗) · CAP
⇒
C(∗)
AP = C(∗) · CAP · KAP
Similarly, for the other species:
C(∗)
PE = C(∗) · CPE · KPE
C(∗)
EB = C(∗) · CEB · KEB
C(∗)
H2 = C(∗) ·
p
CH2 · KH2
where Ci describes the liquid concentration of the species. As the effect of hydrogen
pressure was outside the scope of the study, and KH2 was therefore assumed 1.
The relationship between hydrogen pressure and its mole fraction in the liquid
phase was expressed through the Pseudo Henry’s law constant (Hs), determined by
D’Angelo et al. [30] for n-alcohols (1 ≤n ≤4). The Pseudo Henry’s law constant
for hydrogen in organic solvents has been empirically correlated as a function of
temperature:
ln(Hs) = −52.6234×10−8T 3 +63.2644×10−5T 2 −25.8519×10−2T +40.5862 (27)
where T denotes the temperature in Kelvin.
The unit of Hs is MPa, and it is
inversely proportional to the mole fraction of hydrogen in the liquid phase. Based on
41
==PAGE:52==
this relationship, the mole fraction of hydrogen in the liquid phase can be determined
using Henry’s law:
xH2 = yH2P
Hs
(28)
where xH2 corresponds to the liquid fraction of H2, and yH2 the vapor fraction of
H2, which is 1 for the experiments conducted.
Once the mole fraction of hydrogen was approximated, the concentration of hydro-
gen in the liquid phase was calculated using:
CH2 = xH2 · ρl
Ml
(29)
where CH2 corresponds to the concentration of H2 in the liquid, ρl the density of
the liquid and Ml the molar mass of the liquid. The liquid density and molarity are
assumed to be that of the solvent.
By utilizing equations (27), (28), and (29), the hydrogen pressure was related to a
concentration in the liquid phase.
The surface reactions for the hydrogenation and dehydration are given by:
AP(∗) + 2H(∗) →PE(∗) + 2C(∗)
PE(∗) + 2H(∗) →EB(∗) + 2C(∗)
The total site balance is expressed as:
CT = C(∗) + C(∗)
AP + C(∗)
PE + C(∗)
EB + C(∗)
H2
(30)
where CT denotes the total active site concentration, normalized to 1. Substituting
the previously derived adsorption expressions with the site concentrations yields
the following:
1 = C(∗) 
1 + CAPKAP + CPEKPE + CEBKEB +
p
CH2KH2

(31)
The reaction rate for AP hydrogenation is given by:
rAP = −k′
1C(∗)
APC(∗)2
H2
42
==PAGE:53==
Then substituting the site concentrations yields the following expression:
rAP = −k′
1

CAPKAP ·
p
CH2KH2

C(∗)3
by inserting Equation 31 into the equation above, the final expression of the rate of
AP consumption can be determined:
rAP = Ccat
−k′
1CAPKAP ·
p
CH2KH2
 1 + CAPKAP + CPEKPE + CEBKEB +
p
CH2KH2
3
(32)
Similarly, the rate expressions for PE and EB formation are expressed:
rPE = Ccat
k′
1CAPKAP
p
CH2KH2 −k′
2CPEKPE
p
CH2KH2
 1 + CAPKAP + CPEKPE + CEBKEB +
p
CH2KH2
3
(33)
rEB = Ccat
k′
2CPEKPE
p
CH2KH2
 1 + CAPKAP + CPEKPE + CEBKEB +
p
CH2KH2
3
(34)
where k′
1 and k′
2 correspond to the intrinsic rate constants (in mol · L−1 · min−1 ·
gcat−1). To account for minor differences in catalyst concentration Ccat, all rate
expressions are scaled by this term, ensuring accurate kinetic modeling. With the
rate expressions established, the kinetic parameters can be estimated by fitting the
experimental data to the mole balances including the rate expressions.
3.7
Numerical Methods and Statistics
When fitting the model parameters to the data, a suitable fitting algorithm is nec-
essary. In this study, MATLABs fmincon was used which has the Interior-point
method as the fitting algorithm. The Interior-Point Algorithm is an optimization
technique used to solve linear, nonlinear, and convex programming problems by
iteratively moving through the interior of the feasible region rather than along its
boundary. It is especially powerful for large-scale problems, offering better scalabil-
ity and often faster convergence compared to traditional methods like the Simplex
algorithm, particularly for problems with many constraints. The function which was
minimized was the Sum of Squared Errors (SSE), which evaluates the difference be-
tween calculated data points by given model parameters, and the experimental data.
The function varied the parameters to obtain the smallest possible error. To ensure
the best possible minimum was found instead of an inferior local minimum, the
43
==PAGE:54==
algorithm was looped, such that it ran 100 times with randomized initial guesses.
The lowest SSE was then saved with the corresponding parameters. This was done
to ensure the that global optimum was found rather than a local based on a bad
initial guess.
The specific error function chosen was the one suggested in Bertero et al. [31]:
SSE =
X
i
(C∗
i,t −C∗CALC
i,t
)2
(35)
In this error function, C∗
i,t corresponds to the relative concentration, which is eval-
uated by the given concentration divided by the initial concentration, C∗
i,t = Ci,t
Ci,0,
and C∗CALC
i,t
corresponds to the relative concentration calculated from the model.
Using relative concentrations instead of actual concentrations assures that all the
experiments have the same impact on the error function regardless of the magni-
tude of the concentrations. For some of the experiments, the first sample taken
was at 2 min into the experiment, and for other experiments, the initial sample was
imprecise due to impurities. Therefore the sum of the initial concentrations of AP,
PE, and EB were used instead, as this sum corresponds to the initial concentration
of AP when assuming mole conservation.
To determine the coefficient of determination of the model, r2 was calculated with
Equation 36.
r2 =
Pm
j=1
Po
t=1
Pn
i=1(C∗CALC
j,t,i
−¯C∗
j,i)2
Pm
j=1
Po
t=1
Pn
i=1(C∗
j,i,t −¯C∗
j,i)2
(36)
for the m experiments and the o samples and n the number of components, where
¯C∗
j,i corresponds to the average observed concentrations for the j’th experiment.
To compare the different models tested, the Model Selection Criterion (MSC) was
utilized:
MSC = ln(
Pm
j=1
Po
t=1
Pn
i=1(C∗
j,t,i −¯C∗
j,i)2
Pm
j=1
Po
t=1
Pn
i=1(C∗
j,t,i −C∗CALC
j,t,i
)2) −2pT
NT
(37)
where pT corresponds to the number of fitted parameters and NT corresponds to
the total number of experimental data points across all experiments. This allowed
for a more qualitative comparison between different models with different amounts
of parameters.
44
==PAGE:55==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Autoclave Experiments
4.1.1
Hydrogen Consumption
Accurately quantifying hydrogen consumption can be an excellent, non-intrusive
tool for evaluating reaction kinetics in catalytic hydrogenation. In this section, the
hydrogen mass flow meter (MFM) was used to measure hydrogen uptake, and an
approach was developed to account for pressure fluctuations during the reaction.
The methodology involves combining flow rate measurements with pressure-derived
hydrogen accumulation to estimate the total consumption rate. Additionally, an
integration-based approach was applied to determine the total moles of hydrogen
reacted. These analyses provided insight into the suitability of the MFM for kinetic
studies and guided the assessment of its reliability in this experimental setup. An
example of one of these autoclave experiments with MFM measurements is shown
in Figure 18.
Figure 18: Experiment conducted with 0.25M AP, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 60°C and
10 barH2 in the autoclave, measuring H2 flow using the MFM.
As observed in Figure 18, the pressure exhibited significant instability during the
first hour of the experiment. Initially, the pressure decreased until approximately 30
45
==PAGE:56==
minutes, after which it began to rise again, leading to a spike in hydrogen flow. This
fluctuation was attributed to the inadequate forward pressure control of the pressure
regulator, which was unable to maintain a stable pressure. Due to the instability
in pressure, an attempt was made to estimate the hydrogen consumption rate. The
calculation began with the application of the ideal gas law to determine the amount
of hydrogen introduced through the mass flow meter, as expressed in the following
equation:
rH2−flow = P · v
R · T
(38)
where P represents the pressure, v represents the volumetric flow rate of hydrogen,
R is the gas constant, and T represents the temperature in Kelvin. To account for
the accumulation of hydrogen resulting from pressure fluctuations, the number of
moles of hydrogen present in the headspace at each time point was calculated, and
the corresponding rate was determined using the following expression:
nH2 = P · Vh
R · T
(39)
where Vh represents the volume of the headspace (200 mL). To minimize measure-
ment disturbances, a 60-second moving average was applied.
Subsequently, the
rate was determined by taking the time derivative of the moving-averaged moles of
hydrogen:
rH2−pres = dnH2mov−mean
dt
(40)
The total hydrogen consumption rate was then obtained by summing the two con-
tributions:
rH2−total = rH2−flow + rH2−pres
(41)
The computation of Equation 41 is shown in Figure 19.
46
==PAGE:57==
Figure 19: Experiment at 0.25 M, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 60°C and 10 barH2, estimat-
ing H2 consumption based on mass flow meter readings and pressure variations.
As shown in Figure 19, the results suggested that the H2 consumption rate was ini-
tially low, then increased before decreasing again. This trend, however, contradicts
theoretical expectations, as the reaction rate should be highest at the beginning
when the AP concentration is at its peak. Additionally, the suggestion of a slow
initial reaction rate was inconsistent with the observed temperature profile. The
temperature increased substantially within the first few minutes of the experiment
due to the exothermic nature of the reaction. Since the temperature controller was
unable to compensate effectively, it over-corrects before stabilizing at later stages
when less heat is generated, allowing for improved control.
Another estimate that prompted the search for an alternative method involved
calculating the total moles of hydrogen consumed by integrating the rate expres-
sion. This approach yielded a value of 0.3179 moles of hydrogen reacted, which is
significantly higher than the theoretically possible amount. When operating with
a 100 mL, 0.25 M solution, the maximum number of moles that can react in each
step, such as the conversion of AP to PE, is given by:
n = 0.25M · 100mL = 0.025mol
This means that the consecutive reaction from AP to PE can maximally consume
47
==PAGE:58==
0.025 moles of hydrogen if no ring hydrogenation occurs. From Henrys law, it can
be determined that approximately 0.1 M H2 can be dissolved in the liquid at 10
bar. From GC analysis, it was determined that after 3 hours, the concentration of
EB was approximately 0.16 M. This resulted in the following maximum amount of
hydrogen reacted:
ntot = APreacted +EBformed +H2dissolved = 0.025mol+0.016mol+0.01mol = 0.051mol
Thus, the MFM data suggested that six times more hydrogen was consumed than
theoretically possible. These discrepancies rendered the measurements unsuitable
for determining reaction kinetics, leading to the exploration of alternative methods.
4.1.2
Examination of Mass Transfer Limit
To ensure that the determined reaction kinetics are limited by the surface reaction
rather than mass transfer limitations between the gas and liquid phases, the effect
of the stirring speed on the observed reaction rates in the autoclave was examined.
Experiments at different stirring speeds were then conducted at first 405 RPM
and then 203 RPM where the effect of mass transfer limitations was observed. In
Figure 20 the PE concentrations, obtained from GC analysis, for the liquid samples
taken at different times are marked with the blue dots. The dashed lines connect
the PE concentration profiles for each experiment and are there to help differentiate
the experiments. Figure 20 shows the PE concentrations over time for autoclave
experiments conducted at 203, 405, and 810 RPM.
48
==PAGE:59==
Figure 20: Experiment conducted in the autoclave at 0.25M AP, 1 g/L 5 wt.%
Pd/C, 60°C and 10 barH2 with varying stirring speeds of 810, 405 and 203 RPM.
As presented by Figure 20, no mass transfer limitations were observed at 405 RPM.
Once the stirring speed was reduced to 203 RPM mass transfer limitations were
observed. At 203 RPM, the formation and consumption of PE was slightly slower
than at 810 and 405 RPM. This confirmed that the experiments conducted at 810
RPM, or 100% stirring speed, are not mass transfer limited, meaning the models
described in Section 3.3 could be applied.
4.1.3
Model Fitting
This section presents a comparative analysis of the three kinetic models applied to
the hydrogenation of AP and dehydration of PE, presented in Section 3.6. The
models investigated are the direct model, the rate model, and the L-H model. The
direct model serves as a preliminary approach to determine reaction orders and
rate constants, validating the assumption of first-order kinetics. The rate model
refines this analysis by explicitly assuming first-order behavior, allowing for a more
accurate estimation of rate constants. However, both models neglect the influence
of catalyst surface interactions. To address this, the L-H model was introduced,
incorporating adsorption and desorption effects to better represent the catalytic
reaction mechanism. By evaluating the performance of these models, the aim was
to determine the most suitable kinetic representation for the reaction system.
49
==PAGE:60==
The first model considered was the simple direct model, used to determine reaction
orders and rate constants. This model was particularly relevant for confirming the
first-order behavior of the consecutive reactions.
For the yield versus time plots, such as presented in Figure 21, the green points
represent the fraction of AP converted, the blue points represent the yield of PE,
and the black points correspond to the yield of EB. The model’s concentration pre-
dictions, based on the parameters fitted to the data, are depicted by the lines. The
red stars represent the mole balance, based of the sum of the concentrations at the
initial point. Figure 21 illustrates the yield trends for the experiment conducted
with 0.25 M and 0.1 M AP, 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C and 10 barH2.
(a) 0.25M, 810 RPM
(b) 0.1M AP, 810 RPM
(c) 0.25M AP, 405 RPM
(d) 0.25M AP, 608 RPM
Figure 21: Experimental data fitted with the direct model at 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.%
Pd/C and 10 barH2
50
==PAGE:61==
Table 4: Fitting parameters for the Direct model for the experiments shown in
Figure 21.
Parameter
Value
k1
0.1108 min−1gcat−1
k2
0.0249 min−1gcat−1
α
0.9881
β
1.0162
r2
0.97531
MSC
2.5472
When analyzing the fitting parameters and results presented in Table 4, the co-
efficient of determination, r2, of 0.975 indicated a good accordance between the
experimental data and the model. The initial hydrogenation of AP was observed
to occur more rapidly than the dehydration of PE, as indicated by the difference
in the reaction rates, 0.111 versus 0.025. As observed in Figure 21, the model suc-
cessfully predicted the experimental data and suggested that both reactions follow
first-order kinetics at 0.25 M and 0.1 M AP. However, as observed for the direct
fit on varying initial concentrations, shown by Table C.1, the model predictions be-
came substantially worse and unable to make accurate predictions at higher initial
concentrations. This discrepancy was contributed to the inhibitory effects of the
organic species at higher concentrations, which were not being incorporated by the
direct model.
The next model applied to the data was the rate model, assuming that both reac-
tions were first-order, as indicated by the direct model at low concentrations and no
mass transfer limitations. The data fitted with the rate model is given in Figure 22.
51
==PAGE:62==
(a) 0.25M, 810 RPM
(b) 0.1M AP, 810 RPM
(c) 0.25M AP, 405 RPM
(d) 0.25M AP, 608 RPM
Figure 22: Experimental data fitted with the rate model at 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.%
Pd/C and 10 barH2.
Table 5: Fitting parameters for the rate model for the experiments shown in Fig-
ure 22.
Parameter
Value
k1
0.1136 min−1gcat−1
k2
0.0239 min−1gcat−1
r2
0.97461
MSC
2.5762
As presented in Table 5, the r2 value indicated a slightly worse accordance between
the model and experimental data compared to the direct model in Table 4. This
could be attributed to the model including the reaction order having two additional
fitting parameters, which allowed for a better fit. As shown in Figure 22, the mod-
els reliably predicted the experimental data, with the rate constants only deviating
slightly from those obtained using the direct model. The MSC was observed to be
higher for this model compared to the direct model. This could be attributed to the
52
==PAGE:63==
model containing fewer fitting parameters as the reaction was assumed to be first
order. The model was once again able to make accurate predictions at low concen-
trations but the accuracy at higher initial concentrations decreases, as observed in
Table C.2.
In heterogeneous catalysis, the reaction occurs on the catalyst surface, where the
reactants must adsorb and the products must desorb.
The adsorption constant
could not be estimated without varying initial concentrations resulting in param-
eters converging towards their boundaries as observed in Table C.3, where KPE
and KEB have converged to their lower limit of 0.1. Experiments with initial AP
concentrations of 0.25 M, 0.1 M, 0.5 M, and 1 M, along with an experiment using
0.25 M PE as the initial reactant, were therefore considered. During GC analysis
of the 0.25 M PE experiment, it was discovered that the PE contained significant
AP impurities. Additionally, samples were taken at shorter time intervals due to
the absence of AP resulting in an overall shorter reaction time. While this resulted
in deviations from the expected outcomes, the data remained suitable for use with
the L-H model. Figure 23 and Figure 24 illustrate the observed yields over time
along with the corresponding L-H model fit.
Figure 23: 0.25M, 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C from catalyst batch 1, 810 RPM, fitting
of the L-H model.
In the experiment shown in Figure 23, the initial point was missing. This was due
53
==PAGE:64==
to the feed not being sampled in some of the experiments. As more experiments
were conducted a sample at the initial point was taken instead of the sample at the
two-hour mark.
(a) 0.1M AP
(b) 0.5M AP
(c) 1M AP
(d) 0.25M PE
Figure 24: Experimental data fitted with the L-H model at 60°C, 810 RPM, g/L 5
wt.% Pd/C and 10 barH2.
As shown in Figure 24, the L-H model accurately predicted the yields across various
initial concentrations. However, the mole balance exhibited some imprecision in
certain samples, as illustrated in Figure 24b, where the total moles increased by
up to 30% compared to the initial sample. This imprecision attributed to a worse
accordance between data and model.
54
==PAGE:65==
Table 6: Fitting parameters for the Langmuir-Hinselwood model for experiments
shown in Figure 23 and Figure 24.
Parameter
Value
k′
1
2.4559 mol.L−1.min−1gcat−1
k′
2
0.3450 mol.L−1.min−1gcat−1
KAP
3.9723 L.mol−1
KPE
1.5599 L.mol−1
KEB
2.1419 L.mol−1
r2
0.93587
MSC
1.9419
An analysis of the models and parameters in Table 6 revealed that the rate con-
stant k′
1 was greater than k′
2, consistent with observations from the direct and rate
models. The adsorption constant of AP was 2.8 times higher than that of PE and
1.9 times higher than that of EB. Despite the significant discrepancies in the mole
balance observed in Figure 24, the r2 value suggested that the model was in reason-
able accordance with the data which was also observed from the model predictions.
The overall conclusion from the model fit on the experiments conducted was that
the reactions exhibit first-order behavior at low concentrations, with the hydro-
genation of AP occurring at a significantly faster rate than the dehydration of PE.
At higher concentrations of AP, however, the reactions did not exhibit first-order
behavior and significant inhibition seemed to be present. The inhibitory effects at
higher concentrations were however predicted with the L-H model. From the ad-
sorption constants obtained in Table 6 AP seemed to have a strong affinity to the
catalyst compared to PE and EB.
Comparing the adsorption constants in Table 6 to those reported under similar
conditions in the literature, similar trends could be observed.
Bernardin et al.
[26] investigated the hydrogenation of AP using Pd/C nanoparticles under condi-
tions of 5 bar H2, 0.2 M AP, 60°C, and 0.2 mol% Pd. Their study reported that
KPE and KEB were of similar magnitude for the commercial nano particle Pd cat-
alyst, while KAP was approximately 15 times larger than both KPE and KEB. The
reaction rates observed in their study were significantly higher, which can be at-
tributed to the higher surface area of the nanoparticles. Their model employed a
non-dissociative hydrogenation mechanism with competitive adsorption of AP and
PE. For the dehydration step, a dissociative H2 and competitive adsorption among
AP, PE, EB, and H2 mechanism was used for fitting. Due to these fundamental
55
==PAGE:66==
differences in adsorption models, a direct comparison between the rate expressions
was challenging. However, similar to the results in this study, strong adsorption of
AP relative to PE and EB was observed.
Bergault et al. [5] investigated the hydrogenation of AP using a Rh/C catalyst,
assuming a non-dissociative hydrogenation mechanism with competitive adsorption
of AP and PE, along with a non-competitive and dissociative adsorption of H2 in
the hydrogenation step. Their study reported a KAP value 1.68 times larger than
KPE, which is comparable to the ratio of 2.8 observed in Table 6. They reported
ratios instead of values, as they found the values change with iterations, while the
ratios stayed constant. This suggested that, despite differences in catalyst compo-
sition and reaction conditions, a similar trend of stronger AP adsorption compared
to PE was maintained across different systems.
When comparing the r2 and MSC values obtained in this study to those reported by
Bertero et al. [31], a significant discrepancy was observed, with their L-H models
achieving much higher r2s. However, their experiments included a greater num-
ber of data points per experiment and focus solely on the hydrogenation of AP,
making a direct comparison challenging. To improve the model’s accuracy, cer-
tain experiments may need to be excluded or repeated. This was especially true
for the experiments with mole balances varying more than 10%. Furthermore, in-
corporating temperature and pressure data into the fitting process could enhance
model precision, as slight variations in these parameters were present during the
experiments.
4.1.4
Activation Energy Determination
To optimize the yield of a product, choosing the right temperature is crucial. For
kinetic modeling over various temperatures, it is necessary to determine the activa-
tion energies and pre-exponential factors of the reactions.
To determine the observed activation energies of the consecutive reactions, the ex-
perimental data points at various temperatures were fitted to the Arrhenius equa-
tion:
ki(T) = k0,i · e
Ei
R ·( 1
T −1
T0 )
(42)
where ki represents the rate constant for the i’th reaction, Ei represents the acti-
vation energy, R is the universal gas constant, and k0,i denotes the reference rate
constant at the reference temperature T0. The reference temperature of 60 °C was
56
==PAGE:67==
chosen, and the reference rate constants, along with the activation energies, were
determined through fitting using the rate model. The L-H model was not selected
due to the temperature dependence of the adsorption constants, which generally
decreases with increasing temperature. Therefore the rate model was chosen due to
its satisfactory performance and simplicity, although it is an observed value rather
than an actual value. To obtain this, a precise estimation of the adsorption con-
stants and their entropies and enthalpies are necessary. A comparison between the
experimental data and the model fitting results is presented in Figure 25 below. To
obtain additional data points without reaching full conversion, another experiment
was conducted at 80°C for one hour, rather than the previously used three-hour
duration, as shown in Figure 25d. This adjustment proved to be beneficial, as a
nearly complete conversion of PE was observed after one hour.
(a) 60°C - 3 h
(b) 50°C - 3 h
(c) 70°C - 3 h
(d) 80°C - 1 h
Figure 25: Experiments in autoclave with Arrhenius rate model assuming first-order
reactions at 0.25M AP, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 810 RPM and 10 bar H2.
The accordance between the model and data observed in Figure 25 was reasonable,
as also reflected by the r2 value of 0.984.
57
==PAGE:68==
Table 7: Activation energies and pre-exponential factors obtained from fitting the
rate model with temperature-dependent rate constants using the Arrhenius equa-
tion.
Reaction
Activation Energy [kJ/mol]
Pre-exponential Factor [s−1]
1
47.4
25011
2
48.0
8941
The results presented in Table 7, indicated the activation energies were relatively
similar, whereas the pre-exponential factors varied significantly.
Given that the
pre-exponential factor is related to the number of molecular collisions and the prob-
ability of these collisions leading to a reaction, the higher pre-exponential factor for
the hydrogenation of AP implies that it proceeds at a higher rate under similar
conditions, despite having slightly lower activation energy. Thus, the larger pre-
exponential factor for the hydrogenation of AP indicated a faster reaction rate,
which was consistent with the observed hydrogenation being faster than the dehy-
dration of PE.
The activation energies obtained in this study were comparable to values reported in
the literature. For instance, Rajashekharam et al. [32] reported activation energies
of 42.76 kJ/mol for the hydrogenation of p-isobutyl acetophenone and 36.53 kJ/-
mol for p-isobutyl phenylethanol on a Ni catalyst. Their experiments also showed
a significantly faster dehydration of p-isobutyl phenylethanol compared to the con-
version of PE observed in this work. This could be catalyst or functional group
dependent or based on experiments using lower concentrations, resulting in less in-
hibition.
Furthermore, a later study by Rajashekharam et al. [33] reported activation ener-
gies of 47.63 kJ/mol for AP hydrogenation and 54.63 kJ/mol for PE dehydration
on a Ni catalyst supported on zeolite Y. These values suggested that the activa-
tion energies determined in this study fall within a reasonable range and could be
considered reliable estimates.
4.2
Solvent and Catalyst Influence on Reaction Kinetics
4.2.1
Solvent
Studies have demonstrated that the choice of solvent significantly influences the
reaction rates and yields in the hydrogenation of AP. Bereta et al. [34] investi-
58
==PAGE:69==
gated various solvents, including methanol, isopropanol, DMF, butanol, toluene,
and water, using a Pd/S-DVB catalyst. The findings indicated that methanol and
isopropanol delivered the highest AP conversion rates, whereas water yielded the
lowest. The authors attributed these effects to the hydrogen-bond-acceptance ca-
pacity of the solvents. Binary solvent mixtures also exhibited inhibition, resulting in
low conversions. In binary mixtures, the observed inhibitory effects were explained
by the microheterogeneity of these mixtures and the blocking of the catalyst sur-
face, which restricted substrate access to the Pd active sites.
It was therefore of interest to compare the performance of isopropanol versus ethanol
as solvents for heterogeneous hydrogenation of AP. This was done by simply substi-
tuting the ethanol with IPA in the reactant preparation while considering the small
difference in the densities, 786 vs 789 kg/m3, when determining the mass of IPA for
a 0.25 M AP concentration in the reactant solution. In Figure 26 the PE profiles
of the experiments conducted are shown.
Figure 26: Experiments conducted in the autoclave at 0.25M AP, 1 g/L 5 wt.%
Pd/C 60°C, 810 RPM and 10 bar H2 with IPA end EtOH as solvents respectively.
As illustrated by Figure 26, there was no significant difference between the two
experiments using IPA or EtOH as solvents. The minor differences could be further
examined, however, the equipment and analytics used in this study would not be
suited to do so.
59
==PAGE:70==
As discussed in Section 3, water is formed along with EB during the dehydration of
PE. The water formation has been ignored so far as water was undetectable by the
GC. The water formed, however, could have an inhibitory effect on the reaction.
Furthermore, during the experiments, different sources of ethanol with varying wa-
ter contents were used, which could also affect the rate as examined in Bereta et al
[34]. Therefore the influence of minor water concentrations in the reaction mixture
was investigated by adding an equimolar amount of water to AP in the reactant
solution using 99.8% EtOH. In Figure 27 the influence of the additional water on
the PE yield throughout the experiment is observed.
Figure 27: PE yields of experiments with and without equimolar water added.
Experiments were conducted in the autoclave at 0.25M AP, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C,
60°C, 810 RPM, and 10 bar H2.
From Figure 27, no significant difference in the rate or yields was observed. It could
be further investigated if the slightly faster AP hydrogenation at 5 min for the ex-
periment with more H2O was due to the water content, however, this was likely due
to temporary temperature fluctuation in the autoclave. More experiments could be
conducted to confirm this.
The result observed in Figure 27 do not align with the results observed in Bereta
et al. [34], where water had a significant impact on the rates, however, their result
were based on significantly higher water concentrations and a catalyst with a dif-
60
==PAGE:71==
ferent support, which could have a significant impact.
Yoshida et al.
[35] investigated the effect of solvents on AP hydrogenation us-
ing a Rh-based catalyst and concluded that solvent effects are highly dependent
on the catalyst type.
Their study found, similar to Bereta et al.
[34], that a
carbon-supported Rh catalyst exhibited higher hydrogenation rates in protic sol-
vents, whereas a Rh catalyst supported on Al2O3 demonstrated enhanced hydro-
genation activity in apolar solvents. They however found water to be a suitable
solvent with high PE selectivity for both catalyst supports. In Fujita et al. [36]
they, however, found water to have a higher reaction rate with water used as the
solvent, compared to ethanol at 40 bar. They found the rate of conversion of the
solvent to be correlated to the hydrogen-bound-acceptance capability of the solvent
with higher capability correlating to higher rates. The downside of using water
compared to alcohols is the low hydrogen solubility of water. Ethanol is capable of
dissolving approximately 7 times more hydrogen at 25°C than water [37]. With var-
ious results obtained for different solvents and catalysts, more work should be put
into examining the effect of the specific catalyst and reactant on the hydrogenation
of AP with Pd/C.
Although no effects were observed from solvent choice in the experiments conducted
in this study, it remains of significant importance in heterogeneous hydrogenation.
It affects the adsorption of the reactants on the catalyst surface, it has a direct
impact on the hydrogen solubility as well as an influence on the kLa. In Behr et al.
[38] the addition of IPA was shown to have a significant effect on the bubble coa-
lescence and therefore the interfacial area (a), increasing it substantially compared
to using water.
4.2.2
Catalyst Concentration
In catalytic reactions, the reaction rate is often directly influenced by the concentra-
tion of the catalyst. The number of catalytic sites available for the reaction typically
governs the rate, as higher catalyst concentrations provide more active sites, thus
enhancing the reaction rate. To investigate this relationship further, experiments
were conducted to examine the effect of varying catalyst loadings on the reaction
rate and product formation.
The reaction rates were expected to increase linearly with catalyst load, as an
61
==PAGE:72==
increase in catalytic sites should directly correlate with higher reaction rates [39].
To replicate this phenomenon, experiments were conducted in the autoclave at three
different catalyst loads: 0.5 g/L, 1 g/L, and 2 g/L, shown in Figure 28.
Figure 28: Experiments at varying catalyst concentrations, conducted in the auto-
clave at 0.25M AP, 60°C, 810 RPM, and 10 bar H2.
An increase in PE formation and reaction rate with catalyst load was observed,
as shown in the PE concentration curves in Figure 28. To precisely quantify the
dependence of catalyst loading on the rate constant, the rate constants were deter-
mined using the first-order rate model. A plot of the rate constants versus catalyst
loading was then generated, with the expectation of a linear relationship.
62
==PAGE:73==
Figure 29: Rate constants as a function of catalyst loading, for experiments con-
ducted in the autoclave at 0.25M AP, 60°C, 810 RPM, and 10 bar H2.
As shown by Figure 29, the reaction rate constants showed a linear correlation with
catalyst loading, which was in good agreement with literature reports. This sug-
gested that the reaction rates were primarily controlled by the number of active
catalytic sites, confirming the hypothesis of a direct proportionality between cata-
lyst load and reaction rate. However, it is important to note that while this linear
dependence was observed under the given experimental conditions, other factors,
such as mass transfer limitations or possible saturation effects at very high catalyst
concentrations, may influence the reaction rate beyond a certain threshold. There-
fore, further experiments at higher catalyst loadings or varying reaction conditions
would be required to fully validate the linearity of this relationship and investigate
any potential deviations at extreme catalyst concentrations. It is also of interest to
investigate at which point mass transfer governs the rate in the autoclave, rather
than the catalyst load.
4.3
Jet Loop Reactor Experiments
4.3.1
Mass Transfer
Scaling up heterogeneous hydrogenation presents significant challenges, as reaction
rates are often constrained by the mass transfer of hydrogen from the gas phase to
63
==PAGE:74==
the liquid phase. In the JLR, this mass transfer is enhanced through intense mixing
generated by the jet stream created by the circulation pump. The recirculation
rate, ejector design, and nozzle all play a crucial role in determining the extent of
mass transfer enhancement in the JLR. Given these considerations, it was essential
to investigate the influence of the recirculation rate on the overall reaction rate to
assess whether the JLR can effectively mitigate mass transfer limitations in large-
scale reactors.
The use of a nozzle to generate the jet stream provides the advantage of producing
a high-velocity flow, thereby intensifying mixing within the reactor. To evaluate
this effect, a 4 mm nozzle purchased from Schlick was installed in the reactor, and
two experiments were conducted at recirculation rates of 10 L/min and 16 L/min,
respectively. The results of these experiments are presented in Figure 30 with a
direct comparison of PE profiles in Figure 31.
(a) 10 L/min recirculation rate
(b) 16 L/min recirculation rate
Figure 30: Comparison between the yields in JLR experiments using 10 L/min and
16 L/min recirculation rates fitted with rate model.
Experiments conducted at
60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP and 10 bar H2 using a 4 mm nozzle and no
ejector.
64
==PAGE:75==
Figure 31: Comparison between the PE yields in JLR experiments using 10 L/min
and 16 L/min recirculation rates. Experiments conducted at 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.%
Pd/C, 0.25M AP and 10 bar H2 using a 4 mm nozzle and no ejector.
As shown by Figure 30, a significant difference in the consumption rates of AP was
observed together with substantial differences in final EB yields. This was further
illustrated in Figure 31, where a significant difference in the time required to reach
the peak PE concentration between the two recirculation rates was observed. At
a recirculation rate of 10 L/min, the peak was not reached within the three-hour
experimental duration, suggesting a substantially lower reaction rate.
A kinetic model was fitted to the experimental data, as shown in Figure 30. The
fitted model provided insight into the hydrogenation rates of both AP and PE under
the tested conditions. The first-order rate model was employed for this analysis to
ensure a consistent comparison of reaction kinetics.
Table 8: Comparison of the reaction rate constants of the experiments conducted
with 10 L/min and 16 L/min recirculation rates.
Recirculation Rate [L/min]
k1 [min−1.gcat−1 ]
k2 [min−1.gcat−1 ]
10
0.0198
0.0008
16
0.0632
0.0036
As shown in Table 8, increasing the recirculation rate led to a threefold increase in
k1 and a fourfold increase in k2. However, when comparing the rate constants at a
65
==PAGE:76==
recirculation rate of 16 L/min with those obtained from the autoclave experiments
in Table 5, a notable discrepancy remained. To overcome these limitations, further
optimization was required, such as increasing the recirculation rate, reducing the
reactor volume, or employing a different nozzle.
As the reaction rate was observed to increase with the recirculation rate it had
likely not yet reached its maximum potential. Therefore it was of interest to in-
vestigate whether the addition of an ejector to the JLR could further enhance the
reaction rate. Consequently, experiments incorporating an ejector were conducted
as presented in Figure 32.
Figure 32: Batch experiment conducted in JLR at 16 L/min recirculation, 60°C, 1
g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP and 10 bar H2 using ejector 4D1-1.
As observed in Figure 32, no immediate improvement in reaction performance was
evident with the addition of the ejector. The EB yield obtained from these experi-
ments was slightly lower than that observed using the 4 mm nozzle at a recirculation
rate of 16 L/min, shown in Figure 30b. Consequently, the rate constants obtained
from the rate model fit were used to facilitate a direct comparison.
66
==PAGE:77==
Table 9: Reaction rate constants of batch JLR experiments conducted with and
without ejector at 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP, 16 L/min and 10 bar H2.
k1 [min−1.gcat−1 ]
k2 [min−1.gcat−1 ]
Ejector
0.0600
0.0032
4 mm Nozzle
0.0632
0.0036
The comparison of the reaction rate constants between the two experiments, shown
in Table 9, revealed that they were quite similar. Consistent with the observed
yields, the reaction rates obtained with the nozzle, were slightly higher than those
with the ejector. This slight difference, however, could not be attributed directly to
the ejector, as minor differences in concentrations, pressure, and temperature could
have influenced the rates.
An additional experiment with the jet ejector at 10 L/min recirculation was con-
ducted to compare the performance at lower recirculation rates. The rate constants
obtained from the experiment compared to only the nozzle at 10 L/min are observed
in Table 10.
Table 10: Reaction rate constants of batch JLR experiments conducted with and
without ejector at 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP, 10 L/min and 10 bar H2,
Figure D.2
k1 [min−1.gcat−1 ]
k2 [min−1.gcat−1 ]
Ejector
0.0499
0.0033
4 mm Nozzle
0.0198
0.0008
At lower recirculation rates, a significant improvement of the reaction rates was
observed when the jet ejector was equipped, as shown in Table 10. The rate con-
stant of AP was 2,5 times larger and for PE it was 4 times larger with the ejector
equipped. When comparing the results to the experiment conducted at 16 L/min
recirculation rate, a much smaller difference was observed compared to the nozzle,
shown by Table 8. The difference for the ejector rates at 16 and 10 L/min sug-
gested AP having a 20% increase and PE having a 10% increase. The slight rate
increase suggested a decreased efficacy of the ejector at the higher recirculation rate.
Comparing the rate constants obtained in the JLR shown in Table 9 to the ones
obtained in the autoclave shown in Table 5 a large discrepancy was observed, with
the rate constant of AP being almost twice as big in the autoclave. Moreover, the
rate constant of the dehydration reaction was almost seven times larger in the au-
67
==PAGE:78==
toclave than in the JLR. This difference suggested the mass transfer of hydrogen to
the liquid phase being the limiting step, rather than the rate of the surface reaction.
It also suggested that the kinetics determined in the autoclave, cannot be used for
the mole balance in the JLR, as they were obtained in the surface reaction limited
regime.
4.3.2
Prediction of Continuous Parameters
In the case of consecutive reactions, such as the hydrogenation of AP, optimizing
the yield of the intermediate product is often a key objective. Since operational
parameters significantly influence steady-state concentrations, it is essential to re-
liably predict these conditions. Once the reaction kinetics were determined from
batch experiments, they could be incorporated into the mass balance equations of a
continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR) to predict the optimal operational param-
eters for the JLR, ensuring the highest possible concentration of the intermediate
product. In CSTR calculations, the mean residence time, τ, is a crucial parameter
for determining steady-state concentrations. This parameter changes with varying
reactor volumes and flow rates. It is defined as:
τ = V
v
(43)
where V represents the reactor volume and v the volumetric flow rate through the
reactor. For the following simulation the parameters determined from 16 L/min
ejector experiment using the L-H model, shown in Figure D.2, were used:
Table 11: Simulation parameters for JLR determined from JLR batch experiment
with ejector 4D1-1, shown in Figure D.2.
Parameter
Value
k′
1
7.1811 mol.L−1.min−1.g−1
cat
k′
2
0.1280 mol.L−1.min−1.g−1
cat
KAP
25.3926 L.mol−1
KPE
6.3997 L.mol−1
KEB
6.0200 L.mol−1
T
60 °C
CAP,in
0.25 M
Ccat
1 g.L−1
Comparing the kinetic constants obtained in Table 11 with those from the autoclave
experiments in Table 6, slight differences were observed. Specifically, the rate con-
68
==PAGE:79==
stant k′
1 from the JLR was approximately three times higher, whereas k′
2 was about
three times lower. More notably, the adsorption constant of AP was more than
six times larger in the JLR than in the autoclave experiments. As a consequence,
AP had not reached complete conversion, as illustrated by the model prediction in
Figure 33.
This discrepancy was likely due to the low amount of EB formed in the JLR ex-
periments, as well as the limited dataset from a single experiment, in contrast to
the five autoclave experiments conducted with varying initial concentrations. Ad-
ditionally, the lower overall reaction rates observed in the JLR compared to the
autoclave could have contributed to this difference. Using these kinetic parameters,
the concentration profiles as functions of the mean residence time can be simulated,
shown in Figure 33.
Figure 33: Model predicted concentration profiles of AP, PE, and EB as functions
of the mean residence time, τ. Using simulation parameters shown in Table 11.
As shown in Figure 33, the impact of the residence time on product distribution
was evaluated. The maximum achievable PE concentration was approximately 90%
at the given reaction rates, which occurred at a residence time of 68 minutes.
As discussed in Section 4.1.4, temperature has a significant influence on the re-
action kinetics. Therefore, it was essential to investigate the optimal temperature
69
==PAGE:80==
for maximizing PE production. The modeling was based on the activation energies
and pre-exponential factors determined in Table 7, which defined the temperature
dependence of the rate constants. The adsorption constants were assumed to remain
unaffected by temperature variations.
Figure 34: Concentration profile of PE as a function of the mean residence time, τ,
at different temperatures. Using simulation parameters shown in Table 11.
As shown by Figure 34, the temperature has a limited impact on the maximum
achievable PE yield. The model predicts that the highest possible PE concentra-
tion is approximately 88%, regardless of temperature. The optimal yield is observed
at 100°C, and the trend of increasing yield with increasing temperature continues
until the model becomes invalid at approximately 167°C, where the residence time
τ approaches negative values. Since such low residence times are not practically
feasible, the choice of temperature is primarily dictated by the capabilities of the
pumps in the JLR and the desired process throughput. More experiments should
be done to test the model at steady state.
With the optimal mean residence time determined, the desired throughput can
be selected, and the temperature and reactor volume can be adjusted accordingly.
Conversely, for a fixed reactor volume, the temperature and flow rate can be opti-
mized to achieve the desired yield.
70
==PAGE:81==
4.3.3
Transient Behavior
At the start of continuous operation with a JLR, a transient period occurs before
the system reaches a steady state with constant concentrations. This transition
phase is important as it defines the time required for the reaction to stabilize.
Accurately predicting the duration of this transient period is particularly valuable
in experimental setups where resources are limited. For practical applications, it
helps to determine optimal sampling intervals for liquid-phase analysis and the time
to reach stable operation. The transient behavior was modeled using a mass balance
equation that accounted for the accumulation term, leading to the following mole
balance expression:
dCi
dt = Ci,0 −Ci
τ
+ ri
(44)
To model the transient response toward steady-state, τ must remain constant. A
reaction volume of 2 L was selected, leading to an optimal feed rate of 29.2 mL/min,
as determined using Equation 43 and the optimal residence time determined from
Figure 33. With these parameters established, the transient behavior was simulated
in Figure 35 to provide insights into the stabilization time required for steady-state
operation.
Figure 35: Modeled transient behavior of a JLR with determined kinetic parameters,
shown in Table 11, at 60°C, 10 bar H2, 0.25M AP and 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C feed.
Using the determined rate constants and the optimal mean residence time, τ, the
71
==PAGE:82==
system was predicted to require approximately 80 minutes to reach the steady-state
concentration of PE and 100 minutes for EB, as illustrated in Figure 35. However,
beyond the first hour, the concentration changes are relatively minor, indicating
that the system is approaching steady-state conditions.
4.3.4
Continuous Experiments
A large reason for implementing JLRs in the industry is also the prospect of continu-
ous operation. To evaluate the performance of the continuous setup, an experiment
was designed with a reaction volume of 2 L and a total feed volume of 6 L. Based on
the methodology outlined in Section 3.2.6 and the kinetic parameters determined
from the batch experiments, shown in Figure 38, a feeding rate of 30 mL/min was
selected. This flow rate was chosen to achieve the optimal residence time, as de-
termined in Section 4.3.3, allowing for an approximate experimental duration of
three hours. Liquid samples were scheduled to be taken at incremental intervals to
accurately capture both the transient behavior leading to steady-state along with
the steady-state concentrations.
Figure 36: Continuous experiment conducted in JLR with E1 at 60°C, 10 bar H2,
0.25M AP and 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C feed, 2 L reaction volume 16 L/min recirculation,
and 30 mL/min feed rate at 10 bar.
The initial experiment conducted in continuous operation mode with the JLR ob-
served in Figure 36, resulted in a total runtime of only 75 minutes. Upon emptying
72
==PAGE:83==
the reactor, a total volume of 2.5 L was recovered, indicating that an excess amount
may have been fed initially, assuming the inlet and outlet flows remained balanced
throughout the experiment.
Given that 5.5 L was introduced over 75 minutes,
the actual feeding rate was approximately 75 mL/min, significantly higher than
the expected 30 mL/min. During the experiment, dP readings were monitored to
maintain a stable liquid level in the reactor, as illustrated in Figure D.3.
Since the first experiment had a shorter-than-expected runtime, it was decided
to recalibrate the feeding pump and repeat the experiment. The results from this
second attempt are presented in Figure 37.
Figure 37: Redo of the continuous experiment conducted with E1 at 60°C, 0.25M
AP and 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C feed, 2 L reaction volume 16 L/min recirculation, and
30 mL/min feed rate at 10 bar.
The results highlighted a challenge in achieving steady-state operation, as confirmed
by the final liquid volume in the reactor, which was measured to be only 1 L at
the end of the experiment. The dP readings proved to be insufficiently precise for
maintaining an accurate liquid level with a reaction volume of just 2 L, making
them unreliable for this purpose, as illustrated in Figure D.4. Consequently, the
imbalance between the inlet and outlet flows led to a significant decrease in the
reaction volume.
To compare the experimental data, the L-H model was incorporated. The fitted
73
==PAGE:84==
kinetic parameters from batch operation, presented in Table 11, were used for this
purpose. Moreover, the decrease in volume was incorporated as a linear decrease
with time, from 2 to 1 L reaction volume. The model including decreasing vol-
ume, illustrated by the red dotted line, is presented with the experimental data in
Figure 38.
Figure 38: Experimental data compared with the continuous model using LH kinetic
parameters obtained from batch experiments, shown in Table 11, with decreasing
volume. The experiment was conducted with E1 at 60°C, 10 bar H2, 0.25M AP,
and 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C feed, 2 L reaction volume 16 L/min recirculation, and 30
mL/min feed rate at 10 bar.
As shown by Figure 38, the L-H model, incorporating parameters derived from the
preliminary batch experiments shown in Table 11, successfully predicted the higher
PE yield and provided an overall better prediction of the yields. The model was
not entirely capable of predicting the steep slope of the conversions over time. This
discrepancy was attributed to an additional deviation observed during the exper-
iment. To investigate this further, GC-FID peak areas were analyzed to identify
any inconsistencies. A notable trend in the peak areas was observed, as shown in
Figure 39, where the peak areas of the IS with time are presented.
74
==PAGE:85==
Figure 39: GC-FID peak area of the internal standard hexadecane, increasing over
time.
As illustrated in Figure 39, the GC-FID peak areas of the internal standard hexade-
cane doubled over the course of the experiment. This indicated solvent evaporation,
specifically ethanol from the feeding tank, leading to an increase in reactant con-
centrations in the feed.
To account for this effect, the model was adjusted by
incorporating a time-dependent increase in inlet concentration mirroring the ob-
served increase of the IS peak areas. The model together with the experimental
results are presented in Figure 40, where the blue dotted line corresponds to the
concentration of the feed in mol/L.
75
==PAGE:86==
Figure 40: Experimental data compared to the continuous model with LH kinetic
constants obtained from batch experiments, shown in Table 11, along with decreas-
ing volume and increasing inlet concentration. The experiment was conducted with
E1 at 60°C, 0.25M AP, and 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C feed, 2 L reaction volume 16 L/min
recirculation, and 30 mL/min feed rate at 10 bar.
Incorporating the reduction in feed concentration improved the accuracy of the pre-
diction, as evidenced when comparing Figure 40 to Figure 38. This approach also
contributed to a more precise prediction of the EB conversion, resulting in a more
pronounced slope of the conversion decline.
Another potential explanation for the results was related to the catalyst loading
during the experiment. It was assumed that the catalyst concentration throughout
the system remained constant at 1 g/L. However, from the time the reactants and
catalyst were introduced into the feeding tank until they were fed into the reactor,
it took over an hour. This delay could have created a concentration gradient in the
feeding tank, with higher catalyst concentrations at the bottom. Since the feed was
introduced at the bottom of the feeding tank, the catalyst loading in the reactor
may initially have been higher, gradually decreasing over time, potentially leading
to lower rates as the experiment progressed.
As the IS concentration was observed to increase over time, it was decided to install
an evaporator on the feeding tank to ensure no evaporation of solvent was present.
76
==PAGE:87==
It was also decided to integrate a balance under the sampling container, to be able
to continuously monitor the outlet stream and be able to determine an outlet flow
rate. Lastly, it was concluded that 2L of reaction volume was insufficient to induce
dP readings.
Therefore the consecutive continuous experiments were conducted
with 3L of reaction volume. The first continuous experiment conducted was with
3L reaction volume and 9L feed with a feeding rate of approximately 30 mL/min.
The predicted transient behavior together with sample concentrations are shown in
Figure 41.
Figure 41: Experimental JLR data compared to the continuous model with LH
kinetic constants obtained from batch experiments, shown in Table 11. Experiment
conducted with 3L reaction volume, 30 mL/min feeding rate, 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.%
Pd/C, 0.22M AP feed.
As shown by the experimental results in Figure 41, a steady state operation was
reached at approximately 150 min with a PE yield of approximately 80% and EB
yield of approximately 20% and a minimal AP yield between 0 and 10%. The mole
balance was observed to have a slight increase in the beginning. This was due to
the reaction solution in the reactor and in the feeding tank at time 0 being prepared
in two batches with slightly different AP concentrations. This was necessary due
to the feeding tank only having a capacity of a maximum 10 L.
As shown from the model prediction, it was able to accurately predict the yields
77
==PAGE:88==
with under 10% deviation from the experimental results. Another experiment was
conducted with the same conditions and improvements, however with an increased
feeding rate of 50 mL/min, which is closer to the optimal of feeding rate for max-
imum PE yield at 3L reaction volume.
The results of the experiment with the
predicted behavior are illustrated in Figure 42.
Figure 42: Experimental data compared to the continuous model with LH kinetic
constants obtained from batch experiments, shown in Table 11. Experiment con-
ducted with 3L reaction volume, 50 mL/min feeding rate, 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C,
0.22M AP feed.
When comparing Figure 41 and Figure 42 which operated under identical condi-
tions but at different mean residence times, it was observed that the experimental
PE yields were higher than predicted in Figure 41 and lower than predicted in Fig-
ure 42. Contrary to the model prediction, the experimental PE yields for Figure 41
were slightly higher than Figure 42 at steady-state. The EB yields were however
quite accurately predicted with the model in both experiments. The AP yields in
both experiments were approximately between 0 and 10%. This could have been
due to the peaks of AP and PE overlapping. This was observed in Figure 41 at 120
and 150 min, where the samples with 0 AP yield had higher PE yields compared
to consecutive samples with non-0 AP yields.
Upon examining the hydrogen consumption during the continuous experiment in
78
==PAGE:89==
Figure 37, it was clear that the consumption was much higher than expected. In-
tegrating the consumption curve to determine total hydrogen consumption corre-
sponded to approximately 90 moles over 140 minutes. Given that the amount of
hydrogen required to convert the entire 8 liters of reactant to EB was 0.25M·8L·2 = 4
moles and approximately 0.8 moles being dissolved in the liquid, the precise values
of hydrogen consumption are not correct. However, the consumption trend may
still provide insight into the state of the reaction. As shown in Figure 37, there was
an initial spike in consumption, likely caused by depletion from higher rates and
initial transfer of H2 to the liquid phase, followed by a steady consumption rate of
around 1900 mL/min, indicating steady state.
The excessive hydrogen consumption was likely due to dissolved and gaseous hy-
drogen escaping the reactor with the outlet stream, in addition to system leaks.
Moreover, since the gas flow meter was only factory-calibrated, this may have con-
tributed to an overestimation of the hydrogen consumption.
4.4
Reactor Comparisons
To rigorously evaluate the performance of JLR, the specific energy inputs and the
overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient, kLa, were calculated. Typically, kLa
is determined based on hydrogen consumption, the measured hydrogen concentra-
tion in the liquid phase, and the equilibrium hydrogen concentration, as described
in Equation 7. The hydrogen consumption can be derived from reaction kinetics,
while the saturated hydrogen concentration can be estimated using the measured
reactor pressure and Henry’s law. However, direct measurement of the bulk-phase
hydrogen concentration was not conducted. Although the hydrogen inlet flow was
recorded, the presence of unidentified leaks in the reactor prevented an accurate
hydrogen balance, rendering bulk-phase concentration estimation infeasible.
An alternative approach to approximate kLa, is to consider the maximum hydro-
genation rate, inferred from liquid-phase concentration data of the organic species.
This method involves determining the reaction kinetics through parameter fitting
and subsequently back-calculating the reaction rate at the initial concentration. It
is important to note that this approach is only valid under mass transfer-limited
conditions, where the transport of hydrogen from the gas-liquid interface to the
bulk phase is the rate-determining step, while the subsequent reaction occurs in-
stantaneously, as outlined in Section 2.3.
79
==PAGE:90==
An attempt was made to approximate a lower limit of the kLa by assuming a zero
bulk concentration of hydrogen under mass transfer-limited conditions. Using the
rate constants determined for a 4 mm nozzle and a recirculation rate of 10 L/min,
shown in Table 8, the mass transfer coefficient was calculated according to:
kLa = rH2
CHI
,
(45)
where rH2 denotes the hydrogen reaction rate in the liquid phase and CHI rep-
resents the hydrogen concentration at the gas-liquid interface, as determined by
Henry’s law. Furthermore, it was assumed that the hydrogen consumption could
be estimated using the following equation:
rH2 = k1CAP + k2CPE,
(46)
which yields the hydrogen consumption profile shown in Figure 43 for the 4 mm
nozzle and a 10 L/min recirculation rate.
Figure 43: Hydrogen consumption rate as a function of time for the experiment
using a 4 mm nozzle and 10 L/min recirculation, corresponding to Figure 31.
As Figure 43 indicates, the hydrogen consumption rate was highest at the onset of
the reaction and gradually decreased over time. Therefore, for batch reactors the
80
==PAGE:91==
hydrogen consumption rate was approximated by
rH2 = k1CAP,0
(47)
where CAP,0 represented the initial concentration of AP in the reactor.
The application of these relations resulted in a mass transfer coefficient of 0.0039 s−1
for the JLR batch experiment conducted with a 4 mm nozzle and a recirculation
rate of 10 L/min. In contrast, an autoclave experiment, where mass transfer lim-
itations were observed, as shown in Figure 20, yielded a rate corresponding to a
kLa of 0.0122 s−1, as presented in Figure F.1. For the 4 mm nozzle experiment
conducted with a recirculation rate of 16 L/min, the mass transfer coefficient was
determined to be similar to that of the autoclave operating at 203 RPM, with a
value of 0.0123 s−1. These computed values were relatively low compared to the
typical range of 0.01 to 1 s−1 reported in the literature, as illustrated in Figure 8.
This finding highlighted the necessity of measuring the hydrogen concentration in
the bulk liquid to achieve accurate predictions.
Although the kLas could not be estimated precisely, it was still of interest to com-
pare to literature. The specific power input for a stirrer was approximated using
the expression from Doran’s Bioprocess Engineering Principles [40]:
P = 2πNM,
(48)
where P represents the power input, N the stirrer speed, and M the induced torque.
In the absence of direct measurements of M, the manufacturer’s specified value of
1.8 Nm for the autoclaves magnetic stirrer was used. Substituting N for 203 RPM
yields
P = 2π · 203 RPM · 1.8 Nm = 38.3 W.
This corresponded to a specific power input of approximately 383 kW/m3 for the
autoclave, which was in reasonable agreement with values reported by Linek et
al. [41] for similar stirring speeds. However, the equation likely overestimated the
power input, as the motor was rated at 1/8 hp, corresponding to 93 W. When oper-
ating the stirrer at 25% power and a reaction volume of 100 mL, the specific power
input was calculated to be 233 kW/m3. Therefore, the actual efficiency may have
been lower, and accurately estimating it would require direct measurements of the
torque during operation.
81
==PAGE:92==
In the case of the JLR, the power input was calculated using the equation pre-
sented by Behr et al. [38]:
P = ρl
2 u3
l
π
4 d2
n,
(49)
where ρl corresponds to the liquid density, ul the liquid velocity at the nozzle, and
dn the free nozzle diameter. The liquid velocity was determined using Bernoulli’s
equation, given the volumetric flow rate of 10 L/min and the known pipe and
nozzle diameters. Assuming that the liquid density was equal to that of ethanol,
the primary component of the reaction mixture, which is equal to 789 g/L, and
using a ul of 3.316 m/s and a dn of 4 mm, the power input was calculated as
P = 789 g/L
2
(3.316 m/s)3 π
4 (4 mm)2 = 11.57 W.
This corresponded to a specific power input of approximately 2.31 kW/m3 for the
JLR experiments at 10 L/min. The marked difference between the specific power
inputs indicated that the JLR exhibited significantly higher mixing efficiency com-
pared to the autoclave. During the experiment, the power input for the recirculation
pump was recorded at approximately 400W at 10L/min, as shown in Figure E.1.
For a completely efficient reactor, it would correspond to 80 kW/m3. Therefore to
get precise estimates of the specific energy input, the liquid velocity at the nozzle
must be measured.
The results obtained in the present study were compared with those reported by
Warnecke et al. [42], who examined the mass transfer coefficients of stirred tank,
propeller, and jet loop reactors as functions of specific energy input, as shown in
Figure 8. Notably, the specific energy input of the batch reactor was considerably
higher than that of the other reactor types, including the stirred tank presented
in Figure 8. For the 4 mm nozzle experiment conducted with a 16 L/min recir-
culation rate, the mass transfer coefficient was determined to be 0.0123 s−1, with
a corresponding specific energy input of 9.47 kW/m3. With a similar kLa value
to the 203 RPM autoclave experiment, a direct comparison could be made. The
JLR used 2.5 % of the energy per volume of the autoclave. This comparison was
however somewhat disingenuous, as the energy input in the recirculation pump
was much higher, at approximately 500W for 16 L/min recirculation. This specific
energy input suggested that the JLR has a comparable energy efficiency to those
reported in the literature with comparable kLa values. Although more precise mea-
82
==PAGE:93==
surements, rather than estimates, were required for definitive conclusions. These
findings suggested that the JLR is markedly more energy efficient for mixing and
promoting hydrogen transfer from the gas to liquid phase, than the batch autoclave.
The high energy efficiency of the JLR is highly significant for its scalability. Since
mixing in the JLR primarily depends on liquid velocity, scale-up can be achieved
efficiently by installing larger pumps. This presents a major advantage, as the de-
sign and implementation costs are significantly reduced.
To compare the hydrogen consumption rate per gram of catalyst with the values
reported by Tan et al. [23], the hydrogen consumption rates per g of Pd for both
the autoclave and the JLR were determined. They conducted experiments under
similar conditions as shown by Figure 9, making a comparison somewhat feasible.
For the autoclave, which followed first-order kinetics, the consumption rate was
calculated using Equation 47. In contrast to the JLR, which exhibited inhibition,
the maximum rate was determined based on the L-H rate expression. The calcula-
tions assume a catalyst loading of 1 g per liter of reaction volume, with the catalyst
containing 5 wt.% Pd. Detailed calculations can be found in Appendix F.
In Table 12, the batch experiments represented the maximum hydrogen consump-
tion rates, whereas the continuous experiments reflected steady-state consumption
rates. For the batch experiments conducted in both the autoclave and the JLR,
the maximum theoretical consumption rates were determined at 810 RPM for the
autoclave and at a recirculation rate of 16 L/min with an ejector for the JLR, both
at 60°C, 10 bar pressure, and 0.25 M AP. For the JLR (SS), ITBR, and CTBR, the
steady-state hydrogen consumption rates were reported. The values for ITBR and
CTBR were obtained from Tan et al. [23], measured at 80°C, 10 bar pressure, and
0.5 mol/L AP. The JLR (SS) value was derived from the continuous experiment
conducted at 60°C, 10 bar pressure, and 0.25 M AP, with a 3 L reaction volume
and a 50 mL/min feed rate.
83
==PAGE:94==
Table 12: Comparison of hydrogen consumption rates per gram of Pd in the reaction
solution for autoclave, JLR, and TBR reactors.
Reactor Type
rH2(Pd) [mol/min/gPd]
Autoclave
2.27
JLR (batch)
0.283
JLR (SS)
0.016
ITBR
0.095
CTBR
0.036
As shown in Table 12, the hydrogen consumption rate in the JLR was less than
half of that observed in the conventional TBR and approximately one-sixth of the
intensified TBR reported by Tan et al. [23]. However, the maximum hydrogena-
tion rate observed in the JLR suggests that the reactor has significant potential to
achieve much higher hydrogen consumption rates under optimized conditions.
The values presented in Table 12 were not directly comparable, as the values ob-
tained in Tan et al. [23] were optimized for hydrogen consumption. The batch
experiments represent the maximum theoretical potential for hydrogen consump-
tion, whereas the continuous JLR experiments were optimized to maximize PE
yield. A higher inlet flow rate in the JLR would likely have resulted in increased
hydrogen consumption.
Based on the insights gained in this study, the hydrogenation rate per gram of
Pd is not the most suitable metric for comparison. This is due to hydrogenation
rates being limited by the mass transfer of hydrogen into the liquid phase, which
depends on both pressure and the mass transfer coefficient. However, the hydro-
genation rate still serves as a useful benchmark for comparing the results of this
study with those reported for TBRs, for mass transfer limited operation. Thus, this
comparison primarily highlights the achieved hydrogen consumption rates, the re-
actor’s potential, and its relative performance against TBRs. The TBRs presented
by Tan et al. [23] are therefore of preference for bulk productions, such as hydrogen
storage in the hydrogen economy where higher rates are preferred above all.
4.5
Comparison of Langmuir-Hinshelwood Mechanisms
Accurate reaction modeling is essential for making reliable predictions and deter-
mining optimal operational parameters. In Section 3.6, the L-H model was pre-
sented under the assumption of dissociative and competitive hydrogen adsorption.
84
==PAGE:95==
In this section, different assumptions regarding hydrogen adsorption are explored,
specifically comparing competitive versus non-competitive and dissociative versus
non-dissociative adsorption mechanisms.
To systematically evaluate these models, they were fitted to the same dataset as
in Table 6, which included experiments with varying initial concentrations. The
parameters obtained from the fitting, along with the coefficient of determination r2
values, are presented in Table 13.
Table 13: Comparison of hydrogen adsorption mechanisms on the catalyst. The
corresponding yield trends and model predictions are illustrated in Appendix G.
Parameters
Mechanism
k′
1
k′
2
KAP
KPE
KEB
r2
Dissociative & Competitive
2.46
0.350
3.97
1.56
2.14
0.936
Dissociative & Non-Competitive
0.054
0.012
1000
96.4
102
0.962
Non-Dissociative & Competitive
0.981
0.118
11.5
3.51
4.63
0.950
Non-Dissociative & Non-Competitive
0.121
0.026
1000
100
103
0.959
From the fitting results, it was evident that the dissociative and competitive ad-
sorption model, which was used thus far, yielded the lowest r2 value, indicating the
poorest model prediction of the experimental data. In contrast, the dissociative and
non-competitive adsorption model provided the best predictions. However, when
examining the model predictions in Appendix G and comparing them to Figure 24,
the differences between the models appear marginal, with non-competitive models
demonstrating a slightly better ability to predict high PE yields.
A notable observation in both non-competitive models was the convergence of ad-
sorption constants toward the upper fitting boundaries, along with significantly
lower rate constants. This behavior was attributed to the assumption of a fixed
hydrogen adsorption constant, KH2 of 1. This assumption overestimated hydrogen
adsorption, causing the denominator in the rate expression for organic species to
increase, while only marginally improving the fit.
The nature of hydrogen adsorption in catalytic hydrogenation remains a topic of
ongoing discussion, with limited consensus on the exact adsorption mechanism. It
is widely accepted that hydrogen adsorbs dissociatively on Pd, occupying two or
more vacancies [29, 43]. However, whether adsorption occurs competitively at a
single type of active site or non-competitively at distinct sites for organic species
85
==PAGE:96==
and hydrogen remains debated. Some studies indicate a preference for competitive
adsorption in carbonyl hydrogenation although others disagree [6].
Given the theory and slight deviations, the dissociative and competitive adsorp-
tion model remained the most theoretically supported for the present reaction sys-
tem. While the best-fitting model assumed non-competitive and non-dissociative
hydrogen adsorption, this result was not considered conclusive regarding the actual
mechanism. This was due to the adsorption constant of hydrogen not being reli-
ably estimated as no experiments were conducted at varying pressures. Therefore,
the dissociative and competitive model was retained for continuous predictions, as
it aligned with established theoretical assumptions while maintaining acceptable
predictive performance.
4.6
Order and Site Coverage
In Section 4.1.3, the reaction order analysis suggested that the hydrogenation of AP
and the dehydration of PE exhibited approximately first-order behavior at initial
concentrations of 0.25 M and below. However, for experiments conducted at higher
initial concentrations, as shown in Table C.1, the observed reaction orders were sig-
nificantly lower. The difference was attributed to inhibition, however with the large
uncertainties, further investigation is necessary. Notably, the reaction order can
provide insights into potential inhibitory phenomena. A negative reaction order for
a given reactant indicates that increasing its concentration decreases the reaction
rate, suggesting inhibition, whereas a positive reaction order implies an accelerating
effect.
To further investigate inhibition, it was relevant to examine the reaction order in
the L-H model to identify which species may be limiting the reaction rate. The re-
action order was determined by differentiating the logarithm of the rate expression,
as described in [44], yielding:
ni = Ci
∂ln(r)
∂Ci
(50)
Applying Equation 50, analytical expressions of the reaction orders of H2, AP,
PE, and EB from their site coverages were obtained. In the case of dissociative,
competitive hydrogen adsorption, the order of hydrogen had the expression:
ni = 2
3C(∗)
H2
(51)
86
==PAGE:97==
The expressions for the organic species have the following expressions, depending
whether they are reactants and products respectively:
ni = 1 −3C(∗)
i
(52)
ni = −3C(∗)
i
(53)
where C(∗)
i
corresponds to the site coverage of the species. The site coverages were
derived from Equation 31.
The reaction orders as functions of time are illustrated in Figure 44 for the JLR
experiments, where dashed lines represent reaction orders and the solid red line
denotes reaction rates.
(a) Hydrogenation
(b) Dehydration
Figure 44: Reaction orders of AP, PE, and EB for the hydrogenation and dehydra-
tion reactions, presented alongside yields. Experiment conducted in JLR with a 16
L/min recirculation rate, 1 g/L wt.% Pd/C, 0.25 M AP, and 60°C.
As shown in Figure 44, the reaction order of AP in the hydrogenation reaction
started at -1 and increased as AP concentration decreased until 1. The order of PE
began at 0 and decreased with increasing PE concentration, reaching approximately
-0.5 until AP was depleted.
For the dehydration reaction, the reaction order of AP was shifted by -1 com-
pared to the hydrogenation reaction, as AP was not a reactant in this step. The
order of PE started at 1, decreased to -0.5 at peak PE concentration, and then
increased as PE concentration declined. In both reactions, the order of EB started
at 0 and gradually decreased as the product formed. The order of H2 began at 0.9
and decreased to 0.7 as AP was consumed.
87
==PAGE:98==
These results confirmed the inhibitory effect of AP on the catalyst, suggested by the
negative reaction order at high AP concentrations. However, this phenomenon could
also be attributed to the start-up in the reactor, with no hydrogen available in the
beginning. PE and EB exhibited inhibitory effects on the dehydration reaction, as
higher concentrations of these species corresponded to a lower formation rate of EB.
The findings were compared with experiments where first-order behavior was ob-
served using a simpler reaction order model revealing significant differences. The
reaction orders from the autoclave experiments and their corresponding fits, pre-
sented in Table C.3, are depicted in Figure 45.
(a) Hydrogenation
(b) Dehydration
Figure 45: Reaction orders of AP and EB presented alongside yields. Experiment
conducted in an autoclave at 810 RPM, 1 g/L wt.% Pd/C, 0.25 M AP, and 60°C.
In the autoclave experiments, the reaction order of AP started at 0.75 and increased
to 1, while the order of EB decreased from 0 to -0.06. The order of H2 remained
stable at 0.66 throughout the reaction. These results indicated that AP and EB
exhibited significantly lower inhibitory effects in the autoclave experiments, leading
to reaction orders closer to unity for AP and PE and near zero for the products.
The observed trends suggested competitive adsorption between hydrogen and or-
ganic species on the catalyst surface, supporting the hypothesis that both share
the same active sites. The negative reaction order of AP at high concentrations,
and the elimination of this inhibition when outside mass transfer limitations indi-
cated that the adsorption was competitive. This theory could be investigated by
conducting experiments at increased hydrogen pressures and examining if reaction
88
==PAGE:99==
rates decrease as hydrogen inhibits the organic species.
These findings emphasize the role of mass transfer in achieving optimal reaction
rates and yields. The low hydrogen concentration in the liquid phase leads to re-
duced hydrogen coverage on the catalyst, resulting in higher surface coverage of
organic species and increased inhibition. A similar inhibitory effect of acetophe-
none on Pd based catalyst was observed by Villalba et al. [45] where a blockage of
the catalyst surface by the organic species, limiting reaction rates, was recognized.
This inhibition of the dehydration reaction can, however, be exploited to enhance
intermediate yields. This effect was particularly evident in the JLR experiments,
where a higher intermediate yield was obtained due to the inhibitory influence of
organic species. This phenomenon is further illustrated in Figure 40 and Figure 41.
If however the dehydrated product is desired, it is of interest to maximize the
mass transfer to minimize inhibition on the catalyst surface and obtain higher rates
for both reactions.
89
==PAGE:100==
5
Refelctions and Future Work
This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of the JLR reactor in pharmaceutical API
production. Hetereogeneous hydrogenation of the model compound Acetophenone,
was conducted in a small-scale autoclave reactor and in a pilot-scale JLR.
It was discovered that the hydrogenation of AP has a strong first-order behav-
ior at low AP concentrations, 0.25 M and below when no mass transfer limitations
were present. At higher concentrations, the organic species were discovered to have
a significant inhibitory effect, especially on the dehydration reaction of PE. The
L-H model was fitted successfully to the experimental data and found to predict
concentration profiles over various initial AP concentrations. The model could be
improved by redoing experiments with unstable mole balances. As all experiments
were conducted at the same hydrogen pressure of 10 bar, the adsorption constant
of hydrogen could not be estimated and was assumed to be 1. Approximating the
adsorption constant of hydrogen could help improve the model and give more accu-
rate adsorption constants. The observed activation energies of the hydrogenation
and dehydration reactions were determined to be approximately 47 and 48 kJ/mol
respectively. These were found to be in good accordance with literature. The rates
were found to be impacted significantly by the temperature with significantly higher
rates observed at higher temperatures. Further studies determining entropies and
enthalpies of the adsorption constants, to determine more precise temperature de-
pendencies of the reactions could be investigated in future works.
The influence of catalyst loading was confirmed to have a direct linear correlation
to the reaction rates in the autoclave, likely due to a direct increase in the number
of vacant sites. In future work, it could be of interest to investigate whether the
inhibitory effects of the organic reactants are eliminated at higher catalyst concen-
trations. Experiments conducted with IPA and EtOH found no significant difference
in their performance as solvents. Having low equimolar amounts of water in the
solvent was also found to not have a significant effect on the rates of the reactions.
Additional research on solvent choice should be conducted, as literature describes
hydrogenation and reactor performance to be significantly reliant on the solvent
choice. Most studies however suggested MeOH, EtOH or IPA as superior perform-
ers, with varying opinions on the water as solvent. It is therefore concluded that
the choice of solvent is highly dependent on the catalyst, reactants and operational
parameters.
90
==PAGE:101==
The influence of the recirculation rate and the effectiveness of the nozzle and jet
ejectors were investigated. Although only a single custom ejector design was evalu-
ated, a significant improvement in reaction rates was observed at lower recirculation
rates when the ejector was utilized. However, at higher recirculation rates, the ejec-
tor had no noticeable impact on performance. It was further concluded that with
the 4 mm nozzle, regardless of whether an ejector was employed, the reaction re-
mained mass transfer-limited. Consequently, the reaction kinetics determined in
the autoclave could not be applied for performance prediction in the JLR. Further
effort should be dedicated to the optimization of ejector design. Smaller nozzle di-
ameters would result in higher liquid velocities, thereby enhancing mixing efficiency.
However, increased velocities also impose greater mechanical stress on the reactor
and recirculation pump. Therefore, assessing the durability of the equipment is
essential to optimize operation while ensuring long-term reliability and safety.
Another major advantage of JLRs is their energy efficiency and scalability.
As
the mass transfer is determined by the velocity of the jet stream, it is easily scal-
able by using larger pumps. This is a major advantage of the JLR over conventional
CSTRs where mixing becomes increasingly difficult at larger scales.
One of the aims of this study was to evaluate if the JLR could be used for continuous
operation. After the implementation of the evaporator to the feeding tank and a
balance to the outlet, steady operation was obtained in the JLR with intermediate
yields. The L-H model fitted to a single experiment proved to be sufficient to make
predictions of the yields at steady-state as well as the transient behavior. It was
observed that issues regarding accurate estimation of AP and PE were difficult at
high PE concentrations, as GC peaks were overlapping. Higher dilution rates could
be explored in future work. The EB predictive yields were however shown to be
accurate over various feeding rates. The mass transfer limitations proved advanta-
geous to obtaining higher PE yields, reaching 80% at continuous operation.
To compare the efficiencies of autoclaves and JLRs, in terms of mass transfer and
power consumption, estimates of the kLa from rate expressions and specific power
inputs were determined from empirical equations. The specific power input of the
JLR was 2.5% of the autoclave for similar kLa values. The actual power input of the
JLR however suggested the power consumption to be much higher. To determine
91
==PAGE:102==
the kLa values, measurements, or accurate approximations, of the liquid hydrogen
concentration is necessary. More precise measurements of the liquid velocities in the
JLR and torque of the autoclave stirrer are needed for better approximations of the
specific energy inputs. Comparisons of the hydrogenation rate was made to TBRs
presented in Tan et al. [23]. The JLR was found to have lower hydrogenation rate
at the steady state experiments conducted, however potential gains from changing
operational parameters and ejector design could make JLRs competitive to TBRs
in terms of hydrogenation rate per g of Pd.
As various hydrogen adsorption mechanisms are discussed in literature, more de-
tailed comparison models assuming dissociative versus non-dissociative and compet-
itive versus non-competitive hydrogen adsorption were explored. The dissociative
and non-competitive model had the best fit of all the models. However, without
the adsorption constant of hydrogen determined, precise comparisons between the
models could not be made. This further emphasized the necessity of conducting
experiments with varying pressure in the future.
The inhibitory effects were further investigated by deriving the reaction order of the
reactants and products in the L-H model. At low concentrations in the autoclave
the first-order behavior of the reaction was confirmed, with only slight inhibition oc-
curring initially. The 16 L/min experiments conducted in the JLR exhibited strong
inhibition of the hydrogenation reaction at high AP concentration. PE and EB
were also found to inhibit the hydrogenation reaction. This further emphasized the
necessity of high bulk hydrogen concentration to have higher rates and eliminate
inhibition from high concentrations of the organic species on the catalyst surface.
The magnitude of the reaction order of hydrogen, could likely not be precisely ap-
proximated due to the lack of information on the adsorption constant of hydrogen.
The overall conclusion from this kinetic study is that the mass transfer rate of
hydrogen into the liquid phase is the most critical parameter to optimize hetero-
geneous hydrogenation reactions.
Based on this, solvent selection, catalyst and
reactant concentrations, pressure, and temperature can be adjusted to emphasize
reaction rate and selectivity. This study presented evaluation methods and gaps,
to further improve the design of JLRs to increase mass transfer coefficients.
One critical issue often encountered in catalytic reactions, though not explored in
92
==PAGE:103==
this thesis, is catalyst deactivation. In API production, where compounds contain
multiple functional groups, catalyst deactivation can be a significant challenge. In
batch and TBRs, where the catalyst is not replaced during operation, deactivation
leads to a decline in reaction rates over time. Therefore, an important aspect of this
study was to investigate whether the catalyst could be continuously supplied along
with the reactants in the JLR under continuous operation. This was successfully
demonstrated using the catalyst concentration, feeding pump, and check valves in-
tegrated into the JLR setup, highlighting a promising approach for maintaining
continuous operation over extended timescales.
The overarching objective of this thesis was to evaluate the applicability of JLRs
in pharmaceutical API production and compare their performance to batch auto-
claves and TBRs. In industrial API production, batch autoclaves remain widely
used due to their operational flexibility and ease of handling. However, their ap-
plication in hydrogenation reactions has been limited by insufficient mass transfer
coefficients. In contrast, TBRs offer significantly higher mass transfer rates and are
commonly employed in the petrochemical industry, where operational flexibility is
less critical. However, their inability to utilize powdered catalysts, and exchange
this during operation, further limits their adaptability, making them unsuitable
for API production. The JLR has demonstrated the flexibility of batch autoclaves
while exhibiting the potential to achieve hydrogenation rates comparable to TBRs,
making it a promising alternative for continuous API production.
93
==PAGE:104==
6
Conclusion
This study examined the continuous catalytic hydrogenation of acetophenone using
a Jet Loop Reactor and compared its performance to a batch autoclave system.
The motivation behind this study was to explore whether JLRs could enhance re-
action efficiency through improved mass transfer and operational flexibility, for use
in the pharmaceutical API industry. Empirical data on reaction kinetics and mass
transfer limitations provided insights into the JLR’s potential in API production.
Reaction kinetics were analyzed using autoclave experiments, revealing that at
low acetophenone concentrations, the reaction followed first-order kinetics, while at
higher concentrations, inhibition effects necessitated an L-H model. These findings
aligned with initial expectations, confirming the need for a model that accounts for
inhibitory effects at high reactant concentrations. JLRs demonstrated high mass
transfer efficiency, enabling stable continuous operation and aligning with batch-
determined kinetic model predictions. However, challenges remain in optimizing
design and operational parameters for overcoming mass transfer limitations. The
lower mass transfer leading to lower liquid concentrations of hydrogen, was found
to have an additional inhibitory effect that further reduced reaction rates. The
expectation that JLRs would mitigate some of these limitations was only partially
met, as mass transfer limitations remained significant.
Performance comparisons confirmed JLRs as an energy-efficient alternative to batch
systems. The JLR achieved comparable mass transfer efficiency to a 300 mL au-
toclave at 203 RPM while requiring a fraction of energy per unit volume. This
underscores their potential for process intensification and scalability in pharmaceu-
tical hydrogenation, supporting the initial hypothesis that JLRs could provide a
more efficient alternative. JLRs additionally offer advantages in mass transfer and
operational flexibility, making them promising alternatives to traditional batch and
flow reactors. Their potential for application in API production is particularly no-
table, due to their flexibility being on par with autoclaves, but with increased mass
transfer potential. Future research should focus on optimizing reactor design and
refining predictive models to enhance hydrogen entrainment and further improve
efficiency and scalability.
94
==PAGE:105==
7
References
1.
The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2001 - NobelPrize.org https://www.nobelprize.
org/prizes/chemistry/2001/summary/.
2.
Mäki-Arvela, P., Hájek, J., Salmi, T. & Murzin, D. Y. Chemoselective hydro-
genation of carbonyl compounds over heterogeneous catalysts. Applied Catal-
ysis A: General 292, 1–49 (Sept. 2005).
3.
Westerterp, K. R., Molga, E. J. & Van Gelder, K. B. Catalytic hydrogenation
reactors for the fine chemicals industries. Their design and operation. Chemical
Engineering and Processing: Process Intensification 36, 17–27 (Feb. 1997).
4.
Rylander, P. N. Hydrogenation and Dehydrogenation. Ullmann’s Encyclopedia
of Industrial Chemistry (June 2000).
5.
Bergault, I., Fouilloux, P., Joly-Vuillemin, C. & Delmas, H. Kinetics and Intra-
particle Diffusion Modelling of a Complex Multistep Reaction: Hydrogenation
of Acetophenone over a Rhodium Catalyst. Journal of Catalysis 175, 328–337
(Apr. 1998).
6.
Lee, S., Yu, Z., Zaborenko, N. & Varma, A. Acetophenone hydrogenation on
Rh/Al2O3 catalyst: Intrinsic reaction kinetics and effects of internal diffusion.
Chemical Engineering Journal 288, 711–723 (Mar. 2016).
7.
Hattori, K., Sajiki, H. & Hirota, K. Chemoselective control of hydrogenation
among aromatic carbonyl and benzyl alcohol derivatives using Pd/C(en) cat-
alyst. Tetrahedron 57, 4817–4824 (June 2001).
8.
Marianov, A. N., Jiang, Y., Baiker, A. & Huang, J. Homogeneous and hetero-
geneous strategies of enantioselective hydrogenation: Critical evaluation and
future prospects. Chem Catalysis 3, 100631 (July 2023).
9.
Bergault, I., Rajashekharam, M. V., Chaudhari, R. V., Schweich, D. & Delmas,
H. Modeling and comparison of acetophenone hydrogenation in trickle-bed
and slurry airlift reactors. Chemical Engineering Science 52, 4033–4043 (Nov.
1997).
10.
Foutch, G. L. & Johannes, A. H. Reactors in Process Engineering (2001).
11.
Cleary, S. E. et al. Preparation of (3R)-quinuclidinol using heterogeneous bio-
catalytic hydrogenation in a dynamically-mixed continuous flow reactor. Fron-
tiers in Catalysis 3, 1114536 (Mar. 2023).
95
==PAGE:106==
12.
Cherkasov, N., Denissenko, P., Deshmukh, S. & Rebrov, E. V. Gas-liquid hy-
drogenation in continuous flow – The effect of mass transfer and residence
time in powder packed-bed and catalyst-coated reactors. Chemical Engineer-
ing Journal 379, 122292 (Jan. 2020).
13.
Hickman, D. A., Holbrook, M. T., Mistretta, S. & Rozeveld, S. J. Successful
scale-up of an industrial trickle bed hydrogenation using laboratory reactor
data. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 52, 15287–15292 (Nov.
2013).
14.
Fogler, H. S. Fogler, H. S. (2016). Elements of chemical reaction engineering
(5th ed.). Prentice Hall. 5th, 645–755 (Prentice Hall, 2016).
15.
Thiel, T. A. et al. Photocatalytic hydrogenation of acetophenone on a titanium
dioxide cellulose film. RSC Advances 12, 7055–7065 (Mar. 2022).
16.
Whitman, W. G. The two film theory of gas absorption. International Journal
of Heat and Mass Transfer 5, 429–433 (May 1962).
17.
Gut, G., Kut, O. M., Yuecelen, F. & Wagner, D. Chapter 15 Liquid-Phase Hy-
drogenation: The Role of Mass and Heat Transfer in Slurry Reactors. Studies
in Surface Science and Catalysis 27, 517–545 (Jan. 1986).
18.
Warmeling, H., Behr, A. & Vorholt, A. J. Jet loop reactors as a versatile reac-
tor set up - Intensifying catalytic reactions: A review. Chemical Engineering
Science 149, 229–248 (July 2016).
19.
Hass, T. & Gaube, J. Selective hydrogenation: Kinetic investigation of 1,
3-cyclo-octadiene and cyclo-octene hydrogenation. Chemical Engineering &
Technology 12, 45–53 (Jan. 1989).
20.
Roth, T. F., Häusler, M., Vogt, D. & Seidensticker, T. Advancing the aqueous
biphasic hydroformylation of oleochemicals in the loop: Continuous reaction
and separation using a jet-loop reactor concept. Catalysis Today 439, 114803
(Sept. 2024).
21.
Lehtonen, J. et al. Modelling and scale-up of a loop reactor for hydrogenation
processes. Chemical Engineering Science 54, 2793–2798 (July 1999).
22.
Donati, G. & Paludetto, R. Scale up of chemical reactors. Catalysis Today 34,
483–533 (1997).
23.
Tan, J., Zhou, Y., Li, Z. & Ji, Y. Catalytic hydrogenation of acetophenone via
an intensified trickle bed reactor for efficient hydrogen storage. International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy 86, 800–807 (Oct. 2024).
96
==PAGE:107==
24.
Catalysis | Department of Chemistry https : / / www . chem . ox . ac . uk /
catalysis.
25.
Hiyoshi, N., Sato, O., Yamaguchi, A. & Shirai, M. Acetophenone hydrogena-
tion over a Pd catalyst in the presence of H 2 O and CO 2 w. This journal is
Cite this: Chem. Commun 47, 11546–11548 (1154).
26.
Bernardin, V. et al. Acetophenone hydrogenation and consecutive hydrogenol-
ysis with Pd/CNT catalysts: Highlighting the synergy between single atoms
and nanoparticles by kinetic modeling. Catalysis Today 422, 114196 (Oct.
2023).
27.
Bukhtiyarova, M. V., Nuzhdin, A. L. & Bukhtiyarova, G. A. Comparative
Study of Batch and Continuous Flow Reactors in Selective Hydrogenation of
Functional Groups in Organic Compounds: What Is More Effective? Inter-
national Journal of Molecular Sciences 2023, Vol. 24, Page 14136 24, 14136
(Sept. 2023).
28.
Miceli, M., Frontera, P., Macario, A. & Malara, A. Recovery/Reuse of Het-
erogeneous Supported Spent Catalysts. Catalysts 2021, Vol. 11, Page 591 11,
591 (May 2021).
29.
Christmann, K. Interaction of Hydrogen with Solid Surfaces. Surface Science
Reports 9, 1–163 (1988).
30.
D’Angelo, J. V. H. & Francesconi, A. Z. Gas-liquid solubility of hydrogen in
n-alcohols (1 n 4) at pressures from 3.6 MPa to 10 MPa and temperatures
from 298.15 K to 525.15 K. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data 46,
671–674 (May 2001).
31.
Bertero, N. M., Apesteguía, C. R. & Marchi, A. J. Catalytic and kinetic study
of the liquid-phase hydrogenation of acetophenone over Cu/SiO2 catalyst. Ap-
plied Catalysis A: General 349, 100–109 (Oct. 2008).
32.
Rajashekharam, M. V. & Chaudhari, R. V. Kinetics of hydrogenation of p-
isobutyl acetophenone using a supported Ni catalyst in a slurry reactor. Chem-
ical Engineering Science 51, 1663–1672 (May 1996).
33.
Rajashekharam, M. V. et al. Hydrogenation of acetophenone using a 10% Ni
supported on zeolite Y catalyst: kinetics and reaction mechanism. Catalysis
Today 48, 83–92 (Jan. 1999).
97
==PAGE:108==
34.
Bereta, T., Mieczyńska, E., Ronka, S., Tylus, W. & Trzeciak, A. M. Effect of
solvent in the hydrogenation of acetophenone catalyzed by Pd/S-DVB. New
Journal of Chemistry 45, 5023–5028 (Mar. 2021).
35.
Yoshida, H., Onodera, Y., Fujita, S.-i., Kawamori, H. & Arai, M. Solvent effects
in heterogeneous selective hydrogenation of acetophenone: differences between
Rh/C and Rh/Al2O3 catalysts and the superiority of water as a functional
solvent. Green Chemistry 17, 1877–1883 (2015).
36.
Fujita, S. I., Onodera, Y., Yoshida, H. & Arai, M. Selective hydrogenation of
acetophenone with supported Pd and Rh catalysts in water, organic solvents,
and CO2-dissolved expanded liquids. Green Chemistry 18, 4934–4940 (Sept.
2016).
37.
Hydrogen https://webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=C1333740&Mask=
10#Solubility.
38.
Behr, A., Becker, M. & Dostal, J. Bubble-size distributions and interfacial ar-
eas in a jetloop reactor for multiphase catalysis. Chemical Engineering Science
64, 2934–2940 (June 2009).
39.
Rajadhyaksha, R. A. & Karwa, S. L. Solvent effects in catalytic hydrogenation.
Chemical Engineering Science 41, 1765–1770 (Jan. 1986).
40.
M. Doran, P. Engineering Principles Second Edition 129–163 (Academic Press,
2013).
41.
Linek, V., Vacek, V. & Beneš, P. A critical review and experimental verification
of the correct use of the dynamic method for the determination of oxygen
transfer in aerated agitated vessels to water, electrolyte solutions and viscous
liquids. The Chemical Engineering Journal 34, 11–34 (Jan. 1987).
42.
Warnecke, H.-J. .-., Geisendörfer, M. & Hempel, D. C. Mass transfer behaviour
of gas-liquid jet loop reactors. Chemical Engineering & Technology 11, 306–
311 (Jan. 1988).
43.
Mitsu, T., Rose, M. K., Fomin, E., Ogletree, D. F. & Salmeron, M. Dissocia-
tive hydrogen adsorption on palladium requires aggregates of three or more
vacancies. Nature 2003 422:6933 422, 705–707 (Apr. 2003).
44.
Chorkendorff, I. & Niemantsverdriet, J. W. Concepts of Modern Catalysis and
Kinetics. Concepts of Modern Catalysis and Kinetics (Oct. 2003).
98
==PAGE:109==
45.
Villalba, M., Del Pozo, M. & Calvo, E. J. Electrocatalytic hydrogenation of
acetophenone and benzophenone using palladium electrodes. Electrochimica
Acta 164, 125–131 (May 2015).
99
==PAGE:110==
Appendices
A
GC Example and Calibration curves
=====================================================================
Acq. Operator   : SYSTEM                         Seq. Line :   2
Sample Operator : SYSTEM
Acq. Instrument : GC-FID                          Location :   102  (F)
Injection Date  : 10/16/2024 8:45:49 AM                Inj :   1
                                                Inj Volume : 1 µl
Sequence File   : C:\Users\Public\Documents\ChemStation\1\Data\S194164-AP-CAT-1-L1 2024-10-16
                  08-10-04\S194164-AP-CAT-1-L1.S
Method          : C:\Users\Public\Documents\ChemStation\1\Data\S194164-AP-CAT-1-L1 2024-10-16
                  08-10-04\Frontinlet_250C.M (Sequence Method)
Last changed    : 10/9/2024 3:40:59 PM by SYSTEM
min
5
10
15
20
pA
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
 FID1 A, Front Signal (AP-L1-1-1.D)
5.332
19.012
19.084
20.944
23.404
=====================================================================
                         Area Percent Report
=====================================================================
Sorted By             :      Signal
Multiplier            :      1.0000
Dilution              :      1.0000
Use Multiplier & Dilution Factor with ISTDs
Signal 1: FID1 A, Front Signal
Peak RetTime Type  Width     Area      Height     Area
  #   [min]        [min]   [pA*s]      [pA]         %
----|-------|----|-------|----------|----------|--------|
   1   5.332 BB    0.1133 1.38431e5  1.51141e4  96.34302
   2  19.012 BV E  0.0267  794.64478  456.83261  0.55305
   3  19.084 VB R  0.0243 4099.73975 2551.38696  2.85328
   4  20.944 BB    0.0659   18.47996    3.62395  0.01286
   5  23.404 BB    0.0351  341.67194  151.45663  0.23779
Totals :                  1.43685e5  1.82774e4
Data File C:\Users\P...mStation\1\Data\S194164-AP-CAT-1-L1 2024-10-16 08-10-04\AP-L1-1-1.D
Sample Name: AP-L1-1-1
GC-FID 10/16/2024 9:11:27 AM SYSTEM
Page
1 of 2
Figure A.1: Example of GC results for 0.25M AP, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 60°C100
==PAGE:111==
Table A.1: AP single GC analysis for calibration curve
Sample
STD 1
STD 2
STD 3
Ethanol [µL]
500
750
875
Volume 0.25M AP [µL]
500
250
125
Concentration AP [mol/L]
0.1321
0.0661
0.0330
Peak Area [pA·s]
6.12E+03
3.16E+03
1.63E+03
Table A.2: PE single GC analysis for calibration curve
Sample
STD 1
STD 2
STD 3
Ethanol Volume [µL]
500
750
875
PE 0.25M Volume [µL]
500
250
125
PE Concentration [mol/L]
0.1188
0.0601
0.0315
Peak Area [pA]
5.45E+03
2.82E+03
1.46E+03
Table A.3: EB single GC analysis for calibration curve
Sample
STD 1
STD 2
STD 3
Ethanol Volume [µL]
500
750
875
EB 0.25M Volume [µL]
500
250
125
EB Concentration [mol/L]
0.130
0.065
0.033
Peak Area [pA]
6.15E+03
3.16E+03
1.59E+03
101
==PAGE:112==
B
Experiments conducted
Table B.4: List of experiments conducted in the autoclave.
Experiment
AP [M]
Cat [g/L]
T [°C]
Agitation [RPM]
Catalyst batch
Sampling
Note
1
0.25
1
60
810
1
NO
2
0.25
0.5
60
810
1
NO
3
0.25
1
60
810
1
NO
4
0.25
1
60
810
1
NO
5
0.25
2
60
810
1
NO
6
0.1
1
60
810
1
NO
7
0.25
1
60
810
1
YES
8
0.1
1
60
810
1
YES
9
0.5
1
60
810
1
YES
10
1
1
60
810
1
YES
11
0
1
60
810
1
YES
0.25M PE initial concentration with residual AP
12
0.25
0.5
60
810
2
YES
13
0.25
1
50
810
2
YES
14
0.25
1
70
810
2
YES
15
0.25
2
60
810
2
YES
15
0.25
1
60
810
2
YES
IPA used as solvent and catalyst poisoning
15
0.25
1
60
405
2
YES
Catalyst poisoning
16
0.25
1
60
608
2
YES
16
0.25
1
60
810
2
YES
IPA used as solvent
17
0.25
1
80
810
2
YES
18
0.25
1
60
405
2
YES
19
0.25
1
60
810
2
YES
20
0.25
1
60
203
2
YES
21
0.25
1
60
810
2
YES
0.25M H2O added
102
==PAGE:113==
Table B.5: List of experiments conducted in the Jet Loop Reactor.
Experiment
Nozzle diameter [mm]
Ejector
Recyle rate [L/min]
Reaction Volume [L]
Feed Rate [mL/min]
Comment
1
4
10
5
2
4
10
5
Redo of 1
3
4
16
5
4
4
E1
16
5
5
4
E1
16
2
30
V of 2.5L and feed rate of 70 mL/min
6
4
E1
16
2
30
V of 2-1L and liquid evaporation
7
4
E1
10
5
8
2
10
5
9
4
E1
16
3
30
Equipped with condenser and balance
10
4
E1
16
3
50
103
==PAGE:114==
C
Catalyst Experiments
Figure C.1: Order fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP
Figure C.2: Order fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.1M AP
Figure C.3: Order fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.5M AP
104
==PAGE:115==
Figure C.4: Order fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 1M AP
Figure C.5: Order fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M PE contaminated with
AP.
Table C.1: Fitting parameters for the Direct model. Catalyst batch 1
Parameter
Value
k1
0.0209 min−1
k2
0.0067min−1
α
0.8579
β
0.8036
r2
0.89884
MSC
0.74663
105
==PAGE:116==
Rate fits
Figure C.6: Rate fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP
Figure C.7: Rate fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.1M AP
Figure C.8: Rate fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.5M AP
106
==PAGE:117==
Figure C.9: Rate fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 1M AP
Figure C.10: Rate fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M PE contaminated with
AP.
Table C.2: Fitting parameters for the rate model
Parameter
Value
k1
0.0344 min−1
k2
0.0082 min−1
r2
0.88637
MSC
0.59531
107
==PAGE:118==
L-H model on low concentrations.
Figure C.11: 0.25M, 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 810 RPM, fitting of the L-H model.
(a) 0.1M AP, 810 RPM
(b) 0.25M AP, 405 RPM
(c) 0.25M AP, 608 RPM
Figure C.12: Experimental data fitted with the L&H model at 60°C and 1 g/L 5
wt.% Pd/C
Table C.3: Fitting parameters for the L-H model
Parameter
Value
k’1
6.8522 mol.L−1.min−1
k’2
7.2525 mol.L−1.min−1
KAP
0.4865 L.mol−1
KPE
0.1004 L.mol−1
KEB
0.1034 L.mol−1
r2
0.98926
MSC
2.7243
108
==PAGE:119==
Solvent influence
Figure C.13: 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP with IPA as solvent.
Figure C.14: 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP with 0.25M H2O.
109
==PAGE:120==
D
JLR Experimental Results
Figure D.1: Rate fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP, 10 L/min recirculation
with ejector
Figure D.2: LH fit - 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP, 16 L/min recirculation
with ejector
110
==PAGE:121==
Figure D.3: dP moving average values, for continuous experiment conducted with
2 L reaction volume and 30 mL/min feeding rate
Figure D.4: dP moving average values, for the redone continuous experiment con-
ducted with 2 L reaction volume and 30 mL/min feeding rate
E
Power Consumption
Recirculation Pump Power Consumption
111
==PAGE:122==
Figure E.1: Power Consumptions of JLR recirculation pump at different recircula-
tion rates.
5 L Autoclave Power Consumption
V2
V1
= (D2
D1
)3
P2 = (D2
D1
)5 · P1
P2 = (V2
V1
)
5
3 · P1
P2 = ( 5L
0.1L)
5
3 · 38.3W = 25990W
F
Hydrogen Consumption Rates
Autoclave
112
==PAGE:123==
Figure F.1: Hydrogen Consumption in autoclave with 25% stirring corresponding
to 203RPM. Experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M AP
Hydrogen consumption rate using L-H
rH2 =
k1CAPKAP
p
CH2KH2 + k2CPEKPE
p
CH2KH2
(1 + CAPKAP + CPEKPE + CEBKEB +
p
CH2KH2)3
Figure F.2: Hydrogen Consumption in JLR with 5 L reaction volume batch, 4 mm
nozzle and E1 ejector. Experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M
AP.
113
==PAGE:124==
Figure F.3: Hydrogen Consumption in JLR with 3 L reaction volume and 50
mL/min feeding 4 mm nozzle and E1 ejector. Experiment conducted with 60°C, 1
g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.22M AP.
rH2(Pd) =
rH2 · V
Ccat · V · 5wt%Pd
Example for Figure F.3 at SS
rH2(Pd) =
0.8 mmol
L·min · 3L
1gcat
L · 3L · 5% gPd
gcat
= 0.016 molH2
min · gPd
114
==PAGE:125==
G
Alternate LH models
Dissociative & non-competitive
rAP = −
k1CAPKAP
1 + KEBCEB + KPECPE + KAPCAP
·
p
PH2H
 1 +
p
PH2H
2
(54)
rPE =
k1CAPKAP −k2CPEKPE
1 + KEBCEB + KPECPE + KAPCAP
·
p
PH2H
 1 +
p
PH2H
2
(55)
rEB =
k2CPEKPE
1 + KEBCEB + KPECPE + KAPCAP
·
p
PH2H
 1 +
p
PH2H
2
(56)
Figure G.1: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M
AP. LH dissociative and non-competitive model.
115
==PAGE:126==
Figure G.2: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.1M
AP. LH dissociative and non-competitive model.
Figure G.3: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.5M
AP. LH dissociative and non-competitive model.
Figure G.4: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 1M
AP. LH dissociative and non-competitive model.
116
==PAGE:127==
Figure G.5: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M
PE. LH dissociative and non-competitive model.
Non-dissociative and Competitive
rAP = −
k1CAPKAPPH2H
(1 + KEBCEB + KPECPE + KAPCAP + PH2H)2
(57)
rPE =
k1CAPKAPPH2H −k2CPEKPEPH2H
(1 + KEBCEB + KPECPE + KAPCAP + PH2H)2
(58)
rEB =
k2CPEKPEPH2H
(1 + KEBCEB + KPECPE + KAPCAP + PH2H)2
(59)
Figure G.6: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.25M
AP. LH non-dissociative and competitive model.
117
==PAGE:128==
Figure G.7: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.1M
AP. LH non-dissociative and competitive model.
Figure G.8: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.5M
AP. LH non-dissociative and competitive model.
Figure G.9: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 1M
AP. LH non-dissociative and competitive model.
118
==PAGE:129==
Figure G.10: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C,
0.25M PE. LH non-dissociative and competitive model.
Non-dissociative & non-competitive
rAP = −
k1CAPKAP
1 + KEBCEB + KPECPE + KAPCAP
·
PH2H
1 + PH2H
(60)
rPE =
k1CAPKAP −k2CPEKPE
1 + KEBCEB + KPECPE + KAPCAP
·
PH2H
1 + PH2H
(61)
rEB =
k2CPEKPE
1 + KEBCEB + KPECPE + KAPCAP
·
PH2H
1 + PH2H
(62)
Figure G.11: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C,
0.25M AP. LH non-dissociative and competitive model.
119
==PAGE:130==
Figure G.12: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.1M
AP. LH non-dissociative and non-competitive model.
Figure G.13: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 0.5M
AP. LH non-dissociative and non-competitive model.
Figure G.14: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C, 1M
AP. LH non-dissociative and non-competitive model.
120
==PAGE:131==
Figure G.15: Autoclave experiment conducted with 60°C, 1 g/L 5 wt.% Pd/C,
0.25M PE. LH non-dissociative and non-competitive model.
H
MATLAB Script Example
1
%% Example of MATLAB
script: Rate and Order fit
2
% Load the
datasets
from
experiments
3
4
data1 = readtable('AP -CAT -1-3. xlsx ');
5
data2 = readtable('AP -O-1. xlsx ');
6
7
% Extract
data from each
dataset
8
time1 = data1.TimePassed_min_ ';
9
AP1 = data1.AP '; PE1 = data1.PE '; EB1 = data1.EB ';
10
11
time2 = data2.TimePassed_min_ ';
12
AP2 = data2.AP '; PE2 = data2.PE '; EB2 = data2.EB ';
13
time2 (1) = []; AP2 (1) = []; PE2 (1) = []; EB2 (1) = []; %remove bad
samples if relevant
14
15
%Define Cat load
16
CS = [1.0
0.983]; %cat load
17
18
% Initial
guesses for
parameters: [k1 , k2 , n1 , n2]
19
initial_guess = [1,1, 1, 1];
20
21
% Define
bounds for
parameters
22
lb = [0.01 , 0.001 , 0.9, 0.9]; % Lower
bounds
23
ub = [1, 1, 2, 2]; % Upper
bounds
24
121
==PAGE:132==
25
% Define
objective
function (input
parameters , time vector ,
experimental
data
points and cat
concentration).
26
objective = @( params) relativeResidualsObjective (params , time_all ,
dataMatrix_all , CS);
27
28
% Options
for fmincon (change if fitting is too slow)
29
options = optimoptions('fmincon ', ...
30
'Display ', 'off', 'FunctionTolerance ', 1e
-12, ...
31
'StepTolerance ', 1e-6, '
MaxFunctionEvaluations ', 1e4);
32
33
34
% Number of iterations
for random
initial
guesses (change for
precision)
35
numIterations = 100;
36
37
% Storage
for results
38
bestResidual = inf;
39
bestParams = [];
40
allResiduals = zeros(1, numIterations);
41
allParams = zeros(numIterations , length(initial_guess));
42
43
% Random
initial
guesses
loop with
error
handling
44
for i = 1: numIterations
45
try
46
% Generate
random
initial
guesses
within
bounds
47
random_guess = lb + (ub - lb) .* rand(1, length(
initial_guess));
48
49
% Solve
using
fmincon
50
[params_fit , resnorm] = fmincon(objective , random_guess ,
[], [], [], [], lb , ub , [], options);
51
52
% Store
results
53
allResiduals(i) = resnorm;
54
allParams(i, :) = params_fit;
55
56
% Update
best fit
57
if resnorm < bestResidual
58
bestResidual = resnorm;
59
bestParams = params_fit;
60
end
61
catch ME
122
==PAGE:133==
62
% Display
warning
message
and skip
iteration as parameter
values
give NaN and stops
script. (Only for
reaction
order
model)
63
warning('Iteration %d failed: %s', i, ME.message);
64
allResiduals(i) = inf; % Assign a high
residual
for failed
iteration
65
allParams(i, :) = NaN; % Mark
parameters as NaN for failed
iteration
66
end
67
end
68
69
% Display
best fit
parameters
70
k1 = bestParams (1);
71
k2 = bestParams (2);
72
n1 = bestParams (3);
73
n2 = bestParams (4);
74
fprintf (['Best
Parameters: k1 = %.2f, k2 = %.2f, n1 = %.2f, n2 =
%.2f'], k1 , k2 , n1 , n2);
75
76
% Plot
residual
distribution to see if more
iterations
are
necessary
77
figure (1);
78
histogram(allResiduals , 20);
79
xlabel('Residuals ');
80
ylabel('Frequency ');
81
title('Residual
Distribution ');
82
83
% Names of the
datasets
for saving
figures
84
dataset_names = {'Direct -AP -CAT -1-3', 'Direct -AP -O-1'};
85
86
% Path for saving the
figures (Insert
path of folder
where you want
to save the figures)
87
save_path = '/Users/nikolaj/Library/CloudStorage/OneDrive -
DanmarksTekniskeUniversitet /Speciale/Results/Figures ';
88
89
%% Yield
plots
90
% Yield
plots for each
dataset
91
for i = 1:2
92
% Make time
vector for
predicted
values (based on fit)
93
time_fit = linspace(min(time_all{i}), max(time_all{i}), 100);
94
% Solve
mole
balances
using the
parameters
determined by the
objective
function
95
concentrations_fit = solveODEs(bestParams , time_fit ,
dataMatrix_all {i}(1 ,1), dataMatrix_all {i}(2 ,1),
123
==PAGE:134==
dataMatrix_all {i}(3 ,1), CS(i));
96
97
% Normalize by sum of initial
concentrations (most
often
initial
concentration of AP)
98
C0 = sum( concentrations_fit (:, 1));
99
C02 = sum( dataMatrix_all{i}(: ,1));
100
101
% Define
yields for data
points
102
yield_AP_exp = dataMatrix_all{i}(1, :) / C02;
103
yield_PE_exp = dataMatrix_all{i}(2, :) / C02;
104
yield_EB_exp = dataMatrix_all{i}(3, :) / C02;
105
106
% Define
yields for
107
yield_AP_fit = concentrations_fit (1, :) / C0;
108
yield_PE_fit = concentrations_fit (2, :) / C0;
109
yield_EB_fit = concentrations_fit (3, :) / C0;
110
111
%Calculate
mole
balance
112
mole_balance = conversion_AP_exp + conversion_PE_exp +
conversion_EB_exp ;
113
114
% Plot
Yields
115
figure(i);
116
plot(time_all{i}, yield_AP_exp , 'go', time_fit , yield_AP_fit , '
g-', 'LineWidth ', 2); hold on;
117
plot(time_all{i}, yield_PE_exp , 'bo', time_fit , yield_PE_fit , '
b-', 'LineWidth ', 2);
118
plot(time_all{i}, yield_EB_exp , 'ko', time_fit , yield_EB_fit , '
k-', 'LineWidth ', 2);
119
plot(time_all{i}, mole_balance , 'rp', 'LineWidth ', 2);
120
% Make
figure
look nice
121
xlabel('Time [min]', 'FontWeight ', 'bold ');
122
ylabel('Yield ', 'FontWeight ', 'bold ');
123
ylim ([0 1.2]);
124
xlim('tight ');
125
legend('AP data ', 'AP model ', 'PE data ', 'PE model ', 'EB data ',
'EB model ', 'Mole
Balance ', 'Location ', 'best ');
126
set(gca , 'FontWeight ', 'bold ');
127
hold off;
128
129
% Save the figure in desired
folder
130
saveas(gcf , fullfile(save_path , [dataset_names{i}, '.png']));
131
end
132
124
==PAGE:135==
133
%% Calculate
MSC and r2
134
% Run the
fitting and then
calculate
MSC using the best
parameters
from
objective
function
135
[params_fit , resnorm] = fmincon(objective , bestParams , [], [], [],
[], lb , ub , [], options);
136
137
% Store the
concentrations
for each
dataset
after
fitting
138
concentrations_all = cell(1, numel( dataMatrix_all));
139
for i = 1: numel(dataMatrix_all)
140
concentrations_all {i} = solveODEs(params_fit , time_all{i},
dataMatrix_all {i}(1 ,1), dataMatrix_all {i}(2 ,1),
dataMatrix_all {i}(3 ,1),CS(i));
141
end
142
143
% Calculate
MSC
144
p = length(params_fit); % Number of fitted
parameters
145
MSC = calculateMSC(dataMatrix_all , concentrations_all , p);
146
147
% Display
MSC
148
disp ([' r^2: ',num2str(MSC (2)),', Model
Selection
Criterion (MSC):
', num2str(MSC (1))]);
149
150
%% Functions
151
% Objective
function to calculate
relative
residuals
152
function
resnorm = relativeResidualsObjective (params , time_all ,
dataMatrix_all , CS)
153
residuals_all = [];
154
155
for i = 1: numel(time_all)
156
C01 = max( dataMatrix_all{i}') ';
157
158
% Solve
ODEs to get model
predictions
159
concentrations = solveODEs(params , time_all{i},
dataMatrix_all {i}(1 ,1), dataMatrix_all {i}(2 ,1),
dataMatrix_all {i}(3 ,1), CS(i));
160
C02 = max(concentrations ') ';
161
% Calculate
relative
residuals
162
residuals = ( dataMatrix_all {i}./ C01 - concentrations ./C02)
.^2;
163
164
% Flatten
residuals
and add to the array
165
residuals_all = [residuals_all; residuals (:)];
166
end
167
125
==PAGE:136==
168
% Sum of squared
relative
residuals
169
resnorm = sum(residuals_all);
170
end
171
172
% Function to solve
ODEs for each
dataset
173
function
concentrations = solveODEs(params , t, CA0 , CB0 , CC0 , CS)
174
% Define
parameters
175
k1 = params (1);
176
k2 = params (2);
177
n1 = params (3);
178
n2 = params (4);
179
180
% Define
ODEs
181
odeAP = @(t, C) CS * (-k1 * C(1)^n1);
182
odePE = @(t, C) CS * (k1 * C(1)^n1 - k2 * C(2)^n2);
183
odeEB = @(t, C) CS * (k2 * C(2)^n2);
184
185
% Define
function
for ODE solver
186
odefun = @(t, C) [odeAP(t, C); odePE(t, C); odeEB(t, C)];
187
188
% Solve
ODEs
189
[~, C] = ode89(odefun , t, [CA0 , CB0 , CC0]);
190
191
% Return
concentrations in the
required
format for
fmincon [AP;
PE; EB]
192
concentrations = [C(:, 1) '; C(:, 2) '; C(:, 3) '];
193
end
194
195
% Additional
MSC
calculation
function
196
function
MSC = calculateMSC (dataMatrix_all , concentrations_all , p)
197
MSC_values = zeros(1, numel( dataMatrix_all ));
198
r2 = zeros(1, numel( dataMatrix_all ));
199
200
% Calculate
MSC and r2
201
for i = 1: numel(dataMatrix_all)
202
% Define
normalization
values and
calculate
mean
203
C01 = max( dataMatrix_all{i}') ';
204
C02 = max( concentrations_all {i}') ';
205
mean_exp = 1/ length( dataMatrix_all{i})*sum( dataMatrix_all{i
},2)./C01;
206
207
% Sum of squared
differences
between
experimental
and mean
experimental
values
208
SS_tot = sum(( dataMatrix_all{i}./ C01 - mean_exp).^2);
126
==PAGE:137==
209
210
% Sum of squared
differences
between
experimental
and
calculated
values
211
SS_res = sum(( dataMatrix_all{i}./ C01 - concentrations_all {i
}./ C02).^2);
212
213
% Calculate
MSC for the
dataset
214
n = numel( dataMatrix_all {i}) * 3; % Total
data
points
215
MSC_values(i) = log(SS_tot / SS_res) - (2 * p / n);
216
r2(i) = sum(( concentrations_all {i}./C02 -mean_exp ./C01).^2)/
sum(( dataMatrix_all {i}./ C01 - mean_exp ./C01).^2);
217
end
218
219
% Average
MSC and r2 across all
datasets
220
MSC = [mean(MSC_values),mean(r2)];
221
end
127
