==PAGE:1==
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed
electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plat-
ing
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Marc K. Helge
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Fysikvej, Building
310, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over eight months at the Section for Electrochemical Mate-
rials, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, at the Technical University of Den-
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment of the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Marc K. Helge - s124442
Signature
Date
ii
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Marc K. Helge, MSc Applied Chemistry: Catalysis and Sustainable Chemistry, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Andrea Russo, PostDoc, Supervisor
Jens Oluf Jensenn, Professor, Main Supervisor
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Electroless Nickel Plating Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Ni-P . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Substrates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Nickel Foam
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.3
Polymer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Plating parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Composition of plating baths
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
pH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.3
Temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.4
Stirring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Characterizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDX) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.2
Electrochemical characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Experimental
11
2.1
Plating procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Equipment and chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Results
13
3.1
Initial test platings - Mo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Initial test platings - Fe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Fe series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Mo series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Conclusion
21
4.1
Overall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Bibliography
23
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Most of the theoretical foundations of this work, when not differently indicated, have been
derived from the book ”Electroless Nickel Plating” [1]. Therefore, the text is not directly
cited in the following chapters.
1.1
Electroless Nickel Plating Theory
1.1.1
Ni-P
Summary
Electroless nickel plating is an autocatalytic process facilitated in solution between a
source of metal ions and a reducing agent via the presence of a catalytic metallic sur-
face.
The basics
Electroless Nickel Plating (ENP) is the process of chemically coating a surface in a ho-
mogeneous layer of metallic Nickel. This is done in an electrolyte solution, where metal
ions are reduced by an oxidation reaction on the metal surface by a chosen chemical re-
ductant. In this study, we are focused on nickel plating, but it is also possible to plate a
range of other metals and metalloids with a bit of care. The most commonly plated ones
being Ni-P, Ni-B, Cu and Ag.[Book page 2]
Electroless deposition is an electrochemical process that follows the principles of thermo-
dynamics and kinetics of electrochemical reactions. This is understood to be happening
by the potential difference between at least two half-cell reactions. An anodic, supplying
the electrons for the reduction of the metal ions, and a cathodic one that supplies the
metal ions being reduced into the metallic coating. Because of the reliance on the an-
odic half-cell for supplying the electrons to the reaction, a very limited number of suitable
reducing agents are actually available for electroless plating. The most common are re-
ferred to in the book by D.Fabienne, V. Veronique and B. Luiza [Reference book page
5] and are each suited for different metals and bath compositions. In this work the focus
will be on sodium hypophosphite as the main reducing agent but a few word will be given
on Sodium borohydride due to it’s use during the electrochemical activation of the sub-
strate. The combined reaction occurs under mixed potential control and the potential for
the reaction can be derived from the Nernst equation for each of the electrode potentials:
E = E◦−RT
nF ln Q
(1.1)
Then, the two half-cell reactions can be combined and ∆G derived from the following
equation
∆G = −nFE◦
(1.2)
and as long as ∆G is negative, the reaction will proceed spontaneously in the written di-
rection, this can also be evaluated if ∆E is positive due to its connection to ∆G. However
the rate of reaction for these reactions is normally very low and requires overcoming a
large activation barrier to proceed at reasonable rates. Therefore the baths can be seen
as metastable solutions that requires a catalyst to lower the activation barrier before any
meaningful rate of reaction occurs. The catalyst in this work comes from the metallic Ni
particles on the substrate surface acting as nucleation sites for the start and future growth
of the plating.
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
1
==PAGE:10==
Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
An important part of the electroless deposition reaction is the contribution from the Hydro-
gen Evolution Reaction (HER). For this type of reaction five different mechanisms have
been proposed in regards to how the reaction works and its influence on metals and met-
alloids in regards to electroless metal plating. In this work only the two most popular ones
will be looked at the metal hydroxide mechanism [Ref p9] and the dehydrogenation or
universal mechanism[Refp9] and even then not in equal amounts due to the nature of
their mechanism.
The metal hydroxide mechanism proposed by Cavallotti and Salvago in 1968 [Refp9] will
only receive an honorary mention, as it is mainly used in regards to Ni-P deposition from
acidic electrolytes. Although this study is conducted with Ni-P it is done in alkaline baths
for which this mechanism is not ideal which leads to the Universal mechanism. This mech-
anism was proposed by Van der Meeraker 1981[refp9] and combines electrochemical re-
actions with the less popular atomic hydrogen mechanism and adds a dehydrogenation
and recombination reaction in the anodic part. For the anodic part the reactions are as
follow.
RH
CatMe
−−−−→˙R + ˙H
(1.3)
1.3 Dehydrogenation of the reductant
˙R + OH−→ROH + e−
(1.4)
1.4 Oxidation of the reductant R
˙H + ˙H →H2(g)
(1.5)
1.5 Recombination of the hydrogen molecules into hydrogen gas
˙H + OH−→H2O + e−
(1.6)
1.6 Oxidation of H under alkaline conditions
˙H →H+ + e−
(1.7)
1.7 Oxidation of H under acidic conditions
For the cathodic part the reactions are theorized to be as follows:
Men+ + ne−→Me(s)
(1.8)
1.8 Reduction of metal ions to metallic metal
2H2O + 2e →H2 + 2OH−
(1.9)
1.9 hydrogen evolution reaction in alkaline condition
2H+ + 2e−→H2
(1.10)
2
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:11==
1.10 hydrogen evolution reaction in acidic condition
For P plating it is also important to include the reduction reaction of the reductant P specie
as this is what leads to the co-deposition of solid P into the coating.
H2PO−
2 + e−→P(s) + 2OH−
(1.11)
1.11 Reduction reaction for the co-deposition of P in Ni-P plating.
. Especially the dehydrogenation step of 1.3 is an important part of this reaction as it
is this step that limits the amount of metal substrates that are available for electroless
plating, as metals incapable of catalysing this specific step are not usable for electro-
less plating reactions. Likewise, for reducing agents, it is important to find chemicals that
favour dehydrogenation on the metal surface during its oxidation, as this ensures the re-
duction of metal ions happens when in direct contact with the substrate surface, thereby
growing the metallic alloy on top of the substrate.
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
3
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Substrates
1.2.1
Summary
In this project a range of substrates were used for plating attempts. The main was nickel
foam from the company Alantum. This porous substrate was chosen for its ease of plating
since it is conductive. Secondly, polyacrylonitrile (PAN) was used, as this project is a spin-
out of a previous project to nickel-coat on locally spun polymer nanofibers. The same
principles and methods were attempted with varied success. Finally, attempts were made
to coat polysulfone (PSU) Udel as the previously mentioned project found this polymer
better suited for the rigours an electrode is exposed to when running for extended time
periods.
1.2.2
Nickel Foam
For most of the project Alantum nickel foam was used for coating as this substrate consists
of a robust 3d structure of pure nickel that is easy to coat due to its catalytic properties.
It was therefore deemed a suitable trial medium for designing and testing different bath
compositions before applying these to polymer fibers which are harder to coat due to
the lower amount of nucleation sites. Since the nickel was already in a metallic state
the most important parameters for this substrate were cleaning and deoxidation. As any
surface pollution or oxide layers can block the catalytic surface hindering the adsorption
of reducing agent and nickel ions thereby preventing the coating process from occurring.
The depassivization would normally, in literature, be done by a chemical attack activation-
based treatment using either hydrochloric or sulfuric acid to remove the pollutants from the
surface layer. But in the interest of keeping the activation step for metallic and polymeric
substrates as close to each other as possible it was decided to use the same procedure for
both substrates. The applied procedure for both cleaning and activation were performed
as a combined one step electrochemical activation reaction by spraying the surface with
a mixture of water, ethanol and sodium borohydride. The ethanol and water acting as
cleaning agents against any grease, fat or oils on the surface, while the borohydride acts
as an activation agent reducing any oxides or non-metallic nickel. Any leftover reducing
agent on the surface also worked to enhance the initial plating of the substrate as sodium
borohydride is a strong reducing agent that can also be used in alkaline nickel plating.
1.2.3
Polymer
For polymeric substrates PAN and PSU Udel were both attempted. Both polymers were
used in the form of polymer fiber mats electrospun at DTU energy by supervisor Russo. To
allow for the plating of polymeric substrates a series of preparation steps would normally
be needed to make a surface catalytically active. These steps consists of (i) etching the
surface to increase roughness and surface area with a strong acid (ii) sensitization with a
tin chloride to promote chemisorption of a catalytic agent. (iii) chemical activation of the
surface with metal ion for use as catalyzing agent, commonly palladium and finally (iv)
acceleration stage reducing the ions into metallic catalytic sites for formation of the nickel
coating [[1], chapter 3].
Many of these steps are quite expensive and not very environmentally friendly, hence
why a selection of different variations of this procedure exists. For this project though
all steps but the final acceleration step were circumvented by incorporating the nickel
ions directly into the polymeric solution pre-spinning. Leading to the spun nanofibers
having the nickel ions integrated into their structure awaiting activation without further
modifications. Therefore the same one-step cleaning and activation procedure used for
the nickel foam could also be used on the polymers. Leading to a similar procedure being
4
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:13==
applied for both substrates with similar results.
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
5
==PAGE:14==
1.3
Plating parameters
In the plating optimization process there are some key parameters that need to be un-
derstood and tested. The most important are the bath composition, pH, temperature, and
the agitation or stirring of the solution. Each one of these parameters contributes to the
speed, efficiency and outcome of the coating, and has therefore to be optimized alongside
the others.
1.3.1
Composition of plating baths
The composition of the electrolyte bath is an important step in plating design as each
component have a major impact on the content and morphology of the finalized coat-
ing. Therefore careful consideration should be taken when choosing reagents and their
concentrations.
Nickel salt
The nickel salt is one of the two main components of the electrolyte bath. Supplying the
metal ions used for the cathodic half-cell reaction, this component is vital for determining
the deposition rate of the reaction while the choice of counter ion can also have a large
impact on the finalized product. The type of counter-ion of nickel can, in fact, improve the
efficiency of the reaction by pairing with the other ions present in the solution. In industry,
sulfate salts are normally used to avoid the risk of localized corrosion when plating on
steel and aluminum.
However,sulphur is known for having overlapping peaks with Mo in EDX which could com-
plicate analysis at later stages. Therefore, this project opted for using the alternative of
nickel chloride as the substrate used is not in danger of localized corrosion, the salt is
slightly cheaper and there is no interference in the EDX analysis.
Reducing agent
The reducing agent is considered the second of the two main components of the elec-
trolyte bath. It functions as the main components of the anionic half-cell, supplying the
electrons for the plating process, and therefore its concentration is critical for the reduction
rate of the nickel ions, greatly affecting deposition rate. The deposition rate is important
as higher rate tends to lead to more defects and higher P content in the plating. P content
is what governs the plating structure and is categorized in three categories:
• 1-5 % of phosphorus amount leads to crystalline structure, with high conductivity
and poor corrosion resistance
• 5-8 % of phosphorus determines a mixed crystalline and amorphous structure, which
presents intermediate characteristics of the two structures. Specifically, a generally
good conductivity with a significant corrosion resistance, which make this composi-
tion the ideal target for the purposes of this project.
• 8-12 % of phosphorus results in a completely amorphous structure, which is char-
acterized by poor to absent conductivity and marked corrosion resistance
If the concentration of the reductant becomes to high it can also lead to reduction occurring
in the bulk solution which leads to solution decomposition and bath death.
Complexing agent
Complexing agents are normally organic salts that form metastable chelates complexes
with nickel. Their function is to limit or avoid the uncontrolled reaction of the metal with
reducing agent in the plating bath, which would result in the decomposition of the bath
itself. In addition, at high pH, above 8, complexing agents determine the formation of
metal complexes that allow for multi-step reduction of high-oxidation states metals, such
as Mo [2]. Commonly used chelating agents are citrates and ammonia, whose mechanism
6
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:15==
of action and effects are known for electroplating, whereas their application in electroless
plating is still under investigation.
Bath loading
Bath loading is a term that defines the ratio between the surface of the working piece to
coat and the volume of solution in the tank. As a general rule, the the deposition rate
decreases with increasing bath load, which therefore needs to be optimised depending
on the bathing solution. The bath load for commercial applications is usually in a range
of 0.1–1.0 dm2/L.
1.3.2
pH
One of the most relevant factors for the efficiency and speed of the plating is the pH of the
plating bath. In fact, the kinetics of reactions involved in the electroless plating of Ni has
been observed to change with pH. In particular, the nickel reduction reaction is accelerated
at a higher pH, and the self-reduction of phosphorus from hypophosphite is slower in the
same condition. Since the nickel reduction reaction controls the deposition rate, the use
of high pH baths enhances the deposition rate, with an observed linear increase with the
pH increase. The combination of the above mentioned phenomena have as an effect,
the decrease of phosphorus content in deposits at higher pH. Despite these desirable
characteristics, the increase in the pH of the solution decreases the solubility of nickel
phosphate, which can lead to decomposition and rough deposits.
In order to maintain the chosen pH for electroless deposition, a buffer is often added to
the plating solution. It counteracts the decrease in the pH by supplying OH- to balance
the excess H+ produced during the reduction of nickel ions to its metallic form. Organic
acids, such as acetic acid, and propionic acid, are commonly used as buffers.
1.3.3
Temperature
The temperature of the bath is another factor that can influence the coating. Its importance
is due to the endothermic character of the reactions that are involved in the deposition pro-
cess, for which the heat provides the necessary energy. In particular, for these reactions,
an increase in temperature leads to an increase in the deposition rate.
An exponential relationship between the temperature and the deposition rate has been ob-
served. The temperature range between 60°C and 95°C is the operative range for plating
using hypophosphite baths. Normally, acidic baths are operated at 80°C-90°C, whereas
alkaline baths can be used at lower temperature, as low as 40°C, and are therefore more
suitable for plastic substrates. In addition to the deposition rate, the temperature of the
bath influences the crystallinity, the phosphorus content, as well as the visual appearance
of the coating.
1.3.4
Stirring
Stirring or agitation of the coating solution influences both the speed and the structure of
the coating. It allows for higher diffusion rates, and better interaction between reacting ions
and the surface, alongside with the faster removal of reaction side-products. In addition,
stirring avoids solution stratification, which can cause gas pitting, patterns and/or streaking
of the deposit. There are two main ways to provide agitation of the solution, which are
conventional magnetic stirring, and ultrasound ”stirring”. For electroless plating, a few
alternatives are aeration (bubbling of clean air), continuous pumping, or, in the case of
small substrates, agitation of the substrate itself. The use of ultrasound for agitation differs
from all the other approaches and has, theoretically, several advantages in improving the
coating performance. In particular, as reported in Chapter 5 of ”Electroless Nickel Plating”:
• Increase in thickness and compactness of deposit.
• Reduction of pores and voids in the deposit.
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
7
==PAGE:16==
• Decreased P content in NiP coatings at higher plating temperatures.
• Decrease in hardness of NiP coatings with increase in P(%) content.
• Changes in phases, e.g. amorphous to crystalline.
• Enhanced corrosion resistance and hardness.
8
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:17==
1.4
Characterizations
1.4.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDX)
The Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) is an advanced tool for non-destructive sam-
ple analysis. It works by directing a focused electron beam onto the sample’s surface,
generating an interaction volume where electrons interact with the material. These inter-
actions release different types of electrons, which are detected to produce high-resolution
images.
SEM primarily captures two types of emitted electrons. Backscattered electrons provide
information about atomic mass, with heavier elements appearing brighter in the image.
Secondary electrons come from the sample’s surface, especially edges and fine details,
helping to reveal surface morphology and texture.
SEM is often paired with Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) to analyze the ele-
mental composition. When the electron beam hits the sample, it generates characteristic
X-rays, which EDS detects to identify the elements present. This combination enables
both detailed imaging and precise chemical analysis.
In this study it was used a Zeiss Merlin with a Bruker detector for EDX analysis at DTU
Energy.
1.4.2
Electrochemical characterization
Linear Sweep Voltammetry (LSV) is a widely used electrochemical technique for studying
oxidation and reduction reactions. It works by sweeping the potential in one direction and
measuring the resulting current, providing insights into redox processes.
Chronopotentiometry, another electrochemical method, applies a constant current over
time to evaluate electrode stability. The resulting potential-time curve helps assess the
electrode’s performance under continuous current. Stability is indicated by minimal fluc-
tuations in potential, while a significant increase suggests instability. At high current den-
sities, potential fluctuations often occur due to gas bubble formation and detachment from
the electrode surface.
The ohmic drop (iR compensation) refers to voltage loss caused by the solution’s resis-
tance or electrical contacts. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) helps mea-
sure this by analyzing impedance at different frequencies. The ohmic drop is determined
from the high-frequency intercept of impedance on the real axis in the complex plane.
Testing protocol for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
1. Potentiostatic EIS: 100 kHz to 1 Hz, 5 mV amplitude.
Purpose: evaluate initial resistance for iR correction.
2. Linear sweep voltammetry: 0.1 V to -0.6 V vs Ref, 5 mV/s.
Purpose: evaluate HER performance on the pristine electrode.
3. Chronopotentiometry: -0.1 A for 10 min.
Purpose: activate the electrode.
4. Potentiostatic EIS: 100 kHz to 1 Hz, 5 mV amplitude.
Purpose: check resistance after activation.
5. Linear sweep voltammetry: 0.1 V to -0.6 V vs Ref, 5 mV/s.
Purpose: evaluate HER performance on the activated electrode.
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
9
==PAGE:18==
6. Chronopotentiometry: -0.1 A, -0.5 A, and -1 A for 10 min each.
Purpose: evaluate sample stability at different current densities.
Testing protocol for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER)
1. Potentiostatic EIS: 100 kHz to 1 Hz, 5 mV amplitude.
Purpose: evaluate initial resistance for iR correction.
2. Linear sweep voltammetry: 1 V to 1.8 V vs Ref, 5 mV/s.
Purpose: evaluate HER performance on the pristine electrode.
3. Cyclic voltammetry: 1 V to 1.6 V vs Ref, 5 mV/s, 100 cycles
Purpose: activate the electrode.
4. Linear sweep voltammetry: 1 V to 1.8 V vs Ref, 5 mV/s.
Purpose: evaluate HER performance on the activated electrode.
5. Chronopotentiometry: 0 V vs OCV, 180 s.
Purpose: stabilize the potential before performing PEIS
6. Potentiostatic EIS: 100 kHz to 1 Hz, 5 mV amplitude.
Purpose: check resistance after activation.
7. Chronopotentiometry: 0 V vs OCV, 180 s.
Purpose: stabilize the potential before performing PEIS
8. Potentiostatic EIS: 100 kHz to 1 Hz, 5 mV amplitude.
Purpose: check resistance after activation a second time.
9. Linear sweep voltammetry: 1 V to 1.8 V vs Ref, 5 mV/s.
Purpose: evaluate HER performance on the activated electrode a second time
10. Chronopotentiometry: 0.1 A, 0.5 A, and 1 A for 10 min each.
Purpose: evaluate sample stability at different current densities.
10
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:19==
2
Experimental
2.1
Plating procedure
2.1.1
Equipment and chemicals
Sodium borohydride, Ethanol, Water, 50 mL glass container with lid, airbrush gun, 250
mL glass beaker, 100 mL plating solution, VWR Ultrasonic cleaner USC 600 - TH, 1*2cm
Alantum Nickel foam, 3d printed sample holder, basket or other holder for beaker during
plating, lid for the ultrasonic cleaning unit (optional).
2.1.2
Procedure
The ultrasonic cleaning unit is filled with water to a bit above the indicator for safe usage
and the heating is turned on at 70°C. It should take between 30-240 min depending on
model and lid for the water to hit desired temperature. 100 mL of demineralized water is
added to the 250mL beaker, which is put into the ultrasonicator for heating. While waiting
114mg Sodium borohydride is weighted and mixed with 3mL of Ethanol and 7mL of water.
A piece of substrate is cut, in this case a piece of 1*2cm Alantum Nickel foam.
When the unit is heated, empty the warm 250mL beaker, add the 100mL plating solution
and leave it to heat in the sonicator. The Airbrush is filled with the sodium borohydride
solution and the piece of substrate is reduced by spraying both sides 3-4 times with a
10-15 second interval allowing for the solution to seep into the substrate. Before the last
spraying make sure the plating solution have reached 70 °C, after the last spraying add
the reduced substrate to the solution while turning on the sonic stirring.
Leave the sample in for the desired amount of time, making sure its orientated correctly
for optimal gas release and retrieve when time is up. After plating wash the sample with
water to remove any leftover solution and leave to dry in fume hood or cupboard until
use.
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:21==
3
Results
The knowledge on polyalloyed electroless plating theory and principles is still developing.
Despite the availability of references for polyalloyed electroplating, it is not immediate to
derive an explanation for the phenomena observed in this study. Therefore, the obser-
vations on the obtained results are based on inferences derived from adjacent fields of
study [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18].
3.1
Initial test platings - Mo
Initial plating was attempted using a supplied method for Ni-P with the changes of being
conducted with ultrasonic stirring and the addition of 6wt% molybdenum trioxide as a
molybdenum precursor. Plating was successful as confirmed by both a visible darkening
of the substrate as seen in picture 3.1 and further studies by SEM analysis.
However issues were had with the precursor as this was extremely volatile when coming
into contact with water, which was the main solvent of the mixture. The molybdenum
source were therefore changed to sodium molybdate dihydrate which ensured a more
controlled and stable reaction upon addition.
Figure 3.1: First Mo plating
3.2
Initial test platings - Fe
Tests were then conducted with a similar Ni-P-Fe mixture as used for Ni-P-Mo plating in an
attempt to ascertain ease of plating. Experiments were conducted on PAN nanofibers at
pH7 with a 10%Fe content for 10 minutes with ultrasonic stirring at different temperatures
ranging from 60-80°C to discover an optimal temperature for Fe plating on polymers going
forward.
As can be seen from the picture 3.2 the plating started to get patchy at temperatures 75°C
and above. Hence it was decided to conduct future plating at 70°C as this was expected
to be compatible with the polymers at hand.
3.3
Fe series
Having determined the plating temperature, focus was shifted towards finding an optimal
iron concentration in the coating. To do this a series of iron platings at different concen-
trations and pH’s akin to the ones found in [12] were conducted at a pH ranging from
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: 10% Fe plating temperature range
7.5-8.5 and with mole ratios between 0.2-0.4 of FeCl2/[FeCl2 + NiCl2]. Each plating
was subsequently taken for electrochemical testing and plating was visually verified by
SEM and EDX. The ideal was to compare atomic ratios to the one found in literature, but
EDX analysis proved mostly inconclusive and XPS impossible due to instrument break-
down. Therefore all assessments ended up relying on SEM pictures and the performance
curves from electrochemical testing.
Figure 3.3: Fe OER performance series
From the curves see in pictures 3.3 it can be seen that the performance of the electrode
in performing the OER starts out with a decent performance at pH 7.5 falls off a little when
moving to pH 8 and then increases to higher performances when reaching pH 8.5 this
trend is repeated for all three concentrations across the series.
However a steady increase in performance can be seen as Fe concentrations increases
when looking at the combined series in picture 3.4. Looking at the 20% series no clear
indicators can be see that can help identify the variation in performances. Some artifacts
could be observed on the surface of the 7.5 pH sample but else the morphology tended
to look alike. The pictures are taken a couple of days after plating which is the reason for
the degradation of the plating in the pictures.
For the 30% series observations are much of the same. No noticable differences can
be seen between the three platings except some cracking and a small line of artefacts
found on the 7.5 sample. Nothing here gives clear indication as to why the performance
is different to the eyes of the author though. The 40 % series shows the same tendencies
here the pictures for the pH 7.5 and 8 were taken shortly after plating while the 8.5 was
taken in a later batch leading to obvious degradation in the sample compared to the other
pictures. The surface is muuch alike for all three samples though and there is therefor
again no obvious sign as to what gives the increased performance.
Since there is no clear indication on the surface for all three series the increase in per-
14
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.4: Combined OER performance series
formance should come from an increase in the amount of Fe embedded in the plating.
Hence why it is assumed that the increase in pH and molar ratio leads to a higher ratio of
Fe in the plating as this is the only readily available explanation to the observed results.
3.4
Mo series
A similar study series were conducted for Mo to determine optimal pH and molar ratios
for increasing Mo content in the plating. This was compared with the results found in [3],
where the effect of pH and concentrations were also tested along with their impact on the
morphology of the plating. Based on this paper a pH range of 8-9 was therefore chosen
along with a comparable mole ratio ranging from 0.15-0.35 of Na2MoO4/[Na2MoO4 +
NiCl2]. Each plating was again taken for electrochemical testing and plating verification
by SEM and EDX but the same problems present during the Fe series persisted here
so SEM and performance curves were again used for assessments. In these series a
clear trend was easily observed as the performance tended to increase with increasing
pH across the lowest concentration. For the middel concentration an outlier existed at
Mo 25% for pH 8.5 but else the performance increased with concentration. But for the
highest concentration the trend was inverted, meaning that performance decreased with
increasing pH, and the most optimal pH being the lowest at 8.
For the overall performance chart it was clear to see the increased performance of the
35% over the other series where quite large at the lowest pH where as the highest pH
had the second lowest performance of all the samples. It could therefore clearly be see
that pH had a large influence on the plating composition, to an even greater extend than
than mole ratios.
For the 15% series no noticable changes were observed in the surface plating. Some
artifacts were observed at 8.5 but else there is nothing to indicate a change in performance
The 25% series had a lot of differences between the different coatings and no clear indi-
cators of what impact it had on performancee. It could be observed that pH 8 and 9 had
the same performance and since they both had a high ratio of artifacts and nodes on their
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Surface pictures of 20% Fe
surface it is suspected that this structure is what leads to their similar performances.
For the last series, pictures are similar to the surfaces seen in the 15% series with the
high amount of small bumpes in the surface where as the pH 8 and 8.5 have smoother
surfaces more similar to what was observed for the Fe coating. There is therefore no
clear visual indicators of what leads to the high performance of the pH 8 sample over the
rest and it must therefore be assumed to be due to a higher and smoother incorporation
of Mo into the main coating.
Combined Fe-Mo plating
Optimized platings at extended time
Optimized platings with different P content
Optimized plating with SDS.
16
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.6: Surface pictures of 30% Fe
Figure 3.7: Surface pictures of 40% Fe
Figure 3.8: Fe HER performance series
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.9: Combined OER performance series
Figure 3.10: Surface pictures of 15% Mo
18
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.11: Surface pictures of 25% Mo
Figure 3.12: Surface pictures of 35% Mo
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:29==
4
Conclusion
4.1
Overall
A series of both anode and cathodes were successfully synthesized and electrochemically
tested. Their performances met satisfactory performance goals and the solutions are
ready for use in coating of nanofibers, given a slightly longer plating time due to the lower
amount of surface nucleation sites present on the nanofibers.
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:31==
Bibliography
[1]
Fabienne Delaunois, Veronique Vitry, and Luiza Bonin. Electroless Nickel Plating.
2020.
[2]
Dung T. To et al. “Effects of NH4+/citrate complexing agent ratio on Ni–Mo and Ni–
Mo–O electrodeposits from ammonium citrate baths”. In: Frontiers in Chemistry 10
(Aug. 2022). ISSN: 22962646. DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2022.942423.
[3]
Ching Yuan Bai et al. “Surface modifications of aluminum alloy 5052 for bipolar
plates using an electroless deposition process”. In: Journal of Power Sources 183.1
(Aug. 2008), pp. 174–181. ISSN: 03787753. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.04.082.
[4]
E. Beltowska-Lehman and P. Indyka. “Kinetics of Ni–Mo electrodeposition from Ni-
rich citrate baths”. In: Thin Solid Films 520.6 (Jan. 2012), pp. 2046–2051. ISSN:
0040-6090. DOI: 10.1016/J.TSF.2011.10.024.
[5]
Energy Conversion & Storage Materials Laboratory Part 2. NiMo-MoO x Hybrid as
an Efficient Electrocatalyst for Hydrogen Evolution over a Wide pH Range. Tech.
rep.
[6]
Hoyoung Kim et al. “Facile fabrication of amorphous NiMo catalysts for alkaline
hydrogen oxidation reaction”. In: Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry
94 (Feb. 2021), pp. 309–316. ISSN: 1226-086X. DOI: 10.1016/J.JIEC.2020.10.042.
[7]
H. Liu et al. “Comparison of the corrosion behaviour of laser-annealed Ni-P and
Ni-Mo-P deposits in H2SO4 and NaCl solutions”. In: Transactions of the Institute of
Metal Finishing 94.2 (2016), pp. 76–85. ISSN: 17459192. DOI: 10.1080/00202967.
2015.1124639.
[8]
Sun Hwa Park, Dung T. To, and Nosang V. Myung. A review of nickel-molybdenum
based hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts from theory to experiment. Feb. 2023.
DOI: 10.1016/j.apcata.2022.119013.
[9]
E Potvin and L Brossard. Electrocatalytic activity of Ni-Fe anodes for alkaline water
electrolysis. Tech. rep. 1992, pp. 311–318.
[10]
Maria D. Reyes-Tolosa et al. “Corrosion Resistance, Morphological and Electrical
Properties of Electroless Ni-Mo-P Thin Films Deposited on Ceramic and Kapton
Substrates”. In: ECS Transactions 25.27 (Feb. 2010), pp. 81–88. ISSN: 1938-5862.
DOI: 10.1149/1.3318506.
[11]
N. Ma Rosas-Laverde et al. “Optimizing Electroless Plating of Ni–Mo–P Coatings
Toward Functional Ceramics”. In: Acta Metallurgica Sinica (English Letters) 33.3
(Mar. 2020), pp. 437–445. ISSN: 21941289. DOI: 10.1007/s40195-019-00989-x.
[12]
Sen Lin Wang. “Studies of electroless plating of Ni-Fe-P alloys and the influences
of some deposition parameters on the properties of the deposits”. In: Surface and
Coatings Technology 186.3 (Sept. 2004), pp. 372–376. ISSN: 02578972. DOI: 10.
1016/j.surfcoat.2004.01.017.
[13]
Sen Lin Wang. “Studies of electroless plating of Ni-Fe-P alloys and the influences
of some deposition parameters on the properties of the deposits”. In: Surface and
Coatings Technology 186.3 (Sept. 2004), pp. 372–376. ISSN: 02578972. DOI: 10.
1016/j.surfcoat.2004.01.017.
[14]
Rui Wang et al. “Electroless deposition synthesis of composite catalysts Ni-Fe-P-
WO3/NF with superior oxygen evolution performance”. In: International Journal of
Hydrogen Energy 47.68 (Aug. 2022), pp. 29305–29314. ISSN: 03603199. DOI: 10.
1016/j.ijhydene.2022.06.266.
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
23
==PAGE:32==
[15]
Xuefei Wu et al. “NiFeP-MoO2 hybrid nanorods on nickel foam as high-activity and
high-stability electrode for overall water splitting”. In: Chemical Engineering Journal
409 (Apr. 2021). ISSN: 13858947. DOI: 10.1016/j.cej.2020.128161.
[16]
Ruihao Yang et al. “Codeposition behavior of Fe-Ni alloys: A review in mechanisms,
preparation and effects on composition”. In: Materials Science and Engineering: B
310 (Dec. 2024), p. 117723. ISSN: 0921-5107. DOI: 10.1016/J.MSEB.2024.117723.
[17]
Juan Zhang et al. “3D Hierarchical Porous Fe/Ni-P-B as Practical Bifunctional Elec-
trode for Alkaline Water Electrolysis”. In: ChemSusChem 15.17 (Sept. 2022). ISSN:
1864564X. DOI: 10.1002/cssc.202200937.
[18]
Liguo Zu et al. “Effect of pore orientation on the catalytic performance of porous
NiMo electrode for hydrogen evolution in alkaline solutions”. In: International Journal
of Hydrogen Energy 44.10 (Feb. 2019), pp. 4650–4655. ISSN: 03603199. DOI:
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.12.224.
24
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
==PAGE:33==
Synthesis and application of 3d polyalloyed electrodes via electroless Nickel plating
25
==PAGE:34==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 310
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.energy.dtu.dk
