==PAGE:1==
The Influence of Gut Microbiota on Neural
Development
Master Thesis
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
The Influence of Gut Microbiota on Neural
Development
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Laura Ibáñez Serra- s222796
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Kolonnevej Street,
Building 224, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Bioanalytics Systems Research Group,
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Master’s degree in Advanced
Materials and Healthcare Engineering, MSc Eng.
Laura Ibáñez Serra - s222796
February, 2025
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The gut-brain axis (GBA) has become an important target for the study of neurodegen-
erative diseases, such as Parkinson’s disease (PD). Certain metabolites produced by gut
bacteria play a crucial role in maintaining gut homeostasis while also influencing neuronal
function in the brain. The effects of these metabolites on the brain open new possibilities
for research.
This study aims to investigate the potential of five key compounds that may be found in
bacterial extracts and that are known to have effect on the brain and in some neurode-
generative diseases. The main objective is to assess their effects on neuronal proliferation,
differentiation, and dopamine release capacity to establish the foundation for future gut-
brain therapeutic approaches for PD treatment. To achieve these main objectives, different
techniques and assays such as MTS assay or Live/Dead staining were performed to assess
the different effects of the five compounds on cell viability and proliferation capacity. To
evaluate if the differentiation capacity was affected by the compounds and to identify if
compounds induced neuron differentiation into dopaminergic neurons, Immunochemistry
assays were performed.
Additionally, to determine if differentiated cells could release
dopamine under the compounds influence, Real-time electrochemical dopamine detection
assay was performed using electrodes set-up.
By exploring the role of these compounds in brain neurons, better understanding of the
gut-brain axis foundations for future therapeutic strategies for PD using gut microbiota
as main focus can be explored.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Surangrat Thongkorn, Postdoctoral Researcher, Department of Biotechnology and
Biomedicine - Bioanalytical Systems Group
For her patience and constant support throughout this research. Her dedication and com-
mitment have ensured the progress and success of this work.
Arto Rainer Heiskanen, Senior Researcher, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
- Bioanalytical Systems Group
For his valuable guidance and continuous support throughout the process.
Jenny Emnéus, Professor, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine - Bioanalytical
Systems Group
For her support and for providing me with the opportunity to develop my thesis within
the Bioanalytics group.
Alvaro Gonzalez, Student, MSc student in Advanced Materials and Healthcare Engi-
neering, DTU
For his help and moral support throughout the laboratory work.
My parents,
For their invaluable support and for absolutely always giving me the strength and moti-
vation to keep pushing forward.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
• PD: Parkinson’s disease
• GBA: Gut-Brain Axis
• SNpc: Substantia Nigra pars compacta
• NSP: nigrostriatal Pathway
• SL: Sodium Lactate
• NaB: Sodium Butyrate
• GABA: Gamma-aminobutyric acid
• Ach: Acetylcholine
• SCFA: Short-Shain Fatty Acid
• MTS: 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-
tetra-zolium
• ICC: Immunocytochemistry
• PBS: Phosphate-Buffered Saline
• GM: Growth Media
• DM: Differentiation Media
• BDNF: Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor
• hVM1: Human Ventral Midbrain 1
• PLL: Poly-L-Lysine
• CV: Cyclic Voltammetry
• EIS: Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
• PMMA: Poly(methyl methacrylate)
• PC: Polycarbonate
• PCB: Printed Circuit Board
• ICC: Immunocytochemistry
• TH: Tyrosine Hydroxylase
• RE: Reference Electrode
• CE: Counter Electrode
• WE: Working Electrode
• CNS: Central Nervous System
• PNS: Peripheral Nervous System
• ENS: Enteric Nervous System
• ROS: Reactive Oxygen Species
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
Parkinson Disease and Nigrostriatal Pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Gut-Brain Axis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Literature Review of the selected Gut-microbiota Compounds . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methodology
10
3.1
Experimental Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Experimental Procedures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
HVM1 Cell culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.2
Compounds preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.3
MTS Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.4
Live Dead Staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.5
Immunocytochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.6
Electrodes Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.7
Real-time Dopamine Release Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Results and Discussion
20
4.1
MTS Assay - Phase 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Live Dead Assay - Phase 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
ICC Assay - Early Differentiation - Phase 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
ICC assay - Late Differentiation - Phase 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Bright-field Microscopy Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
Real-time Dopamine Detection - Phase 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.7
ICC Assay on Electrodes - Phase 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Conclusion
47
Bibliography
48
A Appendix
52
A.1 Cell Culture Mediums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.2 Preparation of Compound Stock Solutions and Serial Dilutions . . . . . . .
53
A.3 Cell seeding and Compounds preparation Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.4 MTS Assay Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.5 Live Dead Staining Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.6 Immunocytochemistry Assay Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.7 Electrochemical Dopamine Detection Assay Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.8 Statistical Data and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and Problem statement
In recent years, interest in understanding the complex and interesting relationship between
the gut and brain, known as the gut-brain axis (GBA), has increased. Although signifi-
cant research has been performed, much remains unclear about how specific compounds
secreted from bacteria can influence specific neurological processes. This connection is par-
ticularly relevant to neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s disease (PD), which
is characterized by the progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons, leading to the
inability to produce dopamine molecules. The finding of some specific relationship be-
tween bacteria metabolites and their influence on neurons could open a new window of
opportunities to develop targeted and innovative therapeutic strategies.
The motivation for this research is to identify possible compounds secreted by gut mi-
crobiota that can influence neurons behaviour and dopamine synthesis. Establishing a
link between specific compounds and concentrations and their effects on brain cells could
establish the foundations for targeted gut-based therapies, such as regulating the gut bac-
teria as a strategy for managing or slowing the progression of Parkinson’s disease and
other neurodegenerative disorders.
Specific compounds secreted by gut microbiota, such as Lactate, Butyrate, Dopamine,
GABA, and Acetylcholine, have been identified through previous literature to have the
potential to influence neuronal behavior. Gaining a deeper understanding of these interac-
tions could offer valuable insights for developing understanding the relationship between
gut and brain for Parkinson’s disease.
This master’s thesis has been conducted within the Bioanalytics Systems Research Group
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) as part of the OpenMIND project (Opto-
Electronic Neural Connectoid Model Implemented for Neurodegenerative Disease). Open-
MIND is a collaborative initiative between DTU (Technical University of Denmark), Lund
University, UAM (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid), and CELLINK. This master the-
sis work has been highly exploratory, developed from scratch, allowing for a flexible and
innovative approach to investigate new concepts in the field.
1.2
Objectives
The objectives of this research are:
• Objective 1: Assess the impact of different compounds on neuron cell proliferation.
• Objective 2: Assess the impact of different compound on neuronal differentiation.
• Objective 3: Evaluate the dopamine release capacity of neuronal cells under com-
pound influence using Amperometry.
• Objective 4: Apply and understand electrochemical techniques for the characteri-
zation of pyrolytic electrodes, including Cyclic Voltammetry (CV), Electrochemical
Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS)
1
==PAGE:9==
1.3
Outline
Chapter 2 - Theoretical background: This chapter provides an overview of the key
characteristics of Parkinson’s disease, followed by a literature review of the research con-
ducted to date. It also highlights the role of the gut-brain axis, exploring how gut mi-
crobiota can influence brain neurotransmitter production, with a particular focus on the
five compounds tested in this research. Additionally, the chapter examines specific gut
bacteria-derived compounds that may impact brain functioning, neurogenesis, and, ulti-
mately, the progression of PD.
Chapter 3 - Methodology: This chapter explains the methods and laboratory work
performed to evaluate the effects of microbiota compounds on cells. It also includes an
experimental overview, which explains the three clear phases (Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase
3) into which the experimental work has been divided, ensuring a logical flow along the
experiments.
Chapter 4 - Results and Discussion: This chapter presents and discusses the results
obtained from the experimental work, highlighting the key findings and the main challenges
encountered at each stage of the process.
Chapter 5 - Conclusion: This chapter summarizes the main findings of this thesis and
discusses their possible future impact on PD therapies and models.
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Theoretical background
2.1
Parkinson Disease and Nigrostriatal Pathway
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a well-known neurodegenerative disease characterized by the
progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons located in the substantia nigra, leading
to direct effects on movement, balance, and coordination [1].
The disease primarily affects the midbrain region, specifically the substantia nigra pars
compacta (SNpc), which hosts the dopaminergic neurons responsible for dopamine pro-
duction. The importance of dopamine as a neurotransmitter lies in its crucial role as the
primary communicator between the substantia nigra and the striatum. This interaction
occurs through the nigrostriatal pathway (NSP), a key neural pathway involved in the
movement regulation Figure 2.1 [2].
The NSP plays a vital role in PD as the main feature of the disease is the degeneration
or loss of dopaminergic neurons within this pathway. The underlying mechanism driving
this neurodegeneration, is the accumulation of ￿-synuclein, a protein that aggregates into
structures known as Lewy bodies. Under normal conditions, ￿-synuclein is a soluble pro-
tein that contributes to neurotransmission. However, in Parkinson’s disease, α-synuclein
undergoes misfolding, leading to the formation of insoluble aggregates within dopamin-
ergic neurons. These protein clumps disrupt normal cellular processes, and over time,
contributes to neuronal degeneration and cell death. Consequently, the brain loses its
ability to effectively deliver dopamine from the substantia nigra to the striatum [1].
The relevance of this pathway also extends to the role of GABA (gamma-aminobutyric
acid) in brain function and the regulation of movement. GABA is the brain’s primary
inhibitory neurotransmitter, and it is synthesized by GABAergic neurons that reside in
the striatum, region that is composed of the caudate nucleus and the putamen - both
regions critical for controlling motor activity. Within striatum, GABA helps to modulate
striatal activity, which usally is to stop the movment, therebfor GABA plays its inhibitory
role in the Striatum facilitating the initiation and smooth execution of movement [1].
However, a key factor in this regulatory process is that dopamine modulates GABA release
in the neurons. In Parkinson’s disease, as dopamine can not be effectively delivered from
the Substantia Nigra to the Striatum, where the GABAergic neurons are, dopamine can
not modulate GABA ad therefore GABA can not produce an inhibitory effect on the
Striatum, leading to dysregulated motor control, manifesting uncontrolled movements,
which are among the hallmark symptoms of Parkinson’s disease [1, 2].
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Representative Image of the Nigrostriatal Pathway (NSP) in healthy conditions
and when under PD effects. [2]
Nowadays, the cause behind Parkinson disease (PD) remains unknown which makes signif-
icantly challenging to develop effective treatments. While genetics and environmental are
considered main factors, the exact mechanism producing the degeneration of dopaminergic
neurons is not fully understood [1].
Despite not having a definitive cure, current therapeutic approaches are focused on medica-
tions that increases dopamine levels in the brain, Levodopa (L-DOPA), dopamine agonists
and monoamine oxidase-B inhibitors are one of the mainly used [2]. Levodopa is the pre-
cursor of dopamine which in the brain, is converted into dopamine as a product an of
enzymatic reaction[3]. On the other hand, dopamine agonist are drugs that try to mimic
dopamine by directly binding to dopamine neurons receptors[4].
Finally, Mono-amine
Oxidase-B (MAO-B) inhibitors block the enzyme in charge of breaking down dopamine
molecule increasing dopamine half-life [3]. The primary challenge with pharmaceutical
treatments is not only the adverse effects, but also that medications often require dose ad-
justments and switching between different drugs depending on the progression and stage
of the disease [5].
Advanced therapies rely on Gene Therapy, Cell therapy and Targeted Drug Delivery. The
use of vectors such as Adeno-Associated Virus (AAV) are commonly used for delivering
neurotrophic factors such as GDNF (Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor) to en-
hance dopaminergic neurons survival, but even having results in clinical trials stage, main
challenges remain in overcoming the immune rejection from the body [6]. Also, within
gene therapy, the replacement of enzymes involved in dopamine synthesis such as Tyro-
sine Hydroxylase (TH) have been tested in animal models. CRISPR/Cas9 technology has
been also used to correct mutations in SNCA genes, which are associated with potential
alfa-synuclein aggregation. According to Bougea et.al [6], a review performed on 2024,
just three AAV-based therapies have been authorized in United States and Europe.
Cell Therapies are mainly focused on Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs) transplants, as due
to their nature they can differentiate in any type of cell, including dopaminergic neurons.
Stem Cells (SC) therapies have shown promising results in preclinical models and early
4
==PAGE:12==
human trials, main challenges reside in possible tumor formation due to proliferation
capacity of SC as well as immune rejection. To avoid immune rejection, it has also been
used induced Pluripotent SC (iPSCs), as they are derived from patient´s own cells and
reprogrammed to be dopaminergic neurons before transplantation. In the field of iPSC,
researchers successfully created viable iPSC dopaminergic neurons from patients having
PD and transplanted them into the brains of non-human primates [7, 6].
Targeted Drug Delivery therapies have the main focus on crossing the Blood Brian Barrier
(BBB) to ensure that the drug reaches the target. Some of this Drug Delivery strategies
include nanoparticles delivery systems that act as a carrier to deliver the drug. Polymeric
PLGA nanoparticles or Solid Lipid Nanoparticles (SLNs) have been used to deliver neu-
rotrophic factors or drugs such as L-DOPA directly to dopaminergic neurons promoting
a targeted delivery system [6]. The primary overarching limitations associated with gene
therapies, cell therapies, and targeted drug delivery approaches are the immune rejection
against vectors and nanoparticles, as well as challenged when working with stem cells [6].
2.2
Gut-Brain Axis
In recent years, growing interest on gut microbiota role on influencing brain and neuronal
connections has drastically increased and has unlock new approaches for the treatment of
neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s disease. [8]. Over the past five years,
literature has increasingly highlighted the importance of the gut-brain connection. Al-
terations in gut microbiota composition have been linked to changes in brain function
and behavior, suggesting that targeting the gut microbiome could offer new therapeutic
possibilities for neurological disorders [9].
The gut-brain axis (GBA) is a bidirectional communication network that connects the gas-
trointestinal tract (GI) and the central nervous system (CNS) Figure 2.2. This complex
system facilitates interaction between the gut microbiota and the brain and is recognized
as the primary communication channel linking the digestive system with the brain [10].
The bidirectional nature of the gut-brain axis operates through various systems and in-
volves both direct and indirect pathways, including the enteric nervous system (ENS),
the neuroendocrine system, the immune system, and the circulatory system. On one side
of the axis, the brain influences the gut through neurotransmitters and signals, while on
the other side, the gut influences the brain via bacterial metabolites, neurotransmitters,
hormones and others [11].
The Enteric Nervous System (ENS) is one of the most fascinating mechanisms used by the
gut-brain axis (GBA). The ENS consists of a network of neurons that plays a crucial role
in governing the GI tract. This neural network serves as the primary communication link
between the gut and the Peripheral nervous system (PNS), and also communicates with
the CNS transmitting signals via the vagus nerve. When communication occurs through
the ENS, the microbiota in the gut can produce changes in the signals sent from the ENS
mesh of neurons to the PNS or vagus nerve, affecting signaling in the brain [12, 11].
Also, in the case of the neuroendocrine system, hormones are the ones in charge of de-
livering the signals. Within the Neuroendocrine system, the HPA axis (Hypothalamic-
pituitaryadrenal axis) host different hormones cascade between the hypotalamus, the pi-
tuitary gland, and the adrenal glands. Some of the hormones can be secreted by enteroen-
docrine cells (EECs), which are situated in the epithelium of the GI tract [13]. These
hormones can affect the HPA axis or also go into the systemic circularization [14]. Re-
garding circulatory system as a mechanism used for GBA, it has been showed that some
5
==PAGE:13==
gut species such as SCFAs can pass the gut epithelial cells and reach systemic circulation.
Some of them can cross the BBB and reach the CNS [15, 16, 17].
The bast majority of SCFAs are acetate, propionate and butyrate and are usually present
in µM scale in physiological levels. They are mainly present in the gut and produced via
the microbial fermentation of bacteria. However, the most important feature is that they
have been demonstrated to maintain and regulate the proper functioning of the gut, that
in an indirect way can influence the CNS [18, 19]. Regarding the BBB, gut microbiota
disorders have been related with damage and instability of the BBB, highlighting the effect
of gut microbiota in the brain, specifically in the BBB structure [15]. Despite the different
mechanism from GBA, is still not fully understood how all in detail between gut and brain
works.
In the gut there is also a big population of immune cells that directly connect with the
immune system and that they are also present in the brain[20] . It has been demonstrated
that the gut microbiota has effect on immune cells, as it has been showed that gut microbes
influenced natural killer (NK) cells to produce IFN￿, a proinflammatory cytokine [21, 22].
Some general findings show the key role that microbiota plays in regulating neural stem
cells activity in some brain regions, impacting neurogenesis and neurodegenerative disor-
ders [15]. Findings for PD, show how gut microbiota alterations contribute to inflammation
in the GI and other symptoms, which are intensified over the course of the disease [15].
Some emerging therapies for PD involving the use of gut microbiota, are for instance FMT
(Fecal Microbiota Transplant) derived from healthy donors. Results for FTM showed en-
hanced motor function and neuroinflammation reduction, when using mouse models with
induced PD in preclinical stages [23]. For Alzheimer’s disease, have been researched the
effects of probiotic supplements in patients within clinical trials, investigating the possible
effects in cognitive function and the reduction in inflammatory markers [24]. Addition-
ally, prebiotics and probiotics which restore the microbial balance, can play a re-balancing
role and possibility be associated with reduction in neurodegenerative and cerebrovascular
disease risk [25].
Figure 2.2: Gut-Brain Axis. GBA communicates with the central nervous system (CNS)
through four main pathways [15].
6
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Literature Review of the selected Gut-microbiota
Compounds
As have been described before, gut-derived metabolites and compounds influence CNS
and can play a key role in neurodegenerative diseases as in the case of PD. For this
master’s thesis research, an extensive literature review has been performed prior to start
the experimental part, in order to identify the most relevant compounds and concentrations
for the study. The selected chemical species or compounds are compounds that may be
secreted by gut microbiota: Lactate, Butyrate, Dopamine, Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid
and Acetylcholine have been chosen based on some existing literature supporting their
impact on neurons and their presence in bacteria extracts.
However, its important to highlight that identifying specific concentrations from previous
studies that match with the same experimental conditions used in this research has been
challenging, as it is a relative new specific field of study and therefore there is limited
available literature providing direct data meaning that even if the data is relying on prior
literature, the optimal selection of concentrations is also part of the experimental work
performed in this research.
Sodium Lactate
Sodium Lactate (SL) is the stable salt form from Lactate. Sodium Lactate is the equivalent
form of Lactate for the research performed during this master thesis. Lactate is the ionized
form of Lactic Acid. Lactic acid its one of the main molecules produced by bacteria using
fermentation in the gut. For its nature as an acid, when pH basic conditions occur so
such as pH change from the stomach to the blood, Lactic acid loses one hydrogen and
then is convert it into Lactate [13]. Sodium Lactate is also more stable and more soluble,
and can be diluted directly into the cell culture media. Lactic acid together with butyric
acid, isobutyric acid and others are considered short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). Typically
bacteria such as Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria produce these SCFAs [26].
Lactic acid is produced by glycolysis of cells. Lactate is transported into the brain via
monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs), particularly MCT2 on neurons. Once inside neu-
rons, lactate is converted to pyruvate, and serves as energy source in ATP for neurons.
Lactate exhibits neuroprotective properties by protecting from neuronal apoptosis and
by reducing oxidative stress levels. Moreover, it promotes the expression of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), promoting neuronal survival and growth [13]. Other research
suggest that BDNF could stimulate neurogenesis, through a signaling cascade including
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMKII). Moreover, it has been observed a rela-
tion between increased circulating BDNF with increase in peripheral blood lactate levels
[27, 28]. These last studies explore possible relations, but it is not directly demonstrated
that lactate directly promotes BDNF expression.
For the range of optimal concentrations to be used for Sodium Lactate, it has been studied
that at concentrations of 5mM, lactate does not only play a role as cell energy supporter,
but also can bind to GPR81 receptor in neurons affecting neuronal activity by decreasing
the calcium transients [29].
Other studies show that lactate at 10mM maintained the
survival of neurons, also showing that lactate at 10mM was not toxic for neurons. Also,the
same study reveals that lactate at 20mM was also tested and no differences were observed
[30]. Finally, concentrations between 10mM and 20mM can be reached in the brain under
some conditions, mainly physical conditions [31]. The established concentration range of
Sodium Lactate for this research is: 1.0, 2.5, 5, 10, 12.5, 15, 20, 40 mM.
7
==PAGE:15==
Sodium Butyrate
Butyrate or butyric acid is mainly produced by Faecalibacterium or Anaerostipes caccae
bacteria, and it is also considered a Short-Chain Fatty Acid (SCFA) that comes from
the fermentation of dietary fibers in the gut [18]. Butyrate has been extensively studied
for its key role as neuroprotective agent, due to its function as an HDAC inhibitor, which
increases histone acetylation. This modifications can alter gene expression associated with
neuroprotective tendencies [26].
Among all SCFAs, butyrate has been observed to have an influence on neurodegenerative
diseases. In Alzheimer’s disease (AD) models, butyrate has been shown to reduce neu-
roinflammation [32]. Moreover, regarding Alzheimer’s disease, preclinical study showed
that butyrate can decrease amyloid-beta protein [33]. For PD, butyrate resulted in motor
symptoms improvement in PD models [34], as well as it has been reported that gut mi-
crobiota irregularities in PD patients reduced butyrate levels [35]. Also, study form 2023
highlighted that NaB elevated levels of dopamine and 5-HT in the striatum region Induced
PD Mice, as well as NaB (Sodium Butyrate) enhanced motor functions and behaviour in
the same Induced PD mice [19].
However, excessive amount of butyrate or SCFAs can influence in the mircoglia activity,
promoting misfolding of ￿-synuclein proteins, which are involved in PD [36]. One example
is the possibility of inducing amyloid B formation in AD due to variations o microglia
phenotype [37]. SCFAs and butyrate can play dual roles, demonstrating the complexity
of brain-gut relationship [15].
Some research performed on human neuroblastoma cells, where minor part of the research
aimed to find the safe or non-toxic concentration of NaB for further assays, the tested
range was 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2.5 and 5 mM when evaluating the effect of NaB (Sodium
Butyrate) on cell viability in human neuroblastoma (SH-SY6Y Cells) [38].
Moreover,
some findings reveal that when intestinal neurons used 0.5mM butyrate enhanced neuronal
proliferation, but higher butyrate concentrations possibly inhibit cell growth, highlighting
the diﬀicult relationship between butyrate and optimal concentrations[39]. The established
concentration range of Sodium Butyrate for this research is: 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.5, 5, 10,
15 mM.
Dopamine
Dopamine is a catechol-amine neurotransmitter mainly associated with PD. It can be
synthesized in the brain, but also certain gut bacteria, such as Lactobacillus or Serratia can
also produce dopamine as well as norepinephrine [40]. Other bacteria such as Clostridium
sporogenes or Enterococcus faecalis demonstrated to be involved in levodopa metabolism,
dopamine precursor [41].
Some studies suggest that neurotransmitters that are secreted from bacteria in the intesti-
nal lumen, can promote epithelial cells to produce signaling molecules that communicate
with the ENS and therefore affect CNS. Some neurotransmitter with neuroactive functions
include GABA, serotonin, acetylcholine and dopamine [42].
Dopamine concentrations variate it a lot across literature, but there are evidences that
suggest that there is no significant effect in the nano-molar range. However, when the
micro-molar range is reached, it can be observed proliferation of of hBMSCs (Human
bone marrow stromal cells). Specifically at 50µM dopamine promoted proliferation of of
hBMSCs. However, at 500µM inhibition of proliferation and differentiation was observed
[43]. The established concentration range of Dopamaine for this research is: 5µM, 10µM,
25µM, 50µM, 100µM, 250µM, 500 µM, 1 mM.
8
==PAGE:16==
Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA)
GABA is the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter in the CNS. Several studies have ob-
served that some gut bacteria such as Lactobacillus, or Bifidobacterium to produce GABA.
Recent research has showed the role of GABA as a gut-brain axis mediator and have sug-
gested that circulating GABA can be mainly produced by gut microbiota [44].
Regarding GABA concentrations, it has been showed that the effect of GABA in cortical
cultures when a gradual GABA treatment was applied, concentration range varied from
1.25, 2.5, 5, to 10µM. GABA concentrations were prepared with DMEM [45]. The estab-
lished concentration range of GABA for this research is: 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 and
15 µM.
Acetylcholine
Certain gut bacteria such as Bacillus acetylcholini, Lactobacillus plantarum, Staphylococ-
cus aureus or Escherichia coli, have shown to produce acetylcholine. Acetylcholine main
role is to allow cognitive processes and neuronal plasticity. Acetylcholine nature, makes
it impossible to cross the BBB. However, the brain has his own mechanism by using
choline which can cross BBB using transporters found in the capillary endothelial cells.
When choline is inside, neurons use it to produce acetylcholine conniving choline with
Acetyl Coenzyme A with the help of choline acetyl-transferase [46]. Some studies show
that in advanced real-time electrochemical detection techniques it was possible to detect
acetylcholine concentrations of 2.4 mM in living neurons [47].
The established concentration range of Acetylcholine for this research is: 0.1 mM, 0.25,
0.5, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 mM.
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Methodology
3.1
Experimental Overview
As previously stated, this research aimed to investigate the effects of specific compounds
that may be secreted by gut microbiota on neuronal cells in the context of Parkinson’s
disease. To achieve these objectives, the experimental process was structured into three
main phases, ensuring a logical progression throughout the research.
Each phase was
designed with a specific objective, allowing for the evaluation of various compounds at
different concentrations.
Over time, the number of tested concentrations was reduced
based on the results from previous phases. The selection of compounds was performed
based on the literature review presented in Chapter 2 and the compounds used are listed
below. The experimental workflow is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
• Sodium Lactate (SL) – L7022 Sigma Aldrich
• Sodium Butyrate (NaB) – B5887 Sigma Aldrich
• Dopamine Hydrochloride (Dopamine) – H8502 Sigma Aldrich
• γ-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA) – A2129 Sigma Aldrich
• Acetylcholine Chloride (ACh) – A2661 Sigma Aldrich
Phase 1: Assessment of Proliferation in Undifferentiated hVM1 cells Under
Compounds Influence
Phase 1 was primarily focused on evaluating the effects of various compound concen-
trations on proliferation of undifferentiated hVM1 cells. This initial phase allowed the
testing of a broad concentration range to determine how each compound and concentra-
tion influenced cell proliferation and to identify the most interesting concentrations for
the following phases. Using 96-well plates, cells were seeded and treated with the five
different compounds, each tested with eight different concentrations. Proliferation was
assessed through MTS assay to evaluate cell viability and Live/Dead staining for imaging
live and dead cells. The insights gained from this phase were essential for narrowing down
the concentrations for the next phase.
The timeline for Phase 1 involved a four-day experiment. Compounds were added one day
after cell seeding. MTS and L/D assays were performed 48 hours after adding compounds
to provide suﬀicient time for the cells to uptake and interact with the compounds. The
assays are described in detail in the 3.2.3 MTS assay and 3.2.4 Live/Dead assay from
Chapter 3 Methodology subsections.
Phase 2: Evaluation of hVM1 cells Neuronal Differentiation Capacity Under
Compound Influence: Early and Late Differentiation
This second phase builds upon the results from Phase 1, narrowing down the number of
concentrations from eight concentrations per compound to three per compound, where the
concentrations were selected based on MTS and Live/Dead assay results. After identifying
how compounds and concentrations affect the proliferation capacity of hVM1 cells, in this
second phase, the effect of the selected concentrations on the differentiation capacity of
hVM1 cells was evaluated. Using 48-well plates, cells were seeded and compounds were
added at two different time points, to see if there was a difference in their differentiation
capacity. While in early differentiation, compounds were added at the beginning of the
10
==PAGE:18==
differentiation process, during late differentiation compounds were added when hVM1 cells
were fully differentiated. To evaluate if the compounds were influencing cell differentiation,
an Immunocytochemistry (ICC) assay was performed to identify possible dopaminergic
cells and relevant cell structures.
Phase 3: Evaluation of cells Capacity to Release Dopamine Under
Compounds Influence
The last phase of the project was focused on studying the capacity of cells to release
dopamine and analyzing the different dopamine release profiles depending on the com-
pound influence. Based on Phase 2 results, the number of concentrations was reduced
to one concentration per compound. Compounds were added during early-stage differ-
entiation. To evaluate dopamine release, cells were seeded on electrodes and Real-time
dopamine detection - Amperometry assay was performed. Additionally, ICC was used to
identify possible dopaminergic cells.
Figure 3.1: Diagram summarizing the three experimental phases.
In each phase it is
specified the objective, evaluation methods, and tested compounds with corresponding
concentrations. Illustration created with BioRender.
3.2
Experimental Procedures
3.2.1
HVM1 Cell culture
HVM1 cells
hVM1 cells are a Human fetal Ventral Mesencephalic neural stem cell line derived from
ventral midbrain fetuses, immortalized using a retroviral vector encoding v-myc, allowing
their expansion while preserving their differentiation potential [48, 49]. This cell line was
developed at Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM) in Spain, but primary cells were
originally acquired as donations in Lund University Hospital (Sweeden)[49]. The cells were
provided by Center for Molecular Biology “Severo Ochoa” at Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid. hVM1 cells were the only cells used in this research.
HVM1 cells are committed to a neuronal phenotype, meaning that, unlike pluripotent
stem cells, hVM1 cells are already predetermined to become neurons, with the potential to
11
==PAGE:19==
differentiate into specific neuronal subtypes, such as dopaminergic neurons. This feature
makes them valuable for neuronal studies and therapeutic research, specifically in the
context of Parkinson’s disease [48, 49].
One of characteristics of these cells is that even if they are cultured in the laboratory,
they can be so accurate as they can differentiate into neurons with some basic character-
istics of basic brain cells, such as responding to neurotransmitters [48, 49]. Differentiated
cells show expression of several mesencephalic dopaminergic markers such as LMX1A,
LMX1B, GIRK2, ADH2 and PITX3, indicating that hVM1 cells retain their identity as
midbrain neurons and express dopamine production markers, rather than differentiating
into a generic neuron type [48, 49].
Cell thawing and Cell seeding
HVM1 cells were stored at -130ºC until the start of the experiments. Once thawed, they
were cultured and expanded in a T-25 flask for one week until they reached the required
cell density. Once the desired density was achieved, the cells were stored in cryovials for
long-term use, while additional flasks were maintained for future experiments. For flasks
used to culture cells intended for freezing, the seeding density was set at 70,000 cells,
whereas for proliferation flasks, which were kept for ongoing experiments, the cell density
was 300,000 cells.
Growth Media (GM) was used to support cell proliferation, while
Differentiation Media (DM) was introduced once differentiation was initiated. Further
details about media composition and protocols for cell seeding and other methodologies
can be found in Appendix section.
Before cell seeding in T-25 flasks, a PLL (Poly-L-Lysine) coating was added to the surface,
creating a positively charged environment that enhances cell adhesion.
As mentioned
earlier, the cell density for proliferation flasks, used in experiments, was 300,000 cells per
flask. Depending on the specific experiment, cell density was adjusted during cell passage.
Specific cell densities for each assay are detailed in their respective methods sections. The
culture medium was changed every two days. The same cell seeding and culture basic
procedure was followed on flasks, plates, and electrodes.
Cell Proliferation and Differentiation
For cell proliferation, the media was changed every two days using GM, while cell mor-
phology and cell confluence were monitored under a brightfield microscope. Cell passage
was performed using trypsinization.
For cell differentiation, GM was replaced with DM, which contained specific compounds
that promoted the differentiation of neurons into dopaminergic cells. A key compound
in this medium was GDNF (Glial-Derived Neurotrophic Factor), which is essential for
both differentiation and the survival of dopaminergic neurons. GDNF activates signalling
pathways, such as the RET receptor, enhancing dopamine-related phenotypes and ensuring
successful dopaminergic neuron differentiation [50]. Additionally, db-cAMP (Dibutyryl
cyclic AMP) was included in the cell culture media, to further support differentiation by
stimulating pathways involved in neurite growth and neuronal maturation[51].
For hVM1 cells, the differentiation process lasts 10 days, which is the necessary period
for them to mature into neurons. As a result, experiments evaluating differentiation, such
as ICC and Real-time dopamine release measurements performed in Phase 2 and Phase
3, were conducted on day 10 differentiation to ensure that cells had reached neuronal
differentiation stage. The culture conditions for differentiation remained consistent with
those used for proliferation, with media changes occurring every two days. In Figure 3.2,
12
==PAGE:20==
the differences between hVM1 cells in the proliferative stage and those undergoing differ-
entiation can be observed. The formation of neurites and neuronal connections is clearly
visible, demonstrating the structural changes associated with neuronal differentiation.
Figure 3.2: HVM1 cells seeded on T-25 flask. (A) Image of proliferated hVM1 cells on T-25
flask. (B) Image of differentiated hVM1 cells on T-25 flask. Images captured by the author
during the experiment with ZEISS Primovert brightfield microscope - X10 Objective.
3.2.2
Compounds preparation
The five compounds used in the experiments (Sodium Lactate, Sodium Butyrate, Dopamine,
GABA and Acetylcholine), were prepared through serial dilutions, starting from the stock
solution and progressively diluted to obtain eight different concentrations. In Figure 3.3, a
table summarizing the stock solutions and corresponding concentrations is presented. The
stock solutions were prepared using Growth Medium (GM). Depending on the experimen-
tal phase, the serial dilutions were prepared either with GM (for Phase 1 - Proliferation
stage) or with DM (for Phase 2 and Phase 3 - Differentiation stage). Notably, during
Phase 2 and Phase 3, since the differentiation timeline spans 10 days, media changes oc-
curred every two days, with the fresh media containing the respective compounds at the
designated concentrations.
Table of Compound Concentrations for Phase 1
Figure 3.3: Table showing the five compounds, their tested concentrations, and stock
solutions, with serial dilutions performed down to Concentration 8.”
13
==PAGE:21==
3.2.3
MTS Assay
MTS assay is a method used to evaluate cell metabolic activity. The primary objective
with this assay was to assess how different compounds and their concentrations influenced
metabolic activity and, consequently, proliferation capacity under the effect of these treat-
ments.
This technique is based on the ability of mitochondria in viable cells, to reduce a MTS
reagent (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4 sulfophenyl) -2H-
tetrazolium) into a soluble formazan product, which produces a color change that can be
quantified. The measurement is determined by absorbance, which is proportional to the
metabolic activity of the cells. The plate reader detects absorbance at 490 nm, corre-
sponding to the formation of the soluble formazan product, allowing assessment of cell
viability and proliferation [52].
In this study, the MTS assay was performed during Phase 1 using 96-well plates to assess
cell metabolic activity across eight concentrations for each of the five compounds. To
ensure accurate readings, absorbance was measured at 1, 2, 3, and 4 hours after MTS
reagent addition. This step was essential for determining the optimal incubation time, as
longer incubation can lead to product saturation, where excessive formazan accumulation
disrupts the reading and correlation between absorbance and metabolic activity. After a
certain point, absorbance no longer increases. 2 hours of incubation was selected as the
optimal incubation time for the MTS assay.
The MTS assay timeline extends over four days, starting with cell seeding on Day 0 (10,000
cells/ well).
On Day 1, compounds were added, followed by 48 hours of incubation.
The assay was then performed on Day 4. As will be discussed in the Results section,
dopamine was excluded from subsequent experiments as it is highly prone to oxidation
and impacted on the assay’s readout. Also, MTS analysis and Live/ Dead Staining analysis
were performed on the same day as both followed the same timeline, even being different
experiments.
In Figure 3.4, a clear overview and summary of both assays and their
timelines can be observed.
For each compound, eight concentrations were tested, with three replicates per concen-
tration. These data were statistically analyzed with t-test used to compare results with
the control, considering p ≥0.05 as statistically significant. Data are presented as mean
±SD, with N = 3.
3.2.4
Live Dead Staining
The Live/Dead Staining Assay was used in Phase 1 to evaluate cell viability in response to
different compound concentrations. This fluorescence-based technique distinguishes live
and dead cells using two main stains: Calcein AM, which marks live cells, and Ethidium
Homodimer-1 (EthD-1), which stains dead cells. Calcein AM is a permeable dye that is
converted it into a fluorescent green compound only for esterases, which are only present in
live cells. On the other hand, EthD-1 can only penetrate cells with damaged membranes,
main feature of dead cells, binding to nucleic acids and emitting red fluorescence. This
combination allows a clear differentiation between live (green) and dead (red) cells [53].
For this study, the Live/Dead assay followed a four-day experimental timeline. On Day
0, cells were seeded at a density of 30,000 cells/well in a 96-well plate, and on Day 1 they
were treated with different compound concentrations. After 48 hours of incubation, on
Day 4 the Live/Dead staining assay was performed. Following a short incubation period,
fluorescence imaging was conducted using a Nikon Eclipse Ti2 confocal microscope. Live
14
==PAGE:22==
cells fluoresced green at an excitation of 495nm, while dead cells emitted red fluorescence
due to EthD-1 excitation at 530–540nm [53].
Image analysis was performed using ImageJ Fiji software to quantify the number of live
and dead cells. For each compound, eight concentrations were tested, with three replicates
per concentration. From these three replicates/ wells, four images were captured per well.
These data were statistically analyzed with a t-test used to compare results with the
control, considering p ≥0.05 as statistically significant.
Data are presented as mean
±s.e.m., with N = 12 and n = 4.
Timeline for MTS and L/D Assays
Figure 3.4: Illustrative summary of the MTS and Live/Dead assays, including overview of
experimental steps and timelines for Phase 1 assays. Illustration created with BioRender.
3.2.5
Immunocytochemistry
Immunocytochemistry (ICC) is a fluorescence-based method used to detect specific pro-
teins in cells using primary and secondary antibodies. While the primary antibody binds
to the target protein, the secondary antibody containing a fluorescent dye, is boundto the
primary antibody. The ICC assay was performed on Day 10 of hVM1 cell differentiation
to observe possible dopaminergic cells and relevant structures such as neurites under the
compound influence. For Phase 3 with electrodes, ICC was performed after Real-time
dopamine detection.
In this project, for ICC assay the following antibodies and staining where used:
Primary and Secondary Antibodies
• Anti-beta-Tubulin (Mouse Monoclonal Antibody): Targets beta-tubulin (mi-
crotubiles) that reflect cytoskeletal structure. Alexa fluor 546 was used as a fluo-
rophore for secondary antibody conjugation.
• Anti-Tyrosine Hydroxylase (TH) (Rabbit Polyclonal Antibody): Targets
Tyrosine Hydroxylase, an enzyme involved in dopamine synthesis (L-DOPA), show-
ing dopaminergic differentiation. Alexa fljor 647 was used as a fluorophore for sec-
ondary antibody conjugation.
15
==PAGE:23==
Nuclear Staining
• Hoechst 33342: Targets nuclei by binding to DNA, allowing visualization of cell
population. Hoechst was used as a fluorophore.
For the ICC assay on hVM1 cells, the same protocol was followed for both well plates
(Phase 2) and electrodes (Phase 3). The process started with cell fixation using paraformalde-
hyde (PFA), followed by permeabilization and blocking steps. In these steps, Triton X-100
was used to permeabilize the cells by disrupting the cell membrane, while goat and horse
serum were used to block non-specific binding sites. Once the cells were fixed and perme-
abilized, the primary antibodies were incubated overnight. The day after, once the samples
were rinsed and the primary antibody solution was removed, cells were incubated with
secondary antibodies and nuclear staining. After incubation, the samples were evaluated
using Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 inverted epifluorescence, and the images were analyzed with
Fiji (NIH ImageJ) software. Further details about ICC protocol and other methodologies
can be found in Appendix section.
3.2.6
Electrodes Set-up
Electrode
Electrodes utilized in this study were Circular 2D electrodes fabricated within the Bioana-
lytics Systems research group using a Microfabrication Process of 2D pyrolytic electrodes.
It is important to emphasize that the electrodes were not produced as part of this thesis
research; instead, they were provided for their use in the experimental work. The fabri-
cation steps are outlined in Figure 3.5, where the key aspect is the use of pyrolysis, which
employs a photosensitive polymer as a template to replicate the electrode pattern.
The active electrode area, shown in Figure 3.6A, consists of a carbon-based working sur-
face, which was the hVM1 cells seeding area in Phase 3. Carbon was selected due to its
high electrical conductivity. Additionally, carbon is widely used in cell culture applications
because of its biocompatibility and promoting cell adhesion[54, 55]. The upper layer of the
electrodes incorporates gold, a highly conductive material that facilitates low-resistance
pathways for signal transmission. Some electrode specifications are: Working Area (12.57
mm²), Pyrolytic Electrode Thickness (2 µm) and Number of Electrodes per Wafer (84
electrodes).
Figure 3.5: Microfabrication Process of Circular 2D pyrolytic Electrodes used in this
project. Image provided by the Bioanalytics Systems Research Group.
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: (A) Circular 2D disc electrode design, indicating the diameter of the electrode
area. (B) Real Circular 2D disc electrode. (C) Wafer of Electrodes used in this project.
Images provided by the Bioanalytics Systems Research Group.
Electrode Area Treatments prior to Cell Seeding
To allow cell seeding on the electrode area, specifically on the carbon surface, O2 plasma
treatment and PLL coating were performed. The O2 plasma treatment was performed to
increase carbon surface hydrophilicity, making it more suitable for interaction with cell
membrane and thereby promoting cell adhesion. Meanwhile, the PLL coating introduced
a positively charged layer, ensuring more cell adhesion on the electrode surface. O2 treat-
ment was performed before PLL coating. For cell seeding on the electrode, the cell density
was 30.000 cells/electrode.
Electrode Characterization
Electrochemical characterization ensures that the electrodes have an optimal electrical
performance.
Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
(EIS) were used to confirm the proper functionality of the electrodes. A key advantage of
these characterization techniques is their non-destructive nature, allowing the electrodes
to be used after the characterization.
• Cyclic Voltammetry (CV): This technique evaluates the ability of electrodes to
transfer electrons, crucial for Real-time dopamine detection. In this characterization
technique, it is used ferrocyanide [(Fe(CN)6]4-/solution, to observe redox reactions
when is applied an external voltage. When the voltage is applied, the redox reaction
takes place (ferrocyanide [(Fe(CN)6]4- / ferricyanide [(Fe(CN)6]3-. The appearance
of distinct redox peaks indicates effective electron transfer, suggesting that electrode
surface is clean and has good conductivity. The reversible redox behaviour of ferro-
cyanide makes it an ideal probe for this type of electrochemical characterization.
• Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS): It measures the impedance
of the electrode, so the resistance to current flow. It represents how easily electrons
move between the electrode and the solution.
Low Change Transfer Resistance
(Rct), indicated a good conductivity. For this technique was also used ferrocyanide
[(Fe(CN)6]4- to induce redox reactions. However, unlike CV, which involves applying
a changing voltage, EIS applies a small alternating current (AC) across a range of
frequencies to measure the impedance of the electrode.
17
==PAGE:25==
Electrodes Set-Up
A complex setup was designed in order to incorporate the electrodes.
The set-up for
the electrode holders consisted on a lower base made from Poly(methyl methacrylate)
(PMMA) that had a small surface pattern to ensure proper electrode positioning. Once
the necessary electrode surface treatments were completed, the electrodes were carefully
placed onto this PMMA structure. An upper structure made of Polycarbonate (PC) was
then positioned above the electrodes. To maintain the integrity of the system, silicone
O-rings were placed between the electrodes and the PC structure, with the main mission
to contain the cell culture media and prevent leakage. The whole system was ensured with
screws.
The holders and O-rings were sterilized prior to the experiments. PMMA structure was
sterilized using NaOH, while the PC structure was sterilized with ethanol. Further details
regarding the steps followed for cell seeding on the electrode surface after O2 plasma
and PLL coating, as well as the sterilization procedures for the holders, are provided in
the Appendix section. An important factor to consider is that PMMA is highly sensitive
to ethanol, meaning that can lead to degradation or breakage upon exposure. Similarly,
PC is affected by NaOH. In particular, ethanol can produce PMMA surface crystallization
and therefore the formation of small-cracks [56].These interactions between ethanol and
PMMA caused challenges due to material cracking during experiments in Phase 3 with
electrodes, as explained during Results section.
In Figure 3.7A, it can be observed an actual image of the upper PC structure, clearly
show the round-shaped area designed to accommodate the electrode area, delimited by
the O-rings. On Figure 3.7B, the complete system is presented, with hVM1 cells already
seeded, illustrating the fully assembled electrode set-up.
Figure 3.7: Electrode Holder Setup for Cell Culture Experiments.
(A) Image of the
polycarbonate (PC) holder, showing the structural design used. (B) Complete electrode
holder setup with electrodes in position containing cells on Day 6 differentiation for Phase
3 experiments. Image captured by the author during experiments.
3.2.7
Real-time Dopamine Release Detection
The detection of dopamine release from differentiated hVM1 cells was performed in Phase
3, using Amperometry technique, which allows a Real-time measurement of dopamine ox-
idation reaction occurring on the electrode surface. The Real-time dopamine detection
assay was performed on Day 10 of hVM1 cell differentiation, before the ICC assay. In
18
==PAGE:26==
Amperometry technique, the current that is applied produce the oxidation or reduction
of a specific substance, depending on the voltage applied, thus the oxidation or reduc-
tion reaction generates an electric current that is recorded and its proportional to the
substance concentration in real-time. Circular 2D disc electrodes had an integrated three-
electrode System, containing a working electrode (WE), reference electrode (RE), and
counter electrode (CE).
The WE is the primary site where the electrochemical reaction occurs and where the
hVM1 cells were seeded, meaning it is where dopamine is oxidized, RE maintains a stable
potential, ensuring that the WE operates at a constant voltage, while the CE completes
the electrical circuit, allowing current to flow. These three electrodes are connected to a
Potentiostat, which controls the applied voltage and measures the resulting current from
the WE, as shown in Figure 3.8. Maintaining a fixed voltage in the WE is essential, as the
potentiostat establishes the potential that correlates with dopamine oxidation potential.
The oxidation potential of dopamine is typically +0.6V, at which dopamine undergoes
oxidation, converting into dopamine-o-quinone while releasing two electrons (2e−) and
two protons (2H+) [57].
However, the detection of dopamine is only possible with external stimulation with K+,
which depolarizes the cell membrane and induces exocytosis in the hVM1 cells seeded on
the WE. This depolarization triggers an influx of calcium ions (Ca2+), leading to vesicle
fusion with the cell membrane and the release of dopamine into the extracellular space.
Because dopamine is prone to be oxidized, it immediately undergoes oxidation reaching
the WE, generating a current signal recorded by the potentiostat. The intensity of the
current is directly correlated with the amount of dopamine released. With external K+
stimulation and by comparing the current responses across different compound treatments,
it was evaluated the influence of the compounds on the differentiated hVM1 capacity to
produce dopamine. The findings were evaluated together with ICC assay results obtained
also in Phase 3.
Figure 3.8: Real-time dopamine assay set-up. (A) Potentiostat connected to the electrodes.
(B) Electrode holder connected to the PCB (Printed Circuit Board) plate. Image captured
by the author during the experiment.
19
==PAGE:27==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
MTS Assay - Phase 1
MTS assay was performed to assess the proliferation capacity of hVM1 cells in their
undifferentiated stage under the influence of the different compounds. This assay aimed to
identify the most promising concentrations to narrow down the concentration selection for
Phase 2 experiments. The MTS assay results was complemented with Live/Dead (L/D)
assay, to provide additional insights into cell behavior.
In the MTS assay, the effects of Sodium lactate (SL), Sodium butyrate (NaB), Dopamine,
GABA, and Acetylcholine (ACh) were evaluated by analyzing the cell viability across
different concentrations. This approach helped to evaluate how each compound influenced
cell proliferation and supported the selection of concentrations for further assays.
Sodium Lactate - MTS Assay results
Figure 4.1: Cell Viability of hVM1 cells under Sodium Lactate treatment. Compound
concentrations are presented in ascending order from left to right(0–40 mM) Control group
received no treatment. Data is presented as ± SD. Statistical significance determined using
two-tailed student’s t-test, with p −value < 0.05 considered significant.N=3
In Figure 4.1 it can be observed that Sodium Lactate concentrations going from 1 mM
to 20 mM did not significantly affect cell viability when compared with the control. At
concentration 40mM it can be identified a statistically significant increase of cell viability
( p-value < 0.05). This increase of cell viability at high concentrations can suggest that at
high concentrations Sodium Lactate might enhance metabolic activity and therefore pro-
liferation capacity in hVM1 cells. Also error bars representing SD (Standard Deviation),
showing low variability across the concentrations and replicates.
20
==PAGE:28==
Sodium Butyrate - MTS Assay results
Figure 4.2: Cell Viability of hVM1 cells under Sodium Butyrate treatment. Compound
concentrations are presented in ascending order from left to right (0–15 mM). Control
group received no treatment.
Data is presented as ± SD. Statistical significance was
determined using two-tailed student’s t-test, with p −value < 0.05 considered significant.
N=3
In Figure 4.2, it can be observed that Sodium Butyrate (NaB) concentrations going from
0.1 mM to 0.5 mM did not significantly impacted on cell viability when compared with
the control. Higher concentrations including 15 mM, 10 mM, 5 mM, 2.5 mM and 1 mM
significantly decrease cell viability. (p < 0.05), showing a clear dose-dependent toxic effect
of NaB for cells. The NaB inhibitory effect on cell viability may suggest that at high
concentrations NaB can suppress metabolic activity and consequently cell proliferation.
Also, error bars representing SD (Standard Deviation) show low variability across the
concentrations and replicates, except for 0.25 mM, where high variability is observed.
Dual role of NaB: Neuroprotective effect and Toxicity
Previous results showed how NaB can have a toxic profile on hVM1 cells despite the fact
that is known to have neuroprotective effects, this is due to NaB dual role. Main finding
emphasize NaB’s and Butyrate neuroprotective role in PD and other neurodegenerative
conditions. As have been descrived in previous literature review for NaB and Butyrate, in
an MPTP-induced PD mouse model, NaB improved motor functions, increased dopamine
(DA) and serotonin (5-HT) levels, and enhanced the survival of dopaminergic neurons
by increasing tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) expression [19]. Additionally, NaB inhibited the
activation of microglia and astrocytes, which induce neuroinflammation ans are key cells
to inhibit for neurodegerative disease to avoid excessive cell damage [19].
Furthermore, evidences suggest NaB neuroprotective effects in Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
models by reducing amyloid-beta accumulation, enhancing neurogenesis, and maintaining
the blood-brain barrier (BBB) [15]. However, this last article caution that excessive SCFA
21
==PAGE:29==
levels, can disrupt microglial activity and potentially promote ￿-synuclein misfolding, con-
tributing to PD pathology [15].
This last article is supported by Wiefels et al.
[36], where it highlights the dual role
of butyrate.
While SCFAs as NaB can be neuroprotective, in high levels may cause
neurotoxicity and promote neurodegenerative conditions already present in the disease.
Butyrate also influences the NF-KB pathway, a key player in inflammation [36, 58].
For the literature above, in most of the cases Sodium butyrate and butyrate demon-
strates significant neuroprotective potential by reducing neuroinflammation and support-
ing dopaminergic neuron survival. However, its effects are concentration-dependent, while
moderate doses have been demonstrated as beneficial, excessive levels can lead to neuro-
toxicity. This dual nature might explain why the results from MTS in hVM1 cells when
treated with higher concentrations drastically reduces cell viability even if NaB can be
considered as a neuroprotective compound.
Dopamine - MTS Assay results
Figure 4.3: Cell Viability of hVM1 cells under Dopamine treatment. Compound concen-
trations are presented in ascending order from left to right (0–1000 µM). Control group
received no treatment. Data is presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance was de-
termined using two-tailed student’s t-test, with p −value < 0.05 considered significant.
N=3.
Effect of Dopamine on Cell Viability
Figure
4.3 shows that dopamine concentrations ranging from 5 µM to 1000 µM, have
statistically significant effects on cell viability at specific concentrations. Concentrations
ranging from 5-10 µM did not show statistically difference on cell viability when compared
to control, but from 25-1000 µM statistically difference on increasing cell viability was
observed (p < 0.05). While this might suggest increased proliferation under high dopamine
concentrations, additional evidence indicates that dopamine’s predisposition to oxidation
produces reactive oxygen species (ROS) at high concentrations, leading to oxidative stress
22
==PAGE:30==
rather than cell proliferation [59]. Dopamine’s catechol group makes it highly susceptible
to oxidation, especially at higher concentrations where more substrate is available for their
reaction. ROS may induce metabolic activity as cells activate mitochondrial pathways to
restore redox balance.
However, this increase in metabolic activity does not necessarily reflect true proliferation.
Excessive ROS production at higher concentrations can contribute to oxidative stress [59].
These trends are visually supported by a color change in the medium at higher dopamine
concentrations Figure 4.4. Apart from oxidation being the primary focus result, a decrease
in cell metabolic activity can also be observed at 500 µM concentration. The reason behind
this remains unclear, however a possible explanation could be a lower initial cell seeding
density, which may have influenced the overall metabolic activity measurements.
Figure 4.4: 96-well plate used in the MTS assay Phase 1. The yellow-highlighted square
corresponds to hVM1 cells exposed to the different dopamine concentrations, where a
visible color change is apparent in higher dopamine concentrations. The remaining wells
include other compounds or controls
Oxidation Interference with MTS Assay
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) may interfere with the reduction of tetrazolium which
is usually performed by cell enzymatic activity, which makes tetrazolium salts turn into
a purple-colored formazan product.
The chemical reduction reaction due to excessive
oxidation, artificially affects the MTS reading, showing a high metabolic activity. The
observed darker purple color at higher dopamine concentrations supports this theory.
This interference complicates the interpretation of results in other techniques such as
Live/ Dead Staining, reason why plotted data from L/D staining assay for Dopamine is
not presented as the increased signal made impossible to analyze images. Dopamine was
discarded as a compound to test with hVM1 in the rest of the experiments and phases.
23
==PAGE:31==
GABA - MTS Assay results
Figure 4.5: Cell Viability of hVM1 cells under GABA treatment. Compound concentra-
tions are presented in ascending order from left to right (0–15 µM). Control group received
no treatment. Data is presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance was determined
using two-tailed student’s t-test, with p −value < 0.05 considered significant. N=3
In Figure 4.5, we observe that GABA concentrations going from 0.25 µM to 15 µM do
not significantly affect cell viability when compared with the control, showing no effect on
either proliferation or cytotoxicity. On average, the error bars representing SD indicate
low variability across concentrations, highlighting a neutral trend when compared with
other compounds tested under the same conditions.
24
==PAGE:32==
Acetylcholine - MTS Assay results
Figure 4.6: Cell Viability of hVM1 cells under Acetylcholine treatment. Compound con-
centrations are presented in ascending order from left to right (0–10 mM). Control group
received no treatment. Data is presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance was de-
termined using two-tailed student’s t-test, with p −value < 0.05 considered significant.
N=3
In Figure 4.6, it can observed that Acetylcholine (ACh) concentrations going from 0.5 to
7.5 mM did not show statistically difference on cell viability when compared to control.
However, when the higher concentration applied, 10 mM shows a significant decreasing in
cell viability when compared to control. At lower concentrations, 0.1 and 0.25 mM, the
cell viability significantly decreased comparison to control. However, the trend at low con-
centration is contrary to reality which further experiment is required for confirmation. In
order to prove that there is no statistically significance between 7.5 mM and 10 mM, nei-
ther between 5 mM and 7 mM extra statistical two-tailed student’s t-test were performed,
p-value being 0,376 between 7.5mM and 10 mM, and p-value being 0,319 between 5 mM
and 7.5mM. p −value < 0.05 considered significant, concluding that while a decreasing
trend is observed from 5 mM to 7.5 mM, followed by an increase at 10mM, statistical
analysis demonstrated that the changes are not significant and that variation could be
due to experiment variability.
25
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Live Dead Assay - Phase 1
Live/Dead assay was performed to evaluate the number of dead and live cells and as a
complementary data from MTS results.
In the results presented below, all compound
concentrations are compared with the control, and statistical significance is determined
using two-tailed student’s t-test. Data variability is assessed using the standard error of
the mean (s.e.m).
Sodium Lactate - Live/Dead Assay
Figure 4.7: Cell viability of hVM1 cells shown as the percentage of live (green) and dead
(red) cells across different concentrations of Sodium Lactate (1–40 mM). Control group
received no treatment. Data is presented as ± (s.e.m.). p −value < 0.05 is considered
significant. N=12 and n=4.
Figure 4.7 shows cell viability of hVM1 cells under the influence of Sodium Lactate across
concentrations ranging from 1 mM to 40 mM. The results indicate that Sodium Lac-
tate increases cell viability, with values ranging between 80–100% at most concentrations.
However, there are no statistically significant differences observed when comparing with
the control group, indicating that SL does not significantly affect cell viability.
A notable decrease in cell viability is observed at 20 mM, where the percentage of live
cells decreases significantly compared to other concentrations and the control. This might
be caused by lower cell density seeded or technical inconsistencies during the assay, such
as light interference with the MTS reagent, which could affect absorbance readings. The
high variability in the data at this concentration is evident from the large error bars, with
a standard error of the mean (s.e.m) of 30.63 for dead cells at 20 mM.
26
==PAGE:34==
Sodium Butyrate - Live/Dead Assay
Figure 4.8: Cell viability of hVM1 cells shown as the percentage of live (green) and dead
(red) cells across different concentrations of Sodium Butyrate (0.1–15 mM). Control group
received no treatment. Data is presented as ± (s.e.m.). p −value < 0.05 is considered
significant. N=12 and n=4.
Figure 4.8 shows cell viability of hVM1 cells under the influence of Sodium Butyrate
across concentrations ranging from 0.1 mM to 15 mM. The results indicate that at higher
concentrations, NaB drastically decreases cell viability, with a significant increase in the
percentage of dead cells. Statistically significant differences are observed when comparing
concentrations from 1 mM to 15 mM with the control group, indicating that NaB exhibits a
cytotoxic profile at these higher concentrations. In contrast, at lower concentrations (0.1–
0.5 mM), cell viability is maintained compared with the control. This can be correlated
with MTS results for Nab at 0.1 mM and 0.5 mM concentrations where NaB does not
affect cell viability.
A critical point to highlight is the high data variability at higher concentrations, as ob-
served in the large error bars. This can be easily observed at 10 mM for dead cells, where
s.e.m. reaches 60.66. This variability might be associated with technical challenges during
imaging, as dead cells tend to aggregate, making it diﬀicult to clearly quantify individual
cells.
27
==PAGE:35==
GABA - Live/Dead Assay
Figure 4.9: Cell viability of hVM1 cells shown as the percentage of live (green) and dead
(red) cells across different concentrations of GABA (0.25–15 µM). Control group received
no treatment. Data is presented as ± (s.e.m.). p −value < 0.05 is considered significant.
N=12 and n=4.
Figure 4.9 shows cell viability of hVM1 cells under the influence of GABA across con-
centrations ranging from 0.25µM to 15µM. The results indicate that influence of GABA
tends to be increasing cell viability for all concentration. Notably, it can be observed a
statistically significant difference at 0.25µM, 10µM, and 15µM when compared to control,
were there is an increase in cell population with a decrease in cell death, highlighting
GABA’s neuroprotective nature.
Interestingly, 0.25µM shows statistical significance for live cells. This outcome may be a
result of higher initial cell seeding density as 0.25µM reflects a small s.e.m. value when
compared with the other concentrations. Additionally, results align MTS findings, where,
despite lacking statistical significance, GABA appeared to increase rather than decrease
metabolic activity, including at 0.25µM concentration.
28
==PAGE:36==
Acetylcholine - Live/Dead Assay
Figure 4.10: Cell viability of hVM1 cells shown as the percentage of live (green) and dead
(red) cells across different concentrations of ACh (0.1–10 mM). Control group received no
treatment. Data is presented as ± (s.e.m.). p −value < 0.05 is considered significant.
N=12 and n=4.
Figure 4.10 shows cell viability of hVM1 cells under the influence of Acetylcholine across
concentrations ranging from 0.1 mM to 10 mM. The results indicate that ACh might have
a minor increase of cell viability or cell population, with similar or a bit higher when
compared with the control. However, no significant results can be observed for treatment
with ACh. Additionally, in concentrations such as 2.5 mM high variability in the data
can be observed from the large error bars. Correlation with MTS results, where 0.1 mM
and 0.25 mM showed a decrease in metabolic activity, does not correspond to a decrease
in the number of live cells compared to the control.
Summary Table Concentrations Phase 2
Based on the results obtained from the Live/Dead and MTS assay, the concentrations
listed in Figure 4.11 represent the tested range for each compound.
The highlighted
concentrations are the ones that were selected for translation to Phase 2. While some con-
centrations had more statistically significant results than others, in some cases, they were
not chosen for further experiments to maintain comparability across compounds, ensuring
consistency and balance in the experiments and more realistic sampling. Additionally, as
previously mentioned, dopamine has been excluded from Phase 2 as it is predisposition to
oxidation and therefore inability to obtain results.
29
==PAGE:37==
Table of Compound Concentrations for Phase 2
Figure 4.11: Table displaying the concentrations of the different compounds. The
compounds are listed as follows: SL (Sodium Lactate), NaB (Sodium Butyrate),
Dopamine (DOP), GABA, and Acetylcholine (ACh). Concentrations highlighted in blue
represent those selected for Phase 2.
4.3
ICC Assay - Early Differentiation - Phase 2
ICC results for Early differentiation illustrate if the different compounds and concentra-
tions influence the differentiation capacity of hVM1 cells when added at the beginning of
their differentiation process. Cells were stained with markers for nuclei (Hoechst, blue),
neuron-specific cytoskeletal structure (Beta-Tubulin, orange), and dopaminergic neurons
(TH, red), with a final merged image providing an overview.
As explained in Chapter 3 Methodology section, the timeline for hVM1 cell differentiation
is 10 days. Cell seeding was performed on Day 0, compounds were added on Day 1, and
ICC assay was performed on Day 10 of differentiation. ICC assay was performed after
full differentiation to evaluate the effects of early SL, NaB, GABA and ACh exposure on
neuronal maturation.
Control group
The control group is the same for all compounds and does not differentiate between early
and late differentiation.
The control group shows cells tendency to differentiate into
dopaminergic neurons, with a visible presence of Beta-Tubulin showing clear cytoskeleton
structures of neurites projection between neurons. Their differentiation into dopaminergic
neurons is moderated, TH signal suggests that under normal differentiation conditions,
hVM1 naturally tends to differentiate, to some degree, into dopaminergic neurons. Control
group does not have treatment.
30
==PAGE:38==
Sodium Lactate - ICC Assay (Early Differentiation)
Nuclei
β-Tubulin
TH
Final
Control
SL 20mM
SL 10mM
SL 1mM
Figure 4.12: ICC staining of hVM1 cells treated with Sodium Lactate at 20 mM, 10 mM,
and 1 mM during early differentiation. Staining was performed after full differentiation of
cells on day 10. Cells were stained with Hoechst (blue signal), β-Tubulin (orange signal),
and Tyrosine Hydroxylase/TH (red signal). The final image presents the combination of
all three fluorescence channels.
As presented in Figure 4.12, for Sodium Lactate (addition of compounds in early differ-
entiation stage) ICC results indicate that higher concentrations of SL (20mM) enhance
dopaminergic differentiation of hVM1 cells.
At 20 mM, can be spotted the formation
of clear, long, and well-defined neurites, as indicated by Beta-Tubulin staining. Also, a
notable increase in TH-signal is observed, suggesting a strong differentiation into dopamin-
ergic neurons compared to the control. Additionally, it can be observed a slightly higher
cell population density (nucleus staining) at this concentration, suggesting possible effect
on cell survival or proliferation. In contrast, intermediate and lower concentrations (10
mM and 1 mM) do not show substantial differences compared to the control, with only
minor variations in TH expression and cell density.
31
==PAGE:39==
Sodium Butyrate -ICC Assay (Early Differentiation)
Nuclei
β-Tubulin
TH
Final
Control
NaB 10 mM
NaB 2.5 mM
NaB 0.25 mM
Figure 4.13: ICC staining of hVM1 cells treated with Sodium Butyrate at 10 mM, 2.5 mM,
and 0.25 mM during early differentiation. Staining was performed after full differentiation
of cells on day 10. Cells were stained with Hoechst (blue signal), β-Tubulin (orange signal),
and Tyrosine Hydroxylase/TH (red signal). The final image presents the combination of
all three fluorescence channels.
As presented in Figure 4.13, for Sodium Butyrate (NaB) (addition of compounds in the
early differentiation stage), ICC results indicate a clear toxic profile, which becomes more
pronounced as the concentration increases. For already 2.5 mM and also for 10mM, a
drastic reduction in nucleus staining is evident, suggesting a severe effect on cell viability.
Beta-Tubulin staining is weak, nearly absent, indicating that neurite formation is largely
inhibited. Also, the morphology of the remaining cells appears abnormal, with clear cell
aggregation, a well known characteristic of dead cells and an overall collapse of the hVM1
cells structure. Differentiation into dopaminergic neurons is also significantly reduced,
indicating that NaB impairs the ability of hVM1 cells to differentiate into dopaminergic
neurons. For the lowest concentration (0.25mM), toxicity is less pronounced compared
with 10mM, but when compared with the control there is still a visible reduction in cell
population, neurites creation and dopaminergic neuron differentiation.
32
==PAGE:40==
GABA -ICC Assay (Early Differentiation)
Nuclei
β-Tubulin
TH
Final
Control
GABA 10 µM
GABA 2.5 µM
GABA 0.25 µM
Figure 4.14: ICC staining of hVM1 cells treated with GABA at 10 µM, 2.5 µM, and 0.25
µM during early differentiation. Staining was performed after full differentiation of cells
on day 10. Cells were stained with Hoechst (blue signal), β-Tubulin (orange signal), and
Tyrosine Hydroxylase/TH (red signal). The final image presents the combination of all
three fluorescence channels.
As presented in Figure 4.14, for GABA (addition of compounds in early differentiation
stage), ICC results indicate that higher concentration of GABA (10 µM) significantly
enhance dopaminergic differentiation of hVM1 cells.
At 10 µM, a notable increase in
TH signal is observed, indicating a stronger differentiation into dopaminergic neurons
compared to the control. Additionally, Beta-Tubulin staining is significantly more intense,
highlighting the clear formation of a big number of neurites between neurons. Furthermore,
nucleus staining reveals a higher cell population density, indicating potential support for
cell survival or proliferation at concentration 10 µM. On the other hand, intermediate and
lower concentrations (2.5 µM and 0.25 µM) do not show substantial differences compared
to the control. The results suggest that GABA at 10 µM plays a key role in promoting
dopaminergic differentiation and enhancing neurite formation.
33
==PAGE:41==
Acetylcholine - ICC Assay (Early Differentiation)
Nuclei
β-Tubulin
TH
Final
Control
ACh 10 mM
ACh 2.5 mM
ACh 0.25 mM
Figure 4.15: ICC staining of hVM1 cells treated with Acetylcholine at 10 mM, 2.5 mM,
0.25 mM during early differentiation. Staining was performed after full differentiation of
cells on day 10. Cells were stained with Hoechst (blue signal), β-Tubulin (orange signal),
and Tyrosine Hydroxylase/TH (red signal). The final image presents the combination of
all three fluorescence channels
As presented in Figure 4.15, for Acetylcholine (ACh) (addition of compounds in early
differentiation stage), ICC results indicate that even at the lowest concentration (0.25
mM), slightly induces differentiation of hVM1 cells into dopaminergic neurons. However,
the effect is not as pronounced as observed with other compounds. A slightly higher cell
population density (nucleus staining, blue fluorescence) can be seen across all concentra-
tions. At the highest concentration (10mM), a slight increase the dopaminergic neuron
population can be spotted indicating enhanced differentiation into dopaminergic neurons
compared to the control. Beta-Tubulin staining reveals higher neurite formation for 10mM
concentration. The merged image suggests a slight increase in dopaminergic differentiation
and neuronal connectivity, particularly at the highest concentration 10mM.
34
==PAGE:42==
4.4
ICC assay - Late Differentiation - Phase 2
The ICC results for Late differentiation illustrate if the different compounds and concen-
trations influence the differentiation capacity of hVM1 cells when added at the end of their
differentiation process, i.e. when the cells are completely differentiated. The cells were
stained with markers for nuclei (Hoechst, blue), cytoskeletal structure (Beta-Tubulin,
orange), and dopaminergic neurons (TH, red), with a final merged image providing an
overview.
As explained in Chapter 3 Methodology, the timeline for hVM1 cell differentiation is 10
days. Cell seeding was performed on Day 0, compounds were added on Day 8 differen-
tiation, and ICC assay was performed on Day 10 of differentiation. ICC staining was
performed after full differentiation to evaluate the effects of late SL, NaB, GABA and
ACh exposure on neuronal maturation.
Sodium Lactate - ICC Assay (Late Differentiation)
Nuclei
β-Tubulin
TH
Final
Control
SL 20mM
SL 10mM
SL 1 mM
Figure 4.16: ICC staining of hVM1 cells treated with Sodium Lactate at 20 mM, 10 mM,
and 1 mM during late differentiation. Staining was performed after full differentiation of
cells on day 10. Cells were stained with Hoechst (blue signal), β-Tubulin (orange signal),
and Tyrosine Hydroxylase/ TH (red signal). The final image presents the combination of
all three fluorescence channels.
35
==PAGE:43==
As seen in Figure 4.16, for Sodium Lactate (SL) in late differentiation ICC results show
no significant differences compared to the control at any concentration. TH expression
remains unchanged, and Beta-Tubulin staining does not indicate an enhanced neurite
formation. For nucleus staining, the cell population is also stable. Unlike early differen-
tiation, where SL promoted dopaminergic differentiation and neurite formation at higher
concentration, in the late stage, SL does not influence differentiation,
Sodium Butyrate - ICC Assay (Late Differentiation)
Nuclei
β-Tubulin
TH
Final
Control
NaB 10mM
NaB 2.5mM
NaB 0.25 mM
Figure 4.17: ICC staining of hVM1 cells treated with Sodium Butyrate at 10 mM, 2.5 mM,
and 0.25 mM during late differentiation. Staining was performed after full differentiation
of cells on day 10. Cells were stained with Hoechst (blue signal), β-Tubulin (orange signal),
and Tyrosine Hydroxylase/TH (red signal). The final image presents the combination of
all three fluorescence channels.
As seen in Figure 4.17, for Sodium Butyrate (NaB) in late differentiation ICC results
indicate a reduced toxic effect compared to early differentiation, particularly at lower
concentrations. While in early differentiation, NaB immediately impacted viability and
differentiation, leading to severe toxicity and cell aggregation .Comparing the three con-
centrations with the control, it remains uncertain whether the differences are because of
the possibility that cells having already undergone differentiation, making them less af-
fected to the compounds, or if the compounds did not have enough time to really have
an effect to hVM1 cells. Also, with the 10mM concentration it can also be observed the
evidence of NaB dual role, as previously described in the MTS assay results.
36
==PAGE:44==
GABA - ICC Assay (Late Differentiation)
Nuclei
β-Tubulin
TH
Final
Control
GABA 10 µM
GABA 2.5 µM
GABA 0.25 µM
Figure 4.18: ICC staining of hVM1 cells treated with GABA at 10 µM, 2.5 µM, and 0.25
µM during late differentiation. Staining was performed after full differentiation of cells
on day 10. Cells were stained with Hoechst (blue signal), β-Tubulin (orange signal), and
Tyrosine Hydroxylase/TH (red signal). The final image presents the combination of all
three fluorescence channels.
As seen in Figure 4.18, for GABA in late differentiation ICC results show similar results
as SL; no significant differences compared to the control at any concentration. TH expres-
sion remains unchanged, and Beta-Tubulin staining does not indicate an enhanced neurite
formation. For nucleus staining, the cell population is also stable. Unlike early differ-
entiation, where GABA promoted dopaminergic differentiation and neurite formation at
higher concentration, in the late differentiation SL does not influence differentiation.
37
==PAGE:45==
Acetylcholine- ICC Assay (Late Differentiation)
Nuclei
β-Tubulin
TH
Final
Control
ACh 10 mM
ACh 2.5 mM
ACh 0.25 mM
Figure 4.19: ICC staining of hVM1 cells treated with Acetylcholine at 10 mM, 2.5 mM,
0.25 mM during late differentiation. Staining was performed after full differentiation of
cells on day 10. Cells were stained with Hoechst (blue signal), ￿-Tubulin (orange signal),
and Tyrosine Hydroxylase/TH (red signal). The final image presents the combination of
all three fluorescence channels
As seen in Figure 4.19, for ACh in late differentiation, results show a slight effect on
dopaminergic differentiation at higher concentrations (10 mM), but no remarkable ef-
fects at lower concentrations (2.5 mM and 0.25 mM). At 10 mM, TH expression and
Beta-Tubulin staining are minimal increased, when compared with the control. Lower
concentrations show no clear changes or effect in cell population, neurite formation or
differentiation into dopaminergic neurons. Overall, ACh has a limited impact on differen-
tiation, with only a slight effect at higher concentrations.
Summary Results ICC Phase 2 - Early vs Late Differentiation
There is an evidence difference in the effects of compounds depending if they are added in
early or late stages of hVM1 cell differentiation. When compounds are introduced at the
early differentiation stage, it can be observed more variation on cell population and cell
differentiation. Once the cells have benn already differentiated, the compounds appear to
have low or no impact on hVM1 cells. This raises the hypothesis of whether the low effect
at late differentiation is because cells have already committed to their differentiated state,
making them less susceptible to the compounds, or if the compounds, as they are added
38
==PAGE:46==
at Day 9 differentiation, simply did not have enough time to have an effect when added
at day 8 of differentiation. These conclusions also explains why in the transition to Phase
3 with electrodes, the experiment only involves cells treated during early differentiation.
In Figure 4.20, it can be observed a summary table of the main relevant compounds and
concentrations and the main highlights.
Table comparison Early vs Late Differentiation fro ICC Assay - Phase 2:
Figure 4.20: Summary Table of Immunocytochemistry (ICC) results for Phase 2, com-
paring the effects of compounds added during early and late differentiation. The table
highlights key concentrations and main observations.
39
==PAGE:47==
4.5
Bright-field Microscopy Images
To support the decision-making process about which concentrations should be used on
electrodes (Phase 3), both the ICC results from Phase 2 and the following results from
bright-field microscopy were considered. In Figure 4.21, cells were evaluated using bright-
field microscopy on Day 6 of differentiation (within the 10-day differentiation process).
Images were captured from well plates prior to performing ICC at Day 10, in order to pro-
vide an initial evaluation of the expected outcomes for the Phase 3 electrode experiments.
Figure 4.21: Response of hVM1 Cells at Day 6 of Differentiation to Compound Treatments.
(A) Control, (B) Sodium Lactate (SL) 10mM, (C) Sodium Butyrate (NaB) 0.25mM, (D)
GABA 10µM, (E) Acetylcholine 10mM. Bright-field ZEISS-Primovert microscopy X10
Objective
In Figure 4.21, only the selected concentrations of each compound for translation to elec-
trodes (Phase 3) are displayed.
The selection of these concentrations is based on cell
population density and structural observations from bright-field images, ICC results from
Phase 2, and the need to maintain a stable and logical concentration range across the
compounds. When compared with the control group (A), hVM1 cells treated with GABA
(D) at 10µM and cells treated with 10 mM acetylcholine (ACh) (E) showed an increase
in cell population and differentiation tendance. Additionally, both compounds appear to
promote neurite creation, positively influence on neuronal differentiation.
In contrast, cells treated with 10 mM sodium lactate (SL) (B) did not show remarkable
differences in cell population or increased differentiation when compared with the control
(A). For NaB treatment at 0.25 mM (C), it can be observed that NaB did not promote
cell differentiation as it can not be observed neurite projection. However, when compared
with ICC assay early differentiation, NaB at 0.25mM exhibited the lowest toxicity, making
it the preferred concentration for translation to Phase 3. These images, captured and
analyzed using the ZEISS-Primovert Bright-field microscope, serve as supporting data,
complementing the findings from Immunocytochemistry (ICC) in Phase 2. In the case of
GABA at 10µM concentration, the image results can be supported with L/D assay where
it was observed a significant increase in cell population, as well as with ICC results in
early differentiation where GABA at 10µM promoted TH expression when compared with
the control Figure 4.14 . Acetylcholine brightfield image (E) at 10µM can be supported
40
==PAGE:48==
with the MTS results where it significantly increased cell metabolism, as well as with ICC
results in early differentiation where it can be observed increased neurites projection and
TH expression when compared with the control Figure 4.15. However, it should be noted
that direct comparison between MTS and L/D assays is not entirely possible, as they were
performed on undifferentiated cells, whereas brightfield images and ICC were conducted
during differentiation, which may also impact the results.
4.6
Real-time Dopamine Detection - Phase 3
Real-time dopamine detection assay was conducted to asses the capacity of cells to release
dopamine upon external K+ stimulation. For this assay, dopamine response from hVM1
cells treated with the different compounds is compared with the control condition, where
cells have no treatment. Each figure displays two sub-figures representing the dopamine
oxidation peak on the electrode surface. The first figure shows the overall current response
throughout the experiment (t=600s) and the second one specifically shows the current peak
recorded from dopamine oxidation after K+ addition (t=260s or 300s). Only one replicate
of each condition was used in this assay due to cracking and leaking on the electrodes
holders.
Control - Real-time Dopamine Detection Results
Figure 4.22: (A) Real-Time dopamine detection showing current over time for hVM1 cells
without treatment (only differentiated cells).
Stimulation with K+ occurs at t = 300
seconds. (B): Amplified view of the peak at t=300s.
In Figure 4.22, it can be observed the real-time detection of dopamine released from
hVM1 cells. Cells in the control group only underwent differentiation, with no exposure
to compounds treatment. K+ stimulation is applied at t = 300 s, triggering the current
peak that clearly indicates dopamine release. Following this peak, the current rapidly
decreases, returning to a stable baseline with minimal interferences. This recovery of the
baseline reflects stable electrode and proper cell attachment.
41
==PAGE:49==
Acetylcholine - Real-time Dopamine Detection Results
Figure 4.23: (A) Real-Time dopamine detection showing current over time for hVM1 vells
treated with Acetylcholine (10 mM). Stimulation with K+ occurs at t = 260 seconds. (B):
Amplified view of the peak at t=260.
In Figure 4.23, it can be observed the real-time detection of dopamine released from hVM1
cells when K+ stimulation is applied at t = 260 s, detected as a current peak.
In the case of cells treated with 10 mM Acetylcholine, the current rapidly increases after
K+ addition, reaching higher current values when compared with the control.Interestingly,
after the peak, the current returns to a more stable baseline, indicating consistent signal
recovery. The pronounced current peak could be attributed to a good cell attachment
to the electrode surface, which enhances conductivity. Additionally, the higher current
response might result from an increased cell population because of Acetylcholine treatment,
providing more cells capable of releasing dopamine. These findings can be aligned with
the results from the ICC assay on electrodes, which are presented in the results section
4.7 and with ICC (early differentiation) findings for Phase 2.
Sodium Lactate - Real-time Dopamine Detection Results
Figure 4.24: (A) Real-Time dopamine detection showing current over time for hVM1 vells
treated with Sodium Lactate (10 mM). Stimulation with K+ occurs at t = 260 seconds.
(B): Amplified view of the peak at t=260.
42
==PAGE:50==
In Figure 4.24, it can be observed the real-time detection of dopamine released from hVM1
cells when K+ stimulation is applied at t = 260 s, detected as a current peak.
In the case of cells treated with 10 mM Sodium Lactate (SL), the results show an in-
crease of the current after the K+ addition, indicating dopamine release from the cells and
successful detection by the electrode. Although the current peak is lower compared to
the control, the presence of this response confirms that dopamine release occurred. The
current intensity reduction compared with the control could be attributed to several fac-
tors, such as differences in cell population or effect of sodium lactate on hVM1 cells and
their capacity to synthesizes and produce dopamine. However, due to reduced number of
replicates for this experiment, make the results inconsistent and it can not be concluded
that SL affects in some specific manner to cells regarding ability to produce dopamine.
Sodium Butyrate - Real-time Dopamine Detection Results
Figure 4.25: (A) Real-Time dopamine detection showing current over time for hVM1 cells
treated with Sodium Butyrate (0.25 mM) . Stimulation with K+ occurs at t = 260 seconds.
(B): Amplified view of the peak at t=260.
In Figure 4.25, it can be observed the real-time detection of dopamine released from hVM1
cells when K+ stimulation is produced at t=260s and is detected as a current peak.
In the case of cells treated with 0.25 mM NaB, it can be observed that even if there is an
observable current peak around time 260 s, the baseline remains highly unstable and fails
to return to a steady state after the peak, providing clear evidence of the leakage issues
previously described in the methodology section, caused due to incompatibility between
ethanol and PMMA. The leakage of cell medium from the electrode directly directly affects
to the signal recording, as it can flow through small gaps, causing changes in conductivity.
In Figure 4.27 it can be observed the cracking on PMMA surface and can be assumed the
leaking problems.
43
==PAGE:51==
GABA - Real-time Dopamine Detection Results
Figure 4.26: (A) Real-Time dopamine detection showing current over time for hVM1
cells treated with GABA(10 µM). Stimulation with K+ occurs at t = 260 seconds. (B):
Amplified view of the peak at t=260.
In Figure 4.26, it can be observed the real-time detection of dopamine released from hVM1
cells When K+ stimulation is produced at t=260s and is detected as a current peak. In the
case of cells treated with 10µM GABA, it can be spotted that the signal is highly chaotic
and noisy when compared with the control, making it diﬀicult to clearly interpretation.
One key factors of these results could be a poorly cell adhesion to the electrode surface. If
cells are partially detached, the mechanical movement of the cells can introduce significant
noise. This detachment could also explain the lower overall nA current peak compared
to the control, as fewer cells remain in direct contact with the electrode, reducing the
amount of dopamine detected. Additionally, the compounds used may have influenced
on cell viability and attachment, contributing to the instability of the signal. Another
possibility is that leaking of medium from the electrode, could alter the electrical signal
record. Interestingly, these hypothesis can be supported by next 4.7 ICC on electrodes
Results section, which show reduced cell populations and poor attachment under the same
conditions.
In summary, while the current peak indicates dopamine release, the chaotic nature of the
signal likely results from a possible combination of factors, including poor cell attachment,
the compounds effect, and leaking.
Figure 4.27: PMMA structure from the electrode setup, showing cracks in the material
because of ethanol contact which led to leakage issues.
44
==PAGE:52==
4.7
ICC Assay on Electrodes - Phase 3
This section presents the results from the ICC assay performed on hVM1 cells seeded
on electrodes. The ICC assay was performed after Real-time dopamine detection assay.
Images for each compound and the control are presented, highlighting the direct relation
between the ICC assay and the Real-time dopamine detection assay results presented
before.
Nuclei
β-Tubulin
TH
Final
Control
SL 10 mM
NaB 0.25 mM
GABA 10 µM
ACh 10 mM
Figure 4.28:
Immunocytochemistry (ICC) images of hVM1 cells seeded on electrodes
treated with SL (10 mM), NaB (0.25 mM), GABA (10 µM) and ACh (10 mM) during
early stage differentiation. Cells were stained to visualize nuclei (blue), ￿-tubulin (orange),
and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH, red), with a final column showing merged markers.
45
==PAGE:53==
In Figure 4.28, results from ICC staining of hVM1 cells seeded on electrodes can be
observed. For GABA, NaB, and SL, the nuclei, beta-tubulin and TH signals are detected.
However, despite having a small signal, the cell population in all three compounds is lower
and the morphology of cells do not indicate neurite formation or cell differentiation.
In contrast, cells treated with Acetylcholine show higher cell population and presence
of dopaminergic cells compared to both the control and the other conditions.
When
comparing the Final ICC image from ACh condition, the differences are clearly visible,
especially when compared with the other tested compounds. The findings from ICC also
align with the Real-time dopamine detection assay, where Acetylcholine was the only
condition that showed a strong current peak when stimulated with K+.
A possible explanation for these results can be found in poor cell attachment on the elec-
trode surface. As previously mentioned in Real-time dopamine detection results, leakage
issue produced challenged in dopamine detection, also leakage may have caused cell mi-
gration, contributing to low cell population observed in some conditions. Moreover, the
cell morphology in the ICC images suggests that poor adhesion to the electrode surface
could have impacted cell survival and differentiation. If cells are not completely attached,
they are less likely to survive, and initiating a differentiation process becomes even more
challenging.
It is more likely that these effects come from the leaking issues rather than a problem
with the electrode surface itself. The electrodes used in this study are made of carbon,
as detailed in Methodology section, and according to previous literature[54], and based
on results from the same Bioanalytics research group, carbon surfaces are suitable for
cell adhesion. Therefore, it is unlikely that the material itself contributed to poor cell
attachment. Another possible explanation could be the effectiveness of the O2 plasma
treatment and PLL coating, both of which were applied to improve cell adhesion. If either
of these treatments was not fully effective, it could have led to suboptimal attachment,
which may explain the results observed. Further investigation would be necessary to clarify
the exact cause of poor adhesion and low differentiation eﬀiciency in certain conditions.
46
==PAGE:54==
5
Conclusion
This research aimed to study the effect of five key compounds related with gut microbiome
- Sodium Lactate (SL), Sodium Butyrate (NaB), Dopamine, GABA, and Acetylcholine
(Ach) - on cell proliferation, differentiation, and dopamine release capacity, all with a
focus on their potential for therapeutic approaches to Parkinson’s disease.
The study explored how these compounds influence hVM1 cells through a three-phase
experimental structure. Phase 1 evaluated cell proliferation and viability, revealing spe-
cific compound-concentration effects, such as NaB toxicity at high concentrations and
dopamine’s proneness to oxidation, which interfered with MTS and L/D assays. Phase
2 examined neuronal differentiation, showing that the addition of SL, GABA, and Ach
in the early differentiation stage promoted dopaminergic differentiation, while NaB main-
tained its cytotoxic profile. Additionally, when comparing the addition of compounds in
the early vs. late differentiation stages using ICC assays, the late-stage addition showed
no significant differences compared to the early stage. This suggests that either the cells
did not have suﬀicient exposure time to the compounds or that, once fully differentiated,
they were no longer responsive to their effects. Phase 3 assessed the cells capacity to
release dopamine using electrochemical detection techniques, revealing that cells treated
with Ach exhibited significantly higher dopamine release, aligning with the ICC findings
for early differentiation. Results highlighted the importance of compound concentration
and NaB’s dual role. Additionally, challenges in real-time dopamine detection occurred
due to PMMA cracking and leaking, emphasizing the need for future electrode set-up
optimization.
The findings of this study provide foundations for future research, specifically in under-
standing the interactions between gut-derived metabolites and neurons. However, as this
work research was very exploratory, and performed from scratch with limited literature
support, several actions could be taken to increase its focus. Future research should focus
on testing a wider range of compounds to gain deeper knowledge of their interactions
and effects, including identifying optimal concentrations. Additionally, a more deep study
of Sodium Butyrate effects is needed to understand its toxicity profile obtained in this
research and the neuroprotective effect that literature suggest. Also, using real bacterial
extracts would provide a more biologically realistic approach. Apart from that, exploring
different probiotics as a secondary study in parallel could offer further insight, paving the
way for microbiota therapies and their effect on neurons.
Another key direction would be transitioning from 2D cultures to 3D organoid models,
which could replicate better the biological conditions. Developing an advanced microfluidic
system incorporating brain region organoids such as the striatum and substantia nigra
would allow for a more detailed investigation into how compounds affect dopaminergic
neurons, providing a better understanding of Parkinson’s disease. Refining experimental
models and exploring alternative compounds will be essential in creating opportunities for
microbiota-based therapeutic strategies for Parkinson’s disease.
47
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Bastiaan R Bloem, Michael S Okun, and Christine Klein. “Parkinson’s disease”. In:
The Lancet 397.10291 (2021), pp. 2284–2303.
[2]
Robert B Raffa et al. “Potential of a planarian model to study certain aspects of
anti-Parkinsonism drugs”. In: Adv. Parkinson’s Res 2 (2013), pp. 70–74.
[3]
Thomas Müller. “Clinical pharmacokinetics of levodopa and relevant add-on thera-
pies for Parkinson’s disease”. In: Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism & Toxicology
(2024), pp. 1–10.
[4]
Stuart H Isaacson et al. “Dopamine agonists in Parkinson’s disease: Impact of D1-like
or D2-like dopamine receptor subtype selectivity and avenues for future treatment”.
In: Clinical parkinsonism & related disorders (2023), p. 100212.
[5]
Philippe Rizek, Niraj Kumar, and Mandar S Jog. “An update on the diagnosis and
treatment of Parkinson disease”. In: Cmaj 188.16 (2016), pp. 1157–1165.
[6]
Anastasia Bougea. “Some Novel Therapies in Parkinson’s Disease: A Promising Path
Forward or Not Yet? A Systematic Review of the Literature”. In: Biomedicines 12.3
(2024), p. 549.
[7]
Lorenz Studer. “Strategies for bringing stem cell-derived dopamine neurons to the
clinic—the NYSTEM trial”. In: Progress in brain research 230 (2017), pp. 191–212.
[8]
Philip Strandwitz. “Neurotransmitter modulation by the gut microbiota”. In: Brain
research 1693 (2018), pp. 128–133.
[9]
Amjad Mhanna et al. “The correlation between gut microbiota and both neuro-
transmitters and mental disorders: A narrative review”. In: Medicine 103.5 (2024),
e37114.
[10]
Kaja Kasarello, Agnieszka Cudnoch-Jedrzejewska, and Katarzyna Czarzasta. “Com-
munication of gut microbiota and brain via immune and neuroendocrine signaling”.
In: Frontiers in microbiology 14 (2023), p. 1118529.
[11]
Takahiro E Ohara and Elaine Y Hsiao. “Microbiota–neuroepithelial signalling across
the gut–brain axis”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology (2025), pp. 1–14.
[12]
John B Furness et al. “The enteric nervous system and gastrointestinal innervation:
integrated local and central control”. In: Microbial endocrinology: The microbiota-
gut-brain axis in health and disease (2014), pp. 39–71.
[13]
Patrizia Proia et al. “Lactate as a metabolite and a regulator in the central nervous
system”. In: International journal of molecular sciences 17.9 (2016), p. 1450.
[14]
Thomas C Fung. “The microbiota-immune axis as a central mediator of gut-brain
communication”. In: Neurobiology of disease 136 (2020), p. 104714.
[15]
Kelly Jimin Park and Yao Gao. “Gut-brain axis and neurodegeneration: Mechanisms
and therapeutic potentials”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 18 (2024), p. 1481390.
[16]
Brittany D Needham et al. “A gut-derived metabolite alters brain activity and anx-
iety behaviour in mice”. In: Nature 602.7898 (2022), pp. 647–653.
[17]
Gary Frost et al. “The short-chain fatty acid acetate reduces appetite via a central
homeostatic mechanism”. In: Nature communications 5.1 (2014), p. 3611.
[18]
Francesco Marrocco et al. “Short-chain fatty acids promote the effect of environmen-
tal signals on the gut microbiome and metabolome in mice”. In: Communications
Biology 5.1 (2022), p. 517.
[19]
Tong-Tong Guo et al. “Neuroprotective effects of sodium butyrate by restoring gut
microbiota and inhibiting TLR4 signaling in mice with MPTP-induced Parkinson’s
disease”. In: Nutrients 15.4 (2023), p. 930.
48
==PAGE:56==
[20]
Shengwen Lu et al. “The communication mechanism of the gut-brain axis and its
effect on central nervous system diseases: A systematic review”. In: Biomedicine &
Pharmacotherapy 178 (2024), p. 117207.
[21]
Liliana M Sanmarco et al. “Gut-licensed IFNγ+ NK cells drive LAMP1+ TRAIL+
anti-inflammatory astrocytes”. In: Nature 590.7846 (2021), pp. 473–479.
[22]
Di Wu et al. “The blood–brain barrier: structure, regulation, and drug delivery”. In:
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy 8.1 (2023), p. 217.
[23]
Timothy R Sampson et al. “Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuroinflam-
mation in a model of Parkinson’s disease”. In: Cell 167.6 (2016), pp. 1469–1480.
[24]
Ruth Naomi et al. “Probiotics for Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review”. In:
Nutrients 14.1 (2021), p. 20.
[25]
Magdalena Koszewicz et al. “Dysbiosis is one of the risk factor for stroke and cogni-
tive impairment and potential target for treatment”. In: Pharmacological Research
164 (2021), p. 105277.
[26]
Quantao Ma et al. “Research progress in the relationship between type 2 dia-
betes mellitus and intestinal flora”. In: Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy 117 (2019),
p. 109138.
[27]
Thorsten Schiffer et al. “Lactate infusion at rest increases BDNF blood concentration
in humans”. In: Neuroscience letters 488.3 (2011), pp. 234–237.
[28]
Marinella Coco et al. “Elevated blood lactate is associated with increased motor
cortex excitability”. In: Somatosensory & motor research 27.1 (2010), pp. 1–8.
[29]
Ming Cai et al. “Lactate is answerable for brain function and treating brain diseases:
energy substrates and signal molecule”. In: Frontiers in Nutrition 9 (2022), p. 800901.
[30]
Sascha Wohnsland et al. “Neurons and neuronal stem cells survive in glucose-free
lactate and in high glucose cell culture medium during normoxia and anoxia”. In:
Neurochemical research 35 (2010), pp. 1635–1642.
[31]
Anika Wu, Daehoon Lee, and Wen-Cheng Xiong. “Lactate metabolism, signaling,
and function in brain development, synaptic plasticity, angiogenesis, and neurode-
generative diseases”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 24.17 (2023),
p. 13398.
[32]
Jing Sun et al. “Effect of Clostridium butyricum against microglia-mediated neu-
roinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease via regulating gut microbiota and metabolites
butyrate”. In: Molecular nutrition & food research 64.2 (2020), p. 1900636.
[33]
Enie Lei, Kristina Vacy, and Wah Chin Boon. “Fatty acids and their therapeu-
tic potential in neurological disorders”. In: Neurochemistry international 95 (2016),
pp. 75–84.
[34]
Jorge Missiego-Beltrán et al. “Implications of butyrate signaling pathways on the mo-
tor symptomatology of Parkinson’s disease and neuroprotective effects—therapeutic
approaches: a systematic review”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences
25.16 (2024), p. 8998.
[35]
Joshua D Elford et al. “Buty and the beast: the complex role of butyrate in Parkin-
son’s disease”. In: Frontiers in Pharmacology 15 (2024), p. 1388401.
[36]
Matthew D Wiefels et al. “Targeting gut dysbiosis and microbiome metabolites for
the development of therapeutic modalities for neurological disorders”. In: Current
neuropharmacology 22.1 (2024), pp. 123–139.
[37]
Alessio Vittorio Colombo et al. “Microbiota-derived short chain fatty acids modulate
microglia and promote Aβ plaque deposition”. In: elife 10 (2021), e59826.
[38]
Al Borhan Bayazid et al. “Neuroprotective effects of sodium butyrate through sup-
pressing neuroinflammation and modulating antioxidant enzymes”. In: Neurochem-
ical Research 46.9 (2021), pp. 2348–2358.
49
==PAGE:57==
[39]
Le Wang et al. “Enteric nervous system damage caused by abnormal intestinal bu-
tyrate metabolism may lead to functional constipation”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology
14 (2023), p. 1117905.
[40]
Zahra A Barandouzi et al. “Associations of neurotransmitters and the gut micro-
biome with emotional distress in mixed type of irritable bowel syndrome”. In: Sci-
entific Reports 12.1 (2022), p. 1648.
[41]
Kaifei Xu, Shuo Sheng, and Feng Zhang. “Relationship Between Gut Bacteria and
Levodopa Metabolism”. In: Current Neuropharmacology 21.7 (2023), p. 1536.
[42]
Rebecca Wall et al. “Bacterial neuroactive compounds produced by psychobiotics”.
In: Microbial Endocrinology: The Microbiota-Gut-Brain Axis in Health and Disease.
Springer, 2014. Chap. 10, pp. 221–239.
[43]
Guan-qiao Liu et al. “Effects of Dopamine on stem cells and its potential roles in the
treatment of inflammatory disorders: a narrative review”. In: Stem Cell Research &
Therapy 14.1 (2023), p. 230.
[44]
Jason D Braga, Masubon Thongngam, and Thanutchaporn Kumrungsee. “Gamma-
aminobutyric acid as a potential postbiotic mediator in the gut–brain axis”. In: npj
Science of Food 8.1 (2024), p. 16.
[45]
Yao Han et al. “The effects of acute GABA treatment on the functional connectivity
and network topology of cortical cultures”. In: Neurochemical research 42 (2017),
pp. 1394–1402.
[46]
Yijing Chen, Jinying Xu, and Yu Chen. “Regulation of neurotransmitters by the
gut microbiota and effects on cognition in neurological disorders”. In: Nutrients 13.6
(2021), p. 2099.
[47]
Mei Shen et al. “Single synaptic observation of cholinergic neurotransmission on
living neurons: concentration and dynamics”. In: Journal of the American Chemical
Society 140.25 (2018), pp. 7764–7768.
[48]
Ana Villa et al. “Generation and properties of a new human ventral mesencephalic
neural stem cell line”. In: Experimental cell research 315.11 (2009), pp. 1860–1874.
[49]
Jan Tønnesen et al. “Functional properties of the human ventral mesencephalic neu-
ral stem cell line hVM1”. In: Experimental Neurology 223.2 (2010), pp. 653–656.
[50]
Ana Rosa Montaño-Rodriguez, Tabea Schorling, and Jaan-Olle Andressoo. “Striatal
GDNF System Elicits Chemoattraction to RET Positive Dopamine Axons Seven
Times Longer in Distance than the Abundant Medium Spiny Neurons and Covers
Approximately One Twelfth of the Striatal Neuronal Volume”. In: (2024).
[51]
Howard Kim et al. “Effects of dibutyryl cyclic-AMP on survival and neuronal differ-
entiation of neural stem/progenitor cells transplanted into spinal cord injured rats”.
In: PloS one 6.6 (2011), e21744.
[52]
Promega Corporation. CellTiter 96 AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay
Protocol. Accessed: February 5, 2024. 2024. url: https : / / www . promega . com/ -
/media/files/resources/protocols/technical- bulletins/0/celltiter- 96- aqueous- one-
solution-cell-proliferation-assay-system-protocol.pdf.
[53]
Richard P Haugland, Ian C MacCoubrey, and Patrick L Moore. Dual-fluorescence
cell viability assay using ethidium homodimer and calcein AM. US Patent 5,314,805.
May 1994.
[54]
Letizia Amato et al. “Pyrolysed 3D-carbon scaffolds induce spontaneous differenti-
ation of human neural stem cells and facilitate real-time dopamine detection”. In:
Advanced functional materials 24.44 (2014), pp. 7042–7052.
[55]
Miguel A Correa-Duarte et al. “Fabrication and biocompatibility of carbon nanotube-
based 3D networks as scaffolds for cell seeding and growth”. In: Nano letters 4.11
(2004), pp. 2233–2236.
50
==PAGE:58==
[56]
Stefani Kavda, Stavroula Golfomitsou, and Emma Richardson. “Effects of selected
solvents on PMMA after prolonged exposure: unilateral NMR and ATR-FTIR in-
vestigations”. In: Heritage Science 11.1 (2023), p. 63.
[57]
Do Hyoung Kim et al. “Investigation of the reduction process of dopamine using
paired pulse voltammetry”. In: Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 717 (2014),
pp. 157–164.
[58]
Warner C Greene and Lin-Feng Chen. “Regulation of NF-κB Action by Reversible
Acetylation”. In: Reversible Protein Acetylation: Novartis Foundation Symposium
259. Vol. 259. Wiley Online Library. 2004, pp. 208–222.
[59]
Ikuko Miyazaki and Masato Asanuma. “Dopaminergic neuron-specific oxidative stress
caused by dopamine itself”. In: Acta Medica Okayama 62.3 (2008), pp. 141–150.
51
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix
A.1
Cell Culture Mediums
A. Basal Medium (BM) This medium is used to stop trypsinization. All subsequent
media compositions are based on this medium. 500 ml contains:
• 500 ml DMEM/F-12 w/ GlutaMAX (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat. No. 31331-028)
• 3 g (0.6 % w/v) glucose (Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. G7021)
• 2.5 ml (0.5 % v/v) 1 M Hepes (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat.
No.
11560496 or
Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. H0887)
• 2.5 g (0.5 % w/v) AlbuMAX-I (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat. No. 11530376)
Sterile filtered and stored at 4 °C. Used within 1 month.
B. Growth Medium (GM) This medium is used for cell proliferation and growth. 50
ml contains:
• 500 µl (1 % v/v) N2 supplement (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat. No. 11520536)
• 500 µl Non-Essential Amino Acids (NEAA) (1 % v/v) (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat.
No. 11140-035 or Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. M7145)
• 500 µl (1 % v/v) Penicillin/Streptomycin (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat. No. XX or
Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. YY)
• 10 µl hrEGF (stock: 100 µg/ml in PBS) (R&D Systems Cat. No. 236-EG-200) / 20
ng/ml
• 50 µl hrFGF (stock: 20 µg/ml in PBS) (R&D Systems Cat. No. 233-FB-025) →20
ng/ml
• 48.5 ml BM
Stored at 4 °C. Used within 1-2 weeks.
C. Differentiation Medium (DM) This medium is used for cell differentation. 50 ml
contains: 50 ml contains:
• 500 µl (1 % v/v) N2 supplement (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat. No. 11520536)
• 500 µl Non-Essential Amino Acids (NEAA) (1 % v/v) (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat.
No. 11140-035 or Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. M7145)
• 500 µl (1 % v/v) Penicillin/Streptomycin (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat. No. XX or
Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. YY)
• 10 µl GDNF (stock: 10 µg/ml in PBS) (ThermoFisher Scientific Cat. No. 10110633
or Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. SRP3309) →2 ng/ml
• 500 µl db-cAMP (stock: 50 mg/ml (100 mM) in PBS) (Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No.
D0627) →500 µg/ml (1 mM)
52
==PAGE:60==
• 48 ml BM
Stored at 4 °C. Used within 1-2 weeks.
A.2
Preparation of Compound Stock Solutions and Serial
Dilutions
1. Weigh the amount of compound needed to prepare the stock concentrations based
on their molecular weight:
• Sodium Lactate (SL) (Sigma Aldrich, L7022) - stock solution: 400 mM.
• Sodium Butyrate (NaB) (Sigma Aldrich, B5887) - stock solution: 150 mM.
• Dopamine Hydrochloride (Dopamine) (Sigma Aldrich, H8502) - stock solution:
10 mM.
• γ-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA) (Sigma Aldrich, A2129) - stock solution: 1.5
mM.
• Acetylcholine Chloride (ACh) (Sigma Aldrich, A2661) - stock solution: 100
mM.
2. Prepare 5 eppendorf tubes with a final volume of 1 mL with stock concentration of
each compound in GM to have it for further experiments.
3. Filter stock solutions with a 0.22 µm filter and a 2 mL syringe.
4. Store stock concentrations at -20°C.
5. Prepare serial dilutions from the stock concentrations prepared before, from stock
concentration to the lowest concentration (Concentration 8).
6. Add 100 µL of each concentration to the 96-well plates for MTS and L/D assays.
For ICC assay, serial dilutions should be prepared in DM, and when changing media
every two days, remove 2/3 of the medium containing the compounds.
A.3
Cell seeding and Compounds preparation Protocol
A. Cell Seeding on T-25 flask
1. Prepare PLL (Poly-L-Lysine) coating with PBS (Phosphate-Buffered Saline).
2. Add 2ml of PLL and incubate minimum 2 hours in the incubator.
3. Cell passage: Use trypsin-EDTA for trypsinization in the previous T-25 flask.
4. Use Basal Medium (BM), to neutralize the trypsin.
5. Cell counting and centrifuge cells at 700rpm for 7 minutes.
6. Remove supernatant and re-suspend in Growth Medium (GM)
7. Remove PLL coating from the flask and wash twice with PBS.
8. Seed cells in T-25 flask with a density of 100.000 cells.
9. Change media every two days using Growth Medium (GM).
53
==PAGE:61==
Use this flask as a maintenance flask to obtain cells for the experiments and assays. Cell
passage needs to be performed when medium-high confluence is observed in the flask with
confocal microscope.
B. Cell Seeding in 96-well plates 96-well plates are used in MTS assay and in L/D
assay:
1. Prepare PLL (Poly-L-Lysine) coating with PBS (Phosphate-Buffered Saline).
2. Add 70 µL of PLL per well. Incubate minimum 2 hours in the incubator.
3. Cell passage: Use trypsin-EDTA for trypsinization in the T-25 flask.
4. Use Basal Medium (BM), to neutralize the trypsin.
5. Cell counting and centrifuge cells at 700rpm for 7 minutes.
6. Remove supernatant and re-suspend in Growth Medium (GM)
7. Remove PLL coating from the 96-well plate and wash twice with PBS.
8. Seed cells in 96-well plates at different densities depending on the assay (10,000
cells/well for MTS assay and 30,000 cells/well for Live/Dead staining).
9. Change media every two days using Growth Medium (GM) or Differentiation Medium
(DM) plus the compounds, depending on the assay and phase.
C. Cell Seeding in electrodes
1. Prepare PLL (Poly-L-Lysine) coating with PBS (Phosphate-Buffered Saline).
2. Add 70 µL of PLL per well. Incubate minimum 2 hours in the incubator.
3. Cell passage: Use trypsin-EDTA for trypsinization in the T-25 flask.
4. Use Basal Medium (BM), to neutralize the trypsin.
5. Cell counting and centrifuge cells at 700rpm for 7 minutes.
6. Remove supernatant and re-suspend in Growth Medium (GM)
7. Remove PLL coating from the electrodes and wash twice with PBS.
8. Seed cells in the electrode using GM (30,000 cells/electrode)
9. Change media every two days using Differentiation Medium with the Compounds
(GM)
A.4
MTS Assay Protocol
Dimethylthiazol-carboxymethoxyphenyl-sulfophenyl-tetrazolium (MTS) assay.
1. Remove Growth Medium (GM) from 96-well plate wells.
2. Add 60 µL of Basal Medium (BM) per well to rinse and remove cells residues.
3. Remove Basal Medium (BM).
4. Add 100 µL of Growth Medium (GM) per well.
5. Add 20 µL of CellTiter 96® AQueous One Solution Reagent (MTS solution reagent)
per well.
54
==PAGE:62==
6. Incubate 96-well plate at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 2 hours.
7. Record absorbance at 490 nm with 96-well plate reader.
A.5
Live Dead Staining Protocol
1. Remove Growth Medium (GM) from 96-well plate wells.
2. Prepare 1:1 Live/Dead Staining Solution in Growth Medium (GM) using LIVE/DEAD®
Cell Imaging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. R37601).
3. Add 20 µL of Live/Dead staining solution per well. Minimize light exposure.
4. Perform imaging using Zeiss AxioObserver fluorescence microscope equipped with
FITC filter and TRITC filter.
A.6
Immunocytochemistry Assay Protocol
A. Fixation
1. Remove differentiation medium.
2. Rinse with PBS for 5 min.
3. Fix with 2% (v/v) PFA (diluted in PBS) for 2 min.
4. Fix with 4% (v/v) PFA (commercial solution) for 10 min.
5. Remove PFA.
6. Rinse twice with PBS for 5 min.
B. Permeabilization/Blocking
1. Permeabilize/block with 1% (v/v) goat serum, 1% (v/v) horse serum, and 0.3%
(v/v) Triton X‐100 (diluted in PBS) for 1 h. (STPBS solution)
2. Remove permeabilization/blocking solution.
C. 1° Antibodies – TH (rabbit) and ￿‐tubulin (mouse)
1. Incubate with 1° antibodies (diluted together 1:1000 in STPBS) overnight at 4 °C.
2. Remove the 1° antibody solution.
3. Rinse with STPBS for 10 min.
4. Rinse with 0.3 % Triton X‐100 (diluted in PBS) for 10 min.
5. Rinse with PBS for 10 min.
D. 2° Antibodies – Raised in goat
1. Incubate with 2° antibodies (diluted together 1:500 in PBS) for 30 min.
2. Remove 2° antibody solution.
3. Rinse twice with PBS..
E. Counter staining of nuclei
1. Incubate with 2 ￿g/mL Hoechst (diluted 1:5000 in PBS) for 10 mins.
55
==PAGE:63==
2. Rinse twice with PBS for 10 min.
3. Rinse once with water and let dry.
F. Microscopy
1. Perform imaging using Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 inverted epifluorescence microscope
equipped with 10× (EC Plan-Neofluar 10x/0.30 Ph1, ZeissTM, Germany), and 20x
(LD Plan-Neofluar 20x/0.4 Korr M27, ZeissTM, Germany) objectives.
2. Analyze images using Fiji NIH image analysis software
All the rinsing and incubation steps are performed at room temperature.
Electrodes set-up sterilization and treatments Electrodes holders need to be ster-
alized and electrodes need to have treatments prevus to cell seeding:
1. Prepare 0.5M NaOH solution with MiliQ water
2. Add in the NaOH solution the PMMA structures and start sonification for 30 min-
utes. After 30 minutes clean with deionized H2O twice.
3. With ethanol 70% sterilize PC structures and O-rings.
4. Meanwhile, perform O2 plasma treatment on the electrodes (Important that elec-
trodes do not get dry after the treatment).
5. Assemble electrodes set-up (PMMA, PC and electrodes)
6. Wash electrodes surface area twixe with H2O
7. Wash twice with PBS
8. Add PLL coating as described in Cell seeding on electrodes.
A.7
Electrochemical Dopamine Detection Assay Protocol
A.Electrode ans System Set-up
1. Disinfect the workspace thoroughly with ethanol.
2. Attach the PVC cables to the electrodes holders using screwdriver (Keep in the
incubator the electrode holders that are not being used).
3. Turn on the Potentiostat (CH Instruments Electrochemical Analyzer).
4. Open CHI1010A Electrochemical Analyzer software and set up experimental record-
ing parameters (Baseline: 300 seconds / Total experiment duration: 600 seconds /
Stimulation at 300 seconds, followed by an additional 300 seconds post-stimulation.
B.Chemical Stimulation
1. Prepare 450 mM KCl solution in Differentiation Medium (DM).
2. Remove Differentiation Media (DM) from the electrodes (one at a time).
3. Add 140 µL of pre-warmed Differentiation Media (DM) per electrode and transport
electrodes to the Potentiostat with a CO2 bag.
56
==PAGE:64==
4. Start recording baseline and at t=300s add 70 µL of KCl stimulation solution per
electrode - The addition needs to be fast and at the center the electrode.
5. After recording, remove the stimulation media and wash electrodes twice with PBS
in preparation for the next assay (ICC on electrodes).
A.8
Statistical Data and Analysis
A.Data from MTS assay
Figure A.1: Table for the MTS assay - Sodium Lactate, displaying cell viability, p-value,
SD and corresponding compound concentrations used in the experiment.
Figure A.2: Table for the MTS assay - Sodium Butyrate, displaying cell viability, p-value,
SD and corresponding compound concentrations used in the experiment.
Figure A.3: Table for the MTS assay - GABA, displaying cell viability, p-value, SD and
corresponding compound concentrations used in the experiment.
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.4: Table for the MTS assay - Acetylcholine, displaying cell viability, p-value, SD
and corresponding compound concentrations used in the experiment.
B.Data from Live/Dead Staining
Figure A.5: Table for the Live/ Dead assay - Sodium Lactate, displaying percentage of
cells, p-value, s.e.m. and corresponding compound concentrations used in the experiment.
Figure A.6: Table for the Live/ Dead assay - Sodium Butyrate, displaying percentage of
cells, p-value, s.e.m. and corresponding compound concentrations used in the experiment.
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.7: Table for the Live/ Dead assay - GABA, displaying percentage of cells, p-
value, s.e.m. and corresponding compound concentrations used in the experiment.
Figure A.8: Table for the Live/ Dead assay - Acetylcholine, displaying percentage of cells,
p-value, s.e.m. and corresponding compound concentrations used in the experiment.
59
==PAGE:67==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kolonnevej Street, Building 224
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
