==PAGE:1==
MSc Thesis
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of
Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­
Optic Sensing
Author
Marta Ricci
Supervisors
Asmus Skar, Varvara Zania
External Supervisor
Julius Nielsen
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, February 2025
In collaboration with
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed
Fiber­Optic Sensing
February, 2025
Master of Science in Civil Engineering
Master’s Thesis
30 ECTS
Author:
Marta
Ricci,
MSc
student
in
Civil
Engineering
at
DTU
s232372@dtu.dk, marta.ricci2000@gmail.com
Supervisors:
Asmus Skar, Associate Professor & Head of Studies at DTU Sus­
tain, asska@dtu.dk
Varvara Zania, Associate Professor at DTU Sustain, vaza@dtu.dk
External Supervisor:
Julius Nielsen, PhD holder, Engineer at Rambøll, jun@ramboll.dk
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Load test at Copenhagen Airport, © Marta Ricci, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering,
Bygningstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), De­
partment of Environmental and Resource Engineering (DTU Sustain), Section for Geotech­
nics and Geology, as part of the requirements for the Master of Science in Civil Engineer­
ing. This thesis project accounts for 30 ECTS and was carried out over 6 months, from
26th August 2024 to 14th February 2025.
Marta Ricci ­ s232372
Signature
14th February 2025
Date
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
A large­scale load test was conducted at Copenhagen Airport on existing rigid concrete
pavements. During the test, the strains induced by the applied load on the pavement
surface were measured using fiber­optic cables connected to an Optical Backscatter Re­
flectometer analyzer.
The geometry, soil­slab interactions, and joint interactions of the pavement structure
were replicated using an FE model developed in Abaqus. A sensitivity analysis revealed
that the key parameters governing the mechanical response of the pavement structure
were the coefficient of subgrade reaction k and the coefficient of interlocking joint Kj.
The fiber­optic strain measurements together with the FE model were used to back­
calculate k and Kj. The back­calculated values for the studied area are k equal to 0.3
MPa/mm, Kj equal to 0.15 MPa/mm for construction joints, and Kj equal to 0.5 MPa/mm
for contraction joints.
The accuracy of the FE model in replicating the actual pavement system was validated.
The model successfully reproduced the measured strain profile with a Mean Squared
Error (MSE) of 1.64 µϵ2 and a Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of 1.11 µϵ.
The distributed fiber­optic technology proved to be an effective sensing tool with signif­
icant potential benefits for airport operators. It can help detect problem areas and quality
issues in pavement, validate design assumptions, and potentially monitor damage devel­
opment throughout the pavement’s service life.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
This thesis is dedicated to my grandparents, Renzo and Annamaria.
Figure 1: Renzo and Annamaria
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors: Amsus Skar, Associate
Professor and Head of Studies, Varvara Zania, Associate Professor, and Julius Nielsen,
PhD holder and engineer at Rambøll. They provided constant support throughout the
entire project, demonstrating genuine interest in contributing to my work. In particular, I
am thankful to them for making the large­scale testing at the airport possible, playing a
fundamental role in the execution phase.
I would also like to thank Rambøll for giving me the opportunity to work on this project
and collaborate directly with the industry.
A big thank you to everyone who provided guidance and support in facilitating the large­
scale test: the staff at the DTU Construct laboratories (Buildings 118 and 119), Brødrene
Hedegaard A/S, Per Aarsleff A/S, Henrik Madsen Transport ApS, and Copenhagen Air­
ports A/S.
A special thanks to all the people whose support made it possible for me to pursue my
dream of moving from Italy to Denmark.
My heartfelt thanks go to my father, Riccardo, and my grandparents, Renzo and Anna­
maria, to whom I dedicate this thesis. Words cannot fully express my gratitude and the
love I feel for you. I will forever be grateful for the unconditional support you have given
me throughout every moment and every stage of my life, regardless of the geographical
distance. I owe everything to you.
Lastly, a huge thanks to the Jørgensen family, Læticia, Stig, and Geneviève, for wel­
coming me from my very first day in Denmark, making me feel at home and part of your
family.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Airport Rigid Pavements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Theoretical Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Experimental Basis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
Finite Element Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Experimental Testing
25
3.1
Test Area at Copenhagen Airport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Uniaxial Compression Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.3
Large­Scale Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4
Numerical Modeling
47
4.1
Model Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.2
Benchmark Westergaard Interior Loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.3
Mesh Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5
Investigation
55
5.1
Preliminary Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.2
Numerical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.3
Integration of Fiber­Optic Sensing and Numerical Modeling . . . . . . . . . 69
6
Conclusions
79
6.1
Summary and Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
6.2
Recommendations and Practical Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Bibliography
81
A Appendix
85
A.1 Uniaxial Compression Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
A.2 Fiber­Optic Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.3 Large­Scale Test Simulations in Abaqus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
vii
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
Civil engineering structures such as pavements, mat and raft foundations are usually
modeled using conventional elastic plate theory to evaluate their performance under ser­
vice conditions [1]. However, while the slab’s mechanical responses are easily repro­
duced within the framework of plate theory, the foundation support model is challenging
to define and characterize. The soil is typically represented using highly idealized models,
such as those proposed by Winkler (1867) [2], Hogg (1938) [3], Pasternak (1954) [4], and
Kerr (1964) [5]. In practical situations, it is both difficult to determine which model best
represents the soil under examination and to estimate its prevailing parameters.
Determining soil characteristics is a crucial early design phase to develop structures
that are both safe and cost­effective. Moreover, soil characterization is essential not only
during the design phase, but also to monitor existing structures and schedule mainte­
nance. A proper study and modeling of the soil would ensure a longer service life and
design recommendations for future constructions. Given its importance, various tests
have been developed over the years, including the Plate Load Test (PLT), the Heavy
Weight Deflectometer (HWD), penetrometer tests, and laboratory tests. Despite the large
number and variety of tests available, their application to existing pavement structures,
particularly rigid concrete pavements, remains limited, if not entirely unfeasible. Addition­
ally, performing these soil tests can be time­consuming and data interpretation might be
challenging within a short time frame.
New cutting­edge sensing technologies that can be applied to civil structures have re­
cently been developed. One of the most promising sensors in this field is fiber­optic strain
measurement that uses conventional telecommunications fibers connected to an Optical
Backscatter Reflectometer (OBR) analyzer. Fiber­optic sensing enables the measure­
ment of high­resolution strain profiles along cables ranging from centimeters to kilometers
in length. These characteristics create entirely new possibilities for structural assessment,
monitoring, and fundamental research in both laboratory and in situ settings.
This thesis project aims to develop and investigate the potential of a new method to
characterize plate foundation support below existing rigid pavements, by combining a
finite element (FE) model with high­resolution fiber­optic distributed strain sensing. This
thesis represents a first study in this field, exploring the use of fiber­optic technology as
a potential solution to bridge the gap caused by the lack of test methods for determining
soil characteristics in existing structures, while also overcoming the challenge of data
interpretation within a short time frame. Additionally, the same methodology might be
straightforwardly applied to estimate joint efficiency.
1.2
Objectives
The main objectives of this thesis are:
(i) The development of an installation method for fiber­optic cables on existing pave­
ments, ensuring they remain intact both during and after load tests. Additionally, the
installation method must guarantee that fibers provide high­quality readings with low
noise and high resolution.
(ii) The implementation of an FE model, and the evaluation of its capability to accurately
replicate the pavement­soil system.
(iii) The integration of fiber­optics data into the FE model. The objective is to backcalcu­
late the key parameters governing the mechanical behavior of the soil and the slab,
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
1
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
specifically the coefficient of subgrade reaction and the coefficient of interlocking
joint.
(iv) The validation of the developed test methodology, demonstrating that, once cali­
brated, the FE model can reliably reproduce the mechanical behavior of the struc­
ture under various load setups.
1.3
Methodology
This thesis combines experimental and numerical investigations of concrete rigid pave­
ments, with a specific focus on subgrade and joints behavior.
Chapter 3 provides a detailed description of all the steps of the experimental phase,
which primarily consisted of a large­scale load test carried out on existing rigid concrete
pavements at Copenhagen Airport. At the beginning of the experiment, fiber­optic ca­
bles were installed on the pavement surface and connected to Luna Optical Backscatter
Reflectometer 4600 (OBR) analyser to measure strain along the cables. After the instal­
lation of fibers, a load test was conducted using a Volvo FH16 truck, simulating various
load configurations (e.g., central loading, loading near free edge, and loading near the
joints). Additionally, further studies on the mechanical properties of the concrete mixes
used for the slabs were carried out in the laboratory. Specifically, uniaxial compression
tests were performed on core samples taken from the test area to determine the elastic
modulus and the compressive strength.
The numerical phase presented in chapter 4 involved the use of the commercial soft­
ware Abaqus. A model was developed to replicate the test area, incorporating the effects
of geometry and interactions (i.e., soil­slab and joint interactions). A sensitivity analy­
sis was conducted to determine the most significant parameters affecting the mechanical
response of the plates. The load setups from the experimental phase were simulated.
The final step of this thesis (chapter 5) focused on integrating the outputs from the
experimental and numerical phases. The data collected from the fiber­optic cables during
the load test were used to calibrate the parameters of the FE model. Finally, the validity
of this methodology was assessed by using the calibrated model to generate synthetic
measurements, which were then compared with fiber­optic data. To ensure the validity
of this check, only the load setups that were not used during the back­calculation phase
were considered.
2
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
This chapter first summarizes the design aspects of rigid pavements in the airport con­
text, with a particular focus on apron design (section 2.1.1). It then describes the con­
struction process and techniques used for these pavement structures (section 2.1.2).
Next, section 2.2 presents the relevant theoretical aspects of the mechanical behavior of
Portland cement concrete (PCC) slabs, soil, joints, and slab­soil interaction under service
conditions and static loads, along with some analytical and semi­analytical solutions for
highly idealized rigid pavement structures.
Section 2.3 focuses on experimental basis. Established testing methods for determining
the key parameters influencing soil and joint mechanics are presented. Additionally, the
innovative use of fiber­optic cables in the fields of geotechnics and pavement mechanics
is introduced.
Finally, since analytical solutions only exist for highly simplified geometries and specific
loading configurations, the fundamental principles of finite element (FE) modeling are in­
troduced, along with a review of relevant studies in the fields of geotechnics and pavement
mechanics (section 2.4).
2.1
Airport Rigid Pavements
2.1.1
Design Aspects
Rigid pavements typically consist of precast or cast­in­place PCC slabs placed on top of
a foundation system (fig. 2.1). A rational approach to the design of concrete pavements,
which usually have a service life of 20 to 40 years, should take into account both the
deformational behavior of the soil medium and the flexibility of the slab.
The foundation system is composed of natural soil and prepared layers, such as a
hydraulically bound base (HBB) layer, and a coarse aggregate base and subbase. In the
HBB layer, natural aggregates or crushed concrete are stabilized with a hydraulic binder
like cement. Similar to the HBB, the coarse aggregates in the base and subbase can
consist of natural aggregates like gravel and crushed stone, or recycled materials such
as crushed concrete. Beneath these prepared layers lies the subgrade, i.e. natural soil.
To keep the drawing in fig. 2.1 simple, the subgrade is depicted as a uniform layer, but in
reality, the soil is composed of layers with different properties, often including transition
zones that are not parallel to the ground level, nor easily identifiable.
Figure 2.1: Vertical section of a typical rigid pavement structure
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
3
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
Aprons, Taxiways and Runways
Figure 2.2 shows the main features of an Airport Operations Area (AOA), which includes
aprons, taxiways, and runways. While asphalt flexible pavements are typically valuable
for runways design to withstand dynamic loads generated by aircraft taking off and land­
ing, concrete rigid pavements are particularly advantageous in areas where loads are
primarily static in nature. The main advantage of using concrete instead of asphalt lies
in its higher stiffness and resistance to creep (i.e. slow deformation under constant pres­
sure). The areas where concrete is most widely used are aprons, because of high static
loads generated by aircraft. In aprons, aircraft are parked, loaded, and serviced for ex­
tended periods of time. Concrete pavements are also often used in taxiways, the airport
areas that connects runways, terminals, and aprons. Although taxiways mainly experi­
ence dynamic loads from moving aircraft, they also endure long periods of static loading,
especially near intersections, where aircraft wait or turn. Lastly, concrete pavements are
also used at the ends of the runways, including stopways and Runway End Safety Areas
(RESA), where static loads may occur during emergency situations.
Figure 2.2: Airport Operations Area (AOA) [6]
Joints Design
Since the most common distresses observed in concrete pavements are corner and
edge cracking, joint design is a fundamental aspect of airport pavement design. The per­
formance and service life of concrete pavements largely depend on the ability of joints
to transfer load between abutting slabs. Effective load transfer results in reduced deflec­
tions, faulting, spalling, and corner or edge breaks, thus improving riding quality [7].
The joints must fulfill the following functions:
(i) transfer loads across abutting plates,
(ii) control cracking due to aircraft loads and restrained curling and warping stresses,
(iii) provide space for pavement movements at intersections with other pavements or
structures,
(iv) accommodate utilities, such as drainage systems,
(v) divide the pavement into suitable increments for construction.
There are three categories of airport joints:
(i) isolation,
(ii) construction,
(iii) contraction.
The purpose of an isolation joint is to separate intersecting pavements and provide space
4
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
for embedded utilities.
Construction joints separate abutting slabs placed at different
times, such as between two working days or between adjacent paving lanes. Construction
joints should be placed parallel to the longest dimension of a pavement feature to ensure
an efficient construction process. Contraction joints create a weak section to control the
location of pavement cracking caused by drying shrinkage and/or thermal contraction.
Contraction joints also reduce stress caused by slab curling and warping. Load trans­
fer in contraction joints within aprons is usually accomplished by aggregate interlocking.
However, dowel bars may be used for load transfer if the slabs are close to the edges of
the pavement facilities [8].
Another classification can be made by distinguishing between longitudinal and trans­
verse joints (fig. 2.8). Since slabs are typically square, the transverse and longitudinal
spacing should be the same, usually ranging from four to 6 meters. Longitudinal joints
are parallel to the construction lanes and follow the direction of traffic; they are usually
construction joints. The pavement thickness and the overall width of the pavement struc­
ture are the primary factors determining the spacing of longitudinal joints. For runways
and aprons, joints are untied because the large mass of pavement holds these joints tight,
allowing aggregate interlocking to provide effective load transfer. The only exceptions are
the last three joints before a free edge or isolation joint, where tie bars are recommended.
Tie bars are reinforcement bars designed to keep the faces of adjacent slabs in con­
tact, preserving aggregate interlocking. Tie bars do not transfer load. Transverse joints
are perpendicular to the lanes of construction; they are typically contraction joints. Load
transfer is obtained by using mechanical load transfer (dowels) or by aggregate interlock­
ing. Similar to longitudinal joints, dowel bars are used near free edges as a precaution
to maintain joint performance in case some opening of the perimeter joints might occur.
Dowel bars take part in partial load transfer between abutting slabs. The dowel bars also
allow axial thermal expansion and contraction of the slab along the axis of the dowel [8].
Embedded steel does not significantly contribute to the structural capacity, as it usually
corresponds to only 0.05%­0.3% of the slab’s cross­sectional area, and it is positioned
near the horizontal plane containing the neutral axis. Consequently, the thickness re­
quired for pavements including embedded steel is the same as required for plain pave­
ments. The only purpose of the embedded steel is to keep any cracks that may develop
in concrete panels from separating and becoming a source of debris, and ensure aggre­
gate interlocking. The reason for preferring very thick concrete sections, often exceeding
450 mm, instead of increasing the bending capacity with embedded steel, is primarily
driven by construction efficiency, allowing the slipform paver machine to quickly cast the
construction lanes (section 2.1.2) [8].
Figure 2.3: Tie bars and dowel bars in construction and contraction joints, respectively [9]
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
5
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
2.1.2
Construction Process
Foundation Preparation
The first step before starting any pavement construction project is to ensure that the
area is unobstructed. Soil, rocks, organic materials, and other items occupying the space
for placing the foundation layers and the Portland cement concrete (PCC) slab need to
be removed.
The subgrade must be compacted to guarantee it is uniform, stiff, and well­drained.
Next, coarse materials such as gravel, crushed stone, or recycled concrete are added
to prepare the subbase and base. These layers must also be properly compacted and
leveled.
Finally, designs for facilities accommodating aircraft weighing more than 100,000 lb
(45,360 kg) typically require a stabilized base to provide higher frictional resistance to
slab migration [8]. To form the hydraulically bound base (HBB), the aggregates are first
mixed with a binder. Water is then added so that the hydration chemical reactions can
occur, allowing the HBB to set and harden. Water content is usually compatible with
compaction by rolling. The binder materials may include cement, bitumen, lime, gypsum,
granulated blast­furnace slag, air­cooled steel slag, and coal fly ash.
Concrete Slab Casting Phase
After the foundation layers are prepared, the PCC concrete slabs are cast using a slip­
form paver machine (fig. 2.4). Slipform paving is defined as a process used to consolidate,
form into geometric shape, and finish the surface of a PCC mass [10]. Slipform paving has
numerous advantages, including the use of low­slump (0­75 mm) concrete mixes, which
ensures that the fresh PCC maintains its shape and achieves high compression and flex­
ural strengths. In addition, slipform paver machines are compatible with high productivity
rates that are required for large­scale projects. A typical track­mounted, self­propelled
paver operates at speeds between 1 and 2.5 m/min [11]. The paver usually performs
screeding, consolidation, and initial finishing, following this methodology:
(i) an auger spreads the PCC in front of the strike­off plate,
(ii) the strike­off plate (screed) removes excess portions of the auger­placed PCC and
brings the slab near its final elevation,
(iii) the PCC is consolidated by a group of vibrators,
(iv) the vibrators push large aggregate particles below the slab surface,
(v) the profile pans level off the slab at the right elevation and provide initial finishing.
Some pavers are equipped to place reinforcing steel (if needed), dowel bars, and tie
rods as well. The texturing and curing machine follows the paver and is used to impart
macrotexture and to apply a curing membrane over the pavement [12].
Figure 2.4: Slipform paver machine [10]
6
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
2.1.3
Joint Sawing
The process of sawing joints involves cutting a groove, typically one­quarter to one­
third of the thickness of the PCC slab, to create a weakened section across the lane
where concrete will crack, and consequently form the contraction joint [8].
Figure 2.5: Joint sawing process [10]
Joint Sealing
Joint sealing is a routine construction and maintenance activity, which has three main
purposes:
(i) keep out incompressible materials that may obstruct the joint’s cavity,
(ii) limit moisture ingress, which often results in foundation softening and erosion of fine
particles,
(iii) prevent soil contamination from de­icing liquids, fuel spills, and other chemicals.
The most common approach to seal joints involves liquids that are poured into a pre­
pared reservoir (fig. 2.6). Hot­applied sealants harden and cure after cooling; cold­applied
sealants are often made of two components that react after mixing to produce the desired
curing and hardening. A backer rod or a separating tape is often installed at the bottom of
the reservoir prior to its filling to limit the amount of needed sealant, and control the seal’s
cross­sectional shape. A sealant is expected to take the available reservoir’s shape, fill
it, and cure while adhering to the sides. Under service conditions, as the joint expands
and contracts due to temperature changes, a sealant is expected to compress and stretch
without losing contact with the reservoir sides, and without developing tensile strains that
exceed the material’s capacity. Joint sealing methods are also applicable to crack sealing
[10].
Figure 2.6: Sealing of a contraction joint [8]
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
7
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
2.2
Theoretical Framework
The mechanical response of naturally occurring soils can be influenced by a variety of
factors, these include:
(i) the shape, size, and mechanical properties of the individual soil particles,
(ii) the configuration of the soil structure,
(iii) the intergranular stresses and stress history,
(iv) the presence of soil moisture, the degree of saturation, and the soil permeability.
These factors generally contribute to stress­strain elasto­plastic phenomena, which show
evident non­linear, irreversible, and time­dependent characteristics. The soil also exhibits
anisotropic and non­homogeneous material properties [13].
In addition to the complex behavior of the soil, it is also necessary to evaluate the
characteristics of the pavement, particularly the concrete mix, the geometry of the slab,
as well as how the load is transmitted from the vehicles to the pavement structure.
Other highly complex aspects include the transfer mechanisms of mechanical reactions
across the plate­foundation interface, within the foundation layers, and through the joints
between abutting plates.
Thus, any attempt to solve a plate­foundation interaction problem while considering all
these characteristics is clearly an onerous task. To obtain meaningful and reliable infor­
mation for practical problems, it becomes necessary to idealize the behavior of all these
elements by focusing on the most relevant aspects. In particular, the main simplification
for this type of structure under service conditions is the assumption of purely elastic be­
havior of all the elements involved, namely both the concrete slab and the underlying soil,
together with the joints transfer mechanism [13].
2.2.1
Plate Mechanics
The mechanical behavior of slabs typically follows the classical Kirchhoff & Love plate
theory, which is an extension of Euler & Bernoulli beam theory to thin plates [1]. The
theory was developed in 1888 by Love using the assumptions proposed by Kirchhoff &
Germain. There are six underlying assumptions in this theory:
(i) the plate has a constant thickness h,
(ii) the mean surface deflection uz(x, y) is small compared to the plate’s thickness,
(iii) the mid­surface slope is small compared to unity,
(iv) the mid­surface remains unstrained under bending,
(v) plane sections initially normal to the plate’s top and bottom surface will remain plane
and normal after bending,
(vi) the plate is homogeneous, isotropic, and linear elastic, characterized by Young’s
modulus E and Poisson ratio ν.
Another widely accepted and used plate theory in civil engineering is the Mindlin &
Reissner formulation, which represents the first­order shear deformation plate theory, also
known as the thick plate theory. The difference from the classical plate theory of Kirchhoff
and Love is that, in the Mindlin & Reissner theory, straight lines normal to the mid­surface
remain straight after deformation but are not necessarily perpendicular to the mid­surface
[1].
A common rule of thumb for determining whether a plate is thin is that the ratio of its
side length B to its thickness h should be greater than 8–10 [14]. In pavement mechanics,
this ratio is usually higher than 8–10, meaning pavements are generally classified as
thin plates. For this reason, the classical Kirchhoff­Love plate theory is commonly used
to analyze them. According to this theory, the governing differential equation for plate
bending is:
∇4uz(x, y) = q(x, y)
D
(2.1)
8
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
where ∇4 = ∇2∇2 is the twice­applied 2D Laplace operator (∇2 =
∂2
∂x2 +
∂2
∂y2 ), q(x, y)
denotes the load distribution (considering both the load applied normal to the top surface
and the support reaction), and D is the plate’s flexural rigidity per unit width, given by:
D =
Eh3
12(1 −ν2)
(2.2)
The plate moments per unit length in the radial and tangential directions are obtained from
the expressions:
Mr = −D
d2uz
dr2 + ν
r
duz
dr

(2.3)
Mθ = −D
1
r
duz
dr + ν d2uz
dr2

(2.4)
where r is the radial coordinate, with the origin located directly under the load centroid.
The corresponding bending stresses are:
σr = 12zMr
h3
(2.5)
σθ = 12zMθ
h3
(2.6)
where z is the vertical coordinate, measured from the plate’s mid­surface (neutral plane)
with positive values directed downward. The extremal bending stresses are obtained at
the bottom of the plate where z = h/2 and at the surface where z = −h/2. The notation is
such that a positive moment is associated with tensile bending stress at the plate bottom
under the loaded area, where r = 0 and z = h/2. Finally, the radial and tangential strain
are obtained from:
ϵr = 12z(Mr −νMθ)
Eh3
(2.7)
ϵθ = 12z(Mθ −νMr)
Eh3
(2.8)
2.2.2
Elastic Soil Models
The simplest type of idealized soil response assumes linear elastic behavior of the sup­
porting soil medium. It is recognized that the assumptions of linearity and reversibility
of deformations implicit in linear elastic theory are, of course, not always rigorously sat­
isfied by naturally occurring soil masses. However, the soil medium can be adequately
represented by an elastic medium occupying a half­space region when dealing with ser­
viceability design purposes. Linear elastic behavior considerably reduces the analytical
rigor expended in the solution of a particular boundary value problem and provides useful
information to many practical problems of geotechnical and pavement engineering which
would otherwise be intractable [13].
Winkler’s Foundation Model
The simplest and most commonly adopted model of linear elastic behavior of the sup­
porting soil medium is generally attributed to Winkler (1867) [2]. This idealized model of
soil media assumes that the deflection uz(x, y) of the soil medium at any point on the
surface is directly proportional to the stress q(x, y) applied at that point and independent
of stresses applied at other locations:
q(x, y) = kuz(x, y)
(2.9)
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
9
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
where k is the coefficient of subgrade reaction with units of stress per unit length. Typical
value ranges of k are reported in table 2.1. A physical representation of the Winkler soil
model consists of a system of mutually independent spring elements with stiffness equal
to k multiplied by the spring’s area of influence (fig. 2.7). One important feature and con­
sequence of this soil model is that the predicted displacement occurs immediately under
the loaded area, while outside this region, the deformations are null. The Winkler model is
often referred to as the liquid foundation model because ideal fluids cannot transfer shear
stresses. As a result, an externally loaded plate floating on an ideal liquid experiences a
support reaction equal to the weight of the displaced liquid, i.e. γuz where γ is the specific
weight. If γ is set equal to k, the two models become equivalent.
Table 2.1: Typical values of the coefficient of subgrade reaction k [MPa/mm] for different
soil types and compaction levels [15].
Soil Type
k [MPa/mm]
Dry or moist sand:
Loose
0.01­0.03
Medium
0.03­0.13
Dense
0.13­0.38
Saturated sand:
Loose
0.01­0.02
Medium
0.03­0.04
Dense
0.13­0.15
Clay:
Stiff
0.01­0.03
Very Stiff
0.03­0.05
Hard
>0.05
Hogg’s Model
Since the predicted surface deflections which occur in a Winkler model are limited to
the loaded region, this restricts its applicability to soil media which possess the slightest
amount of cohesion or transmissibility of applied forces. It is common experience that, in
the case of soil media, surface deflections will occur not only immediately under the loaded
region but also within certain limited zones outside [16]. In attempts to account for this
continuous behavior, soil media have often been idealized as linear elastic homogeneous
and isotropic half­space (fig. 2.7). The elastic half­space model is characterized by two
parameters, the Poisson’s ratio νs and the Young’s modulus Es [3]. Unlike the Winkler
model, this representative model of the soil as an elastic continuum is mathematically
complex [10], [16].
Pasternak’s Model
The two models for elastic soil behavior described above can be regarded as the two ex­
treme cases, represented on one hand by the completely discontinuous Winkler medium,
where the idealized springs are independent, and on the other hand by the completely con­
tinuous elastic solid. It has been observed from both experimental and theoretical studies
that, for soil media, surface displacements occur not only within the loaded area but also
outside it. These displacements, however, decrease more rapidly than that predicted by
the elastic continuum model [10], [16]. Consequently, different models are needed to pro­
vide a transition between these two types of idealized soil behavior. Therefore, models
characterized by two independent parameters have been developed; among these mod­
10
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
els, one of the most accurate in describing the soil medium behavior is the one proposed
by Pasternak (1954) [4]. The Pasternak model is an extension of the Winkler model,
incorporating shear interaction between the elastic adjacent elements. A physical repre­
sentation of the Pasternak model can be accomplished by connecting the spring elements,
that were already introduced with the Winkler model, to a layer of incompressible verti­
cal elements that deform in transverse shear only (fig. 2.7), which leads to the support
reaction:
q(x, y) = ku(x, y) −Gp∇2u(x, y)
(2.10)
where Gp denotes the shear stiffness parameter with units of force per unit length. If Gp
is set to zero, the Pasternak model reduces to the Winkler model, i.e. eq. (2.10) reduces
to eq. (2.9), as the shear interaction between the elastic elements is eliminated. Although
the Pasternak model possesses some of the characteristic features of continuous elastic
solids, it is a simplification which cannot capture all complexities [17].
Figure 2.7: Response of foundation support models: (a) Winkler foundation model, (b)
the elastic half­space continuum model, and (c) Pasternak model [16]
Kerr’s Model
In the early sixties, Kerr (1964) [5] presented a foundation model characterized by three
parameters, two vertical coefficients c and k, and a shear stiffness Gp. The model con­
sists of two spring layers, with stiffness equal to c (or k) multiplied by the spring’s area
of influence, and an intermediate shear layer with stiffness Gp (fig. 2.8). The equation
governing the support reaction in the Kerr’s model can be written as:
(1 + k
c )q(x, y) −G
c ∇2q(x, y) = ku(x, y) −G∇2u(x, y)
(2.11)
Note that for c →∞, the upper spring layer vanishes, and the soil reaction simplifies to
the Pasternak model eq. (2.10). Consequently, for c →∞and Gp = 0, the reaction is
reduced to the Winkler model eq. (2.9).
Figure 2.8: Kerr foundation model
2.2.3
Interface Plate­Soil
In order to define the interaction problem completely, it becomes necessary to assign
certain conditions which relate to the mechanical behavior of the plate—foundation inter­
face. From a theoretical point of view, several assumptions can be made, ranging from
the completely smooth (frictionless) to the completely adhering interfaces. Due to the fi­
nite strength of soil media, the frictional forces, if developed, will also have finite values. In
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
11
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
addition, factors such as the distribution and character of the external loads on the plate,
the relative flexibility of the plate, and time­dependent effects can significantly influence
the condition at the interface. From the point of view of a comprehensive interaction anal­
ysis it would be prudent to estimate the effects of friction by considering the two extreme
classes of behavior, i.e. the completely smooth and the completely adhesive interface
[13].
The groundwater level but also temperature changes can affect the behavior of the
plate­foundation interface. Constant temperature change within the slab can cause ther­
mal expansion or contraction, and the development of stresses if the slab is restrained.
Temperature gradients through the depth of PCC slabs can produce curling [18].
Additionally, the aggregates in the first layer under the PCC slab are often stabilized
with cement or other binders (HBB), which usually creates a perfect adhering interface
between the PCC slab and the HBB. However, this layer can be deteriorated with time,
decreasing the friction that is developed at the interface.
It should also be considered that the prepared foundation is not composed of a single
material, but rather it always consists of multiple layers of artificial and natural materials
laid over the natural soil. The behavior of the interface between these layers should also
be taken into account.
2.2.4
Joints
The behavior of the joints is also assumed to be elastic. The mechanism governing the
mechanical behavior of the joints is primarily shear [10], [19], but normal stresses are also
transmitted [20]. In the classical modeling of joints, the bending mechanism is typically
neglected [10]. Joints are therefore modeled as vertical springs (for shear stress transfer)
and horizontal springs (for normal stress transfer) that connect the edges of adjacent slabs
(fig. 2.9).
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.9: (a) Shear vertical spring and (b) normal horizontal spring
In pavement mechanics, an important parameter to characterize the behavior of a joint
is the joint efficiency LTE, which refers to the ability of a joint separating two abutting
plates, to engage both plates in carrying a load that is applied only to one. The scenario
under which joint efficiency is quantified involves a single force, or a load distributed over
a small region, that operates adjacent to the joint being evaluated on one side. From a
theoretical point of view, the loading is imagined to be composed of two separate forces,
one with a magnitude PL that operates on the loaded plate, and another with a magnitude
PU that operates on the unloaded plate. The splitting of PT is additive, such that
PT = PL + PU
(2.12)
Three joint efficiency types that are interrelated are commonly considered [10]:
12
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
(i) efficiency of transferring loads
LTEL = PU
PT
(2.13)
efficient joint LTEL = 50%, completely inefficient joint LTEL = 0%.
(ii) efficiency of transferring deflections
LTEδ = δU
δL
(2.14)
where δL is the loaded plate deflection, and δU is the unloaded plate deflection. Ef­
ficient joint LTEδ = 100%, completely inefficient joint LTEδ = 0%. The efficiency
of transferring deflections LTEδ can be estimated using the Heavy Weight Deflec­
tometer near the joint (section 2.3.1).
(iii) efficiency of transferring bending stresses
LTEσ = σU
σL
(2.15)
where σU is the maximal bending stress in the unloaded plate, and σL is the max­
imal bending stress in the loaded plate. Efficient joint LTEσ = 100%, completely
inefficient joint LTEσ = 0%,
2.2.5
Analytical and Semi­Analytical Models
Analytical analysis are particularly suited to problems where the geometry of the struc­
ture is of a relatively simple form and soil exhibits no significant spatial variations. For
these ideal situations, the solutions for the plate deflections, bending moments, stresses
and strains can be represented in the form of infinite integrals. The contact stress is de­
termined by considering the compatibility between the deflections of the foundation and
the surface displacements of the idealized soil medium, together with the equations of
equilibrium for the entire foundation. For certain cases of external loading associated
with foundations resting on Winkler or two­parameter media, these infinite integrals can
be expressed in terms of special functions (e.g. the Bessel functions) in relatively simple
forms [13].
The earliest application of Winkler behavior of the supporting medium to an interaction
problem is due to Hertz (1884) [21]. It concerns the problem of a floating infinite elastic
plate subjected to a concentrated load. An important parameter that serves as a charac­
teristic length for the problem is the radius of relative stiffness, defined as:
l =
3
r
D
k
(2.16)
The radius of relative stiffness has units of length and provides some measure for the
plate’s flexural rigidity relative to the stiffness of the foundation support.
Within the field of concrete pavements, the work of Harold Malcolm Westergaard is
considered seminal [10]. In a series of contributions, Westergaard derived solutions for
rectangular plates supported on a Winkler foundation, while considering three loading
cases that are of practical relevance [22]. The three cases are:
(i) interior loading, where loading operates far from the plate’s edges (equivalent to
Hertz’s solution),
(ii) edge loading, where loading operates close to one edge but far away from the other
edges,
(iii) corner loading, where loading operates close to a vertex of a very large plate.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
13
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
According to Hertz’s and Westergaard’s interior loading case, when a distributed stress
over a circular area with radius a is applied far from the edges of a plate, the plate’s
deflection (in cylindrical coordinates) becomes:
uz(r) = aq
lk
Z ∞
0
J0
  mr
l

J1
  ma
l

1 + m4
dm
(2.17)
where J0 and J1 are the Bessel functions of the first kind of order 0 and 1, respectively,
and m is an integration variable. Once the vertical deflection is known, it is straightforward
to obtain all other plate responses from eqs. (2.3) to (2.8).
An analytical treatment to the problem with joint efficiency was developed under the
supervision of Westergaard in the work of Skarlatos (1949) [23]. Skarlatos (1949) [23]
idealized the problem to a joint of zero width connecting two semi­infinite plates. Present
in­between the plates is a continuous spring with stiffness f0 representing the joint’s trans­
fer mechanism (fig. 2.9a). An efficient joint has f0 →∞, while a completely inefficient joint
has f0 = 0.
Theoretical solution for vertically applied loads to an improved model for rigid slabs
supported on Pasternak foundations has been provided by Fwa et al. (1996) [24]. The
analytical solution developed is valid for an arbitrary vertical load applied at any point on
the thick plate. The solution represents an improvement to the Westergaard solution in
the following aspects:
(i) it incorporates the more general Pasternak foundation model in the analysis,
(ii) it takes into consideration the transverse shear deformation and local effects within
the concrete slab,
(iii) it is derived considering the actual width and length of the concrete slab,
(iv) it satisfies the boundary condition at all four free edges of the concrete slab.
If the same loading conditions as in eq. (2.17) are considered, the Pasternak model gives
the following plate’s deflection:
uz = aq
lk
Z ∞
0
J0
  mr
l

J1
  ma
l

m4 + 2bm2 + 1 dm
(2.18)
where
b = Gp
2kl2
(2.19)
If b or equivalently Gp is set equal to zero, eq. (2.18) reduces to the Westergaard solution
eq. (2.17).
Regarding the Kerr’s model, Van Cauwelaert et al. (2002) [17] presented the general
analytical solution of a thin PCC slab subjected to interior and edge loads. It provides the
means to determine any stress or deflection at any distance from an interior or edge load.
2.3
Experimental Basis
2.3.1
Common Testing Methods
The effectiveness of simplified models of the slab­soil behavior is dependent on the
ease and accuracy with which material parameters encountered in the idealized soil mod­
els could be determined from either laboratory or in situ tests, and the reliability and ac­
curacy of the theoretical predictions, as verified by experimental studies [13]. The deter­
mination of the coefficient of subgrade reaction k describing the Winkler model, or the
parameters describing the Pasternak model, k and Gp, can be obtained from laboratory
or in situ tests. During laboratory tests, the elastic constants Young’s modulus Es and
Poisson’s ration νs of the soil are first estimated, subsequently the coefficient of subgrade
14
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
reaction and the shear stiffness are related to these constants [13]. The main laboratory
tests used to determine the elastic constants of soil are the triaxial test and the oedometer
test. For example, one formula that is widely used is that of Meyerhof & Baike (1965):
k =
Es
B · (1 −ν2s)
(2.20)
where B is the foundation width. Typical in­situ tests during the initial phase of soil charac­
terization include penetration tests such as the Cone Penetration Test (CPT), the Standard
Penetration Test (SPT), and the Dynamic Cone Penetration Test (DCPT). Other in­situ
tests are the Plate Load Test (PLT), which is performed after the preparation of founda­
tion layers, and the use of the Heavy Weight Deflectometer (HWD) on already existing
pavements.
Dynamic Cone Penetration Test
The Dynamic Cone Penetration (DCP) equipment is shown schematically in fig. 2.11 It
consists of a 16 mm diameter steel drive rod with a replaceable point or disposable cone
tip, an 8 kg hammer which is dropped from a fixed height of 575 mm, a coupler assembly,
and a handle. The tip has an included angle of 60° and a diameter at the base of 20 mm.
The test is conducted by measuring the number of blows and the resulting penetration
into the soil.
Figure 2.10: DCPT equipment [25]
The data can be represented in a graph showing cumulative blows versus penetration.
Changes in the slope of the curve may indicate the transition between different soil layers.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
15
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
For each layer identified in the graph, it is possible to define the DCP Index, which repre­
sents the penetration per blow. Once the DCP Index is determined, it can be correlated
with the California Bearing Ratio CBR (%) as specified in ASTM­D6951, Table 1 [25].
Finally, from CBR, it is possible to determine both the elastic modulus and the coefficient
of subgrade reaction. There are numerous empirical formulas available, two of the most
widely used are presented below [26], [27]:
Es = 17.6 × CBR0.64 [MPa]
(2.21)
k = 2.7 × 10−4
1500 × CBR
26
0.78
[MPa/mm]
(2.22)
Plate Load Test
The Plate Load Test (PLT) is known since Westergaard’s time, and involves the ap­
plication of a load having known dimensions and intensity, and the measurement of the
resulting deflections. The test consists of a simple application of Winkler’s assumption:
k = q
uz
(2.23)
A loading device with sufficient weight is required in order to influence the surface that
is under investigation. The load is applied through a hydraulic jack and a set of bearing
plates to ensure rigidity. Dial gauges mounted on a deflection beam are used to mea­
sure the displacement (fig. 2.11). This method has been used in the industry, where it
is common that a truck or trailer is used as the loading device. Both wheels will then be
used as supporting points, where the wheels should be at a considerable distance from
the circumference of the applied bearing plates [13].
It should be noted that the PLT is usually performed after the preparation of the founda­
tion system, when the PCC slabs have not been cast yet. Consequently, this test can be
performed only during the construction phase, and cannot be used to monitor the evolution
of soil characteristics along time. Additionally, it should be recognized that the settlement
of foundations resting on cohesive soils increases with time due to the consolidation pro­
cess. Consequently, any data derived from a short­term PLT are not always appropriate
for design purposes [13].
Figure 2.11: Plate Load Test [28]
16
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
Heavy Weight Deflectometer
The Heavy Weight Deflectometer (HWD) is a device used in the investigation of ex­
isting flexible and rigid pavements that performs non­destructive tests. It measures the
deflections that occur on the pavement surface due to the application of a uniform dis­
tributed load. The equipment consists of a falling weight, a guide system, a load plate,
deflection sensors, a load cell, and a data processing and storage system. The HWD
itself is mounted on a trailer towed by a truck in which the data processing and storage
system is installed. A circular plate is used to apply this impulse, which is generated by
dropping from a known height a known mass onto the plate. A set of geophones is posi­
tioned at various radial distances from the load center to measure the deformations of the
pavement’s surface (fig. 2.12). The peak load and deflections, along with their time histo­
ries, are recorded and used to back­calculate the stiffness of each layer in the pavement
system [10].
Due to the high stiffness of PCC slabs for rigid pavements, the deflections caused by
the HWD can be very small and difficult to measure. The HWD is better suited for use
in back­calculation techniques for flexible asphalt pavements. However, an alternative
use of the HWD for rigid pavements can be in estimating joint’s LTE. In this particular
case, the load is positioned near the joint to be analyzed, and the geophones measure
the deflections both on the loaded plate and the unloaded plate.
Figure 2.12: Heavy Weight Deflectometer [29]
Determination of Pasternak and Kerr Parameters
The shear parameter Gp for the Pasternak model can be determined together with k
from a PLT test where an eccentric load is applied. It is necessary to measure not only the
settlement of the loaded plate but also the deflections of the soil surface in the immediate
vicinity of the plate to determine its rotation [4].
In order to avoid performing an eccentric load test, Fwa et al. (1996) [24] studied the
feasibility of estimating Gp directly from k by matching the theoretical solution of slab
stresses and deflections with measured values of full­size pavement slab experiments.
The authors suggested a semi­analytical solution that reduces the Pasternak model to
one independent parameter only, which is k. The shear stiffness Gp is set proportional to
k by a constant θ having units of area, Gp = θk.
To the best of the author’s knowledge, there appear to be no established methods
or references in the literature for directly determining the upper coefficient of subgrade
reaction c for the Kerr model, whether through in situ or laboratory tests. In practice when
using the Kerr model, c is back­calculated by fitting the model to the measured data.
The influence of c is significant only for the shear force distribution between the slab and
subgrade near an edge or a joint [17].
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
17
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
2.3.2
Fiber Optic Studies
Introduction to Fiber Optic Theory
New cutting­edge sensing technologies that can be applied to civil structures have re­
cently been developed. One of the most promising sensors in this field is fiber­optic strain
measurement that uses conventional telecommunications fibers connected to an Optical
Backscatter Reflectometer (OBR) analyzer. Fiber­optic sensing enables the measure­
ment of high­resolution strain profiles along cables ranging from centimeters to kilometers
in length. These characteristics create entirely new possibilities for structural assessment,
monitoring, and fundamental research in both laboratory and in situ settings.
Light is transmitted into the fiber, where the light pulses interact with the medium par­
ticles and acoustic waves. These interactions, known as scattering, occur due to im­
perfections in the material structure within the medium. An important effect in fiber­optic
sensing is back­scatter, where the scattered light is transmitted in the opposite direction
to the propagation direction (fig. 2.13). The three primary scattering effects are Raman,
Rayleigh, and Brillouin scattering [30] (fig. 2.17).
Figure 2.13: Principle of light signal transmission in optical fiber cables for applications in
geotechnical and pavement mechanics
Figure 2.14: Spectrum of light scattered in an optical fiber [30]
The light scattering effect of primary interest in the field of fiber­optic sensing appli­
cations in geotechnics and pavement mechanics is Brillouin scattering. This scattering
occurs due to thermally excited acoustic waves in the GHz range present in the silica
fiber, causing a refraction of light at shifted wavelengths (fig. 2.15). The positions of the
Brillouin peaks depend on the temperature and strain at the scattering location. Thus,
the position is shifted if the temperature or strain changes. The effect of temperature and
strain dependency comes from the fact that the acoustic wave velocity depends on mate­
rial density, and material density again depends on temperature (thermal expansion) and
deformation (strain). Since these are all linear relations, strain and temperature changes
cause the Brillouin frequency shift to change linearly [30].
Figure 2.15: Wavelength shift due to Brillouin scatter [30]
18
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
Fiber Optic Studies in Pavement Mechanics and Geotechnics
Although the high resolution of distributed fiber­optics is ideal for small­scale projects,
this technology holds significant potential for monitoring large­scale civil structures and
infrastructures. Below are some studies of significant interest in the field of geotechnics
and pavement mechanics, presenting new possibilities for the use of optical fiber, par­
ticularly in lifetime monitoring, facilitating, for example, failure prediction and proactive
maintenance.
Goldfeld & Klar (2013) [31] discussed Brillouin optical time domain reflectometry (BOT­
DR/A) to analyze the behavior of reinforced concrete (RC) beams. They proposed an
algorithm to convert BOTDR/A readings into parameters that describe the geometrical
configuration of cracks and the associated loss of stiffness in the beams, as cracks caused
a local increase in fiber strain.
Figure 2.16: Design plan of the test beam and the layout of the fiber optics [31]
A notable example of a fiber optic application for tunnels monitoring was performed at
Crossrail’s Liverpool Street Station, where fiber­optics were embedded in the tunnel lining
to monitor strain changes during cross­passage excavations [32]. This continuous moni­
toring was able to localize weak areas in the sprayed concrete lining, where non­uniform
soil pressure would have been difficult to assess using single­point measurements.
Schenato et al. (2017) [33] demonstrated that distributed fiber­optics can identify land­
slide evolution by creating a large­scale physical model of the slope, allowing the detection
precursory failure signs, and improving landslide warning systems.
Chapeleau et al. (2017) [34] investigated the detection of cracking in pavements. Sen­
sors embedded in pavements monitored strain changes, identifying areas of increased
strain prior to visible damage. Cracks later appeared in these areas, demonstrating a
correlation between strain increases and cracking.
The use of strain sensing has been investigated for concrete bored piles, particularly
for temperature monitoring during the curing process. Fiber­optic sensing cables were
embedded and attached to the reinforcement cage of the pile during casting with the aim
of evaluating the thickness of the concrete cover concerning heat transfer in adjacent
ground [35]. A similar research was conducted by Gao et al. (2019) [36]. It focused on
bored concrete pile deformation by monitoring strains along the axial direction.
Skar et al. (2019) [16] introduced a novel load­independent method to characterize
plate foundation support using high­resolution fiber­optic distributed strain sensing. Their
approach involved tracking the locations of zero and maximum strain points and relating
the shifts in these locations to changes in soil reaction. The methodology was based on
three main steps:
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
19
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
(i) a mechanical plate foundation model,
(ii) a small­scale experiment with distributed fiber­optic strain sensors,
(iii) an iterative interpretation scheme.
Figure 2.17: Small­scale slab on grade system: (a) aluminum plate instrumented with
fiber­optic cables and supported by a thick polystyrene mat and (b) OBR device and laptop
[16]
The study most closely related to this thesis project was conducted at Zurich Airport on
asphalt pavements. Hauswirth et al. (2020) [37] demonstrated that embedded distributed
fiber­optic sensors are a valuable technology for assessing pavement conditions. These
sensors were deployed on an asphalt test track at Zurich Airport to measure strains in
pavement caused by aircraft load. The data collected from these sensors enabled the
back­calculation of the pavement layers’ elastic moduli. A finite element (FE) model was
developed with the commercial FE software Abaqus. The sensors successfully captured
strains induced by the rear landing gear of the airplane, with individual tires identifiable
based on strain distribution along the sensing cable. The inverse analysis indicated that
the strains could be reasonably reproduced by a relatively simple FE model with a linear
elastic constitutive model for the layers.
2.4
Finite Element Modeling
2.4.1
Introduction to Finite Element Theory
The Finite Element Method (FEM) is a powerful computational technique used for solv­
ing a wide range of engineering problems. FEM is invaluable when dealing with civil
structures having a complicated geometry and soil media with spatial variations of material
response. This computational method divides a complex structure into smaller, manage­
able elements interconnected at nodes, where the governing equations are approximated,
leading to the formation of a set of algebraic equations.
The governing equations for a linear static analysis are derived from the compatibility
conditions, the equilibrium equations, and the constitutive equations. FE models highly
rely on the ability of the constitutive model to represent real soil behavior and boundary
conditions of the model. The compatibility equations ensure that the strains are com­
patible with the displacements. For the case of a three dimensional (3D) material body
where after the deformation the body is still a continuum, Barre de Saint­Venant in 1860
formulated the 6 governing compatibility equations, expressing the following ideas [10]:
(i) the body does not develop cracks or gaps at any point,
(ii) material points originally close remain close to each other after deformation,
(iii) material does not overlap.
The constitutive equations define the relationships between strains and stresses. This
20
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
system of equations can be written as a matrix equation. The constitutive equations for a
linear elastic material can be written as [10]:
σmn = Emnpqϵpq
(2.24)
where σmn is the stress tensor, Emnpq is the elasticity tensor, and ϵpq is the strain tensor.
For isotropic homogeneous linear elastic materials, the elasticity tensor depends only on
Young’s modulus E and Poisson’s ratio ν).
In the case of a static analysis, the equilibrium equations can be expressed in the fol­
lowing matrix equation:
∥K∥u = F
(2.25)
where ∥K∥is the global stiffness matrix, u is the displacement vector, and F is the force
vector.
The domain is split into a finite number of elements. Each element has a predefined
shape and is characterized by a set of nodes. The displacement field inside each element
is approximated by interpolation functions that are defined on the nodes. In the simple
case of a linear element, the displacement field u can be expressed as:
u(x) = ∥N(x)∥ui
(2.26)
where ∥N(x)∥is the shape function matrix, and ui is the vector containing the nodal dis­
placements of the element. The local stiffness matrices and force vectors of single ele­
ments are assembled into global stiffness matrix ∥K∥and global force vector F:
∥K∥=
N
X
i=1
∥Ki∥
(2.27)
F =
N
X
i=1
Fi
(2.28)
where N is the number of elements, Ki is the stiffness matrix, and Fi is the force vector of
the ith­element. The displacement vector u is then obtained from the solution of eq. (2.25).
2.4.2
Finite Element Models for Rigid Pavements
FE models have been widely used within the field of pavement mechanics, and the
literature offers numerous studies addressing various aspects. The main concepts from
research focusing on rigid concrete pavements in the context of airport aprons are pre­
sented in this section, with a focus on the analysis of the slab­foundation interface and
the joints behavior.
Many FE­based rigid pavement models simplify rigid pavements as a two dimensional
problem (2D), treating the slabs as medium­thick plates resting on an elastic foundation.
In this 2D common approach, finite elements discretizing the slab have only three de­
grees of freedom per node: vertical deflection and two rotations. Zokaei­Ashtiani et al.
(2014) [18] developed a 2D FE model for jointed concrete pavements, that can predict
the thermo­mechanical responses of rigid pavements. This tool accounted for pavement
curling and the interaction between the slab and soil foundation, offering an improved ap­
proach compared to traditional 2D methods, while avoiding the computational expense
of 3D FE models. The authors used interface elements to connect the unbounded layers
within the slab and model the interaction between the bottom slab and the soil foundation.
Thanks to the interface elements, the model was able to capture separation and sliding
between different layers caused by thermal loads and calculated the resulting frictional
forces at their interface.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
21
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.18: (a) Plate­foundation system and (b) Interface element [18]
The American Concrete Pavement Association (ACPA) (2008) [27] presented the mains
advantages and disadvantages of 3D FEM for structural design of airport pavements. Ac­
cording to ACPA, FEM is applicable to a wide range of boundary conditions and loading
scenarios, which make 3D FEM a useful tool to replicate load setups with multi­tire gears
of airplanes. This method accurately models rigid pavement geometries, such as slab
edges and joints, and provides a complete view of the stress and displacement fields. It
also allows for non­linear analysis, unlike analytical and semi­analytical methods. How­
ever, the 3D FEM also has some disadvantages. It may require long computation times
and may need significant pre­processing and post­processing demands. Additionally, the
solutions are mesh­dependent, meaning that the right balance between computational
time and accuracy must be considered. It is important to note that 3D FE analysis is not
a design method, nor is it an exact mathematical solution. It is also not always preferable
to analytical solutions, which are still essential for proper verification. Moreover, 3D FE
models increase the sensitivity of the rigid pavement’s response to the coefficient of sub­
grade reaction k, compared to the Westergaard solution (section 2.2.5). Inaccuracies in
selecting k can lead to significant changes in the required pavement thickness.
In their study on the mechanisms influencing joint behavior, Ioannides & Korovesis
(1990) [19] noted that the efficiency of aggregate interlocking can decrease over time due
to abrasion and friction of aggregates, together with temperature variations that affect the
joint opening. Aggregate interlocking is a load transfer mechanism present in contraction
joints that relies on the frictional shear action between individual aggregate particles (sec­
tion 2.1.1). In their FE investigation, they found that joint opening is the main parameter
affecting the aggregate interlocking and the efficiency of load transfer.
Maitra et al. (2010) [38] presented a 3D FE model for concrete pavements where the
shear load transfer mechanism is represented by discrete springs. They introduced a
new parameter, the coefficient of interlocking joint Kj with units of stress per unit length, to
characterize the load transfer efficiency of the joints (fig. 2.19a). This coefficient was used
to guide the selection of spring stiffness values for modeling granular interlocked joints
in FE investigation. The aggregate interlocking was modeled with two series of linear
elastic springs placed one below the other, connected between the nodes of adjacent
slabs (fig. 2.19b). The coefficient of interlocking joint is influenced by aggregate size and
joint width, while it is independent of load and slab thickness.
22
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 2. Literature Review
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.19: (a) Variation of LTE with coefficient of interlocking joint Kj, slab thickness
h = 300 mm [38] and (b) Model of aggregate interlocking with two series of elastic springs
[38]
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
23
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
3
Experimental Testing
In section 3.1 a brief history of the construction and expansion of Copenhagen Airport
is provided. Then, geometry and construction process of the test area are explained in
detail, along with some key aspects regarding the soil characterization. The information
on the soil is intended to be of a general nature and serves as preliminary data in relation
to the expected outcomes of this thesis project. These initial details have been of great
support both for the proper planning of the large­scale test and for the implementation of
the FE model in Abaqus.
The mechanical properties of the slabs’ concrete mixes were not provided a priori.
Consequently, uniaxial compression tests were performed to determine the compressive
strength and estimate the elastic modulus. The methods followed to perform the tests are
described in section 3.2.
Section 3.3 is undoubtedly the most important section of this chapter. It contains a de­
tailed explanation of the methodology followed to perform the load test and record strains
with fiber­optic sensing technology. It outlines the execution of the large­scale test, start­
ing with the preparation of the optical fiber, its installation, the execution of the load test,
and the subsequent steps taken to process the obtained data.
3.1
Test Area at Copenhagen Airport
Copenhagen Airport was inaugurated in 1925, and after a period of significant growth
in demand for passenger and cargo transportation, extensive expansion work began in
1982 [39]. This expansion involved reclamation of the coastal area to the east (fig. 3.1),
where the airport’s cargo zone was constructed. In the same area, Slightly further south
of the cargo zone, the test site was paved. It is located near the coast, within a zone used
for storing sand, gravel, and as a landfill for crushed concrete and other construction
debris (fig. 3.2). The soil beneath the eastern part of the airport, where reclamation was
performed, does not consist of natural soil layers (i.e. soil that has accumulated there over
time through geological processes). Instead, the ground consists of engineered fill, mainly
composed of sand or gravel that have been excavated, transported, and compacted in
this location for the reclamation of the coastal area [40].
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
25
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: Expansion of Copenhagen Airport and the consequent changes in the coast­
line: (a) 4­cm map (1953 – 1976) (KDS) and (b) 4­cm map (1980 ­ 2001) (KDS) [40]. Test
area in the red rectangle
Figure 3.2: Orthophotos of the southeast corner of Copenhagen Airport, with a progres­
sive zoom on the test area
The test area was constructed between August and September 2024. It is 60 m long
in the north­south direction, and 15 m wide in the east­west direction. It consists of 36
square Portland cement concrete (PCC) slabs, arranged in three lanes; the slabs form a
3x12 grid (lanes x rows) (fig. 3.1). For clarity, the slabs will be referred to as ”lanes” (3) in
the longitudinal direction and ”rows” (12) in the transverse direction; lanes will be called
by abbreviations (RAFA, FUT, and REF), while rows will be numbered starting from north.
Each slab has a square side of 5 m. The three lanes are composed of different concrete
mixes, as the primary purpose of constructing this test area was to evaluate paving and
finishing of more sustainable concrete mixes. The plates of the western lane are made
with a potentially more sustainable concrete mix (RAFA), which incorporates rapid cement
and fly ash. The plates in the central lane are also made with an eco­friendly concrete
mix (FUT), which contains calcined clay. The eastern lane consists of plates made with a
classic concrete mix (REF), serving as a reference.
Each PCC slab has a thickness of 360 mm, supported by the following layers (from top
to bottom, fig. 2.1):
(i) hydraulically bound base (HBB), 150 mm thick,
(ii) base made of crushed concrete, 150 mm thick,
26
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
(iii) subbase, 150 mm thick.
Regarding the HBB, two mixes were used. Beneath the 6 rows to the north, a standard
HBB mix was used, while the HBB under the 6 rows south contains recycled concrete.
No dowels nor tie bars were used. Additionally, joints have not been sealed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: (a) Sketch of the test area; longitudinal construction joints in blue, transverse
contraction joints in green and (b) picture of the test area, with north indicated on the right
A useful tool for investigating soil characterization is Geo­Atlas [40]. It is a multi­layered
map tool that provides information on the subsurface (e.g. seabed sediments, bedrock
geology, geomorphology), environment (e.g., soil contamination), and water (e.g., bore­
holes, groundwater). Figure 3.4 shows a vertical soil profile derived from the soil model
København 25 m. This profile refers to the soil stratigraphy beneath the test area. About
40 m east from row 12, a borehole was drilled in 1994, from which additional information
about the soil characterization was obtained (fig. 3.4). Row 1 is located on land with an
altitude of about 3.5 m above sea level, while row 12 has an altitude of about 2.5 m. The
slope of the ground level seems to be fairly constant, meaning that it is around 1%­2%.
The data from the terrain model and the borehole seem to coincide and provide aligned
information. Specifically, the ground appears to be composed of the following layers (from
top):
(i) artificial fill, presumably sand,
(ii) clay,
(iii) sand or gravel,
(iv) clay (present in the terrain model, but not observed in the borehole),
(v) bedrock of limestone.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
27
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.4: (a) Orthophoto of the location where the vertical ground profile was taken.
Please note that the orthophoto is out of date and reflects the situation before the pave­
ments were constructed, (b) legend of vertical profile and borehole, (c) the ground profile
beneath the test area, and borehole 208­2599, 27th May 1994
To obtain more detailed information regarding the stratigraphy immediately beneath the
slabs, a Dynamic Cone Penetration Test (DCPT) was conducted following the preparation
of the base and subbase. This test was carried out in August 2024 during the construction
phase, approximately beneath RAFA lane, around row 9­10.
3.2
Uniaxial Compression Test
From row 3, 15 core samples were extracted (five samples per plate), each with a
diameter of 150 mm and a height of 360 mm (equal to the slab thickness). The cores
were taken approximately 150­200 mm north of the row’s centerline, in a straight line and
at regular intervals (fig. 3.5a). The samples were sent for laboratory testing to assess the
mechanical properties of the three concrete mixes. After the extraction, the holes were
28
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
supposed to be refilled and restored with concrete. However, it is unclear whether this
procedure was properly followed. The holes are filled with a cement­like material, but they
are not perfectly flush with the surface of the slab, showing slight depressions. Moreover,
filling material, although cemented, appears to crumble easily.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a) Restored slabs with filled holes where cores were extracted; north is indi­
cated on the right and (b) core samples
Of the 15 concrete samples taken from row 3, 9 (three for each concrete mix) were
sent to DTU and tested as part of this thesis project, while the remaining 6 (two for each
concrete type) were sent to the Danish Technological Institute. The samples were labeled
with the lane codes (RAFA, FUT, and REF) followed by a number (1­5); specifically, the
samples numbered 3­5 were given to DTU. All 9 samples available for this thesis project
underwent a uniaxial compression test. The tests were performed following the standards
Testing Hardened Concrete, Part 3: Compressive Strength of Test Specimens [41].
The samples obtained from the airport had a highly irregular base surface, i.e. the one
in contact with the HBB. Therefore, the cores were cut with saw to remove any remaining
HBB residues. Subsequently, it was observed that the height of the cylinders was not
consistent. All REF samples, along with FUT 3 and 4, had the expected thickness of
approximately 360 mm, while the three RAFA samples and FUT 5 had appeared to be
shorter, with a height ranging between 320 and 330 mm. Due to this discrepancy, all
cylinders were cut again to achieve a height­to­diameter ratio of 2:1, corresponding to a
height of 300 mm and a diameter of 150 mm.
According to the standard [41], the uniaxial compression test must be conducted with a
force control, corresponding to a constant loading rate within the range of 0.6 ± 0.2 MPa/s.
For this experiment, the lower value of the range, 0.4 MPa/s, was chosen. To set up the
testing machine, stress per unit time was converted into force per unit time:
Load control = 0.4 MPa/s × π
4 (150 mm)2 ≈7 kN/s
(3.1)
The Instron SHY­035 servo­hydraulic test machine was used, which is equipped with
a hydraulic piston that moves downward, applying the load to the sample under exami­
nation. Two wood panels were placed on the base and upper surface of the cylinders to
prevent imperfections from causing microcracks, which could lead to loss of contact and
an increase in piston speed especially during the initial phases of the test.
All cylinders reached failure. In fig. 3.6 an example of a satisfactory failure mode of
the cylinder is shown, together with a partially unsatisfactory failure, which occurred for
REF 4. It is important to emphasize that determining whether the fracture patterns are
optimal is not always straightforward. Having a larger number of samples and verifying
test reproducibility is the most effective method to assess the adequacy of the specimens.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
29
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: (a) Satisfactory failure of RAFA 4 sample and (b) unsatisfactory failure of REF
4 sample
The raw data collected from the test include the values of load and the piton vertical po­
sition (with positive values while moving downwards), which are reported in appendix A.
The load values were converted into stress by dividing the load by the base area, while the
piston vertical position was first converted into actual displacement, and subsequently into
axial strain. The main limitation in determining the actual displacement and the axial strain
is that the machine is not able to measure the point where the load is null and there is con­
tact between the piston and the cylinder, and consequently the first data points collected
showed load values between 3 and 15 kN. Additionally, since the samples had been cut,
their faces were not perfectly parallel, leading to an overestimation of the initial displace­
ment in the first moments of the test compared to the actual stiffness of the concrete. To
correct this effect, the test phase in which the applied load ranged between 25 and 45 kN
(corresponding to a stress between 1.4 and 2.5 MPa) was considered, ensuring that the
concrete was still within the elastic range while avoiding initial data fluctuations caused by
imperfect contact between the machine and the cylinder. Within this load range, a linear
regression was performed to determine the piston position value when the load was zero
and actual contact between the surfaces occurred. From the equation of the line:
y = mx + q
(3.2)
the value of x for which y = 0 was determined as:
x = −q
m
(3.3)
An example of linear regression is presented for RAFA 3 (fig. 3.7). Once this value was
found, it was possible to calculate the initial position and, consequently, determine the
actual displacement ∆L and axial strain as:
ε = ∆L
L
= piston position −x
L
(3.4)
30
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
Figure 3.7: Load [kN] versus piston position [mm] for the sample RAFA 3 in the early
phases of the uniaxial compression test. Regression line in red
The compressive strength fcm corresponds to the stress at which failure occurs. Once
determined, an estimate of the elastic modulus E can be obtained using empirical formu­
las. Below is the one provided in Eurocode 2: Design of Concrete Structures [42]:
E = 22000 ·
fcm
10
0.3
[MPa]
(3.5)
where fcm is the compressive strength in MPa.
3.3
Large­Scale Test
3.3.1
Materials Preparation
The preparation phase for the load test began in the geotechnical laboratory at DTU,
during which the fiber optic instrumentation was set up. This preparation phase was car­
ried out in the laboratory instead of at Copenhagen Airport to ensure greater precision
and to avoid the typical challenges of field testing.
As the first step, the number of cables, their length, and their arrangement were deter­
mined for data collection during the load test. It was decided to install two lines of cables,
as shown in fig. 3.8:
• First Line (referred to as ”long cable” in this report). This cable runs across the
entire transverse section of the test area, covering a length of 15 m. The purpose of
this installation setting is to (i) assess the behavior of the longitudinal construction
joints, (ii) detect any variations in the soil beneath the three rows of plates, (iii) detect
any variations in the mechanical behavior of the PCC slabs made of three different
concrete mixes, and (iv) minimize noise in the data by installing the cable in a straight
line.
• Second Line (referred to as ”short cable” in this report). This cable crosses the
transverse contraction joint and then forms a square, covering a total length of 8.75
m. Its purpose is to (i) assess the behavior of the transverse contraction joint, (ii)
evaluate the possibility of determining the load position directly from the collected
data thanks to the square­shaped installation, eliminating the need for manual mea­
surements, and (iii) compare the data with those collected by the first line.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
31
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
Figure 3.8: Sketch of cables’ location. First long line in red, second short line in blue.
Units in [mm]
To ensure the installation geometry presented in fig. 3.8, the cables needed to be cut
slightly longer than required. Starting from a spool of several hundred meters, the cables
were cut to obtain the two test cables. For both cables in this experiment, an extra 2
meters in length was left to allow for splicing with the connectors (fig. 3.9a), which were
later attached to the analyzer, and to leave some slack around joints. Additionally, for the
short cable, this extra length was necessary for the turnings in the square trajectory of the
short cable.
Once the cables were cut, they were connected with the necessary connectors for sub­
sequent connection to the Optical Backscatter Reflectometer (OBR) analyzer. The cables
feature two layers of coating. The connection process involved the following steps:
(i) The outer coating was stripped from the cable over a length of approximately 3 cm
using a stripper (fig. 3.9b), followed by the removal of about 2 cm of the inner coating.
(ii) After stripping, the exposed optical fibers were cleaned with a tissue soaked in ace­
tone (fig. 3.9c) to remove any rubber residues from coating. The same process was
applied to the connector cable.
(iii) Once cleaned, the exposed ends of the fibers were precisely trimmed using the
Fujikura CT50 cleaver (fig. 3.9d).
(iv) The prepared fiber ends were then aligned and spliced using the Fujikura 70S+
fusion splicer (fig. 3.9e).
(v) The spliced section was protected with a small plastic cap.
32
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3.9: Materials used to splice: (a) connector, (b) stripper, (c) tissue and acetone,
(d) Fujikura CT50, and (e) Fujikura 70S+
3.3.2
Fiber Optics Installation
The installation of the optical fibers took place on 12th November 2024, during a sunny
or slightly cloudy day, with an air temperature of approximately 8°C. The selection of the
plates for the test was primarily guided by practical considerations:
(i) proximity to the urban power electrical grid,
(ii) avoiding interference from heavy vehicles operating in the area (the surrounding
area is used as a storage site for construction materials and a landfill).
Since the only building near the slabs was located in the northern part of the test area,
it was decided to focus the selection in this zone to ensure access to electricity. The
presence of operating vehicles did not cause any issues; the only precaution taken was
to mark and enclose the area where the load test was conducted with traffic cones and
warning tape for safety reasons and to ensure the integrity of the fiber optic equipment.
In general, the slabs in the three adjacent lanes did not have a perfectly uniform surface
elevation, resulting in small steps between them. This issue was likely caused by the
slipform paver machine, constructing one lane at a time. Additionally, the three mixes
of concrete shrank with different volume contractions. The area where this issue was
least pronounced was identified as row 3, the row from which the cores were taken to
perform material’s laboratory testing. Due to the more uniform slab surface elevation, it
was decided to install the first long line on row 3 and the short cable on the FUT lane
between the row 3 and 4.
The surrounding area featured soil deposits and unpaved roads. Because of that, heavy
vehicles regularly transiting over the concrete plates, brought gravel and mud onto the
pavement surface. Before the fiber installation, the surfaces of the plates needed to be
cleaned. Residues of mud, gravel, sand, and dust were initially removed using a vehicle
equipped with brushes and water jets (fig. 3.10a). However, due to the initially heavy dirt
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
33
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
conditions, the cleaning results were not entirely satisfactory. While the vehicle did remove
gravel and some mud, it also spread the remaining dirt more evenly. Subsequently, the
areas designated for fiber installation were dried using a heat gun (fig. 3.10b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: (a) Cleaning truck and (b) drying phase with a heat gun
After the initial cleaning and drying, the precise cable positions were marked on the
surface of the plates using a tape measure and chalk. Since the cleaning of the plates
with the vehicle­mounted brushes had not been entirely effective, manual cleaning was
carried out by rubbing with hands and using an air compressor to remove residual mud.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11: (a) Manual cleaning with air compressor and (b) detail of targeted cleaning
focused on the surface beneath the cable
The cables were then approximately positioned using tape. The main challenge in the
initial gluing phase was that the cables tended to shift very easily, folding onto themselves.
In order to overcome this difficulty, the actual installation began with pretensioning the
cables to ensure they were straight: small drops of super glue were applied at 500 mm
intervals to temporarily hold the cables in place; immediately after each drop of glue,
a small amount of baking powder was added (fig. 3.12a) to induce instant hardening,
eliminating delays caused by low temperatures and high humidity.
The installation of the long cable started from the center of the plates, working towards
both ends where the cable was left loose with loops (fig. 3.12b). This choice was made
to allow the cables to remain free at joints, areas more prone to potential damage, and to
prevent the cables from measuring incorrect strain values between one plate and another
due to a “bridge effect.”
To keep the cables adhered to the plates and avoid safety issues or risks of objects
getting caught in the loops, a few drops of glue were applied.
For the shorter cable, installation began with the straight section, but due to time con­
straints, no precise pattern was followed. The square­shaped cable path was glued on
34
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
the same day as the load test was performed (the following day, the 13th of November
2024), approximately 4 h before the test began. As with the longer cable, the shorter
cable was also left loose in a loop at the joint. The same technique was applied at the 90°
turns, to avoid fibers breaking.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: (a) Spot gluing with super glue and baking powder, and (b) loop at the joint
After the cables were spot­glued to the plates with super glue, continuous bonding was
performed using epoxy resin, which is particularly suitable for irregular or not perfectly
clean surfaces, and it also provides an additional protective layer for the cables. The
epoxy that was used is a two­component resin. To facilitate the gluing phase, an applicator
capable of automatically mixing the two components was selected, along with a tube
equipped with a gun/piston (fig. 3.13). However, due to the temperature being below 10
°C, the resin was highly viscous and difficult to dispense from the applicator. To lower its
viscosity, the resin tube was heated using the heat gun.
Since the epoxy hardens within hours after application, the load test was scheduled for
the following day. Connectors were protected using plastic bags sealed with tape. Air
was trapped inside the bags to create an insulating layer against nighttime temperature
and humidity fluctuations.
Figure 3.13: Continuous gluing with epoxy
3.3.3
Load Test
On the day of the load test, the weather conditions were almost identical to those of the
previous day.
First, a vehicle (minivan) was parked between the building and the west edge of the test
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
35
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
section, near row 3. The vehicle served to protect the analyzer and the computer from
external weather conditions. The analyzer was placed on the back seats and leveled.
A power extension was passed from the building to the analyzer and to the computer
through a partially closed vehicle’s window. The analyzer was connected to the laptop and
was turned on (fig. 3.14). However, the low external temperature caused the analyzer to
malfunction, failing to take measurements. This problem occurred because the operating
temperature for the analyzer used in this thesis project, Luna OBR 4600, is above 10°C.
This issue was overcome by turning on the vehicle’s heating system.
The analyzer was then calibrated and tested using a reference cable (fig. 3.15a). The
preparation phase concluded with the connection of the longer cable, which was chosen
to start the first measurements. Every time a cable was connected to the analyzer, both
the analyzer’s end and the connector had to be cleaned with the appropriate equipment
(fig. 3.15b, fig. 3.15c).
Figure 3.14: Analyzer and laptop positioned inside the vehicle
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.15: Materials for the connection phase between the analyzer and the fiber­optic
cable: (a) reference cable, (b) connector’s cleaner, and (c) analyzer’s cleaner
36
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
A Volvo FH16 truck was used to generate the load for the large­scale test (fig. 3.16).
The truck gear’s geometry is sketched in fig. 3.17. There are 12 wheels in total, arranged
as single wheels on the two front axles and twin wheels on the two rear axles. The vehicle
was loaded with sand to reach a total mass of 40500 kg. Thanks to axle load sensors, it
was possible to determine the exact load distribution across the 4 axles, which is reported
in table 3.1. However, the actual tire pressure was not measured and is instead assumed
equal to those values that are recommended by the manufacturer (table 3.1).
Figure 3.16: Volvo FH16 truck
Figure 3.17: Sketch of the truck gear. Rectangles represent the projection of the tire
area onto the pavement (i.e. diameter x width). The dashed square area represents the
simplified contact area between the tires and the pavement; further explanation of the
methods used to approximated the contact area is provided in section 4.1
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
37
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
Table 3.1: Axles data summary: number of wheels, estimated tire pressure [MPa], and
load
Axle
N° Wheels
Tire Pressure [MPa]
Load [N]
1
2
0.85
92,200
2
2
0.85
94,200
3
4
0.80
104,000
4
4
0.80
106,000
Before starting the load test, a reference measurement was taken with no loads on the
PCC slabs. It served as a zero point to compare all the strain measurements during the
load test.
The truck was positioned outside the test section, on the east side, with its front facing
east and its centerline parallel to the cable. The truck was driven slowly in reverse from
the east edge until it moved onto the plates, with the cable running below the truck (i.e.,
the 6 wheels on the driver’s side were to the north of the cable, and the other 6 wheels
were to the south). Using a remote control, the driver was able to move the truck slowly
and accurately to the predetermined configurations. The use of the remote control also
allowed for better control to prevent the truck’s tires from traveling directly over the cable.
When the right wheels crossed the shorter cable, the cable was protected with aluminum
plates. The truck’s engine remained running during the tests, as the engine vibrations did
not affect the measured data.
Figure 3.18: Aluminum plates to protect the cables
The truck’s centerline was not aligned with the cable for two reasons:
(i) the length of the axle is the same as the side of the square formed by the shorter
cable, so the wheels would have passed over the part of this cable that is parallel
to the longer cable (fig. 3.8, fig. 3.17),
(ii) to position the load points closer to the cable in order to measure higher strain val­
ues.
Seven load setups were performed (fig. 3.20). In this report, they are referred to as
”load setup 1­7”. For each setup, the position of the rear right tire was marked on the slab
surface with chalk (the point on the outer side of the tire aligned with the rear axle). Fig­
ure 3.20 illustrates the contact areas between the wheels and the pavement as squares,
38
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
along with the centerline, the four axles, and the coordinates of the external tire load cen­
ter relative to the west edge and the cable. Note that the coordinate relative to the cable
of this point does not correspond to the same coordinate of the point marked with chalk
on the pavement. Additionally, during the test, photos were taken to support the markings
on the plates (fig. 3.21)
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
39
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
Figure 3.20: Sketches of load setups 1­7. Units in [mm]
Figure 3.21: Pictures of load setups 4, 6 and 7
In the gear arrangement, axles three and four are quite close, resulting in a greater load
applied in this area. Therefore, considering the rear gear as the primary loading zone of
interest, the objective was to replicate interior loading (setup 3), loading near the joints
(setups 2, 4, and 6), and loading near the free edge (setup 7). At the same time, the
test’s plan tried to ensure simple truck movements, which was only driven straight in the
east­west direction during this first testing phase with the long cable.
It was not possible to perform any load tests on RAFA plate (except for partial loading
40
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
in setup 1) because the minivan with the analyzer was parked just beyond the west edge.
The truck’s rear overhang would have hit the minivan.
Four measurements were taken and saved for each load setup. No specific require­
ment of waiting time before measurement was applied, since no time­dependent effect is
expected for this static loading test. After load setup 7, the truck was driven away from the
test are, and the positions of the last right wheel marked earlier with chalk were measured
using a measuring tape.
A new reference measurement was taken, and a heated metal rod (warmed with hot
water) was used to locate specific points on the cable, allowing the collected data to be
matched with the slabs’ geometry. The rod was placed in contact with the cable to induce
thermal strain at the joints, before and after the loop. Four measurements were taken:
RAFA east edge, FUT west edge, FUT east edge, REF west edge. This was done both
to locate these points and subsequently to calculate the length of the cable in the loops.
Locating a single point would not have been sufficient, as the cable length within the loops
at the joints was unknown.
Then, the longer cable was disconnected, and the analyzer vehicle was moved on REF
lane on the row 5 to connect the shorter cable, following the same procedure. Once
again, the metal rod was used to locate various points of interest on the cable, after an
initial reference measurement. This time, it was used not only to identify the edge of the
two plates but also the start and end of the loops where the cable followed the square
trajectory.
Aluminum plates were placed to protect the cable’s transverse sections from being run
over by the truck. A new reference measurement was taken. This time the test area was
not completely unloaded since the minivan was parked on it. However, the influence of
the minivan’s load compared to the truck’s load is negligible.
Subsequently, the truck was reversed as close as possible to the minivan, parallel to
the short cable (the initial part of it). The truck was then driven forward to record three
load setups, referred to as ”load setups 8­10”. For each setup, the position of the truck’s
outer left tire was marked on the ground with chalk.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
41
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
Figure 3.22: Sketches of load setups 8­10. Units in [mm]
Afterward, the aluminum plates were removed, and another reference measurement
was performed. The truck was again reversed to apply a direct load on top of the cable,
and assess the cable’s ability to withstand the load (setup 11, fig. 3.23).
Figure 3.23: Sketch of load setup 11. Direct loading on the cable
Lastly, the truck was driven off the plates, and another measurement with no load on
the test area was performed to check whether the cable returned to its initial state. Once
again, the chalk­marked tire positions were recorded using a measuring tape.
42
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
For safety reasons, given the frequent transit of trucks over the plates and the proximity
to the operational airport, at the end of the test the cables were pulled off and thrown to
prevent potential hazards (fig. 3.24a). The cables detached easily by pulling with force,
with no tools or solvents required. The epoxy residue did not appear rigid or hard but
rather flexible with a plastic­like behavior. Most of the epoxy did not come off with the
cable removal and remained stuck to the slabs’ surface, forming a thick adhesive layer
(fig. 3.24b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.24: (a) Cables removal and (b) remaining epoxy on the plates
3.3.4
Data Processing
The fiber­optic data collected during the large­scale load test needed to be processed,
ensuring meaningful results that can be compared and integrated with the FE model
(chapter 4, chapter 5).
The first step involved processing the temperature­perturbation­measurements obtained
by applying the hot metal stick on the cables. Section 3.3.4 illustrates how the fiber­optics
recorded strains when a thermal perturbation was applied. A very high peak is generated,
making it easy to identify and correlate it with the corresponding point on the slab. To keep
the report concise, only one localization plot is presented (east edge of FUT plate).
By comparing the localization of the west and east FUT edges, it was confirmed that
there was no scale factor between the measured and actual distances. This check was
performed because sometimes fiber­optic data require length scale factor corrections. As
previously shown in fig. 3.8 and fig. 3.20, the zero­coordinate reference point was set
at the free west edge for the long cable and at the midpoint of the FUT­row 4 slab for
the short cable. In the case of the long cable, this reference was established by aligning
the measured peak at the RAFA east edge with the 5000­mm coordinate. Finally, data
recorded inside the loops were removed, which approximately corresponded to 500 mm
of cable length (the loops are circumferences with diameters of around 150­160 mm).
Figure 3.25: Joint location with hot metal stick
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
43
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
To keep this report concise and easy to read, only the data processing graphs for load
setup 3 are shown in this section (fig. 3.26). However, plots for all other configurations
were included in appendix A.2. The sign convention is that positive strain corresponds to
expansion, while negative strain corresponds to contraction.
For each load setup, four measurements were taken, with strains recorded at 40 mm
spacing. The four measurements showed quite small fluctuations, confirming that leaving
the truck engine running did not affect the test. The first step in data cleaning was to
calculate and plot the average of these four measurements. To quantify the fluctuations
among the four measurements, the variance was also plotted. In both the strain average
and variance plots, the effect of the loops at the joints is noticeable, extending into the
plates for some tens of millimeters.
A variance plot excluding these peaks was also provided, offering a clearer view of the
actual behavior of cables on the plates. It can be observed that for the long cable, variance
remained very low, below 0.5 µϵ2 for the first 9000 mm. Beyond 9000 mm, especially on
the REF plate, the data became noisier, with variance peaks reaching up to 30 µϵ2.
For the short cable, the loop effect was still present but much less pronounced. The
baseline noise remained constant along the whole cable, with an average variance of
around 0.5 µϵ2 to 1 µϵ2, except in the part of the cable that was directly loaded in setup
11.
To further smooth out fluctuations in the mean strain plot, a moving average was applied
using 11 points (400 mm spacing). Additionally, as with the variance plot, data near the
joints were removed.
The final step in the data processing phase concerned thermal drift correction (only for
data measured with the long cable). Since this step involved comparison with Abaqus
simulations, it is presented in chapter 5.
44
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 3. Experimental Testing
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.26: (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance ignoring data
near the loops, and (d) moving average
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
45
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
4
Numerical Modeling
This chapter presents the methodology used to implement the Finite Element (FE)
model in Abaqus that replicates the test area, considering its geometry and the effects
of soil­slab and joint interactions (section 4.1). In section 4.2, a study is conducted on the
selection of the most suitable mesh elements, and in section 4.3, a mesh convergence
study is performed to determine the optimal mesh refinement for the model.
4.1
Model Construction
To replicate the geometry and mechanical behavior of the pavement structure in the test
area under the large­scale load test conditions, a FE model was implemented in Abaqus.
4.1.1
Portland Cement Concrete Slabs
In the part module, three identical parts were created to model the three lanes. Each
plate was defined as a three­dimensional (3D) deformable part with dimensions of 5000
mm x 5000 mm (length x width). The parts were partitioned into small squares of constant
dimensions using the partition face sketch tool. These squares correspond with the
mesh elements (section 4.3).
Three materials having purely elastic behavior and corresponding to the three concrete
mixes (RAFA, FUT and REF) were defined in the property module. According to Eu­
rocode 2: Design of Concrete Structures [42], each material was assigned a Poisson’s
ratio of 0.2. The Young’s elastic modulus was assigned according to the uniaxial com­
pression test results summarized in table 5.1. After creating the materials, three identical
sections (corresponding again to the three lanes) were defined. Each section is defined
from the shell, homogeneous category, with a thickness of 360 mm and a thickness inte­
gration rule of Simpson over 7 points. The material properties, i.e. the concrete properties,
are assigned to the corresponding section. The final step in the property module was the
assignment of each section to its corresponding plate through the section assignment
manager tool, with the offset set to the middle surface.
4.1.2
Foundation Support
To implement the foundation support, we went back to the part module. A group of
vertical springs connected to the ground was created to replicate the Winkler foun­
dation model (fig. 4.1). A spring with stiffness f equal to the product of the coefficient of
subgrade reaction k with the area of spring’s influence was assigned to every mesh node.
It was calculated as:
f = kB2
N
(4.1)
where B is the plate side length, and N is the number of nodes per plate. This very
simple equation to calculate f is applicable only in cases where the nodes have a con­
stant spacing, and consequently the spring’s area of influence is constant. Alternatively,
the elastic foundation interaction already implemented in Abaqus might have been
used. As long as the mesh is sufficiently refined, the two methods are equivalent.
The Pasternak shear interaction layer was model as vertical springs connecting two
points. Due to the computational weight of this system, it was not possible to position
a shear spring for each pair of adjacent nodes. Instead, nodes were connected every
four (fig. 4.1). According to Fwa et al. (1996) [24] (section 2.3.1), the stiffness of shear
interaction Gp was rewritten in dependence on k. The stiffness of the shear springs g was
defined as:
g = θk
4
(4.2)
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
47
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4. Numerical Modeling
where θ has units of area. The factor 4 was introduced because the shear springs were
defined every four nodes, and the shear interaction between nodes decreases linearly
with increasing spacing.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: (a) Plane view of a discretized plate. All nodes have a vertical spring con­
nected to the ground (Winkler model), and the nodes in pink are connected to each other
by vertical springs connecting two points (Pasternak model) and (b) vertical section sketch
of a plate supported by a Pasternak foundation
4.1.3
Mesh
The last step in the part module was the mesh generation. Using the global seed
size control tool, the elements of the mesh matched the squares defined in the partition
face. Square shell elements were used, for which Abaqus considers the Mindlin & Reiss­
ner plate theory. A more detailed study of the choice of elements is presented in sec­
tion 4.2.
4.1.4
Global Geometry
Subsequently, in the assembly module, 9 instances were generated, 3 for each part,
representing 9 plates. The plates were arranged in a 3x3 grid (three lanes x three rows)
with a 1 mm gap between adjacent plates to replicate the joint width. The arrangement
was performed by translating the instances. The Cartesian reference system (0,0) is
coincident with the center point of the central plate (FUT).
4.1.5
Joints
The edges of the plates were connected using springs connecting two points to
simulate shear (vertical) and normal (horizontal, perpendicular to the edge) stress transfer.
The stiffness of the shear springs was calculated as:
Fj = KjBh
n
(4.3)
where Kj is the coefficient of interlocking joint, B is the plate side, h is the plate thickness,
and n is the number of nodes along the edge. The same procedure was followed to
determined the spring stiffness for normal stress transfer. The coefficient of normal load
transfer is set equal to 0.6 MPa/mm.
The external plates on the east and west sides have free edges. The plates on the north
and south sides transfer load to adjacent plates (not present in the 3x3 grid but assumed)
through springs connected to the ground, both vertically and perpendicularly to the
edge, with the same stiffness as the springs between plates that replicate joint previously
described.
48
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4. Numerical Modeling
4.1.6
Load and Simulations
In the step module, a second step was created, following the initial one, of type static,
general keeping default parameters. In the load manager module, the loads were de­
fined and applied. The loads were simplified and modeled as uniformly distributed (i.e.,
pressure) over a square area. The tire­slab contact area was calculated using the formula
[43]:
Area =
Load
Tire Pressure
(4.4)
Since the mesh was kept constant, the load setups had to be adapted to the mesh
elements, as shown in fig. 4.2. The pressure value that is applied on the element is
calculated in relation with the area of that element that is subjected to the load. The result
of this simplification always led to an overestimation of the loaded area. Specifically,
for this aspect, section 4.3 explains the methodology followed to refine the mesh and
demonstrate that this simplification is adequate.
Figure 4.2
Finally, in the field output request module, the quantities to be calculated in the sim­
ulation were selected. These are: S (stress components and invariants), E (total
strain components), U (translations and rotations), and SF (section forces and
moments). Lastly, a job was created, to define the simulation.
4.2
Benchmark Westergaard Interior Loading
To verify that the FE model correctly estimates the mechanical reactions of the pave­
ment structure, it is essential to compare its results with analytical solutions, which remain
fundamental for proper verification. In the case of a highly idealized situation, the behav­
ior of square shell elements was evaluated. This verification allowed for the selection of
the most appropriate elements for the model that replicates the pavement structure of the
test area. Instead of considering a complex loading scenario like the real truck used in
the test, a simpler idealized case was studied: a single load uniformly distributed over
a circular area. The analytical solution under analysis was Westergaard’s solution for a
uniformly distributed load over a circular area, interior loading over an infinite plate [22]
(section 2.2.5). The validity of the shell elements was assessed by constructing a model
equivalent to the one described by Westergaard.
To approximate the behavior of an infinite plate, a square plate with a side length of 500
m was implemented. The pavement structure system had the following characteristics:
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
49
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 4. Numerical Modeling
Table 4.1: Pavement structure system parameters, benchmark Westergaard interior load­
ing.
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Units
Plate thickness
h
360
mm
Concrete Poisson’s ratio
ν
0.2
­
Concrete Young’s modulus
E
35,000
MPa
Coefficient of subgrade reaction
k
0.10
MPa/mm
Load radius
a
150
mm
Load pressure
q
1
MPa
The chosen plate thickness is the same as that of the test area at Copenhagen Airport.
The other parameters fall within the normal ranges for rigid concrete pavement structures.
The plate was discretized into 150,000 elements. The mesh was finer in the loading
area and progressively coarser toward the edges. Since the mesh element size was
not uniform, it was not possible to model the Winkler foundation using discrete vertical
springs connected to the ground.
Instead, the elastic foundation interaction
was used.
The first type of shell element evaluated was S4R, which consists of four­node quadri­
lateral general­purpose shell elements with reduced integration, hourglass control, and
finite membrane strains [44].
Westergaard’s analytical solution yielded a maximum bending moment of 17.48 N·mm
and a maximum bending stress of 0.81 MPa. The FE model returned values of 17.20
N · mm and 0.80 MPa, corresponding to a relative error of ­1.6% and ­1.2%, respectively.
Although the discrepancy between the FE model and Westergaard’s analytical solu­
tion is small, the FE model was unexpectedly found to be less stiff. Several checks were
performed to investigate potential sources of this discrepancy. Refining the mesh did
not lead to significant variations in the results. Doubling the plate’s side length to 1000
m also did not affect the results, confirming that the initial assumption of a side length
equal to 500 m was already large enough to approximate an infinite plate. The final check
concerned the load area to plate thickness h ratio. By progressively reducing h, the differ­
ence between the two solutions decreased, reaching perfect agreement at a thickness of
170 mm. Below this threshold, the trend reversed, and the FE model became stiffer than
the analytical solution. A possible explanation for this behavior lies in the different plate
theories underlying the two models. Westergaard’s analytical solution is based on thin
plate theory, which neglects shear deformations. In contrast, S4R shell elements in the
FE model, accounts for shear deformations, following the Mindlin­Reissner plate theory.
Abaqus elements’ database provides square elements that numerically follow the Kirch­
hoff thin plate theory. Among these, S4R5 (four­node doubly curved thin shell elements
with reduced integration and hourglass control, using five degrees of freedom per node)
and S8R5 (eight­node doubly curved thin shell elements with reduced integration, using
five degrees of freedom per node) were evaluated [44]. However, changing the element
type did not improve the solution. On the contrary, using S8R5 elements significantly
increased computational costs due to the doubled number of nodes.
Since the discrepancy between the two predictions of the mechanical response was
relatively small (less than 2%) it can be concluded that S4R elements are suitable for
modeling pavement structures. Another important consideration is that the pavement
geometry under analysis has a B to h ratio of 13.89, which is not far from 10, the value
used as a rule of thumb to transition between thin and thick plate theories [14].
50
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4. Numerical Modeling
4.3
Mesh Refinement
Since the precision and accuracy of finite element (FE) models are highly dependent on
mesh refinement, a convergence study was performed to demonstrate that as the mesh
was progressively refined, the model stabilized toward a unique solution. However, it
is essential to note that excessive mesh refinement leads to high computational costs.
Through the convergence study, it was possible to define an acceptable level of mesh
refinement that balanced accuracy and computational efficiency.
For this study, as well as for the subsequent sensitivity analysis, a simpler load was
selected compared to that of the truck. Specifically, one of the two main landing gears of
a Boeing 777­9 was considered. This aircraft is currently the heaviest commercial airplane
in service and is widely used worldwide. Simulating aircraft loads on airport pavements
was of greater interest, as it represents a realistic loading condition in standard operations.
The mechanical response of the plates was also easier to interpret, given that the landing
gear wheels are closely spaced.
The key aspect that allowed linking the results for the Boeing 777 load setup to the
large­scale test performed with Volvo FH16 is that the truck and the aircraft should have
a tires­pavement contact area of the same order of magnitude. This is crucial because
the choice of defining a mesh with elements of constant size might introduce errors in
estimating the mechanical response of the structure due to an overestimation of the actual
tire­slab contact area.
In fig. 4.3, the geometry of the landing gear is illustrated, highlighting the positions of its
six wheels. Additionally, a summary table provides information on the design weight and
tire dimensions and pressure.
Figure 4.3: Boeing 777­9 landing gear arrangement [45]
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
51
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4. Numerical Modeling
The maximum vertical main gear (VMG) ground load at the most aft center of gravity
is 166,168 kg [45]. Assuming an even distribution across the six wheels, each wheel
supports a load of 27,695 kg.
The tire pressure is 1.58 MPa [45], and the contact area between the tire and the pave­
ment is calculated using eq. (4.4) [43], yielding a contact area of 171,950 mm2. For com­
parison, the truck used in the large­scale test had a contact area of approximately 110,000
mm2 for each front wheel and 130,000 mm2 for the rear wheels. The total load area in
the case of the Boeing 777­9 is 1,031,700 mm2, while for the truck, it is about 1,490,000
mm2. Since both the truck and the Boeing 777 have load areas of the same order of mag­
nitude, the mesh convergence study and sensitivity analysis could be performed using
this aircraft load.
The contact area under each Boeing 777 wheel can be approximated as a square with
a side length of 400 mm. In the analysis, the landing gear was positioned longitudinally
relative to the test area, with its middle axle perfectly aligned with the transverse axis of
the central plate.
Figure 4.4: Boeing 777­9 interior loading
The foundation support was approximated with Winkler model, meaning that the shear
spring stiffness g, eq. (4.2), was set to zero. The following parameters were chosen and
kept constant throughout the study:
Table 4.2: Pavement structure system parameters, mesh refinement study.
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Units
Plate thickness
h
360
mm
Concrete Poisson’s ratio
ν
0.2
­
Concrete Young’s modulus
E
35,000
MPa
Winkler modulus
k
0.10
MPa/mm
Stiffness of shear interaction
Gp
0
N/mm
Coefficient of interlocking joint
Kj
10
MPa/mm
Coefficient of normal load transfer
Kn
0.6
MPa/mm
The mesh convergence study began with a coarse mesh where the element side length
was 1000 mm and was progressively refined down to a fine mesh with an element side
length of 31.25 mm. Figure 4.5 depicts the plots for the maximum vertical displacement uz,
the maximum bending moment M, and the maximum bending stress σ in the transverse
direction as a function of the number of elements per plate.
52
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 4. Numerical Modeling
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.5: (a) Maximum vertical displacement, (b) maximum transverse bending mo­
ment, and (c) maximum transverse bending stress versus number of elements per plate
The Abaqus model seemed to converge, confirming that mesh refinement enhanced
accuracy. While the maximum vertical displacement remained relatively stable across
different mesh densities, the maximum bending moment and bending stress exhibited a
stronger dependence on discretization. Specifically, with a coarse mesh (element side
length 1000 mm), the bending moment was underestimated by 50%, ranging from 40
N · mm to 80 N · mm as refinement increased.
The four finest mesh refinements, starting from 2500 elements per plate (element side
length 100 mm), yielded nearly identical solutions, indicating convergence. Based on this
convergence study, a mesh with 10,000 elements per plate, corresponding to a square
side length of 50 mm, was selected and used for the remainder of this thesis project.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
53
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
5
Investigation
This chapter presents and discusses the results of this thesis project.
Section 5.1 contains the results obtained from the uniaxial compression test and the
Dynamic Cone Penetrometer Test (DCPT).
Section 5.2 presents the results of Abaqus model’s sensitivity analysis, which high­
lighted the primary importance of the coefficient of subgrade reaction and the coefficient
of interlocking joint.
Finally, section 5.3 contains the most important results of this thesis, where the fiber­
optic data are combined with the Finite Element (FE) model. The fiber­optic data were
used to calibrate the coefficient of subgrade reaction and the coefficient of interlocking joint
in the Abaqus model. The final part of section 5.3 also includes the results supporting the
validation of the proposed methodology.
5.1
Preliminary Characterization
5.1.1
Uniaxial Compression Test
This section presents the results of the uniaxial compression test performed on 9 con­
crete specimens coming from the test area at Copenhagen Airport. The mean compres­
sive strength and the elastic modulus calculated using eq. (3.5) are reported in table 5.1.
According to the results of the uniaxial compression test, the strongest concrete mix is
FUT followed by REF, and finally RAFA. This finding was surprising because the cores
made of REF concrete were expected to be the strongest. This test showed that the more
eco­frienly FUT concrete, in which calcined clay is added, could be a viable and promising
eco­friendly alternative to common concrete.
In the case of the REF test, the results of specimen 4 were disregarded as the failure
was not optimal (fig. 3.6b). As seen from the curve, which is slightly off in terms of slope, it
reached failure under a compressive stress equal to 57.12 MPa, which is 4.90% lower than
the average of the other two tests performed on REF 3 and 5. Apart from this specimen,
the other collected data and results were highly consistent, confirming the validity and
reproducibility of the uniaxial compressive test.
The elastic modulus was estimated using the empirical formula proposed by the Eu­
rocode 2 Design of Concrete Structures [42], instead of evaluating the initial slope of the
plots in fig. 5.1. This approach was chosen because the intercept on the curves was forced
to zero with linear regression techniques. The elastic field is usually very limited, until the
axial strain reaches a value equal to 0.002 (0.2%) [42]. Additionally, the specimens were
cores rather than poured cylindrical specimens, meaning that the top and bottom faces
were not perfectly parallel because of manual cut. This resulted in a reduced initial contact
surface, leading to a lower initial slope of the graph.
An alternative and more accurate method to determine E independently of the com­
pressive strength would have been the use of displacement gauges while performing the
test.
Finally, it is important to note that the common convention is to assign a negative sign
to compressive strain. However, in many cases, including this report, the uniaxial com­
pression test results are presented without considering the negative sign in the graphs.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
55
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5. Investigation
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.1: Results from the uniaxial compression test performed on 9 specimens. Stress
[MPa] versus strain [­]: (a) RAFA, (b) FUT, and (c) REF concrete mixes
Table 5.1: Mean stress [MPa] recorded at failure (i.e. compressive strength), and esti­
mated elastic modulus E [MPa].
Concrete Mix
Compressive Strength [MPa]
E [MPa]
RAFA
58.25
37,330
FUT
63.46
38,300
REF
60.05
37,670
5.1.2
Dynamic Cone Penetration Test
The number of cumulative blows versus depth that were recorded during the Dynamic
Cone Penetration Test (DCPT) are depicted in fig. 5.2. The reference elevation (zero) in
fig. 5.2 coincides with the surface of the prepared foundation, i.e. the upper surface of the
HBB. Since the DCPT cannot be performed on cemented stabilized soil, the recorded data
start from a depth larger than 150 mm. When a change in slope is observed in the plot of
56
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5. Investigation
cumulative blows versus depth, it is likely that this is associated with a change in soil type.
Table 5.2 reports the layers that seemed to have been identified. The California Bearing
Ratio CBR was estimated from ASTM­D6951, Table 1 [25], based on DCP Index. E
was estimated from eq. (2.21), and k from eq. (2.22).
The first two surface layers are both characterized by a high k of 0.19 MPa/mm, and
the slope variation in fig. 5.2 between them is minimal. These layers likely correspond to
the base and subbase. Beneath these two stiff layers, layers with lower k were identified,
and named as Soil 1 and Soil 2. The change in slope in fig. 5.2 between them is minimal.
It may be possible to merge the data from these two layers into a single layer with a total
depth of approximately 800 mm, ranging from 400 mm to 1100 mm below the HBB level.
On the other hand, the transition between Soil 2 and Soil 3 is more distinct, indicating that
the soil below 1100 mm is less stiff and more easily penetrable.
All the identified soil layers are likely part of the artificial fill placed since the 1980s
for the reclamation and expansion of Copenhagen Airport (section 3.1). However, it was
not possible to directly correlate the reference elevations from the geological profile and
borehole (fig. 3.4) with the DCPT results.
It is important to emphasize that the DCPT results are only indicative and provided pre­
liminary information within a range for comparison with the results that were obtained from
the integration of fiber­optic data and the FE model (section 5.3). Another limitation in the
results interpretation and comparison is that the DCPT was conducted in August, whereas
the large­scale test was carried out in November. During this period, soil characteristics,
especially the groundwater level, might have changed due to different weather conditions.
Moreover, the DCPT was performed near row 9­10, while the load test was conducted on
row 3 and 4. Along a distance of 30 m, soil characteristics may vary considerably.
Figure 5.2: DCPT layers identification from slope changes in the cumulative blows versus
depth [mm] plot
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
57
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5. Investigation
Table 5.2: Layers identified based on DCPT data, DCP Index, California Bearing Ratio
CBR [25], elastic modulus E eq. (2.21) [26], modulus of subgrade reaction k eq. (2.22)
[27]
Layer
DCP Index [mm/blow]
CBR [%]
E [MPa]
k [MPa/mm]
Base
3
80
291
0.19
Subbase
3
80
291
0.19
Soil 1
6
40
187
0.11
Soil 2
9
25
138
0.08
Soil 3
22
9
72
0.04
5.2
Numerical Results
5.2.1
Sensitivity Analysis
A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the influence of various parameters on
the Abaqus model representing the test area (section 4.1). Specifically, the changes in
the maximum vertical displacement, maximum transverse bending moment, and bending
stress were studied, together with the effects on the strain curve along the midline of the
row (i.e., same location as the long cable).
The initial parameters used in the model are those listed in table 4.2. Starting from
these values, each parameter was varied one at a time, with the exception of the plate
thickness (a geometric property not analyzed in this study), the Poisson’s ratio, and the
coefficient of normal load transfer. In summary, the parameters investigated individually
are:
(i) concrete elastic modulus E,
(ii) coefficient of subgrade reaction k,
(iii) stiffness of shear interaction Gp (Pasternak model),
(iv) coefficient of interlocking joint Kj.
Their influence was evaluated under two load configurations: an interior load and a load
near a joint.
As in the mesh convergence study, the sensitivity analysis was conducted using the
main landing gear of a Boeing 777, instead of Volvo FH16. This loading configuration
provides a more realistic load scenario in the field of airport pavement mechanics. Addi­
tionally, the results were easier to interpret, as the Boeing 777’s landing gear wheels are
closely spaced.
As reported in section 4.3, the tire­pavement total contact area of the Boeing 777 and
the Volvo FH16 are of the same order of magnitude. This ensured that the results obtained
using the Boeing 777 are also valid to investigate the load setups involving the truck.
Interior Loading
The load setup shown in fig. 4.4 has been simulated in the FE model. The plate de­
picted is the central one of the 3x3 plate grid. In figs. 5.3 to 5.6 the maximum vertical
displacement, maximum bending moment, and maximum bending stress are depicted as
functions of E, k, Gp, and Kj. The dashed lines represent values at which the bend­
ing stress exceeds the bending capacity of the concrete plates, which is approximately
10%­15% of the concrete’s compressive strength.
Since this is a sensitivity analysis, these values were still included in the graphs of ver­
tical deflection, bending moment, and bending stress. However, it is important to note
that they do not have real­world significance. Additionally, this sensitivity analysis consid­
ered the heaviest aircraft currently in operation. As a result, the values often exceed the
58
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5. Investigation
permissible range for bending stress.
In the strain graphs, two curves are depicted, representing the strains along the midline
of the row (i.e., the same path as the long cable), considering the maximum and minimum
admissible values in accordance with the bending capacity. The strains refer to the upper
surface of the plate so that these values align with the measurements obtained from the
fiber­optic cables.
As the concrete elastic modulus increases, the vertical displacement decreases, while
the bending moment and bending stress rise because the slabs become stiffer. It is impor­
tant to note that even though the bending stress increases with the elastic modulus, the
plate’s capacity to withstand these stresses also improves. In the strain curve graph, it can
be observed that an increase in the concrete elastic modulus leads to a slight reduction
in the peaks, but does not cause a shift in the points of zero strain.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.3: Model sensitivity to variations in concrete elastic modulus
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
59
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5. Investigation
The coefficient of subgrade reaction is the parameter that most influenced the mechan­
ical response. For the selected characteristics, only a subgrade with a coefficient greater
than 0.07 MPa/mm can support the weight of a Boeing 777. This k value corresponds to
a medium­high stiff foundation. Varying k from 0.07 MPa/mm to 0.30 MPa/mm decreased
the compression peak by approximately 40%, from ­100 µϵ to ­40 µϵ. In addition to the
variation in peaks, the zero­strain points also change and come closer to the loaded areas.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.4: Model sensitivity to variations in coefficient of subgrade reaction
60
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 5. Investigation
The transition from the Winkler model to the Pasternak model did not cause significant
changes in the mechanical response, except for a slight reduction in the strain peaks. For
greater clarity, the parameter theta (Gp = θk) is reported in the legend of fig. 5.5.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.5: Model sensitivity to variations in stiffness of shear interaction
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
61
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 5. Investigation
The variation in joint stiffness did not affect the mechanical response of the centrally
loaded plate. However, the unloaded external plates remained completely at rest when
the joints had zero load transfer efficiency.
It should be noted that, as with the bending stress capacity, the plates must also achieve
at least 70% load transfer efficiency for long­term service [46]. Since the test area does
not have dowel bars and consists of only three lines of plates (meaning that there are not
many adjacent plates to keep the system stable and packed together) it was expected that
this value could have not be met, and the shear interlock mechanism could be minimal.
Because of that, results for coefficient of interlocking joint values that did not meet the
standards are still shown as continuous lines in the graphs.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.6: Model sensitivity to variations in coefficient of interlocking joint
After performing the sensitivity analysis for interior loading, it was concluded that for
this load configuration, the positions of the wheels could always be identified in the strain
curve, and they correspond to the two compression peaks.
The only parameter that truly needs to be accurately estimated is the coefficient of
subgrade reaction, as it significantly affected the mechanical response.
62
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5. Investigation
An increase in the coefficient of subgrade reaction from 0.07 MPa/mm to 0.30 MPa/mm
resulted in a 40% reduction of bending moment, stress, and strain.
Loading Near a Joint
For the load setup shown in fig. 5.7, the same sensitivity analysis performed for interior
loading was repeated. The slab sketched in fig. 5.7 represents the central slab in the 3x3
grid of the FE model.
The dashed lines in figs. 5.8 to 5.11 corresponds to values that would already exceed
the bending capacity in the interior loading case. Even if they did not exceed the bending
capacity for loading near a joint, they were still considered unrealistic based on the interior
loading sensitivity analysis.
Figure 5.7: Boeing 777­9 loading near a joint
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
63
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 5. Investigation
Also with this load setup, the variation in the elastic modulus did not lead to significant
changes in the mechanical response.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.8: Model sensitivity to variations in concrete elastic modulus
64
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5. Investigation
The Winkler modulus significantly influenced the mechanical response of the plates. In
the case of a stiffer foundation (0.3 MPa/mm), the peak compression and tensile strains
were closer to the loaded area, whereas in a less rigid foundation (0.07 MPa/mm) these
peaks shifted farther away. The most significant variation in mechanical responses was
observed on the unloaded plate, where, in the case of a rigid foundation, the maximum
tensile strain was approximately 30% lower.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.9: Model sensitivity to variations in coefficient of subgrade reaction
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
65
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 5. Investigation
The implementation of the Pasternak model did not result in significant changes; peaks
of tensile strain slightly decreased, while peaks of compressive strain increased.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.10: Model sensitivity to variations in stiffness of shear interaction
66
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 5. Investigation
The parameter that most significantly influenced the mechanical response of the plate
was clearly the coefficient of interlocking joint. For a high load transfer efficiency (Kj
equal to 10 MPa/mm), the loaded plate primarily experienced compression, while the
unloaded plate was in tension. In contrast, in the case of an inefficient joint, the loaded
plate was entirely in tension, while the unloaded plate remained completely at rest. It is
also important to note that while for all simulations where the coefficient of interlocking
transfer was equal to or greater than 1, the maximum tensile bending stress occurred on
the lower surface of the plate, in the case of an inefficient joint, the situation was reversed,
and the maximum tensile stress was recorded on the upper surface.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.11: Model sensitivity to variations in coefficient of interlocking joint
The results of the sensitivity analysis have shown that the two truly important param­
eters that must be accurately estimated when modeling the pavement structure are the
coefficient of subgrade reaction and the coefficient of interlocking joint.
In the case of interior loading, the only parameter that influenced the shape of the strain
curve was the coefficient of subgrade reaction. However, in the case of load near a joint,
the shape of the curve depended on two parameters: the coefficient of subgrade reaction
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
67
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 5. Investigation
and the coefficient of interlocking joint.
5.2.2
Large Scale Test Simulations
The model implemented in Abaqus was then used to simulate the same load setups
as the large­scale test. Since during the field test only the position of one wheel was
recorded, in fig. 3.20, fig. 3.22, and fig. 3.23, as well as in subsequent Abaqus simulations,
it was assumed that the truck’s centerline was parallel to the long cable during the first 8
simulations and parallel to the initial part of the short cable during the following ones.
According to the load on the axles and tire pressure reported in table 3.1, the contact
area between the tire and pavement was calculated using eq. (4.4). In table 5.3, the
contact area values for each tire and the approximated square side used in the Abaqus
model are reported.
Table 5.3: Tire­slab contact area and its approximated square side
Axle
Contact Area [mm2]
Approximated Square Side [mm]
1
54,200
233
2
55,400
235
3
32,600
181
4
33,300
182
For the slabs, a Poisson’s ratio of 0.2 and the elastic moduli estimated from the uni­
axial compression test (table 5.1) were considered. The simulated foundation support
was Winkler, disregarding the stiffness of shear interaction Gp, as the sensitivity analysis
results indicated that k had a major influence. A fixed value for the coefficient of normal
load transfer was set to 0.6 MPa/mm.
Four Abaqus simulations were conducted for each load setup, varying the coefficient
of subgrade reaction k and the coefficient of interlocking joint Kj as shown in table 5.4.
Table 5.4: k and Kj values used to simulate the large­scale load setups
Coefficient of subgrade reaction
Coefficient of interlocking joint
[MPa/mm]
[MPa/mm]
High (H)
0.30
10
Low (L)
0.01
0
To keep this report concise and easy to read, only the results for load setup 3 (fig. 5.12a)
and 4 (fig. 5.12b) are presented in this section. However, plots for all other configurations
were included in appendix A.3
During load setup 3, the goal was to replicate the interior loading with the rear gear
(axles 3 and 4). In accordance to the findings of the sensitivity analysis for interior loading,
the only parameter that modified the shape of the curve was the coefficient of subgrade
reaction.
On the other hand, during load setup 4, the goal was to replicate the loading near a
joint. In this case, the parameter that governed the main shape of the strain curve was the
coefficient of interlocking joint. The coefficient of subgrade reaction played a secondary
role in determining the amplitude of the peaks.
68
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5. Investigation
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.12: Abaqus simulations for (a) load setup 3 and (b) load setup 4
5.3
Integration of Fiber­Optic Sensing and Numerical
Modeling
5.3.1
Corrections in Fiber­Optics Data
An initial comparison between the experimental data and the numerical results from
the FE simulations revealed the presence of a drift in the fiber­optic strain data recorded
with the long cable. In the first half of the cable, the data fell within the range predicted
by the FE model. However, in the second half, the strain values progressively deviated
linearly from this range, measuring higher tensile strain values. This linear drift is likely
attributable to thermal effects.
The analyzer was placed inside a vehicle with the heating on, while the cables were ex­
posed to an external temperature of 8°C. It is probable that the analyzer failed to correctly
apply the temperature correction to the strain values.
With the support of Abaqus simulations that define the plausible range of values, the
long cable data (ϵ) were corrected (ϵ∗) using the equation:
ϵ∗= ϵ −d(X −l∗)
(5.1)
where d is a coefficient with units of length−1, X is the coordinate along the cable, and
l is the coordinate of the initial point from where thermal drift began to be observed.
Although it was not possible to identify a unique value for d and l that corrected the drift
for all 7 configurations, the values used were oscillated within a small range. The drift
was observed to always begin on the FUT plate, and d ranged from 1.5 × 10−3 mm−1 to
2 × 10−3 mm−1.
This manual correction of thermal drift was certainly a major source of error in the re­
sults.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
69
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 5. Investigation
After applying the thermal drift correction, the fiber­optic data that still did not fall within
the range of plausible strain values were disregarded. From load setup 4 onwards, the
data from the RAFA plate and part of the FUT were discarded. The issue seems to be
mainly attributed to permanent deformation of the adhesive bonding the cables to the
plate, which left an imprint on subsequent measurements during later load setups. Other
data that were discarded come from the REF plate. In this case, the loss of data quality
is likely due to the large length of the cable, the high variance indicating noise in the data,
and the inherent source of error from the manual drift correction.
The issue related to permanent deformation of the adhesive could have been partially
mitigated by unloading the plate between successive loads and performing a reference
measurement every time the plate was unloaded before conducting each individual load
test.
The quality of the data measured by the short cable is certainly better, as no thermal
drift was observed, and the data fell perfectly within the range defined by the Abaqus
simulations.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13: Load setup 3: (a) initial comparison of fiber­optic data and Abaqus simula­
tions and (b) thermal drift correction
A separate discussion must be made for the data measured during load setup 11, where
two wheels of axle 4 were directly above the cable. In this case, the measured data fall
within the Abaqus range, with the exception of the area where the cable was directly
loaded, where hundreds of µϵ were recorded. This is because the cable did not mea­
sure the actual deformation of the slab but rather the combined deformation of the rubber
covering of the cable and the epoxy. Even though the cable survived the direct load, the
deformations in this directly loaded area, without any protection such as aluminum plates,
caused permanent deformations (fig. 5.14b).
70
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 5. Investigation
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.14: (a) Load setup 11: initial comparison of fiber­optic data and Abaqus simula­
tions and (b) permanent deformation in the fibers after direct loading
5.3.2
Optimization
The preliminary comparison between the fiber­optic data and the four Abaqus simu­
lations, which define the range of plausible k and Kj values, already indicated that the
foundation was rigid and that there was partial load transfer.
Three load setups were considered for back­calculating the coefficient of subgrade
reaction k and the coefficients of interlocking joint (longitudinal Kj,long and transverse
Kj,transv). The selected load setups were 2, 3, and 8. Load setup 3 replicated an in­
terior loading, setup 2 a loading near a longitudinal joint, and setup 8 loading near the
transverse joint.
Due to the poor quality of some data, the back­calculation procedure was performed
manually by minimizing the difference between the strain curves, aiming to minimize the
total mean squared error (MSE):
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
ϵfibers,i −ϵFE,i
2
(5.2)
where ϵfibers,i represents the experimental strain values and ϵFE,i represents the strain
values obtained from the Abaqus model. Since the fiber­optic data had a spacing of 40
mm, while the FE data was spaced at 50 mm, the FE results were interpolated to align
with the experimental points. Specifically, the FE model results, originally computed at
nodes every 50 mm, were interpolated using a spline interpolation in MATLAB via the
interp1 function.
The back­calculation procedure began with load setup 3 to determine k, which resulted
in the maximum value within the considered range, i.e., 0.3 MPa/mm. Next, the stiffness
Kj,long was back­calculated from load setup 2 and found to be 0.15 MPa/mm. Finally,
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
71
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 5. Investigation
load setup 8 was used to back­calculate Kj,trans, resulting in 0.5 MPa/mm.
A significant advantage of the chosen load configurations was that since the load was
nearly centered with respect to the plate axis, Kj,long and Kj,transv could be identified
independently, one at a time.
Figure 5.15: Optimization for load setup 3
Figure 5.16: Optimization for load setup 2
72
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 5. Investigation
Figure 5.17: Optimization for load setup 8
Table 5.5: Estimated parameters from back­calculation
Parameter
Symbol
Estimated Value [MPa/mm]
Coefficient of subgrade reaction
k
0.30
Coefficient of interlocking joint (longitudinal)
Kj,long
0.15
Coefficient of interlocking joint (transverse)
Kj,transv
0.50
The foundation is very rigid, which is likely due to the presence of the HBB, a significant
compressive layer of prepared foundation over 450 mm (HBB + base + subbase), as well
as the fact that the structure is recently built. As a result, the soil conditions are optimal,
and no degradation of the subgrade has yet occurred. The fact that Kj values are low
is consistent with the absence of tie bars and dowel bars to keep the plates together.
Additionally, as there are only three lines of plates, the interlocking joint does not develop
well at the longitudinal joints, likely because the plates are not close enough to each
other. The same issue applies to the transverse joints, as the test was conducted on
row 3 and 4, only about 15 m from the north free edge. Furthermore, it is also likely that
the longitudinal joints have a lower load transfer efficiency. This is probably due to the
construction technique. The lanes were built at different times and were simply cast in
place next to each other. The contraction joints, on the other hand, are the result of a
single line that has cracked, resulting in a relatively small gap between the plates and
allowing for better joint efficiency to develop.
5.3.3
Validation
With the 8 remaining load setups that were not used during the back­calculation phase,
it was possible to validate the methodology used. This was done by verifying that, even
for these load setups, the selected parameters entered into the FE model accurately repli­
cated the recorded experimental data.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
73
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 5. Investigation
Figure 5.18: Validation for load setup 9
Figure 5.19: Validation for load setup 10
Figure 5.20: Validation for load setup 11
74
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 5. Investigation
Figure 5.21: Validation for load setup 1
Figure 5.22: Validation for load setup 4
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
75
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 5. Investigation
Figure 5.23: Validation for load setup 5
Figure 5.24: Validation for load setup 6
76
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 5. Investigation
Figure 5.25: Validation for load setup 7
In table 5.6, the values of MSE and the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) are reported. MSE
is defined as:
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
ϵfibers,i −ϵFE,i

(5.3)
Table 5.6: Mean squared error and mean absolute error for each load setup
Load Setup
MSE [µϵ2]
MAE [µϵ]
3
2.94
1.30
2
4.59
1.40
8
1.40
0.91
4
46.70
4.72
5
14.32
2.96
6
29.69
4.44
7
5.92
2.01
9
2.22
1.09
10
2.08
1.13
11
1.64
1.11
The load setup for which the model reproduced the measured data most accurately is
load setup 8, used to back­calculate Kj,transv, with a MSE equal to 1.4 µϵ2.
From the validation phase, it can be seen that in the case of data measured with the
short cable, the difference between the model and the measured data is very small for
every load setup (9­11). The model reproduced the strain profile measured during load
setup 11 a MSE equal to 1.64 µϵ2 (excluding the area directly loaded). In contrast, for
the long cable, the difference is significantly larger. This should not be attributed to the
model, which, given its strong similarity to the data collected from the short cable, can
be considered validated, but rather to the poor quality of the data measured with the
long cable. Additionally, the MSE is greater than the MAE for all configurations, and this
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
77
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 5. Investigation
difference is particularly pronounced for the data collected from the long cable, as the
MSE tends to be more sensitive to outliers.
78
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:91==
6
Conclusions
6.1
Summary and Findings
This thesis developed a novel method to characterize plate foundation support beneath
existing rigid pavements and evaluate joint efficiency by integrating a finite element (FE)
model developed in Abaqus with high­resolution fiber­optic distributed strain sensing.
As part of this research, a large­scale load test was conducted at Copenhagen Airport
on existing rigid concrete pavements. During the test, the strains induced by the applied
load on the pavement surface were measured using fiber­optic cables connected to an
Optical Backscatter Reflectometer analyzer.
A fast and cost­effective method was developed for installing fiber­optic cables on ex­
isting pavements using epoxy resin. This technique allowed the fibers to remain intact
and measure strain during the load tests. However, the method presented some limita­
tions. The epoxy resin underwent permanent deformation, and direct loading on the fibers
was not feasible, as they would measure the deformation of the adhesive and the rubber
coating of the cable rather than the actual deformation of the plate.
The geometry, soil­slab interactions, and joint interactions of the pavement structure
were replicated using an FE model developed in Abaqus, whose ability to accurately rep­
resent the pavement­soil system was evaluated under different loading conditions, par­
ticularly interior loading and loading near the joints. A sensitivity analysis revealed that
the Winkler foundation model can replicate the behavior of the studied structure. The key
parameters governing the mechanical response of the pavement structure are the coeffi­
cient of subgrade reaction k and the coefficient of interlocking joint Kj,for both longitudinal
and transverse joints.
The fiber­optic strain measurements together with the FE model were used to back­
calculate k, Kj,long e Kj,transv . The back­calculated values for the studied area are k
equal to 0.3 MPa/mm, Kj,long equal to 0.15 MPa/mm, and Kj,transv equal to 0.5 MPa/mm.
The accuracy of the FE model in replicating the actual pavement system was validated.
The model successfully reproduced the measured strain profile with a Mean Squared
Error (MSE) of 1.64 µϵ2 and a Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of 1.11 µϵ.
6.2
Recommendations and Practical Applications
The distributed fiber­optic technology proved to be an effective sensing tool with signif­
icant potential benefits for airport operators. It can help detect problem areas and quality
issues in pavement, validate design assumptions, and potentially monitor damage devel­
opment throughout the pavement’s service life.
This thesis represents an initial research study on the implementation of a methodology
to back­calculate foundation parameters and load transfer efficiency in large­scale tests
and real field conditions, combining fiber­optic strain sensors with an FE model. This novel
method requires further studies and developments before it can be effectively applied in
practical contexts.
One of the main issues to address concerns the selection of an Optical Backscatter
Reflectometer (OBR) that has a wider operating temperature range. Alternatively, if a
more advanced analyzer is not available, cables with a maximum length around 8­10 m
could be used, to prevent errors caused by the thermal drift.
The developed installation technique is fast and cost­effective. However, it can be fur­
ther improved by ensuring better cleaning of the slabs’ surface and evaluating different
epoxy resins or other types of adhesives. The primary aims of the installation technique
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
79
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 6. Conclusions
are to protect the fibers from potential damage and to ensure the correct transfer of de­
formations from the slabs to the fibers.
In order to use this methodology in practical contexts, it would be ideal to install the
cables permanently. Measurements would then be carried out only when needed by con­
necting the cables to the OBR analyzer. A small groove in the slabs might be the right
location to place the cables, followed by embedding them with sealants or concrete.
The primary practical application of this methodology would be the monitoring of exist­
ing airport rigid concrete pavement structures. It might be a valuable, cutting­edge tool
to optimize the maintenance operations and support future design developments. This
technology has already been validated for predicting the foundation behavior and the
load transfer efficiency of joints, but it may also be able to detect cracks in the Portland
cement concrete (PCC) slabs.
80
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
S Timoshenko and S Woinowsky­Krieger. Theory of plates and shells. McGraw­Hill,
1959, 580 s.
[2]
E Winkler. Die Lehre von der Elastizität und Festigkeit. Dominicus, 1867.
[3]
A H A Hogg. “Equilibrium of a thin plate, symmetrically loaded, resting on an elastic
foundation of infinite depth”. In: Philosophical Magazine 25 (168 1938), pp. 576–
582. ISSN: 14786435, 14786443.
[4]
P L Pasternak. On a New Method of Analysis of an Elastic Foundation by Means
of Two Foundation Constants. A significant work introducing the concept of elas­
tic foundations characterized by two constants, known as the Pasternak model
in foundation engineering. Gosudarstvennoe Izdatelstvo Literatury po Stroitelstvu
i Arkhitekture, 1954.
[5]
A D Kerr. “Elastic and Viscoelastic Foundation Models”. In: Journal of Applied Me­
chanics (Transactions of the ASME) 31 (1964). This paper discusses various mod­
els of elastic and viscoelastic foundations and their applications in structural analy­
sis., pp. 491–498.
[6]
Prashant Surveys. Airport Runway, Taxiway, and Aprons Surveys. Accessed: 2025­
01­24. 2025. URL: http://www.prashantsurveys.com/airport-runway-taxiway-and-
aprons.php.
[7]
Jeffery R Roesler, Victor G Cervantes, and Armen N Amirkhanian. “Accelerated per­
formance testing of concrete pavement with short slabs”. In: International Journal
of Pavement Engineering 13 (6 2012), pp. 494–507. ISSN: 1477268x, 10298436.
DOI: 10.1080/10298436.2011.575134.
[8]
American Concrete Pavement Association. Airfield Joints, Jointing Arrangements
and Steel: For Airfields Serving Aircraft Larger than 100,000 lb (45,360 kg).
[9]
Zeta Industry. Tie Bar ­ Features and Applications. Accessed: 2025­01­24. 2025.
URL: https://www.zetaindustry.com/tie-bar/.
[10]
Eyal Levenberg. Pavement Mechanics: Lecture Notes. English. 1st ed. Eyal Lev­
enberg, 2020. ISBN: 978­87­972317­0­8. DOI: 10.11581/dtu:00000088.
[11]
American Concrete Pavement Association (ACPA). Construction of Portland Ce­
ment Concrete Pavements. National Highway Institute Course No. 13133. AASH­
TO/FHWA/Industry joint training. Washington, D.C.: Federal Highway Administra­
tion, Department of Transportation, 1995.
[12]
Pavement Interactive. Slipform Paving. Accessed: 2025­01­24. 2025. URL: https:
//pavementinteractive.org/reference-desk/construction/placement/slipform-paving/.
[13]
Antony P S Selvadurai. Elastic analysis of soil­foundation interaction. Elsevier, 1979,
XIV, 543 S.
[14]
E. Ventsel and T. Krauthammer. Thin Plates and Shells: Theory, Analysis, and Ap­
plications. 1st. CRC Press, 2001. DOI: 10.1201/9780203908723.
[15]
B.M. Das. Principles of Foundation Engineering. Cengage Learning, 2015. ISBN:
9781305537897. URL: https://books.google.it/books?id=ZKOaBAAAQBAJ.
[16]
Asmus Skar, Assaf­Avraham Klar, and Eyal Levenberg. “Load­Independent Char­
acterization of Plate Foundation Support Using High­Resolution Distributed Fiber­
Optic Sensing”. In: Sensors 19 (16 2019), p. 3518. ISSN: 14243210, 14248220.
DOI: 10.3390/s19163518.
[17]
Frans Van Cauwelaert, Marc Stet, and André Jasienski. “The General Solution for a
Slab Subjected to Centre and Edge Loads and Resting on a Kerr Foundation”. In: In­
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
81
==PAGE:94==
Bibliography
ternational Journal of Pavement Engineering 3 (1 2002), pp. 1–18. ISSN: 1477268x,
10298436. DOI: 10.1080/10298430290029894.
[18]
Ali Zokaei­Ashtiani, Cesar Carrasco, and Soheil Nazarian. “Finite element model­
ing of slab–foundation interaction on rigid pavement applications”. In: Computers
and Geotechnics 61 (2014). Received 5 February 2014; Revised 30 June 2014;
Accepted 1 July 2014; Available online 7 August 2014, pp. 101–111. DOI: 10.1016/
j.compgeo.2014.06.004.
[19]
Anastasios M Ioannides and George T Korovesis. “Aggregate Interlock: A Pure­
Shear Load Transfer Mechanism”. In: Transportation Research Record 1286 (1990),
pp. 14–24. ISSN: 0361­1981.
[20]
Asmus Skar and Peter Noe Poulsen. “3­D cohesive finite element model for appli­
cation in structural analysis of heavy duty composite pavements”. In: Construction
and Building Materials (2015). Technical report.
[21]
Heinrich Hertz. The Principles of Mechanics Presented in a New Form. Macmillan
and Co., 1899.
[22]
H M Westergaard. “Stresses in concrete pavements computed by theoretical analy­
sis”. In: United States Department of Agriculture – Public Roads 7 (2 1926), pp. 25–
35.
[23]
M. S. Skarlatos and United States. Army. Corps of Engineers. Ohio River Division
Laboratories. Deflections and stresses in concrete pavements of airfields with con­
tinuous elastic joints. Tech. rep. Note: Harvard University, Graduate School of En­
gineering. Harvard University, Graduate School of Engineering, 1949.
[24]
T F Fwa, X P Shi, and S A Tan. “Use of pasternak foundation model in concrete
pavement analysis”. In: Journal of Transportation Engineering 122 (4 1996), pp. 323–
328. ISSN: 19435436, 0733947x. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-947X(1996)122:4(323).
[25]
ASTM International. Standard Test Method for Use of the Dynamic Cone Penetrom­
eter in Shallow Pavement Applications. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM Interna­
tional, 2023. URL: https://www.astm.org/Standards/D6951.htm.
[26]
W. D. Powell et al. The Structural Design of Bituminous Roads. Tech. rep. LR 1132.
Transport and Road Research Laboratory (TRRL), 1984, p. 62.
[27]
Gary L. Mitchell. FAA Pavement Design: AC 150/5320­6E – FAARFIELD. Presented
to ACPA – Southeast Chapter Workshop. Director of Airports, American Concrete
Pavement Association. American Concrete Pavement Association, Oct. 2008.
[28]
PlateLoad. Plate Loading Test. Accessed: 2025­01­06. 2025. URL: https://www.
plateload.co.uk/.
[29]
Dynatest. Heavy Weight Deflectometer (HWD). Accessed: 2025­01­06. 2025. URL:
https://dynatest.com/.
[30]
Michael Iten. “Novel Applications of Distributed Fiber­optic Sensing in Geotechnical
Engineering”. 1 Band. PhD thesis. ETH Zurich, 2011. DOI: 10.3929/ethz-a-6559858.
[31]
Yiska Goldfeld and Assaf Klar. “Damage identification in reinforced concrete beams
using spatially distributed strain measurements”. In: Journal of Structural Engineer­
ing (united States) 139 (12 2013), p. 4013013. ISSN: 1943541x, 07339445. DOI:
10.1061/(ASCE)ST.1943-541X.0000795.
[32]
N De Battista et al. “Strain monitoring using embedded distributed fibre optic sen­
sors in a sprayed concrete tunnel lining during the excavation of cross­passages”.
In: Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Structural Health Monitoring
of Intelligent Infrastructure (SHMII­7). Available online at http://www.rioxx.net/
licenses/all-rights-reserved. Turin, Italy: Politecnico di Torino, 2016.
[33]
L. Schenato, L. Palmieri, M. Camporese, et al. “Distributed optical fibre sensing
for early detection of shallow landslides triggering”. In: Scientific Reports 7.14686
82
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
(2017). DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-12610-1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
017-12610-1.
[34]
X. Chapeleau et al. “Assessment of cracks detection in pavement by a distributed
fiber optic sensing technology”. In: Journal of Civil Structural Health Monitoring
(2017).
[35]
Yi Rui et al. “Integrity Testing of Pile Cover Using Distributed Fibre Optic Sensing”.
In: Sensors 17.12 (2017), p. 2949. DOI: 10.3390/s17122949.
[36]
Lei Gao et al. “Experimental Study on Deformation Monitoring of Bored Pile Based
on BOTDR”. In: Applied Sciences 9.12 (2019), p. 2435. DOI: 10.3390/app9122435.
[37]
Dominik Hauswirth, Frank Fischli, and Carlo Rabaiotti. “Distributed Fiber Optic Strain
Sensors in Pavements: Challenges and Solutions”. In: ed. by Christiane Raab.
Vol. 76. Springer, 2020, pp. 825–834. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-48679-2_77.
[38]
Swati Roy Maitra, K S Reddy, and L S Ramachandra. “Load transfer characteris­
tics of aggregate interlocking in concrete pavement”. In: Journal of Transportation
Engineering 136 (3 2010), 013002QTE. ISSN: 19435436, 0733947x. DOI: 10.1061/
(ASCE)TE.1943-5436.114.
[39]
Copenhagen Airport. Hub 1973­1999. Accessed: 2025­02­11. 2015. URL: https:
//web.archive.org/web/20150103000938/http://www.cph.dk/en/about-cph/profile/
History/Hub-1973-1999/.
[40]
Geo.dk. GeoAtlas Live. Accessed: 2025­01­26. 2025. URL: https://data.geo.dk/
geoatlas-live/.
[41]
European Committee for Standardization. EN 12390­3:2019 Testing hardened con­
crete – Part 3: Compressive strength of test specimens. https://webshop.ds.dk/en/
standard/M316812/ds-en-12390-3-2019. Accessed: 2025­02­11. 2019.
[42]
European Committee for Standardization. EN 1992­1­1: Design of Concrete Struc­
tures ­ Part 1­1: General Rules and Rules for Buildings. Eurocode 2: Design of
Concrete Structures. Brussels, Belgium: European Committee for Standardization
(CEN), 2019. URL: https://www.cen.eu/cen/.
[43]
Boeing. Calculating Tire Contact Area. Accessed: 2025­01­28. 2014. URL: https:
//www.boeing.com/content/dam/boeing/boeingdotcom/commercial/airports/faqs/
calctirecontactarea.pdf.
[44]
ABAQUS. ABAQUS Analysis User’s Manual (v6.6). Accessed: 2025­02­12. 2009.
URL: https://classes.engineering.wustl.edu/2009/spring/mase5513/abaqus/docs/v6.
6/books/usb/default.htm?startat=pt06ch23s06alm15.html.
[45]
Boeing Commercial Airplanes. 777­9 Airplane Characteristics for Airport Planning.
E. Boeing Commercial Airplanes. Feb. 2023.
[46]
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). Guide for Concrete Pavement Distress
Assessments and Solutions. Tech. rep. FHWA­HIF­16­008. U.S. Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 2016. URL: https://www.fhwa.
dot.gov/pavement/concrete/pubs/hif16008.pdf.
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
83
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
A
Appendix
A.1
Uniaxial Compression Test Data
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.1: Uniaxial compression test raw data. Applied force [kN] versus piston position
[mm]: (a) RAFA, (b) FUT (c) REF
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
85
==PAGE:98==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.2
Fiber­Optic Data Processing
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.2: Load setup 1. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
86
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:99==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.3: Load setup 2. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
87
==PAGE:100==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.4: Load setup 3. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
88
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:101==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.5: Load setup 4. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
89
==PAGE:102==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.6: Load setup 5. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
90
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:103==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.7: Load setup 6. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
91
==PAGE:104==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.8: Load setup 7. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
92
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:105==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.9: Load setup 8. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
93
==PAGE:106==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.10: Load setup 9. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
94
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:107==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.11: Load setup 10. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
95
==PAGE:108==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.12: Load setup 11. (a) Average of four measurements, (b) variance, (c) variance
ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving average
96
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:109==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.13: Final unloading after direct loading on the cable. (a) Average of four mea­
surements, (b) variance, (c) variance ignoring data near the loops, and (d) moving aver­
age
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
97
==PAGE:110==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.3
Large­Scale Test Simulations in Abaqus
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.14: Load setup 1. (a) Abaqus simulations, (b) Abaqus simulations and fiber­
optics original data, and (c) thermal drift correction
98
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:111==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.15: Load setup 2. (a) Abaqus simulations, (b) Abaqus simulations and fiber­
optics original data, and (c) thermal drift correction
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
99
==PAGE:112==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.16: Load setup 3. (a) Abaqus simulations, (b) Abaqus simulations and fiber­
optics original data, and (c) thermal drift correction
100
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:113==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.17: Load setup 4. (a) Abaqus simulations, (b) Abaqus simulations and fiber­
optics original data, and (c) thermal drift correction
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
101
==PAGE:114==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.18: Load setup 5. (a) Abaqus simulations, (b) Abaqus simulations and fiber­
optics original data, and (c) thermal drift correction
102
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:115==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.19: Load setup 6. (a) Abaqus simulations, (b) Abaqus simulations and fiber­
optics original data, and (c) thermal drift correction
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
103
==PAGE:116==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.20: Load setup 7. (a) Abaqus simulations, (b) Abaqus simulations and fiber­
optics original data, and (c) thermal drift correction
104
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:117==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
Figure A.21: Load setup 8. (a) Abaqus simulations and (b) Abaqus simulations and fiber­
optics original data
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
105
==PAGE:118==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
Figure A.22: Load setup 9. (a) Abaqus simulations and (b) Abaqus simulations and fiber­
optics original data
106
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:119==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
Figure A.23: Load setup 10. (a) Abaqus simulations and (b) Abaqus simulations and
fiber­optics original data
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
107
==PAGE:120==
Appendix A. Appendix
(a)
(b)
Figure A.24: Load setup 11. (a) Abaqus simulations and (b) Abaqus simulations and
fiber­optics original data
108
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
==PAGE:121==
Appendix A. Appendix
Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Plate Constructions Utilizing Distributed Fiber­Optic Sensing
109
==PAGE:122==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
