==PAGE:1==
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Be­
havior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation
Performance: A Simulation Study
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ven­
tilation Performance: A Simulation Study
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By:
Gudrun Brynja Viglundsdottir
Supervisor:
Jakub Kolarik
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 17 00
E­mail: byg@byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, De­
partment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Gudrun Brynja Viglundsdottir ­ s223284
Signature
Date
ii Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Mechanical ventilation systems play a crucial role in ensuring indoor air quality, thermal
comfort, and energy efficiency in modern residential buildings. However, these systems
are often subject to various dysfunctions caused by inappropriate design, operational
faults, or user interventions. Such issues can lead to poor indoor air quality, thermal
discomfort, and excessive energy consumption.
This thesis investigates the impact of three common ventilation system dysfunctions;
blocked air terminals, duct leakage, and the misplacement of a temperature sensor, on
the performance of a mechanical ventilation system in a Danish apartment. A dynamic
simulation study was conducted using the IDA Indoor Climate and Energy (IDA ICE) tool,
where a typical Danish apartment was modeled with a constant air volume (CAV), bal­
anced ventilation system with heat recovery. Reference (fault­free) and faulty cases were
compared to assess the influence of these dysfunctions on indoor air quality (IAQ), energy
performance, and ventilation effectiveness.
The findings reveal that blocking air terminals results in increased system resistance,
reducing total airflow and altering air distribution across zones. This leads to elevated
CO2 concentrations, particularly in bedrooms. Duct leakage in supply ducts leads to a
reduction of conditioned air to its intended zones, reducing ventilation effectiveness and
local deterioration in IAQ. However, results revealed that impacts are minimal. Misplaced
temperature sensors cause incorrect system responses, leading to inefficient bypassing
of the heat recovery and unnecessary heat losses.
Overall, the study highlights the effects of these faults on ventilation performance in CAV
systems, emphasizing the need for good design practices, proper installation, and user
awareness to ensure optimal indoor environments.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Jakub Kolarik, Associate Profes­
sor at DTU Civil Engineering, for his guidance and assistance throughout this project. His
expertise and constructive feedback during weekly meetings and through written commu­
nication, have been greatly helpful and appreciated.
iv Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Importance of ventilation systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Types of ventilation systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Faults in ventilation systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Simulation tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
11
3.1
General Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Simulation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
The faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Results and Discussion
33
4.1
Blocked Air Terminal Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Duct Leakage Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.3
Misplaced temperature sensor results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5
Conclusion
67
6
Future Work
69
Bibliography
71
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
v
==PAGE:8==
vi Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Mechanical ventilation systems are important for creating a healthy indoor environment,
thermal comfort and good energy efficiency in residential buildings [1]. Energy efficiency
regulations for buildings have been tightened over the years [2] and there is an increasing
demand for a healthy indoor air quality [3] and comfortable living conditions. However,
mechanical ventilation system performance is not always up to standard due to inap­
propriate design, user interventions and/or operational faults which can results in poor
performance, bad indoor air quality, and energy inefficiency [4].
Energy efficient building operation and design are a priority in Denmark and ventilation
systems in residencies must comply with certain standards [5]. Despite this, common
dysfunctions such as duct leakage, sensor misplacements and user negligence remain
an issue. These faults can damage system performance, leading to inadequate air qual­
ity, thermal discomfort, and excessive energy consumption. It is essential to understand
the influence of dysfunctions occuring in ventilation systems, in order to improve design,
operation, and user instructions and information.
The purpose of this thesis was to investigate how common residential mechanical ven­
tilation system dysfunctions impact their performance using dynamic simulations. The
research will focus on typical Danish residential ventilation systems modeled in the simu­
lation tool Indoor Climate and Energy from IDA (IDA ICE), incorporating common ventila­
tion faults. By comparing fault, and non­fault models, the study will evaluate performance
metrics such as indoor air quality and energy performance. The insights gained will give
a better understanding of the operational challenges in managing ventilation systems and
offer recommendations for improved design and maintenance.
This topic highlights the importance of integrating fault analysis into the design and opera­
tion of mechanical ventilation systems, and contributing to more effective and sustainable
solutions for residential buildings in Denmark other countries.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
1
==PAGE:10==
2 Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Importance of ventilation systems
For the purpose of saving energy, buildings have become more airtight than they used
to [6]. By improving the airtightness of buildings, there is less uncontrolled exfiltration
and infiltration, which contributes to energy and thermal losses. In Denmark, for instance,
building airtightness requirements tightened in 2015, reducing allowable air leakage from
5.4 m³/h∙m² to 3.6 m³/h∙m² at 50 Pa pressure difference [7]. Airtightness testing is now
mandatory in Denmark and other European countries [2], measuring air leakage per hour
per square meter of a building’s external surface area. While increased envelope airtight­
ness reduces energy losses, it also eliminates natural air renewal, making mechanical
ventilation systems necessary to achieve better indoor air quality. Exposure to airborne
pollutants in homes account for a major portion of lifetime exposure, ranging from 60%
to 95%, with approximately 30% occurring during sleep [8]. Pollutant sources found in­
doors can come from the outside air as well as indoor activities such as cooking, building
materials, and from the occupants themselves [9]. Indoor air pollution sources also in­
clude excess moisture, cleaning products, tobacco smoke, and other household items
and activities [10]. WHO [11] provided a list of common indoor pollutants associated with
health concern from exposure, highlighting the importance of managing these pollutants
in indoor environments. These pollutants are carbon monoxide (CO), benzene, radon,
formaldehyde, and more. These pollutant exposures can cause immediate and/or long
term effects on the occupants of a building [12]. The literature also shows that bad in­
door environment and occupant discomfort influence productivity, worker performance
and health. Wargocki et al. [13] found that air quality affects office productivity. They
conducted experiments where air quality was improved either by removing a pollution
source while keeping the ventilation rate constant, or by increasing the outdoor air sup­
ply rate while maintaining a consistent pollution source. A total of 90 female participants
performed regular office tasks while being exposed to varying air quality levels. The re­
searchers found that higher air quality levels led the women to perform better, highlighting
the importance of IAQ and the likely effect of improved productivity.
2.2
Types of ventilation systems
In general, ventilation systems can be categorized as natural ventilation or mechanical
ventilation. Natural ventilation uses natural forces such as the wind to provide fresh out­
side air in and out of a building through openings such as windows and doors. Natural
ventilation is more common in older buildings, while a mechanical system is used in newer,
modern buildings. A mechanical ventilation system must maintain a required ventilation
rate without any involvement from the building residents. It uses fans, ducts, and other
mechanical components to control airflow within the building. The air supplied by the me­
chanical system is of higher quality because it can be cleaned of pollutants coming from
the outside.
There are different types of mechanical ventilation systems available. An exhaust­only
system is a system that mechanically extracts air out of the building. The supply air only
depends on the pressure difference between the outside and the inside. If the inside air
pressure is below the outside air pressure, the air will infiltrate through envelope leakages,
or flow in through openings like doors and windows. A house is depressurized when more
air is being exhausted than there is air entering; therefore, an exhaust only system is not
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
3
==PAGE:12==
ideal for the warmer climates because it will draw in moisture. The downside to an exhaust
only ventilation system is that the outside air entering the building is unfiltered and can po­
tentially bring in undesirable pollutants and humidity which may cause mold and moisture
damages. However advancements like humidity controlled exhaust mechanical ventila­
tion systems (RH­MEV) have been shown to reduce these issues. Savin and Bernard
[14] found that RH­MEV save about 30­50% of heating energy compared to constant air
volume (CAV) exhaust only systems.
A supply­only system does the opposite of an exhaust­only ventilation system. It uses fans
to pressurize the inside air and draws fresh outside air into the building. The pressuriza­
tion makes it harder for outdoor pollutants to enter the building, and the supply system
allows the air to be filtered and conditioned before reaching the intended spaces. The con­
taminated indoor air is removed through exfiltration or intentional vents. The supply­only
ventilation system is better suited for warmer climates because in winter, when humid,
warm inside air leaks through the building envelope due to the pressurization, there is a
chance of condensation in exterior walls causing mold and decay [15].
A balanced ventilation system is a combination of the two. It neither pressurizes or de­
pressurizes, but supplies instead equal amounts of fresh outside air and exhaust stale air,
mechanically in and out of the building. This system usually contains two types of fans,
supply and return fans, two duct systems, and is therefore typically more costly than the
supply­only and exhaust­only systems. A balanced ventilation system usually supplies
air to living rooms and bedrooms where residents spend most of their time. The system
also exhausts air from humid areas such as bathrooms, kitchens and utility rooms. This
type of system is suitable for all climates, but the disadvantages of a balanced ventilation
system is that it can be expensive and energy inefficient [16].
The energy efficiency of a balanced ventilation system can be improved by implement­
ing heat recovery. A study conducted in Finland revealed that a typical exhaust system
uses up to 67% more energy than an 80% efficiency heat recovery system and 41% more
energy than a 60% efficiency heat recovery system [17]. When simulating the effects of
heat recovery, Zemitis and Borodinecs [18] found that a balanced ventilation system with
heat recovery can reduce the heating demand of a single­family home by up to 84% com­
pared to natural ventilation. A heat recovery system utilizes a heat exchanger inside the
air handling unit (AHU) to transfer heat from the warm exhaust air to the fresh outside air
used for supply. This process recaptures thermal energy from the air leaving the building,
helping to preheat and condition the supply air. This way there is less need for additional
heating, such as using a heating coil, an electrical heater, or other supplementary heating
objects, lowering the energy consumption and cost over time. Although the initial cost
of purchasing and setting up a ventilation system with heat recovery is higher than with
no heat recovery, the long term operational savings usually offset this [19]. With heat
recovery, the system does not have to rely solely on external heating and cooling sources
to meet the supply temperature setpoint selected by the occupants. Furthermore, it im­
proves thermal comfort, and lowers energy consumption. In order to further improve the
energy efficiency of the ventilation, a variable airflow ventilation (VAV) system can be im­
plemented [20]. The VAV system can be controlled by a predefined schedule, or it can be
demand controlled based on humidity, occupancy, or air quality.
2.3
Faults in ventilation systems
Even though HVAC systems today are highly advanced and designed to provide sustain­
able and energy efficient solutions for indoor climate control, they are not always without
fault. The systems described above rely on a seamless operation of various mechanical
4 Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:13==
and control components in order to deliver the desired energy efficiency, thermal com­
fort and IAQ. The complexity of these systems create a potential for malfunctions, design
flaws, and installation errors. Understanding these failures is important for improving sys­
tem performance, minimizing maintenance and repair costs, and increasing awareness
among engineers, designers, installers, and end users. As buildings in the EU are the
cause of 40% of the energy consumption and 36% of the greenhouse gas emissions
[21], it is important to continue improving energy efficiency in buildings and ensure proper
functionality of the systems.
These failures in mechanical ventilation systems can arise from various causes. In many
cases, they are the result of installation errors in the mounting stage [22] and a lack of
regular maintenance. Boerstra et al. [23] found that up to 82% of observed homes had
maintenance intervals longer than recommended. However, failures in the systems can
also occur without human involvement, such as material degradation and accumulation
of dirt within the system [23]. Common limitation of the failures are higher noise levels,
poor operation, and insufficient supply ventilation capacity compared to design standards
[24]. In order to mitigate failures, regular maintenance, quality installation where correct
system installation is ensured, and regular system monitoring is essential [25]. More
solutions could include implementing smarter systems and increasing user training [22].
Smart ventilation systems save energy and reduce cost while improving IAQ [26]. They
use control methods to reduce airflow when it is unnecessary, or increase airflow when it
benefits IAQ or energy consumption [27].
The literature suggests that poorly functioning ventilation systems and equipment waste
a considerable amount of energy. The actual impact of a faulty ventilation system and the
amount of energy that is wasted depends on the failures that occur and their magnitude.
Some faults cause little to no changes in energy consumption, but rather have a bad
influence on the thermal comfort of occupants and IAQ [28]. Based on the findings of the
literature review, many different types of HVAC faults and dysfunctions can be found in
buildings.
A French study [22] analyzed the quality, and actual performance of on­site ventilation sys­
tems in 1287 dwellings. They found that roughly 50% of those dwellings fail to meet the
regulatory requirements for ventilation systems in France. The study identified 1246 dys­
function points across the dwellings and sorted them into six categories: air inlets (24%),
air outlets (22%), exhaust air flows (27%), system configuration (10%), ventilation units
(9%), and ductwork and air transfer (8%). The most frequently observed issues, account­
ing for 46%, are related to the poor quality of air inlet and air outlet mounting. A large issue
was the absence, or incorrect installation of air inlets along with insufficient or excessive
exhaust airflows. Hurel and Leprince [29] conducted a survey among professionals in the
field in order to find 5 specific dysfunctions in ventilation systems that are both common
and easily quantified. These dysfunctions were related to duct leakage, duct insulation,
filter clogging, inappropriate fan settings and AHU scheduling. The inspections were per­
formed on nonresidential buildings, and the results of these non­conformities yielded a
high increase in thermal loss and additional costs. These research articles consistently
show that buildings are rarely operated as intended, with HVAC objects frequently ex­
periencing failures or operational faults throughout their operation. Furthermore the IEA
Annex 25 report [30] is a major source which highlights the extensive occurrence of faults
in HVAC systems. It provides a detailed fault classification and their impact on perfor­
mance, laying the groundwork for future research. Basarkar et al. [31] conducted a study
on four different HVAC faults identified from the IEA Annex 25, among other academic
studies, in the simulation program EnergyPlus. These faults were a clogged plant piping
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
5
==PAGE:14==
loop, leaking outdoor air damper, a fouled water heating coil, and room air temperature
sensor offset. They found that the overall energy penalty for the faults caused up to a
22% increase in the total HVAC energy use. More specifically, a negative sensor offset,
combined with other faults, increased heating energy use by up to 12.2%.
Another commonly observed HVAC flaw are leaky ducts. Although building airtightness
has improved with time, data suggests the opposite for duct airtightness [32]. For exam­
ple, a survey conducted with 10 residential HVAC contractors in California, who install
18000 systems per year, revealed that about 75% of the installed ducts are only sealed
with cloth duct tape, which is not considered a reliable practice [32]. [4] found that for a
bad airtightness class and a leaky duct located in a heated area, the overheating energy
consumption could increase by 13%. They also mention that if the over consumption of
the fan would be included in the calculations, the negative impact of dysfunction might be
even higher in regards to energy performance, but for now it is mainly a sanitary impact.
A common issue in residential ventilation systems are blocked air inlets and outlets. These
obstacles often occur as a consequence of improper installation or user interference, such
as placing furniture and other objects in front of vents, or closing them intentionally. Oc­
cupant behavior has been proven to be a significant portion of the energy consumption
gap between reality and simulations [33]. People tend to have the misbelief that closing
vents in unoccupied rooms will lower energy consumption and utility bills. They also tend
to believe that a HVAC system works independently for each room and that closing a vent
will have no broader impact [34]. Another reason why people would close their air vents
could be to prevent drafts or mitigate noise. However, in reality this has a negative effect
on the airflow of the system, pressure in the ductwork, the overall system performance
and IAQ [35].
Table 2.1 provides a summary of commonly observed faults in residential ventilation units.
6 Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:15==
Table 2.1: A list of commonly observed dysfunctions in residential ventilation systems
([22], [29], [30], [31], [36])
Component
Dysfunction
Possible symptoms/effects
Water heating coil
Leak or fouled coil
Low flow and water pressure
Filter
Clogged filter
Excessive pressure
difference across the filter
Heat exchanger
Fouled
Difficulty maintaining desired
heating or cooling output.
Increased energy consumption.
Temperature sensor
Misplacement of the sensor,
sensor offset or
complete signal failure
False signaling to VAV system
and/or heat exchanger and
heating/cooling system.
Air inlets
Lack of module or
non­compliance with
characteristics of the module.
Insufficient airflow to the zone.
Poor IAQ. Lower ability to
maintain proper air exchange rates.
Fan
Failure to respond to control signal.
Mechanical failure.
Improper flow rate set point
Inadequate fan settings.
Too high or too low airflow to zones,
Electrical overconsumption.
Duct
Insufficient or damaged insulation.
Condensation on ducts.
Higher humidity.
Inconsistent room temperatures.
Thermal losses.
Duct
Leakage
Room temperature deviation.
Excessive fan energy.
Lower airflow to zones.
Noise.
AHU schedule
Badly scheduled occupancy
or not well timed
Excessive energy consumption.
Overcooling or overheating.
Poor IAQ.
VAV system
Failure in adjustment
Too much or too little air volume.
Too low or high room temperatures.
2.4
Simulation tools
Simulation tools play an important role in the evaluation of building energy performance.
The simulations in this project are performed using the Indoor Climate and Energy from
IDA (IDA ICE) simulation tool. IDA ICE is a tool that has been developed to study the en­
ergy consumption and indoor air quality of buildings. It is a special program applicable to
most building types, capable of performing calculations of air and surface temperatures,
CO2 and moisture levels, comfort indices such as PPD and PMV, the airflow distribution
to zones, etc. [37]. Along with IDA ICE there are multiple BPS tools on the market com­
monly used for analyzing HVAC system performance, for example, EnergyPlus, DOE­2
and Modelica. Each of these tools has distinct features that contribute to BPS in different
ways.
EnergyPlus is a „new generation“ simulation tool made with the purpose of combining
the best features of DOE­2 and BLAST [38], developed by the U.S. Department of En­
ergy starting in 1996 [39]. It includes an integrated (simultaneous loads and systems)
simulations approach, which gives a better estimate of resulting parameters like thermal
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
7
==PAGE:16==
comfort due to improved accuracy of space temperatures [38]. Features that Energyplus
can simulate better than DOE­2 and BLAST due to the integrated simulation are realis­
tic system controls, moisture adsorption/desorption in building elements, and inter­zone
airflow [39].
DOE­2 Is one of the most popular simulation tools for thermal analysis in the design
phase of buildings, developed by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in the 1970s
[38].
The program contains a sequential simulation approach with steps for LOADS,
SYSTEMS, PLANT, and ECONOMICS. This framework calculates thermal loads, sys­
tem energy needs, and fuel/equipment costs separately. While DOE­2 is considered to
be user friendly and simple, these same features limit its flexibility to simulate complex
faults or custom HVAC systems [40].
Modelica. In 1997 the programing language Modelica 1.0 was developed with an inter­
national effort for hierarchical physical modeling [41]. In Modelica it is possible to create
physically relevant and user friendly model compnents. Unlike EnergyPlus and DOE­2,
Modelica allows users to build and customize HVAC system models from individual com­
ponents [41]. Modelica models are described mathematically by differential, algebrai and
discrete equations and no variable needs to be manually solved for [42].
However, the limitation of simulation tools is the assumption that equipment always per­
forms and functions as intended. In practice, that is not the case. It can be a complex
task to simulate faults in HVAC systems due to how most building performance simulation
(BPS) tools are designed. These BPS tools are generally designed to model ideal sys­
tem behavior, rather than real­world situations where objects may malfunction or degrade
over time. This limitation makes it tough to simulate faults accurately.
As simulation tools are the most commonly used methodology for evaluating and ana­
lyzing building performance during the design and operational phase [43], it is important
to be able to model system faults. Simulation models should account for potential dys­
functions and degradations to evaluate performance under faulty conditions, as well as
for design optimization and risk assessment.
2.5
Regulations
Since the energy efficiency and IAQ of modern airtight buildings is becoming increasingly
relevant, it is critical to ensure proper ventilation with regulations. Regulations for venti­
lation systems were created to address issues and provide minimum standards related
to indoor air quality, energy efficiency, occupant health, and environmental sustainability.
The building code followed in Denmark is the Danish Building Regulations (BR18) [5].
It addresses laws for building design and ventilation systems that must be followed in all
circumstances. General requirements from the BR18 for ventilation systems in residential
buildings that relate to the objectives of this study are:
• Ventilation systems must be located so that operation and maintenance can be car­
ried out in an appropriate and responsible manner.
• Sensors must have the necessary precision and stability and should be placed so
that they measure the desired parameter and are protected from extraneous influ­
ences.
• Air transfer between rooms should not occur from areas with higher levels of air
pollution to those with lower levels.
• Ventilation systems must be designed and installed so that they do not introduce
8 Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:17==
substances, including microorganisms, into ventilated spaces that cause indoor cli­
mate conditions that are unsatisfactory from a health perspective.
• Ventilation systems with supply and exhaust must be designed with heat recovery.
• However, the requirement for heat recovery can be waived when the excess heat in
the exhaust air cannot be reasonably utilized, for example in situations where there
is only cooling need.
• Supply and exhaust ventilation systems serving a single dwelling must include heat
recovery with at least 80% dry temperature efficiency.
• For ventilation systems with heat recovery serving a single dwelling, the specific fan
power must not exceed 1,000 J/m³ at the basic air change.
• In living spaces as well as in the dwelling as a whole, there must be an outdoor air
supply of at least 0.30 l/s per m² of heated floor area.
• Cleaning, operation, service and maintenance of ventilation systems must be carried
out so that they are kept in a technically and hygienically sound condition.
• Ventilation must be done so that unnecessary energy consumption is avoided.
• In rooms where people stay for longer periods, it must be ensured that a thermal
indoor climate is satisfactory in terms of health and comfort and can be maintained
during the intended use and activity.
These regulations provide a framework for evaluating system design and operational per­
formance in this study. They emphasize the importance of system functionality, proper
sensor placement, and airtightness, which are all addressed by the selection of faults in
this study. By evaluating how the faults fail to meet regulation standards, this research
identifies opportunities to improve compliance and enforcement.
2.6
Objectives
This research is structured around several objectives which include:
• Conducting a literature study focused on research documenting real performances
and faults of residential mechanical ventilation.
• From the literature review, identify the faults frequently occurring in ventilation sys­
tems.
• The results of the literature study are used to define the representative design and
operation faults as well as examples of inappropriate user interactions and imple­
ment them in the IDA ICE simulation models.
• A parametric simulation study will be conducted to explore the influence of faults
and user behaviour on ventilation performance.
• Results are analyzed, presented and critically discussed to provide actionable in­
sights for the building service industry.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
9
==PAGE:18==
10Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:19==
3
Methodology
3.1
General Method
The general methodology of this thesis consisted of a literature review where common
design, operational faults and user behaviors that affect ventilation system performance
were identified. The goal of the literature review was also to gain insight into real­world
issues affecting ventilation system performance and to define the faults to be simulated
further in the project. After identifying the faults, the building models were set up in IDA
ICE and the simulation models were prepared for use. The setup consisted of creating a
reference case (ideal system) and different fault models. The specific faults were either
implemented in the simulation tool to mimic real­world dysfunctions or addressed with
manual calculations. Parameters and severity levels for each fault were defined, and all
models were simulated to gain comparative insights. After performing simulations and
calculations, the data was collected and analyzed. Performance metrics such as IAQ,
energy efficiency, and system behavior were evaluated and compared with the results of
the reference case in order to quantify the impact of each fault.
3.2
Simulation Model
3.2.1
Architectural Model
The architectural model used in this project is adapted from an apartment block called
Horisonten II, located at C. F. Møllers Allé 2, Copenhagen. The model was made and
described in Christian Nielsen’s Master’s thesis [44]. The Horisonten II apartment model
was chosen as it is a representative example of Danish residential buildings, The building
envelope and geometry were derived from the TABULA WebTool [45] and refined accord­
ing to real­world data. Nielsen manually compared real­world building examples to the
TABULA reference building images eventually identifying the floor plan for the Horison­
ten II apartment. He measured exterior dimensions and building hight using land register
maps and visual references to determine the physical geometry of the building with as
much accuracy as possible.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Apartment floor plan [44].
As seen on Figure 3.2 the floor plan was altered by introducing large doors between con­
nected zones to ensure separate outputs for the corridor, living room and kitchen. IDA ICE
outputs are limited to the number of defined zones in the model. If a space is not defined
as a separate zone, detailed outputs for that specific area are not available. Balconies
were modeled as shading objects, the windows are modeled according to TABULA data
as 3­layer low energy windows.
This model serves as a baseline for the simulation study and was further adapted to in­
clude ventilation related dysfunctions, such as blocked terminals, leaky ducts and mis­
placed sensors. Duct leakage is a well­documented problem in HVAC systems, often
resulting from poor sealing practices and degradation over time. Studies suggest that
duct airtightness has not improved at the same rate as building envelope airtightness,
and leaks can lead to significant energy losses due to unintended airflow and pressure
imbalances. Blocked air terminals whether due to user behavior (e.g., closing vents)
or improper installation, can cause airflow disruptions, increased system pressure, and
reduced ventilation effectiveness. Occupant misconceptions about vent closures further
contribute to this issue, as many believe it improves efficiency when, in reality, it neg­
atively affects system performance. Misplaced temperature sensors are a critical but
often overlooked issue in HVAC control systems. Sensor placement directly influences
heat recovery regulation, setpoint accuracy, and system response, yet it is common for
sensors to be installed in suboptimal locations due to misinterpretation of design guide­
lines. Even small deviations in placement can lead to system inefficiencies.
12Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: Floor plan as modeled in IDA ICE [44].
3.2.2
Occupancy
Nielsen [44] explained that the occupants in the apartment will be two adults (2 occupants)
and two kids, one 11 year old and one 5 year old, contributing 0.75 occupant and 0.5 occu­
pant, respectively. The tenants of a building are a large source when it comes to internal
heat gain and moisture production. This contribution to heat and moisture gains depends
on the occupants’ metabolic rate. The metabolic rate is different between bedrooms and
levels of activity and is defined by DS/EN ISO 7730 [46] as 1 met = 58.2 W/m2. Nielsen
assumes that the general metabolic rate of an occupant is 1.2 met for sedentary activity.
However, for bedrooms, an average metabolic rate of 0.9 met is used, which accounts for
values 0.8 (sleeping) and 1.0 (sitting relaxed).
Nielsen [44] used occupancy schedules from Wistoft and Hoang [47] for each zone, based
on a time use survey from Barthelmes et al. [48]. Figures 3.3 and 3.4 show the occu­
pancy schedules for the kitchen (maximum 3 occupants) and master bedroom (maximum
2 occupants).
Figure 3.3: Kitchen/living room occupancy schedule [44].
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: Master bedroom occupancy schedule [44].
Figure 3.5: Bathroom occupancy schedule [44].
Activities such as cooking produce a significant amount of moisture which are also added
to the model. Moisture loads in the kitchen, in addition to occupancy moisture load, can be
seen on figure 3.6. Moisture loads produced during breakfast are 0.17 kg, 0.25 kg during
lunch time on the weekends, and 0.58 kg for dinner. The moisture load and schedule are
based on a method from Smith and Svendsen [49].
Figure 3.6: Moisture production schedule [44].
14Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:23==
3.2.3
Ventilation system
In this study a constant air volume (CAV) balanced ventilation system with a counter flow
heat exchanger was used. Air enters the system and passes through a filter, removing
contaminants from the outside air. The air then undergoes heat recovery and if the supply
temperature setpoint has not been reached, the air temperature is increased by a heating
coil. The system has air temperature sensors at different locations in the air handling unit
to monitor and regulate the temperature of the air supplied to the zones in an effort to
meet the setpoint. The temperature sensors in the supply part of the system are located
after the heat exchanger and before the heating coil. There is also a temperature sensor
that measures the inlet temperature after the heating coil. Ther temperature sensors in
the return ducts are located before and after the heat exchanger. These sensors reg­
ulate the bypass valve and the heating coil to adjust the temperature of the supply air.
The bypass system allows air to bypass the heat exchanger and bring colder external air
into the building if needed. The bypass valve is controlled by a temperature sensor that
measures the air coming out of the heat exchanger and opens when there is no need for
heat recovery. The air leaving the AHU is distributed to the rooms through supply ducts
by fans and returned from the rooms through return ducts.
In this project, the Sabik 210 ventilation unit was used as a reference model due to its
suitability for residential apartments. Furthermore, the manufacturers [50] provide detailed
data on the fan and power curve (Figure 3.7), necessary to accurately model the supply
and return fans. The Sabik 210 is equipped with the functionality of heat recovery, a
required component for meeting the regulation standards [5] explained in Chapter 2.5.
Key characteristics of the Sabik 210 include:
• A high performance, counterflow heat exchanger with an efficiency up to 94%.
• Delivers a maximum airflow of 225 m3/h, sufficient for ventilating small to medium
sized apartments.
• Bypass control.
• The unit is also equipped with automatic control system, which supports demand
controlled ventilation (DCV) with humidity, temperature and CO2 sensors.
Even though the heat exchanger efficiency of the Sabik unit can reach 94% it is set to 90%
in IDA ICE to account for typical system inefficiencies and for a more realistic approach.
The unit’s features align with the goals of this project. Even though the unit is equipped
with different control features like CO2 and humidity sensors, they are not implemented
in the simulations as the system is a constant air volume system and therefore out of the
scope of this project.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.7: Fan/Power curve [50].
The supply and exhaust fans in this project have two different fan curves (Figure 3.8).
They were derived from the fan curves provided by the manufacturer in Figure 3.7. The
graph presents four curves, each corresponding to a different fan speed, illustrating the
relationship between airflow rate and both pressure and power consumption. However,
the actual operating points of the supply and return fans in this study did not align precisely
with the curves provided by the manufacturer. To accurately represent system behavior,
the original curves were adjusted, either shifted up or down, to match the expected oper­
ating conditions determined through system calculations, as shown later in this chapter.
16Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:25==
(a) Exhaust fan curve
(b) Supply fan curve
Figure 3.8: Supply and exhaust fan curves
3.2.4
Air flow rates
The supply and extract airflow rates for each room were decided according to [1] (Table
3.1). As mentioned above, the minimum air supply according to BR18 [5] must be 0.3
L/s/m2 of heated floor area at all times, but the values in table 3.1 show the flow rates
each zone must be able to provide when there is need for more ventilation.
Table 3.1: Supply and extract airflows [1].
Zones
Supply [L/s]
Extract [L/s]
Living room >15 m2
8+0.27 l/(s· m2)
Bedrooms (11­15 m2)
12
Bedrooms <11 m2
8
Bathroom
15
Wardrobe room
6
Kitchen
25
In real­world systems, airflow depends on pressure losses withing the ductwork. However,
IDA ICE does not calculate pressure losses. It is a flow­based system, where the airflow
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
17
==PAGE:26==
delivered to each zone is controlled by predetermined airflow rates. This simplification
means that even though IDA ICE models airflow rates effectively it does not replicate the
behavior of pressure in the duct system.
When determining the amount of supply and extract air volume for each zone, it was
decided to supply and extract the minimum amount of air according to table 3.1, as the
AHU is a constant air volume system. The supply air flow was balanced with the extract
air flow by increasing the volume to each supply zone equally until the total airflow was
the same. The sum of the air flows to each zone is the total supply and extract air flow
rates, given in L/s in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Supply and extract air flows.
Zone
Area
Supply
Return
[m2]
[L/s/m2]
[L/s]
[L/s/m2]
[L/s]
Bathroom
5.49
2.732
15.0
Corridor
3.854
Kitchen
7.604
3.288
25.0
Living room
21.65
0.687
14.9
Master Bedroom
10.6
0.853
9.0
Room 1
8.91
1.014
9.0
Room 2
12.31
1.059
13.0
Walk in
3.267
1.837
6.0
Total
46.0
46.0
3.2.5
Heating and cooling
All zones of the apartment are equipped with default ideal heaters from IDA ICE which
heat up the zones when necessary. The heating setpoint for the zones is 21°C, and the
supply air temperature setpoint is 19°C.
There is no mechanical cooling in the apartment, only natural, PI temperature controlled
cooling from window openings. The PI temperature controller is the default window open­
ing setting in IDA ICE. When a specific zone reaches the cooling setpoint of 25°C, the
windows are opened for the purpose of cooling down the zone. Occupants are also able
to open windows as they please, which they are assumed not to do, except for the inves­
tigation of the misplaced temperature sensor, explained further in this chapter.
3.3
The faults
Three types of dysfunctions were chosen for this project:
1. Blocked air terminals
2. Duct leakage
3. Misplacement of a temperature sensor
The faults chosen had to be both technically feasible to model in IDA ICE and also reflect­
ing issues commonly encountered in residential ventilation systems. These faults align
with challenges observed in residential buildings in Denmark [25], where energy regula­
tions demand high levels of building system performance. By focusing on these three
faults this project will both address real­world challenges and key research objectives
18Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:27==
while providing meaningful insights to improve the operation of residential mechanical
ventilation systems. The literature review demonstrates the relevance of these faults, and
through detailed simulation and manual calculation this project aims to provide actionable
insights that can be directly applied to the building service industry.
3.3.1
Blocked air terminals
In a mechanical ventilation system, air terminals serve as connection points between the
ductwork and indoor spaces, distributing supply or exhaust air. A blocked air terminal
refers to a condition where outlets or inlets are partially or fully closed, restricting airflow.
This can occur due to user interventions (e.g., closing or covering vents), improper main­
tenance, or design flaws.
In order to quantify the impacts of a blocked outlet or inlet, it is necessary to know the air
flow volume and pressure losses in the duct system. From previously decided air flow to
the zones (Table 3.2) the pressure loss of the system was found by designing a ductwork
system for the apartment and calculating the pressure drop manually. A total air flow of
46 L/s corresponds to a system pressure of 32.1 Pa for the return ducts and 51.9 for the
supply ducts that the AHU needs to cover. Corresponding system curves and operating
points are presented in figures 3.9 and 3.10.
Figure 3.9: Fan and system curve for the return ducts.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.10: Fan and system curve for the supply ducts.
A system curve is a graphical illustration demonstrating how much pressure is needed
to provide a specific amount of flow in a system. The curve is derived from the system
design and the relationship between pressure and flow, as expressed in equation 3.1.
p = R · q2
(3.1)
• p: Pressure [Pa]
• R: A constant determined by the characteristics of the system
• q: Flow [m3/s]
The fan curve represents the performance of a fan and shows the relationship between
airflow and the pressure that the fan can generate. The fan curve is based on fan speeds
and is provided by the manufacturer [50]. Each fan speed has its own curve and a higher
speed shifts the curve upward, simultaneously driving more air through the system. In the
case, since the system operates as a Constant Air Volume (CAV) system, it maintains a
single fixed fan speed setting.
If the fan operates at zero resistance, it can provide its maximum airflow capacity, as can
be seen in Graphs 3.9 and 3.10. However, fans are usually part of a ductwork system
made up of different components such as filters, dampers, and fittings. These components
impose resistance that the fan must overcome to maintain a desired airflow. In general,
if a fan curve is steep, changes in pressure drop will not have a large influence on the
amount of air flow. Conversely, if the fan curve is more flat, the air flow is more sensitive
to changes in pressure drops. In this study, the fan curves are relatively steep, meaning
that variations in pressure drop do not cause a drastic decrease in airflow.
The intersection of the fan curve and the system curve represents the operating point
of a system and how the fan should operate. The characteristics of a system play an
important role when fan capacity is estimated [51]. For a fan operating at a fixed speed,
the changes in pressure drop can result in a new total airflow rate. Modifications in the
system that affect pressure drop, such as a blocked outlet or inlet, removal of ductwork,
20Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:29==
or clogged filters, can cause the system curve to shift upward or downward, resulting in a
new operating point.
The resistance in the ductwork system is made up from friction losses, dynamic losses,
and equipment pressure losses [52]. Friction losses produced by the air flow resistance
are influenced by air velocity, duct size, material roughness and duct length. The system’s
dynamic losses cause a pressure drop from variations in air velocity and from fittings such
as bends, T­pieces and terminals. Pressure losses from equipment such as fans, filters
and coils are neglected in these calculations for simplification. The friction losses in the
ducts and dynamic losses at terminals and fittings are calculated from Equations 3.2 and
3.5 respectively. The total pressure drop is the sum of the friction losses and dynamic
losses [53].
∆pl = 1
2ρv2λ 1
Dh
· l
(3.2)
Where
• ∆pl: pressure loss due to friction [Pa]
• l: duct length [m]
• ρ: air density [1.2 kg/m3]
• v: air velocity [m3/s]
• λ: friction factor
• Dh: hydraulic diameter of duct [m2]. For a round duct, the hydraulic diameter is the
same as the actual diameter (D) of the duct.
The friction factor (λ) is a dimensionless value that is used in fluid mechanics to calculate
pressure losses due to friction in pipes or ducts. The friction factor was found in The
Moody Diagram which is a graphical representation of the friction factor as a function of
the Reynolds number and the relative roughness of the duct.
Reynold’s number:
Re = vD
ν
(3.3)
ν: Kinematic viscosity of air [1.5 · 10−5 m2/s]
Relative roughness:
r = ϵ
D
(3.4)
Where ϵ is the absolute roughness of the duct. For galvanized steel ϵ = 0.00015 m [54].
Pressure drop from air speed and duct elements:
∆pd = ξ · pd = ξ 1
2ρv2
(3.5)
Where
• pd: dynamic pressure loss [Pa]
• ξ: pressure loss coefficient, dependent on type of fitting and outlet. Found in figure
3.11.
• ρ: fluid density [1.2 kg/m3]
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
21
==PAGE:30==
• v: air velocity [m3/s]
Figure 3.11: Pressure loss coefficients for different fittings [1].
Characteristics of the ductwork design:
• The AHU unit is located in the kitchen.
• Ducts are round and diameters are 100 mm or 125 mm.
• The material of the ducts was chosen to be galvanized steel. It is one of the most
used metals for ducts and is used in a variety of air handling systems [55].
• Bends and fittings: Smooth 90° elbows, T fittings, both reducing and straight T fit­
tings (figure 3.11).
• Terminal devices: The most popular air terminals from Lindab [56] were selected for
the design. Supply valve KIR and exhaust valve KVG from Lindab product catalog
[57][58].
• The duct layout was designed with the intention of having a low number of bends to
minimize pressure drops.
• Highest air velocity for supply the ducts: 3.7 m/s.
• No changes in elevation.
The duct design layout may be found in figure 3.12
22Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.12: Duct layout in the apartment. Supply ducts are labeled in red and return
ducts are labeled in blue.
The total pressure loss of the system is determined by summing up all the pressure losses
from start to end of each branch. The fan must be able overcome the pressure loss of the
branch with the highest total pressure drop, known as the critical branch. This is typically
the longest branch, but it can also be a shorter branch with significant resistance due
to fittings, bends, or dampers. In this case, the longest branch determines the critical
pressure drop for both the supply and return ducts. To balance the system, dampers are
installed in the other branches to ensure that the pressure drops are equal in order to
achieve the required flow rates in each zone.
Total pressure drop of the system:
p = ∆pl + ∆pd + pt
(3.6)
Where pt is the terminal pressure drop.
The terminal pressure drops were found by inserting the flow amount through each ter­
minal into the Lindqst product configurator [59].
After calculating the highest pressure drop for the duct system in the apartment from
equation 3.6, the same calculations were performed for a system with a blocked terminal.
The valves in the rooms are partially closed by rotating the disc on the air terminal to
control the size of the opening, reducing airflow to/from the zone. This is implemented
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
23
==PAGE:32==
in IDA ICE by decreasing the supply/return flow in the affected zone. The new pressure
drops of the terminals were determined using a nomogram provided for the specific air
terminal (figure 3.13a and 3.13b). In this case the adjustment setting of the disc is rotated
to a = ­ 9 mm for extract terminals with a diameter of 100 mm, and a = 2 mm for supply
terminals with a diameter of 100 mm.
24Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:33==
(a) Nomogram used to determine terminal pressure
losses for a blocked outlet (KVG exhaust valve), for
setting a = ­9 mm [56].
(b) Nomogram used to determine terminal pressure
losses for a blocked inlet (KIR supply valve), for setting
a = 2 mm [56].
Figure 3.13: Nomograms showing the pressure increase as a function of flow when a
terminal valve is adjusted, where ”a” represents the adjustment opening of the terminal
valve in millimeters (mm) affecting airflow resistance and system pressure.
The setting ”a” corresponds to the opening adjustment of the valve or diffuser, which
regulates the air distribution and associated performance metrics. It represents a setting
in millimeters (mm) that influences the performance characteristics of the air valves and
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
25
==PAGE:34==
diffusers. Specifically, it affects:
• Airflow rate (q) [l/s or m3/h]
• Total pressure drop (∆pt) [Pa]
As mentioned above, when the characteristics of the system change, the system curve
moves up or down along the fan curve, depending on if the pressure drop increases or
decreases. When the terminal disc is rotated so that it is almost closed, the pressure drop
in that particular valve increases and the system curve therefore shifts to the left, up along
the fan curve, causing the airflow through the system to be reduced. In order to determine
the new pressure drop through the closed air valve, it is necessary to know how much air
is flowing through it.
To determine the new airflow and pressure drop in the systems with the adjusted terminals,
it was necessary to solve for the airflow (q) that satisfies both the fan curve and the system
curve.
The fan curve, which describes the relationship between airflow (q) and pressure (p(q)),
was derived using fan performance data from the manufacturer. The data points were
plotted in Excel and a polynomial trendline was applied to the data to fit the curve accu­
rately.
The trendline equation, generated by Excel, provided the mathematical representation of
the fan curve. A second order polynomial (p(q) = a · q2 + b · q + c) was chosen based on
its ability to closely match the shape of the fan curve. The coefficients (a, b, and c) were
automatically calculated by Excel, based on the performance characteristics of the fan.
This equation was then used in further calculations to solve for the new airflow volume of
the system.
Similarly, the system curve, which represents the relationship between airflow and pres­
sure drop in the duct system, was defined as S(q) = R · q2, where R is the system
resistance constant. The resistance constant (R) was found from the previously calcu­
lated pressure losses (frictional, dynamic and terminal) for the airflow q. Since the airflow
(q) is unknown beforehand, the calculation was performed iteratively. Using the Goal
Seek function in Excel, the airflow was determined by finding the value of q that satisfies
p(q) = S(q). The iterations provide the new airflow when a terminal is closed, along with
the new pressure drop of the terminal and the total pressure drop of the system.
It was decided to investigate the terminals when the flow is restricted by 50%. The lowest
flow given on figures 3.13a and 3.13b is 5 L/s, so the investigation of a 50% flow reduction
was a reasonable amount to find the pressure drop of the terminals when the opening is
at its lowest setting, a = ­9 mm for the outlets, and a = 2 mm for the inlets. Since it is
difficult to predict the amount of airflow reduction in each zone, this method assumes that
the flow to or from the rest of the zones decreases/increases proportionally with the total
airflow of the system.
Three different scenarios were investigated:
1. Blocked bathroom outlet
Bathrooms are moisture­heavy zones where proper exhaust is needed to prevent
the growth of mold and humidity. The blockage can cause air stagnation in the
bathroom, potentially leading to poor humidity removal and condensation issues.
2. Blocked living room inlet
Since the living room is often the largest and most frequently used space in a home,
26Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:35==
proper ventilation is needed for thermal comfort and air distribution. Restricting a
major inlet might create an imbalance between the amount of supply and exhaust
as the ventilation system is designed for a balanced airflow.
3. Blocked master bedroom inlet
Bedrooms need a constant supply of fresh air for quality sleep and healthy indoor
air. A blocked supply inlet would disrupt fresh air distribution, causing poor air quality
and a potential CO2 build­up. Adequate fresh air supply is necessary for maintaining
healthy indoor air quality as the bedroom is an occupied space for large durations,
especially throughout each night.
3.3.2
Duct leakage
Duct leakage was selected as one of the key dysfunctions for this project due to its com­
monness in real­world systems. All duct systems experience some amount of leakage
[28]. An ideal scenario is where the ducts deliver all of the ventilation’s heat and airflow
capacity to the conditioned spaces, but that is not the case. In practice, a leaky duct can
either lead to increased energy use by adjusted fan settings and possibly a over­ventilated
apartment depending on the location of the ducts. The fan could also not adjust with the
air losses and the air supply to the building will decrease, also depending on the location
of the ducts. In this project, the duct leakage was calculated from the leakage rate equa­
tion 3.7 and modeled in IDA ICE by adjusting the airflow rates in the specific leaky duct
sections, as described further in this chapter.
The definition of ductwork airtightness is the resistance to supply or return air leakage
through the shell of the ductwork [60]. European Standard EN 12237 [61] define the air­
tightness classes of ductwork components/fittings. Airtightness of the components ranges
from class A to D, with A being the leakiest class [60]. EN 16798­3:2017 (EPBD standard)
[62] define the airtightness classes for ductwork systems. The airtightness classes range
from ATC 7 to ATC 1, with ATC 7 being the leakiest (See Table 3.3). The worst case
scenario, ATC 6, was investigated for Sections 1.1, 1.3 and 1.5 in the supply ducts. The
sections are found on figure 3.12.
In this project the duct leakage is calculated from equation 3.7. This calculation method
is inspired by Leprince et al. (2019) [63].
Qleak = x · pn
t · 10−3 · A
(3.7)
Where
• Qleak: The leakage rate through all duct leaks for a given area (A).
• x: Dependent on the airtightness class, found in table 3.3.
• pt: The average pressure difference between the pressure within the duct to be
tested and the pressure of the ambient air. pt is calculated by finding the average
pressure drop at the start and end of each section. The pressure drop is the friction
losses (Eq. 3.2) and dynamic losses (Eq. 3.5) combined. The pressure drop at the
terminals is not included here as the sections.
• n is a pressure difference exponent, n=0.65 is a default value.
• A: Surface area of the duct [m2]
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.3: Airtightness classes for ducts [64].
Airtightness class
x
ATC 7
Not specified
ATC 6
0.0675
ATC 5
0.0270
ATC 4
0.0090
ATC 3
0.0030
ATC 2
0.0010
ATC 1
0.00033
The pressure drop calculations in chapter 3.3.1 were used to find the the average pres­
sure difference (pt) for each section. For the purpose of this investigation, the ducts are
assumed to be located in a suspended ceiling, meaning that any air leakage will not en­
ter the apartment but instead be lost to the ceiling void. Consequently, this results in a
reduction of airflow supplied to the zones.
The simulation model for the duct leakage was set up in such a way that the airflow sup­
plied to the zones was decreased according to the calculated leak volume (Qleak). Conse­
quently, IDA ICE simulates a decrease in the total supply airflow through the AHU. How­
ever, this does not fully reflect real­life conditions, where the airflow entering the supply
ducts remains largely unchanged, but decreases along the duct system due to leakage,
ultimately reducing the flow reaching the zones. This simplification was considered ac­
ceptable, as the primary focus of the results was on the supply zones rather than the AHU.
This scenario includes the hypothesis of a fixed return airflow at the outlets.
3.3.3
Misplacement of temperature sensor
Sensors are a vital technology that can significantly contribute to energy savings even
though they do not reduce energy consumption themselves. The precision of temperature
sensors is important to optimize the building system’s performance [28] and it can be
difficult to place them in an appropriate location. It is fairly common for an installation
technician to misunderstand the intended location of a sensor [65], and it can be only a
matter of centimeters that determine whether the placement is wrong or right.
The inspiration for the investigation of the misplaced temperature sensor came from Christof­
fer Brinch’s Master’s thesis [36] where he diagnoses HVAC system operations and iden­
tifies faulty operational behavior. During the investigation he noticed a significant amount
of faulty bypass valves in the apartments, affecting the operation of the heat recovery
system by causing unintended bypass of the heat exchanger.
The apartment building he investigated had 12 out of 42 apartments with a faulty bypass
valve. The ventilation units are decentralized and are not equipped with a heating coil.
Brinch noticed that the temperature sensors were placed inside of the rooms but not in
the ducts like they were supposed to. When a temperature sensor is misplaced inside the
room, it measures the room temperature instead of the temperature of the air coming out
of the heat exchanger. A correctly placed temperature sensor ensures that the air supplied
to the zones is at the correct temperature. This misplacement caused the bypass valves of
the apartments to be open way more than they should, hindering air from entering the heat
exchanger, and some apartments were even bypassing the heat exchanger over a whole
winter period. While some apartments had bypass valves that were open all the time,
others had periods where the valves would close for short periods of time, which Brinch
28Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:37==
mentions is due to coincidence when the room temperature decreases and reaches the
threshold of the setpoint. This temperature decrease is assumed to be due to window
openings.
In this project, the dysfunction was investigated where the sensor was misplaced in the
Master bedroom. In order to mimic Brinch’s findings, a window opening schedule was
made for the zone. It was assumed that the occupants of the Master bedroom would like
to have their window open during the night, allowing in fresh air while they sleep. This
schedule was made taking into account the predefined occupant and moisture schedules
of the zone 3.4, 3.6. The new window opening schedule can be seen in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Window opening schedule in the master bedroom. Window is fully open (”1”)
during the night time, and completely closed (”0”) during the daytime
As mentioned earlier for the reference case, the windows of the apartment are PI temper­
ature controlled. For the investigation of the misplaced sensor they are still PI temperature
controlled, except when they are kept open (”1”) continuously during the opening sched­
ules. This window opening setting had to be made with a custom control macro in IDA.
Figure 3.15 shows how it was made. The windows in the remaining zones are still PI
temperature controlled only.
Figure 3.15: Control schedule in IDA ICE for window openings in the master bedroom.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
29
==PAGE:38==
During the time of the window opening in the master bedroom the heating was also turned
off in the zone for a realistic approach.
In IDA ICE, this temperature sensor is already built into the heat exchanger, so it is not
possible to move it manually into the room. In order to mimic this, the heat exchanger
schedule was changed from ”always on” to being on only when the room temperature
would drop to the setpoint (19°C), by using the thermostat controller in IDA ICE 3.16.
With these settings the heat exchanger is ”turned off” (i.e. the bypass valve is open)
when the room temperature is above 19°C. But when the windows are opened, and the
room temperature falls to 19°C or lower, the heat exchanger turns back on in IDA ICE
(bypass valve closes again).
Figure 3.16: Heat exchanger control in IDA ICE.
3.3.4
Parametric Simulation Framework
This study uses a parametric simulation approach to investigate the impact of ventilation
faults on IAQ and energy consumption. The parametric investigation consists of modifying
specific input parameters to assess how different conditions influence the severity of the
faults. As previously mentioned, three primary ventilation faults were modeled: blocked
air terminals, sensor misplacement, and leaky ducts. These faults were also considered
under different scenarios and user behaviors to evaluate their impact on system perfor­
mance and IAQ. The following points detail the parameter variations and the scenarios
analyzed.
Blocked Air Terminals:
• To assess how zone airflow reduction impacts CO2 accumulation, simulations were
performed with the bedroom door either open or closed during the night. This anal­
ysis explores whether increased airflow exchange between rooms mitigates CO2
buildup caused by blocked inlets. The analysis focuses on the master bedroom, as
bedrooms are typically the most affected zones for CO2 due to prolonged occupancy
during the night.
• Additionally, the effect of higher occupancy was investigated by introducing a case
where the room is occupied by two adults and a baby, increasing the occupancy
from 2 to 2.5 persons in IDA ICE. The scenarios tested are found in table 3.4.
30Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:39==
Table 3.4: Different paramteric scenarios for the blocked air terminal dysfunction. ”0.5”:
half open door, ”0”: closed door. The normal occupancy for the zone is ”2” which repre­
sents two adults, ”2.5” represents 2 adults and a child.
Valve
Door opening
Occupancy
Reference
Closed
0
2
Scenario 1
Closed
0.5
2
Scenario 2
Closed
0
2.5
Scenario 3
Closed
0.5
2.5
• The numbers in Table 3.4 represent the opening of the doors. ”0.5” suggests that
the door is half open, and ”0” means that the door is closed.
Misplaced Temperature Sensor:
• Effects of varying the degree of window opening at night were examined. Since
users may open windows to enhance ventilation, this scenario tests whether in­
creasing the window opening mitigates or worsens energy consumption caused by
the bypass malfunction. The scenarios tested are found in table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Different parametric scenarios for the misplaced temperature sensor dysfunc­
tion. ”1”: fully open window, ”0.5”: half open window.
Sensor placement
Window opening
Scenario 1
Room
1
Scenario 2
Room
0.5
• The numbers in Table 3.5 represent the opening of the windows. ”1” suggests that
the window is fully open while ”0.5” suggests that the windo is half open.
Leaky ducts:
• The leaky duct scenario was included in the fault analysis to assess its potential
effects on IAQ and energy performance. However, it was not included in the para­
metric study, as its impact was expected to be less sensitive to boundary condition
variations compared to the blocked terminals and misplaced sensor cases.
In each parametric scenario, all other parameters remained constant to isolate the effects
of the boundary conditions.
3.3.5
Energy and IAQ performance Indicators
The analysis of the simulation results is based on key performance indicators related to
indoor air quality (IAQ) and energy consumption. These metrics are used to compare the
impact of ventilation faults under different scenarios.
CO2 levels are widely used to evaluate ventilation effectiveness in occupied rooms [66].
They are also considered an indicator of general IAQ, especially in relation to human
odors [67]. Typical CO2 levels in residential spaces range from 400­1000 ppm and are
generally considered acceptable for indoor air quality. Even though the 1000 ppm limit is
widely used it lacks a strong scientific foundation [68]. According to BR18 [5] ventilation
system performance should be sufficient to ensure a healthy indoor climate in residential
buildings, but it does not specify a maximum CO2 level for residencies. EN 15251 [69]
however, describes that the CO2 limit of 1200 ppm corresponds to the lowest IAQ level,
or IAQ category IV.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
31
==PAGE:40==
Professional organizations suggest keeping indoor relative humidity between 40% and
60% because lower humidity levels can negatively affect the respiratory system [70].
Keeping the RH levels within the range of 40­70% can minimize the survival of viruses
and bacteria [71]. For minimized negative health effects and thermal discomfort, the RH
range of 40­60% is recommended [72]. Studies also show that high humidity (RH above
60%) can lead to mold growth and fungi survival [73], [74].
The following indicators are evaluated:
CO2 Levels:
• One metric used to evaluate the IAQ is the average number of hours per day that
CO2 concentrations exceed 1200 ppm [hours/day].
• Additionally, the average exceedance concentration is calculated to determine by
how much the CO2 levels surpass 1200 ppm.
• Monthly averages of CO2 levels are determined to observe long­term trends and
compare them to the reference case.
Relative Humidity (RH):
• To assess humidity conditions, the percentage of time RH falls outside the ideal
range of 40­60% is determined from simulation results.
• Monthly RH averages are calculated to assess the influence of the ventilation faults
on humidity levels.
Energy Consumption:
• The increase in fuel heating consumption due to ventilation faults is used as an
indicator of energy performance.
• The energy performance of the ventilation system is evaluated by comparing the
total yearly heating consumption (kWh) for the faulty cases against the reference
case. The yearly heating consumption is obtained by summing the total monthly
heating demand from the simulation results. The monthly heating demand is calcu­
lated by multiplying the average heating power (W) by the number of hours in the
month.
32Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:41==
4
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the results of the calculations and IDA ICE simulations are presented and
analyzed. First, the impacts of increased system resistance due to blocked air terminals
are examined and compared to the reference case. Changes in IAQ are also investi­
gated, focusing on CO2 levels and relative humidity. Second, the impact of leaky duct
dysfunctions is analyzed, including IAQ changes, airflow reduction and other related ef­
fects. Finally, the impacts of a misplaced temperature sensor explored, with a focus on
fuel heating energy consumption, bypass valve operation, air temperature variations in
the AHU and IAQ.
4.1
Blocked Air Terminal Results
4.1.1
Airflow changes due to increased system resistance
When an air valve is adjusted to reduce airflow, the pressure drop across the valve is likely
to increase. In the three scenarios investigated in this project, reducing airflow through
the bathroom, living room, and master bedroom valves by 50%, resulted in both local and
global pressure increases. The consequences of this pressure increase are examined
further in this chapter.
The changes in airflow from the different zones when the air terminals are closed can be
found in Figures 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3.
When the extract airflow through the bathroom outlet is reduced by 50%, the total extract
flow in the system is reduced by 16%. Minimal changes occur in the airflow for the walk­in
closet and kitchen; as shown in the graph, it increases by only 0.4%.
Figure 4.1: Flow decrease/increase to the zones for a blocked bathroom outlet
Table 4.1 below provides the airflow values in L/s before and after the increased system
resistance due to the closed bathroom valve.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.1: Flow volume to the extract zones before and after valve blockage in the bath­
room
Original flow [L/s]
New flow [L/s]
Bathroom
15.0
7.5
Walk in closet
6.00
6.02
Kitchen
25.00
25.10
Total flow
46
38.6
When the valve in the living room is adjusted for a 50% airflow reduction, the airflow to the
remaining supply zones increases, while the total supply flow decreases by 8%. Similar
to the blocked bathroom outlet case, the remaining zones are receiving more airflow than
before, or 12% more than in the reference case.
Figure 4.2: Flow decrease/increase to the zones for a blocked living room inlet
Table 4.2 below provides the airflow values in L/s before and after the increased system
resistance due to the closed living room valve.
Table 4.2: Flow volume to the supply zones before and after valve blockage in the living
room
Original flow [L/s]
New flow [L/s]
Master bedroom
9.0
10.1
Room 1
9.0
10.1
Living room
14.9
7.4
Room 2
13.0
14.6
Total flow
46
42.2
34Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:43==
The last scenario investigated for the blocked terminal dysfunction was the supply valve
in the master bedroom. With a 50% flow reduction in the master bedroom, the remaining
zones get a 10% increase in supplied flow, while the total supply flow decreases by 2%.
Figure 4.3: Flow decrease/increase to the zones for a blocked master bedroom inlet
Table 4.3 below provides the airflow values in L/s before and after the increased system
resistance due to the closed master bedroom valve.
Table 4.3: Flow volume to the supply zones before and after valve blockage in the master
bedroom
Original flow [L/s]
New flow [L/s]
Master bedroom
9.0
4.5
Room 1
9.0
10.0
Living room
14.9
16.4
Room 2
13.0
14.4
Total flow
46
45.3
Figures 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 illustrate the interaction between the exhaust fan curve and the sys­
tem resistance curve, showing how changes in ductwork characteristics shift the system
curve and result in a new system flow rate. As seen in the figures, the system curves
have shifted upwards along the fan curve with the increased system pressure, introduc­
ing a new operating point. System curve 2 on the graph represents the new system curve
due to increased resistance in the terminal. As the curve moves to a higher pressure
level, the operating point shifts accordingly. Operating point 2 therefore represents the
flow rate and pressure at which the system operates when the bathroom valve is nearly
closed. Displayed on the graphs are the fan curves, the system curves before and after
valve adjustment, and their corresponding operating points. The graph also displays the
fan curve polynomial equation which was used for the airflow calculations.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.4: Fan and system curve for the blocked bathroom outlet.
Figure 4.5: Fan and system curve for blocked living room inlet.
36Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.6: Fan and system curve for a blocked master bedroom inlet.
4.1.2
IAQ
CO2
Figures 4.7, 4.8 and 4.9 present the weekly average CO2 concentrations when the valves
are blocked, compared to the reference cases. The x­axis represents the number of
weeks, showing how CO2 levels change over the course of the simulation year, with week
1 being the first week in January.
Figure 4.7: Weekly averages for CO2 levels in blocked bathroom outlet.
The blocked outlet case consistently shows higher CO2 levels than the reference case,
with the weekly average increase ranging from 10 to 40 ppm throughout the year.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.8: Weekly averages for CO2 levels, blocked living room inlet
The blocked living room inlet case consistently shows higher CO2 levels than the refer­
ence case, with the weekly average increase ranging from 12 to 46 ppm throughout the
year.
Figure 4.9: Weekly averages for CO2 levels in Master bedroom
Similar to the other cases, the master bedroom case consistently shows higher CO2 levels
than the reference case. The weekly average increase ranges from 29 ppm all the way
up to 323 ppm throughout the year.
Although the blocked valve scenarios in the bathroom and living room show a clear in­
crease in CO2 concentration, a maximum weekly average increase of 40 ppm is not con­
cerning, as the concentrations are not strong to begin with. These results are as expected
38Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:47==
due to low occupancy. Bedrooms however are typically the rooms with the highest CO2
levels in apartments, making them critical zones for IAQ. Figure 4.9 shows that the CO2
weekly averages for the master bedroom are already high for the reference case, with
the faulty scenario taking the concentration levels even higher. The bedrooms have a
constant CO2 source during a large part of the day, where a blocked inlet shows a signif­
icant impact on ventilation efficiency, as fresh air supply is restricted causing the CO2 to
accumulate more rapidly.
Even though the weekly average comparison is a fine indicator of the overall increase in
CO2 levels, it does not represent the actual concentration levels reached during occu­
pancy. The daily CO2 peaks and drops follow a consistent pattern throughout the year
due to the occupancy schedules. For the bathroom, the peaks occur in the mornings and
evenings. For the living room the peaks occur during the morning breakfast hours and
evening dinner hours. For the master bedroom the CO2 levels are the highest around
the time occupants wake up in the morning. When the zones are unoccupied, the CO2
concentration stays around 400 ppm, which is a typical concentration level of outside air.
Figure 4.10 below illustrates daily CO2 trends over a typical week for the master bedroom
as an example.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.10: Daily CO2 trends over the course of a week for the reference and blocked
master bedroom inlet cases
The bar chart on Figure 4.11 below displays the maximum CO2 concentration measured
for each zone during the simulation year. These results show that in reality the actual
CO2 concentration the occupants experience is greater than displayed on the figures
above showing weekly averages.
As observed on Figure 4.11, when the flow is reduced to the master bedroom the CO2
peaks almost reach a concerning 2000 ppm. However, the faulty conditions for the bath­
room and the living room do not seem to cause concerns in regards to CO2 levels, as
they never exceed 1000 ppm and stay within a relatively comfortable range throughout
the day. Therefore, additional calculations on the impact of a blocked inlet on CO2 levels
were conducted only for the master bedroom.
40Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.11: Maximum CO2 concentration in each zone, before and after flow reduction
due to a blocked valve.
Table 4.4: Results of CO2 levels above 1200 ppm in the master bedroom: impact of
varying parameters
The average concentration
exceeding the
1200 ppm CO2 threshold
[ppm]
Hours a day above
1200 ppm
[hr/day]
Reference case
92
5.9
Closed valve
451
8.7
Closed valve + open door
52
0.3
Closed valve + increased occupancy
792
9.0
Closed valve + increased occupancy
+ open door
113
2.1
Table 4.4 shows that a blocked air inlet in the bedroom significantly increases CO2 buildup
and prolongs the time spent above 1200 ppm. Keeping the bedroom door open nearly
eliminates the issue, showing that air exchange with other rooms is crucial for maintain­
ing IAQ. When occupancy is increased, the CO2 exceedance level spikes to 792 ppm,
the highest value in the table, showing that adding another person significantly worsens
CO2 buildup even though the extra occupant is only a child. When the inlet is blocked,
increasing the occupancy has only a minor effect on the duration of CO2 levels above
1200 ppm, with the hours per day increasing by just 0.3 hours compared to normal occu­
pancy. According to the occupancy schedule, the room is fully occupied for approximately
9 hours per night. In the scenario with a blocked inlet and an additional occupant, CO2
levels remain above 1200 ppm for the entire 9 hour occupancy period. This indicates
that under these conditions, inadequate ventilation leads to persistently high CO2 con­
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
41
==PAGE:50==
centrations throughout the night. When the door is opened, the CO2 exceedance drops
significantly to 113 ppm, along with a reduction in the daily duration above 1200 ppm,
showing that keeping the door open greatly reduces CO2 accumulation, even with addi­
tional occupancy.
Perceptions of IAQ can vary greatly with CO2 levels. Gabel et al. [75] found that increased
CO2 levels led to a perception of poor IAQ. Similarly, [76] reported a greater perception
of poor air quality when mean CO2 levels were above 1000 ppm. However, perceived
IAQ does not always correlate with measured CO2 levels. Gabel et al. [75] found that
11% of people reported poor IAQ when experiencing CO2 levels below 1000 ppm. They
also found that approximately 40% of people experiencing CO2 levels above 1000 ppm
reported bad air quality in summer, whereas only 25% did so under the same conditions in
winter. This suggests that perceived IAQ is influenced by other factors such as humidity,
which may explain why poor IAQ is reported more frequently in summer than in winter.
Despite the increase in CO2 levels in the faulty case, it is unclear whether occupants would
perceive a significant decline in IAQ, as perception does not always align with measured
CO2. However, the CO2 buildup in the master bedroom suggests inadequate ventilation
in the faulty case, which could also lead to the accumulation of other pollutants that were
not measured in this study. While IAQ perception is variable, CO2 levels above 1000
ppm have been correlated with increased respiratory, nasal, and fatigue symptoms [75].
In the faulty case, master bedroom CO2 levels frequently exceed 1600 ppm, with peaks
reaching 2000 ppm, suggesting that occupants may be at increased risk of discomfort
or health symptoms. However, as noted by Persily [68], CO2 may act as a proxy for
ventilation quality rather than being the direct cause of symptoms. Poor ventilation can
lead to the accumulation of other indoor pollutants or humidity­related issues, which may
contribute to the reported ([75]) discomfort and health effects [73].
The CO2 increase due to the blockage is higher in winter than in summer which could be
due to more frequent window openings in the summer.
Relative Humidity
Figures 4.12, 4.13 and 4.14 present the weekly average relative humidity when the valves
are blocked, compared to the reference cases. The x­axis represents the number of
weeks, showing how RH levels change over the course of the simulation year, with week
1 being the first week in January.
42Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.12: Weekly averages for RH, blocked bathroom outlet
Figure 4.13: Weekly averages for RH, blocked living room inlet
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.14: Weekly averages for RH in Master bedroom
The largest increase in the weekly averages for the relative humidity throughout the year
for all three cases is 3.5%. These changes in RH are negligible. However, similarly to the
CO2 levels, RH follows a daily pattern influenced by occupancy and moisture production
schedule. Results show that there is no increase in maximum values for the living room
and master bedroom when ventilation was reduced due to blocked inlets. However, in
the bathroom, the maximum RH reached over the simulation period was 74.8% for the
reference case and 83.5% for the blocked bathroom outlet case. Figure 4.15 below shows
an example of the daily RH trends over a typical week for the bathroom.
Figure 4.15: Daily RH trends over the course of a week, showing RH peaks when the
bathroom is occupied.
44Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:53==
The histogram in Figures 4.16, 4.17, and 4.18 illustrate the distribution of relative humidity
(RH) levels, categorized into four ranges which are presented on the x­axis. The figure
compares the percentage of time spent in each RH range for both the reference cases
(orange bars) and the blocked valve cases (blue bars).
Figure 4.16: RH levels in the bathroom when terminal is blocked vs. reference case
Figure 4.17: RH levels in the living room when terminal is blocked vs. reference case
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.18: RH levels in the master bedroom when terminal is blocked vs. reference
case
When the terminals are blocked, RH tends to exceed 60% more often than the reference
case. However, it also reduces time spent below 30% RH. In total, for all three scenarios,
the reference case experiences more time outside the ideal RH range. These results
suggests that blocking the air valves slightly improved overall RH levels in the apartment.
However, the increase is minimal across all cases, suggesting that RH is relatively stable
despite major ventilation changes. Holsteijn et al. [67] reported similar findings where they
found that RH remained within acceptable levels regardless of ventilation system type or
flow rates, suggesting that humidity is less sensitive to airflow variations than other IAQ
parameters like CO2. Hesarki et al. [77] also found that RH was within acceptable levels
despite large reductions in ventilation.
The pattern in RH for the apartment throughout the year is as expected, lower in the winter
and increases in the summer. Several sources show that the likelihood of respiratory
infections is increased during winter when there is more exposure to low indoor RH [78],
[71]. The faulty cases reduced the time spent in low temperatures. Even though the
bathroom is experiencing a 50% decrease in extract flow, the moisture contents remain
low, as RH mainly rises due to showers. The low occupancy in the zone ensures that
the system is still able to remove enough moisture over time to prevent a significant RH
buildup.
4.1.3
Energy consumption
The following Figures 4.19, 4.20, and 4.21 compare fuel heating energy consumption
between the blocked valve cases and the reference cases.
46Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.19: Bathroom energy consumption
Figure 4.20: Living room energy consumption
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.21: Master bedroom energy consumption
The figures above show a noticeable increase for the fuel heating consumption in all
three cases. The faulty cases have lower exhaust and supply airflow rates, less warm
air is therefore available to transfer heat to the supply air. Even if return air temperatures
are similar for the reference and faulty cases, the reduced volume of warm air passing
through the heat exchanger could be the reason the results show lower heat recovery,
and consequently higher fuel heating.
4.1.4
Alternative Fault Modeling Approaches
Without an on­site measurement, it is not possible to know how much the flow to each
zone changes with the valve adjustments. In this scenario it was assumed that if the
occupants would close the valve as much as they could (a=­9 mm or a=2 mm), the extract
flow through the valve would decrease by 50%, and the remaining zones would have a
flow increase/decrease proportional to changes in the total flow.
For a different scenario, it could be assumed that the flow through all valves would de­
crease proportionally with the total flow. That means that the zones with a fully open valve,
would have the same amount of flow reduction as the closed valves, which is not realistic.
In reality, the distribution depends on pressure losses and system characteristics. There­
fore, zones with fully open valves should not experience the same flow reduction as the
nearly closed valves.
When the valve in the zones are nearly closed, the local pressure increases significantly
while minimal pressure changes occur at the other valves. It is assumed that the dampers
in the ducts are not adjusted to these pressure changes, leading to an imbalance in the
system. Since the pressure in the duct with the blocked valve is now higher than in the
other zones, airflow is more likely to redistribute toward them, as air tends to follow the
path of least resistance. However, the actual amount of redistributed air depends on the
total decrease in airflow. Therefore, it is unlikely that the airflow will not be equally reduced
across all three zones.
As explained earlier, a flow reduction of 50% was assumed for all zones. As seen in the
nomograms (Figure 3.13a and 3.13b) in Chapter 3.3.1, and Figure 4.22 below, if the flow
48Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:57==
reduction through the terminals had been less than 50%, the pressure increase would
have been greater, leading to an even greater total flow reduction.
Figure 4.22: Nomogram, illustrating how flow and pressure act when a terminal valve is
closed
Figure 4.22 shows an example of this, where instead of the flow from the bathroom being
reduced by 50% (7.5 L/s), the flow is reduced by 40% (9 L/s), resulting in a higher pressure
drop. This means that if the occupants adjusted the valve to a = ­9 mm for exhaust valves
(as shown in Figure 3.13a) or a = 2 mm for supply valves (as shown in Figure 3.13b), and
the flow reduction to/from the zone were, for example, only 40%, the total system pressure
would be higher, leading to a greater overall reduction in airflow. If that were the case, the
flow reduction in the critical zone would be lower (40% instead of 50%), resulting in less
significant IAQ effects for that particular zone, while the flow reduction in the remaining
zones would increase (due to increased total flow reduction).
4.2
Duct Leakage Results
The pressure generated by the supply fan and causes the air to move through the ducts
to its intended zone, creates a pressure difference between the inside of the duct and
the surrounding areas. If the ducts are not airtight the pressure difference causes the air
to escape the ducts into the extended ceiling instead of being delivered to the intended
zones. This means that the actual supply airflow intended to be delivered to the zones
decreases which leads to reduced ventilation efficiency.
Figure 4.23 shows the layout of the three supply duct sections that were investigated for
the leaky duct dysfunction. The static pressure drop in the ducts at the start and end of
each section are also presented in the figure.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.23: Supply ducts divided into three section to investigate the leakage behavior.
The volume flow through the leaks (Qleak) for different airtightness classes are presented
in Tables 4.5, 4.6, and 4.7. The tables shows results for leaks through Section 1.1, 1.3
and 1.5. As mentioned in the Methods chapter, the investigation was conducted for the
worst case scenario, ATC 6, which is marked in red. As shown in the tables, Qleak is only
minimal for the other airtightness classes, and therefore assumed to have no significant
impact on the system. The Qleak equation presented in the tables below shows that the
leak depends on the static pressure in the ducts (pt). As shown in Figure 4.23 above,
Section 1.3 and 1.5 are located further from the AHU, resulting in lower static pressure
compared to Section 1.1, and consequently, lower Qleak. It is also noted that the size of
the surface area of the duct affects the leak volume, both Sections 1.3 and 1.5 have a
smaller surface area than Section 1.1.
50Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:59==
Table 4.5: Calculation results for the airtightness classes for ducts in Section 1.1
Airtightness classes
Limit value air leakage,
fmax [m3/s/m2]
Qleak through Section 1.1,
fmax ∗A [L/s]
x
x ∗p0.65
t
∗10−3
ATC 6
0.0675
0.00075
2.4039
ATC 5
0.027
0.00030
0.9616
ATC 4
0.009
0.00010
0.3205
ATC 3
0.003
0.00003
0.1068
ATC 2
0.001
0.00001
0.0356
ATC 1
0.00033
0.00000
0.0118
Avg. pressure drop in Section 1.1 (pt)
40.9 Pa
Surf. area of Section 1.1 (A)
3.19 m2
Table 4.6: Calculation results for the airtightness classes for ducts in Section 1.3
Airtightness classes
Limit value air leakage,
fmax [m3/s/m2]
Qleak through Section 1.3,
fmax ∗A [L/s]
x
x ∗p0.65
t
∗10−3
ATC 6
0.0675
0.00053
0.6145
ATC 5
0.027
0.00021
0.2458
ATC 4
0.009
0.00007
0.0819
ATC 3
0.003
0.00002
0.0273
ATC 2
0.001
0.00001
0.0091
ATC 1
0.00033
0.00000
0.0030
Avg. pressure drop in Section 1.3 (pt)
24.1 Pa
Surf. area of Section 1.3 (A)
1.15 m2
Table 4.7: Calculation results for the airtightness classes for ducts in Section 1.5
Airtightness classes
Limit value air leakage,
fmax [m3/s/m2]
Qleak through Section 1.5,
fmax ∗A [L/s]
x
x ∗p0.65
t
∗10−3
ATC 6
0.0675
0.00041
0.2738
ATC 5
0.027
0.00016
0.1095
ATC 4
0.009
0.00005
0.0365
ATC 3
0.003
0.00002
0.0122
ATC 2
0.001
0.00001
0.0041
ATC 1
0.00033
0.00000
0.0013
Avg. pressure drop in Section 1.5 (pt)
16.1 Pa
Surf. area of Section 1.5 (A)
0.67 m2
When performing the calculations, an assumption was made that the flow decrease would
be divided equally between the affected zones, as it can be difficult to estimate the exact
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
51
==PAGE:60==
loss of flow in each zone due to variations in system resistance, pressure distribution, and
air leakage characteristics, especially when the exact location of the leak is unknown.
The zones affected by the duct leakage are presented in Figures 4.24, 4.25, and 4.26.
For Section 1.1, the Master bedroom, Living room, Room 1 and Room 2 are all affected
by the leak. The same zones are affected by the leak in Section 1.3, but for a leak in
Section 1.5, only the Living room and Room 2 are affected. The figure illustrates the
difference between the intended airflow to the zones and the actual airflow reaching them
after leakage. It also displays the percentage reduction in airflow.
Figure 4.24: Airflow changes due to leaky ducts in Section 1.1 compared to the reference
case.
Figure 4.25: Airflow changes due to leaky ducts in Section 1.3 compared to the reference
case.
52Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.26: Airflow changes due to leaky ducts in Section 1.5 compared to the reference
case.
It is evident from the figure that the flow reduction in the zones is minimal. The largest
reduction occurs in Section 1.1 where the flow decreases by 6.6% in the master bedroom
and room 1. For Section 1.3 the largest flow reduction is only 1.7%, while for Section 1.5
it is just 1%. The total flow reduction is also minimal and can be considered negligible for
Sections 1.3 and 1.5. However, the total flow reduction in Section 1.1 was more significant
at 5.2%, which called for further simulations of its impact.
4.2.1
IAQ
The master bedroom along with room 1 were found to be the critical zones for the leaky
duct in Section 1.1. As analyzed earlier in Chapter 4.1 (Blocked Air Terminal Results),
the master bedroom exhibited the highest CO2 levels when the supply flow was reduced
by 50%. However, the relative humidity levels for the master bedroom showed minimal
deviation from the reference case. Since the flow reduction is only 6.6% in this scenario,
RH simulations were deemed unnecessary. The CO2 results for the master bedroom and
room 1 under leaky duct conditions in Section 1.1 are presented in Figures 4.27 and 4.28.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.27: Weekly average CO2, comparison for a decreased airflow in the Master
bedroom due to a leaky duct.
Figure 4.28: Weekly average CO2, comparison for a decreased airflow in Room 1 due to
a leaky duct.
The leaky duct conditions consistently show increased CO2 levels for both rooms, with a
weekly average increase up to 90 ppm for the Master bedroom and 29 ppm for Room 1
throughout the year. Week 39 had the largest increase in CO2 levels for both the Mas­
ter bedroom and Room 1, with a weekly average increase of 90.3 ppm and 29.2 ppm,
respectively.
CO2 levels in Room 1 never go above 1200 ppm (or even 1000 ppm) when flow to the
zone is reduced (same for the reference case). Table 4.8 shows how the master bedroom
exceeds the 1200 ppm threshold throughout the year.
54Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:63==
Table 4.8: Results of CO2 levels above 1200 ppm in the master bedroom (MB) and room
1 (R1): impact of duct leakage in Section 1.1
The average concentration
exceeding the
1200 ppm CO2 threshold
[ppm]
Hours a day above
1200 ppm
[hr/day]
MB reference
92
5.9
MB leaky duct Sec.1.1
103
6.3
R1 reference
0
0
R1 leaky duct Sec.1.1
0
0
4.2.2
Energy consumption
Duct leakage has an impact on how air is distributed to different zones. In this case, since
the system has leak in the supply ducts, some of the air will be lost into the suspended
ceiling. While the leak does not impact airflow through the AHU or its associated energy
consumption, it does affect the zone heating as seen in Figure 4.29.
Figure 4.29: Total zone heating for the reference case compared with zone heating with
a leak in duct Sections 1.1, 1.3, and 1.5
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.30: Zone heating for each zone for a leak in duct Section 1.1, compared with the
reference case
As mentioned above, the supply flow reduction is the same for the master bedroom (MB)
and room 1 (R1). Figure 4.30 shows that despite that, fuel heating is increased in MB,
and decreased in R1.
When zones experience changes in supplied airflow, the variations in heating demand
across zones are not solely caused by the reduction in mechanical supply airflow, but
are mainly driven by how each zone reacts in terms of infiltration, exfiltration, and heat
transfer.
Even if two zones experience the same supply flow reduction, their heating demand may
increase, decrease, or remain the same depending on how airflow travels in the building.
Pressure balance is a major driver, influencing infiltration and exfiltration patterns. Zones
with higher infiltration of cold air (e.g., the master bedroom, see Table 4.9) see an increase
in heating demand, while zones with minimal infiltration (e.g., Room 1) see a decrease in
heating demand, despite the same supply reduction.
An example of how MB and R1 experience different infiltration rates despite having the
same supply flow volume in both scenarios, is presented in Table 4.9.
56Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:65==
Table 4.9
Leaky duct Section 1.1
Master bedroom
Room1
Fault case
Reference case
Fault case
Reference case
External outflow [L/s]
3.28
3.37
0.95
1.28
External inflow [L/s]
2.90
2.51
0.30
0.26
Internal outflow [L/s]
8.19
8.30
7.84
8.06
Internal inflow [L/s]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Mechanical inflow [L/s]
8.44
9.04
8.44
9.04
Total flow [L/s]
11.33
11.55
8.74
9.30
Infiltration %
25.6%
21.7%
3.4%
2.8%
Mechanical supply %
74.5%
78.3%
96.6%
97.2%
The two critical zones, as seen on Figure 4.30 are the walk­in closet (W) and MB. These
two zones account for the majority of the total heating increase in the apartment following
the duct leakage. Table 4.10 presents changes in heating demand, heat losses from
airflows, and heat transfer through walls and floors for the W and MB. The data shows
that heat loss from airflows has significantly increased in both zones, leading to higher
heating demand. The results indicate that the increased heating demand in these zones
is primarily due to higher heat losses from airflows rather than conductive heat transfer
through surfaces. Other heating sources in the apartment were not directly affected by
the duct leakage, and therefore not included in the table.
Table 4.10: Heating in the critical zones. Values are presented in kWh per simulation
year.
Walk­in closet
Master bedroom
Heating from heating units [kWh]
Fault case
171
219
Reference case
146
180
Heat from airflows [kWh]
Fault case
­77
­721
Reference case
­51
­683
Heat from walls/floors [kWh]
Fault case
­32
­30
Reference case
­33
­28
Additionally, zones such as the kitchen experienced a minimal increase in heating demand
despite no direct change in mechanical airflow. This suggests that duct leakage affects
the overall building pressure balance, causing indirect changes in infiltration and heat loss
patterns.
4.2.3
Discussion
The impact of duct leakage in this study is minimal due to the low static pressure in the
system and the small surface area of the ducts. As a result, leakage has only a small
influence on both indoor air quality and energy consumption. The maximum average
pressure drop in the ducts is only 24 Pa, and the total duct surface area per section
is relatively small, which limits the potential for air loss through the ducts. A potential
limitation of this study is that leakage was only calculated and modeled in sections, where
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
57
==PAGE:66==
the duct surface area is max. 3.2 m2. If the entire supply duct had been included in the
leakage analysis, the total surface area would increase to approximately 5 m2, resulting
in a higher leakage rate and a more noticeable effect on system performance. However,
such a small increase in duct surface area is only minimal when it comes to the leakage
rate. It is clear that leaky ducts in small decentralized CAV systems in multifamily homes
do not appear to have significant effects on IAQ and energy performance due to the small
duct surface area and low system pressure drops. This is supported by a study conducted
by Hammarlund (1992) [79], which examined duct leakage in 60 apartments and 12 single­
family homes. The study found that duct leakage was significantly lower in the apartments
where duct runs were shorter and pressure levels in the ducts was lower.
Previous studies have examined the influence of duct leakage in various building types
and ventilation systems. Leprince et al. [63] and Hurel et al. (2023) [6] (2019) analyzed
leakage in residential ventilation systems with duct surface areas ranging from 7.4 to 23.6
m2 and minimum pressure differences of 80 Pa, significantly higher than the conditions
in this study. Their findings indicate that duct leakage can greatly impact residential ven­
tilation performance, particularly in systems with higher pressures. This suggests that the
limited impact observed in this study is largely due to the system’s lower pressure levels
and compact duct network. While their focus was not specifically on IAQ, they demon­
strated that leakage can lead to compromised system efficiency and higher energy losses.
This suggests that the lower leakage impact observed in this study is due to the smaller
duct network and lower static pressures.
Marigo et al. (2023) [25] specifically examined CAV systems and found that duct leakage
had minimal effects on total energy consumption but led to worse IAQ levels, which closely
aligns with the findings of this study. They observed that: ”Despite not having important
impacts on thermal and electrical energy consumption, leakage in the ducts decreases
the air supplied to the building, causing lower IAQ in the indoor environment.”
However, a key difference between their results [25] and those from this study, is the
heating system response. Marigo et al. (2023) found a slight decrease in system heating
consumption, whereas in this study, heating consumption in the zones slightly increased.
The findings from Palmiter et al. (1995) [80] however, align with the results of this study.
They concluded that reducing duct leaks by 70% improved heating efficiency by more than
16%, suggesting that reduced leakage ensures more conditioned air reaches the intended
spaces, reducing the need for additional heating. Bailly et al. [4] investigated the impacts
of a duct leak in an exhaust only mechanical ventilation system. They assumed a fixed
exhaust airflow rate through the terminals and found that increased leakage could raise
heating consumption by more than 13% due to higher exhaust airflows from the heated
zones. That means that there is more heated air being extracted from the zones resulting
in a higher heating demand. This could be related to the findings in this project as the
leak through the supply ducts decreases heated air volume to the zones and consequently
increases space heating. However, they explain that the exhaust flow through the outlets
is often not fixed in real­world systems, which is also worth noting for this study, and
introduces uncertainty in the results. These inconsistencies may stem from differences
in the simulation setup. In this study, the AHU was simulated in such a way that the total
supply airflow through the AHU was reduced, rather than modeling leakage along the
ducts. In reality, the airflow entering the supply ducts would remain nearly unchanged,
but as air passes through the ductwork, some of it would be lost through leaks, reducing
the amount of air reaching the zones. This simplification was considered acceptable since
the focus of this study was on the effect of leakage on the conditioned supply zones rather
than the AHU itself. However, this simplification may slightly overestimate the increase in
58Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:67==
zone heating demand compared to real­life conditions.
4.3
Misplaced temperature sensor results
Key Considerations for the Misplaced Temperature Sensor Dysfunction:
1. The temperature sensor controls the bypass valve which regulates whether air flows
through the heat exchanger or bypasses it.
2. The bypass valve opens when the sensor measures temperatures > 19°C and
closes for temperatures≤19°C.
3. The temperature sensor is misplaced in the master bedroom.
4. The impacts of the misplaced sensor depend on the temperature measurements
inside the the room.
5. The room temperature depends on the window opening schedule, the size of the
window opening, and the zone heating.
Before analyzing the results of a misplaced temperature sensor it is important to see
how a properly functioning heat exchanger and bypass valve operate. Figure 4.31 shows
an example of a correct operation of the bypass valve along with corresponding AHU
temperatures. Displayed on the figure are the outside temperatures, inlet temperatures
and the setpoint temperature, which was set at 19°C. The red line shows how the bypass
valve is opening and closing. On the right­hand­side axis, a value of 0 indicates that
the bypass valve is closed, while a value of 1 indicates that it is fully open. The room
temperature is not displayed in Figure 4.31 as it does not influence the operation of the
heat exchanger or the bypass valve under normal operating conditions. It is however
displayed in Figure 4.32 as it has a significant impact on the faulty system.
Figure 4.31: Temperatures in an AHU with a correctly working bypass valve. The x­axis
represents the hours of the day.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
59
==PAGE:68==
In a properly functioning system, the temperature sensor is located inside the duct, mea­
suring the air temperature as it leaves the heat exchanger, which corresponds to the inlet
temperature of the air delivered to the zones. What is observed in the figure above is that
the inlet temperature is consistently equal to the setpoint, due to the air flowing through
the heat exchanger. The heat exchanger transfers heat from the return air to warm the
incoming colder outside air until it reaches the setpoint temperature. As observed in the
figure, the bypass valve opens when the inlet temperature exceeds the 19°C setpoint (at
13:00), and closes again when it drops below 19°C (at 20:00). When the bypass valve is
open (from 13:00­20:00), the outside air bypasses the heat exchanger, causing the inlet
temperature to equal the outside air temperature during that period.
Figure 4.32 however, shows how the bypass valve operates when the temperature sensor
is misplaced inside the Master bedroom when the window is fully open. Displayed on this
figure are the outside temperatures, room temperatures (which the misplaced sensor is
measuring), the inlet temperatures and the setpoint, along with the bypass valve openings.
As shown in the figure, the room temperature drops to 11°C during the night. While this
may not be realistic for many apartments, it represents an assumed worst­case scenario
for cooling due to window openings. However, as discussed later in this chapter, it does
not represent the worst­case scenario for the impacts of the sensor dysfunction.
Figure 4.32: AHU temperatures for a sensor misplaced in the Master bedroom (window
fully open). The x­axis represents the hours of the day.
When a temperature sensor intended to measure the air exiting the heat exchanger in­
stead measures room temperature, it leads to incorrect system responses, affecting both
the AHU and heating system operation. Due to heat generated by the heating unit in the
zone, which maintains a setpoint of 21°C, the temperature sensor measures higher tem­
peratures than it normally would, especially during heating season. Consequently, the
bypass valve remains open, allowing cool outside air to flow into the zones.
As previously mentioned, the window openings for this dysfunction scenario were altered
60Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:69==
in ordered to mimic Brinch’s [36] findings. The impacts were investigated for a fully open
window, and a half open window. The windows are opened during the night and the heat­
ing is turned off in the meantime. As seen in figure 4.32, the room temperature decreases
during the night time while cold air flows into the room. As the temperature drops below
the 19°C setpoint (at 23:00), the misplaced sensor sends a signal to the bypass valve,
which then closes. In the morning (at 7:00), when the windows are closed and heating
turned back on, the room temperature increases. When the room temperature reaches
the 19°C setpoint again, the bypass valve opens. This causes the AHU to supply cold air
to the zones, as can be seen from the yellow line in the graph 4.32.
Figure 4.33 below shows how the bypass valve operates when the temperature sensor is
misplaced in the master bedroom and window opening decreased to 50%. It is observed
when the window is only 50% open it has a minimal impact on room temperature. Since
the window opening is reduced, the room temperature is not dropping as significantly
during the night time, and staying close to the 19°C setpoint threshold. The bypass valve
operation is directly influenced by this temperature stability. When the room tempera­
ture reaches 19°C, the bypass valve closes, allowing the heat exchanger to recover heat.
However, due to the relatively small temperature drop in the zone, the heat exchanger
is able to quickly reheat the inlet air to 19°C, causing the bypass valve to reopen shortly
after. This results in frequent on­off cycling of the bypass valve throughout the night. This
repetitive cycling indicates inefficient system operation, as the bypass valve continually
opens and closes rather than maintaining stable heat recovery, as it does when the win­
dow is fully open. The reduced window opening leads to a prolonged period of bypass
valve opening, diminishing the effectiveness of the heat exchanger.
Figure 4.33: AHU temperatures for a sensor misplaced in the Master bedroom (window
half open). The x­axis represents the hours of the day.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
61
==PAGE:70==
4.3.1
Energy consumption
The graph below (Figure 4.34) illustrates the percentage of time that the bypass valve
stays open for three scenarios. When the sensor is misplaced in the Master bedroom
with fully open windows during the night, the bypass valve is open 70% of the time. When
the sensor is misplaced in the Master bedroom with half open windows during the night,
the bypass valve is open 93% of the time, whereas with the correct sensor placement
(for both window opening scenarios), the valve is only open 8% of the time. This sug­
gests that by placing the temperature sensor in the wrong location significantly impacts
the system’s operation, leading to an excessive bypass opening. The incorrect sensor
placement increases unnecessary bypass operation and reduces system performance.
Figure 4.34: How much the bypass valve is open throughout the year.
The bypass valve being open 8% of the year is a realistic amount for a climate like Den­
mark. It indicates that the heat exchanger is effectively warming up the air supply to the
apartment. Compared to the valve being open 70­93% of the time with a misplaced sen­
sor, the correct placement dramatically improves system efficiency as can be observed
in Figure 4.35.
62Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.35: Energy consumption comparison for a misplaced sensor.
The sensor being misplaced in the room causes a large increase in heating demand for
the apartment as the fuel heating energy consumption majorly increases in both window
opening scenarios. The fully open window allows for lower room temperatures during
the night, which results in higher heating demand when the zone heating is turned back
on in the mornings. The half open windows cause less decrease in room temperatures,
and therefore result in lower heating demand before and after sensor misplacement. An
example of how the two different window opening scenarios influence the room temper­
atures is shown in Figure 4.36. A fuel heating energy consumption of up to 5179 kWh
represents a significant increase. Brinch [36] does not provide specific numerical values
for the additional energy demand caused by bypass malfunctions in his study. However,
he emphasizes the severity of the issue, stating that ”the incorrect installation of the inlet
sensor has an extremely large negative impact on energy efficiency.”
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.36: An example of how the room temperature decreases with varying window
openings.
Figures 4.37 and 4.38 below show how the zone heating increases with lower inlet tem­
peratures. Presented on both figures is the return temperature as well as the inlet tem­
perature, and the heating demand for the Master bedroom, shown over the course of one
week.
Figure 4.37: Correct sensor placement ­ Heating in the zone, return temperatures and
inlet temperature (fully open window).
64Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.38: Misplaced sensor ­ Heating in the zone, return temperatures and inlet tem­
peratures (fully open window).
A comparison of the two graphs (4.37 and 4.38) shows how the heating in the bedroom
increases when the inlet temperatures are lower. It is observed that the return tempera­
tures for both cases are the same, (21­22°C), even though there is a large difference in
the inlet temperatures. The figures clearly show that lower inlet temperatures result in a
higher heating demand in the bedroom. This increased heating demand ensures that the
system maintains its minimum heating setpoint of 21°C, which it does in both cases.
4.3.2
IAQ
In this scenario, investigating the impact of a misplaced sensor on IAQ is not meaning­
ful. This is because altered window openings in the simulation model introduce additional
natural ventilation at night, significantly lowering CO2 levels. Additionally, the master bed­
room remains unoccupied during the day, meaning CO2 levels are not affected by this
specific HVAC dysfunction. While it would be possible to analyze thermal performance
in these simulations, any observed effects would primarily result from the window open­
ings rather than the misplaced sensor itself. Since the window openings were modified
solely to assess the misplaced sensor’s impact, the effects they have on IAQ and thermal
comfort does not represent the actual dysfunction scenario being investigated. Although
the misplaced sensor causes the system to supply very low temperatures to the room
during the day, it does not significantly affect occupant thermal comfort, as the room is
unoccupied during that period. The primary consequence of the misplaced sensor is its
effect on the bypass valve operation and fuel heating energy consumption.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
65
==PAGE:74==
66Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:75==
5
Conclusion
This thesis has investigated the impact of three common dysfunctions in residential me­
chanical ventilation systems: blocked air terminals, duct leakage, and misplaced tem­
perature sensors. Through dynamic simulations using IDA ICE, the study assessed the
influence of these faults on indoor air quality (IAQ), and energy consumption in a typical
Danish residential apartment.
Increased system resistance from blocked air terminals led to an overall reduction in air­
flow, causing higher CO2 concentrations in affected zones, particularly in bedrooms. The
parametric study showed that partially opening bedroom doors during the night could mit­
igate some of the negative IAQ effects by allowing for increased air exchange between
rooms.
Duct leakage reduced the amount of supply air delivered to the conditioned spaces, re­
sulting in lower ventilation rates, decreased indoor air quality and increased zone heating
consumption. However, the impact was minimal, suggesting that duct leakage has a lim­
ited effect on CAV systems in small apartments.
Misplacement of the supply air temperature sensor resulted in incorrect system responses,
causing the bypass valve in the heat exchanger to remain open unnecessarily.
This
dysfunction led to excessive heat losses, increasing the overall heating demand of the
apartment significantly. Window opening behavior influenced the extent of the impact,
with more significant energy losses observed in cases where windows were fully opened,
compared to only half opened.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
67
==PAGE:76==
68Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:77==
6
Future Work
This study has demonstrated the significant impact of ventilation system faults—including
blocked air terminals, duct leakage, and misplaced temperature sensors—on indoor air
quality, and energy consumption in residential buildings. While the findings provide valu­
able insights into the consequences of these dysfunctions, several areas remain open for
further investigation to refine the understanding of system behavior and optimize future
ventilation system designs.
One limitation in the analysis of blocked air terminals was the uncertainty in airflow re­
distribution within the ventilation system. The redistribution of airflow when a terminal is
blocked was based on assumptions rather than direct measurements, leading to poten­
tial inaccuracies. Future work could include physical measurements of pressure changes
in terminals and actual volume reductions to provide more precise results. Conducting
experimental studies with real ventilation systems would allow validation of the simulated
findings and offer more robust conclusions.
A key limitation in the misplaced temperature sensor scenario was the fixed window open­
ing schedule, which assumed that windows were opened every night throughout the year.
This is unlikely to reflect actual occupant behavior, which varies based on season, tem­
perature, and personal habits. Future research could incorporate behavioral studies and
occupant surveys to develop a more realistic window opening model. By integrating data­
driven schedules derived from real user interactions, future studies could yield more ac­
curate predictions of the energy impact caused by sensor misplacement.
This study focused on a constant air volume (CAV) system. However, modern ventilation
systems increasingly rely on smart ventilation strategies [26], such as variable air vol­
ume (VAV) control, which adjusts airflow dynamically based on demand. Future research
could examine how the same faults (e.g., blocked terminals, duct leakage, and sensor
misplacement) affect VAV systems.
As discovered from the literature review, most studies focus on analyzing and improv­
ing leakage in supply ducts; therefore, this study selected them as the focus. However,
research has shown that return duct leakage can also influence HVAC performance, par­
ticularly by introducing unfiltered air into the system. Bryant (2001) [81] studied 9 single­
family houses and found that all of the duct leakage was on the return side. Similarly,
Hammarlund (1992) [79] found that 90% of the 12 homes they tested had return duct
leakage, compared to 85% of the supply ducts. In a case of return ducts, the surrounding
pressure is higher than the pressure inside the duct, which causes air to leak into the duct
rather than out of it, as occurs with supply ducts. If there is a leak in the return ducts, the
system pulls unfiltered air from the extended ceiling (or where the duct is located), due to
the negative pressure inside the ducts caused by the exhaust fan. This unfiltered air may
contain dust, fibers, or other contaminants, causing the filter to clog more quickly [82].
Future investigation could further research return duct leakage and its effects on indoor air
quality and energy efficiency. This would provide a more comprehensive understanding
of how both supply and return ducts contribute to overall HVAC system performance.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
69
==PAGE:78==
70Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
J. Kurnitski. “Residential Heat Recovery Ventilation/ edited by Jarek Kurnitski. RE­
HVA.” In: 2018.
[2]
Valérie Leprince, François Rémi Carrié, and Maria Kapsalaki. “Building and duct­
work airtightness requirements in Europe–Comparison of 10 European countries”.
In: 38th AIVC Conference, Ventilating Healthy low­energy buildings, Nottingham,
UK. (2017), pp. 13–14. URL: https://www.aivc.org/resource/building-and-ductwork-
airtightness-requirements-europe-comparison-10-european-countries.
[3]
Andy P Jones. “Indoor air quality and health”. In: Atmospheric environment 33.28
(1999), pp. 4535–4564.
[4]
Adeline Bailly, Franck Duboscq, and Romuald Jobert. “Impact of a poor quality of
ventilation systems on the energy efficiency for energy­efficient houses”. In: 35th
AIVC Conference, Vent. Airtightness T, AIVC, Poland. (2014).
[5]
Bygningsreglementet. URL: https://www.bygningsreglementet.dk/tekniske-bestemmelser/
22/krav/.
[6]
Nolwenn Hurel, Valérie Leprince, and Marcus Lightfoot. “Financial impact of leaky
ductwork in buildings–a calculation tool to raise awareness”. In: 43rd AIVC Confer­
ence “Ventilation, IEQ and health in sustainable buildings.” (2023).
[7]
Lone H Mortensen and Niels C Bergsøe. “Air tightness measurements in older Dan­
ish single­family houses”. In: Energy Procedia 132 (2017), pp. 825–830. URL: https:
//vbn.aau.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/269254728/Open_Access_Article.pdf.
[8]
W Borsboom et al. “Technical Note AIVC 68 Residential Ventilation and Health; In­
ternational Energy Agency”. In: Energy in Buildings and Communities Programme:
Lozenberg, Belgium (2016). URL: https://www.aivc.org/resource/tn-68-residential-
ventilation-and-health.
[9]
Gaëlle Guyot et al. “Residential smart ventilation: a review”. In: [Research Report]
LBNL­2001056 (2017). URL: https://hal.science/hal-01670527/.
[10]
John D Spengler. “Sources and concentrations of indoor air pollution.” In: Indoor
Air Pollution: A Health Perspective(Samet JM, Spengler JD, eds.). Baltimore:Johns
HopkinsUniversity Press, 33–67 (1991).
[11]
World Health Organization et al. “WHO guidelines for indoor air quality: selected
pollutants”. In: (2010).
[12]
Introduction to Indoor Air Quality. 2024. URL: https://www.epa.gov/indoor- air-
quality-iaq/introduction-indoor-air-quality#immediate.
[13]
Pawel Wargocki, David P Wyon, and P Ole Fanger. “Productivity is affected by the
air quality in offices.” In: Proceedings of Healthy Buildings 2000, Helsinki, Finland
(2000).
[14]
JL Savin and A Bernard. “Improvement of the ventilation and building air tightness
performance in occupied dwellings in France”. In: 4th International Symposium on
Building and Ductwork Air Tightness–BUILDAIR, Berlin. 2009.
[15]
Linquip Team. Mechanical Ventilation System, Types, Advantages and Disadvan­
tages. 2024. URL: https://www.linquip.com/blog/mechanical-ventilation-system/.
[16]
Whole­House Ventilation. n.d. URL: https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/whole-
house-ventilation.
[17]
Juha Jokisalo et al. “Performance of balanced ventilation with heat recovery in resi­
dential buildings in a cold climate”. In: International Journal of Ventilation 2.3 (2003),
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
71
==PAGE:80==
pp. 223–236. URL: https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/epdf/10.
1080/14733315.2003.11683667?needAccess=true.
[18]
J Zemitis and A Borodinecs. “Energy saving potential of ventilation systems with
exhaust air heat recovery”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and En­
gineering. Vol. 660. 1. IOP Publishing. 2019, p. 012019.
[19]
Renato M Lazzarin and Andrea Gasparella. “Technical and economical analysis
of heat recovery in building ventilation systems”. In: Applied thermal engineering
18.1­2 (1998), pp. 47–67.
[20]
Arefeh Hesaraki and Sture Holmberg. “Demand­controlled ventilation in new resi­
dential buildings: Consequences on indoor air quality and energy savings”. In: In­
door and Built Environment 24.2 (2015), pp. 162–173.
[21]
In focus: Energy efficiency in buildings. 2020. URL: https://commission.europa.eu/
news/focus-energy-efficiency-buildings-2020-02-17_en.
[22]
Romuald Jobert and Gaëlle Guyot. “Detailed analysis of regulatory compliance con­
trols of 1287 dwellings ventilation systems”. In: Proceedings of the 34th AIVC–3rd
TightVent–2nd Cool Roofs’–1st Venticool Conference. (2013). URL: https://www.
aivc.org/resource/detailed-analysis-regulatory-compliance-controls-1287-dwellings-
ventilation-systems.
[23]
Atze Boerstra et al. “Residential ventilation system performance: outcomes of a field
study in the Netherlands”. In: 33rd AIVC Conference. (2012).
[24]
F. Durier A. Janssens R. Carrié. “Securing the quality of ventilation systems in resi­
dential buildings: existing approaches in various countries”. In: Edited Proceedings
AIVC­TightVent International Workshop, Brussels (2013), p. 3.
[25]
Marco Marigo et al. “Fault impact analysis of ventilation systems in residential build­
ings: A simulation­based case study in Denmark”. In: Energy and Buildings 292
(2023), p. 113150.
[26]
Ge Song et al. “A systematic literature review on smart and personalized ventila­
tion using CO2 concentration monitoring and control”. In: Energy Reports 8 (2022),
pp. 7523–7536.
[27]
Gaëlle Guyot, Max H Sherman, and Iain S Walker. “Smart ventilation energy and
indoor air quality performance in residential buildings: A review”. In: Energy and
Buildings 165 (2018), pp. 416–430.
[28]
Kurt W Roth et al. “Energy impact of commercial building controls and performance
diagnostics: market characterization, energy impact of building faults and energy
savings potential”. In: Prepared by TIAX LLC for the US Department of Energy.
November. 412pp (2005).
[29]
Nolwenn Hurel and Valérie Leprince. “Impact of ventilation non conformities: cal­
culation methodology and on­site examples”. In: Presented at the 42nd AIVC­10th
TightVent­ 8th venticool conference, Rotterdam, The Netherlands (2022). URL: https:
//www.aivc.org/sites/default/files/AIVCProceedings_041.pdf.
[30]
Eds. J. Hyvärinen and S. Kärki. “Building Optimization and Fault Diagnosis Source
Book”. In: Annex 25, International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Conservation in
Buildings and Communities programme, Technical Research Centre of Finland (1996).
[31]
Mangesh Basarkar et al. “Modeling and simulation of HVAC faults in EnergyPlus”.
In: Lawrence Berkeley National Lab. Berkeley, CA, United States (2011).
[32]
M Modera et al. “Improving the Energy Efficiency of Residential Air­Distribution Sys­
tems in California”. In: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Report LBNL­ 30886
(1992).
72Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:81==
[33]
Nicolás Carbonare et al. “The influence of occupancy behaviour on the performance
of mechanical ventilation systems regarding energy consumption and IAQ”. In: 38th
AIVC Conference “Ventilating Healthy LowEnergy Buildings (2017).
[34]
Meghan Overdeep. Should You Close Vents In Unused Rooms During Winter? An
HVAC Expert Explains. 2024. URL: https://www.southernliving.com/should-you-
close-vents-in-unused-rooms-in-winter-8764480.
[35]
Should You Close Vents In Unused Rooms During Winter? An HVAC Expert Ex­
plains. 2020. URL: https://apollohome.com/blog/closing-air-vents/.
[36]
Christoffer Haug Brinch. Performance analytics and ongoing commissioning of res­
iden tial ventilation andheatingsystems. Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark, 2020.
[37]
Niclas Björsell et al. “IDA indoor climate and energy”. In: Proc. of the 6­th IBPSA
Conference. Citeseer. 1999, pp. 1035–1042.
[38]
Tobias Maile, Martin Fischer, and Vladimir Bazjanac. “Building energy performance
simulation tools­a life­cycle and interoperable perspective”. In: Center for Integrated
Facility Engineering (CIFE) Working Paper 107 (2007), pp. 1–49.
[39]
Drury B Crawley et al. “EnergyPlus: creating a new­generation building energy sim­
ulation program”. In: Energy and buildings 33.4 (2001), pp. 319–331.
[40]
B Birdsall et al. “Overview of the DOE­2 building energy analysis program”. In: Re­
port LBL­19735m rev. w, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, CA (1990).
[41]
Peter Fritzson and Vadim Engelson. “Modelica—A unified object­oriented language
for system modeling and simulation”. In: ECOOP’98—Object­Oriented Program­
ming: 12th European Conference Brussels, Belgium, July 20–24, 1998 Proceedings
12. Springer. 1998, pp. 67–90.
[42]
Martin Otter and Hilding Elmqvist. “Modelica overview”. In: URl: https://www. model­
ica. org/education/educationalmaterial/lecture­material/english/ModelicaOverview. pdf
(2001).
[43]
Aslihan Senel Solmaz. “A critical review on building performance simulation tools”.
In: Alam cipta 12.2 (2019), pp. 7–21.
[44]
Christian Nicolai Nielsen. Climate Change and Smart Ventilation. Brovej, Building
118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark, 2020.
[45]
Tobias Loga, Jens Calisti, and Britta Stein. TABULA WebTool. 2020. URL: https:
//webtool.building-typology.eu/#bm.
[46]
DanskStandard DS/EN ISO 7730. “Ergonomics of the thermal environment – An­
alytical determination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the
PMVand PPDindices and local thermal comfort.” In: (2006).
[47]
Siri Wistoft and To Quyen Hoang. “Detailed Modelling of Mechanical Ventilation and
Occupancy Behaviour in Danish Residences Using a Commercial Building Simula­
tion Tool”. MA thesis. DTU, 2019.
[48]
Verena M Barthelmes et al. “Profiling occupant behaviour in Danish dwellings using
time use survey data”. In: Energy and Buildings 177 (2018), pp. 329–340.
[49]
Kevin Michael Smith and Svend Svendsen. “The effect of a rotary heat exchanger
in room­based ventilation on indoor humidity in existing apartments in temperate
climates”. In: Energy and Buildings 116 (2016), pp. 349–361.
[50]
SABIK 210 heat recovery unit. URL: https://en.ventilatory.net/sabik-210.html.
[51]
Fan Curves Explained: A Complete Guide. 2024. URL: https://integracontrols.com/
fan-curves-explained/#elementor-toc__heading-anchor-2.
[52]
A Bhatia. “HVAC­how to size and design ducts”. In: Continuing Education and De­
velopment, Inc 877 (2001), p. 89.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
73
==PAGE:82==
[53]
Pump Curve and System Curve. 2023. URL: https://www.chembrium.com/blog/
pump-curve-and-system-curve.
[54]
Surface and roughness coefficients. URL: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/
surface-roughness-ventilation-ducts-d_209.html.
[55]
Badran M Salim, Omar M Yousf, and Firas M Younis. “Experimental Investigation on
the Influence of Duct Material on the Heat Gain to Air Flow”. In: 2019 International
Engineering Conference (IEC). IEEE. 2019, pp. 64–67.
[56]
Product catalog. Accessed 2024. URL: https://www.lindab.com/Catalog/.
[57]
KIR Valve. URL: https://www.lindab.com/Catalog/ventilation-systems/air-diffusion/
air-valves/supply-air/kir/?sort=popularity&display=16&page=1.
[58]
KVG Exhaust Valve. URL: https://www.lindab.com/Catalog/ventilation-systems/air-
diffusion/air-valves/exhaust-air/kvg/?sort=popularity&display=16&page=1.
[59]
Lindqst product configurator. URL: https://www.lindqst.com/airborne/calculator/
default.aspx?productcode=KIR.
[60]
What is ductwork airtightness? URL: https://tightvent.eu/faqs/what-is-ductwork-
airtightness.
[61]
EN 12237:2003 CEN. “Ventilation for buildings ­ Ductwork ­ Strength and leakage
of circular sheet metal ducts.” In: (2003).
[62]
CEN. European Standard EN 16798­3:2007. “Energy performance of buildings ­
Ventilation for buildings ­ Part 3: For non­residential buildings ­ Performance re­
quirements for ventilation and room­conditioning systems (Modules M5­1, M5­4)”.
In: (2017).
[63]
Valérie Leprince, Marcus Lightfoot, and Jelmer de Jong. “Impact of ductwork leak­
age on the fan energy use and sound production of central mechanical ventilation
units in houses”. In: (2019).
[64]
How is the ductwork airtightness quantified? URL: https://tightvent.eu/faqs/how-
is-the-ductwork-airtightness-quantified.
[65]
David Sellers et al. Control system design guide. Tech. rep. Lawrence Berkeley Na­
tional Lab. (LBNL), Berkeley, CA (United States), May 2003. DOI: 10.2172/840026.
URL: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/840026.
[66]
Bjarne W Olesen et al. “The use of CO2 as an indicator for indoor air quality and
control of ventilation according to EN16798­1 and TR16798­2”. In: Mitsubishi Elec­
tric R&D Centre, Politecnico di Torino: Torino, Italy (2020).
[67]
Ir Rob CA van Holsteijn et al. “Improving the energy and IAQ performance of ventila­
tion systems in Dutch dwellings”. In: International Journal of Ventilation 14.4 (2016),
pp. 363–370.
[68]
Andrew Persily. “Challenges in developing ventilation and indoor air quality stan­
dards: The story of ASHRAE Standard 62”. In: Building and Environment 91 (2015),
pp. 61–69.
[69]
CEN. Indoor environmentalinput parameters for design and assessment ofenergy
performance of buildings addressing indoorair quality, thermal environment, lighting
andacoustics. EN15251. 2007.
[70]
n.a. What is the ideal indoor humidity? Accessed February 2025. URL: https://www.
condair.co.uk/industry-guidelines-and-regulations-on-indoor-humidity#:~:text=The%
20majority%20of%20professional%20bodies%20recommend%20an%20ideal,leading%
20to%20an%20impaired%20respiratory%20immune%20system%20response..
[71]
Anthony V Arundel et al. “Indirect health effects of relative humidity in indoor envi­
ronments.” In: Environmental health perspectives 65 (1986), pp. 351–361.
[72]
Thomas Alsmo and Catharina Alsmo. “Ventilation and relative humidity in Swedish
buildings”. In: Journal of Environmental Protection 5, 1022­1036 (2014).
74Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:83==
[73]
William J Fisk, Quanhong Lei­Gomez, and Mark J Mendell. “Meta­analyses of the
associations of respiratory health effectswith dampness and mold in homes”. In:
Indoor air 17.LBNL­59363 (2006).
[74]
Haoxiang Wu and Jonathan Woon Chung Wong. “Temperature versus relative hu­
midity: Which is more important for indoor mold prevention?” In: Journal of Fungi
8.7 (2022), p. 696.
[75]
Charlotte Gabel et al. “Seasonal indoor air quality, self­reported health and comfort
amongst tenants living at Danish multi­family social housing sites”. In: Indoor and
Built Environment (2024). URL: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/
1420326X241274516.
[76]
Charlotte Gabel et al. “The prevalence and association of measured and perceived
indoor air quality, housing characteristics, and residents’ behavior and health”. In:
Frontiers in Environmental Health 3 (2024).
[77]
Arefeh Hesaraki, Jonn Are Myhren, and Sture Holmberg. “Influence of different ven­
tilation levels on indoor air quality and energy savings: A case study of a single­
family house”. In: Sustainable Cities and Society 19 (2015), pp. 165–172.
[78]
JH Hemmes, Kcf Winkler, and SM Kool. “Virus survival as a seasonal factor in in­
fluenza and poliomyelitis”. In: Nature 188.4748 (1960), pp. 430–431.
[79]
J Hammarlund et al. “Enhancing the Performance of HVAC and Distribution”. In:
Proceedings of ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings. 1992.
[80]
L Palmiter. Measured efficiency improvements from duct retrofits on six electrically
heated homes. Final report. Tech. rep. Electric Power Research Inst.(EPRI), Palo
Alto, CA (United States), 1995.
[81]
John A Bryant and R Perez. “A Residential Duct Leakage Case Study on’Good
Cents’ Homes”. In: (2001).
[82]
The Effects of Dirty Air Filters on Your HVAC System. April 24, 2023. URL: https:
//www.leecompany.com/resources/the- effects- of- dirty- air- filters- on- your- hvac-
system/.
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
75
==PAGE:84==
76Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
==PAGE:85==
Impact of System Dysfunctions and User Behavior on Residential Mechanical Ventilation Performance: A
Simulation Study
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
