==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Segmentation methods of arteries in
patients scanned with
[64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
Authors
Asta Kristensen Vølund & Vera M. Bruun Frederiksen
s180457 | s193046
bvr494 | tbn916
Supervisors
Andreas Kjær, Rasmus Ripa & Johanne Straarup Madsen
3. February 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this project the use of a deep learning-based segmentation model for segmentation of carotid
arteries on CT scans was investigated.
The purpose of this project was to automatize the
carotid artery segmentation, which could then be used for extraction of PET values. Within
this project a total of 192 CT scans were manually annotated. Based on these annotations, an
nnUNet segmentation model was trained. From the model-predicted segmentations, PET values
were extracted and metrics were computed. The model performance was evaluated based on
various statistics, such as Bland-Altman plots and the intraclass correlation coeﬀicients (ICC).
Furthermore, the intra- and inter-rater variability was investigated and compared to the vari-
ability between the model predictions and the manual annotations.
The model revealed promising results, with fast segmentation predictions, an excellent ICC
and a performance comparable to the intra- and inter-rater variability.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
i
==PAGE:3==
Resume
I dette projekt er brugen af en deep-learning-baseret segmenteringsmodel blevet undersøgt, med
henblik på segmentering af carotiderne ud fra CT-skanninger. Formålet med dette studie var
at automatisere segmenteringen af carotiderne, som efterfølgende kunne bruges til at ekstra-
here PET-værdier.
I alt er 192 CT-skanninger blevet manuelt annoteret.
Baseret på disse
annoteringer, blev en nnUNet segmenteringsmodel trænet.
Fra modellens prædikterede seg-
menteringer kunne PET-værdier udtrækkes og kvantitative mål udregnes.
Modellens perfor-
mance blev evalueret baseret på diverse statistiske analyser, blandt andet Bland-Altman plots
og intraclass correlation coeﬀicient (ICC). Derudover blev intra- og inter-rater variabiliteten
undersøgt, for at kunne sammenholdes med variabiliteten mellem modellens prædikterede seg-
menteringer og de manuelt annoterede segmenteringer.
Overordnet set, viste modellen lovende resultater, med hurtige segmenteringsprædiktioner,
en fremragende ICC og en performance, der var sammenlignelig med intra- og inter-rater vari-
abiliteten.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
A. car. dxt.
Arteria carotis dextra (right carotid artery)
A. car. sin.
Arteria carotis sinistra (left carotid artery)
AI
Artificial intelligence
ANN
Artificial neural network
ASD
Average symmetrical surface distance
CI
Confidence interval
CT
Computed tomography
CVD
Cardiovascular disease
DOTATATE
Oxodotreotide
ECM
Extracellular matrix
FDG
[18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose
FOV
Field of view
HPC
High performance computing
HU
Hounsfield units
ICC
Intraclass correlation coeﬀicient
LDL
Low-density lipid
LoA
Limits of agreement
LOR
Line of response
NaF
[18F]-sodium fluoride
NEN
Neuroendocrine neoplasm
NET
Neuroendocrine tumors
PCC
Pearson’s correlation coeﬀicient
PET
Positron emission tomography
PMT
Photomultiplier tube
ROI
Region of interest
SMC
Smooth muscle cell
SUV
Standardized uptake value
SST2
Somatostatin receptor subtype-2
TBR
Target-to-background ratio
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Resume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Atherosclerosis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
PET/CT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Data
19
4
Methods
22
4.1
Manual annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Data pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Data split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Model configuration and training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Extraction and computation of metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Results
30
5.1
Model training and inference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Target mask . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
Intra- and inter-rater variability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion
47
6.1
Isolated model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Intra- and inter-rater variability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Clinical significance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
Performance comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.5
Qualitative evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
iv
==PAGE:6==
6.6
Evaluation methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.7
Limitation of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.8
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Conclusion
56
8
References
57
A Learning curves
61
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
v
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Each year 17.9 million lives are lost as a result of cardiovascular disease (CVD), making it the
leading cause of death globally [1]. Atherosclerosis is known to be the main underlying cause
of CVD, and it plays a key role in many cardiovascular events, such as stroke and heart at-
tacks [2]. To improve patient outcomes, there is a need for accurate, non-invasive methods for
staging atherosclerosis severity. A field that is gaining attention is the use of PET imaging,
for atherosclerosis diagnosis and staging. PET is a versatile imaging modality, and with a vast
selection of radiotracers, it is now possible to target specific elements of atherosclerotic plaque
development. So far, 17 different tracers have been used clinically for imaging atherosclerosis.
Several of these were designed for other uses, but have been repurposed for cardiovascular imag-
ing.
[18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), the most commonly used PET radiotracer, has been used
for imaging of atheroschelrotic plaques, due to its ability to detect inflammatory activity. How-
ever, the tracer is not cell type-specific and has a high background uptake. In contrast, the tracer
DOTATATE targets a specific inflammatory marker and has a low background uptake in the
heart. Labeled with either 64Cu or 68Ga, DOTATATE targets pro-inflammatory macrophages.
This means that the tracer has a high specificity towards cellular inflammatory activity, which
makes it a perfect candidate for assessment of the inflammation that is known to occur in high-
risk atherosclerotic plaques.
68Ga- and 64Cu-DOTATATE have demonstrated potential, for
discrimination of high- and low-risk plaques and monitoring of effectiveness of therapy, however,
further research is still required. [3]
Jensen et al. (2022) [4] investigated how PET imaging with Cu-DOTATATE as a marker for
atherosclerotic inflammation, can be used for staging of CVD. They were able to link the Cu-
DOTATATE uptake in the carotid arteries, with different stages of CVD. The results of this
study are promising. However, in order to obtain an assessment of PET uptake for a single scan,
the anatomical structures must be annotated manually. Manual annotation is a time-consuming,
labor-extensive task, which is subject to variability between annotators. This lack of eﬀiciency
and consistency limits the clinical applicability of the method. A solution to this challenge is to
automatize the annotation process.
The aim of this project is to implement an AI-based segmentation model, which can provide
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
1
==PAGE:8==
a fast annotation of both carotid arteries, that can be used for PET uptake assessment. More-
over, this method will be compared to the manual annotation technique.
Deep neural networks have proven effective for the task of automated segmentation of
anatomical structures [5] [6]. Therefore, we will train a deep learning-based segmentation model
with the state of the art algorithm; nnUNet [7].
A dataset of 192 contrast-enhanced 64Cu-
DOTATATE PET/CT scans has been provided, from patients with varying degrees of CVD.
The model will be trained and evaluated based on this dataset, and multiple PET metrics
will be examined. With the results of this project, we hope to demonstrate the potential of
automated segmentation in medical applications such as Cu-DOTATATE PET/CT imaging.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
2
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the vessel wall in large and medium-sized
arteries. While largely asymptomatic in its early stages, atherosclerosis can lead to heart attacks,
stroke and other ischemic disease with great clinical implications. Atherosclerotic heart disease
is responsible for 85% of all deaths from cardiovascular disease (CVD), making it the leading
cause of mortality. One third of all deaths worldwide are caused by CVD. [8]
2.1.1
The arterial wall
Arteries deliver oxygenated blood from the heart to the tissues. Compared to veins, arteries
have a small lumen and a thick vessel wall. The vessel wall consists of three layers: tunica intima,
tunica media, and tunica externa. Tunica externa is a layer of connective tissue comprising the
outermost layer of the vessel wall. It is made up of collagenous and elastic fibers. The tunica
media provides the vessel with its contractile ability. It consists of smooth muscle cells (SMCs)
and elastic fibers. Tunica intima is the innermost layer of the vessel wall, and is lined with
endothelium towards the vessel lumen. The endothelium is a monolayer of endothelial cells that
acts as a barrier between the blood in the lumen and the inner parts of the vessel wall. [9]
2.1.2
Atherogenic risk factors
There are several risk factors for developing atherosclerosis. Among the modifiable risk factors
are hypercholesterolemia, especially an elevation of low-density lipid (LDL) cholesterol level,
smoking, obesity, visceral fat, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, physical inactivity, stressful life
patterns, elevated C-reactive protein blood levels and serum homocysteine levels. Increasing
age, a family history of cardiovascular disease and male sex are non-modifiable risk factors. [10]
2.1.3
Pathophysiology of atherosclerosis
Figure 2.1 illustrates the stages in the development of an atherosclerotic plaque. The pathophys-
iology of atherosclerosis will be described in this section.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.1: Schematic of the stages in atherosclerotic plaque formation [11]
Lesion initiation
The development of atherosclerosis is initiated when the endothelial wall becomes dysregulated
and unable to maintain homeostatic conditions.
The disruption of the normal conditions is
caused by the atherogenic risk factors in combination with local hemodynamic conditions.
In straight vessels the relatively high wall shear stress on the vessel wall imposed by laminar
blood flow contributes to endothelium cell alignment and modulation of the wall’s physiological
function. Where the vessel branches the blood flow becomes turbulent and as a result the wall
shear stress imposed on the endothelium is decreased, resulting in changes in endothelial cell
appearance and function. Additionally, the turbulent flow causes LDLs to remain in the area
for longer. Thus, the endothelium is especially vulnerable to dysfunction at bifurcations and
branch points. Risk factors such as hyperlipidemia, hypertension, smoking and diabetes mellitus
contribute to atherosclerosis through a reduction in the availability of nitric oxide. Nitric oxide
protects against atherosclerosis by being involved in the reduction of platelet aggregation, tissue
oxidation and inflammation, activation of thrombogenic factors and in cell growth, proliferation,
and migration.
Dysregulation of the vessel wall predisposes to lipid infiltration, monocyte recruitment, and
oxidative stress, see ’Lesion initiation’ in Figure 2.1.
The lipid infiltration consists of retention of LDLs in the intima, which in combination with
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
4
==PAGE:11==
an inflammatory response caused by the recruitment of monocytes and other inflammatory cells
marks the initiation of atherosclerosis.
Formation of fatty streaks
Inflammatory recruitment makes monocytes adhere to the vessel wall and subsequently migrate
across the endothelial cell basement membrane into the intima space. Here they differentiate
into macrophages; either M1, pro-inflammatory, or M2, anti-inflammatory, phenotype.
M1
macrophages further promote monocyte recruitment, LDL internalization and propagation of
the inflammatory response.
High concentration of LDLs in the blood plasma increases the
infiltration of LDLs through the endothelium. In the inflammatory environment of the intima
the LDLs are oxidized. Oxidized LDLs further contribute to the pro-inflammatory response
of the endothelial cells and the macrophages. In an attempt to remove the excess amount of
cholesterol macrophages engulf the LDLs. Large amounts of oxidized LDLs accumulate inside
the macrophages and SMCs, which become foam cells. An atherosclerotic lesion, the fatty streak,
is formed. See ’Fatty streak’ in the figure. [11]
Development of a fibrous plaque
As atherosclerosis progresses fatty streaks develop into fibrous plaques, which consist of a necrotic
core covered by a fibrous cap. The necrotic core is a cell-free and lipid-rich area at the center
of the lesion. It develops as a result of an impaired removal of apoptotic cells, i.e. efferocytosis,
resulting in an accumulation of cell debris from dying foam cells. This creates an inflammatory
environment, with high oxidative stress and low availability of nutrients, which in combination
with activation of receptors involved in death signaling and inhibition of survival pathways, fur-
ther promotes the death of neighboring cells, such as SMCs and macrophages. The phagocytosis
of dead cells and lipids by macrophages becomes defective in advanced atherosclerosis, and the
macrophages undergo necrosis in their failed attempts to engulf cell debris, leaving cholesterol
crystals to accumulate in the lesion.
The necrotic core is highly thrombogenic, but formation of thrombosis is avoided by the
fibrous cap, which separates the necrotic core and the vessel lumen. The fibrous cap consists
of SMCs and extracellular matrix (ECM). When growth factors are emitted from foam cells,
SMCs migrate from the media to the intima, where they undergo proliferation and produce
ECM, which constitute the fibrous cap of the atherosclerotic plaque.
In advanced atherosclerosis, plaques can become calcified. The calcification is initiated by
matrix vesicles that are released upon the death of macrophages and SMCs. A mineralized ma-
trix is generated and calcium is deposited in the ECM, resulting in a bone-like formation within
the plaque. At first microcalcifications are formed, which later develop to larger calcifications.
Although calcification often increases as the atherosclerosis advances, the degree of calcification
is not directly related to the risk of plaque rupture. Plaque vulnerability is instead affected by
the location of the plaque, the calcification type, and the surrounding environment. See ’Fibrous
plaque’ in the figure. [11]
Plaque rupture
Plaques with a large necrotic core, a thin fibrous cap and an increased inflammatory response
are vulnerable to rupture, see ’Plaque rupture’ in the figure. Death of SMCs cause a reduction in
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
5
==PAGE:12==
the production of ECM, and the cap thins out and becomes weaker. Prolonged exposure to the
pro-atherogenic environment increases the vulnerability of the plaque. Inflammation contributes
to all stages of the plaque development, and in the late stages it promotes the instability of the
fibrous cap, increasing the risk of rupture. Often, the inflammation will not be generalized, but
rather specifically located in the cap and shoulder of the plaque.
When subjected to the hemodynamic forces a vulnerable plaque may rupture, exposing the
subendothelium to the blood. To cover the wound, platelets adhere to the subendothelial colla-
gen and become activated. When activated the platelets recruit more platelets that aggregate
in the area. Pro-thrombotic elements from the lipid core trigger the coagulation cascade. The
coagulation cascade leads to the production of thrombin, which ultimately leads to the forma-
tion of fibrin. Platelets and threads of fibrin form a well-arranged structure that makes up the
thrombus. Although the thrombus successfully heals the wound and decreases the risk of further
rupture, the risk of clinical implications is not alleviated. Along with the thrombus formation,
growth of the intima towards the luminal side is also triggered, leading to constriction of the
lumen. If the vessel becomes partially or fully obstructed and the blood flow is reduced it results
in ischemia: a reduced delivery of oxygen to the tissues that the affected vessel perfuses. If the
thrombus detaches it will travel through the circulatory system as an embolus, until it occludes
a smaller vessel causing local ischemia, organ dysfunction, or potential infarction. If treated in
time, for example with administered lipid lowering treatment, the consequences of a plaque rup-
ture can be avoided, by stopping the inflammatory response and maintaining an adequate vessel
lumen. Although less common than plaque rupture, plaque erosion can also cause thrombus
formation. [11]
2.1.4
Clinical complications
The clinical implications and resulting symptoms of plaque rupture depend on where in the
circulatory system the thrombus or embolus causes vessel obstruction. Atherosclerosis can lead
to symptoms in most organs of the body, but the consequences are the most severe, when blood
supply is obstructed to the heart and brain. Atherosclerosis can cause peripheral arterial disease,
atherosclerotic renovascular disease, coronary artery disease and stroke. [2]
Figure 2.2: Schematic of the (left) carotid artery [12]
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
6
==PAGE:13==
The leading cause of death within CVDs is coronary artery disease, followed by stroke [13]. The
most common type of stroke, is ischemic stroke; a loss of blood supply to an area of the brain,
which leads to neurological symptoms and damage. Ischemic stroke can be caused by thrombosis
within an artery in the brain, that cuts off blood supply to a certain area, or by an embolism,
that detaches from an upstream, unstable atherosclerotic plaque and clots the lumen of a smaller
vessel in the brain. Embolisms in the brain often originate from the bifurcation of the carotid
arteries, as cerebral blood supply is delivered by these arteries, and due to the fact that this site
is vulnerable to endothelial dysfunction and plaque development, as previously mentioned. [14]
The carotid arteries are located on both right and left side of the neck. Each artery consist
of the common carotid artery, which bifurcates into the internal and external carotid artery. A
schematic drawing of the left carotid artery can be seen in Figure 2.2. The right carotid artery,
arteria carotis dextra (a. car. dxt.) branches from the brachiocephalic artery, whereas the
left carotid artery, arteria carotis sinistra (a. car. sin.) branches from the aortic arch. The
bifurcation typically occurs around the level of the fourth or fifth cervical vertebra, where it
splits into a. car. externa, which perfuses the face, and a. car. interna, which perfuses the brain.
[15]
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
7
==PAGE:14==
2.2
PET/CT
2.2.1
Computed Tomography
Computed tomography (CT) is a medical imaging modality that uses X-rays to create anatomical
images of cross-sectional slices.
X-rays are attenuated, when they travel through an object, e.g. the tissues of a patient being
scanned. The intensity of an X-ray beam, I, will be attenuated exponentially in relation to the
distance it travels, z, such that:
I = I0e−
∫
µ(z)dz,
(2.1)
where I0 is the intensity of the incident beam and µ(z) is the linear attenuation coeﬀicient, which
varies depending on the density of the tissue. The attenuation is mainly caused by Compton
scattering and photoelectric absorption, and it depends on the X-ray energy.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the principle behind backprojection (a) without a filter and
(b) filtered [16]
When CT is acquired, X-rays are generated by an X-ray tube and are emitted as a beam that
goes through the patient, before the attenuated X-rays are measured by X-ray detectors.The
result is a one-dimensional projection of the X-ray intensity, from which the corresponding
attenuation coeﬀicients can be derived, by isolating µ i Equation 2.1. The projection is captured
from a number of evenly spaced angels around the patient to create the sinogram from which
a CT image can be computed. A commonly used technique is filtered backprojection, which
is illustrated in Figure 2.3. The attenuation values are projected onto all pixels in the image,
and the process is repeated for each of the projections at different angles. The resulting image
is a blurry representation of the object.
To make the image sharper, a filter is applied to
the projections. The filtering is often performed in the Fourier domain. Note that although the
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
8
==PAGE:15==
example in Figure 2.3 is two-dimensional, modern day systems will often often acquire projections
in a helical trajectory and with a cone-shaped X-ray beam, complicating the geometry of the
backprojection. Nevertheless, the underlying principle remains. [17] [16]
Another approach to image reconstruction is iterative reconstruction algorithms. Many different
iterative algorithms exist, but the general principles are the same. The input to the algorithm
is an estimate of the image.
This can be either the output from filtered backprojection or
an artificially made guess. First step is a forward projection from the estimated image to its
corresponding projections. These projections are then compared to the measured projections,
and a correction is applied to the estimated projections to decrease the difference. Lastly, the
estimated image is created by backprojection.
These steps are repeated until a satisfactory
reconstruction has been obtained. [18]
Image intensity values in CT images are usually in Hounsfield units (HU). HU expresses the
attenuation on a scale relative to that of water. Water per definition has a HU of 0, while tissues
with smaller density have negative values and tissues with higher density have positive values.
Air has a HU of approximately -1000, while bone is 1000-3000 HU. When inspecting soft tissues
in a CT image the intensity is often windowed at a level of 50 HU with a window width of 350
HU. [17]
When imaging blood vessels, solid organs, free spaces like the abdominal cavity, or the limbs,
contrast media is often administered intravenously. Iodine in the contrast media increases the
attenuation of the X-rays, which enhances the intensity of the target organ or perfused vessels,
improving the contrast in the images. [19]
2.2.2
Positron Emission Tomography
Nuclear medicine is a branch of medical imaging, that utilizes radioactivity to convey informa-
tion about bodily function. A radiotracer is a molecule labeled with a radioactive isotope. When
the radiotracer is injected into a patient, it accumulates in certain regions or tissues, where the
radioactive decay can be measured. Multiple nuclear imaging modalities exist, among which
positron emission tomography (PET) is one of the most commonly used. [17]
PET is a highly sensitive imaging technique, which provides three-dimensional maps from
positron-emitting radiotracers. PET is a versatile imaging technique, which is used clinically in
various fields such as oncology, cardiology and neurology.
Radiotracers used for PET are labeled with a radioactive isotope, that undergoes beta plus
decay, i.e. a positron is emitted when the nucleus decays. The positron travels a short distance
within the body before it annihilates with an electron. The annihilation results in the release
of two photons (γ-rays) with the same energy of 511 keV, that travel in almost completely
opposite directions. The PET scanner is equipped with a ring of γ-ray detectors, designed to
detect pairs of coinciding photons. If a pair of photons is detected at opposite sites of the ring,
approximately within the same, very narrow, window of time, they are assigned as a coincident
event, and the positron emission is assumed to have occurred in a line of response (LOR) between
these detectors.
The steps from the detection of a γ-ray to the construction of a three-dimensional image
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
9
==PAGE:16==
can be understood in terms of the components of the PET scanner. Figure 2.4 shows a block
diagram of the elements of a PET scanner, along with an illustration of the detector ring. The
latter demonstrates how multiple LOR are formed and detected, as a result of the decay of the
radioactive tracer.
Figure 2.4: The block diagram shows the components and processes involved in the
generation of PET data [17]
The crystals are the innermost elements of the detector ring and they are the components
that detect the γ-rays. The crystals are connected to photomultiplier tubes (PMTs), which
amplifies the signal and converts it to electric voltage. The next block is coincidence detection,
and the construction of the LOR, followed by a correction for incorrect coincidence detections.
Incorrect coincidence detection occurs e.g. when a coincidence is detected, yet the two photons
originate from two different positron-electron annihilations. This event is common, and in some
cases, such as full-body scans, the randoms count rate will exceed the true count rate, making
incorrect coincidence correction vital. To correct or minimize the effect of these events, different
algorithms and techniques are deployed in the signal processing stage.
The succeeding block, attenuation correction, is an essential part of signal processing to
ensure accurate quantitative measurements. The attenuation of a photon differs based on from
where it is emitted; a photon emitted from the center of the body, will travel further, and thereby
be attenuated more than one that is emitted from the periphery. The photon attenuation is
dependent on the properties of the tissues in the LOR, thus a map of the tissues in the scanned
field of view (FOV) is necessary for the correction algorithm. For integrated PET/CT scanners,
it is common practice to extract the attenuation map from the CT data. The final step is image
reconstruction, which is commonly done using filtered back projection, or iterative models, as
explained in the CT section. [17]
The intensity of each voxel in the PET image, is proportional to the radioactivity measured in
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
10
==PAGE:17==
that volume. The most common unit of measure from PET imaging is the standardized uptake
value (SUV). This metrics takes into consideration the size of the patient and the injected
amount of radiotracer. This makes the values easier to compare between patients. SUV has the
unit [g/ml]. The SUV is calculated with the following formula:
SUV =
r
a′/w,
(2.2)
where r is the concentration of radioactivity [kBq/ml] measured by the scanner, a′ is the amount
of injected radiotracer [kBq] and r is the weight of the patient [g]. [20]
2.2.3
Radiotracers
A large variety of radiotracers have been developed and, based on the characteristics of the
tracer, they can be used for different purposes, both clinically and in research. As a radiotracer
consists of two entities, the radioactive isotope and the molecule to which it is attached i.e. the
ligand, both will affect the outcome of a scan.
The radioactive isotope is the positron-emitting unit of the radiotracer. Some of the com-
monly used compounds for PET imaging are 11C, 18F and 68Ga [21]. The isotopes have different
properties, such as half-life, positron range etc., which affects the image acquisition and resolu-
tion. Radioactive isotopes are synthesized on-site in a cyclotron, and are subsequently integrated
with the ligand. Which bodily function or tissue is visualized on the PET scan, depends on the
chosen ligand. The ligand is a molecule, that interacts with the body and ensures that the
radiotracer is accumulated in the desired region.
The radiotracer most commonly used in PET imaging is [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG).
This tracer acts as a glucose analog, which means it enters parts of the glucose metabolism.
Using FDG for PET imaging will reveal tissue with high glucose demand, which is the case for
tumors and inflammation. [17]
2.2.4
Atherosclerosis and PET imaging
New, specialized radiotracers are continuously being developed and evaluated, and a recent
focus is the development of tracers, targeted to reflect atherosclerosis. Of the 17 tracers that
have been employed for clinical imaging of atherosclerosis, eight have obtained FDA approval
for PET imaging in humans, including FDG, [18F]-sodium fluoride (NaF) and [68Ga]Ga- and
[64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE. As previously stated, FDG is the most frequently used PET tracer, and
it has been demonstrated that uptake of FDG, correlates positively with inflammatory activity
in atherosclerotic plaques. Nevertheless, as this tracer targets all metabolic activity, it lacks
specificity. Another relevant tracer is NaF. The PET tracer was developed for imaging of bones,
but can also be used for imaging of atherosclerotic plaques, as it is sensitive to calcification, which
occur in advanced plaques. This tracer is a good indicator of the risk of future cardiovascular
events, however, it is a stable marker, meaning it is not optimal for detecting the progression of
plaques. [3]
A third tracer, with a lot of potential is oxodotreotide (DOTATATE). DOTATATE targets
a specific receptor, known to be expressed by M1 macrophages; somatostatin receptor subtype-2
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
11
==PAGE:18==
(SST2). M1 macrophages are pro-inflammatory immune cells, which play a substantial role in
the development of chronic inflammation and formation of atherosclerotic plaques [22]. This
makes the M1 macrophages a good marker for the assessment of inflammation, more specifically
atherosclerotic inflammation.
DOTATATE coupled with a radioactive isotope, such as Cu-DOTATATE or Ga-DOTATATE,
has initially been used clinically for diagnosis and assessment of neuroendocrine tumors (NET),
also known as neuroendocrine neoplasms (NEN), as most of these types of tumors also have a
high expression of SST2 [23], [22]. Yet, more recent studies have investigated the use of this
tracer as an inflammatory marker.
As mentioned, DOTATATE can be coupled to different
radioactive isotope, where 64Cu has certain advantages over e.g.
68Ga.
Firstly, 64Cu has a
short positron range of approximately 1 mm, whereas 68Ga has a range of approximately 4 mm.
The positron range refers to the distance from where the positron is emitted to the point of
annihilation with an electron, which is ultimately the point that is detected. Thus a shorter
positron range allows for a higher PET image resolution, and a more precise location detection.
Furthermore the half-lives of the 64Cu and 68Ga are 12.7 h and 68 min, respectively. The long
half-life of
64Cu allows for multiple PET scans at different points in time [24]. These advantages
of Cu-DOTATATE, makes it an attractive radiotracer to conduct research with.
2.3
Deep learning
Deep learning is a branch of machine learning in which a computational model is arranged in an
architecture, which mimics the organization of the human brain. Such models are therefore called
artificial neural networks (ANNs) or deep neural networks. Deep learning is a fundamental part
of many artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, due to its ability to recognize patterns in large
amounts of data. In supervised deep learning, the model is trained on labeled or annotated data
from which it learns to recognize patterns which makes it able to predict the output on new data
instances. The architecture of an ANN consists of multiple hidden layers that perform linear
and non-linear operations. Where traditional machine learning algorithms rely on an engineer
to identify relevant features of the data, the ANN is capable of automatic feature extraction.
Because of this ability to extract features from unprocessed data, ANN are very suitable for
handling images and volumes. [25]
2.3.1
Image segmentation
An application of deep learning is image segmentation. Image segmentation is an image analysis
task with the aim of locating a certain structure or object within an image or volume. Based on
the location, the corresponding pixels are assigned to discrete class values. An example of an
image segmentation is shown in Figure 2.5. If a model is given a two-dimensional image (Figure
2.5, left), the output will be an image of the exact same size, where each pixel value correspond
to which class the pixel belongs to (Figure 2.5, right), i.e. if a model only assigns pixels to two
classes, foreground and background, the output values will be either 0 or 1. Such an image is
referred to as a mask.
Image segmentation is a widely used technique. In medical image analysis, it is used to find
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
12
==PAGE:19==
organs, lesions and tissue. However, the gold standard of medical image segmentation has tra-
ditionally been manual segmentation, where a clinician manually identifies and annotates the
region of interest (ROI) in the image. But in recent years deep learning-based algorithms have
become increasingly applied in medical image analysis, and the performance of the method is
constantly being improved. [26]
Figure 2.5: Image segmentation. An image and its corresponding segmentation mask [27]
AI-based image segmentation models can have different architectures, but the U-Net has proved
to be superior in this field. This unique architecture consists of several convolutional layers
in succession, and for each layer the spatial dimension of the data is first reduced, and then
increased. In Figure 2.6 the U-Net architecture can be seen.
Figure 2.6: The U-Net architecture [28]
The advantage of this architecture is its ability to retain spatial information while extracting
high-level features.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
13
==PAGE:20==
2.3.2
nnUNet
Within the field of medical image segmentation the nnUNet is considered the current state-of-
the-art method. nnUNet is a deep learning-based segmentation framework, which uses a U-Net
architecture, but configures it to the given dataset to obtain the optimal performance. nnUNet
automatically takes care of pre-processing, network architecture, training, post-processing and
inference [7]. nnUNet is highly versatile framework, that has outperformed several state-of-the-
art models in competitions. Although the elaborate framework consists of many components,
it can be readily used. For a better understanding of the framework, each component and the
overall workflow will be described below. Figure 2.7 shows the framework pipeline, and each
component from left to right, will be elaborated.
Figure 2.7: The complete nnUNet framework [29]
Data fingerprint
The training data is fed into the framework, and from the dataset, a data fingerprint is
extracted. This contains properties of the dataset that will be used to design the U-Net. The
properties include image size, image spacing, imaging modality and number of classes.
Inferred parameters
Based on heuristic rules, training parameters are inferred from the data fingerprint. Inferred
parameters include normalization of image intensities, resampling to ensure that images have
the same spacing, and adaptation of patch and batch size. Finally, the architecture, i.e. the
number of convolutions and layers of the U-Net, is configured to the image size.
Blueprint parameters
The blueprint parameters are predetermined parameters, that dictate the pre-proccesing,
training and inference of the model. More specifically, it determines the template for the archi-
tecture, and it schedules the training hyper-parameters in terms of loss function, optimizer, and
number of epochs, as well as the data augmentations1.
Pipeline fingerprints
From the inferred parameters and blueprint parameters the pipeline fingerprints are
generated. These contain the pipeline for the training of the model. nnUNet includes three
different model configurations, that can be trained; 2d, 3d full resolution and 3d cascade full
resolution. The first two are, as described by their names, a two- and three- dimensional model.
The latter is a configuration where a low-resolution 3D U-Net is trained in succession with a
1These will be introduced in section 4.4
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
14
==PAGE:21==
high-resolution 3D U-Net, which simply refines the predictions of the former. A set of pipeline
fingerprints is generated for each network configuration, as well as for a 3d low resolution
configuration used for the 3d cascade full resolution model.
Network training
The models are trained with a five-fold cross-validation scheme. In this method the model is
trained five times, and for each iteration 80% of the dataset is used for training, while the
remaining 20% is used for validation. This method ensures that over-fitting is prevented. With
five-fold cross-validation five fully trained networks are produced in the end, thus the model
predictions will be an average of the output of all five models.
Empirical parameters
After the training is terminated, the empirical parameters determines the optimal post-
processing strategy for the segmentation predictions along with the best ensemble of different
network configurations. These strategies are determined by assessing which combination pro-
duces the best average Dice score when evaluated on the training data.
Prediction
To obtain the final segmentation predictions, or simply predictions, inference is performed on
the test data with the best model configuration. Inference refers to the process of employing
the model, after the training and validation has been concluded. Hence, a selected dataset, here
the test data, is fed to the finished model, which provides segmentation predictions.[30]
2.3.3
Segmentation metrics
To evaluate the performance of an image segmentation model, metrics that compare the predic-
tion to the target segmentation are used. The Dice score and the average symmetric surface
distance (ASD) are commonly used metrics.
Dice score
The Dice score or Dice-Sørensen coeﬀicient is a volume-based performance metric, that measures
the overlap between two volumes. It is a commonly used as quantitative metric for evaluating
the performance of medical image segmentation.
The Dice score is calculated by the following formula:
Dice(A, B) = 2 · |A ∩B|
|A| + |B|
(2.3)
where A and B refer to the predicted and the target volume, respectively. |A∩B| is the common
area of A and B, i.e. the number of voxels included in both A and B, and |A| and |B| are the
number of voxels in A and B, respectively. [31] A visual representation of the Dice score can be
seen in Figure 2.8.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.8: Calculation of the Dice score [32]
The Dice score takes on values in the interval [0,1], where 1 corresponds to a complete overlap
between the predicted and target mask and 0 is a complete lack of overlapping voxels.
Although the Dice score is a good metric for medical images, it tends to be overly sensitive
to mislabelling of small structures. This means that an incorrect classification of a few voxels,
would be penalized more for a small object, compared to a large one. For this reason, it can be
beneficial to include a surface-based metric along with the Dice score in evaluations.
Average symmetric surface distance
Average symmetric surface distance (ASD) is a surface-based metric, that measures the minimum,
Euclidean distance from a voxel on the surface of one volume, A, to a voxel on the surface of
another volume, B. As it is symmetric, the distance from each surface voxel of A to the surface
of B, as well as the distance from each surface voxel of B to the surface of A is included. All
distances are then averaged to produce the ASD. A surface voxel can be defined as a voxel,
where at least one of the 18 adjacent voxels is classified as background. The definition of ASD
includes the measure of the minimum distance between an arbitrary voxel, v, and the surface of
a volume, S(A), which can be defined by the following:
d(v, S(A)) =
min
sA∈S(A) = ||v −sA||,
(2.4)
where sA is a single surface-voxel from the volume S(A). From this, Equation 2.5 can be derived,
as the ASD between the surfaces of two volumes, S(A) and S(B).
ASD(A, B) =
1
|S(A)| + |S(B)|


∑
sA∈S(A)
d(sA, S(B)) +
∑
sB∈S(B)
d(sB, S(A))


(2.5)
The ASD is a positive value, measured in mm. A good similarity between two volumes, corre-
sponds to a small ASD. [33]
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
16
==PAGE:23==
2.4
Statistical analysis
2.4.1
Pearson’s correlation
Correlation describes the strength of the linear relationship between two variables (x and y).
There are several ways to calculate correlation, but one commonly used is Pearson’s correlation
coeﬀicient (PCC). PCC is calculated as:
PCC =
∑xy
√∑x2 ∑y2
(2.6)
PCC ranges between -1 and 1. If PCC = 0 the variables are completely uncorrelated, while 1
indicates a perfect positive linear relationship and -1 a perfect negative linear relationship. A
property of PCC is that it is unaffected by linear transformations. This means that if one of the
variables is scaled or a bias is added the correlation is unaffected. As a result, a high correlation
does not indicate agreement between the variables.
PCC is based on the following assumptions: 1) the variables are quantitative and continuous,
2) the variables are approximately normally distributed, 3) the relationship between the variables
is linear and 4) the data does not contain outliers. [34]
2.4.2
Intraclass correlation
The intraclass correlation coeﬀicient (ICC) is a measure of reliability, which is often used in
analyses such as test-retest and inter-rater reliability analysis. ICC measures both correlation
and agreement.
There are several forms of ICC with different choices of model, type and
definition.
The choice of model depends on the selection of the raters.
The model can be
either a one-way random effects model, two-way random effects model or two-way mixed effects
model. The type refers to whether each measurement is done once (”single rater”) or taken as
a mean of multiple raters’ measurements (”mean of k raters”). For the definition it is possible
to choose between ”consistency” and ”absolute agreement”.
The ICC with a two-way mixed effects model, absolute agreement and single rater/measure-
ment is calculated as:
ICC =
MSR −MSE
MSR + 1
n(MSC −MSE),
(2.7)
where MSR is the mean square for rows, MSE is the mean square for error, MSC is the mean
square for columns and n is the number of subjects. [35]
2.4.3
Scatter plot
A scatter plot can be used to visualize the variability between estimated values from two different
methods. Each point in a scatter plot represents the estimated value from one method on the
x-axis and the estimate of the same value from another method on the y-axis. A straight line
with a slope of 1, termed the line of equality, is also shown in the plot. If the two methods have
estimated the same value, the point lies on the line. [36]
2.4.4
Bland-Altman plot
The Bland-Altman plot is a difference plot, which can be used to visualize the bias and the
agreement between two methods. The x-axis shows the mean of the estimated values from the
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
17
==PAGE:24==
two methods, while the y-axis is the difference in the values between the two methods. Thus, if
a point has the y-value 0 the two methods have estimated the same value for that scan, while
a positive value means that one method has a larger estimate compared to the other, and a
negative value represents the opposite. The plot makes it possible to see if the magnitude of
disagreement between the methods depends on the magnitude of the metric.
Bland-Altman plots also show the mean of the difference, along with its corresponding 95%
confidence interval (CI), and the limits of agreement (LoA). The LoA are ± 1.96 standard
deviation away from the mean, such that 95% of the data points lies between these limits. [36]
The calculation of the LoA rely on the assumption that the differences in the metric between
the two methods is normally distributed.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
18
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Data
The PET/CT scans used in this project have been retrospectively selected from a patient cohort,
where scans were acquired with the purpose of assessing neuroendocrine tumors (NET). Hence,
no acquisition of PET or CT data has been performed within this project. Nevertheless, this
section provides a brief introduction to the patient cohort and image acquisition, as well as a
presentation of the data.
3.0.1
Patient details
As previously stated, the study by Jensen et al. (2022) [4] was conducted with the purpose
of comparing arterial uptake of [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE across different patient risk groups, to
investigate if the method could be used for staging the severity of CVD. For the study, a number
of scans were selected based on various criteria. With limited adjustments, this was the dataset,
that was used in this project.
The patient cohort from which the scans were retrospectively selected, were individuals who
had all undergone routine clinical Cu-DOTATATE PET/CT imaging in the Department of
Clinical Physiology, Nuclear Medicine and PET, University Hospital Rigshospitalet, in the time
period from November 2014 to February 2021. All patients were either known or suspected
to have NET. The patients included in the study fulfilled the following criteria: ”Referral for
suspected NEN diagnosis or staging of NEN, age > 50 years at time of PET/CT scan, [64Cu]Cu-
DOTATATE whole-body PET/CT scan performed within the time frame of the study approval and
available for analysis, and no treatment with immune-modifying medication (glucocorticoids or
conventional and biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs) one year prior to the [64Cu]Cu-
DOTATATE PET/CT scan”. [4]
Jensen et al. used the earliest Cu-DOTATATE PET/CT scan for assessment, if more than
one scan was available for a patient, thus a total of 79 patients and 79 scans were included in
the study. Patients had between 1 and 4 scans in the time period, and in our project all scans
were included, resulting in a dataset of 192 PET/CT scans.
3.0.2
Image acquisition
Each scan involved a whole-body PET/CT, conducted on a Siemens Biograph mCT 64 True
Point hybrid PET/CT system. PET images were acquired 60 minutes after injecting 200 MBq
of [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE. The images were reconstructed using the an algorithm, that is used as
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
19
==PAGE:26==
the clinical standard (Point spread function, TrueX; Siemens Medical Solutions) with 3 iterations,
21 subsets, and a 2-mm Gaussian filter for smoothing (full width at half maximum). A low-dose,
non-contrast-enhanced CT-based attenuation correction was used for the reconstruction of PET
images. Following the PET scan, diagnostic quality venous phase CT scans (1.5 mm - 3 mm
slice thickness) with iodine intravenous contrast were performed, which would later be used for
tracing the ROIs of the carotid ateries. [4]
3.0.3
Technical details
The dataset consists of 192 PET/CT scans, all stored in DICOM format (.dcm), which is custom-
ary for medical images. The hybrid PET/CT scanner ensures that the PET and CT scan were
obtained nearly simultaneously, and are therefore capable of superposition, and joined analysis,
yet, many parameters differ between the two modalities, and they will therefore be presented
separately. All scans have been anonymized and randomized, to ensure patient confidentiality.
The scans have therefore been assigned new names consisting of a letter and a number, e.g. a0.
CT data
Each CT scan is a three-dimensional volume. The first two dimensions, the ones that span the
axial plane, are always 512 x 512 voxels. The third dimension, varies for each scan, and occurs
in the range of [274,651], with a median of 426 voxels. The size of each voxel, also referred to
as the voxel dimension, also varies from scan to scan, but in a narrower range. The first two
dimensions of the voxel are always identical, and are either 0.78 mm or 0.98 mm, whereas the
third is either 1.5, 2.0 or 3.0 mm. As the pixel size is varied throughout the scans, the resolution
as well as the FOV are not constant.
The intensities are discrete values measured in HU, spanning from -1000 to 3000 HU. In
Figure 3.1 a CT scan is displayed in three different planes.
The contrast of these and all
following CT scans is enhanced by using a soft tissue window with a window width and level of
350 and 50, respectively.
Within the CT dataset, some scans are subject to artifacts and poor contrast resolution.
These limitations will have an effect on the manual annotation, and will therefore be addressed
in Section 4.1.
PET data
The volumetric PET image corresponds to the CT image, in terms of spatial location, but has a
lower resolution. As for the CT data, the first and second dimensions of the volume are identical,
and are either 336, 400 or 440 voxels, and the third dimension occur in the range of [200, 651]
with a median of 426 voxels. The voxel dimension is 1.65 mm x 1.65 mm or 2.04 mm x 2.04 mm
in the first two dimensions, and the third dimension occurs in the range [1.5, 3.0] with a median
of 2.0 mm, i.e. the third voxel dimension occurs in the same range as for the CT data, but does
not confine to the same three values as the CT data.
PET data is measured in units of SUV, a metric that takes the amount of injected tracer, as
well as the weight of the patient into account. Consequently, this sensitive patient information
must be retrieved when the SUVs are extracted. This means that the anonymized scan is linked
to the original patient, in order to construct the correct PET map. SUVs are continuous positive
values.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: CT scan of patient b2, in axial (upper left), sagittal (lower) and coronal (upper
right) view. Soft tissue window. Slice 63, 256 and 256, respectively
In Figure 3.2a, a slice of the PET image is displayed. As PET data does not convey anatomical
information, it can be diﬀicult to interpret alone, which is why Figure 3.2b shows the joint
PET/CT image.
(a) Isolated PET scan
(b) Combined PET/CT scan
Figure 3.2: (a) PET and (b) PET/CT scan from the neck region of patient b2, axial
view (slice 63).
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
21
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4
Methods
In this section, methods used in the project will be presented. While the main objective of this
project was to train a model, the methods used extend beyond this task. The overall workflow is
a series of successive operations, and each operation will be described in detail in the following.
The workflow can be divided into 6 consecutive sections:
1. Manual annotation
2. Data pre-proccesing
3. Data split
4. Model configuration and training
5. Extraction and computation of metrics
6. Statistical analysis
4.1
Manual annotation
The manual annotation refers to the process of tracing the ROI, which in this project is the
carotid arteries, on a contrast-enhanced CT scan. This process is a key part of this project, as it
is the method of standard practice that the model-predicted segmentation will be compared to. It
is also from these annotations that the target masks, that the model is trained on, are generated.
The manual annotation was done using the medical imaging software OsiriX MD. This software
is the standard practice for visualization and manual annotation of medical images in the de-
partment. The vast majority of the annotations were performed in version 14.1.1 of the program,
yet due to practical problems, the annotations of the entire dataset was conducted in several
versions of OsiriX MD.
A ROI was annotated for each carotid artery, as well as the right atrium, resulting in three
separate ROIs. The time for annotating both carotid arteries was measured and averaged for
the annotation of 42 scans, yielding an annotation time per scan of 14.5 ±3.5 min.
The segment of the carotid arteries, that was included in the ROIs, is outlined in Figure 4.1,
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
22
==PAGE:29==
visualized in the coronal plane. Furthermore, the anatomical description of the process will also
be presented here.
Figure 4.1: A schematic drawing of the course of the carotid arteries with the annotated
segment outlined in light blue
The manual annotations are based on the anatomical description of the carotid arteries in section
2.1.The ROIs were drawn on axial slices, and each carotid artery was drawn from the point where
the branch begins and upwards to the point of bifurcation, where the ROI continued along the
internal carotid artery for 5-7 slices, corresponding to 0.75 to 2.1 cm of interna, depending on
the voxel dimensions. Not every single slice was annotated, rather 2-5 slices were skipped as a
fully-connected volume could be generated from the slices with ROIs, with linear interpolation.
The ROIs could afterwards be transferred to the PET image, where SUVs within the ROI were
measured.
Finally, an estimate of the background SUV, is required for the calculation of TBR (further
explained in Section 2.3.3), therefore a blood pool annotation of five adjacent slices in the right
atrium was also included.
(a) Full FOV
(b) Close up of annotations
Figure 4.2: Manual annotation of carotid arteries. Axial slice of neck region, patient b2
(slice 63)
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
23
==PAGE:30==
Figures 4.2 and 4.3 show examples of the annotations in the axial plane. Note that due to the
orientation of the patient in a CT scan, the right side of the body, and thereby the right artery,
will appear in the left side of the image, and vice versa. The annotation of the left and right
artery, are shown in Figure 4.2, in the neck region, at the level of the jaw where a. car. dxt.
bifurcates. Figure 4.3 shows the annotation of the blood pool, in a slice from the thoracic region.
(a) Full FOV
(b) Close up of annotation
Figure 4.3: Manual annotation of blood pool. Axial slice of thoracic region, patient b2
(slice 182)
The manual annotation of the carotid arteries can also be visualized as three-dimensional ren-
derings of their volumes, an example of which can be seen in Figure 4.4.
(a) A. car. dxt
(b) A. car. sin
Figure 4.4: Three-dimensional rendering of manually annotated carotid arteries, pa-
tient b2
As previously mentioned, some CT scans are affected by artifacts, due to implants, or low
contrast resolution affecting the visibility of the arteries. These scans present a challenge during
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
24
==PAGE:31==
manual annotation, making it more diﬀicult to identify the arteries with absolute certainty.
Examples of such scans can be seen in Figure 4.5. The three columns are examples of scans,
where 1) the artery is not enhanced by the contrast agent, 2) an artifact caused by dental
implants blocks the view of the arteries and 3) a shoulder implant blocks the view of the right
artery. All scans show the same slice in the axial view. The first row shows the full FOV, the
second is a close-up and the third is a close-up with the manual annotations included.
Scan j6 (slice 59)
Scan t0 (slice 52)
Scan e9 (slice 87)
Figure 4.5: Three examples of challenging scans, with and without the manual annotation
All 192 scans were manually annotated, by one of the authors, Frederiksen or Vølund. Each
scan was annotated once by a single rater, and each of the two raters handled half of the scans.
Intra- and inter-rater variability
Additionally, the reliability of the raters were assessed by testing the intra-rater and inter-rater
variability. The former term refers to the annotation variability of a single rater, i.e. the dis-
similarity between two annotations, performed on the same scan, by the same rater, but at
two different points in time. The latter term refers to the variability between two raters i.e.
the dissimilarity between two manual annotations performed on the same scan, but by different
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
25
==PAGE:32==
raters. The intra-rater and inter-rater variability test, were performed on subsets of 10 randomly
selected scans each, where both arteries and the blood pool were annotated. Frederiksen was
assigned as rater 1 and Vølund as rater 2.
4.2
Data pre-processing
The data pre-processing involves the pipeline from the obtained CT scans and manual anno-
tations to the processed input of the segmentation model. A flowchart illustrating the steps
involved in the preparation of the data is shown in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Flowchart of the pre-processing pipeline
The manual annotations that were created in OsiriX MD have to be converted into a mask, that
can be used as a target for the model to learn from. However, since OsiriX MD is intended as
a clinical tool and not for machine learning purposes, no built-in functionality is provided to
convert ROIs to masks. Instead, we have created a custom procedure to obtain the target mask
for each scan.
Firstly, the manual annotations of the right and the left carotid artery were exported sep-
arately. Each annotation was exported as a three-channel (RGB) DICOM file containing the
CT scan in black and white with the ROI in color superimposed. Thus, the spatial dimensions
match that of the CT scan. This RGB-CT was subsequently loaded into Python. Here, the
colored part of the image, i.e. the ROI, can be isolated from the CT. To correct for a distortion
that makes the ROI too large, when the RGB-CT is exported, a morphological erosion was
performed. The masks for the right and left carotid artery were then combined, resulting in
a target mask with the same dimension as the corresponding CT volume, and with each pixel
assigned to one of three different classes; 0 for background, 1 for the right carotid artery and 2
for the left carotid artery.
The target mask is saved in the NIfTI file format. The CT scans, which are originally in
DICOM file format, are also converted to the NIfTI file format.
To reduce model computation time, the size of the input to the nnUNet model, was reduced.
The target mask and the corresponding CT were cropped so that the longitudinal dimension
(z-dimension) is halved and only the upper part of the body is kept. The metadata, such as the
spatial dimensions, is copied from the CT to the target mask. When the described pre-processing
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
26
==PAGE:33==
has been performed for all the scans, the CT images and target masks are renamed and placed
in a folder structure, that is compatible with nnUNet. While assigning the data into the folder
structure, the dataset was split into train and test subsets.
4.3
Data split
When training a machine learning model it is common practice to split one’s dataset into two
parts: a training set and a test set. The model will be trained on the training set and evaluated
based on how well it performs on the unseen data of the test set. To ensure a reliable evaluation,
the test data should be unknown to the model, as having the same data in the train and test
set, leads to an artificially positive performance. In our dataset we have multiple scans of the
same patient, thus to avoid getting an overly optimistic test result, all scans of the same patient
must be in either the test or training set. Apart from this, the scans are randomly assigned to
a set in a 80/20 split, meaning approximately 80% of the scans are assigned to the training set
and the remaining 20% to the test set. Thereby we get a training set consisting of 154 scans
and a test set of 38 scans.
Moreover, the scans in the training set are further split into five training and validation splits
for the five-fold cross-validation. As a result, the model is trained five separate times on 80%
of the training set, leaving out a different subset of 20% of the data for each fold, which the
training process is continuously validated on. All scans of the same patient, are always in either
the training or validation set.
4.4
Model configuration and training
The nnUNet framework was used to train a 3D full resolution U-Net segmentation model. The
operations explained in Section 2.3, were performed in three step 1) nnUNet-specific data pre-
proccesing, 2) model training and 3) inference. All steps were performed on a high performance
computing (HPC) infrastructure on a node with 1 GPU node of 40 cores and 192 GB RAM
(NVIDIA V100).
The median voxel dimensions of the images in the training set is [512, 512, 213] and the
median spatial resolution is [0.78 0.78 2] mm.
As part of the nnUNet specific pre-processing (step 1) data augmentation is performed on
the images. The data augmentations applied are rotation, scaling, Gaussian noise, Gaussian
blur, brightness, contrast, simulation of low resolution and gamma resolution. We chose that
the images were not to be mirrored, as that flips the spatial location of the right and left carotid
artery in the images.
Each of the five folds in the cross-validation was trained for 1000 epochs. The input images
were resampled, so they all had the same voxel dimensions, and the image intensity was nor-
malized based on the CT values in the foreground classes (a. car. dxt. and a. car. sin.). The
U-Net architecture used in the model had 6 hidden layers. The model was trained on batches of
two images. The patch size was [192, 160, 64] and the kernel size for the convolutions was [3 3
3]. The loss function was a combination of cross-entropy and dice loss, and for the optimization
algorithm stochastic gradient descent with Nestrov momentum was used. The learning rate was
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
27
==PAGE:34==
decreased in fixed increments over the 1000 epochs, with an initial rate of 0.01 and a final rate
of 0.0001. [29]
After the model was trained, inference was performed on the scans in the test set, i.e. the
model was used to create a segmentation of the carotid arteries in each scan.
The outputs
of each model of the cross-validation folds, were averaged and the prediction was performed
with a sliding window approach. The model output will be referred to as the model prediction,
model-predicted mask or model-predicted segmentation throughout this report.
4.5
Extraction and computation of metrics
The model-predicted masks and the target masks for the scans of the test set are saved as
RT structures, which is a file type that can be loaded into OsiriX MD as a ROI. The manual
annotations of the carotid arteries, the manual annotation of the blood pool, the target mask
and the model prediction, are imported separately onto the non-anonymous PET images, where
they are used to extract the SUVs. Thus, all the SUVs in the given ROI are extracted for each
slice of the PET image. From the SUVs the model-predicted PET and segmentation metrics
are calculated. The volumes of the target mask and model-predicted mask were also extracted.
From the extracted PET values and segmentation volumes, PET and segmentation metrics are
computed.
4.5.1
PET metrics
In order to evaluate and compare the PET uptake, four values are computed for each segmen-
tation volume. Thus, for each carotid artery, four different metrics are computed; SUVmax,
mSUVmax, TBRmax and mTBRmax.
SUVmax is the maximum SUV measured within the ROI. mSUVmax is the mean of all
slice-wise maximum SUVs.
The target-to-background-ratio (TBR) is a unit of measure, where the background Cu-
DOTATATE uptake is accounted for, meaning all SUVs are divided by a background SUV.
An estimate of the background SUV, is the mean uptake in a volume of the blood pool. This
is calculated from the manual annotated blood pool ROI, placed in the right atrium. Note
that the background SUV extracted from the manual annotation, is used for the calculation of
TBR for all carotid artery segmentations, that is the target mask, the model prediction and the
manual annotation. As for the SUV, the TBRmax and mTBRmax is extracted. Additionally
to the distinction between SUV and TBR metrics, the metrics can also be considered as the
max-of-max metrics, i.e. SUVmax and TBRmax and the mean-of-max metrics, mSUVmax and
mTBRmax.
4.5.2
Segmentation metrics
To assess the similarity of the volumes of the model-predicted masks and the target masks, Dice
scores and ASDs were calculated for the test set according to Equation 2.3 and 2.5, respectively.
4.6
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was applied for comparison of the two methods; the manual annotations and
the model predictions, and to investigate the intra- and inter-rater variability of the manual
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
28
==PAGE:35==
annotation method. The analysis was performed on the PET data of the 38 scans in the test
set.
For the four PET metrics extracted by the manual annotations and the model predictions
scatter plots and Bland-Altman plots along with their LoA, were made. The PCC and ICC were
also calculated for the PET metrics according to Equation 2.6 and 2.7. A 95% CI was calculated
for both coeﬀicients, as well as a p-value from a statistical test based on the null hypothesis that
the coeﬀicient was equal to 0. The form of ICC used was a two-way mixed effects model, the
single rater per measurement type and the absolute agreement definition. The choice of the two-
way mixed effects model means that the results cannot directly be generalized to other raters,
but are specific to the raters and the segmentation model in this project. The single rater per
measurement type reflects that the PET metrics are a single value as opposed to an average over
several values. The ”absolute agreement” definition is chosen since we are interested in avoiding
a bias between raters (i.e. between the manual annotation and model prediction).
To ensure that assumptions of normality are upheld histograms and Q-Q plots of the four
PET metrics were inspected. The distributions of all metrics were approximately normal.
The same analysis was performed for the PET metrics for the intra- and inter-rater variability
test, done on the manual annotation.
The ROIs of the model predictions and the manual annotations were visually inspected on
the corresponding CT scans for qualitative assessment of the model predictions.
For the target masks and the model-predicted masks scatter plots and a Bland-Altman
plot were made, comparing the volumes. The PCC and ICC were calculated for the volumes,
and lastly, segmentation metrics (see Section 4.5.2) were computed for the target masks and
model-predicted masks.
All of the analysis was implemented in Python with the SciPy and Pingouin packages.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
29
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 5
Results
5.1
Model training and inference
The model training was performed on an HPC server for 20 hours.
As previously stated, a five-fold cross-validation was performed, which means that the model
was trained five times, with different subsets of the data for each fold. Figure 5.1 shows the
learning curve of the first fold, the plots for the remaining four folds can be seen in Appendix
A, but as all learning curves show similar trend, only fold one is assessed.
Figure 5.1: The learning curve for the first fold of the five-fold cross-validation
The learning curve plot shows the loss and pseudo Dice score as a function of epochs of the
training. The curves in blue and red are the training and validation loss, respectively. The
axis on the left, reflects the loss, which ranges from -1 to 0. The loss here is the sum of the
cross-entropy loss (optimized towards 0) and the Dice loss (implemented as the negative of the
Dice score i.e -Dice, and is therefore optimized towards -1). Thus, a loss of -1 corresponds to
the best possible performance. It appears that the model quickly converges towards a small loss,
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
30
==PAGE:37==
and that the loss is relatively stable onward. From epoch 400, the training and validation loss
seem to diverge, as the former is decreased, but the latter remains the same. This trend suggests
a slight overfitting, yet the validation loss does not increase, which means that the general model
performance is not deteriorated.
The green lines, dotted and full, show the pseudo Dice score, and the moving average thereof,
respectively. The axis for the pseudo Dice score is on the right side of the plot and ranges from
0 to 1. This metric is an approximation of the average Dice score of the foreground classes, i.e.
the right and left carotid arteries. It does not reflect the actual Dice score of the validation set,
but rather the average Dice score of randomly selected patches, from different samples in the
validation set. It is thereby not a metric that should be taken literately, but is included, as it
gives a good indication of how the model is learning. Nonetheless, from the plot, it appears that
the pseudo Dice score converges quickly and remains stable at a value of ∼0.9, in the same
manner as the validation loss.
Following the training, inference was performed, to obtain the model-predicted segmenta-
tions. This process took 63 seconds per scan.
5.2
Descriptive statistics
For the manual annotations, the target masks and the model predictions, descriptive statistics
have been computed. The mean and standard deviation of the metrics for the right (a. car.
dxt.) and left (a. car. sin.) carotid artery for all test scans are shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Mean and standard deviation of PET metrics and the volume of the test
set for the manual annotations, the target masks and the model predictions, respectively. SUV
metrics are measured in g/ml and volume is in ml.
Metric
a. car. dxt.
a. car. sin.
Manual
Target
Prediction
Manual
Target
Prediction
SUVmax
3.25 ± 1.19
3.19 ± 1.18
3.19 ± 1.17
3.50 ± 1.68
3.45 ± 1.67
3.43 ± 1.66
mSUVmax
1.74 ± 0.35
1.72 ± 1.18
1.71 ± 0.34
1.71 ± 0.33
1.69 ± 1.67
1.64 ± 0.29
TBRmax
3.90 ± 1.96
3.80 ± 1.88
3.86 ± 1.98
4.50 ± 3.67
4.42 ± 3.64
4.40 ± 3.65
mTBRmax
2.06 ± 0.90
2.04 ± 0.89
2.02 ± 0.88
2.03 ± 0.89
2.01 ± 0.90
1.95 ± 0.83
V olume
-
8.88 ± 2.52
8.59 ± 2.52
-
11.72 ± 2.83
10.85 ± 2.83
5.3
Target mask
The target masks were constructed based on manual annotations as explained in Section 4.2.
For a visual assessment, a target mask was imported into OsiriX MD, where it can be seen along
with the original, manual annotation, in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2 demonstrates the overlap between the manual annotation and the target mask.
The selected slice is from the neck region around the bifurcation, the same as shown in Figure
4.2. From the figure it can be seen that the manual annotation and target are not identical, but
overlapping. The edges of target mask are more jagged and are not as smooth as those of the
manual annotation. Still, the two ROIs (blue and red) appear to be on top of each other, with
minimum discrepancies.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.2: CT image of the overlap between manual annotation (blue) and target
mask (red) of the carotid arteries. Close-up, axial slice of neck region, patient b2 (slice 63)
From Table 5.1, it appears that the target masks on average have slightly lower values for all
PET metrics compared to the manual annotations. As all metrics are based on maximum values
within the ROI, a lower value corresponds to a smaller ROI. The highest similarity in PET values
are seen for mSUVmax and mTBRmax, where the difference in mean is 0.02 for both right and
left carotid artery. For SUVmax and TBRmax the differences in mean range from 0.05 to 0.10.
5.4
Model performance
The results of the model predictions are introduced in this section. The model-predicted PET
metrics are compared to the PET metrics extracted with the manual annotations i.e. the manual
annotation-based PET metrics. Moreover, the segmentation metrics from the model-predicted
segmentations and the target masks will be presented.
The scatter plots in Figure 5.3 show the model-predicted and the manual annotation-based
PET metrics for all scans in the test set. The x-axes represent the metric from the manual
annotation, while the y-axes represent the metric from the model prediction. The dark blue
points represent the right carotid artery and the light blue points represent the left carotid
artery. The green line is the line of equality, on which points lie when both methods result in
the same value of the metric.
The majority of carotid SUVmax values lie between 2 and 5 for both the manual annotation
and the model prediction. The model prediction has produced slightly lower values with a mean
of 3.19 for a. car. dxt. and 3.43 for a. car. sin. compared to 3.25 and 3.50 for the manual
annotation, which is also reflected in the scatter plot by more points lying under the line of
equality than over it. Two arteries have unusually high SUVmax values of approximately 9.5
and 10.5 for both methods.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
32
==PAGE:39==
(a) SUVmax
(b) TBRmax
(c) mSUVmax
(d) mTBRmax
Figure 5.3: Scatter plots of manual annotation-based and model-predicted PET met-
rics. SUV metrics are measured in g/ml.
mSUVmax ranges from just under 1 and up until 2.5 in both arteries for both methods, except
one outlier with a value close to 3. The model prediction has also produced slightly smaller
values than the manual annotation (a mean of 1.71 for a. car. dxt. and 1.64 for a. car. sin.
compared to 1.74 and 1.71) for the mSUVmax. As expected, the mSUVmax values are smaller
than the SUVmax, since they are an average of the maximum uptake in each slice instead of
being the overall maximum. The same is true for the TBR metrics.
For the TBR metrics the model prediction also results in slightly smaller values than the
manual annotation. TBRmax values lie between 2 and 8 for both methods, except three outliers
of which the highest has a value above 20. The average TBRmax from the model prediction is
3.86 for a. car. dxt. and 4.40 for a. car. sin. while it is 3.90 and 4.50 for the manual annotation.
This means that on average the highest uptake value in the artery is four times higher than that
in the blood pool. For mTBRmax the average value from the model prediction is 2.02 for a. car.
dxt. and 1.95 for a. car. sin., while it is 2.06 and 2.03, respectively, for the manual annotation.
For the max-of-max metrics, SUVmax and TBRmax, the values are higher for a. car. sin.
For the mean-of-max metrics, mSUVmax and mTBRmax, the values are comparable between
the arteries, although slightly larger for a. car. dxt. Looking at the scatter plots it is evident
that there is a large overlap between the metrics for the right and left artery. The differences
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
33
==PAGE:40==
in the mean between the arteries do not appear visually significant.
Table 5.2 shows the PCC between the PET metrics from the manual annotation and the model
prediction. The table also contains the corresponding CI and the significance level of the cor-
relation. From the scatter plots (Figure 5.3) the metrics from the two methods appear highly
correlated. This is also reflected in the very high PCC values. For SUVmax and mSUVmax the
PCC is 0.97 and for TBRmax and mTBRmax it is even higher with a value of 0.99.
Table 5.2: The Pearson correlation of the PET metrics on the test set between the manual
annotations and the model-predicted segmentation for both left and right carotid artery. The
table contains the PCC and corresponding 95% CI for each of the PET metrics, as well as the
significance. **** corresponds to p ≤0.0001
Metric
PCC
CI
Significance
SUVmax
0.97
[0.96 0.98]
****
mSUVmax
0.97
[0.96 0.98]
****
TBRmax
0.99
[0.98 0.99]
****
mTBRmax
0.99
[0.987 0.995]
****
(a) SUVmax
(b) TBRmax
(c) mSUVmax
(d) mTBRmax
Figure 5.4: Bland-Altman plots of PET metrics extracted with respectively the manual
annotations and the predicted masks. SUV metrics are measured in g/ml.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.4 shows the Bland-Altman plots for the manual annotation-based and model-predicted
PET metrics. The y-axis shows the difference in metric values, i.e. the metric from the model
prediction subtracted from that of the manual annotation. Thus, a point with a positive differ-
ence means that the prediction mask estimated a smaller value for the metric than the manual
annotation.
Table 5.3 shows the mean and LoA for the difference between the PET metrics from the manual
annotation and the model prediction. The table contains the LoA calculated for both right and
left carotid arteries together and individually.
Table 5.3: LoA for PET metrics of manual annotations and model predictions
Metric
a. car. dxt.
a. car. sin
Joint a. car. dxt and sin.
Mean
LoA
Mean
LoA
Mean
LoA
SUVmax
0.06
[-0.52 0.60]
0.07
[-0.63 0.78]
0.07
[-0.58 0.71]
mSUVmax
0.04
[-0.06 0.13]
0.06
[-0.12 0.25]
0.05
[-0.10 0.20]
TBRmax
0.05
[-0.70 0.80]
0.09
[-0.94 1.12]
0.07
[-0.82 0.97]
mTBRmax
0.04
[-0.10 0.19]
0.09
[-0.22 0.39]
0.07
[-0.18 0.31]
When the LoA are calculated separately for a. car. dxt. and a. car. sin. the limits are more
narrow for a. car. dxt. over all the PET metrics as seen in Table 5.3. When the LoA are
calculated for both arteries, the limits fall somewhere in between. From the plots a slight conic
shape of the point distribution can be seen for mTBRmax, and to a lesser degree; SUVmax and
TBRmax. This suggests that the average difference between values is increased with a rising
mean PET value. The mean of the difference, or the bias between the two methods, is 0.07 for
SUVmax, 0.05 for mSUVmax, 0.07 for TBRmax and 0.07 for mTBRmax. The positive bias for all
the metrics corresponds to how much smaller the metric is estimated on average by the model
prediction compared to the manual annotation. For the max-of-max metrics the difference be-
tween the methods is exactly 0 for some of the segmentations. For the mean-of-max metrics the
variability of the points appear more random in their pattern. The CIs of the means contain 0
for the max-of-max, but not for mean-of-max metrics.
Table 5.4 shows the ICC and the corresponding CI and significance level of the PET metrics
of the manual annotations and model-predicted masks. The ICC for all four metrics are 0.96
or higher, which indicates an excellent reliability.
The ICC is the highest for TBRmax and
mTBRmax at 0.99, while it is 0.97 for SUVmax and 0.96 for mSUVmax.
Table 5.4: The intraclass correlation of the PET metrics between the manual annotations
and model-predicted segmentation for both left and right carotid artery. The table contains the
ICC and corresponding 95% CI for each of the PET metrics, as well as the significance. ****
corresponds to p ≤0.0001
Metric
ICC
CI
Significance
SUVmax
0.97
[0.96 0.98]
****
mSUVmax
0.96
[0.89 0.98]
****
TBRmax
0.99
[0.98 0.99]
****
mTBRmax
0.99
[0.97 0.99]
****
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
35
==PAGE:42==
5.4.1
Predicted volumes
Additionally to the inspection of the predicted PET values, the model-predicted segmentation
volumes are also assessed, qualitatively and quantitatively.
Qualitative analysis
For the qualitative analysis, a few of the predicted segmentations are visualized along with the
manual annotations, both displayed on the corresponding CT image. This can be seen in Figure
5.5. Each column shows one carotid artery segmentation of scan, a4, c3 and e0, respectively. All
scans are axial slices from the neck region, but the upper row is at a higher level, at the point of
bifurcation and the lower row shows the same artery, but at the level of the larynx. These slices
were chosen as the bifurcation is a complex anatomical structure, and we assume the model will
have high uncertainty in this area whereas at the lower level the course of a. car. communis is
steady, and we assume the model does not have a high uncertainty. The color of the predicted
masks is magenta and the manual annotations are light blue in all images. To see the difference
between the manual annotation and the model prediction, the image is zoomed in considerably.
Scan a4, a. car. dxt. (slice
65 and 86)
Scan c3, a. car. sin. (slice
45 and 63)
Scan e0, a. car. sin. (slice
45 and 63)
Figure 5.5: Model-predicted segmentations and manual annotations of three scans.
The upper images show the scan at the level of bifurcation, and the lower images show the same
scan at the level of larynx.
From the figure, it appears that the model has successfully located the bifurcation of the artery
in all three cases. Moreover, a. car. communis has also been correctly identified at the lower
level. The edges of the predictions are less smooth compared to that of the manual annotations.
Examples of suboptimal predictions are also included.
Figure 5.6 shows two of such.
Each
column shows different slices from the same carotid segmentation. The upper left corner shows
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
36
==PAGE:43==
an example of disagreement at the point of bifurcation and the upper right corner shows an
example of disagreement in the beginning of the segmentation, i.e. the branching of a. car.
communis from the aortic arch. The two lower figures show the same segmentations as above,
but at the level of the larynx.
Scan p9, a. car. dxt (slice
51 and 74)
Scan j3, a.car. sin (slice 111
and 73)
Figure 5.6: Model-predicted segmentation and manual annotations of two scans. The
upper images show the scan at the level of bifurcation and at the level of the aortic arch,
respectively. The lower images show the same scan at the level of larynx.
The upper left image in Figure 5.6, shows the bifurcation, where the manual annotation have
included both a. car. externa and interna, while the prediction includes a. car. interna, but
only partially externa. It should be noted that the following slice upwards only includes a. car.
interna in the manual annotation, so the model have made a prediction, that is somehow an
average of the two slices.
The upper right image in Figure 5.6, shows that at the beginning of a. car. sin., the manual
annotation traces the full circumference of the artery from one slice to another, whereas the
model prediction have a reduced size of the ROI in the first slice, giving the 3D segmentation
a rounded end, instead of a sharp cylindrical end. Still, in both cases the overall segmentation
of a. car. communis - demonstrated by the segmentation at the point of the larynx - is satisfying.
The agreement between prediction segmentations and manual annotations, were investigated on
the entire test set. Each carotid segmentation was considered separately, yielding 76 segmenta-
tions in total. The following was observed:
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
37
==PAGE:44==
• 66/76 predicted segmentations located a. car. communis and a. car. interna in agreement
with the manual annotations.
• 7/76 predicted segmentations located a. car. communis, but not a. car. interna.
• 3/76 predicted segmentations followed a different structure, i.e. externa instead of interna
or a different blood vessel than a. car. communis.
For all cases where a wrong structure was followed, the rater also expressed a high degree of
uncertainty, due to a poor quality of the scan. In the cases where a. car. interna was not located
4/7 scans were of poor quality, causing an uncertainty of the rater.
Quantitative analysis
For the quantitative analysis, the volumes (measured in ml) of the segmentations are considered.
The average volume of the target masks in the test set is 8.88 ml for the right carotid artery and
11.72 ml for the left carotid artery (see Table 5.1). The model-predicted segmentations have a
slightly smaller volume with an average of 8.59 ml for the right carotid artery and 10.85 for the
left. For both the target mask and model-prediction, the volume of the left carotid artery is
larger than that of the right.
Figure 5.7 shows Bland-Altman plots for a. car. dxt. and a. car. sin., respectively. The
plots illustrate the difference between the volume of the target mask and the model-predicted
segmentation. When the value is positive, it indicates that the volume of the model-predicted
segmentation is smaller than that of the target mask. The model-predicted segmentations are
on average 0.29 ml smaller than the target masks for the right carotid artery and 0.87 ml for
the left. The CI for the mean includes 0 for a. car. dxt., but not for a. car. sin.
(a) a. car. dxt.
(b) a. car. sin.
Figure 5.7:
Bland-Altman plots of the volume for the target masks compared to the
model-predicted masks for a. car. dxt. and sin.
Figure 5.8 shows the volumes of the target masks and the model-predicted segmentations, for
both right and left carotid arteries. In Figure 5.8a the scatter plots can be seen, and Figure 5.8b
shows the Bland-Altman plot of the difference between the volumes of the target masks and the
model-predicted segmentations.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
38
==PAGE:45==
(a) Scatter plot
(b) Bland-Altman
Figure 5.8: Scatter and Bland-Altman plots for the volume of the model-predicted masks
compared to the target masks
The mean of the difference and the LoA for the right, the left and both carotid arteries, respec-
tively, are shown in Table 5.5. Furthermore, the PCC and ICC are shown in Table 5.6, along
with the CIs and significance level.
Table 5.5: Mean and LoA of the volume for the manual annotation and model prediction
a. car. dxt.
a. car. sin.
Joint a. car. dxt. and sin.
Mean
0.29
0.87
0.58
LoA
[-3.68 4.25]
[-2.06 3.80]
[-2.93 4.09]
Table 5.6: PCC and ICC for the volume of the model-predicted masks and the target masks.
**** corresponds to p ≤0.0001
PCC
ICC
Coeﬀicient
0.86
0.84
CI
[0.79 0.91]
[0.74 0.90]
Significance
****
****
In the scatter plot, it is visible that the left carotid artery tends to have a larger volume than
the right. Moreover, a positive correlation between the two can be seen; however, more points
are located under the line of equality than above it, indicating that the target masks have higher
volumes. The PCC is 0.86, which indicates a high degree of correlation, although quite smaller
than for the PET metrics.
From Figure 5.8b, we see that while the mean of the volumes for right and left carotid ar-
teries, are different, it is not easily to distinguish the two groups visually. The mean difference
between the volume of the predicted masks and the target masks is 0.58 ml. 0 is not included
in the CI for the mean.
Finally, the ICC of 0.84, indicates good reliability, but it is still lower than that of the PET
metrics.
Segmentation metrics for the volume of the right and left carotid artery, the Dice score and the
ASD, are shown in Table 5.7. The mean Dice score for a. car. dxt. is 0.86 with a standard
deviation 0.11 and for a. car. sin. it is 0.88 with a standard deviation of 0.04. The ASD is on
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
39
==PAGE:46==
average 0.70 mm for the right carotid artery and 0.53 mm for the left with standard deviations
of 1.15 and 0.43 mm, respectively.
Table 5.7: Segmentation metrics for the volume of the model prediction compared to the
target mask. ASD is in mm
a. car. dxt
a. car. sin
Dice score
0.86 ± 0.11
0.88 ± 0.04
ASD
0.70 ± 1.15
0.53 ± 0.43
5.5
Intra- and inter-rater variability
In this section the results of the intra- and inter-rater variability tests are presented. In the
previous section, two methods, that is, the manual annotation and the model prediction, were
evaluated based on PET metrics, presented as scatter and Bland-Altman plots, along with
the PCC and ICC. The intra- and inter-rater variability is evaluated in the same manner, but
here two separate manual annotations are compared. To assess intra-rater variability, manual
annotations by rater 1 at two different points in time are compared, and for the assessment of
inter-rater variability, the manual annotations of rater 1 and 2 are compared.
5.5.1
Intra-rater variability
Figure 5.9 shows the scatter plots of two annotations performed by rater 1. The four different
PET metrics, SUVmax, TBRmax, mSUVmax and mTBRmax are shown in Figure 5.9a, b, c and
d, respectively.
In Table 5.8 descriptive statistic of the distributions are presented. From the scatter plots,
no visual difference between a. car. dxt. and a. car. sin. is notable, but from the table, it
appears that a. car. sin. have slightly lower values across all four metric.
For SUVmax, the vast majority of the points lie in the range between 2 and 7, with means of
4.23 and 4.12, for the first and second annotation, respectively, yet two points appear to have
noticeably larger SUVmax, that is, of 10 and 12. For mSUVmax, the same trend can be observed;
two points with notably larger values, and the rest of the observations clustered between 1 and 3,
where the mean value of first and second annotation is 2.15 for both. For TBRmax the majority
of points are in the range from 1 to 5 (mean values are 4.19 and 4.25), with four points at larger
values and for mTBRmax, the points are more or less evenly distributed between 1 and 4 with
means of 2.14 and 2.24.
The correlation of the different annotations can be assessed from visual inspection of the
scatter plot or based on the Pearson correlation coeﬀicients, which are presented in Table 5.9.
Based on the plots the observations seem to be strongly correlated over all four metrics, yet,
SUVmax and mSUVmax appear to be slightly better correlated. PCC values from Table 5.9
confirms this, as all are close to 1.00, and PCC for SUVmax and sSUVmax are 0.99 and 1.00,
respectively, which is slightly better than that of TBRmax and sTBRmax, which are 0.97 for
both.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
40
==PAGE:47==
(a) SUVmax
(b) TBRmax
(c) mSUVmax
(d) mTBRmax
Figure 5.9: Intra-rater variability - Scatter plots of PET metrics.
SUV metrics are
measured in g/ml
Table 5.8: Mean and standard deviation of the PET metrics on the intra-rater vari-
ability subset of data
Metric
a. car. dxt.
a. car. sin.
1st annotation
2nd annotation
1st annotation
2nd annotation
SUVmax
4.29 ±2.84
4.17 ±2.81
4.14±2.34
4.06 ±2.24
mSUVmax
2.19 ±1.07
2.21 ±1.09
2.11 ±1.01
2.09 ±1.01
TBRmax
4.23 ±2.03
4.27 ±1.98
4.14 ±1.92
4.23 ±1.71
mTBRmax
2.18 ±0.72
2.30 ±0.75
2.10 ±0.65
2.18 ±0.67
Table 5.9: The Pearson correlation of the PET metrics for the intra-rater variability
for both left and right carotid artery. The table contains the PCC and corresponding 95% CI
for each of the PET metrics, as well as the significance. **** corresponds to p ≤0.0001
Metric
PCC
CI
Significance
SUVmax
0.99
[0.99 1.00]
****
mSUVmax
1.00
[0.998 1.00]
****
TBRmax
0.97
[0.93 0.99]
****
mTBRmax
0.97
[0.94 0.99]
****
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
41
==PAGE:48==
The similarity between the two annotations is evaluated further based on Bland-Altman plots,
which are shown in Figure 5.10. The mean value and LoA from the Bland-Altman plots, are
also listed in Table 5.10.
(a) SUVmax
(b) TBRmax
(c) mSUVmax
(d) mTBRmax
Figure 5.10: Intra-rater variability - Bland-Altman plots of PET metrics. SUV metrics
are measured in g/ml
Table 5.10: Mean and LoA for the PET metrics for the intra-rater variability
Metric
Mean
LoA
SUVmax
0.10
[-0.47 0.67]
mSUVmax
0.00
[-0.08 0.08]
TBRmax
-0.06
[-1.00 0.87]
mTBRmax
-0.10
[-0.42 0.22]
When inspecting the four plots, it can be seen, that they all have a mean value close to 0, and
that the variability does not depend on the magnitude of the metric. A notable thing is the
spread of data points along the y-axis for SUVmax. For only this metric, multiple data points
have the value of 0, whereas for the other metrics, the data points are spread around 0 on the
y-axis, but does not take the value of 0 as consistently as for SUVmax.
Along with the mean value, the CI is shown in the plots, and from that, it appears that all
metrics, except mTBRmax, have the value 0 within the CI.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
42
==PAGE:49==
The spread of the data points, are described by the LoA. The range of the LoA for mean-
of-max metrics, are 0.16 and 0.64, respectively. Compared to that of the max-of-max metrics
where the LoA ranges are 1.14 and 1.87, respectively, and thereby the spread of the points, are
smaller for the former metrics.
Finally the ICC was computed for the annotations for all four metrics, and can be seen in
Table 5.11. Overall, the reproducibility measured by the ICC, between the two annotations was
excellent for all metrics. The SUVmax and mSUVmax with ICCs of 0.99 and 1.00, respectively,
are slightly higher than TBRmax and mTBRmax, both with ICCs of 0.97, the same trend as
observed for the PCC values.
Table 5.11: The intraclass correlation of the PET metrics for intra-rater variability
for both left and right carotid artery. The table contains the ICC and corresponding 95% CI
for each of the PET metrics, as well as the significance. **** corresponds to p ≤0.0001
Metric
ICC
CI
Significance
SUVmax
0.99
[0.98 1.00]
****
mSUVmax
1.00
[1.00 1.00]
****
TBRmax
0.97
[0.93 0.99]
****
mTBRmax
0.97
[0.89 0.99]
****
5.5.2
Inter-rater variability
Annotations from two different raters, are shown in scatter plots in Figure 5.11, where rater 1
and 2 are scattered across the first and second axis, respectively. The four PET metrics, SUVmax,
TBRmax, mSUVmax and mTBRmax are shown in Figure 5.11a, b, c and d, respectively.
Furthermore, the mean and standard deviation of all metrics are shown in Table 5.12.
All scatter plots show a positive correlation between the two annotators and no visually sig-
nificant difference between PET values of right and left carotid artery. Plots of SUVmax and
TBRmax, show that the main cluster of data points are close to, and equally distributed around
the line of equality and are in ranges [2,4] and [2,6], respectively. For both metrics two outliers
are present in the plots, with higher disagreement between the raters. From the plots it can be
seen that the outliers deviate in terms of agreement between the raters, and from the mean and
standard deviation in Table 5.12 it appears that the values are also outliers in terms of their
PET values.
The data points for mSUVmax are clustered between 1 and 2.5, with a mean of 1.7. The
points are close to the line of equality, yet it appears the point lie a bit below the line, meaning
that the first annotator tends to make slightly larger annotations. Finally, mTBRmax appear
in the range [1, 3.5] with a mean of 2.04 and as for mSUVmax, slightly larger PET values are
seen for rater 1.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
43
==PAGE:50==
(a) SUVmax
(b) TBRmax
(c) mSUVmax
(d) mTBRmax
Figure 5.11: Inter-rater variability - Scatter plots of PET metrics. SUV metrics are in
g/ml.
Table 5.12: Mean and standard deviation of the PET metrics on the inter-rater
variability subset of data
Metric
a. car. dxt.
a. car. sin.
Rater 1
Rater 2
Rater 1
Rater 2
SUVmax
3.14 ±0.45
3.22 ±0.76
3.22±0.94
3.13 ±0.64
mSUVmax
1.77 ±0.22
1.74 ±0.23
1.63 ±0.25
1.58 ±0.25
TBRmax
3.80 ±1.11
3.96 ±1.60
3.93 ±1.80
3.80 ±1.32
mTBRmax
2.11 ±0.47
2.09 ±0.51
1.97 ±0.59
1.92 ±0.57
The correlation of the two raters’ annotations, can be observed from the plots, and are further
supported by the Pearson coeﬀicients, seen in Table 5.15. The PCCs show a significant cor-
relation for all metrics. The metrics mSUVmax and mTBRmax with PCCs of 0.98 and 0.97,
respectively, have the highest correlation, which is also what can be seen in the scatter plots.
The remaining metrics; SUVmax and TBRmax, have lower PCCs of 0.79 and 0.87, respectively,
which can also be deducted from the scatter plots, as outliers that notably deviate from the
linear correlation are present in these plots.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
44
==PAGE:51==
Table 5.13: The Pearson correlation of the PET metrics for the inter-rater variability
for both left and right carotid artery. The table contains the PCC and corresponding 95% CI
for each of the PET metrics, as well as the significance. **** corresponds to p ≤0.0001
Metric
PCC
CI
Significance
SUVmax
0.79
[0.53 0.91]
****
mSUVmax
0.98
[0.96 0.99]
****
TBRmax
0.87
[0.69 0.95]
****
mTBRmax
0.97
[0.92 0.99]
****
The Bland-Altman plots for the assessment of inter-rater variability, are shown in Figure 5.12,
for the four metrics, in the same order as the scatter plots. Furthermore, the mean values and
the LoA are extracted and presented in Table 5.14
(a) SUVmax
(b) TBRmax
(c) mSUVmax
(d) mTBRmax
Figure 5.12: Inter-rater variability - Bland-Altman plots of PET metrics. SUV metrics
are measured in g/ml
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
45
==PAGE:52==
Table 5.14: Mean and LoA for the PET metrics for the inter-variability
Metric
Mean
LoA
SUVmax
0.00
[-0.94 0.94]
mSUVmax
0.04
[-0.06 0.13]
TBRmax
-0.01
[-1.54 1.51]
mTBRmax
0.03
[-0.24 0.31]
With mean values that ranges from -0.01 to 0.04, it appears that there are no systematic biases
detected between the two raters in all metrics. As for the intra-rater variability test, the metric
SUVmax, is distinctly different from the others, as many data points take the exact value of 0
in this plot. All metrics except mSUVmax have the value 0 within their CI.
The overall spread of the data points over the x-axis, appears to be even for most metrics,
yet a tendency to have increased disagreement with higher PET values appears for mSUVmax.
Still, this metric is the one that has the smallest range of LoA, 0.19, which suggest a high degree
of agreement between the raters. Along with mSUVmax, mTBRmax has the smallest range of
LoA. This agreement is also reflected in the ICC, which are computed and presented in Table
5.15.
The ICC is 0.97 for both mSUVmax and mTBRmax meaning an excellent agreement between
the annotations of the raters. A good to excellent agreement was obtained for the remaining
metrics, SUVmax and TBRmax, with values of 0.80 and 0.88, respectively.
Table 5.15: The intraclass correlation of the PET metrics for inter-rater variability
for both left and right carotid artery. The table contains the ICC and corresponding 95% CI
for each of the PET metrics, as well as the significance. **** corresponds to p ≤0.0001
Metric
ICC
CI
Significance
SUVmax
0.80
[0.55 0.91]
****
mSUVmax
0.97
[0.87 0.99]
****
TBRmax
0.88
[0.71 0.95]
****
mTBRmax
0.97
[0.92 0.99]
****
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
46
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Discussion
The aim of this project was to develop an AI-based segmentation model, which could ultimately
perform on a level comparable to that of a manual annotation. In this section we will evaluate
the performance of the model based on the metrics presented in Chapter 5. These metrics give
a good indication of the isolated performance of the model, however, to assess the applicability
and clinical relevance of this model, further perspectives need to be included in the evaluation.
Thus, in five sections, different aspects are considered to give a complete assessment of the
model performance. In the sections we will I) compare the performance of the model to the
intra- and inter-rater variability, II) consider the clinical significance of the results III) compare
the performance of the model to other medical segmentation models, found in literature, IV)
qualitatively evaluate the model-predicted segmentations and finally, V) consider the evaluation
methods, used in this project.
Finally, we will discuss the target mask as a limitation of the model and future work.
6.1
Isolated model performance
The model performance is based on numerous performance metrics and plots, which all show
overall positive results. The reliability of the model, as measured by the ICC, is excellent for
all metrics. Furthermore, the correlation coeﬀicients for all metrics also reveal that the model
predictions and the manual annotations have a high positive correlation.
For the evaluation of the volume of the segmentation, the Dice score and ASD were computed
and they were 0.87 and 0.62 mm, respectively, note that this is the average of the right and
left carotid artery. These results are satisfying, especially since the Dice score is a metric that
penalizes small structures strongly.
The model predictions of the PET metrics are slightly lower than for the manual annotations;
this is manifested as the positive bias in the Bland-Altman plots in Figure 5.4. However, from
Table 5.1 it appears that while the model predictions of all metrics on average are smaller than
that of the manual annotations, they are very similar to the values for the target masks, which
are also smaller than the manual annotations. This suggests that the model predictions have a
high similarity to the target masks. This is also supported by the high Dice score and low ASD.
Yet, both tend to underestimate PET values in comparison to the manual annotations. The
limitation of the target mask will be discussed further in a later section. It can also be seen from
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
47
==PAGE:54==
Table 5.1 that the model on average predicts higher SUVmax and TBRmax values for a. car. sin.
than a. car. dxt. But as these PET metrics are also higher for the manual annotations, it could
just be an anatomical feature, that is beyond the scope of this project or a random variation in
the data.
A distinction between the right and left carotid artery can also be seen from the LoA in the
Bland-Altman plot, cf. Table 5.3. The limits are narrower for a. car. dxt. than for a. car. sin.
This means that there is a higher uncertainty for the prediction of the latter. The explanation
could be the fact that the volume of a. car. sin. is larger than a. car. dxt. (cf. Table 5.1),
which leaves room for a larger segmentation error.
All in all, these metrics point to a good model, yet further discussion is still necessary.
6.2
Intra- and inter-rater variability
To get a realistic impression of the model performance, it is vital to assess the intra- and inter-
rater variability. This is because the manual annotation of the carotid arteries will vary between
annotations conducted by the same person and between different raters. These are two different
sources of variability, that are estimated through intra- and inter-rater variability tests.
The ICC of a single rater, i.e. the estimation of the intra-rater reliability, indicates excel-
lent agreement over all metrics, and the ICC between two raters, i.e. inter-rater reliability, is
excellent for mSUVmax and mTBRmax, and good to excellent for SUVmax and TBRmax. This
means that the variability is small for both cases, yet the intra-rater reliability is better than
the inter-rater reliability, as expected.
The reliability was tested on a subset of 10 scans, resulting in 20 annotations - one for each
carotid artery. Due to the small size of the subset, the results were compared to the inter-rater
variability test from the paper by Jensen et al. (2022) [4], to ensure that our results were rep-
resentative. Jensen et al. also present their data with Bland-Altman plots, and compared to
Figure 5.12, it can be observed that the mean values are very similar for the two studies, yet the
LoA are slightly wider for Jensen et al. Overall, we can assume that our results are representable,
even though a higher agreement between raters is seen in this project.
The fact that the intra-variability, although small, still exists means that when one person repeats
the annotation of a scan, it will never result in the exact same annotation. This small discrepancy
is an inherent, random noise, which cannot be eliminated, but can be estimated as the intra-
rater variability. The second source of variation, the inter-rater variability, is the difference that
can be measured between raters. Since the method needs to be applicable even when performed
by different raters, the inter-rater bias must be considered clinically insignificant. As stated by
Bland and Altman (1986): ”Repeatability is relevant to the study of method comparison because
the repeatabilities of the methods of measurement limit the amount of agreement which is possible”
[37]. Hence, the optimal performance of the segmentation model, is not necessarily to produce
the exact same segmentation that it is evaluated against, but rather that the dissimilarity
between the two, is within the same limits as the intra- and inter-rater variability.
To compare the model performance with the intra- and inter-rater variability, the LoA of
the Bland-Altman plot are considered. For SUVmax and mSUVmax the limits are wider for the
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
48
==PAGE:55==
model than for the intra-rater results, but compared to the inter-rater variability, the model
present with comparable or even narrower limits. For TBRmax and mTBRmax, the limits are
comparable to that of both the intra- and inter-rater variability. This indicate that the variability
between the predictions of the model and the manual annotation, is not clinically significant,
following the previously stated logic, that the inter-rater variability is a measurement of the
limit of the amount of agreement possible.
It is also worth noting that the model’s own intra-rater variability is 0, and thus its repeata-
bility is a 100%. This is because the model-predicted segmentations are created based on a
deterministic computational algorithm, and thereby the exact same output will be produced if
the same input is given twice. This is a clear advantage of the method.
We have now argued that that model performance is comparable to that of two independent
raters, but it is also important to consider whether the raters’ manual annotations are of rea-
sonable quality. The two raters were trained in annotation together and the restraints of the
annotation, such as number of slices, how to trace the bifurcation or handle diﬀicult scans etc.,
were strictly agreed upon. As stated previously, the inter-rater variability is smaller in this
project, compared to literature. These annotations are considered the ground truth, as they
are the ones the model is trained and evaluated on, even though the annotations might not
be a representative example of how the annotations of clinicians, researchers or other trained
annotators might look. The variation between the two raters might be smaller, due to the higher
interdependence between their processes. If the model was to be used on a greater scale, the
predictions should not just reflect the annotation style of two very similar raters, but rather the
model should be trained on annotations from a larger selection of raters. Note that this will
increase the inter-rater variability and deteriorate the Dice score of the model, as predictions
would then be an average of many different annotation techniques.
6.3
Clinical significance
While the applicability of medical segmentation models is wide, this model was designed for a
specific clinical purpose. Therefore, the performance should be evaluated with the clinical task
in mind.
The use of PET imaging for the study of atherosclerosis is not novel, and previous studies
have established guidelines for optimal usage in terms of metrics and choice of vessels to inspect
for other radiotracers, such as [F 18]-FDG. Such guidelines do not exist for Cu-DOTATATE
uptake. Thus to evaluate if the error of our model predictions is within a clinically acceptable
boundary, we cannot simply hold it up against a clinical standard. However, Jensen et al. state
that TBRmax is the most robust metric to use for quantifying carotid Cu-DOTATATE uptake
and using for classification of different stages of CVD. Here it is necessary to point out that a
”robust” metric, is not the same for their study as for ours. In our project, we have found the
mean-of-max metrics (mSUVmax and mTBRmax) to be the most robust, as the disagreement
between model and manual annotation is the smallest for these metrics. Taking the average
of maximum values, reduces the importance of each slice annotation and thereby the outlying
max-values, which are captured in the max-of-max metrics (SUVmax and TBRmax). This means
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
49
==PAGE:56==
that the range of the mean-of-max values is narrower and the agreement between model and
manual annotation is higher. The larger variability of max-of-max metrics, makes them better
predictive indicators, as limits can be more precise on a large scale compared to a small one.
The fact that the higher variability of the max-of-max metrics lead to higher uncertainty in the
model estimates, is not optimal, but as we concluded earlier, the variability does not surpass
that of the inter-rater variability, and therefore, the TBRmax predictions are still very valid for
the model.
Manual annotation is a time-consuming task, that requires training, and thus, the clinical po-
tential of this segmentation model is to assist the manual annotation or even substitute it
completely. If the automatic segmentation was implemented, it would save a lot of time, and
thereby increase the applicability of automatic staging of severity of CVD from PET values in
the clinic, as well as other applications that include extraction of SUV from PET/CT scans.
The model can produce a segmentation of the left and right carotid artery in 63 seconds per
scan, whereas the manual segmentation takes approximately 14.5 minutes. The 93% decrease in
time, demonstrates the potential of using an automated segmentation, compared to the manual
segmentation.
An important aspect to consider if the model is to be used clinically, is that it should be
able to generalize to other patients. While these patients were all drawn from a joint group of
NET-patients, a reasonable degree of variability between the patients can still be assumed. The
patient cohort have different degrees of atherosclerosis, which means that the carotid arteries
might look very different among the patients. This makes the model more robust to different
anatomies, both in terms of morphology and CT intensity. As no scans have been excluded due
to poor quality or artifacts, the dataset is a realistic representation of clinical CT scans.
A common problem when developing algorithms for medical data, is the high variability due
to differences in data acquisition. It has not been tested in this project, but it can be assumed
that the performance of our model will not be robust, when presented with scans acquired on
different scanners, i.e. the performance will deteriorate. Our model has only been trained on
data from one scanner with very particular settings, so if the model should be used on a larger
scale, it should be trained on data from different devices and clinics, to improve the model’s
ability to generalize.
6.4
Performance comparison
When judging the performance of our model, it is relevant to compare it with the performance
others have obtained on the same or a similar task. Piri et al., 2022 [5], compared the perfor-
mance of an AI-based segmentation method with the manual annotation of the carotid arteries.
They used a 3D U-Net that had been trained on 50 scans, where the carotid arteries had been
manually annotated from their emergence to the end of the bifurcation. They tested it on a new
dataset of 49 NaF PET/CT scans of healthy subjects and patients with angina pectoris.
Their manual annotations had on average a smaller volume than ours for both right and left
carotid artery. Their manual annotations had a mean volume of 6.96 and 8.36 ml for the right
and left carotid artery, respectively, compared to ours which were 8.88 and 11.72 ml. This may
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
50
==PAGE:57==
be partially due to their annotation ending at the end of the bifurcation while ours ends 0.75
to 2.1 cm after the bifurcation. The segmentations generated by their model had even smaller
volumes (5.08 and 7.02 ml). Our model also created segmentations with smaller volumes than
our manual annotations. However, their model showed a larger underestimation with a mean
difference of 1.89 and 1.34 for the left and right carotid artery, respectively, while ours was only
0.29 and 0.87 ml smaller on average. We had narrower LoA for the left carotid artery than
Piri et al., but their LoA were narrower for the right carotid artery. They achieved an average
Dice score of 0.63 ± 0.16 for the right carotid artery and 0.72 ± 0.1 for the left. Both these
Dice scores are significantly lower than ours, which are on average 0.86 ± 0.11 and 0.88 ± 0.04,
for right and left carotid artery, respectively. The somewhat lower standard deviations of our
Dice scores also indicate that the good overlap of our model-predicted segmentations with the
manual annotations are consistent. Overall, our model performs better in terms of making ac-
curate model-predicted masks. The main explanation for this is likely that we have trained on
a larger dataset (154 scans). Our use of the state-of-the-art nnUNet framework may also have
contributed to the performance.
Wasserthal et al. (2023) [6], trained a nnUNet segmentation model on 1204 CT scans to segment
104 different anatomic structures, including the right and left common carotid arteries. Their
model is available as a tool that they have named TotalSegmentator.
They do not include
the bifurcation in their segmentation of the carotid arteries, but rather end their annotation
right below it. The overall Dice score for TotalSegmentator is 0.943. For the right and left
carotid arteries, they obtain a Dice score of 0.904 and 0.931, respectively [38]. Thus, they have
obtained a significantly better performance than us. However, it is important to note that they
did not include the bifurcation, which is relevant for two reasons. Firstly, the bifurcation is the
most challenging part for our model to segment correctly. Thereby, including the bifurcation
in the segmentation is likely to decrease the Dice score.
Secondly, the bifurcation and the
initial segment of a.
car. interna can arguably be considered the most clinically important
segment of the carotid arteries to include when considering atherosclerosis. The bifurcation is
a hotspot for vulnerable atheromatous plaques, and thus it is very relevant to include, when
evaluating a patient’s atherosclerotic burden based on extracted PET values from the arteries.
Nevertheless, it would be interesting to see how the PET metrics would compare, when extracted
by segmentations from TotalSegmentator. This has not been done as it was not within the time
scope of the project, but could be future work.
6.5
Qualitative evaluation
To evaluate the quality of the predicted masks we have compared them to the manual annotations
to inspect when and how often the overlap is good and in which cases the model performs poorly.
In general, the model is very good at locating the carotid arteries. This is in itself an achievement,
as the task requires training before the carotid arteries are easily spotted by the human eye. In
the few cases where the model locates a wrong structure, the scans are of poor quality due to
artifacts or low contrast, and the raters expressed uncertainty in their annotation. In cases with
poor quality, it can be very challenging to make a manual annotation, and thus, it is important
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
51
==PAGE:58==
to keep in mind that the manual annotations are the raters’, i.e. us, the authors, best guess,
which may very well, in the challenging cases, be wrong.
In most of the scans of the test set, the model prediction is very well aligned with the manual
annotation (see Figure 5.5), but at times a misalignment can be observed. This misalignment
occurs most often in the first and last slices of the segmentation and in the slices around the
bifurcation. This makes sense, as these are locations where the manual annotations may vary.
The blurriness in the images caused by the spatial resolution means that it is not always clear
in exactly which slice a vessel is branching. Thus, there is uncertainty around which slice the
annotation should start, i.e. which slice the carotid arteries branch from aorta or brachiocephali-
cus, and which slice the bifurcation takes place. However, the model deals with this uncertainty
differently than a human annotator. The upper images in Figure 5.6 illustrate this. The upper
left corner shows a slice at the bifurcation, where the model has made a ROI that includes
interna and half of externa. Rather than choosing between seeing the slice as before or after
the bifurcation, the model has made an in-between guess. The same is the case for the slice
in the upper right corner. Instead of choosing between including or excluding the slice in the
segmentation the model has made a small ROI. Thereby, the model sometimes makes ROIs that
anatomically and logically do not make sense. However, whether this is a problem or not is
debatable. Clinicians may view the anatomically incorrect ROIs as unacceptable. In that case
a solution could be including a step in the workflow where the model-made segmentations are
manually checked and adjusted as needed. However, as discussed above, the agreement between
the model and the manual annotations is as good as the agreement between two different raters
when it comes to estimating PET metrics. Thus, the sometimes weird behavior of the model
predictions is not an obstacle for a good PET metric estimate, and in that light it may not be
a significant issue.
6.6
Evaluation methods
To evaluate the model’s ability to create masks of the carotid arteries, which can be used to
extract reliable PET metrics, we compared it to the conventional method of manually annotating
the scans. We compared the two methods by calculating the PCC and ICC and by inspecting
scatter plots and Bland-Altman plots of the metrics. The results of this analysis have been
discussed above, but in order to trust the reliability of the drawn conclusions, it is important to
consider whether the chosen analysis methods are actually measuring what we are interested in
and doing so in a reliable way.
From the scatter plot and the PCC we concluded that the two methods are highly correlated.
However, we cannot use the correlation as an argument for saying that the two methods can be
used interchangeably. The reason for this is that the two methods need to both be correlated
and have a high degree of agreement. Even though two methods have high correlation they may
show poor agreement [37]. If all the points in a scatter plot lie on a straight line, the correlation
will be perfect. This could be the case if all metrics from one method were exactly double that
of the first method. Clearly, this would not be desirable, as the two methods would provide
vastly different measures for the same underlying value. In other words, correlation does not
tell us about the bias between two methods.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
52
==PAGE:59==
In contrast, the Bland-Altman plot is useful for inspecting the agreement between methods.
Bland-Altman plots provide information about both the bias and the variability between the
methods. When considering the bias, i.e. the mean of the difference, it may seem obvious to
judge it by whether it is statistically significantly different from 0 or not. This can be deduced
from the CI of the mean, which is shown in the Bland-Altman plot, or by performing a paired
t-test. However, it is important to be aware not to equate statistical significance with clinical
significance. Statistical significance depends on the sample size in such a way that even a small
bias will be deemed significant, if the sample size is large enough, while the same bias would
not be classified as significant, if the sample size is small. Instead, what should be considered
is the clinical relevance of the bias. The same is the case for the LoA. If the LoA are of a
magnitude that clinically makes no difference, then we can consider the agreement between the
methods acceptable. The Bland-Altman plot also allows one to observe if there is a relationship
between the magnitude of the metric and the variability. For mTBRmax there seems to be a
larger variability in the difference between the estimate from the manual annotation and the
model prediction when mTBRmax is large, compared to when it is small. The same may be the
case for mSUVmax and mTBRmax, although the pattern is not clear enough to say so with any
certainty for these metrics (see Figure 5.4). When the variability depends on the magnitude of
the metric, the LoA will be too wide for small values and too narrow for large values. In this
case the dependency on the magnitude of the metrics is small enough that it can be considered
negligible. However, if a more accurate calculation of the LoA for the larger values was desired,
a logarithmic transformation of the data could be applied.
Unlike PCC, ICC takes both correlation and agreement into account and thus, it can be
used as a quantitative measure of the reliability between two methods [35]. Based on the ICC
the reliability of the model predictions for extracting PET metrics is excellent, as the ICC is
higher than 0.90 for all four metrics (see Table 5.4).
When calculating the LoA, it is assumed that the samples are independent. However, the samples
in our dataset are in fact not independent as there are multiple scans of the same patient. In
the test set we have 2-4 scans of 16 patients, in total 38 scans. Bland and Altman (2007) [39],
explain how to take repeated scans into account when calculating the LoA. Doing so results in
narrower LoA. Nonetheless, we have used the usual way of calculating LoA without taking the
effect of repeated measures into account, as this was the only implementation that was available
in the statistical package, we have applied (Pingouin version 0.5.5). However, Bland and Altman,
(2007), go through an example, where the LoA calculated with and without consideration for
the repeated measurements, only vary on the second decimal point. Bland and Altman explain
that the reason for this small difference is that ”the number of pairs per subject is quite small
and less than the number of subjects”. In the example, there are 60 samples from 12 subjects
with 3-7 replications. As we have less replications and more subjects than in the mentioned
example, the effect on the LoA must in our case be very small. Thus, we deem this deviation
from the assumption of independent samples to be insignificant.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
53
==PAGE:60==
6.7
Limitation of the model
The target masks used to train the model are not identical to the manual annotations, even
though the target masks are just a differently formatted representation of the annotations. This
is due to an inherent noise from the conversion between the OsiriX MD and Python file formats.
Upon inspection of Figure 5.2, it is clear the the edges of the manual annotation ROI (blue)
are smooth compared to that of the target mask ROI (red). A mask is an image that only
takes on discrete values indicating whether each voxel belongs to the carotid artery or to the
background. Thereby, the resolution of the target mask is limited to one voxel. This is what
gives the ROI its edgy or pixilated shape. However, the manual annotation created in OsiriX
MD is not limited by the location of the voxels, but rather has a smooth edge. When the SUVs
are extracted from the PET image these differences in shape affect which values are extracted
near the border. In our case the pixilated shape of the target masks results in lower estimations
of the PET metrics.
The model predictions and the target masks have the same pixilated appearance, which is
presumably why the PET values, cf. Table 5.1 are more alike for the two, compared to the
manual annotation. As the model prediction obtains a high similarity to the target mask, it
should be considered, that the limiting factor of the model performance is not in the model itself,
but rather in the similarity between the target mask and manual annotation. This dissimilarity
seems more pronounced due to the fact that the segmented objects, the carotid arteries, are
small structures with a width of only approximately a dozen pixels.
A solution to such an issue would be to upsample the CT image, to get a higher resolution
of the masks, effectively making them smoother. However, this is not possible to do in OsiriX
MD. Overall, this method of exporting the manual annotation to the reconstructed target mask
is not ideal, and may result in masks with imperfections. Since there is no in-built method
for exporting the ROIs in a Python-compatible format, OsiriX MD is not the most compatible
program for machine learning purposes. For future projects it could therefore be considered to
create the manual annotations in a different, more compatible program.
6.8
Future work
The results of the segmentation model have proven to be promising, still, further improvements
can be implemented to achieve a better performance. The first thing that should be addressed
is the size of the training set. The model was trained on 154 scans, which is a small dataset for
machine learning purposes. We assume that if the size of the training dataset is increased, a
better performance can be obtained. And as previously mentioned, if the model is to be used
clinically, it is important, that it is able to reliably process any kind of PET/CT scan, no mat-
ter the scanner type and acquisition parameters. Thus, to improve the model’s generalization
abilities, CT scans from different scanners and hospitals should be included in the training data.
The network configuration, that we chose, was a full resolution 3D U-Net. This choice was
made based on the assumption that a 3D U-Net performs better than a 2D U-Net on three-
dimensional data. However, as the ROIs were drawn on consecutive two-dimensional slices of a
three-dimensional structure, it could be interesting to investigate if the performance would be
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
54
==PAGE:61==
enhanced if a 2D full resolution configuration was selected instead.
It was previously stated that a limiting factor of the model performance was the similarity
between the manual annotation and the target mask. If it was possible to obtain a perfect recon-
struction of the manual annotation as a target mask, the model predictions, would presumably
have higher similarity to the manual annotations. While this does not seem to be possible at the
moment, some improvement can still be done to the target mask construction pipeline. Though
most target masks are correctly constructed from the manual annotations, some targets have a
small inaccuracy due to errors in the exported RGB-CT image. The source of these errors has
not been identified as it requires an extensive investigation of OsiriX MD’s functions. As this
is a time-consuming process, and due to the fact that these errors are scarce and do not affect
the PET value for the prediction, this has not been looked into in this project.
From where the model is now, there is still some way to go, before it is ready to be used clinically.
The pipeline from CT scan to a PET metric that reflects the uptake in the carotid arteries, is at
this point divided between OsiriX MD and Python. In an optimal scenario, everything would
done in one software. For this to work, the extraction of PET values should be independent of
OsiriX MD, and done solely in Python. Furthermore, the model should segment the blood pool
ROI as well as the arteries, so there would be no need for a manual annotator. These things could
be implemented, but taking the annotator completely out of the process, will cause new prob-
lems. If the model prediction needs to be corrected, a user interface needs to be integrated with
the Python workflow. Creating or integrating such a user interface is a huge task, but without it
there would be no way for the annotator to adjust the ROI, if the entire process is to be done in
Python. Thus, a better solution is a semi-automated algorithm, where the segmentation model
is integrated with OsiriX MD. The model could then provide a prediction, that would be im-
ported directly into OsiriX MD, where it would be either approved or corrected by an annotator.
An issue when working with PET data, is the low resolution, which results in the ROI sometimes
having spill-in from surrounding biological structures with strong PET uptake, such as lymph
nodes. This problem has not been addressed in this project, but should be, if further work is done
with this model. As the PET metrics relies on maximum values, a high value from an adjacent
lymph node leads to misinterpretation, so to avoid spill-in, the ROI should be readjusted. The
PET values from lymph nodes are distinctively higher than that of the artery wall, so scans
that have suffered from spill-in, can easily be identified. Thus, an algorithm that flags these
scans, could be implemented in the pipeline, so the annotator is notified, when a scan should
be altered. In the same manner, scans could be flagged, when a model prediction has a high
uncertainty. It should be kept in mind, that the goal of this model is to assist the annotator,
so implementing small tools and actions in the pipeline, that helps the user, is key to obtaining
the best possible results.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
55
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this project, we have trained an nnUNet segmentation model on 154 clinical CT scans to
segment the carotid arteries. The model obtained a Dice score of 0.87.
We have used the model predictions to extract the SUVs from the corresponding Cu-DOTA-
TATE PET scans and calculated four PET metrics for 38 scans, which the model was not
trained on. Comparing the model-predicted PET metrics to those we obtained from manual
annotations, we found that the model had a tendency to underestimate the metrics, however only
very slightly. When the manual annotations were converted to target masks, the transformation
from a smooth to a pixilated shape resulted in an underestimation of the PET metrics, likely
causing the underestimation of the model predictions. Nevertheless, the ICC between the model
predictions and the manual annotations were excellent for the metrics. The estimates of the
PET metrics from the manual annotations vary when repeated by a different or even by the
same rater, making some degree of variability unavoidable. The LoA between the model and the
manual annotations were comparable to the intra- and inter-rater variability of the PET metrics
from the manual annotation. Overall, the AI-based model segmentation can be considered as a
reliable method to estimate the PET metrics.
Upon visual inspection of the model-predicted segmentations it can be concluded that the
model in general is able to identify the carotid arteries.
In most cases the model finds the
bifurcation and follows a. car. interna afterwards, as desired. However, a limitation to the
model is its behavior in areas with uncertainty. Around the bifurcation and in the start and
end of the segmentation, the model, in some cases, makes ROIs that anatomically do not make
sense. Despite the bifurcation being a challenging area for a segmentation model, its clinical
importance makes it valuable to include in the model.
The model was able to create a segmentation of both carotid arteries in just 63 seconds, while
the manual annotations takes approximately 14.5 minutes to perform. The time eﬀiciency of
the AI-based segmentation in combination with its good reliability for estimating PET metrics
for atherosclerosis, demonstrates the potential in using segmentation models on medical images,
not least when it comes to PET/CT scans.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
56
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 8
References
[1]
Mattingly, Quinn. Cardiovascular diseases. 2021. url: https://www.who.int/health-topics/
cardiovascular-diseases#tab=tab_1.
[2]
HRI. Atherosclerosis: causes and risk factors. url: https://www.hri.org.au/health/learn/
cardiovascular-disease/atherosclerosis-causes-and-risk-factors.
[3]
Maier, Alexander et al. “Uncovering atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease by PET imag-
ing”. In: Nature Reviews Cardiology 2024 21.9 (Apr. 2024), pp. 632–651. url: https://
www.nature.com/articles/s41569-024-01009-x.
[4]
Jensen, Jacob K. et al. “[64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE PET metrics in the investigation of atheroscle-
rotic inflammation in humans”. In: Journal of Nuclear Cardiology 30.3 (June 2023), pp. 986–
1000. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1071358123000156?via%
3Dihub.
[5]
Piri, Reza et al. “Common carotid segmentation in 18F‐sodium fluoride PET/CT scans:
Head‐to‐head comparison of artificial intelligence‐based and manual method”. In: Clinical
Physiology and Functional Imaging 43.2 (Mar. 2022), p. 71. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/articles/PMC10100011/.
[6]
Wasserthal, Jakob et al. “TotalSegmentator: Robust Segmentation of 104 Anatomic Struc-
tures in CT Images”. In: Radiology. Artificial intelligence 5.5 (Sept. 2023). url: https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37795137/.
[7]
Isensee, Fabian et al. “nnU-Net: a self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomed-
ical image segmentation”. In: Nature Methods 2020 18:2 18.2 (Dec. 2020), pp. 203–211.
url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-020-01008-z.
[8]
Cesare, M.D., Bixby, H., and Gaziano, T. Worlds heart report 2023 confronting the world’s
number one killer. Tech. rep. World Heart Federation, 2023. url: https://medbox.org/
document/world-heart-report-2023-confronting-the-worlds-number-one-killer.
[9]
Structure and Function of Blood Vessels | Anatomy and Physiology II. 2022. url: https:
//courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-ap2/chapter/structure-and-function-of-blood-vessels/.
[10]
Norris, Tommie L.. and Tuan, Rupa Lalchandani. Porth’s essentials of pathophysiology.
Fifth. Wolters Kluwer, 2020, p. 641.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
57
==PAGE:64==
[11]
Jebari-Benslaiman, Shifa et al. “Pathophysiology of Atherosclerosis”. In: International
Journal of Molecular Sciences 23.6 (Mar. 2022), p. 3346. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/articles/PMC8954705/.
[12]
Mancini, Mary C. Carotid artery surgery - series—Normal anatomy. 2023. url: https:
//medlineplus.gov/ency/presentations/100124_1.htm.
[13]
Global Health Estimates: Life expectancy and leading causes of death and disability. 2021.
url: https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/mortality-and-global-health-estimates.
[14]
Bladbjerg, Else Marie and Jacobsen, Jens Brings. Sygdomslære for ikke-klinikere. 2019,
p. 538.
[15]
Sethi, Danielle, Gofur, Ekramul M., and Munakomi, Sunil. “Anatomy, Head and Neck:
Carotid Arteries”. In: StatPearls (July 2023). url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK545238/.
[16]
Leahy, R. M., Clackdoyle, R., and Noo, Frédéric. “Computed Tomography”. In: The Es-
sential Guide to Image Processing (Jan. 2009), pp. 741–776.
[17]
Smith, Nadine barrie and Webb, Andrew. Introduction to Medical Imaging: Physics, En-
gineering and Clinical Applications. 1st. CambridgeUniversityPress, 2011.
[18]
Beister, Marcel, Kolditz, Daniel, and Kalender, Willi A. “Iterative reconstruction methods
in X-ray CT”. In: Physica Medica 28.2 (Apr. 2012), pp. 94–108.
[19]
Schöckel, Laura et al. “Developments in X-Ray Contrast Media and the Potential Impact
on Computed Tomography”. In: Investigative Radiology 55.9 (Sept. 2020), pp. 592–597.
url: https://journals.lww.com/investigativeradiology/fulltext/2020/09000/developments_
in_x_ray_contrast_media_and_the.9.aspx.
[20]
Kinahan, Paul E. and Fletcher, James W. “PET/CT Standardized Uptake Values (SUVs)
in Clinical Practice and Assessing Response to Therapy”. In: Seminars in ultrasound, CT,
and MR 31.6 (Dec. 2010), p. 496. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3026294/.
[21]
Woolley, Michael and Czarniecki, Marcin. “PET radiotracers”. In: Radiopaedia.org (July
2017).
[22]
Blagov, Alexander V. et al. “The Role of Macrophages in the Pathogenesis of Atheroscle-
rosis”. In: Cells 12.4 (Feb. 2023), p. 522. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC9954519/.
[23]
Sanli, Yasemin et al. “Neuroendocrine tumor diagnosis and management: 68 Ga-DOTATATE
PET/CT”. In: American Journal of Roentgenology 211.2 (Aug. 2018), pp. 267–277. url:
https://ajronline.org/doi/10.2214/AJR.18.19881.
[24]
Malmberg, Catarina et al. “64Cu-DOTATATE for Noninvasive Assessment of Atheroscle-
rosis in Large Arteries and Its Correlation with Risk Factors: Head-to-Head Compari-
son with 68Ga-DOTATOC in 60 Patients”. In: Journal of Nuclear Medicine 56.12 (Dec.
2015), pp. 1895–1900. url: https://jnm.snmjournals.org/content/56/12/1895%20https:
//jnm.snmjournals.org/content/56/12/1895.abstract.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
58
==PAGE:65==
[25]
Kumre, Harshalkumar. What is Deep Learning and How Does It Work? Why Is It So
Popular. 2022. url: https://medium.com/@kumreharshalkumar/what-is-deep-learning-and-
how-does-it-work-why-is-it-so-popular-aaf4cb33544f.
[26]
Yao, Wenjian et al. “From CNN to Transformer: A Review of Medical Image Segmentation
Models”. In: Journal of Imaging Informatics in Medicine (2024). url: https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/38438696/.
[27]
Ahmed, Zubair. Applications of Foreground-Background separation with Semantic Seg-
mentation. 2019. url: https://learnopencv.com/applications- of- foreground- background-
separation-with-semantic-segmentation/.
[28]
Ronneberger, Olaf, Fischer, Philipp, and Brox, Thomas. “U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)
9351 (2015), pp. 234–241.
[29]
Gupta, Prateek. nnU-Net : The no-new-UNet for automatic segmentation. 2020. url:
https://medium.com/miccai-educational-initiative/nnu-net-the-no-new-unet-for-automatic-
segmentation-8d655f3f6d2a.
[30]
London Data Consulting (LDC). Inference in Machine Learning and Deep Learning: What
is it? How to use it? Ultimate Guide 2023. 2023. url: https://londondataconsulting.medium.
com/inference-in-machine-learning-and-deep-learning-what-is-it-how-to-use-it-ultimate-
guide-2023-152fed531edc.
[31]
Sandhu, Armaanjeet Singh. Calculating the Sørensen–Dice Coeﬀicient: A Simplified Guide.
2023. url: https://medium.com/the-research-nest/calculating-the-s%C3%B8rensen-dice-
coefficient-a-simplified-guide-3b59a1829a82.
[32]
Rao, Divya et al. “Automated segmentation of the larynx on computed tomography images:
a review”. In: Biomedical Engineering Letters 12.2 (May 2022), pp. 175–183. url: https:
//link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13534-022-00221-3.
[33]
Al-Kababji, Ayman et al. “Automated liver tissues delineation techniques: A systematic
survey on machine learning current trends and future orientations”. In: Engineering Ap-
plications of Artificial Intelligence 117 (Jan. 2023), p. 105532.
[34]
Lane, David M et al. Introduction to Statistics. 2003.
[35]
Koo, Terry K. and Li, Mae Y. “A Guideline of Selecting and Reporting Intraclass Correla-
tion Coeﬀicients for Reliability Research”. In: Journal of Chiropractic Medicine 15.2 (June
2016), p. 155. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4913118/.
[36]
Simundic, Ana-Maria. Statistical analysis in method comparison studies part one. 2016.
url: https://acutecaretesting.org/en/articles/statistical-analysis-in-method-comparison-
studies-part-one.
[37]
Martin Bland, J. and Altman, Douglas G. “Statistical methods for assessming agreement
between two methods of clinical methods”. In: The Lancet 327.8476 (Feb. 1986), pp. 307–
310.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
59
==PAGE:66==
[38]
Wasserthal, Jakob. TotalSegmentator. 2023. url: https://github.com/wasserth/TotalSegmentator.
[39]
Bland, J. Martin and Altman, Douglas G. “Agreement Between Methods of Measurement
with Multiple Observations Per Individual”. In: Journal of Biopharmaceutical Statistics
17.4 (July 2007), pp. 571–582. url: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
10543400701329422.
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
60
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
Learning curves
(a) Fold 2
(b) Fold 3
(c) Fold 4
(d) Fold 5
Figure A.1: The learning curves of the last four training folds in the 5 fold cross
validation. First fold in shown in figure 5.1
Segmentation methods of arteries in patients scanned with [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
61
