==PAGE:1==
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant
Configuration
and
Market
Integration
for
Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing
LCOH2 with Renewables
Master Thesis
February, 2025
By
Dante Augusto Gregorini
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic
citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Akademivej, Building 358,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Energy Economics and Modelling, Depart-
ment of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc in Sustainable Energy, with specialization
in Energy Conversion and Storage.
Dante Augusto Gregorini - s223458
Signature
Date
ii
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Sustainable, cost-effective hydrogen production is key to transitioning into a new energy economy that can
provide an alternative to fossil fuels, where the EU’s climate neutrality goals are met. This study explores the
optimization of Power-to-Hydrogen (PtH2) plant configurations and their integration into electricity markets
to minimize the Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCoH2), all while applying renewable energy sources (RES)
along the way. It integrates the energy system model Balmorel for long-term price projections and OptiPlant
for the techno-economic optimization of the hydrogen plant. Later, these inputs are merged and used as
the base for a techno-economic assessment of the PtH2 feasibility throughout its lifetime across different
European locations.
This research focuses on five strategic sites: Esbjerg (Denmark), Skellefteå (Sweden), Huelva (Spain), Ro-
stock (Germany), and Klaipėda (Lithuania). They were chosen based on their renewable sources availability
and proximity to infrastructure, such as the European Hydrogen Backbone (EHB), and high-emission indus-
trial sites. Through scenario-based analysis, the study evaluates different plant configurations, including
grid-only, mixed (RES + grid), and fully off-grid setups for various technologies like Alkaline (AEC), Proton
Exchange Membrane (PEM), and Solid Oxide Electrolyzers (SOEC). The results here highlight that mixed
configurations combined with AEC or PEM are the most cost-effective solutions, reducing grid dependency
while maintaining a flexible operation.
Among the locations studied, Denmark has the lowest LCOH2 with €2.49/kgH2 in a wind-driven AEC con-
figuration, followed by Spain’s AEC with €2.90/kgH2 which benefits from high solar resources. On the other
hand, Sweden’s fully renewable grid (98%) allows for a green-certified H2 production at €3.25/kgH2 with-
out any additional RES infrastructure. Sensitivity analysis of electricity prices findings show how important
is aligning and optimizing the plant’s operation with peak renewable generation periods. To maintain the
project’s financial viability securing power purchase agreements (PPAs) is a must in the long-term.
This research provides a framework to assess the PtH2 project’s feasibility by bridging energy market mod-
eling with detailed plant optimization. This model contributes to optimize the resources available and estab-
lishing hydrogen’s role in the market without compromising financial returns. Future work should explore
the regulatory H2 support and compliance, perform further sensitivity analysis, and reduce uncertainty on
electricity estimations.
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This master’s thesis was written in collaboration with the Department of Technology, Management, and
Economics at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and European Energy A/S. I am grateful to my
academic supervisors, Rasmus Bramstoft, Assistant Professor (DTU), and Nicolas Jean Bernard Campion,
Postdoctoral Researcher (DTU), for their guidance, patience, and assistance throughout this project.
Additionally, I extend my utmost gratitude to my industry mentor and friend, Alexander Reumert-Kristensen,
PhD, from European Energy A/S, for believing in me, consistently pushing me to bring out my best, and for
the endless talks on electrolyzers, which I am hopefully now closer to understand. I could not have asked
for a better mentor to guide me through this journey. Your insights and mentorship have been instrumental
in completing this thesis. Thank you for your patience, support, and the numerous discussions that have
significantly improved my work.
A huge thanks to my lovely family for their wise counsel in every moment and unwavering support. Despite
the physical distance, the warmth of your love and the strength of your presence have always been felt.
Thank you for raising me with care and instilling the values guiding my life. We will celebrate this achieve-
ment together soon. Your constant love and encouragement have been my greatest strength throughout
my Master’s degree. To my roommates in this Danish adventure, Juli, Gonza, Seba, and Fabi, who have
become a part of this greater family and make me feel at home every day. Gracias totales!
I acknowledge my Argentinian and Italian ancestors, whose courage and determination to seek a better life
have set an example and paved the way for my journey. Their resilience and spirit of exploration continue
to inspire me to pursue my dreams and opportunities, just as they did in their time. I am deeply grateful for
the legacy they have passed down, which continues to guide and empower me.
Finally, I express my heartfelt gratitude to my incredible colleagues, who have made these past two and a
half years an unforgettable experience. Your friendship, support, and endless encouragement have trans-
formed every challenge into an adventure and every success into a shared celebration. The laughter,
late-night discussions, and memorable moments we have shared have enriched my academic journey and
truly shaped me into a better person. Being surrounded by such kind, inspiring, and genuine people has
been a true gift.
A special thank you to Andrés Costa, Franco Bloise, Alexandre Gimeno, Alberto Lahoz Soler, Sebastián
Saladino, Natalia Pérez Jiménez, Marian Fenton Aguilar, Virginia Natonek, Neus Ferrer, Dayana Harris
Vanegas, Anne-Kathrin Juhl, Amaia Ortiz de Zarate Osa, Maria Philipsen Hally, Christina Pagourtzi, Jurek
von Petersdorff-Campen, Finnur Mauritz Einarsson, Samantha Marie Rebolledo, Luciano Blachman, Alex
Abades Grimes, Philipp Becker, Giulia Dalmonte, Pablo Blanco Canella, Maël Grandin, Daniel Moctezuma-
Baker, Edgardo Reyes and Carla Soleta for your exceptional support and friendship. You have made this
journey brighter and more meaningful. I am grateful for the wonderful memories we have created and the
lifelong bonds we have formed, which I look forward to keeping.
I will always carry you on my memory to all mentioned above and to those who have left a mark throughout
my life. It is impossible for me to ask for a better experience than what I have had in Denmark so far. I will
continue to thrive and do my best to make you and myself proud. Last but not least, thank you for reading
this right now and for spending your valuable time. I hope this can be an inspiration for further analysis, and
I wish you all the best in your journey and leave you an inspiration phrase to motivate yourself in that new
endeavor.
”The impediment to action advances action. What stands in the way becomes the way.”
— Marcus Aurelius, Meditations
iv
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methods
4
2.1
LCoH2 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Production Pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Types of Electrolyzers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Suitable Locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Power Price Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Results and Discussion
10
3.1
Optimal Locations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Power Price Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Plant Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Conclusion
16
4.1
Cost and resource utilization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Minimizing LCoH2: When, where,and how? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Configuration and go-to Market Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Bibliography
18
A Appendix
21
A.1 Electrolyzers Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
A.2 Hydrogen Colors and Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
A.3 EU Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
A.4 Techno-economic input for OptiPlant Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
B Coordinates and Maps
24
C Electricity Forecast
26
D Supplementary Data
28
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Abbreviations and Nomenclature
AEC
Alkaline Electrolysis Cell
BoP
Balance of Plant
CAPEX
Capital Expenses
CCS
Carbon Capture and Storage
CO2
Carbon Dioxide Molecule
CHP
Combined Heat and Power
EC
European Commission
EHB
European Hydrogen Backbone
ENTSO-E
European Network of Transmission
System Operators for Electricity
EU
European Union
FLH
Full Load Hours
GAMS
General Algebraic Modelling System
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
H2
Hydrogen Molecule
H2O
Water Molecule
IEA
International Energy Agency
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change
IPCEI
Important Projects of Common
European Interest
IRENA
International Renewable Energy Agency
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
LCoH2
Levelized Cost of Hydrogen
NECP
National Energy and Climate Plans
NBHC
Nordic-Baltic H2 Corridor
NPV
Net Present Value
NZE
Net-Zero Emissions
OPEX
Operation Expenses
PEM
Proton Exchange Membrane
PPA
Power Purchase Agreements
PtH2
Power-to-Hydrogen
PtX
Power-to-X
RE
Renewable Energy
RED
Renewable Energy Directive
RES
Renewable Energy Sources
RFNBO
Renewable Fuels of Non-Biological
Origin
SOEC
Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell
SMR
Steam Methane Reforming
TSO
Transmission System Operator
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
WACC
Weighted Average Cost of Capital
1.1
Context
”I believe that water will one day be employed as
fuel, that hydrogen and oxygen which constitute it,
used singly or together, will furnish an inexhaustible
source of heat and light, of an intensity of which coal
is not capable.” – Jules Verne, The Mysterious Island
(1874)
Applying
Verne’s
vision
to
modern
times,
the
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change),
which supports and provides scientific data to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC), introduced the Kyoto Protocol
(1998) [1] which later will have its successor in
2015 with the Paris Agreement [2].
Here several
guidelines are presented and legally binding targets
are introduced, which warn about the irreversibil-
ity scenario if the global temperature goes above
2°C above average and push to limit the increase
to 1,5°C above pre-industrial levels.
Later, under the European Green Deal (2019) [3] and
the Climate Law (2021) [4], strategies to be the first
climate-neutral continent in 2050 were implemented.
These efforts are made under the framework of the
‘Fit for 55’ package (2021) [5], which name comes
from the proposal to make greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions at least 55% lower in 2030, compared to
the 1990 levels. Updated recently, the full package
of measures has now increased its ambitions up to
57% by 2030 [6].
Throughout the last few years, efforts have been
made to raise awareness and accelerate renewable
energy development. Here is where initiatives like
the REPowerEU Plan (2022) [7], and a massive hy-
drogen infrastructure plan [8] are applied to respond
to geopolitical tensions. This has resulted in cutting
dependencies on external countries producing fossil
fuels, and target investments in the security of supply
and energy storage, re-purposing gas infrastructure
with fast implementation, among other measures.
To track the EU’s progress toward its climate goals
and to readapt accordingly, strategies like the RED
III (Renewable Energy Directive) in 2024[9], suc-
ceeding the RED I & II [10, 11] have been devel-
oped. The revised EU Climate Action Progress Re-
port (2024) [12], informs about the diverse NECPs
applied across member states.
Building on this broader EU climate strategies to the
EU, the focus shifts towards hydrogen’s critical role
in the energy transition, mostly on its production, in-
tegration, and emissions impact. These regulations,
later analyzed in Section A.3, explain the creation of
a hydrogen market and the growth of infrastructure
support to promote renewables and low-carbon hy-
drogen [13].
Since the interest of this thesis is the adoption and
widespread use of sustainably produced hydrogen,
criteria that contribute to this purpose will be ana-
lyzed according to IRENA [14] as follows:
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
1
==PAGE:8==
Drivers for Green Hydrogen Adoption
• Lower Renewable Energy Costs due to the
declining costs of solar PV and wind energy,
making hydrogen production more economi-
cally viable.
• Technological Advancements: which have
dropped down costs significantly.
CAPEX
of alkaline electrolyzers (AEC) went from
1200€/kW to 875€/kW between 2020 and
2025, with further reductions expected [14].
• System Flexibility: provided by Power-to-X
plants, stabilizing the system in times of ex-
cess electricity (due to intermittency generated
by RES) and low-demand periods.
• Government Policies: Subsidies and targets,
will drive the expansion of H2 development.
That being said, obstacles around its production and
mainstream use will also be addressed here, provid-
ing a complete overview:
Challenges for Green Hydrogen
• High production costs:
Making hydrogen
from RES is still expensive compared to fossil-
based H2. The electricity prices are the produc-
tion’s main component, which is later analyzed
in Section 3.
• Infrastructure
Gaps:
Limited
hydrogen-
specific
infrastructure
for
transport
and
storage of H2 remains a challenge, despite
the expected EHB development in the coming
years [8].
1.2
State of the Art
Green hydrogen (via water electrolysis) is a key pri-
ority to achieve the EU’s ambitions of carbon neu-
trality [3] and to avoid the blue H2 lock-in effect in the
short-term, as described by Kountouris et al. [15]. In
the various uses hydrogen has, it can be used as a
fuel, energy carrier, storage, or feedstock for indus-
trial processes while emitting no CO2 in the process.
Recent advancements and research have been
done on techno-economic modeling of hydrogen pro-
duction, electricity price forecasting, and energy sys-
tem modeling; however, gaps remain in the aca-
demic literature, which are seen in ”Key Limitation”
section in Table 1.
This feasibility study for the lifetime of a hydrogen
plant addresses these gaps by integrating all these
different research topics to conduct a comprehen-
Study
Focus Area
Methodology
Key Limitation
Kountouris
et al. (2024)
Macro-level
hydrogen
infrastructure roll-out
Balmorel-based
macro
analysis
Lacks
plant-level
cost
optimization
Lin
et
al.
(2021)
Wind-powered hydrogen
production costs
Empirical data using real
electricity prices
Does not incorporate electricity
price forecasting
Campion
et
al. (2023)
Optimization
of
e-
ammonia production
Least-cost
Power-to-X
optimization modeling
Does not focus H2 production, it
does ammonia
Bloise
(2024)
Optimization
of
e-
methanol production
Techno-economic
modeling
using
Opti-
Plant
Does
not
address
hydrogen-
specific cost minimization
Bramstoft et
al. (2020)
Energy
system
co-
simulation with Balmorel
Balmorel and OptiFlow co-
simulation
Limited temporal and technolog-
ical detail in simulations
Wiese et al.
(2018)
Overview
of
Balmorel’s
capabilities
Theoretical
and
applied
Balmorel framework
Does not assess feasibility over
lifetime of a H2 plant
Ravn et al.
(2001)
Development of Balmorel
model
Mathematical
modeling
and optimization
Does not incorporate real-time
electricity price dynamics
Campion
et
al. (2025)
Impact of power profile
simulation
on
techno-
economic assessments
Comparison of simulated
vs measured PV profiles
Uses present-day data without
future market forecasting
This Master
Thesis
Optimization of a PtH2
for
Minimizing
LCoH2
with RES
Balmorel
+
OptiPlant
framework
model
for
PtH2 optimization
Dependent
on
model
assumptions
and
scenario
design
Table 1: Overview of State-of-the-Art
2
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:9==
sive techno-economic assessment.
By analyzing
its underlying assumptions, it intends to provide an
overview of all variables that play a role and their im-
pact on the levelized cost of hydrogen (LCoH2) calcu-
lations. All mentioned studies will now be described:
As described by Ravn et al.(2001) [16], the Balmorel
model is a partial-equilibrium energy system opti-
mization model designed for analyzing electricity and
combined heat and power (CHP) sectors. Wiese et
al.(2018) [17] presents an overview regarding this
system energy modeling and highlights that it as-
sumes perfect foresight. Here, it details the limita-
tions regarding the level of spatial, temporal, and
technological detail when running the simulations.
This will be addressed later again in Section 2.5
Bramstoft et al.(2020) [18] conducted an integrated
assessment for sustainable biomass and determined
possible pathways by 2050, using a co-simulation of
Balmorel and OptiFlow. In this case, four represen-
tative weeks are chosen and denoted as seasons,
which represent the full-year profiles on an hourly
basis. However, this study does not span multiple
years nor all weeks during a year, which may limit
the model’s ability to capture fluctuations and long-
term variability.
On the other hand, Kountouris et al.(2024) [15] used
Balmorel to assess hydrogen development roll-out
around Europe by considering various possible path-
ways.
A thorough macro-level analysis evaluated
the infrastructure and storage facilities across the
EU. Nevertheless, it does not contain the micro-level
optimization to find the lower LCoH2, which is neces-
sary for developing a hydrogen economy.
A techno-economic assessment report by Campion
et al.(2025)[19] highlights the importance of assess-
ing power profile simulation. This study compares
simulated and measured solar power profiles and
how they affect the time series, leading to an overes-
timation of PV performance. However, inputs for the
OptiPlant model were available to optimize the plant
for present-day data.
Lin et al.(2021)[20] evaluated the techno-economical
cost of powered hydrogen by renewables, where
only wind power is considered. Located in China,
different market and policy conditions apply. As the
main difference, the report uses real prices as an in-
put compared to Balmorel’s price estimation in this
study.
Regarding this topic, Campion et al.(2023) [21] uses
a least-cost optimization open source model, which
analyzes the economics of state-of-the-art Power-to-
X cost calculation methods. As a result, it highlights
the importance of the plant’s flexibility in various se-
tups. In this paper, the analyzed fuel was ammonia
produced via electrolytic hydrogen rather than hydro-
gen as the primary fuel. Similarly, Bloise (2024) [22],
taking EU Delegated Acts [23] into account, inves-
tigated the optimization of e-methanol production.
That same model, OptiPlant, will be utilized to fill the
gap in feasibility modeling specific to PtH2 plants and
find the minimum LCoH2.
1.3
Problem Statement
Given the constraints of limited resources and the
global deployment of renewable energy, which are
explained in the RED III [9], making hydrogen afford-
able and competitive with fossil fuels is challenging.
Taking that into account, the purpose of this thesis
is to minimize the cost of producing hydrogen, which
depends on many factors, such as electricity costs,
production technology, and geographical variations
in resource availability.
The knowledge gaps ad-
dressed by this project are on the overview in Table
1.
This project seeks to identify how the production of
H2 in Europe can be improved from a cost and re-
source utilization point of view. It will employ soft-
ware such as Balmorel, described in [24], to forecast
electricity prices and the OptiPlant model from Cam-
pion et al. [21] to optimize hydrogen plants, which
will become an input for a techno-economic feasibil-
ity study.
Through scenario analysis and sensitivity testing, it
aims to provide insights into when, where, and how
hydrogen can most effectively support Europe’s low-
carbon economy. By understanding the LCoH2 dy-
namics, the main objective to identify the configura-
tion and go-to-market strategy for a PtH2 plant mini-
mizing the cost of H2 using RES will be achieved.
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Methods
2.1
LCoH2 Model
Description of the model
The model consists of a feasibility study over the
plant’s lifetime, starting operation in 2025 up to 2050.
It will consider the techno-economical input from the
software described before and relevant industry data
as clarified in Fig.1. Industry data is provided and ex-
tracted from different technology data reports [25],
with sources from national (Danish Energy Agency)
and international entities, such as IEA, IRENA or EU
Commission, as well as ENTSO-E and ENTSO-G
(European Network of TSOs for Electricity and Gas).
This model obtains additional data and metrics from
other relevant energy sector associations like the Hy-
drogen Council [26].
Second, wind and solar power profiles are obtained
for the different locations in a typical weather year, as
described in Section 2.5. Balmorel generates the es-
timation of the power prices (on an hourly basis) for
years 2025, 2030, and 2050. These electricity prices
will become an input for the OptiPlant simulations.
Furthermore, OptiPlant is used to obtain the plant’s
hourly performance.
The first step will be to ac-
quire the Power-to-H2 plant optimized according to
the 2025 price estimation and, from these results,
the renewable installed capacities (MW) investments
are obtained. Later, the OptiPlant model will use this
configuration to determine that scenario’s 2030 and
2050 performance.
The feasibility model will then
use the OptiPlant’s results as an input to simulate
the years of the plant’s lifetime.
Assumptions
There is a fixed minimum demand for the produced
hydrogen, as seen in Fig.2, estimated from indus-
try knowledge (Min.
250kgH2/hr).
Also, demand
is considered flexible for the different off-takers, re-
ducing the demand side’s uncertainty. In terms of
transportation, the assessment considers the use of
both trucks and pipelines, to be aligned to reality. It
is estimated that in the first five years of operation,
between 2025 and 2030, hydrogen is delivered by
trucks to then continue via pipelines. This is accord-
ing to IEA [27], because as the distance increases,
the pipelines become cost competitive with trucks.
The distance from the plant to the demand is consid-
ered less than 100km, to maintain cost-efficiency of
trucks carrying H2.
The plant’s maintenance time will equal two weeks
from the year, and these will be calculated accord-
ing to the seasons, taking place either in Winter for
southern locations (SP) or in summer for all the rest
(DE, DK, LT, SE). These periods are variable to op-
timize the plant in the best way possible by consid-
ering the seasonality of the weather and maximizing
the generation of the plant throughout the year.
Figure 1: LCoH2 Model Diagram
4
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:11==
Configurations Used
As seen in Fig.2, on this thesis three different con-
figurations will be considered.
First, there will be
a Only-Grid case, in which all electricity consump-
tion (MWh/year) of the plant will be taken from the
grid and no RES will be installed. Then, the sec-
ond configuration Mixed is one where both RES and
grid connection are available as options to supply the
yearly H2 production.
Finally, Off-Grid is the last case, where a behind-
the-meter configuration takes place and all renew-
able energy produced is consumed by the plant. No
point of grid connection is available and the produc-
tion is expected to increase its cost. Also, plant will
be evaluated with and without the option of installing
batteries, and these results will be on Section 3.
WACC
To assess the project’s viability for private invest-
ment, the concepts applied will be the Weighted Av-
erage Cost of Capital (WACC), Net Present Value
(NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR). Bankability
and different support schemes for the project’s anal-
ysis are considered as out of scope.
The formula to achieve the WACC is as follows:
WACC = E
V re + D
V rd(1 −T)
And the following numbers are the ones used for is
analysis.
Item
Value
Unit
Debt share
D/V
75.00%
Equity share
E/V
25.00%
Cost of equity
re
8.00%
Cost of debt
rd
2.60%
Corporate tax rate
T
22.00%
Inflation rate (constant)
I
2.30%
The values in this table are used for calculating
WACC, and they are correct only for Denmark’s
case. As a reference, V is the total value of capital
(equity plus debt). Inflation rate I, cost of equity r_e
and debt share D/V will be considered as constant.
However, corporate tax T and cost of debt r_d vary
per location considered, and the values are shown in
the table below:
Country
Corporate Tax
Cost of Debt
Denmark
22.00%
2.60%
Spain
25.00%
3.15%
Lithuania
15.26%
3.15%
Germany
30.00%
3.15%
Sweden
20.60%
2.50%
The Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCoH2) is given by:
LCOH2 =
n
∑
t=1
Ct
(1 + r)t
n
∑
t=1
Ht
(1 + r)t
Figure 2: Scenario Scheme
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
5
==PAGE:12==
Where:
• Ct: Represents the total costs in year t, includ-
ing CAPEX and OPEX from RES, distribution
and the H2 plant.
• Ht: Hydrogen production in year t (yearly de-
mand is fixed).
• r: Discount rate, which will be equal to WACC
in this case, reflecting the time value of money.
• n: Number of years for the lifetime of the plant,
which will be 25 years in total.
The goal of this study is to find the location and con-
figuration where the minimized LCoH2 is found, while
having a positive NPV and a IRR > WACC. These
concepts are important to help determine whether
the project is profitable, where NPV is the present
value of future cash flows, and IRR is the discount
rate where NPV=0 and the project breaks even.
Transportation
Regarding the cost and limitations around the oper-
ating pressure of trucks, Horizon Europe [28] states
that in 2024, the transportation CAPEX/kgH2 should
be 450 €/kgH2. Considering trucks can carry 700
kgH2 at 300 bar, that results in a CAPEX cost of
around €315,000.
Also, CAPEX, OPEX, capacity and total number of
trucks required to deliver in peak production times.
This is done for every configuration and location to
ensure that the distribution of the hydrogen is ade-
quate.
2.2
Production Pathway
Hydrogen (H2) can be produced through a variety
of methods, each differing in energy source, green-
house gas (GHG) emissions, and cost [29]. These
methods are categorized into distinct colors based
on environmental impact and sustainability.
Green H2 is produced through water electrolysis and
powered by RES and strict criteria must be met to be
classified as green, especially when taking electricity
from the grid. These criteria will be clarified in the Ap-
pendix A where two EU regulations [23] [30] are dis-
cussed. These set the thresholds for GHG emissions
savings for RFNBOs to allow only climate-beneficial
hydrogen to qualify.
While this study will focus only on green and low-
carbon hydrogen, sources such as IRENA [14] and
the EU Parliament [31] will be used to classify other
H2 production pathways in the Appendix A.
2.3
Types of Electrolyzers
Four types of electrolyzers are available for the wa-
ter electrolysis process. Only three will be included
in the analysis, due to the lack of market adoption
of Anion Exchange Membrane (AEM). They hold po-
tential for future applications, but are unsuitable at
the moment for green H2 projects. The remaining
three are described as follows:
Alkaline Electrolyser Cell (AEC): Alkaline elec-
trolyzers are widely applied in the industry due to
their cost-efficiency, robustness, and proven perfor-
mance. They are applicable for large-scale hydro-
gen projects, due to their lower CAPEX and opera-
tional costs than the others.
Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM): Character-
ized for performing well under dynamic loads, which
is ideal for projects where electricity is variable. Their
technology can be an option in applications where
spaces are limited, and significant investments are
made in R&D to further reduce costs.
Solid Oxide Electrolyzer Cell (SOEC): Are the pre-
ferred option when a high-quality source of waste
heat is available, in which case, it will outperform
AEC and PEM. Ideal for applications where electric-
ity is expensive because heat is utilized to create
electricity, and not so much in other regions where
electricity is cheaper.
As seen above and as stated by IRENA [32], no sin-
gle electrolyzer technology is ideal for all cases, due
to the unique characteristics of each one. In the Ap-
pendix section A.1 table 3 presents a comparison of
the different types in terms of efficiency, tempera-
ture, CAPEX, development stage and market avail-
ability.
As an industry player, customer, or investor in
these technologies these concepts highlight trade-
offs between flexibility, consistency, and potential
use. Also, it indicates that it does not only matter the
technology chosen but also the specifics that are in-
volved in the datasheet of each electrolyzer, whether
this is alkaline, solid oxide, or a PEM. Understanding
these parameters and the implications around them
will increase the odds of making the right purchase
for meeting requirements for future PtH projects.
6
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:13==
2.4
Suitable Locations
Figure 3: European H2 Backbone Corridors [8]
The locations were chosen based on a variety of fac-
tors, for example like other studies selected [22],[33],
including proximity to infrastructure (ports) or one of
the several corridors by the EHB [8] has planned
across the upcoming years, as seen in Figure 3.
Other factors that were considered are industry ex-
perience, proximity to high-emission factories that
will need to decarbonize, and the amount of renew-
able energy (RE) available on the grid.
In terms of the published hydrogen supply corridors
[34] we have five major ones, of which three (Corridor
C, North Sea, Corridor D: Nordic and Baltic regions,
and corridor B: Southwest Europe and North Africa)
were chosen due to the amount of renewables in the
grid, and close availability in time, which is critical for
the following analysis in this article.
Five regions were selected, which are expected to
play a significant role in the hydrogen backbone [8],
with their respective electrical bidding zones noted in
parentheses:
1. Germany: Rostock (DE) leads in wind energy
development in Germany, with planned expansions
include 6 GW of onshore and 1.5 GW of offshore
wind capacity.
The region also benefits from an
existing hydrogen transport infrastructure and early
developments of close H2 connections (Bornholm-
Lubmin pipeline) [8] [35].
2. Sweden: Skellefteå (SE1) is a major renewable
energy hub, located near the Markbygden ETT wind
farm, the largest in Europe. The city has an strate-
gic location near ports, EHB corridors, and the H2
Green Steel project [36] [37] which further enhances
its significance.
3. Lithuania: Klaipėda (LT) located on Lithuania’s
coast, is a hub for metal and plastic production [38]
and is one of the key ice-free ports in the Baltics, pro-
viding a logistical advantage [39]. Directly connected
to the EHB network via the Nordic-Baltic H2 corridor
[8], supporting its role as a critical hydrogen distribu-
tion point.
4. Spain: Huelva (ES) located in Andalucía, Huelva
has received European Commission funding for hy-
drogen projects such as Hy2Use under the IPCEI
mechanism [40]. The region’s focus includes pro-
ducing green fertilizers (a top-priority use of H2, as
seen in Fig.19) and leveraging significant solar, wind,
and hybrid energy potential. Huelva is also a key
connection point for Corridor B, linking North Africa
and Central Europe [8].
5. Denmark: Esbjerg (DK1) is a major port city in
Jutland, which is near North Sea wind farms and PtX
projects. It is located close to the proposed North
Sea Energy Island [41] [42]. Although delays have
pushed the island’s expected operation to 2036 [43],
Esbjerg remains to be essential for H2 development.
These locations will be utilized in the OptiPlant model
from Campion et al. [21] to optimize the hydrogen
plant layout. These optimized results will then be the
input for a feasibility study where the LCoH2 will be
calculated.
Infrastructure
As illustrated in Fig.
20 in Appendix B, the EHB
transmission network for H2 has different types of
pipelines.
Depending on whether they are con-
structed from zero, a conversion of existing ones, or
a hybrid mix of both. This choice will significantly im-
pact the network’s availability and delays in time it will
experience, in the range of years. Factors such as
rising costs, permits, and regulations play a critical
role.
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
7
==PAGE:14==
2.5
Power Price Estimation
Price projections were derived using the open-
source energy system Balmorel [44]. This program
is a tool written in GAMS, originally designed to be
applied in the Baltics [16] [24]. It has now grown and
expanded to simulate energy markets and provide
assistance in answering questions from an interna-
tional perspective, making Balmorel highly relevant
to this research project.
As in other studies con-
ducted before [45], the estimate of electricity prices
was based on a year of typical weather, using the
Balmorel electricity and heat market model. The ver-
sion used here was obtained from DTU Management
and is available on GitHub [44], which is applied for
predicting electricity prices.
In the reference scenario, different years (2025,
2030 and 2050) were considered, with these years
serving as inputs for the model. It is important to note
that no major political events, such as COVID-19 or
the Russia-Ukraine conflict, were taken into account
regarding electricity prices. Underlying assumptions
are used to determine the optimal solution for the
overall system, and as seen in Fig.4 it contains a cer-
tain complexity, highlighted by energy vectors and
the sector coupling taken into account.
The procedure will consist of two parts. The first,
in which necessary investments are identified, a re-
duced simulation is performed with lower temporal
resolution. Once this is done, an operational run fol-
lows with fixed investment inputs, aiming to resolve
a year’s calculations using those values, making the
overall process more efficient.
As mentioned in Section 1.2, Wiese et al.[17] de-
scribes a trade-off between the details of spatial,
temporal, and technological levels when running the
Balmorel Model. In terms of the spatial resolution, it
is divided into country, region, and areas, as stated
in Gea-Bermudez et al.[46], where each one as-
signed its resources (like hydro, solar, wind). Cer-
tain constraints also occur in the temporal resolution
since Balmorel is divided from the largest layer to the
smallest layer. Years (Y) represent the same unit,
Figure 4: Schematic overview of energy vectors and sector coupling modeling in Balmorel, taken from
Kountouris et al.[15]
8
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:15==
seasons (S) represent weeks, and timesteps (T) rep-
resent hours in all simulations. This process may re-
sult in structural uncertainties that could impact the
sensitivity of the model runs.
Achieving the full three-year hourly-based reference
dataset required several partial simulations in Bal-
morel, executed using the High-Performance Com-
puter at DTU Compute.
This dataset is provides
a more detailed temporal resolution than those by
Bramstoft et al.(2020) [18], who used four represen-
tative weeks as seasons, representing the full-year
profiles on an hourly basis. Since Balmorel’s repre-
sentative data cannot follow real-world changes be-
cause of the amount of real-time data it would need,
some seasons are under-estimated and some over-
estimated in the results of all countries. Therefore,
this work applies seasonal adjustments to Balmorel’s
data to align them with real-world patterns observed
in the last rolling calendar year.
The Adjustment Factor per season is calculated as
the ratio of Balmorel’s seasonal average price to the
corresponding real-world seasonal average price,
and it quantifies the systematic estimations by com-
paring them to current market prices, correcting sea-
sonal biases. Later, the Adjusted Price (h) for each
hour is then obtained by dividing Balmorel’s origi-
nal hourly price by the seasonal adjustment factor.
Aligning averages by season and country in 2025
compared to the real-world data in 2023-2024 en-
ables us to preserve the hourly and intra-seasonal
variability trends from Balmorel while correcting sys-
tematic deviations. The results obtained here will be
described in Chapter 3.2 and later used as a base for
the techno-economic business case of the Power-
to-Hydrogen plant, located in the areas identified in
Chapter 2.4.
Wind and Solar Profiles
First, as described in this section, Balmorel’s estima-
tions rely on long-term weather projections, system
assumptions, and market conditions. This trade-off
between the details of spatial, temporal, and tech-
nological levels brings multiple layers of uncertainty
in the model. These projections are based on simu-
lated system-wide dynamics rather than actual mea-
sured data.
As stated in section 1.2, Campion et
al.[19] state-of-the-art work highlights differences be-
tween simulated and measured solar PV profiles and
their impact on assessing the right plant size. This
study does not integrate such corrections because
adding more computational burden and complexity
will not necessarily reduce uncertainty in the techno-
economic analysis and minimize the LCoH2.
In this thesis, the wind power profiles are repre-
sented by several onshore and offshore turbine tech-
nologies available on the market.
These are the
same used options in Campion’s work [21], to ensure
consistency and simplicity around the study. For so-
lar profiles, first, data was obtained from Solar Global
Atlas [47] to find the optimal tilt and azimuth for ev-
ery location, later defined in Table 5. Fixed-axis and
1-axis tracking profiles are being considered in this
study for the PV technologies acquired for a typical
weather year (same as in Balmorel), so it is a co-
herent and representative profile. Then, the CorRES
model [48], provided by DTU Wind, was applied and
power profiles were obtained for the specific loca-
tions.
In the following Table 2 the reference data is sourced
from ENTSO-E [49] where it is used to calculate the
share of renewables in the grid and average prices
(€/MWh) for every country. Also, the capacity factor
(CF) is a ratio that indicates how efficient a plant is
utilized over a period of time, in this case a calendar
year.
Location
Rostock (DE)
Skellefteå (SE1)
Esbjerg (DK1)
Huelva (SP)
Klaipėda (LT)
Country
Germany
Sweden
Denmark
Spain
Lithuania
CF PV
unit
0.15
0.13
0.15
0.27
0.16
CF Onshore Wind
unit
0.46
0.32
0.47
0.27
0.42
CF Offshore Wind
unit
0.47
0.33
0.56
0.26
0.47
Average Grid Prices
€/MWh
73.37
32.49
66.63
58.19
88.29
Share of RE in Grid
%
58.6
97.90
80
75.5
70.1
Table 2: Locations summary, and their related energy data
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
9
==PAGE:16==
3
Results and Discussion
These sections will discuss the findings of the work
and highlight the best possible locations for a PtH2
plant, considering all limitations mentioned before in
the Methodology in Section 2.
A discussion regarding the power estimated pro-
vided by Balmorel and the optimized performance
of the plant in OptiPlant, will also be presented. A
weeks performance of the plant will also be shown.
3.1
Optimal Locations
Considering the five chosen locations, three elec-
trolyzer technologies in three different configurations
of LCoH2. As a general description of all cases, the
installation of batteries is only done in off-grid config-
urations. The transportation costs are similar across
all locations, between 0.12 and €0.3/kgH2. In terms
of technologies, SOEC’s are outperformed in LCoH2
by AECs and PEMs, and results are included in the
Appendix for reference. Comparison graphs in the
Appendix are also available for all data on RES in-
stalled capacities in Fig.32, full load hours (FLH) in
Fig.33 and maximum H2 production rate in Fig.34
Now, the four most promising ones will be described
in detail, according to Figures 5 to 8. These break
down CAPEX and OPEX into plant costs, individual
RES, transportation (or distribution), and electricity
from the grid.
Figure 5: Mixed - AEC - Scenario Comparison
As the most cost-effective scenario, alkaline elec-
trolyzers (AEC) in Esbjerg, Denmark (DK1), present
a LCoH2 of €2.49/kgH2 due to the efficient utiliza-
tion of its high wind resources (CF=0.47). As seen in
Fig.5, this scenario indicates a high up-front CAPEX
(€1.01/kgH2) from onshore wind and decreased de-
pendency on grid electricity (€0.3/kgH2).
As a reference, sources such as the Hydrogen Coun-
cil [50] and Clean H2 Monitor [29] state that by 2030
the LCoH2 could be €2.5-4/kgH2, while as of today
is between €4-5/kgH2, increasing from previous es-
timates. IRENA [32] states that regions with a very
high capacity factor (CF=0.5), power costs of €25-
30/MWh, and with high FLH could achieve it. How-
ever, in this study, the electricity cost is €37.3/MWh,
with a lower CAPEX of €875/kW [21] and FLH above
5000, differing from IRENA’s estimates. Therefore,
results should be taken with caution. Sensitivity anal-
ysis on prices is done later on Section 3.4.
Figure 6: Mixed - PEM - LCoH2 Composition
In second place, the configuration of PEM in Den-
mark has a similar production cost of €2.61/kgH2 but
different underlying factors. Since the technology uti-
lized here is PEM, the plant’s OPEX is optimized to a
low €0.14/kgH2, being 40% less than in AEC. How-
ever, higher onshore and plant CAPEX compensate
for this factor. These differences between both tech-
nologies will be explained in detail in the Appendix
section A.1.
Figure 7: Mixed - AEC - LCoH2 Composition
10
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:17==
Huelva, located in Spain, achieves a €2.90/kgH2
cost in its AEC configuration.
The high solar re-
source in southern Europe, captured by 1-axis so-
lar tracking PV modules, provides 57% of the elec-
tricity consumed yearly and accounts for less than
a quarter of LCoH2.
However, challenges must
be addressed due to the variability of solar profiles
throughout the day, increasing our dependency on
the grid (€1.05/kgH2).
Figure 8: Mixed/Grid-Only - AEC - LCoH2 Composi-
tion
Finally, with a relatively higher cost at €3.25/kgH2 the
mixed configuration of the AEC in Sweden (SE1) is
worth mentioning. This mixed configuration has the
same result as the only-grid case since all energy
comes from grid electricity, and no RES are built. As
seen in Table 2 in the Appendix, Sweden’s grid has
more than 90% of renewables, mainly based on hy-
dro and wind energy. This specific data highlights
that the production of clean H2 is possible with the
grid’s integration since it counts as fully renewable
according to the RED regulation [23].
Financial Assessment
A comparison in Figures 10 and 11 are presented
to delve more into the viability of the different high-
lighted cases. The concepts of IRR and WACC are
applied here, indicating if a scenario can most likely
provide positive returns at the end of its lifetime.
WACC lines vary depending on the tax rates and
the applicable cost of debt in each country.
As a
rule of thumb, those with a higher IRR > WACC
represent that the investment has a strong perfor-
mance and will be sustainable over time. This will
be evaluated in two cases, one at current market
price for green hydrogen at €6/kgH2 [51] and one at
€3.5/kgH2, which sources [29] cite as the target price
to where H2 becomes competitive with fossil-fueled
based H2.
Figure 10:
IRR vs LCoH2 with WACC Lines @
6EUR/kgH2
Denmark’s AEC is overall the best one, with the low-
est LCoH2 found at €2.49/kgH2 and showing a solid
financial performance with an IRR of 16.6%.
On
the other hand, Sweden’s only-grid configurations
are found at the right spectrum of the graph, solid-
ifying as the IRR best performers, with a close dif-
ference with Spain’s AEC in terms of levelized cost
(€0.35/kgH2). This is due to the cheaper and renew-
able available grid, which gives Sweden an advan-
tage in minimizing CAPEX investment as H2 price
increases. This case differs when the price tag is at
€3.5/kgH2, as seen in next Figure 11
Figure 11:
IRR vs LCoH2 with WACC Lines @
3.5EUR/kgH2
Spain’s AEC with an IRR=7.28% surpassing WACC
and a LCoH2 lower than €3/kgH2 is a strong can-
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 9: Average Balmorel Prices in Sweden and Spain Estimation vs Calendar Year 23-24
didate.
It shows a balanced performance by rep-
resenting options with high PV and low wind re-
sources, highlighting one of the best cases. The re-
sults should be taken with caution due to the uncer-
tainty in electricity price projections since these esti-
mations play a key role here, and a sensitivity analy-
sis is performed later in Section 3.4 considering low
and high electricity scenarios.
3.2
Power Price Prediction
As shown in Fig.9 below for the case in Sweden and
Spain, Balmorel can simulate electricity prices ac-
cording to technical, market, and policy conditions.
In this graph, in a continuous line, Sweden (SE1) and
Spain (SP) real average prices can be seen for the
last year (Oct’23-Sep’24), in violet and blue, respec-
tively.
In the dashed line, Balmorel’s scaled fore-
cast is seen. The adjusted estimation is used for the
OptiPlant simulations since it reflects Balmorel’s as-
sumptions, long-term trends, and correlations, which
are kept intact hourly. Here, we can see that Bal-
morel’s forecast follows the real average throughout
the year. Since hourly electricity markets are non-
stationary, unforeseen external shocks could disrupt
our forecast and change the seasonality of the fore-
casts, while Balmorel assumes a perfect foresight. A
recent example of these events is the case of Lithua-
nia, separating from the Russian electricity network
[52] after decades.
In conclusion, forecasts, no matter how accurate
they may be, only act as general guidance for future
economic decisions and try to limit uncertainty based
on historical values. In the case of this study, Bal-
morel’s model is used because of the validity of this
approach, but it is not necessarily the best, and it will
be mentioned in Section 4.4 for future work and im-
provements. All other electricity forecasts and trends
for Balmorel in 2030 and 2050 are located in the Ap-
pendix from Figures 23 to 27.
3.3
Plant Performance
In Figure 12, the performance throughout a week
of high prices in Lithuania will serve as an exam-
ple for analysis; in the upper image, the off-grid
setup is located; in the middle one, the mixed case,
and down below the grid spot market prices in EU-
R/MWh. The plant’s performance is taken from the
OptiPlant model results, and the colored rectangles
will serve as a guide when referring to different con-
cepts highlighted here.
Starting from the top, the off-grid setup relies entirely
on renewable sources installed and batteries in an
islanded setup. Since the battery storage is limited,
the storage capacity, which begins charged at the
beginning of the week (seen in red), is almost empty
by the middle of the week (seen in yellow). In this
case, energy storage plays a significant role since it
acts as a buffer between periods of low renewable
generation, which can be seen in green, where the
electricity from batteries compensates for a period of
low availability. Blue area shows significant curtail-
ment (exceeding 90.000MWh) happens during high
renewable generation periods, which could lead to
inefficiencies and higher associated costs.
The mixed setup integrates grid access and renew-
able sources, ensuring a more consistent utilization
of the resources. The red and yellow areas show
that due to fluctuations in power prices, the plant re-
12
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:19==
Figure 12: Hourly Operation of the plant for Off-Grid and Mixed Case
duces and increases its H2 production according to
solar and wind availability. Here also the reflection
that a period of high RES can impact power prices
due to the merit order curve. The blue area at the
end shows that despite curtailment is present in this
mixed case, its impact is minimized. In conclusion,
grid power is only used due to high prices, and the
demand’s flexibility is critical since it must be aligned
with peak renewable generation periods. A graph
with the installed capacities (in MW) is located in the
Appendix in Fig.32 showcasing these results.
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
13
==PAGE:20==
3.4
Sensitivity Analysis
Three scenarios have been defined to examine the
impact and analyze the sensitivity of the electricity
prices estimated and how they affect the Levelized
Cost of Hydrogen (LCoH2).
Mid_El corresponds to the baseline scenario, as the
closest to calendar year prices, and is used as the
reference case between the following two projec-
tions. Keeping the same profile and the same sea-
sonality from the estimated power prices, Low_El
serves as the case with low electricity prices, which
are -20% compared to the Mid_El scenario, acting
as an optimistic case scenario where market condi-
tions favor us. As a result, the operational costs of
hydrogen production are lower. At last, the High_El
scenario has a +20% increase compared to Mid_El
and represents a higher volatility in the market. As
a result, average prices (in EUR/MWh) show an up-
ward trend, increasing our overall costs.
In the Appendix A, the price difference (in EU-
R/MWh) will be summarized to offer more context to
the analysis. The results of this implementation on
the sensitivity analysis on the electricity prices were
evaluating the three different configurations done in
OptiPlant are the following:
Implementation of Scenarios on LCoH2
The sensitivity analysis results were evaluated using
these configurations in OptiPlant for the three elec-
trolyzers applied in this work: AEC, PEM, and SOEC.
While the case scenarios of PEM and SOEC are
available in the appendix from Fig.28-31, the most
relevant will be the AEC electrolyzers.
In AECs Grid-Only and Mixed scenarios in Figures
13 and 14, some LCoH2 results vary up to a 20%
by country and price scenario. The higher sensitivi-
ties are seen in the Grid-Only scenarios, highlighting
the impact the reliance on the grid has on electric-
ity prices. The exclusive use of this, having no RES
available, means the results are more sensitive to
market fluctuations like in Germany or Lithuania sce-
narios. Sweden (€3.03 to €3.48) shows lower vari-
ability due to the stability of its grid, thus having the
lowest prices of all countries.
On the other hand, mixed scenarios benefit from not
relying solely on the grid, varying less than 10% in all
cases by integrating RES and thus reducing sensi-
tivity by half. Denmark and Spain present the lowest
hydrogen costs, at €2.49 and €2.84 per kgH2, pri-
marily due to the abundance of renewable sources.
Sweden €0.03 per kgH2 difference between Mixed
and Grid is considered the same since it is less than
1%.
High_El scenario analysis are next, representing the
most pessimistic price scenarios. The magnitude of
the volatility is proportional to the reliance on RES,
and it impacts the competitiveness of the H2 produc-
tion. For example, last year, Germany, with an aver-
age price of 73.37 €/MWh, and Lithuania, with 88.29
€/MWh [8] have 58% and 70% of RES available on
the grid all year round. This inputs are seen in Table
2. These specific countries could benefit from poli-
cies or mechanisms like long-term power purchase
agreements (PPA), which could reduce the risk when
investing. As a conclusion of this section, renew-
ables are not only environmentally beneficial but also
critical when competing in the export market across
the EU.
Figure 13: Mixed - AEC - Scenario Comparison
Figure 14: Grid Only - AEC - Scenario Comparison
14
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:21==
Capacity Factor vs. LCoH2 Analysis
The sensitivity analysis focuses on the different con-
figurations and how the LCoH2 varies only with the
optimal capacity factors for every case. An optimistic
electricity scenario Low_El and a pessimistic one
High_El are used for this purpose.
Figure 15 illustrates how alkaline technologies be-
have under different power price scenarios in three
selected countries. This limited graph scope is done
to simplify the visualization and improve the un-
derstanding.
As a general guideline, the Low_El
scenario is represented by constant lines, and the
High_El scenario is shown in dashed lines.
The
colored rectangles will serve as a guide when re-
ferring to different configurations highlighted here,
using Red for Only-Grid cases, Yellow for mixed
(RES+Grid) cases, and green for the off-grid scenar-
ios.
Figure 15: Capacity Factor vs LCoH2 for AEC Elec-
trolyzers in Different Configurations
As seen in the graph, Off-grid scenarios (green) are
unaffected by the price fluctuations, highlighting the
right approach since the optimal CF point does not
change. In yellow background Mixed, the optimal
CF moves on a lateral way to the left from Low_El to
High_El. This is sustained by the theory that under a
scenario of higher prices on the grid, the electrolyz-
ers will have less operating time (FLH) to maintain
economic viability. Meanwhile, the Grid-only case
in Red, where the lower CF and higher LCoH2 ob-
serve a reduced economic performance under the
High_El scenario. And as a reference, Figure 16
is inserted here to see the similarities between the
two electrolyzer technologies, which follow the same
trend.
Figure 16: Capacity Factor vs LCoH2 for PEM Elec-
trolyzers in Different Configurations
Figure 17 shows the Off-grid scenarios in all the
electrolyzer technologies as a reference. In color we
see the AEC showing the lower costs, closely fol-
lowed by PEM and with SOEC in the higher end of
the graph with over a 20% increase in all countries.
Figure 17:
Off-Grid - Comparison between Elec-
trolyzer Technologies
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
15
==PAGE:22==
4
Conclusion
As highlighted before, these conclusions are meant
to be an overall guide considering the different mod-
eling limitations described in the previous sections,
providing an overview of how the underlying factors
play a role in the LCoH2 calculations.
Using the
framework specified in Section 2.1, various locations
and scenarios were analyzed to answer the ques-
tions displayed in Section 1.3.
4.1
Cost and resource utilization
To improve hydrogen production, a balance is re-
quired between balancing the renewable sources
available, minimizing the average electricity costs,
and optimizing the electrolyzer’s FLH. Some of the
following advice should be considered to enhance
the use of all resources and minimize the Levelized
Cost of Hydrogen (LCoH2).
Regarding technology selection, prioritization of AEC
and PEM is a must. AECs have the lowest costs, and
PEMs closely follow them in every country. Solid Ox-
ide Electrolyzers (SOEC) are not a viable option for
producing hydrogen since their CAPEX is not com-
pensated with the higher efficiencies this technology
achieves. Battery storage solutions and off-grid H2
production must also be avoided because they are
only financially viable in large-scale projects at cur-
rent market prices (€6/kgH2). Offshore wind solu-
tions are barely used in the different configurations,
indicating that onshore and solar remain the most
cost-efficient solutions.
Another focus area could be on the best cost-
resource utilization balance, targeting the locations
where projects are more likely to have favorable con-
ditions.
As seen in Fig.11, Huelva’s AEC has an
IRR=7.28% and a low LCoH2 (€2.9/kgH2), which
showcase a good financial performance in a mixed
scenario (RES + Grid), at the market price of
€3.5/kgH2 competing with fossil-based H2. On the
other hand, an only-grid configuration in Fig.8 high-
lights Sweden’s case where an IRR=7.32%, despite
a higher cost of €3.25/kgH2 in AEC and €3.42/kgH2
in PEM. Sweden’s best case is at the current mar-
ket prices for green hydrogen €6/kgH2, since these
projects do not require additional RES development
and their CAPEX investment is minimized as H2 price
increases.
4.2
Minimizing LCoH2: When, where,and
how?
Hydrogen production must be aligned with peak re-
newable energy generation periods. Considering the
seasonality of the different resources, in southern re-
gions like Spain, a focus should be on the summer
period with the highest solar outputs available. In
the case of Denmark and Sweden, both benefit from
the higher availability of wind throughout the year,
making possible a more stable production. However,
seasonality is still present, and production should be
optimized during winter season when higher peak
wind resources are available.
As highlighted before, Esbjerg, located strategically
in west Denmark, is an ideal location for cost-
efficient production, with the lowest LCoH2 found
there (€2.49/kgH2). In Huelva, southern Spain, the
high solar resources available make hydrogen devel-
opment scalable according to the needs of the de-
mand. As a final option, due to its low price vari-
ability and outstanding stability, Northern Sweden,
characterized by a renewable grid all year round,
takes the spot. This last location must be consid-
ered because, despite the cost of green and sus-
tainable H2 is higher, being €3.25/kgH2 for AEC and
€3.42/kgH2 for PEM, there would be a great possibil-
ity in the short term to develop a hydrogen demand
there, even in cases of higher electricity prices.
Mixed configurations are the go-to option in most
cases, with different percentages of grid integration
in the mix according to the country. Wind-driven in
Denmark, and solar-driven in Spain are the cases in
which it makes more sense to do so. The only excep-
tion to this case is Sweden, where its not convenient
to roll-out RES to power a PtH2 plant, since we have
the possibility to use a fully renewable grid, powered
by hydro and wind.
4.3
Configuration and go-to Market
Strategy
The best configuration for a Power-to-H2 plant com-
bines alkaline electrolyzers with renewable sources,
which should be tailored to the regional strengths
highlighted. However, the difference between AEC
and PEM will depend on further detail since both
remain competitive in most cases. Any preference
should be according to the chosen location and the
full load hours (FLH) to see if the LCoH2 is OPEX
or CAPEX-driven.
Regarding CAPEX economics,
in the case of Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM)
electrolyzers, they are OPEX-driven and will have
an advantage if the electrolyzers have more full load
hours, like the ones seen in Sweden. The CAPEX is
more significant than its competitor but will compen-
sate with lower operation and maintenance costs.
16
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:23==
Vice versa in AEC, where they are CAPEX-driven
since building materials and technology are cheaper
due to mass abundance, the OPEX takes up a higher
portion of the cost. The explanation is located in the
Appendix section.
Several points must be made to reach an overall con-
clusion regarding which strategy to follow. The opti-
mization of the plant’s full load hours can be achieved
by securing a long-term power purchase agreement
(PPA) below the capture prices of the region, reduc-
ing electricity costs, which are the major component
of the LCoH2. In the case of Denmark and Spain,
there should also be a focus on expanding the re-
newable integration to further reduce costs, with on-
shore turbines and solar, respectively. Another mo-
tivation could be that the percentage of RES in the
national grids is 80% and 75,5%, which, if arriving at
90%, opens the door to renewable H2 production via
grid electricity.
Also, depending on the region, different market ap-
proaches should be prioritized. In the case of Den-
mark, domestic industrial users (local or across bor-
ders, like Germany) that need a stable supply of H2
to decarbonize their operations are the go-to option.
Since the lowest LCoH2 costs are there, focusing
on bulk supplying the demand and saving on stor-
age would be the best approach. On the other hand,
Spain could focus on exporting big loads of H2 in the
summer, building a flexible demand with its solar re-
sources. The hydrogen backbone development is a
key player in Spain’s demand, opening up renewable
hydrogen to other countries and industry players. At
last, Sweden’s case approach should prioritize a pre-
mium RFNBO-certified hydrogen with a higher target
price. This strategy is an excellent option for decar-
bonizing the local steel industry and exporting the
rest via pipelines to the Baltic and Nordic countries.
In conclusion, the findings show how various factors
that have an impact on the LCoH2 calculations were
estimated to the best of possibilities, and sensitivity
analysis is carried out to see how relevant these are
in different scenarios.
The purpose of this thesis is to serve as a close-to-
reality study that emphasizes how different locations
around the EU have various energy mixes and re-
sources, which could enable us to drive the green
transition forward in the most efficient ways.
4.4
Future Work
Future research should focus on exporting excess
electricity to the grid and its impact on the feasibility
study and the business case. With more time avail-
able, this broader scope could be performed, and it
would be interesting to see how much it affects this
study’s conclusions around the LCoH2 calculations.
Further efforts to update data on the Balmorel model
could be a plus, as the estimation of electricity prices
feeds the OptiPlant model.
Since the reference
dataset is a full three-year hourly-based one, the un-
certainties around the underlying data are more sig-
nificant. Although Balmorel’s trend in the upcoming
years is similar to those predicted by other entities,
assumptions show a trade-off between the different
levels when running the model. In conclusion, much
work could be less complex, and the forecast would
be more accurate.
Analyzing and going deeper into how the LCoH2 is
affected under various CF could provide valuable in-
sights on how to dynamically operate the plant effec-
tively under varying loads. In this thesis, these top-
ics were slightly touch upon in the graph where the
different CF are shown under the different scenarios
(off-grid, mixed and only-grid).
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
17
==PAGE:24==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations Framework Convention on Cli-
mate Change (UNFCCC). “Kyoto Protocol”. In:
(1998).
[2]
United Nations Framework Convention on Cli-
mate Change (UNFCCC). Paris Agreement.
2015.
[3]
European
Commission.
European
Green
Deal. Tech. rep. 2019.
[4]
European
Parliament.
“Regulation
(EU)
2021/1119
-
European
Climate
Law”.
In:
Official Journal of the European Union (2021).
URL: https : / / climate . ec . europa . eu / eu -
action/european-climate-law_en.
[5]
European Commission. “Fit-for-55 Package”.
In: (2021). URL: https : / / ec . europa . eu /
commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_21_3541.
[6]
European Commission. “Fit for 55: Press Re-
lease”. In: (2023). URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_4754.
[7]
European Commission. “RePowerEU Plan”.
In: (2022). URL: https://commission.europa.
eu/strategy- and- policy/priorities- 2019- 2024/
european - green - deal / repowereu - affordable -
secure-and-sustainable-energy-europe_en.
[8]
European TSOs. European Hydrogen Back-
bone (EHB) initiative. 2024. URL: https : / /
www . ehb . eu / page / country - specific -
developments.
[9]
European
Parliament.
“DIRECTIVE
(EU)
2023/2413 - RED III - Promotion of Energy
from Renewable Sources”. In: Official Journal
of the European Union (2023).
[10]
European
Parliament.
“DIRECTIVE
2009/28/EC - RED I”. In: Official Journal
of the European Union (June 2009).
[11]
European
Parliament.
“DIRECTIVE
(EU)
2018/2001 - RED II”. In: Official Journal of the
European Union (Dec. 2018).
[12]
European Commission. EU Climate Action
Progress Report. Tech. rep. 2024.
[13]
European Parliament. “REGULATION (EU)
2024-1789 - internal markets for renewable
gas, natural gas and hydrogen ”. In: Official
Journal of the European Union (July 2024).
[14]
International
Renewable
Energy
Agency
(IRENA). Green Hydrogen: A guide to policy
making. Tech. rep. Abu Dhabi, 2020.
[15]
Ioannis Kountouris et al. “A unified European
hydrogen infrastructure planning to support
the rapid scale-up of hydrogen production”.
In: Nature Communications 15.1 (June 2024),
p. 5517. ISSN: 2041-1723. DOI: 10 . 1038 /
s41467-024-49867-w.
[16]
Hans F Ravn. The Balmorel Model: Theoreti-
cal Background. Tech. rep. 2001.
[17]
Frauke Wiese et al. “Balmorel open source
energy system model”. In: Energy Strategy
Reviews 20 (Apr. 2018), pp. 26–34. ISSN:
2211467X. DOI: 10.1016/j.esr.2018.01.003.
[18]
Rasmus Bramstoft et al. “Modelling of renew-
able gas and renewable liquid fuels in future in-
tegrated energy systems”. In: Applied Energy
268 (June 2020), p. 114869. ISSN: 03062619.
DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114869.
[19]
Nicolas Campion et al. “Green hydrogen
techno-economic assessments from simu-
lated and measured solar photovoltaic power
profiles”. In: Renewable and Sustainable En-
ergy Reviews 209 (Mar. 2025), p. 115044.
ISSN: 13640321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2024.
115044.
[20]
Haiyang Lin et al. “Economic and techno-
logical feasibility of using power-to-hydrogen
technology under higher wind penetration in
China”. In: Renewable Energy 173 (Aug.
2021), pp. 569–580. ISSN: 09601481. DOI: 10.
1016/j.renene.2021.04.015.
[21]
Nicolas Campion et al. “Techno-economic as-
sessment of green ammonia production with
different wind and solar potentials”. In: Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 173
(Mar. 2023), p. 113057. ISSN: 13640321. DOI:
10.1016/j.rser.2022.113057.
[22]
Franco Federico Bloise. “Techno-economic
optimization of e-methanol production under
EU RED Delegated Acts”. 2024.
[23]
European Commission. “DELEGATED REGU-
LATION (C) 2023/1086 - Minimum threshold
for GHG emissions savings of recycled carbon
fuels and from liquid and gaseous RFNBOs”.
In: (Feb. 2023).
[24]
Hans F. Ravn. The Balmorel Model Struc-
ture. 2018. URL: chrome - extension : / /
efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj / https : / /
www.balmorel.com/images/downloads/model/
BMS303-20190311.pdf.
[25]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data for
Renewable Fuels. Tech. rep. 2024.
[26]
Hydrogen Council and McKinsey & Company.
Hydrogen Insights 2024. Tech. rep. Sept.
2024. URL: https://hydrogencouncil.com/en/
hydrogen-insights-2024/.
[27]
IEA. The future of Hydrogen. Tech. rep. 2019.
18
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:25==
[28]
Horizon Europe. Increased hydrogen capacity
of H2 road trailers.
[29]
Hydrogen Europe. Clean Hydrogen Monitor
2024. Tech. rep. 2024.
[30]
European Parliament. “REGULATION (EU)
2024/1788”. In: Official Journal of the Euro-
pean Union (July 2024).
[31]
European Parliament. “A hydrogen strategy
for a climate-neutral Europe”. In: (2019). URL:
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/legislative-
train/theme- a- european- green- deal/file- eu-
hydrogen-strategy.
[32]
International
Renewable
Energy
Agency.
Green Hydrogen Cost Reduction: Scaling up
Electrolysers to Meet the 1.5￿C Climate Goal.
Tech. rep. Abu Dhabi, 2020.
[33]
Nektaria-Anastasia
Gkountou.
Biogas
to
methanol:
Systems
simulation
and
com-
parative cost assessment in variable prices
environments. 2024.
[34]
Gasgrid Finland. Hydrogen supply corridors.
2022. URL: https://gasgrid.fi/en/2022/05/31/
gasgrid-finland-together-with-other-european-
hydrogen - backbone - group - members - publish -
five-hydrogen-supply-corridors-to-meet-europes-
accelerated-2030-hydrogen-targets/.
[35]
European Hydrogen Backbone. Country Nar-
ratives - Germany (ONTRAS, OGE and GAS-
CADE). URL: https : / / www . ehb . eu / page /
country-specific-developments#germany-ontras-
oge-and-gascade.
[36]
Bodenxt. One of the world’s largest hydrogen
plants. 2023. URL: https : / / bodenxt . se / en /
one-of-the-worlds-largest-hydrogen-plants-is-
planned-here/.
[37]
Hydrogen Insight. Sweden’s flagship green
hydrogen-based steel plant. Sept. 2024. URL:
https://www.hydrogeninsight.com/industrial/
swedens- flagship- green- hydrogen- based- steel-
plant- receives- first- 100m- of- state- aid/2- 1-
1712480.
[38]
The Baltic Times. Klaipeda: Free Economic
Zone. 2024.
[39]
Invest Lithuania. Klaipėda Region. 2024. URL:
https://investlithuania.com/regions/klaipeda/.
[40]
Iberdrola. Spain’s largest green hydrogen cen-
tre. Mar. 2023. URL: https://www.iberdrola.
com / press - room / news / detail / we - are -
promoting - spains - largest - green - hydrogen -
centre-in-huelva.
[41]
Danish Energy Agency. Denmark’s Energy Is-
lands. URL: https : / / ens . dk / en / our -
responsibilities/offshore-wind-power/denmarks-
energy-islands.
[42]
Nicolas Jean Bernard Campion et al. Energy
islands in 2030: Where do we place the P2X
facilities? 2020. URL: https://www.cee.elektro.
dtu.dk/news/2020/12/energy-islands-in-2030-
where - do - we - place - the - p2x - facilities ? ?id =
227df4ff-16de-49fe-b628-30734dd17556.
[43]
Newsweek. “Denmark’s $30 Billion ’Energy Is-
land’ Pushed to 2036”. In: (Aug. 2024). URL:
https://www.newsweek.com/denmark-energy-
island-billion-delays-1945598.
[44]
Balmorel
Community.
Balmorel
GitHub
Repository. URL: https : / / github . com /
balmorelcommunity/Balmorel.
[45]
Anders Kofoed-Wiuff. Ea Energi Analyse.
2021. URL: https : / / www . ea - energianalyse .
dk/en/cases/projection-of-electricity-market-
prices/.
[46]
Juan Gea-Bermúdez et al. “The role of sec-
tor coupling in the green transition: A least-
cost energy system development in Northern-
central Europe towards 2050”. In: Applied
Energy 289 (May 2021), p. 116685. ISSN:
03062619. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . apenergy . 2021 .
116685.
[47]
Global Solar Atlas. 2024.
[48]
DTU Wind. CorRES Model.
[49]
European Network of Transmission System
Operators for Electricity. ENTSO-E Trans-
parency Platform.
[50]
Hydrogen Council. Hydrogen Insights 2023
December Update. Tech. rep. 2023.
[51]
CEGH. GreenHydrogen Index.
[52]
AP News. Baltic nations count final hours to
ending electricity ties to Russia.
[53]
International
Renewable
Energy
Agency
(IRENA). Making the breakthrough: Green
hydrogen
policies
and
technology
costs.
Tech. rep. Abu Dhabi, 2021.
[54]
NitroVolt ApS. Nitrovolt Electrolyzer Database.
2024. URL: https : / / nitrovolt - electrolyzer -
database.streamlit.app/.
[55]
Michael Liebreich/Liebreich Associates. Clean
Hydrogen Ladder, Version 5.0. Oct. 2023.
URL: https : / / mliebreich . substack . com / p /
hydrogen-ladder-version-50.
[56]
Danish Government. Denmark NECP 2021-
2030 - Final 2024. Tech. rep. June 2024. URL:
https : / / commission . europa . eu / energy -
climate - change - environment / implementation -
eu- countries/energy- and- climate- governance-
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
19
==PAGE:26==
and - reporting / national - energy - and - climate -
plans_en.
[57]
European Parliament. DRAFT AMEND FOR
REGULATION (EU) 2024-1788. 2024.
20
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:27==
A
Appendix
A.1
Electrolyzers Comparison
Technology
Efficiency (LHV%)
Temperature
Operation (°C)
CAPEX
Technology
Readiness
Market
Availability
SOEC
>80
700–900
High
Early-stage,
limited deployments
Limited
AEC
60–70
∼60–80
Low
Mature,
well-established
Wide
PEM
65–75
∼50–80
Moderate
Commercially available,
advancing
Wide
AEM
Moderate
∼40–60
High
Early-stage,
experimental
Very limited
Table 3: Overview and comparison of electrolyzer technologies in the market
As the table above shows, AECs have lower electrical efficiency than PEM electrolyzers, typically ranging
from 60-70% (LHV). However, their lower CAPEX makes them a convenient option in applications where
space is not a problem since they generally require more floor area due to design and operational differ-
ences.
PEMs are not as cost-efficient as AECs due to the catalyst’s requirement of rare metals (Pt and Ir). On
the other hand, this expensive equipment enables them to run at higher current densities (1–3 A/cm²)
and compensate in OPEX terms when performing. This is mentioned in section 4.3 where the preference
between both technologies should be according to the chosen location and the full load hours (FLH) to see
if the LCoH2 is OPEX or CAPEX-driven. Regarding CAPEX economics, if the scenario presents a reliable
grid with low electricity fluctuations in price, as seen in Sweden, PEMs would be the go-to option since the
CF should be as high as possible when running them to take advantage of this. On the other hand, in a
scenario with higher volatility in the electricity market, where electrolyzers have less runtime and, therefore,
a lower CF, AECs will be the most convenient option.
Having explained the main characteristics and differences of the different types of electrolyzers in the mar-
ket and how each one takes a portion of it, it is time also to show how big of a range they comprehend
between the same technologies. According to recent sources [25] [53], in terms of electricity consumption,
commercial PEM’s operating range is located between 4.5 and 5.5 kWh/Nm³ (LHV) under standard condi-
tions. This range may appear wider if looked upon from sources like [54] that show highly optimized (most
likely laboratory scale) or inefficient older systems. This variation in the range is not the case for SOECs,
where the efficiency range (0.5 kWh/Nm³ difference) comes limited by intrinsic technology constraints, such
as materials (ceramic electrolytes) and operating conditions across all manufacturers.
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
21
==PAGE:28==
A.2
Hydrogen Colors and Uses
Figure 18: Shades of Hydrogen (H2), taken from [14].
• Grey/Black/Brown H2 produced from fossil fuels (Grey via Steam Methane Reforming (SMR) or
black/brown via coal gasification). It’s estimated around €3.2/kg and has significant CO2 emissions,
making it incompatible with net-zero emissions (NZE) goals.
• Blue H2 estimated cost around €3.8/kg (via Autothermal Reforming with CCS), captures around 85-
95% of CO2. It serves as a starting transitional technology while clearing the path for green H2,
creating the necessary demands.
• Turquoise H2 Uses pyrolysis to produce H2. No information on its costs yet due to it being on devel-
opment phase (pilot plant scale)
Neither yellow (solar) nor pink (nuclear) hydrogen are included in the classification above. Since no country
develops only solar, but combined with other RES like wind, yellow overlaps with green. Pink, while it’s
significance is recognized, it is considered region-specific. While some locations included on Chapter 2.4
have nuclear energy (Sweden and Spain), they don’t contemplate nuclear-powered H2 production on their
overall strategies, limiting its relevance in this report.
Figure 19: Clean Hydrogen Ladder 5.0 [55]
22
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:29==
A.3
EU Regulations
National Energy and Climate Plans
As said in Chapter 1.1, different energy and climate (NECP) targets are being developed in EU countries to
meet the guidelines set by the Paris Agreement [2].For example, Denmark’s plan (NECP [56]) is to achieve
70% by 2030 and a pretentious climate neutrality target forward to 2045. However, the 2024 Climate Action
Progress Report [12] highlights Denmark is falling short, with the need to increase deployment of RE and
intensify emissions reductions.
This aligns with the RED III [9], which has increased a third (33%) compared to the previous one [11], in
cases like the EU’s overall renewable energy consumption (32 to 42,5%). This new directive, which has
been formally adopted, is a significant number that shows the attempt to decarbonize the energy sector, is
accountable for over 75% of the EU’s emissions. This is done to support the market mechanism outlined in
[13] and to set up sustainable criteria and unified methodology for emissions accounting, aligning with the
EU’s goals to decarbonize the energy system.
RED III - Latest Updates
When the latest draft of the Delegated Act [57], still unregulated at this moment, is reviewed and approved
it will amend the regulation [30] stating that materials used for low-carbon fuels should be traceable, as
they are for renewable fuels. All these measures guarantee that emissions are not only shifted from one
market sector to another as investment decisions and state aid are consistent with the internal market, as
discussed earlier.
These RFNBOs count towards transport if they have at least 70% emissions savings. There are two ways of
complying here, first, if they are supplied in the national territory in any of the transport modes, and, second,
if they are used as intermediary products to produce conventional transport fuels, as renewable hydrogen
is used in refineries.
The motivation is to help develop a market for RFNBO – both for consumption and production and decrease
fossil–based output since it’s unlikely to compete with a cheaper equivalent. Also, in article 22a [9], the
transportation format is considered when calculating the RFNBO for the industry.
A.4
Techno-economic input for OptiPlant Model
Equipment
Min Load %
Electrical consumption
CAPEX
Fixed OPEX
Variable OPEX
Lifetime (years)
Source
Water supply (desalination plant)
0%
168.72
€/kgH2O/h
5.06
€/kgH2O/h
30
[21]
H2 end-user
5%
Electrolysers AEC
0%
56.70
kWh/kgH2
875.00
€/kW
35
€/kWh
30
[25]
Electrolysers PEM
0%
60.50
kWh/kgH2
975.00
€/kW
19.5
€/kWh
30
[25]
Electrolysers SOEC alone
20%
43.40
kWh/kgH2
2075
€/kW
249
€/kWh
30
[25]
Solar fixed
0%
552.68
€/kW
9.12
€/kWh
35
[21] [25]
Solar tracking
0%
646.53
€/kW
11.16
€/kWh
35
[21] [25]
ON_SP198-HH100
0%
1758.68
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
ON_SP198-HH150
0%
2188.79
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
ON_SP237-HH100
0%
1554.76
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
ON_SP237-HH150
0%
1947.47
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
ON_SP277-HH100
0%
1414.98
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
ON_SP277-HH150
0%
1807.69
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
ON_SP321-HH100
0%
1301.29
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
ON_SP321-HH150
0%
1694.01
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
OFF_SP379-HH100
0%
2205.19
€/kW
41.77
€/kWh
0.003
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
OFF_SP379-HH150
0%
2534.61
€/kW
41.77
€/kWh
0.003
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
OFF_SP450-HH100
0%
1988.12
€/kW
41.77
€/kWh
0.003
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
OFF_SP450-HH150
0%
2265.53
€/kW
41.77
€/kWh
0.003
€/kWh
27
[21] [25]
Batteries
10%
550
€/kW
8.25
€/kWh
15
[21]
Table 4: Input data for OptiPlant Model
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
23
==PAGE:30==
B
Coordinates and Maps
Location
Country
Bidding
Zone
Offshore Wind GIS
Solar and Onshore Wind GIS
PV Characteristics
Latitude (°)
Longitude (°)
Latitude (°)
Longitude (°)
Azimuth (°)
Tilt (°)
Rostock
Germany
DE
54.305307
12.001877
54.58121
12,097458
180
38
Skellefteå
Sweden
SE1
64.779536
21.614742
64,990393
21,349182
180
46
Esbjerg
Denmark
DK1
55.524348
7.287369
55,462896
8,447113
180
38
Huelva
Spain
SP
36.914763
-7.218704
37,173449
-6,895981
180
33
Klaipėda
Lithuania
LT
55.846016
20.484009
55,747598
21,167908
180
40
Table 5: GIS of Studied Locations
Figure 20: Chosen locations in Europe
24
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:31==
Figure 21: GIS Locations and PV Potential [47]
Figure 22: GIS Locations and Wind Potential [47]
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
25
==PAGE:32==
C
Electricity Forecast
Figure 23: Average prices - Rolling Calendar Year 23-24 per Country
Figure 24: Average prices - Adjusted Balmorel Forecast Estimation per Country
Figure 25: Average prices - Balmorel Forecast Estimation per Country in 2025
26
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:33==
Figure 26: Average prices - Balmorel Forecast Estimation per Country in 2030
Figure 27: Average prices - Balmorel Forecast Estimation per Country in 2050
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
27
==PAGE:34==
D
Supplementary Data
Figure 28: Grid Only-PEM with Different Prices
Figure 29: Mixed - PEM - Scenario Comparison
Figure 30: Grid Only-SOEC with Different Prices
Figure 31: Off-Grid- All Electrolyzer Technologies
Figure 32: Installed Electrolyzer Capacities (in MW) in different scenarios
28
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
==PAGE:35==
Figure 33: Full Load Hours per country in different scenarios
Figure 34: Max. H2 production rates (kgH2/Hr) per country in different scenarios
Optimization of a Power-to-Hydrogen Plant Configuration and Market Integration for Minimizing LCOH2 with Renewables
29
==PAGE:36==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
